AN EXPOSITION ON THE CXXIIII. CXXV. CXXVI. PSALMS, Called the Psalms of
DEGREES: Or, The Churches Deliverance.

PLAINLY SET FORTH for the benefit of Gods Church, By T. S.

Psalm. 40.12. Innumerable troubles ( says David) have compassed me. Psalm.
129.1, 2. They have oftentimes afflicted me from my youth (may Israel now say)
but they could not prevail against me. Psalm. 116.12. What shall I render unto
the Lord for his benefits toward me? Seen, and allowed.

LONDON, Printed by B. A. for William Lee, and are to be sold at his shop near
Sergeants Inn in Fleetstreet, at the sign of the golden Buck. 1621.

TO THE HONORABLE and my especial good Master, Mr. THOMAS MVRRY, Secretary to
the Prince his Highness: Grace, Mercy, and Peace be multiplied in this world,
and eternal Glory in the world to come.
Honorable Sir,
WE read in the Book of Exodus how God by MOSES, Exodus 35.45
and MOSES from God, commanded the people of Israel to bring their offerings
and gifts for the erecting and building of the Tabernacle. Whereof some brought
more rich, sumptuous, and costly gifts, as Gold, Silver, Eare-rings, Rings, and
Bracelets, all being Jewels of Gold. Some more mean, base, and of less value,
worth, and estimation; as Rams skins, Badgers skins, Goats hair, and such
like: all which they did perform and execute, so willingly, readily,
chearefully, and freely; that they brought too much, and more then was
sufficient for the service of this Sanctuary, Exo. 36.5.7
and the use of the work of the Tabernacle which the Lord commanded to be
made. This most notable, rare, and admirable example of their willing hearts
and minds, in serving God with their earthly goods: I have propounded to my
self to be imitated and followed in a twofold respect: First, for
consolation; herein comforting my self, that God who accepted their meanest
offerings toward the building of an earthly Sanctuary, will much more accept,
allow, and approve of this Spiritual offering which so voluntarily and
cheerfully I bestow to the glory of God, and furtherance of the work of his
Spiritual Sanctuary; for God does love a cheerful Giver, and regards more
the heart in giving, then the gift it self. Secondly, for instruction,
teaching me not to bury my gifts and Talents in the Earth, with that evil
and slothful Servant mentioned of, in the Gospel, Mat. 25.25.
but to put them forth, and employ them to the use and benefit of Gods people,
the good of his chosen, the profit and commodity of all true hearted and truly
devoted Christians.

Sir, to this end therefore I have written this little Book. First, to
admonish some kind of people, (who for lack of experience, never feeling
other days then these, full of peace and quietness) that thereby they might
learn the better to apply unto themselves whatsoever they shall hear or read
of the trial of GODS Children, lest falsely imagining the same to appertain
either to the times that are past, or to other Nations, it fall suddenly upon
them as a Thief in the night, and they be destitute of all hope and comfort.
Last of all, to comfort another sort whom it has pleased God to press down
with sorrows, and to exercise with the continual afflictions and calamities
of this Mortal life, as no times seeming favorable unto them; they can scarce
receive the words of any comfort. And whereas every one in his calling is bound
to do some thing to the furtherance of the holy building. I have according to
my duty brought my poor basket of stones to the strengthening of the walls of
that Jerusalem, whereof by grace we are all both Citizens and Members. And
here I present unto your Honor this poor Talent of mine: which may it please
you to accept at my hands, as at one that wishes all happiness to you and
yours in the Lord. Your Honors acceptance shall be my sole satisfaction: the
bond of my duty has this only bound of my hope; humbly craving that your
favorable wisdom would supply the wants of this thing: and that this so
simple a gift may be accepted of you rather for my good meaning, and the end
whereof I do it, then for the value of the thing it self: If you judge them
worthy, vouchsafe them I pray you your Patronage: if not, your pardon; at least
your gracious and favorable acceptance, according to the kindness of your
nature and wonted courtesy in other matters. The which thing if you will be
pleased to do, it shall not only greatly rejoice mine heart, but make me
much indebted unto you for the same. The Lord for his Sons sake grant that
this labor of mine may be accepted of the Saints, and tend unto Gods glory:
and I heartily beseech the Lord, the GOD of all Grace, and Giver of all
Blessings, that he would multiply his heavenly Grace upon you and yours, that
you may always walk worthy of the Lord, and please him in all things. Thus
craving pardon for my boldness I humbly take my leave. The God of heaven give
you that blessing of blessings, which Jerome says, few men have, that you may
go on from Grace to Grace, and be a long time happy in this life, and for
ever happy in the life to come.

Your Honors humble Servant in all obseruant to be commanded. THOMAS STINT.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER.
GEntle Reader, the most skillful Fisher may sometimes catch a Carpe: for no
doubt, but there are many busy Brains, itching Ears, taunting Tongues, and
carping Conceits, that will critically play the right Momes; especially, they
that do least good, will find greatest fault with others good Endeavors. But
from such, I appeal to thy courteous and charitable Censure; with
consideration of want of time: commending this Book to thy courteous
entertainment: Read it at thy leisure, and mark it well; begin not alone, but
make an end: for happily, as it is in Saint John's Gospel, the best Wine is
reserved till the last. And thus I bid thee heartily farewell in the Lord.

A Plain and familiar exposition upon the 124.125.126. Psalms: called the
Psalms of degrees; written for the benefit of GODS Church.
COncerning the Book of the Psalms; it is an Epitome of the whole Bible,
teaching us what we are to believe and do, both to God and man, in which we may
as in a glass, clearly behold the nature of God, his wisdom, goodness, and
mercy toward his Church and children: as also most notable spectacles of his
fearful wrath and vengeance against the wicked and ungodly.

Next concerning the Title of the Psalms: first, here rises a question,
wherefore they are called the Psalms of degrees, or stars: or after some
translations of the ascending up, wherein the opinions of the Interpreters be
diverse: all which it shall not be needful to rehearse.

Some expound these Psalms steps or ascending up, to signify a completing
or finishing, because they were commonly song in the end, when the people
should depart, and the divine service was finished; and therefore were called
the Psalms of the ascending up, for the finishing and closing up of the divine
service. And indeed, because they are brief, and set forth very notable
doctrine: Therefore they were most meet for the conclusion and closing up of
all.

If men would learn to pray unto God, and crave for any mercy and blessing at
his hands; lo here be excellent platformes of true, hearty, and earnest
prayers: if men would give thanks for blessings received, or for Judgment
escaped, or for deliverance from wicked and ungodly men, here be most worthy
examples and directions. Again, if men would find comfort in temptation,
troubles and affliction, and learn with patience to bear them, there is no
part of the Bible more sweet and comfortable then this book of the Psalms:
and therefore it should be our delight and study, and we ought to spend the more
time in reading and in meditating of so worthy a Book, according to that of
our Savior: Search the Scriptures, because that will bring a man to true
happiness in the end.

Psalm. 124. Verse 1. If the Lord himself had not been on our side, etc.
The Argument of the Psalm.
THis Psalm is a thanksgiving to God for his great mercy in preserving his
people, placed as the Stories do show in the midst of the Gentiles and heathen
people, and as a flock of sheep in a wild forest, or in respect of the
multitude, as a City compared to a mighty kingdom, being compassed on every
side with the Kings of the Assyrians, The people of Israel, as a sheep among
many wolves.
the Egyptians, the Ammonites, the Ishmalites, the Moabites: who Satan had
stirred up with deadly hatred to vex and persecute them, seeking by all means
to root out them from off the earth; that thereby he might utterly deface and
abolish the word and worship of the Lord. This danger David saw, and thanked
God which had preserved his people from the rage of many Lions and Dragons:
which notwithstanding, that they never ceased to seek their destruction, yet
all that they went about was in vain. And what a miracle was this, that this
people could so long continue, notwithstanding the malice and rage of so many
devils.

David therefore in this Psalm, exhorts his people to be thankful to the
Lord their God, for so mightily preserving, defending, and delivering them from
the violence of so many Nations and Kingdoms, hating them, and persecuting
them on every side.

If the Lord himself had not been on our side now, may Israel say. If the
Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us, etc. Here
the Prophet David exhorts the people to consider how mercifully God had
delivered the^ from the hands of their enemies, and how miraculously he had
preserved that kingdom, and also to praise God with him for the same: which
words are not to be restrained to David's time only, for the Heathen people had
oftentimes before warred against them with such force and power as was like to
the rage of most huge and terrible floods of water, whereof he speaks here,
ready to ouerflow them: therefore seeing he mentions here no one kind of
deliverance, it seems that he means in these words of thanksgiving to set
forth whatsoever God had done for the succor and deliverance of his people at
any time before. Wherein he shows as it were in a glass, the dangerous
estate of the Church from the beginning, that the faithful may learn to know,
that it has not been preserved, by the strength and policy of man; but by the
miraculous power and hand of God: and therefore in their troubles and
afflictions should always fly to God for help and succor. Israel signifies
the people of God: let us acknowledge the^ that there is no way for Gods people
to escape the hands of their enemies, but by the help and power of God; and
that he will have the praise and glory thereof to be given to him alone. This
praise can none give unto God, but the true Israel: having experience both of
their own weakness, the force and power of their enemies, the dangers past,
and of the merciful help and protection of the Lord.

Hence we learn that it is our duty to bind our selves by solemn covenant
and promise to God; Solemn vows a christian duty.
that so he deliver us from misery, trouble, affliction, judgments,
punishments; and from unreasonable men: that then we will offer unto him praise
and thanksgiving, call upon him, serve and worship him all our days. Genesis
28.2.21.
Jacob vowed that if the Lord would be with him in his journey to keep him
and defend him in it: he would then build an house to God and worship him
there. Josias made a covenant unto the Lord, and all the people with him, Psa.
1.16.14 31.
to serve the Lord, who did deliver him from the curse of the Law. David did
often use this to bind himself by covenant to serve the Lord: he paid his
vows he made to God. So Iephtah vows unto the Lord that that he would offer
sacrifice unto the Lord, who gave him victory. Judge. 11:30.
And though the matter of his vow was unlawful, yet his vow to honor God was
the fruit of his faith. Well then, seeing it is not only lawful (but our
duties even) to make solemn covenant unto God, that if he shall be favorable
unto Sion, and build up the walls of Jerusalem: that if he shall deliver us
from any misery, judgment, or affliction whatsoever; that then we will be
careful to honor God, and to be thankful to his Majesty. Let us then make
this covenant with the Lord our God, let us vow obedience and newness of life:
and let us say with David, Psalm 119.106.
I have sworn and have steadfastly purposed to keep thy righteous judgment.
Let us even take a solemn vow of our own souls, that by the grace of God we
will have more care to praise him, to honor him, to serve him, to call upon
him. And so accordingly let us be mindful to perform the same: for the Lord
will require alll the vows we make unto him.

First, this may stir us up to consider what a solemn vow and promise we
have made in Baptism: (that is) to forsake the devil and all his works, the
vain pomp and glory of the world, that we will forsake sin and Satan, so
as we will not be led nor ruled by them, yea that we will manfully fight
under the banner of Christ Jesus, become his faithful soldiers and servants
unto our lives end.

Secondly sworn servants.
Not only are we bought to be Christ's servants, but also we are sworn: for
Baptism as on the part of God, it is a seal of the covenant of grace, to
confirm that promise of remission of sins, which God has made to us in the
blood of Jesus Christ. So on our parts it is a solemn resignation of of our
selves and our service to the Lord, wherein we give up our names to be enrowled
among his Soldiers and servants, swearing, binding and oblieging our selves to
reounce the service of the devil, the world and the flesh. And this oath of
resignation we have renewed, so often as we have communicated at his holy table:
whereof it is evident that they who have given their names to Christ, and yet
live licentiously walking after the flesh, are forsworn Apostates, guilty of
perfidie, and of foul Apostasy and desertion from Jesus Christ.

And thirdly, Not only are we bought and sworn, but we have received wages
and payment in hand, Thirdly we have received wages before hand of services to
be done.
which should make us ashamed (if we have so much as common honesty) to refuse
service to the Lord, whose wages we have received already. It may be said to
every one of us, as Malaciah in the name of the Lord spoke to the Levites of
his time. Mala. 1.10.
Who among you shuts the door of the Temple, or kindles a fire upon my Alter in
vain. And who among us can stand up and say, that he has done service to the
Lord for naught. Consider it when you will, for every piece of service ye have
done to the Lord, ye have received wages more then ten times: who has called
aright on his name, and has not been heard? who has given thanks for
benefits received, and has not found Gods benefits doubled upon him? who has
given alms in the name of the Lord, and has not found increase? I speak not
of rewards which God has promised: I speak of that only which we have
received already, the least of all Gods mercies showed unto us already, does
far exceed all the service that we poor wretches have done unto him: as
therefore we are content to receive the Lords pay, so let us never refuse to
give the service of our bodies and spirits unto him.

This is the covenant which we have made every one of us in our Baptism and
entrance into the Church of God, before the presence of God and his Angels:
before the congregation and Church of God: but (alas) we break it daily, and
have no care nor conscience to keep it. Well let us know this for a certain,
that the Lord will one day require our covenants and vows made unto him: for
he looks we should as well keep them as make them. Well then, would thou
be loath to break thy vow, covenant, or promise made to an honest man,
especially it being in thine own power to keep it, and such a promise as the
keeping whereof may procure thee much peace, liberty and happiness: I know you
would; Oh then let us be as careful to keep promise with God, to renounce
the world, the devil, and our sinful lusts: so shall we bring much honor to
Almighty God; and eeuerlasting good unto our own souls.

If the Lord himself had not been on our side when men rose up against us,
etc.

We learn hence, Public thanksgiving after deliverance required.
that it is the duty of every Christian man and woman to pray in public and
private, for the safety and good estate of the Church. So likewise, it is our
duty publicly to render thanks unto God for deliverance bestowed upon the
same. We must not be like the nine Leapers, who have wide mouths to beg, but
no heart nor mouth to give thanks for benefits received. It has ever been
the care and religious custom of Gods Church and people, after great and
notable deliverances from apparent and common Judgments, to render hearty and
earnest thanks unto God in solemn and public manner. Genesis 8.20.
When Noah and his Sons and family were newly delivered from perishing in the
flood, he did the first thing build an Altar, offer sacrifice, and call on the
name of the Lord; so Moses and the Children of Israel after their deliverance
out of Egypt, when they were safe, and their enemies drowned, do devoutly and
publicly sing praise and thanks unto the Lord. Judge. 5.1.2.3.
Deborah and Barake does the like. And the Jews being delivered from Hamans
treason, Hcster 9.19 20.
rejoice and keep a solemn day to sing praise unto the Lord.

Well then, let us apply this unto our selves; we are by Gods blessing the true
Church and people of God; professing the Gospel of Jesus Christ, truly, hating
all superstition and Idolatry, and for this cause cannot want many enemies; the
Papists the most subtle, cruel, and malicious enemies of Gods Church, have
often set upon us, assaulted us, sought to have invaded our King and Country,
as in eighty eight by sundry treasons to kill our late Queen of famous and
blessed memory. And to destroy our gracious King, Queen, and all his
posterity: But amongst the rest, and above all the rest, none comparable to
that last treason, which was most close and cunningly wrought a long time, in
contriuing most bloody and deuilish, most barbarous and savage, threatening and
seeking to destroy and root out, our King, Council, Spiritual and Temporal
Magistrates, aiming at the utter subversion of our English Nation: both Church
and Commonwealth. And surely if we consider well of it, I do not see in all
the Bible the like deliverance so wonderful and admirable.

First, being so long a time in hatching and contriuing with such secrecy and
concealment.

Secondly, being under the ground in hell as it were, in a place under the
earth, desiring darkness more then light, because the deed was evil.

Thirdly, being brought so near the execution of it, and never known nor
suspected before.

Fourthly, being disclosed so strangely, even by one of the traitors
themselves, one of the chief Actors in the tragedy. Being so general, so
fearful, and so monstrous, that it should not have bin only to the
destruction of one or two, but of the chief of the whole land, King, Queen,
Prince, Judges Bishops, in a word, the flower of the whole kingdom: the want
of any one whereof were a blemish to a State, and would bring a ruin to a
kingdom. Now do as Ahashuerosh did, Hest. 6.1.2.
cause the records to be read, and chronicles to be searched, ancient and
modern, divine or profane, amongst the Turks or Painims; yea if hell keep
any records search there, and see if ye can pattern this conspiracy, or match
this danger.

But there is no council against the Lord, man's wisdom is foolishness unto
him, his greatest strength but weakness, his life but a breath, and his
honor but a blast.

So then we see we have as great cause to render thanks unto the Lord as any
people or nation under heaven; that fifth day of November is a day to be
remembered, and never to be forgotten, a glad and joyful day, and we ought
every one in public and private to stir up our hearts in thanksgiving unto
the Lord, For it was the Lords doing, and it is marvelous in our eyes: It is
the day which the Lord has made for the glory of his Name, let us rejoice and
be glad in it.

Now it is not enough to keep that day as an idle holy day, to rest from labor
and work, to ring Bells, and make Bonfiers, to give our selves to eating,
drinking, and swilling, to sports and pastimes, for this is no honor to God.

But first our thankfulness must appear in a most reverent and thankful
commemoration, and Remembrance of this so great and wonderful a deliverance,
we must call it to mind, think of the greatness of it, we must speak of it
to our Children and Posterity, and call upon them to be thankful, for the
Child that is yet unborn is bound to bless God for it. Exodus 12.6.

Secondly, we must sing Psalms of praise and thanksegiuing unto God, in token
of thankfulness and that publicly in the Church and Congregation of Gods
people.

Thirdly we must come together into Gods house to hear his word and call upon
his name, and that is a special part of our unfeigned thankfulness.

Fourthly, we must testify our thankfulness in most hearty and dutiful
obedience, which is the greatest and the best sacrifice. 1. Sam. 15.22 And if
this be wanting, all that we do is nothing worth. Esaias. 29.13. so that for our
general deliverance there should be a general thanksegiuing in a general
reformation of Church and Commonwealth, of our hearts and sinful lives:
otherwise we are indeed unthankful if still we live in sin and rebellion.
Then notwithstanding our keeping a day, ringing of Bells, sport and play, if
their follow no reformation of our lives, we may justly fear a more dreadful
judgment: if not utter ruin and destruction to follow. Now (alas) where is
this use of Gods mercy and our deliverance, where does the people reform their
lives, reform their ways, grow more religious, conscionable, and careful to
hear, read, pray in their families: it is but a wonder of nine days, men
make little or no use of it, but to talk of it and speak of it.

And lastly, our thankfulness should beget in us an earnest hatred of Popery
and superstition so vilde, faulse, mischievous, bloody, and cursed religion: to
abhor it, to have nothing to do with it, but to abandon it: which that all
estates and degrees of men may do, the Lord grant for his mercy sake. Amen.

Verse 1. They had swallowed us up quick when they were so wrathfully
displeased at us.
THis repitition is not in vain for whiles we are in danger our fear is
without measure, but when it is once past, we imagine it to have been less
then it was indeed and this is the delusion of Satan to diminish and obscure
the grace of God. David therefore with this repetition stirs up the people
to a more thankfulness unto God for his gracious deliverance, and implyteth
the dangers which they had passed. Whereby we are taught how to think of our
troubles and afflictions past, least the sense and feeling of Gods graces
vanish out of our Minds. And here note how God deals with his people in
their distress, who suffers their enemies so far to prevail over them,
and deferreth his help so long till it seem impossible for them to escape: so
that they are compelled to confess and acknowledge that they must needs have
perished, if the mighty hand of God had not delivered them: These two things,
then we see the Israelites here to acknowlegde first that the Lord was on
their side; that is, succored and delivered the^, then also that it had not
been possible but they must utterly have perished if God had not preserved and
defended them.

David says, Psalm. 129 1.2.3
that albeit he was persecuted and sore oppressed for his profession, yet no
troubles could make him swerue from the Testimonies of God; Trouble is the best
trial of true Religion: It is no great thing to cleave unto the Testimonies of
God, when none pursues them for it; when authority allows it; when honor and
prosperity follows it: It is no great praise then to profess it. When the
Lord gloried of his Servant Job, That he was an upright man, fearing God: yet
Satan replied; Job. 1.
And what marvel does Job worship God for nothing: he knew there were many
hirelings, and temporizers in the world that worshipped not God sincerely and
therefore would not continue it, he thought Job to be one of these: lay now
thine hand upon all that he has, and he shall blaspheme thee to thy face. But
he was deceived for the more he was crossed, the nearer did he cleave unto the
Lord. Let us remember as Saint Paul has warned us, we have not yet resisted
unto blood, neither that which S. Peter calls the fiery trial have we endured,
and yet what a shame is it to see how many are become coulder in Religion: an
evident argument that they were never truly religious: for if they cannot stand
against offenses, how should they stand against oppressions and persecutions.

They have swallowed us up quick, in these words he expresses, not only the
strength and rage, and cruelty of the enemies, but also how weak and unable
the Isralites were to withstand them: and here he uses a similitude taken of
fierce and outrageous beasts, whose property is, when they have taken their
prey, to swallow them alive. Likewise when we would express the cruelty or
malice of any toward us, we are wont to say, he hates me so deadly, that he
could find in his heart to eat me, or swallow me up quick: the Prophet
means then that their enemies were so many and so mighty, that they needed no
armor or weapons to destroy them, but were able like fierce and cruel beasts,
to swallow them up alive, being so weak and so little a flock; let us learn
then to sing with David; If the Lord had not bin on our side, whose mighty hand
has delivered us, whose power alone has preserved us: and although the world
rage against us: though Satan vex us never so sore, they cannot hurt us. Be
of good comfort says Christ our Savior: For I have overcome the world Again,
I give unto them everlasting life, and none shall take them out of my hands.

First, this teaches us to remember and meditate of all such gracicious
deliverances, which he showed unto us either in general or particular; from
treasons, trecheries, conspiracies, and the like: in regard whereof we had long
since bin consumed had not God taken our parts against those that rose up
against us, whose purpose was to have devoured us: in regard of which treason
we may truly say as David: and now may England say, If the Lord had not been on
our side, if the Lord himself had not bin on our side, when men rose up
against us, viz. the Papists, they had then swallowed us up quick, when their
wrath was kindled against us, etc. Let us again remember how nere their
purpose has bin brought to pass, ready even to take effect, as we have spoken
in the 1. verse, and yet their net is broken, and we are delivered. This will
make us to hate and abandon all sin, which are the cause for the most part of
al his punishments, Lam. 3.39.
this will make us afraid to displease God by any one sin, fearing lest he
should justly give us over unto the will of our adversaries: this will make us
to fly to him for help and succor, to depend upon him, to seek by all means to
come into his love and favor, Least his wrath be kindled, and so we perish
from the right way: in a word this will be a special means to quicken us to
the performance of all dutiful obedience unto our good God, who has been so
gracious and merciful to us, thus to deliver us.

Secondly, we must call to mind often our perils by land, by water, by fire,
at home and abroad; our danger in sickness and diseases: and how many ways
God could plague us: with strange and grievous visitations, as the stone and
chollicke, the frencie, madness and manifold destructions: from all which the
Lord has graciously preserved us. We must remember Gods mercy in preserving of
us in our conception, in our birth, in our infancy, youth, middle age, old age,
and how he has continually provided for us all things necessary, whereas he
might justly for our sins have sufferd us to starve and and famish for want
of food: infinite are Gods works in preserving of us, which never ought to
slip out of our minds, but to be treasured up in faithful memories,
acknowledging that God and none but he does all things for us: and who
therefore would abuse this bounty and goodness of God, and not rather as the
Apostle Paul says, Be moved by these to forsake our sins, and turn to God
by true repentance: Romans 2.4.5.
being led, as it were, by these to return the more speedily unto God.

Here first we are to consider how great things God has done for our souls,
how he has kept us from the spiritual famine, in giving us his word, to be
so plainly and plentifully taught: how he has kept us from the power and
snare of the devil: how he has pulled us out of the dungeon of hell: and
has delivered us from Sin, Death Hell, and Condemnation, how he has made us
to know his Will, to understand his Word, how he has enlightened our
understandings: informed our Judgments in Truth, Psalm. 24.2.
sanctifying our affections, renewing our wills; rectified our reasons, pacified
our troubled consciences, assuaged the maledy of our minds: how he has kept
us from the power and dominion of sin: of children of wrath, he has made us
heirs of heaven, he has not only given us his Son, to be our Savior, but
his spirit to assure us, and his Sacraments to seal the assurance of our
salvation, in our hearts: he has elected, called, justified and sanctified us:
and many gracious promises has he made, from which he will never go back;
that undoubtedly he will glorify us; he gave us power over sin and Satan in
our conversion: he has given us strength from time to time to withstand the
temptations of the world, the flesh, and the devil, so that we may truly
say, What could the Lord have done more for his Vineyard? the Lord has not
dealt so with every Nation, neither had the Heathen such knowledge of his
Laws. O that men would wisely consider these things, it would make them leave
sinning, and move them to exercise themselves, meditating day and night to live
so, and to please God. O my people (says God) What wrong have I done unto
thee? or wherein have I wearied thee, Micah. 6.4, 5, 6
testify against me? I have delivered thee, redeemed thee, and sent before
thee Moses, Aaron, and Meriam i. Minister and Magistrate, O my people, remember
now, etc. and this with David, this will make us cry out and say, Come, and I
will tell you what the Lord has done for my soul.

Secondly, we must remember the manner how God has thus preserved us both in
body and soul: and that has been extraordinarily for the most part, on Gods
part, and undeservedly always on our part, extraordinary on Gods part, as in
those manifold treasons and treacheries, beyond all expectation: when there
have been no way as we might think for us to escape, when they have been
ready to put in execution their wicked devises; then has God awaked, as one
out of sleep, to rescue and deliver us, and that miraculously discovering
their hidden treacheries, as we have showed before: which the world knew not
of. Psalm. 107.
O that men would therefore remember to praise the Lord for his goodness, and
declare his wondrous works to the Children of men. Again, all this is
undeserved on our parts, for we have deserved justly to be cast off from God:
for we diserue nothing but damnation, and when we have done all we can do,
yet still we are unprofitable servants, Luke 17.
and therefore, with David we may justly say, not unto us Lord, not unto us,
Psalm. 115.1. Romans 5.
but to thy name give the praise, for thy mercy and truths sake.

Yea, when we were enemies to GOD, yet did he look upon us: all which as it
aggrauateth our misery, and Gods mercy, so it should aggrauate our hatred to
all sin, and love to God and goodness.

Thirdly, we must remember the end of our preservation, and that is to leave
us so much the more without excuse, at the latter day, if we remember not these
things to make aright use of them.

Secondly, to make our punishment, so much the greater, having abused Gods
mercy.

Thirdly, that we may be moved by the sight and consideration of Gods great
mercy, to yield him all possible thanks and praise, expressing the same, by all
dutiful obedience to his commandments.

Fourthly, that we may hereby see our own inabilitie, weakness and
insufficiency, how soon we might perish, were not God our good God, to help
us and do for us.

Fifthly, to make us depend upon his fatherly providence, in the use of all
means: Lam. 3.38.
for out of the mouth of the most high, proceeds both evil and good. That
is, both prosperity and adversity.

Sixthly, to make us humble suitors to Almighty God, for every good we stand in
need of, If the Lord himself had not been on our side, they had then
swallowed us up quick, for it is only He, who preserues us, and every good and
perfect gift comes from above. Iam. 1.17.


Seventhly, to attribute nothing to chance and fortune, but all to Gods mercy
in Christ Jesus.

Lastly, to deny our selves, with all that we have, acknowledging that not for
any merit in us, but only because God had a favor unto us, he has showed such
wonderful deliverance unto us both in soul and body: for had it not been
Gods endless mercy, we had long since been swept away, as the Prophet Esaiah
has it: Esaias. 19:
Except the Lord of of Hosts had left us a small remnant, we had long since
been like Sodom and like Gomorrah, for the Lord our God has not set his love
upon us, for any thing in us, but because he loved us, Deuteronomy. 7.7, 8
has he delivered, preserved, and redeemed us, and done all good unto us.

Here we are briefly to consider of these things. First how graciously God
bestows his blessings and benefits daily upon us: especially how he
continues the gracious liberty of the Gospel amongst us, increasing daily the
number of faithful Preachers: Who break unto us the bread of life: this is a
blessing of blessings, without which the soul may the sooner starve; yet
indeed of the wicked of the world no more esteemed of, then their old shoes,
and therefore they seldom hear it, lightly regard it, but never practice it:
this is that pearl to attain which we ought to sell all that we have,
rarher then to want it: if this meditation of the price of this word, were
truly in our hearts, it would not be that so many could suffer their people
to starve for want of it.

Secondly, let us remember our health, wealth, peace and liberty, and our daily
protecting under so gracious a government, which we enjoy by God: It is in,
Act 17.28 Verse 25.
and through him, that we live, we move and have our being, he gives us life
and breath, and all things, we cannot live one minute of an hour, without
Gods providence: he daily provides for us food and raiment: and no good
thing does he withhold from us: he defends us day and night from all dangers:
he makes men to be of one mind: and live together in unity: he blesses our
corn, our cattle, and all our substance: he prospers all our handy work,
our meat might be our bane, did not God continually bless it unto us: we
might have our Throats cut in our beds, were nothe watchful over us, by his
fatherly providence: he sends rain to moysten the earth: He gives grass
for the Cattle, Deuteronomy 11.
and Herbs for the use of man; he causes the Corn and oil to come to
perfection, that man may eat, and have all manner of fruit in abundance, he
never forsakes his inheritance, he blesses our going out, and coming in, On
foot on horseback, in company, and out of company, in public and secret, at
home and abroad, sleeping and waking, he is all in all unto us. This
meditation will make us to receive nothing without thanksgiving, to live
circumspectly, to look to our ways, and to study to please God, to give our
hearts unto him, and to make him our treasure.

First, this serves to put us in mind of all those gracious promises that God
has made unto us, either of temporal blessing; or spiritual grace, which we
are to believe, that in Gods due time they shall be performed, and so we shall
not lose our reward. The not believing of this truth, is one maine cause of
sin, and the continuance of it: and no one thing does make the wicked so
desperate in evil courses, as this, to think it is altogether in vain to
live a godly life. We must therefore remember and believe that God is a
plentiful rewarder of all those that seek him, Heb. 11.6. Ioh. 16.23. Mat.
1.28.
that whatsoever we ask in Christ his name, shall be given us. That whosoever
comes to Christ, Ezec. 18.31
laden with the burden of his sins, shall have refreshing and find rest to
his soul: That whosoever does repent him of his sins from the bottom of his
heart shall be forgiven; Ios. 1.5
that he will never fail nor forsake his, and infinite such which God has
made to all his children. Heb. 13* 5


But especially we ought to Meditate, and often call to mind That maine
promise of life eternal, Mar. 26.16
which God has promised to all believers, and most surely will perform it:
whosoever believes shall be saved. So God loved the world that he gave his
only begotten Son that whosoever believes in him shall not perish but have
everlasting life. Ioh. 3.16


And herewithall to join the meditation of the certainty of the future
resurrection after death, and the full fruition of everlasting glory described
at large: 1. Cor. 15.
and if any thing in the world will move us to forsake our sins, and return
to God: this will.

The want of this is the cause of all manner of sin in the wicked, they say
and believe, that it is in vain to serve God, Mal. 3.14.
and what profit it is that we have kept GODS Ordinances, and walked so
mournefully before the Lord etc. It profits a man nothing to delight himself
in God: Job. 34.9.
They say, unto God depart from us, and what can the Almighty do for us? they
take the Timbrell and Harp, and rejoice at the sound of the Organ: Job. 22.17.
They spend their days in wealth and mirth, and in a moment go down to the
Grave, therefore they say unto God, Job 21.12, 13, 14, 15
Depart from us, for we desire not the knowledge of thy ways: What is the
Almighty that we should serve him? thus as the godly are stirred up by Gods
gracious promises to serve him the better, so the wicked by not being persuaded
of the truth of his promises for time to come, abuse Gods goodness, and spend
their days in all manner of sin, to their own destruction.

Lastly, in a word, our remembrance of Gods favor toward us must be constant,
without wearines, and certain, without change: as David says, Psalm. 119.93
I will never forget Gods Word: It must be thankful for all Gods mercies,
spiritual and temporal. Psalm. 63.5.6.
My mouth (says David) shall praise thee with joyful lips, when I remember
thee. It must be fruitful, provoking us to al good works, and quickening us to
every good duty: I will meditate in thy precepts, Psalm: 119-1* 5
and have respect to thy ways. It must be cheerful in affliction, and
victorious in time of trouble, that we may say as David, Unless thy law had
been my delight, Psalm. 119.9* 2
I had perished in my affliction. And thus much of the remembrance of Gods
works of mercy, in preserving of us, both for time past, present, and to come.

Verse 3. Yea the waters had drowned us, and the stream had gone over our
souls.
TErrible is the rage of fire, but much more terrible is the violence and rage
of water, for that no power cannot resist. Now says David, like as huge and
mighty streams of water, carried with great power and violence, do suddenly
overthrow, and beat down whatsoever they meet withal: even such is the rage
of the enemies of Gods Church, which no power of man is able to with-stand.
Therefore let us learn to trust to the Lords defense and succor; for what
else is the Church but as a little Boat tied by a Rivers side, and by violence
of the water soon carried away, or as a Reed which by force of the stream is
easily plucked up and carried away: such was the people of Israel, in David's
time, being compared to the Gentiles round about them, such is the Church at
this day, compared to the Adversaries, such is every one of us in respect of
the force and power of the malignant Spirits, we are like a withered leaf,
soon blown from the Tree, and he like a mighty wind or tempest, not only
blowing down leaves, but plucking up, and overthrowing trees and all; what are
we then poor wretches able to do of our pour and strength for our defense:
we must learn therefore by faith, wholly to rest upon God, for what is our
victory, but even our faith, let this be then our assured trust, let this be
the rock of our safety, help and succor, that God will be our defender and
keeper, that the great floods and mighty waters carry us not away,

Teaching us thus much that though we have many enemies and sore adversaries,
as David and Christ had, yet they shall not prevail against us, but we shall
prevail against them do they what they can, as David and Christ did. Israel in
Egypt was cruelly handled, but yet the more the Egyptians did vex them, the
more they multiplied and grew, as it is in Exodus 3.12. And when they had done
all the spite that they could against them, yet at the last they were delivered
out of their hands, they themselves being oftentimes plagued by the Almighty
for their sakes, and in the end most fearfully drowned in the red Sea, as it
is most apparent in the 14 chapter of the same book. Mention is made of a
great battle fought between Christ and the Devil, Re^el. ^^.7
and their Armies, but if you mark the sequel thereof, you shall find that
Christ and his side had the victory, for as it is witnessed of the Dragon, who
is the Devil, and his Angels, who are his soldiers that they prevailed not,
neither was there plague found any more in Heaven, in the 8. verse of this
chapter, so it is recorded, to the glory and comfort of all those that take
Christ's part, that they overcome the Devil the accuser of Gods children by the
blood of the Lamb, and the word of their testimony in the eleventh verse
thereof, but to omit other Testimonies and examples, whereof the holy Scripture
is full and frequent, in this case, let the words of our Savior Christ suffice
us at this time, Mat. 16.18.
he tells us that the gates of Hell, whereby is meant, all the power and force
thereof shall not overcome his Church, etc. or be able to overthrow, such as
do depend upon him by a true and justifying faith. In the seventh Chapter of
the same Book, Mat. 7.25
toward the latter end thereof he does show the stablenesse of them that
belong unto the Lord, and have care both to hear the Word of the Lord and do
it, by a notable comparison whereby he does resemble them to an House which is
built upon a Rock, which cannot be cast down by any tempest of weather
whatsoever, but does stand always still and cannot fall: a thing never to be
thought of enough, it is so full of comfort and consolation unto every godly
soul, chiefly unto him that is afflicted here in this world.

Objection. But what may the reason thereof be, may a man say, that thus the
godly should always prevail and be never ouerthrown by their enemies, but
overcome them rather, experience does teach us that they are fewer in number
then the wicked are, that they are weaker for power and strength, that they are
more simple for wit and policy, and that they are more careless for
diligence and watchfulness, then their Adversaries be: how then comes it to
pass that they have the upper hand?

Answer. The Prophet Esaias does declare it unto us in the 8. chapter of his
Prophecy, and the 10. verse thereof; it is in few words, because the Lord is
with them, and for them.

For first he is stronger then all, being able to resist all power that is
devised against him and his, and to do whatsoever he will both in heaven and in
earth.

2. He is wiser then all, knowing how to prevent them in all their ways, and
also how to bring matters to pass for the good of his people.

3. He is diligenter then all, to stand as it were upon his watch, and to take
his Advantage when it is offered him, Psalm. 121.4.
for He that keeps Israel does neither slumber nor sleep. Lastly, he is
happier then all to have good success in all his enterprises, for he does
prosper still in all things which he does take in hand, and none can resist a
thought of his; yea the very word that goes out his mouth, Esa 55.11.
does accomplish that which he will, and prosper in the thing whereunto he
does send it: In war, all these four things are respected in a Captain that
will still overcome: first, that he be strong; secondly, that he be wise;
thirdly, that he be diligent; and lastly, that he be fortunate, for the victory
goes not always with the strong, nor always with the wise, nor always with
the diligent, nor always with the fortunate: but sometimes with the one of
them, and sometimes with the other, but look where all four do concure
together, there is always the victory: and therefore seeing all of them are
in God, it is no marvel, though those whose battles he does fight do always
overcome and get the victory.

Objection. But me thinks I hear some obiecting, against that which has
been said; saying, that it is not true, that Gods children do always
prevail against their enemies, but that their enemies often prevail against
them, for we see that they are murdered and put to death: mention is made
thereof in the book of the Revelation, and in other of the holy Scriptures
besides, and a thousand examples every where do demonstrate the same daily
unto us, for we do behold still with our own eyes, and hear with our own
ears, that the godly have the worst end of the staff, and that the wicked do
bear sway and dominion over them; how then is it true, which has been
spoken, that do the ungodly what they can, yet the righteous shall still
prevail against them, as here David and Christ did?

Answer. The answer hereunto may easily be collected out of Paul's words in
the eighth of the Romans, the latter end of the chapter which was touched
before, where he does declare, that though we be killed all the day long,
and be accounted as Sheep for the Slaughter: yet we be notwithstanding
that, even then and therein Conquerours, yea more then Conquerours, through him
that loves us,

Howsoever that this may seem a Paradoxe to flesh and blood, and be as a
Riddle unto some of GODS own Children themselves, yet it is true in Divinity,
and a clear point to them, whose eyes are opened to behold the mysteries of
the Almighty, and to see the deep things of the Lord.

For tell me I pray you, is not he a Conqueror, yea more then a Conqueror,
that does so subdue his enemies, that they can no more rise up against him?

A man may vanquish his enemy and beat him clean out of the field, yet
afterward he may gather a power against him again, and put him to the worst.

But here Satan, the world, and all our enemies, are so beaten down, and
trodden under foot, by all such as suffer and dye for the truth, that they can
never assault them any more, to stir either tongue, hand or foot against
them, to do them any hurt; for they go immediately upon that their death and
passion to Heaven, and unto all that happiness, which is provided there for
them, as John does show, Apo. 14.13.
saying: Blessed are the dead which dye in the Lord, even so says the spirit,
for they rest from their labors, and their works do follow them.

Christ a powerful Savior stronger the^ Samson* yea then that strong one.
Judges 16.1.
O wonderful work, Surely the weakness of God is stronger then man, he is
that strong one indeed, stronger then Sampson, when the Philistians thought
they had him sure within the ports of Azzah, He rose at midnight, and took
the doors of the gates of the City, and two Posts, and carried them away with
the bars thereof on his shoulders, up to the top of the mountain which is
before Hebron.

But our mighty Conqueror and deliverer the Lord Jesus, has in a more
excellent manner magnified his power, for being closed in the Grave, clasped in
the bands of death, and a stone roled to the mouth of the Grave, the Sepulcher
sealed, and guarded with soldiers, he rose again the third day, before the
rising of the Sun he carried like a victor, the bars and Posts of death
away, as upon his shoulders, and upon the mount of Olives, he ascended upon
high, leading Captivity captive. 2. King. 18.35.
Let Satan boast like Rabsecha, that the Lord is not able to deliver Jerusalem
out of his hands, Deuteronomy. 26.29
he is a blasphemous liar, the Lord will rebuke him, and will shortly tread
Satan under our feet. It is the curse of the wicked, he shall be oppressed,
and there shall be none to deliver him. Psalm. 143.12
But blessed be the Lord, who has provided a strong deliverer for us, who
certainly shall set us free; glory therefore be unto him for ever.

It is good for us to know this, as also to think oftentimes upon it: for
first by it we may learn, to take heed we go not about any thing which may be
hurtful or pernicious unto Gods children, for if we do (we see here) our
labor shall be in vain, we shall not prevail against them, but they
prevail against us. He is a very fool that will attempt a thing which he
knows for certain he cannot bring to pass, and which he is sure will be
his bane and destruction, but we know that we cannot prevail against the
faithful, and we are sure that our plots against them, will turn to our
overthrow, and therefore let us beware that we lift not up our selves against
them at any time.

Again, from hence we learn, even so many of us, as do truly serve the
Lord, and fear him from our hearts, that there is no cause why we should
fear Man, or what he can do against us.

Oh we may rejoice and be glad as it is required of us, in which places you
may read at your leisure, fear not beloved, be of good comfort, Zeph. 3.14.
though that you have enemies in every Corner yet be not discouraged, you shall
have the conquest: And the Lord your God shall deliver you: 1. Pet. 3:14.
out of all your troubles, according to the saying of David, Psalm. 34 9
Great are ihe troubles of the righteous, but ihe Lord delivers them out of
them all; he is wise, he does know how to do it, and he is omnipotent, he is
able for to do it, and as for his willingness, he is ready at all times to
accomplish it, wherefore be (I say) of good comfort, and fear not, but trust in
the Lord and commit your ways unto him, and he shall bring all things to pass
according to your hearts desire in the end: he that delivered Noah from the
flood, Lot from Sodom, Jacob from Esau, Joseph from Potiphar, Moses from
Pharaoh, Israel from Egypt, the three Children from the Fire, Peter from Herod,
Mordecay from Hamman, and here Christ and David, from all sorts of enemies; He,
even he, will deliver you out of all trouble. If you say that your enemies are
many, and that the whole world is against you, I will say again to you with
Elisha the Prophet, 2. Kin. 6.16 2. Chr. 32*7
and Hezechiah the King, that there are more with us then are against us, for
God and all the Host of Heaven is for us: if you say again, that your enemies
are wise and politic, and they are able to ouer-reach you by their craft and
cunning, considering that you are but simple and ignorant like Doves, I will
answer you with the Apostle, 1. Cor. 1.25
That the foolishness of our God, who is on our side, is wiser then their best
wisdom, and that he will destroy their wisdom, and bring their
understanding to naught to do us good. If you say in the third place, that
your enemies have hemmed you in, and compassed you about, that it is impossible
for you to escape them, I will answer you with the Angel Gabriel, 1. Cor. 1.19
that with God nothing shall be impossible, and with the three Children
Shadrach, Meshach and Abednego, that GOD both can and will deliver you, Dan.
3.17
when they say, Behold our GOD we serve, is able to deliver us from the hot
fiery Furnace, and he will deliver us out of thine hand O King.

If you say lastly, that your Enemies have already taken you, and do put you
daily unto death: I will answer you with Paul in Romans the eight, verse the
seven and thirtieth, which place was touched before, and with John in the
Revelation the twenty two chapter, the twelfth verse, that by this means you
do overcome your enemies most of all.

For when you resist thus unto blood, and dye for the truth, you give your
enemies such an overthrow, that they never rise up against you any more; and as
for your selves, you enter presently into Heaven, the only place which you
strive for: Even as he has the victory most in this world, who does enter
into the City, and take all the spoil thereof, and does confound his
adversaries that they can never stir any more against him.

In consideration of all which things cleave fast unto Christ I beseech you,
and fear no danger or peril, but rejoice in the Lord and be glad, always
fighting for the Crown of righteousness, which shall be given unto every
one, who does with patience wait for the appearing of our Lord Jesus, and love
the same, and therefore fear not, be not any whit discouraged, hold out unto
the end: certain it is thou shall be blessed, and in so doing thou shall have
a Crown of Life.

If the Lord himself had not been on our side, the waters had drowned us, and
the stream had gone over our souls. This serves to comfort the godly, in that
the Lord sits upon the floods, and that to this purpose, to perform this
gracious promise, When thou passest thorough the waters Esaias 42:3
I will be with thee: and through the floods, that they shall not ouerflow
thee. So Eliphaz tells Job, In six troubles he will deliver thee, Job 5.19.
and in the seventh evil shall not come near thee. As if he had said, Though
six and seven troubles beset thee, yet the evil of them shall not come near
thee. This presence of God with his children, makes them glory in their
troubles, as in a Crown upon their heads: and the Apostle Paul gloried, 2.
Cor. 11.
that he was more in affliction then all the false teachers. Heb. 11.35
The Saints were in most deadly trials, and would not be delivered, namely,
upon unlawful conditions, because they found God as good as his word.

Therefore, miserable men are they that withdraw their hearts from the Lord,
and seek him not in his promises, not in their prayers, but trust to wind out
themselves by other means: some make falsehood their refuge, and some embrace
the world, and carnal means, and lean upon the arm of flesh: these fly
from their defense, Jonas 2.8
wait upon lying vanities, and forsake their own mercy. It Is, as if Noah, for
fear of the inundation, should have left the Arc, and fled to the Mountains,
which had been to have thrown himself into the midst of the waters: and thus
do they, that to avoid troubles, fear, and fly their Profession, and so
Apostasy, and Idolatry, and corruption drownes them. We must rather with the
Church, fly to the Rock, Psalm. 69.2.
Save me, O God, the waters are upon me: yea, I am come to the deep waters.
And then, being delivered, we must go back unto him, Psalm: 124
saying, Salvation is the Lords: if the Lord had not been with us, Verse 3:
the waters must needs have drowned us when they roared upon us.

This serves to persuade every man to become godly, seeing this privilege
belongs only to such: there is no man but desires safety in danger, and yet no
man but the godly man can assure himself of safety therein. If then thou
would have assurance of this promise, thou must practice piety in these
seueralls:

First, Become an humble person, How to be safe in dangers.
repent, and turn to God, cry out of sin, sue daily for pardon, as for life
and death, and then let all the miseries and calamities in the world come upon
thee, thou shall be safe: only sin is as poison, cast into the Lords Cup:
GOD gives thee no poison to drink but that is of thy own tempering: pull the
sting out of these Scorpions, and the fight only will be dreadful, but the
danger is past.

2. Pet. 2.7.
Secondly, As thou mournest for thine own, so for other men's sins. God
delivered just Lot, vexed with the unclean conversation of the wicked.

Thirdly, Get thy heart washed with the blood of Christ: be a true Israelite, a
true believer: for God is good to Israel, even to the pure of heart: Psalm. 73.1.
and deliver Israel, O Lord.

Fourthly, Get innocence and uprightness into thy life, to be able to say
with David, Psalm. 18.24.
Deliver me, according to mine uprightness.

Fifthly, Draw daily nearer unto God: and if God be with thee, or thou with
him, thou need not fear, Psalm. 23.4.
though thou walk in the shadow of death: and do this three ways; first,
get near him by thy affection, love him in his Word and Image, because he
has loved me, Psalm. 91.14.
I will deliver him and exalt him: that is, set him out of the reach of
trouble. Secondly, In obedience; I am thine (says David) O save thy servant.
Thirdly, Psalm. 91.9.
In thy confident prayer: for he said to the Lord, Thou art my refuge.

Verse 4. The deep waters of the proud had gone over our soul.
He Incists still in his complaint against his enemies, and describes them
from the quality of their persons, Enemies of David described.
they were proud. This is a style commonly given to the wicked, because as it
is our eldest evil, so is it the strongest and first that strives in our
corruption, to carry men to a transgression of the bounds appointed of the
Lord. From the time that pride entered into Adams heart, that he would be higher
then God had made him, he spared not to eat of the forbidden tree: and what
else is the cause of all transgression, but that a man in his ignorant pride
will have his will preferred to the will of God.

Neither is it without cause, that wicked men are so commonly called proud men,
for pride is the mother of rebellion against God and man. By pride Satan and
his confederate Apostates usurped to be like unto God, Pride an horrible evil.
and by the same sin he drew man into the similitude of his own
condemnation: so that now every man by nature is a proud man, which makes him
shake off the yoke of God, and without regard transgress the limits of
obedience appointed unto him by God; as Pharaoh would not let Israel go, till
the Lord slew his firstborn: so our nature, now corrupted, shall never render
obedience to God, nor love to man, till the first borne sin, that is pride,
be subdued by grace.

For grace, on the contrary, Grace works humility in the godly.
ever works humility: so soon as the eyes of Gods children are opened to see
their sins, they abhor themselves, the comb of their natural pride is
pulled down, and they abase themselves before God and man. It was the humble
speech of Abraham, the father of the Faithful, Genesis 18.27
I am but dust and ashes. It was the voice of Jacob, I am not worthy of the
least of Gods mercies. David has the like, Who am I, Lord? etc. Gedions voice,
My fathers house is the least in all Israel. And John Baptist, who received
praise, that a greater Prophet was not among the children of women,
acknowledged in humility, Ioh. 1.27.
that he was not worthy to loose the latchet of Christ's shoe.

The Centurian confessed, he was not worthy that Christ should come under his
roof.

Peter's voice was, Depart from me, for I am a sinful man.

Saint Paul, I am not worthy to be called an Apostle: yea, he confessed
plainly, he was the least of all the Apostles, and the chief of all sinners.
Thus all the Children of GOD give glory to GOD, by down casting themselves:
and if you will go through all the examples of the Book of GOD, ye shall
find, that they who have been greatest in Gods estimation, have been always
smallest in their own eyes: the heart which has received most from GOD, ever
thinks least of it self.

The deep waters of the proud, have gone even over our soul.

Thus David sets out the afflictions and calamities of the Church and of the
godly, whom the world does not only hate, but cruelly persecute; whereby we
may see, that it has not only a greedy desire, but also power to hurt,
murder, and destroy. Satan likewise goes about like a raging Lion, seeking
whom he may devour: that we fall not therefore every moment into desperation,
or otherwise perish, it is because he is greater which is in us, then he which
is in the world; as David says, If God had not been with us, our enemies had
swallowed us up quick.

A proud man his own punishment.
But here is the just recompense of his pride, Let the proud be ashamed (says
David.) He would feign have honor or pre-eminence, which God will not give unto
him: he flies shame and contempt, but God shall power them upon him. The
consideration of this serves to humble the pride of man. Since they are but men
of clay, why wax they proud to oppress others? It was a very worthy warning
which a certain Ambassador gave once to Alexander the Great, That flies and
worms at length should eat the flesh of Lions. If proud men considered this,
that they are but earth, and that shortly their beautiful bodies will become
carcasses to be eaten by worms, it would abate their natural pride, by which
they trample dowme others, poorer and weaker then they, under their feet: and
when they shall go the way of all flesh, they shall then say, What has pride
profited us? 2. Cor. 10.
and what has the pomp of riches brought us to? When they shall see, that all
the days of their life they have wearied themselves in vain, and then shall
be plunged into irreuocable and intolerable torments.

These are fools, The miserable condition of a proud man.
and of all fools the greatest, they set themselves as parties against the
Lord; for he resists the proud, not considering that he is stronger then
they, and they cannot stand before him: the Lord is the most high God; but it
is not height makes a man stand before him: none so sure to stand in his sight,
as they who are humble, and little in their own eyes, to them he gives
grace; where it is the just recompense of the proud, that because they usurp
to be before all others, the Lord puts them behind all, and casts them
down to the lowest room, for mounting to the highest. A notable example
hereof we have in that Pharesie, who was not so far before the Publican in
his own estimation, as he was behind him in the account of Christ, who
judges of things according as they are.

Here then we must put a difference between sins of pride, and sins of
infirmity: he that of rebellion and pride departs from Gods Commandments,
not so, he that sins of weakness, in whom every sin committed increases
a grief for sin, a hatred of sin, and a care to withstand it, for to these
there is no condemnation: these are not under the Law, but under Grace: mercy
always waits on them, as a refreshing Medicine to restore them, when of
infirmity they fall.

But as for the wicked, who sin, and are proud and impenitent in their sins,
the curse of God is upon them, though it be not seen at the first, but like a
moath, or secret consumption, it eats them up, it shall devour their
substance, and shall quickly turn their glory and prosperity, into shame and
confusion.

First, let us therefore consider, and that seriously, that all worldly pomp,
all thy bravery, thy gay attire, and all thy vaunting of it in the world,
Eccles. 1.2.
all is but vanity; vanity of vanities, all is but vanity This was the foot
of Salomons saying, who knew too much of this by experience: and no question
but the like conclusion a number of proud Gallants make in the world, who have
delighted to see and follow fashions, so long till all is spent, and then
having nothing, cry out when it is too late, All is but vanity, and vexation of
spirit; and a most vain thing to vaunt it so in pride: therefore let us lay
this to heart, 1. Cor. 7.31.
that the time is short, and the fashion of this world passes away. See this
vanity, and it will abate thy pride.

Secondly, learn to know thy self thoroughly: remember thou art but a man,
therefore mortal, frail flesh, thy body an house of clay: why then will thou,
O vain and mortal man bestow so much cost upon thy rotten carcass, and pamper
it up in iollitie, and in the mean time neglect thy soul. Remember, whosoever
thou art, of what degree soever, that of David, Lord, what is man! or the son
of man! as if he should have said, Lord, man is nothing; yea, vanity it
self, and less then nothing, as David speaks elsewhere. Yea, remember with
thy self, that it is not all thy pride shall make thee to be respected, but
rather ridiculous to the world, and in the end breed sorrow to thy self. In
a word: remember the saying of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 2.22.
Man's breath is in his nostrils, and wherein is he to be accounted of: As if
the Prophet had answered, In nothing.

Objection. But I do but as the most do, who follow the fashion.

Exodus 23.2.
Answer. Thou must not follow a multitude to do evil.

Now it is a great evil, and a grievous sin, to be given over to follow
fashions, it being expressly forbidden in the Word of God; Be not conformed to
this world: Romans 12.28
or, Fashion not your selves according to this world.

Therefore to conclude, Pride is a most accursed and damnable sin. Esaias 28.13
Woe to the crown of pride: it shall be trodden under feet. Psa. 119.21
Cursed are the proud. Pro. 16.18.
Pride goes before destruction: Pro. 18.12
and a haughty spirit before a fall. Esaias 5.14.
Before destruction the heart of man is haughty, their glory and their pomp
shall descend into hell. Read, Woe unto them that are wise in their own eyes,
Dan. 4.30. to 37. verse. 21. Psalm. 124.4 Genesis 19.24 Ezekiel. 16.49 50. Revel. 18.4,
5, 6, 7, etc. Esaias 10.5. to 20. and 13.11.
and prudent in their own sight. Remember how wonderfully Sodom, Babylon, and
Tyrus, came down for their pride. The Devil thrown down from heaven to hell
for his pride: in all which is set down the terrible judgments of God against
pride. Let women read with shame, Esaias 3.16. to the end: I mean, the proud
Fizgigs of this age, who deck and trim the body beyond their calling and
ability. Read Ier. 44.10.11, 12 where as the Apostle would have them not to
be outwardly adorned with plaited hair, and wearing of gold, or putting on
gorgeous apparel: but let it be the hid man of the heart, in that which is not
corruptible, even the ornament of a meek and quiet spirit, which is in the
sight of God of great price: 1. Pet. 3.3, 4, 5.
for after this manner the holy women in old time were adorned, etc. Let women
(and men also) mark that place well: but women especially, as being most given
to pride, and it being properly spoken to them; where we see pride in apparel
flatly forbidden by the Word of God: howsoever my words may seem unsavory to
the wicked, and I dare say, to no other, but such as bear a proud mind.

And thus I conclude from that which has been said, that the proud (unless
they will forsake their abominable pride) (for then they shall have mercy)
shall be as certainly damned, Pro. 28.13.
as God has appointed a Judgment day: Esaias 14.15
and proud Lucifer shall be brought down to hell: Mat. 11.23.
and thou Capernam, which art exalted unto heaven, shall be brought down to
hell.

Verse 5. But praised be the Lord, which has not given us over for a prey
unto their teeth.
FRom the meditation of his enemies malice, he returns again to the
meditation of Gods mercy: and so it is expedient for us to do, lest the number
and greatness and malitiousnesse of our enemies make us to faint. When we
look upon them, it is good that we should cast our eyes upward to the Lord,
then shall we see they are not so near to hurt us, No enemy so near to hurt
us, as God is near to help us.
as the Lord our God is near to help us: and that there is no evil in them,
which we have cause to fear, but we shall find in our God a contrary (good)
sufficient to preserve us.

Comfort against the contempt of men.
And truly it should greatly comfort all the godly, to remember, that such as
are their enemies, are Gods enemies also, since they are far from the
obedience of Gods Law: what marvel then if they be also far from that duty
of love which they owe unto us: it may content us to want that comfort in men,
which otherwise we might and would have, when we consider that God wants his
glory in them; let this sustain us, when we see that godless men are enemies
unto us.

Comfortable examples thereof.
Otherwise we could not endure, if when Satan, and his instruments, come near
to pursue us, the Lord were not near to protect us. Comfortable is it, Genesis
31.24.
that when Laban, with great fury, followed Jacob, the Lord stepped in between
them, and commanded Laban not to hurt him: and when Satan, many a time,
intended to destroy Job, he found that he could not, Job. 1: 10.
because the Lord was a hedge and defense unto him.

This is of GODS marvelous working, that we being in the midst of the
wicked, who like so many rauenning Woolues, thirst for our blood and before the
mouth of that great roaring Lion, that seeks to destroy us, we should still
be preserved: for the which we may give thanks with David, Praised be the
Lord which has not given us over for a prey unto their teeth.

He exhorts the faithful to be thankful for their deliverance, and
expresses unto them how, and as it were with what words they should declare
their thankfulness; wherein he sets forth yet further by another
similitude, that it could not be but they must utterly have perished, if God
had not miraculously defended them: but praised be the Lord, which would not
suffer us so to perish. He says not, Which delivered us, albeit he did indeed
mightily deliver them: but, which has not given us as a prey: for this is it
which here specially the holy Ghost sets forth, that the wicked cannot hurt
the godly, be they never so many, mighty, furious, cruel, and terrible, like
to raging and violent waters, like to cruel and outrageous beasts, falling
upon them with open mouth, except the Lord give them into their hands. Let us
therefore with David, sing praises unto the Lord our God, which keeps and
defends us. Let this be then our assured trust, let this be the rock of
our safety, help, and succor, that God will be our defender and keeper, that
the great floods and mighty waters carry us not away.

The godly live in this world like sheep among wolves. What the wicked are to
the godly.
Every wicked man, in whom Satan rules, is like a Cananite to an Israelite, a
thorn in our eye, a prick in our side: yea, and as a dart of Satan shot at
us, to drive us away from the fear of God: if so we can take them, it should
greatly strengthen us to endure all troubles that can come from them. There will
never be peace among them, between whom the Lord himself in Paradise
proclaimed enmity: and howsoever, to strengthen themselves in an evil cause,
the wicked go together by bands and companies: yet shall it not avail them,
nor hurt us. Babels builders, Moab, Ammon, and Edom, conspiring in one, may
tell us, though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not escape unpunished: the
wicked are like thorns before the fire, their multitude may well imbolden it,
but cannot resist it; not one of the^ shall escape the strokes of God, though
for a time he defer his judgments.

First, this teaches us to remember the judgments of God upon the wicked,
that so seeing Gods dealing with them, we may better. rified by their example
to take heed of the like sins, that we may prevent the l^ke judgments.
This is a notable means against sin, and often enjoined us in holy Scripture,
both generally and specially.

Generally: O come, and see the works of God, Psalm. 66.5.
how terrible he is in his doing toward the children of men. Psalm. 105.5
Verse. 7.
Remember the marvelous works that he has done: his wonders, and the
judgments of his mouth. He is the Lord our God, his judgments are in all the
earth. And we are not only to remember them, but in remembrance of them, to
talk of them, (Praised be the Lord which has not given us over for a prey
unto their teeth) publishing and declaring them unto others, that so they also
may be kept from the like, and escape the like punishments, as David did; With
my lips have I declared all the judgments of thy mouth. Psalm. 119.13.
David's practice was to meditate of the judgments of God, in so much that he
laid the judgments of God before him, I remembered thy judgments of old, and
comforted my self. Psalm. 119.30. Verse. 52.


Specially: we are commanded to remember Gods particular judgments: and this
also is a special means to keep us from sin: First, let us remember his
Judgments on the wicked Angels: 2. Pet. 2.4.
for, God spared not the Angels that sinned, but cast them down to hell, and
delivered them into chains of darkness, to be reserved unto Judgment.
Secondly, his judgments on men: Remember Lots wife: Luke 17.32
and how he spared not the old world, 2. Pet. 2.5.
bringing in a Flood upon the world of the ungodly: how he turned the Cities
of Sodom and Gomorrah into ashes, condemned them with an overthrow, and all to
make them an example unto those that after should live ungodly. Even so, the
Lord knows how to reserve the unjust unto the day of Judgment to be
punished: 2. Pet. 2.9, 10.
chiefly, those that walk after the flesh, in the lust of uncleanness, and
despise government, etc. Thus, when Pharaoh hardened his heart against God,
Psalm. 136.
the Lord caused the Red Sea to overthrow him. 1: Sam. 15.
When Saul grew rebellious and disobedient, the Lord reiects him. Acts 12.23
When Herod waxes proud, the Lord caused the very woormes to devour him. When
Caine played the vile hypocrites part, the Lord makes him of a Prince, Genesis 4.
a Vagabond and a runagate upon the face of the earth. Mat. 27.
When Judas plays the hypocrite, and proves a villainous Traitor, the Lord
suffers him to despair, and make away himself. When Ananias and Saphira lie
unto the holy Ghost, Acts 5.
they are both smitten with present death. Thus, if we will seriously remember
Gods judgments, for such and such sins, every forewarning will be a good
forearming of our selves against all the sins of wicked and ungodly men.

The consideration whereof should move us to hasten our repentance, not to live
in sin any longer, but to walk circumspectly in this present world, Ephesians.
5.15 16.
and redeem the time, because the days are so evil, and to cease from sin,
by the example of our Savior Christ: and to keep our selves unspotted of the
world, 1. Pet. 4.1.
and to shun the paths of the wicked, Iam. 1.27.
not communicating with them in their sins, Revel. 18.4.
least we be partakers with them in their plagues. We must take heed, Ioh.
5.14.
and sin no more, lest worse things happen to us. We mvst preserve our selves
from sin, and watch, lest that day come upon us unawares, and so finding us
unprepared, we perish in our sins: for look how the day of death leaves
us, so shall the day of judgment find us. As Solomon speaks: Eccles. 1.3.
Look how the tree falls, so it lies.

This is a duty indeed both befitting the times wherein we live: as also,
best beseeming, not only our Christian Profession, but an holy conversation
also; which appears in nothing more, than in ceasing to do evil, and rising
up to newness of life: and therefore (as being the only and principal duty
required) Paul persuades it chiefly: saying, Phil. 1.28.
Only let your conversation be as it becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Now we cannot adorn the Gospel more, then by preserving our selves from the
ways of sin, and keeping our selves in the ways of God: neither can we
disgrace the Gospel more, than by forsaking the ways of God, and living in
our sins.

Verse 6. Our soul is escaped, even as a bird out of the snare of the Fowler;
the snare is broken, and we are escaped.
THe Prophet amplifieth yet further, by a third similitude, the great perils
and dangers of the faithful, being in the hands of their enemies: as a bird
that is taken in the snare, is in the hands of the Fowler, and yet
notwithstanding they escape, by the mighty power of God. Every tentation is a
snare, whether it be of the flesh, or of the spirit, persecutions, torments,
imprisonment, slander, diseases and infirmities of the body, be snares, which
as they are permitted of God to exercise and strengthen our faith, so by the
malice of Satan they are wrought to afflict and vex Man, that he may bring
them to infideltie and desperation, and so into the snares of eternal death:
from the which snares, but by the special grace of God, there is no way to
escape: therefore, says Solomon, Pro. 3.26.
The Lord shall be for thy confidence, he shall support and sustain thy
hope, he shall encourage and establish thy heart, and shall keep thy foot
from taking: because it is an old custom for the wicked to lay snares and
spread nets for the feet of the godly: and as common a thing, as for Fowlers
and Hunters to set snares and traps for birds and beasts: therefore the Lord
does graciously deliver his from being taken in the same: and when he himself
does lay his nets and his ginnes for the ungodly, he will most prouidently take
order that his own be not entangled therein. The like Allegory is used by the
Prophet for the same purpose: Psalm. 91.3.
Surely he shall deliver thee from the snare of the Fowler, and from the
noisome pestilence.

True godliness will endure great tontations, True godliness endures great
tentations.
even as trees well rooted, abides the blastes of strong winds; and gold that
is fine, abides the trial of fire. Many ways was David tempted, and among the
rest, the wicked by troops and multitudes combinde themselves against him, yet
did he not forsake the Law of the Lord.

Hereby may we discern a sanctified cross from a cursed. The cross which
makes thee better then thou wast, how sharp soever it be, if it work a
correction in thee, thou may be sure it is a blessing. It is commonly in the
mouths of many when they are in trouble, we must thank God for his correction.
But alas, how can that be called a correction, which corrects thee not? if thou
be not corrected with David, thou have matter of grief in thy trouble, but
none of Joy, and so can not say with David, Psalm. 119.
it is good for me that I have been afflicted.

Affliction in it one nature, is evil, being a punishment of sin, but the
Lord who changed the bitter waters of Marah, and made them sweet unto Israel,
has also changed to his children the nature of the cross, that not only they
find comfort in it, but most happy effects are wrought in them by it.

And this being a prerogative of Gods children: namely, that evil shall be
turned to their good, as good to evil, to the wicked, be be not dismayed in
afflictions, but comfort thy self in the Lord thy God: and in this, that the
prsent affliction tends unto, and ends in good, because it brings forth
the fruits of unfeigned righteousness.

3. things we see in trouble better then in prosperity.
In trouble we see three things, better then in prosperity: First, how
provident, merciful, and true the Lord is. Secondly, how weak and miserable
our selves are. Thirdly, how false and changeable the world is: besides all
these, it is an eff^ctuall means, whereby the Lord beats down the pride of
nature, and humbles for our sins. Hagar was proud and blind in Abraham's
house, but in the wilderness she is humbled, and begins to look to the
Lord. Israel learned not to mourn, until they were sent to Babell: Jonas 1.5.
Jonas sleeps in the ship, but wakes and prays in the Whales belly. Blessed
is the man whom the Lord corrects: therefore refuse not the chastisement of
the Almighty, for tribulation brings forth patience, patience, experience;
Romans 5.4, 5.
experience hope, and hope makes not ashamed.

Thus our life lies open always to the snares of Satan, and we as silly
birds, are like at every moment to be carried away; notwithstanding the Lord
makes a way for us to escape, yea, when Satan seems to be most sure of us,
by the mighty power of God, the snares are broken, and we are delivered:
experience hereof we have in those which are inwardly afflicted, and with
heaviness of spirit grievously oppressed, that when they seem to be in
utter despair, and ready now as you would say to perish, yet even at the last
pinch, and in the uttermost extremity, comes the sweet comfort of Gods holy
Spirit and rayseth them up again; when we are most ready to perish, then is
God most ready to help. Psalm. 94.17.
Except the Lord had helped me, says David, my soul had almost dwelt in
silence.

The use of this is to comfort the children of God, who are often discouraged,
with the sense and feeling of their own wants: it is one of Satan's
stratagems, to try those by the rule of perfection, who are yet in the state of
proficients: and we had need to beware of it. Shall I give that vantage to
the adversary, as to think I have no faith, because it is but in a beginning;
or I have no love because it is little. No, but I will so hunger and thirst for
more grace, that I will still give thanks for the grace I have received, for
here we have no fullness, our greatest measures is as the first fruits, in
respect of that which is to come.

One the other side, because every comfort which is given to the godly, is
turned by profane contemners and workers into an occasion and nourishment of
sin, This comfort vainly abused by profane men.
they are to know this comfort belongs not unto them, it is a common thing to
them to excuse the want of grace: O it is but a small grace which in this life
is communicated to the best, and they think their sins are well enough
covered, by this, that all men are sinners: as if there were no difference
between sin tyrannizing in the wicked, and captiued in the godly, or as
beginning of grace in the regenerate, did not separate them in regard of
conversation from the unregenerate, who are void of all grace. Let us therefore
know, that the Spirit of God, whom the godly receive, is not only called the
first, the earnest and the witness of God, but also the seal and signet of
the living God.

As the seal leaves in the Wax, the similitude and impression of the form
which is it self, so the spirit of God communicates his own image to all
those to whom he seals, against the day of redemption, he makes them new and
holy creatures: and this conuinceth carnal professors of a lie, who say they
have received the first fruits of the spirit, notwithstanding that their
works be wicked and unclean; they may rather if they would tell the truth,
say as those who being demanded, whether they had received the holy Ghost or
no: answered, Act. 19.2.
We know not whether there be an holy Ghost or no, so may they instead of
bragging of the first fruits of the spirit, say in truth, we know not what
ye call the first fruit of the Spirits.

Why the Lord gives us not in this life the principal as well as the earnest.
And thirdly, out of this description we may gather, that albeit we have no
more but the first fruits of the Spirit, yet are they sufficient to assure
us, that hereafter we shall enjoy the whole mass in two respects.

It is accustomable to men to give an earnest penny in buying and selling,
either when the sum is greater then they are able to pay for the present, or
when the thing bought is of that nature that it cannot presently be delivered:
but between the Lord and us there is no buying nor selling, he gives freely
unto us, both the Earnest and the Principal, but first the one, and then the
other. Not that the Lord is unable to pay presently all that he has promised,
but because the Principal is of that nature, that it cannot be received, till
we be prepared for it. 2. Tim. 2.6.
As the Husbandman must sow, and tarry with patience till the Harvest come;
as the Warrior must fight, before he obtain the Victory; and the Wrastler
receives not his Crown, till he have overcome; neither does he that runs a
Race, obtain the Prize, till he have finished it: So must the Christian be
exercised in all these, before that the Lord possess him in the promised
Kingdom of his Son Christ Jesus.

Christ's members milita^t and triumphant are not to be tried by one Rule.
And this again do we mark for the comfort of the weak conscience: it is
Satan's subtletie, whereby commonly he disquiets many, that because carnal
corruption is in them, he would therefore bear them in hand that they are
none of Christ's, in this he plays the Deceiuer, he tryes us by the wrong
rule: when he tryes us by the rule of perfect sanctification; this is the
square that ought to be laid to Christ's members, triumphant in Heaven, and not
to those who are militant here on Earth.

Sin remaining in me, will not prove, that therefore I am not in Christ,
otherwise Christ should have no members upon Earth: but Grace working that new
disposition, which Nature could never effect, proves undoubtedly, that we are
in Christ Jesus.

Let this therefore be our comfort, There is fleshly corruption in the
Christian militant: but he follows it n^^
That albeit there be in us a fleshly corruption, yet thanks be to God we
walk not after it, that is, we follow not willingly the direction and
commandment thereof. It is true, and alas we find it by experience, that
the regenerate man may be led captive (for a time) to the Law of Sin: he may
be pulled perforce out of the way of Gods Commandments, wherein he delights
to walk, and compelled to do those things which he would not: Yet even at
that same time he disclaymes the government of the Flesh, mourning and
lamenting within himself, that he should be drawn from the obedience of his
own Lord and Governor, the Spirit Jesus.

(...) service (...) Christi^^ (...) to (...), is ^hrow^e not by Oppression,
like that Israel gave to Pharaoh. Exodus 56.
And indeed it is worthy to be marked, That what ever service the regenerate
man gives unto Sin, it is like the service that Israel gave to Pharaoh in
Egypt, thrown out by Oppression, and therefore compelled them to sigh and cry
unto God: but the service which the regenerate man gives to the Lord, is
voluntary, done as unto his most lawful Superior, with gladness, joy, and
contentment of mind. Happy is that man who can make this reply to his
spiritual Adversary, when he is challenged of his sins. Augustine.
It is true (O enemy) that I have done many things by thy inticement; yet
herein I rejoice, whatsoever service I have done to thee, it is now, through
the grace of God, the matter of my grief: but the weak service I have given
unto God, is the matter of my joy. The comfort of a Christian militant, in this
body of sin, is rather in sincerity and feruencie of his affections, then in
the absolute perfection of his actions. He fayles many times in his obedience
to Gods Precepts, in regard of his action, but love in his affection still
remaynes: So that both before the Tentation to sin, and after it, there is a
Grief in his Soul, that he should find in himself any corrupt will, or
desire, contrary to the holy Will of the Lord his God.

The Snare is broken, and we are delivered. Wicked men are subtle in inuenting
ways to hurt, and craftily lay many Snares wherein to trap me, but my defense
is in thee only. David was in many most desperate dangers, yet still he found
the Lord providing unlooked for Deliverances. The strong City of Keilah could
not defend him; the Lord warned him to come out of it, and he was a shield
unto him: The solitary Wilderness of Maon could not secure him, for even
there Saul and his soldiers had compassed him; but God had a care of him, and
turned his pursuers another way.

These the fore-passed experiences of Gods loving care and favor toward him,
do now confirm him to rest in God: how many ways soever his enemies pursue
him, He will still make the Lord his refuge, Psalm. 119.
and shield, and trust in his word, etc.

Therefore David says in the Psalms, Psalm. 4.
Thou have set me at liberty, when I was in distress: implying, that he was
in a strait, and as it were strongly besieged with enemies, or dangers; but the
Lord enlarged him, and so preserved him: Psalm. 25.15. He will bring my feet out
of the Net. The godly may be in as great danger as a silly Bird in a Net: but
the Lord will break the Net, that the Bird may escape, who delivered us from
so great a death, and does deliver us; 2. Cor. 1.10
in whom we trust, that he will hereafter deliver us.

First, Gods care of his Children: though it free them not from the exercise of
Troubles, yet it leaves them not, till he have delivered them. Can a Mother
forget her Child? she may let it get a knock, and fear it with the sense of
some danger, but leave it in danger, she cannot. And who be they toward whom
the Lord thinks thoughts of peace, or to whom he will remember mercy, but
Vessels of mercy? Once have I heard, says David, yea twice, Psalm. 72.11.
that mercy belongs to God: and therefore it is so true, as it can never be
false; once, yea twice: that is, once by the Scriptures, and another time by
the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, Gods promise is, that he will not suffer his to be tempted above
that they are able to bear: and therefore at length they find him. Psalm. 73.2.
As David says, My feet were almost gone, but not altogether. The man of God
may slip, and slide, and much ado to keep his feet, but at worst, his feet
are but almost gone, and this comes from Gods promise.

Thirdly, Gods providence limiteth the times in which his Church shall suffer
no longer: sometimes a longer time, as Israel in Egypt 400-years: sometimes
shorter, seventy years in the Babylonish captivity: Reu 2.10.
sometimes shorter then so, ye shall suffer tribulation for ten days.
Sometimes three days, as Jonas in the Whales belly, and Christ in the grave:
sometimes but one night; Sorrow may endure for a night, but joy comes in the
morning. And sometimes there is but an hour for the power of darkness: then
Gods time is come: and the godly see the salvation of the Lord.

Lastly, he delivers them in their troubles by his presence. First, of power.
And so a 4. like the Son of God: was in the furnace with the three children.
And it is said, I will be with thee in six troubles, and in seven, in fire and
water. Secondly of grace, his right hand is under their heads, he gives the^
grace sufficient, proportions their strength to the burden, mitigates their
sorrow, makes them possess their souls in patience: yea, rejoice in sorrow,
which else would sink them, and at length recompenseth their light affliction
with an eternal weight of glory.

Verse 7. Our help stands in the name of the Lord, who has made both heaven
and earth.
THis is the conclusion of thanksgiving, containing a worthy Sentence of
great comfort that against sin, The name of the Lord is our only sanctuary
and succor in all afflictions,
the horror of death and other dangers; their is no other help or safety, but
only the name of the Lord: if that were not (says he) we should fall into
all manner of sin, blasphemy, errors and into all kind of calamities: but
our help is in the name of the Lord, which preserves our faith and our life
against the devil and the world. And as ye hear in the other verses before,
so he shows in this verse also, that God suffers his Saints to be tempted,
and in their temptaion to fall into great distress: only the word of the Lord
sustaines us, and assures us that our light and momentary afflictions shall
cause to us at the length an infinite weight of glory. These prayers of David
are penned with such heavenly wisdom, that they are convenient for the state
of the whole Church, and every member thereof. The Church is the bush that
burns with fire but cannot be consumed: every member thereof bears a part
of the cross of Christ, never without some affliction: we know that in
afflictions, it is some comfort to us to have our crosses known to such, How
God is a spectator and partaker with in all our afflictions.
as of whom, we are assured that they love us, it mitigates our dolor, when
they mourn with us, albeit they be not able to help us, but the Christian
has more solid comfort, to wit, that in all his troubles the Lord beholds him,
like a king rejoicing to see his own servant wrestle with the enemy, he looks
with a merciful eye, pitying the infirmity of his own when he sees it, and
with a powerful hand, ready to help, but because many a time the cloud of our
corruption, comes between the Lord and us, and lets us not see his helping
hand nor his loving face, looking upon us, we have need to pray at such times
with David, Psalm. 119.
Behold mine affliction.

And notwithstanding godly men be full of afflictions, sorrows and sicknesses,
necessities, molestations, and disgraces: yet al these or whatsoever other
calamities vanish away in time, and the hope of Gods favor, and blessed reward
from him, shall out live all these, and take place when these are abolished.
Psalm. 37.37
Mark well the upright man and hehold the just for the end of that man is
peace: that which he desired he shall enjoy: a faithful man shall not be
frustrated of his expectation, nor defeated of that he hopes for. According as
the Psalms says: The poor man shall not always be forgotten, Psalm. 31.29.
the expectation of the poor shall not perish for ever: for that is ever
grounded upon faith, and faith is surely grounded upon Gods promises.

David was a godly man, and dearly beloved of the Lord his God, yet he was
sore humbled by affliction: Ioh. 15.2.1
for even those branches which are fruitful, God will purge to make them more
fruitful. Our nature is so rebellious that without sore afflictions it cannot
be tamed and subdued. Stones cannot be squared for Palace work, without
strokes of the hammer, gold cannot be purged and prepared for work without
fire, neither is corn separated from the chafe without wind: we are Gods
corn, let us abide the wind of temptation, to cleanse us from the chafe of our
corruption: we must suffer the fire of afliction that we may be fined and
made vessels of honor for the house of God: and we must be content, that the
hammer of God strike upon us, to beat away the proud lumps, that so we may be
squared and made ready, like lively stones to be laid in heavenly Jerusalem.
By the which examples we may learn to know the will of the Lord, and to seek
our help and safety at his hands, which suffers his people to be exercised
in the furnace of Egypt, not to their utter destruction, but only to kill the
old man with his vain hope and confidence which he has in his own strength:
this is the cause why God suffers his people so to be exercised: For it is
not hearing, reading, talking, or teaching only, which makes a Christian man;
but practice is that which is further required in a true Christian. That is to
say, the cross to pluck down the flesh and bring it to nothing, that man
dispairing of his own strength, and seeing no succor in himself, should
resign himself wholly to the Lord, looking with patience and hope for help at
his hands. To know this doctrine, is one piece of the victory: for they that
know it not, when temptations assayleth them either do despair, or seek
other helps.

Let us learn then out of this Psalm, that it is the will of God, to exercise
his Saints with troubles and afflictions, Iam. 1.12.
Blessed is the man who endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall
receive the Crown of life which the Lord has promised to them who love him.

Therefore this is a necessary conclusion, our help is in the name of the Lord:
it is a short sentence, but it sets forth most worthy doctrine, and
consolation, whereof especially in these latter days we have great need,
seeing the Pope together with the greatest part of the world, so cruelly
persecute the doctrine of the Gospel, etc.

In respect of these huge mountains, what are we small mole-hils yea though
they were no force, nor powe of man for us to fear, how are we able to stand
against, not only so many Devils, but even the very gates of hell also, and
yet this experience, we have of the great mercy and goodness of the Lord our
God, that when we are even in the hands and never so much oppressed, yet are we
not forsaken, but are safe through our confidence and trust in his help: but
to this wisdom it is impossible for us to attain, without continual
afflictions. The fruit of afflictions.
Whereby it is necessary that the confidence of all worldly succors should be
beaten down, for vexation and trouble brings understanding (as Isaiah says)
whereby we are compelled to cry, Help Lord for else we perish. So in the last
hour when death approaches, there is nothing wherein man's heart can repose it
self or find comfort, but in the help of the Lord; there is rest, and
quietness, there is perfect peace: he that can then say, my help is in the
name of the Lord, and lay hold on Jesus Christ by a true and justifying faith
dies happily and is out of all danger. Thus we may learn what it is to have
and enjoy God, even to rest in sure trust of his merciful help and succor in
all dangers: these are the words therefore of a triumphing and victorious
faith, our help stands in the name of the Lord, which made heaven and earth:
as if he said, the maker of heaven and earth is my God, and my helper. Ye see
whither he flies in his great distress, he dispaireth not, but cries unto
the Lord, as one yet hoping assuredly to find relief and comfort, rest thou
also in this hope, and do as he did. David was not tempted, to the end he
should despair, In the temptations of sin and of the wrath of God, what we
ought to do.
think not thou therefore that thy temptations are sent unto thee that thou
should be swallowed up with sorrow and desparation; if thou be brought
down to the very gates of Hell, believe that the Lord will surely raise thee
up again. If so thou be bruised and broken, know it is the Lord that will
help thee again. If thy heart be full of sorrow, and heaviness, look for
comfort from him, who said, Psalm. 51.17.
That a troubled Spirit is a Sacrifice unto him. Thus he sets the eternal
God, the Maker of Heaven and Earth, against all Troubles and Dangers, against
the floods and ouerflowings of all Tentations, and swalloweth up as it were
with one breath all the raging furies of the whole World, and of Hell it self,
even as a little drop of water is swallowed up of a mighty flaming fire: and
what is the World, with all his force and power, in respect of him that made
Heaven and Earth?

Let the World fret then, let it rage then, so that this succor never fail
us: and if it be the will of God that we shall suffer Trouble and Affliction,
yet in him we shall overcome at length. Only happy and sure is the estate of
that man, who is in Christ: neither Life, nor Death, things present, nor things
to come, shall separate him from the love of God in Christ Jesus.

Our help stands in the Name of the Lord, which has made Heaven and Earth.
Hence I gather this Doctrine, That no elect child of God, that is truly
regenerate, and borne anew, and a lively member of Christ's mystical Body, can
perish, and finally fall away. Romans 8.30.
For whom he predestinateth, him he calls; whom he calls, he
justifies; whom he justifies, he glorifieth. The gift and calling of God
is without repentance: My sheep hear my voice, and follow me, and I give unto
them eternal life, and they shall never perish, John 20.27 28.29.
neither shall any man take them out of my hands. And the reason is, we bear
not the root, but the root bears us: our salvation depends not upon our
selves, for then indeed we were in danger to fall away every moment of an
hour: but it depends upon him because we are in him: and through him we grow
and increase, yea the older we be in Christ, the more do we fasten our root
and floorish: they which are planted in the courts of the Lord shall flourish in
their old age, and bring forth much fruit.

least consumed by length of time, it shall not be so with them that are in
Christ, for they are kept by him, as the root bearing branches: Because I am
not altered nor changed, therefore are you not consumed O ye sons of Jacob:
and therefore right happy is the state of that man, who is in Christ Jesus: For
neither life nor death, things present, Romans 8.18.
nor things to come, shall separate him from the love of God.

And this comfort is confirmed to us by most sure, arguments. Arguments to
prove a Christians perseueranee. Phil. 1.6.
The first is taken from the nature of almighty God: he is faithful which has
promised. And I am persuaded, says the Apostle, Romans 6.9.
that he who has begun this good work, will perform it until the day of
Christ Jesus.

The second is taken from the nature of that life which Christ communicates to
his members. We know, that Christ being raised from the dead, dies no more.
This life of Christ is communicated to us: so that it is not we that live in
Christ, but Christ in us.

The third is taken from the nature of that Seed whereof we are begotten: 1.
Pet. 1.3, 4.
We are borne anew, not a mortal Seed, but of immortal. Now, as the Seed
is, so is the life that comes by that Seed: Our life therefore must needs be
immortal.

This confuteth a damnable Doctrine of the Papists, who hold, and reach, That a
man elected, called, justified, and sanctified, may for ever fall away; and be
damned: that he which to day is the dear child of God, to morrow may become
the child of the Devil; to day a member of Christ, to morrow a Limb of the
Devil; to day an heir of salvation, to morrow an heir of damnation. Now what
Doctrine can be more deuillish and uncomfortable: this is nothing else, but to
set up a Gibbet to torment the poor souls of Gods children; to overthrow the
nature of Faith; to make God feeble and weak, 2. Pet. 1.10. Psalm. 15.
or foolish and unwise: which is manifest Blasphemy. But we see here the Word
of God tells us this cannot be: Rom: 8.1. and 8.35.
for what shall separate us from the love of God in Christ? Nothing.

This may serve to reprove another sort of men, who are ready to abuse this
Doctrine. Tush, says the carnal and loose Christian, it skils not how a man
lives, whether well or ill: he that is elected, and is a member of Christ,
shall be saved; and he that is rejected, shall be damned, though he live never
so well: Therefore they take liberty to sin, and make no conscience of any
sin whatsoever. But they must know, that God decrees a man as well to the
means as to the end: and it is impossible a man should be elected and called,
but he must live well; so he that is not elected and called, cannot live well:
And it is all one, as if a man should never eat or drink, and yet hope to
live and like well; or lying in the fire or water, and using no means to come
out, should not perish. But we must know, that the end and the means must go
together; and for a man to neglect or reject the means, it is in vain for him
to hope to be saved: for if thou belong unto God, thou shall in time be called
and sanctified: and where this work is not yet already wrought, that man is
as yet in the state of damnation.

Our help is in the name of the Lord. Here is matter of endless comfort to
every child of God, that truly repents and believes in Jesus Christ: that
howsoever through the malice of Satan, the temptation of the Devil, the
allureme^ts of the world, and the corruption of our flesh, we may grievously
sin, and fall, Romans 8.1.
yet there is no condemnation to them that are in Christ: the gates, that is,
Matthew. 16.18.
all the power of Hell shall not prevail against us. If ever thou fou^dst the
sound work of grace in thee, thou foundst Jesus Christ to dwell in thy heart by
faith, so that thou hate all sin, and desire in all things to please God:
though Satan rage and storm, and all the gates of Hell rise up against thee,
yet thou may comfort thy self in the Lord, and say with Paul, There is no
condemnation to me that am in Christ, which walk not after the flesh, but
after the Spirit: Thou may triumph with Paul, and say, Who shall lay any
thing to the charge of Gods chosen? And if God be with us, who can be against
us. And again, I am persuaded nothing can sever me from the love of God in
Christ Jesus; no not sin, nor death it self. Oh happy then and blessed is
the estate of that man who is in Christ: neither life nor death, things
present, nor things to come, shall separate him from the love of God.

PSALM 125. They that put their trust in the Lord, etc.
THe Psalm going before is a Thanksgiving, The argument of the Psalm.
or a Sacrifice of Praise: because the godly see, and by experience feel, that
the Lord is faithful, and helps them in the time of need. This Psalm
following contains also in a manner the same matter: for it pertayneth to the
Doctrine of Faith, and exhorts the faithful likewise to a sure trust and
affiance in the help of the Lord, in all their necessities: whereunto he
stirs them up with great and excellent promises.

It may also easily be understood, by that which we have said before: for
like as God makes all things of nothing, and of Darkness, Light; so he
works by his Word, that in Death there is nothing but Life. They then which
stick to the Word and Promise of God, and follow the same, do find it true
which David says, He spoke the Word, and it was done. But before we can come
to this experience, we must abide some trouble; and therefore have need of such
exhortation as this Psalm here sets forth.

Verse 1. They that put their trust in the Lord, shall be even as the Mount
Sion, which may not be removed, but stands fast for ever.
THe Prophet uses here a Similitude of Mount Sion; because Jerusalem, wherein
Sion stood when the Temple was builded, had most ample and notable Promises of
God: as appears in very many places of the Prophets; That it should stand
sure and invincible for ever against all troubles and calamities, for that the
Lord had his abiding and dwelling there: according to that Promise, where he
says, Here is my rest, here will I dwell, etc. And therefore David in another
Psalm gloryeth on this wise: Lo, the Kings were gathered, Psalm. 48.5.
and went together; when they saw it, they marvelled, they were astonished and
suddenly driven back. As we may see it came to pass under Ezechias, in that
great destruction of the Assyrians, and other Kings, as the Stories witness:
Which show, that Jerusalem remained safe in all Dangers, not by the strength
and policy of the Inhabitants, but by the miraculous work of God, dwelling in
it.

They that put their trust in the Lord, shall never be removed: but stands
fast for ever. Though others do perish, and are destroyed, who do withdraw
their Hearts from him; yet blessed and happy are those that do depend upon
him, and make him their only trust and confidence, they serving him aright, as
it does become them: for here it should seem that the word (trust) which is a
principal part of that worship and service which man does owe unto Christ, is
put for the whole worship and service it self, by the figure Synecdoche, when
one part is put for all: and well might the Prophet use this word before al
others, in regard of the judgments he spoke of before; to note, that the
godly, who have a care to obey Christ, have good hope and trust in him, even in
the midst of dangers. Here we learn this doctrine that they are blessed and
happy that do rely upon Christ, and make him their stay and refuge: Blessed is
the man, says Jeremy, Ier. 17.7.
that trusts in the Lord: and whose hope the Lord is: Psalm. 146.
and blessed is he, says David, that has the God of Jacob for his help,
whose hope is in the Lord his God; so that all that do trust in Christ are
happy and blessed.

And the reason thereof is this, because they shall never perish but have
everlasting life, as it is oftentimes repeated in the new Testament: where God
the Father is said to have loved the world so, that he gave his only begotten
Son for it, Ioh: 3.16.
that whosoever did believe in him should not perish, but have everlasting
life. For in these two things all blessedness and happiness does stand: first,
in a freedom from all misery and destruction, then in a possession of all
joys and life everlasting.

Therefore let every one of us labor soundly and truly to believe in Christ,
and to depend upon him, as upon a sure rock that will never deceive us, for
then you see we shall be blessed. A man will do much to have happiness here in
this world, and every one by nature does desire the same: and shall not we then
trust in Christ to attain unto it. Withdraw we our hearts from the world, and
let us place them wholly upon him, as they are cursed that do make flesh their
arm and trust in man; So they are blessed that do make Christ their arm and
trust in him: remember what David said touching this matter: Lo (says he to
God) they that withdraw themselves from thee shall perish: Psalm. 73.27 28.
thou destroyest all them that go a whoring from thee: as for me, it is good
for me to draw near to God, therefore I have put my whole trust in the Lord
God, that I may declare all thy works. Let these things move up our hearts to
clean fast unto Christ: doubtless there is nothing wanting in him, which is
fit to be in one, on whom we are to place our trust. There are six things
required of such a one. First, power, that he may be able to help us.
Secondly, Will, that he may be ready to do it. Thirdly, Skill, that he may
know how to do it. Fourthly, Remembrance, that may mind us for the doing of it.
Fifthly, Carfulness, that he may not post it off or neglect it from time to
time. Lastly, Boldness, that he may fear no inconvenience to ensue upon it,
to hinder him from doing of it: but all these are in Christ, he is able to
help us, because he is Omnipotent: he is willing, because he loves us to the
death: he is Skillful, because all the treasures of knowledge and wisdom are
hid in him: he is Mindful, because his eyes are always open upon us, as who
does neirher slumber nor sleep, but stands always girded in the midst of the
seven golden Candlestickes to do them good. He is Careful, because he is Lord
and King over all; and that Lion of Judah that fears nothing. Withdraw not
then your hearts from him, but trust in him most constantly for evermore.

Secondly, by this we see that godliness is great gain, or riches, as the
Apostle does speak: for trust here you see brings with it blessedness: it is
not a barren thing, but fruitful it comes laden with all the blessings of the
Lord unto us. Cursed man will say, Mal. 3.14.
that it is in vain to serve the Lord, and that there is no profit in keeping
his commandments, and in walking humbly before him. But here we are taught
the contrary, the wicked that do rebel, they are cast down and do perish;
but as for those which do serve Christ and trust in him, they stand up and are
blessed. Then for as much as your labor is not in vain in the Lord, that I
may use the phrase of the Apostle: Be ye steadfast, immovable, abundant always
in the work of the Lord: 1. Cor. 15.58.
and trust you in Christ for evermore, which will thus bring blessedness unto
you.

Seeing then they are blessed that do trust in Christ, even then when others
perish and are destroyed we should not fear at any time, but be of a good
hope and comfort in the midst of all our calamities, as knowing that then we
are blessed and in happy estate as well as at other times: for Christ does know
how to make a separation betwixt us that are his friends, and others that are
his enemies.

Questionless, as God did put a difference betwixt the Israelites and the
Egyptians in all such plagues as he sent among them, sparing still the
Israelites, and punishing the Egyptians, and as he did put a difference betwixt
his servant Noah and the old world: Genesis 7.
saving Noah, and drowning the world: and as he did put a difference betwixt
holy Lot and wicked Sodom, Genesis 17.
delivering Lot and burning Sodom with fire and brimstome from heaven, so will
Christ put a difference betwixt us and others to save us, and destroy them, as
we may see most apparently. Where it is said, Mat. 25.32.
that he will gather all nations before him, and that he will separate them one
from another, as a Sheapheard separates the sheep from the Goats: sending
some to hell, and carrying others with him into heaven. Let us then never fear
in any peril or danger whatsoever, whether of war, famine, plague, or the like
lest we should perish with the wicked hand over head: we see he has a care of
his own, and what he will do he can do: if it be good for us to escape these
worldly woes we are assured we shall, as we are sure, we live. And if
otherwise it please him to wrap us with others, in the outward punishment, yet
shall we ever be sure to be distinguished from them in the eternal pain, and
those outward griefs shall be but means to lead us to everlasting joys.

Now therefore says he, like as mount Sion or our holy city Jerusalem is never
moved, but remains sure and safe by the mighty protection of the Lord, in all
extremities; so he that trusts in the Lord, shall be defended against the
furious rage of the world, and the gates of hell for ever: pronouncing this to
be chiefest anchor of our salvation, only to hope and trust in the Lord, To
hope and and trust in the Lord is the greatest service that we can do to him.
and that is the greatest service that we can do unto God: for this is the
nature of God as I have said, to create all things of nothing; therefore he
creates and brings forth in death life, in darkness light, and this to
believe is the very nature and most special property of faith: when God then
sees such a one as agrees with his own nature, that is, which believes to
find in danger, help; in poverty, riches; in sin righteousness; and that
for Gods own mercies sake in Jesus Christ alone: The nature of faith.
him can God neither hate nor forsake, for he worshippeth God truly which
puts his whole trust in the mercy of God. With this service God is highly
pleased, because he delights of nothing to make something, so he made the
world of nothing; so he raised the dead: who so then consents to Gods
nature, and obeys his will, there hoping for something where nothing is, he
it is that pleases God and shall never be removed.

That is, they shall never be removed from Gods favor, they shall never be
removed from the constant graces of the spirit in their souls, or hurtfully in
the way of a curse, from outward good estate, nor unseasonably be cut off from
the earth. Now because some of these judgments seem sometimes to fall on some
righteous persons, who for a season being separated from the comfortable sight
of Gods kindness and favor toward them, and their estate in appearence is
wholly ruinated: Therefore the word does well bear it, agreeing with that of
Solomon, that the righteous shall not be removed for ever: though they seem to
be cast down for a time, yet they shall be restored again. Therefore godly men
must needs be in safety, because they be Gods children who^ he in Christ has
begotten to himself by the immortal seed of the word.

We see here the constancy of Gods children, The constancy of Gods children.
no wind of tempration can remove or overthrow them, they are like rocks in
the sea enduring every wave, like trees planted by the river side: Gods own
plantation, they may be shaken, but not ouerturned; they abide rooted and
stablished by the Lord: such is the nature of faith, that it carries us out of
our selves into the Lord, and makes us lean upon him, rest in him, and live in
him. They who abide in themselves, resting in any thing that is in them, either
wisdom, strength or merits, shall be found to have built their house on the
sand which will not continue: but such as go out of themselves and trust in
the Lord, have built their house on the rock that shall never fail them.

Therefore cleave ye fast unto him, and fear not, be of good comfort, though
others be cursed, yet you shall be blessed, for you see the difference of being
religious and being profane, of loving Christ, and loathing him; and this
difference here will make a fearful difference in the world to come, when no
man can help it, had he the treasures of all the earth to purchase his ease
with all: and therefore remember your selves betimes, and turn to the Lord
with all your hearts, and serve him in holiness and righteousness all the days
of your lives, that so you may be blessed both here in this world, and in the
world to come.

First, this may seem to reprove that cursed, yet common opinion of the world:
namely, that of all men, the godly man is most miserable. We see here the Lord
himself does proclaim from heaven, that he accounts the godly man and him
that trusts in the Lord, a blessed and happy man: but yet the world, that is
the wicked men in the world, judge and deem the godly man wretched and
miserable: such a man as truly fears God, hates all iniquity, disliketh
lewd company, makes conscience of good duties, as to pray in his family, to
instruct his servants and children, is diligent and careful to frequent
Sermons: this man is an Owl among Birds, whooted at and poynted at, and of all
men he most contemned: But as Paul says, thus it must be, We are brought upon
the Stage, we are made a gazing-stocke to wicked men, and accounted as dung
for Christ's sake.

Secondly, this may serve to stop their mouths that say and think it is in
vain to serve the Lord, that it is lost labor to be religious, that there is
no good got by hearing of Sermons and leading of a godly life: it is, and ever
has been the cursed thoughts of man's heart to think so, as in the time of
the Prophet Malachy. Mal. 3.14.
It is lost labor to serve the Lord, and what good comes there by serving of
God: So in these days it is clear, men think it is in vain to be
religious, to live godly, and in all things to labor to keep faith and a
good conscience, before God and men. But it is manifest here that it is not in
vain to serve God: nay it is that alone that brings a man to happiness and
true comfort here, and eternal measure of glory in the world to come: and
withal this may serve to comfort every child of God against all the
discouragements of the world by Satan and his cursed instruments. Namely, that
whatsoever thy estate be, Heb. 11.24.12.23. Psalm. 125. verse 1.
never so poor in this world, and subject to never so many afflictions: yet if
thou be a godly man, certainly then thou art blessed, thou that art in Gods
favor thou that art reconciled to God in Jesus Christ, and have thy sins
pardoned, eternal life belongs unto thee, and therefore fear not, be not any
whit dismayed, hold out unto the end, and trust in the Lord for evermore.

Hence we learn, that as many as desire to be truly happy and blessed, may
here behold the way to be happy and blessed. Would thou be truly happy and
blessed here in this life, and hereafter in the life to come? Would be
assured that thou art the child of God, in his favor, reconciled unto him in
Jesus Christ? Would thou be assured of salvation of thy soul? Oh labor then
to become a godly and a religious man, repent of thy sins past, amend thy
life, walk before God in new obedience, labor to keep Faith and a good
Conscience, hate every evil way, cleave unto the Lord, delight in his Word,
let it be the joy of thine heart: then certainly thou shall be blessed, and
happy for evermore.

To conclude, if the godly man, and he that trusts in the Lord, be blessed,
then the wicked man must of necessity be cursed: if the estate of the
righteous and religious man be so comfortable and blessed, then the estate of
the wicked and ungodly must needs be miserable, and cursed. According to that
of Moses unto the Israelites: Deu. 28.15.
If thou will not obey the voice of the Lord thy God: as indeed Obedience is
far from a wicked man; howsoever he may come with Saul's painted Sacrifice:
what follows? Thou shall be cursed in Body, and cursed in Soul, Psalm. 119.21.
etc. Again, Thou have destroyed the proud, and cursed are they that err from
thy Commandments.

Verse 2. The Hills stand about Jerusalem: even so stands the Lord about his
people, from this time forth for evermore.
WHere many hundred thousands of men are, there are scarcely seven thousand
which know God, or believe in God, and yet for their sakes the whole multitude
is called Gods people: even so was it in Jerusalem; albeit the greater part was
wicked, and godless, yet was Jerusalem called Holy, not only in respect of a
small number of the godly, but also because God had his abiding there. So when
there was not one just person in Sodom, but Lot, Genesis 19.22.
with his two Daughters, yet could not the Angel destroy Sodom with Fire, so
long as Lot was in it. Likewise, where four, or five, or ten godly persons
are to be found, for their sakes the whole City is called Holy. For these
are the Elect Corner Stones, these are the precious Pearls which GOD so highly
esteems, and for those sakes he spares the wicked. Therefore says David,
As Jerusalem is compassed about with Mountains, so does the Lord compass his
people, and mightily defend them on every side. In like manner Zachary
prophecyeth of a City, whose Wall is of Fire.

These similitudes do set forth unto us the safety of Gods people, that weak
and little poor Flock, against all Dangers: upon this promise if we also do
rest, which at this day do enjoy the inestimable benefit of Gods Word, we
shall be defended against the rage of Satan, and the whole World. These things
albeit we cannot comprehend, yet should we believe them so certainly, as if
we did see them with our bodily eyes. If we should see our selves compassed
about with brazen Walls, we should be without all fear, and triumph against
Satan: but it is a matter of Faith, not to trust unto that which the eyes see,
but which the Word offers and promises. This one thing therefore is lacking
in us, that we have not the eyes of the Spirit, but we judge according to the
eyes and sense of the Flesh. We must not doubt therefore: but if we believe, we
are compassed about with fiery and brazen Mountains; that is to say, we
abide for ever invincible against the rage of Satan, and all the powers of
Darkness. Blessed therefore is he that believes.

These Mountains are the Angels which compass us on every side, that Satan
with his Angels and Ministers cannot hurt us as he would, whose malice and
power is such, if they did not continually behold us, continually defend us,
and watch over us, he would destroy us every moment. This can all they
testify, which know that Satan is a Murderer, and a Liar, which cannot abide
to see the godly prosper: and therefore he seeks by all means to root them
out from the face of the Earth. That we are not then utterly consumed, it is
the benefit of these Mountains, by whom we are so compassed and defended.
Sometimes Satan hurleth his Darts at us as it were through the Window, to
destroy us, and works us indeed some sorrow, but he cannot hurt us, nor move
us.

This similitude seems to be taken out of the story of Helizeus; where the
servant of Helizeus saw the Hills about him full of fiery Chariots, and
Horsemen, 2. Kin. 6.17.
compassing Helizeus round about, and mightily defending him. This succor
which the servant of Helizeus saw, and the Prophet believed, when he saw
nothing, is (says the Prophet) round about all them which trust in the Lord:
The Angel of the Lord pitcheth his Tent round about them that fear him, and
have a charge of them. Psalm. 34.7.
The Saints of Heaven and Earth are their fellow Brethren, the Creatures of
Almighty God are their Friends, yea their Servants, to do them good all their
days.

The Devils, nor all the powers of Darkness shall not hurt them: Psalm. 37.25.
Psalm. 34.7. Psalm. 91.11.
for Christ has spoiled Principalities, and Powers, and has made a show of
them openly, Hosea 2.18.
and has triumphed over them upon the Cross; yea, that which is more, Col.
2.15.
the Lord Jesus Christ (to whom all Judgment is committed) is become their
Lord and Savior: so that they shall never come into condemnation, Ioh. 5.24.
but shall pass from Death unto Life.

This Promise then will never deceive us, only let us never deceive our
selves. If therefore we did believe, no doubt we should sleep, we should
live, we should dye, we should suffer whatsoever Satan and all the World can
do against us, without all fear: for thus should we think; If I suffer any
thing, it is not without the will of God, nor without good cause well known,
though not unto me, yet unto God. Therefore although Satan break through the
wall in one place, yet shall he never be able utterly to overthrow it
altogether: thus should we think in our troubles and afflictions, and comfort
our selves with the good will of God: The Lord will be a wall of fire round
about Jerusalem, and the glory in the midst of her: he will keep her as the
apple of his eye, and make Jerusalem a cup of poison to all her enemies, and a
heavy stone, which whosoever strives to lift, shall be torn therewith,
though all the people of the earth were gathered together against it; the
weapons made against her, shall not prosper, and every tongue that shall rise
against her in judgment shall be condemned, this is the heritage of the Lords
servants and the portion of them that love him: for the Church is that Arc,
which mounts up mounts up higher, as the water increases, but cannot be
overwhelmed: Mat. 7.25:
the bush which may burn, but not be consumed: the house built upon a rock,
which may be beaten with wind and rain, but cannot be overthrown. Besides
all this it is not enough that we are compassed about with fiery walls; that
is, with the sure custody, the continual watch and ward of the Angels: but the
Lord himself is our wall, so that every way we are defended by the Lord
against all dangers. Therefore in our greatest mutations our hearts should not
be moved from confidence in God.
All which should learn us in the greatest changes and alterations that fall
out in the world, to rest assured that the Lord will work for the good of his
Church: though the earth should be moved, and the Mountains fall into the
midst of the Sea, yea though the waters there of rage and be troubled, yet
there is a River whose streams shall make glad the City of God in the
midst of it. Yea if they who should be the nourishing Fathers of the Church
do forsake her and become her enemies, they shall most assuredly perish, but
Comfort, Joy and Deliverance shall appear unto Gods people out of another
place: the Lord for awhile may put the bridle of bondage in the Philistians
hands, for to humble Israel for their sins, but it shall be taken away from
them at the length: then shall his Church with Joy draw water out of the Well
of Salvation, and praise the Lord their God, saying, Though thou were now angry
with me, yet thy wrath is turned away, and thou comfortest me, yea Sion shall
cry out and shout for joy, for great is the holy one of Israel in the midst of
her: And therefore in our lowest humiliation, let us answer our enemies:
Rejoice not against me O mine enemies; though I fall, I shall rise, when I
shall sit in darkness, the Lord is a light unto me: I will bear the wrath of
the Lord, because I have sinned against him, until he plead my cause, and
execute judgment for me, he will bring me forth to light, and I shall see
his righteousness; then he that is mine enemy shall look upon it, and shame
shall cover him who said to me, Where is the Lord thy God: now shall he be
trodden under as the mire in the streets, yea so let all thine enemies perish O
Lord.

The hills stand ahout Jerusalem, even so stands the Lord about his people.
Therefore seeing the Lord does thus compass the godly with such mercies, O
then labor to be godly men. And such as trust in God, to whom all these
precious promises are made: O how excellent is thy mercy; therefore the
children of men shall trust under the shadow of thy wings. Here is a great
comfort for the godly, who have no small security hence; that whatsoever their
outward estate is or may be, Gods mercy compasses them as the hills compass
Jerusalem.

First, if Satan assalt us on every side wirh temptation, to vex and disquiet
us with inward fears: he shall not have so nimble eyes to spy our weakness,
as the eye of the Lord to spy means to strengthen us. Let him object the
greatness and infinite number of our sins: yet he shall but amplify the
great mercy of God, which is greater and more large then all the sin and
misery in the World. Thus Moses comfort Gods people: Deu. 4.31
The Lord thy God is a merciful God, he will not forsake nor destroy thee,
nor forget the covenant of thy fathers which he swear unto them.

(...). 118.^^.
Secondly, if unmerciful men compass them and come about them like Bees, and
sharpen their stings, yet the mercies of the Lord are nearer them, then that
they can hurt them. Thus David comforted himself. Psalm. 86.14.15.
O Lord the proud are risen against me, but thou Lord art strong and
merciful gracious and long suffering, and a pitiful God.

Thirdly, if a man should conflict with Gods own hand, by inward temptations
or outward trials* of sickness, poverty persecution: if he were so beset as
he could see nothing but troubles without, and fears within, now is the time
to mound and fence himself with this comfortable doctrine, that even now Gods
Mercies do guard and compass him: seeing he cannot deny himself, nor fail
of any of his promises: David when he was to choose of the three rods of God,
the Sword, Famine, or Plague; he chose to fall into the hands of God, because
he is merciful.

He may afflict and chasten us a while, 2. Sam. 24.14. Isai. 45.7.10. Psalm.
103.8.
and for a moment seem to fosake us: But with great compassions he will gather
us: for he chides not always, neither retains he his wrath for ever.

Fourthly, if a man were in the hands of death, and the messengers thereof had
already taken hold on him, as on Hezekiah: Yet even then he need fear none
ill, seeing Gods mecrcies compass him. This is ever our cover, though we
cannot always see it, as Elisha his servant saw not the great mercies of God
compassing him and his Master. Even then when we know not, Gods mercy is all
about us. There are still more with us then against us: our mountain is always
beset with heavenly warriors.

Was Jonas ever more compassed with mercies, then when he was in his own sense
cast off, and compassed with waves and weeds? Was Israel ever more co^past with
mercy then when they were compassed with Mountains, Sea enemies, Death, and
deadly things? these our extremities are Gods opportunity.

Nay fifthly, suppose a man were in the house of death, in the grave; yet even
this separates not from Gods mercyes, which being eternal leaves us not in
death: but when we are most compassed with dust and corruption, shall then be
most abundant and mighty for us.

Oh therefore let so many as trust in God, fly in all their straights to this
sanctuary, which can make not only deaths forerunners, but even death it
self welcome, which depriues us of all things else but this mercy, into the
full estate of which it sets us.

Let us therefore labor above all things in the world, to get part in this
mercy, by getting assurance of the pardon of sin: get this, and thou gettest
a mercy reaching up to heaven, a crown of blessings, a plentiful redemption.
Our Prophet here calls it a compassing mercy: for a godly man thinks not
himself compassed with mercy when he is compassed only with outward
blessings, when God has hedged about his house, and he has wealth to tumble
in though the world breath after nothing else: but when he has a voice telling
him that God in Christ is merciful to his sin, and has covered his iniquity:
oh now thinks David himself compassed with mercy, and not before, although he
was a king, and had all outward things to his hearts wish. Zacheus had mercy
enough when salvation was come to his house, he never got so fast before, as
now he forgoes and restores: he was never compassed with mercy till now, though
he was a great rich man; never so rich as now when he was impouerishing
himself to entertain Christ in his house and heart. Jacob when he saw Joseph's
face, his best beloved Son; now (says he) I have enough, let me now dye,
seeing I have seen my son Joseph's face: how much more shall we have enough
to see the face of the well-beloued Son of God; yea, and God himself in that
wel-beloued one, appeased and fully pacified. Simeon having seen Christ with
his eyes, and held him in his arms. Now, Lord (said he) let thy servant depart
in peace: for mine eyes have seen thy salvation: but to see christ by the eye
of faith, and hold him in our hearts, will make death much more welcome to us:
we shall think we have enough: the sweet sense of it will frame the mouth to
speak plentifully of it; as our Prophet does in this place, neither can any
good heart either lightly account, or speak slenderly of such a mercy: neither
content it self with slight means to get it, or with superficial phrases in
holding it. In a word if once we can claspe hold on this mercy of God in
pardoning our sins, we could desire even to live no longer in this world,
were it not to come to a more full sense and fruition of it.

Where he adds from henceforth, and for ever, by rhese words he shows that
this vigilance of the Lord our God over us, is not temporal but eternal:
according to that which he said before in the first verse of this Psalm, they
shall remain for ever. Let us learn therefore out of this Psalm, that our
constancy and perseurance consists in this, that we are defended by the power
and providence of the Lord on every side

Verse 3. For the rod of the ungodly comes not into the lot of the
righteous, lest the righteous put their hand unto wickedness.
HEre the Prophet plainly decalreth, that the people which rest under this
defense and protection, are afflicted and subject to all miseries and
calamities as touching the flesh, although they be compassed about with high
and mighty mountains: as touching the spirit, as Satan can never surmount,
yet touching the flesh and the old man they lie open on every side to the darts
of Satan and of the world, for God by these means will afflict and exercise
the flesh, that sin and the foolishness of the flesh may be mortified in
them, and that spiritual wisdom and the inward man may increase: this is the
cause why we are according to the flesh as a broken hedge, and as a city Whose
walls are cast down, and so lies open to the enemy on every side. Hereof
comes intolerable blasphemies cruel torments, and bloody slaughters of the
Saints of God; for the flesh has no walls, no munitions to defend it, but the
spirit, therefore the flesh is in danger to all storms and tempests, as the
Prophet Esaias says, which have said unto thy soul, bow down that we may go
over, thou have laid the body as the ground, and as the street to them that
went over. These afflictions we must needs suffer, and by patience overcome
them; and withal, we must beware, that by these outward afflictions the inward
man be not weakened or overcome: resting in the assured hope and trust that the
Lord will never forsake us, but that we are in the bosom of the Father, and
are closed within most sure and strong holds, so that now although our goods,
our Wives, our Children; yea, our lives also be taken from us, yet we shall
never be spoiled of our Christ, by whom we are so surely defended, that in the
midst of all our tentations he will make a way for us to escape, or else
give us strength to bear them. Blessed is the Man who indureth tentation, Iam.
1.12.
for when he is tried he shall receive the Crown of life which the Lord has
promised to them that love him.

Thus we see what consolations the holy Ghost sets forth unto them which
believe the word, for unto such as look for a better life then this is, all
things are here full of calamities and miseries, death follows death, as
Saint Paul says, and we continually die; one temptation follows another,
until at the length, by the death of the flesh all miseries shall cease and
have an end. This verse therefore admonishes us, that we must suffer many
troubles, yet so that at length we shall be safe, and set at liberty from
them, although not in this life, yet in the life to come, as this verse full of
consolation does promise us. Notwithstanding this promise seems incredible,
both to us which suffer, and also to them which persecute and aflict us, for if
we behold the same with our outward eyes, what can be more false; yea, the
contrary seems to be most true: behold our Savior Christ, was he not so
forsaken, hanging upon the Cross, that the rod or scepter of the wicked rested
upon him, did it not rest likewise upon the Prophets, the Apostles, and orher
holy Martyrs: this matter then, if we consider it with our outward eyes, has
another meaning then the words do import, for they promise that the Scepter of
the wicked shall have no power over the godly, and yet all Stories and examples
do testify the contrary; therefore the holy Ghost calls us back to the
purpose and counsel of God revealed in his word, and commands us to weigh
and consider, not what we suffer, but what is decreed with the Lord in heaven,
and he that can so sequester himself from the beholding of his afflictions and
tentatfons, and yield himself wholly to the will of God, and there rest, is a
right divine; yea, he that is ignorant hereof, in true divinity knows
nothing at all: for what knows he which is ignorant that God is such a God,
as will not suffer the godly to be oppressed of the wicked. For seeing he has
said, I am the Lord thy God, he will never suffer that which is his own to be
wrested, either by the world, or by the gates of hell out of his hands: if he
then abide and continue, they shall also continue for ever which are his. Thus
to believe, and thus to lay hold on things invisible, is true divinity, and
true spiritual wisdom indeed.

Whereupon we may ground this proposition out of the invisible counsel of God,
God hates the wicked, and loves the just, ergo, he will damn and destroy the
wicked, and will deliver and save the just.

And here we see that which is the chiefest thing in all Psalms and Prophets
to spring out of the first precept. I am the Lord thy God.

Now have we to learn, how we may apply this verse rightly, and to our great
comfort, for true divinity consists in use and practice. We are vexed on
every side with wicked and perverse scorners, and others which hate the word
of God, and the doctrine which we profess. Comfort when the godly are not
esteemed of the wicked.
The men of this world esteem Gods Children as the off-scowrings of the earth:
So Paul, a chosen vessel of God, yet not esteemed of men. Let this confirm
the godly against the contempt of men, only the Lord has in his own hand the
balance of Justice which weighs men aright, according as they are: but these
are very trifles, if we compare them with those vexations, which Satan,
sin, and our own infirmity raise up in our consciences: we must learn
therefore thus to judge of all things, that they are the rod or scepter of the
wicked, and to set the Lord against them; revealing his will here in his word,
and pronouncing that he will not suffer the scepter of the wicked to rest upon
the godly. Since then the same Prince promises thus much unto us, which has
all things in his hand, what can we require more: for the will of God is
certain, that though he suffer us to be afflicted, yet will he not see us
trodden under foot or perish.

What the rod signifies in the Scriptures, it is well known: children when
they are young are corrected with a rod, and when they wax bigger, with a
wand, or a cudgel, and if they will not amend, then follows the iron rod:
hereof it comes that the rod signifies all power and rule, which is for the
amendment and corrction of such as do offend: so it is taken in the 110.
Psalm, The Lord shall send forth the rod of thy power out of Sion; That is to
say, Thy kingdom, for here he signifies such a rod whereby kingdoms and
people are governed. On this wise the Holy Ghost permits here to the Wicked
dominion and tyranny over the Godly, which they are compelled to suffer: this
dominion or tyranny the Holy Ghost called the rod of the Wicked, and
comfort us. That as the Lord lives, their tyranny shall fall, and shall
not rest upon the lot of the Godly.

The lot of the Just, is as much to say as the Portion, that is, the Number or
Congregation of the lust: like as Christ calls them the little Flock, and
Paul the poor Saints. Over these (says he) although the tyrants do rule,
yet shall not their power endure: although the persecutors of the Church do
oppress the Faithful, yet shall they not do so always, neither shall their
counsels have that success which they desire: for they think to root out
this Doctrine for ever; but that shall they never be able to do. Therefore,
albeit ye suffer in the mean time, says the Holy Ghost; yet know ye, that my
will is, That they which believe in me, shall never perish, but shall be
preserved to life everlasting.

Here then have ye whereunto ye may trust in all your tentations.

But behold the reason which the Holy Ghost here uses, to prove the Scepter
of the Wicked shall not rest upon the Just: God is moved (says he) to help
and defend the Just: For else it might so come to pass, that God should have
no Church at all, and the Just should put forth their hands to wickedness. So
we find in Jeremy, that before the people were delivered into the hands of the
Babylonians, they had a promise, that after seventy years they should return
again to Jerusalem, because they should not be brought into doubt of Gods
mercy, and so utterly despair, and falling away from God, should turn to
foolishness, (that is to say) should blaspheme and become impatient, this is
the cause why God joins the promise of the word with the execution and
performance of the deed, for else the godly should be driven to desparation:
We see how many are cast down with adversity, by the loss of goods, wife,
children, and other things which are dear unto them, except therefore their
minds were raised up again and comforted; first with the word and promise, and
then with the performance and execution of the same, many would say there were
no God: therefore God must needs show himself to be a God, not only in a word,
but also in deed.

David had great promises of God, 2. Sam. 15.30.
and yet by his own son was driven out of his kingdom, and so persecuted,
that he was compelled to fly away bare head and bare foot, this was a sore
tentation, wherefore the great and ample promises made unto him could never
have raised him up and comforted him again, except God had indeed delivered
him out of this great misery and affliction; even so, if we had no more but
the promises of God to support us against the Papists and adversaries of the
word; yea, if God did not indeed fight for us, and defend us against their
tyranny; God therefore works both ways: he raises up with the word and
promise, and delivers out of troubles and afflictions by the execution of the
deed, that according to the saying of Saint Paul, the tentation should not be
above our strength, but should have an end: and we learn by our own
experience, that the first Commandment, I am the Lord thy GOD, is most
certain and infailable; therefore when he says, Least the just should turn
away from God and fall to gentilitie, for GOD has a double care over the
faithful; first that they be not overcome, but may overcome the tentation.
And this he does by the word and promise; the second is, that the tentation be
not perpetual, even so must we be undoubtedly persuaded, that besides the
infailable promises which we have of the good will of God toward us, and in
the end of everlasting life, we shall also be delivered, and our adversaries
destroyed, albeit we can see no manner of way or possible means how that it
may be done.

But here we must beware, that we do not appoint the time of this
deliverance, for before that come, God will have us tried to the uttermost, and
brought to that extremity, that all our hope and trust shall be utterly
spent, and we at the point of desparation.

Now when we are brought into this case, that we can see nothing but
desparation, then, even then God sends comfort: in death he shows life, and
even in damnation he brings salvation. Briefly, of nothing he makes all
things: and when all hope of remedy is past, then begins he to work, and
frames all anew again in most perfect wise. Thus cannot the God of this world
do, this is the singular work of God: therefore when thou think thy self
clean cast away, and utterly forsaken, even then thou should be most sure
and safe, and most gloriously shine as the Day Star in the Firmament. These
things are easily taught: but by experience we find and feel, how far they
pass all reason and power of man, and how hardly we can believe, that God
makes all things of nothing; that he is careful of us, and for us, whether we
be afflicted in the flesh, or in the spirit; and that he is more mindful of
our deliverance, then we our selves can be.

Here have we then a singular promise and consolation: as if he should say,
the rod of the wicked grieueth you, but be of good comfort my people, and
patiently endure it, for I will not suffer the tentation so far to prevail
over you, that your confidence and trust in me shall utterly fail you: storms
and tempests shall arise, and your dangers shall seem so great, as though the
waves should presently swallow you up; but I will not suffer you to perish: I
will bridle their rage, and make an end of the rod of the wicked. If Satan
and your own Conscience do accuse you as most wicked and unrighteous, yet
will I not leave you destitute of my righteousness.

Thus do Tentations teach us the true use and meaning of the first
Commandment; the which none without Afflictions and Tentations shall rightly
know or understand.

Hereby the Prophet will teach us, that our Afflictions are but short, and
endures but a while: The rod of the wicked shall not lie for ever upon the
back of the righteous. The time of our trouble in holy Scripture is called
sometime a Day of Trial, and sometimes an Hour of Tentation. As our Savior
said to the three Disciples, Mat. 26.40.
Can ye not watch with me one hour? so may he say to us all, as often as we
faint under trouble, Can ye not suffer with me one hour? It was the comfort
that Athanasius gave to the Church in his time, that Julian should be but a
stormy little Cloud, that would quickly pass by. And it is certainly true,
both of the troubles, and of all the instruments thereof. Let us wait a while
on our God with patience, and we shall see them no more.

Therefore seeing the use of afflictions and sorrows of the godly is but for a
time, to exercise their faith, and patience, and therefore cannot be
perpetual: for when the trial is over, the burden must be removed. The
time of Winter is bitter, and barren, and cold, through Frosts, and Storms:
but besides, that it is profitable for the Earth, and Plants, to kill Weeds,
and Worms, and to mellow and rot the Ground; it is a forerunner of a pleasant
spring and a fruitful harvest: such is the state of the godly often here.
Christ the Son of righteousness sometimes departs further off, and leaves
the believer in a wintrous estate, laid open to many storms and sad showers:
but, besides that all this winter prepares the soil, and kills the weeds and
vermin of the soul, it goes before an happy spring and harvest, which will
bring in fruits of righteousness to those that are exercised. I go away for a
while, and ye shall be sorrowful: but I will come again, and your heart shall
rejoice, and your joy shall none take away.

Here is then first of all a notable ground of patience in sorrows; The rod of
the wicked shall not lie for ever upon the back of the righteous. And seeing
God has set the time how long they shall last, and shall not exceed the
appointed time. This should always learn us patience: yea, he has not only
set a time of duration, but also of exchanging thy sorrows into joy. Art thou
in any trouble, or under any molestation of Satan? Are wicked men under
reproach, scandal, hatred, persecution, etc? it is a storm too violent to last
long: nay, it shall be changed into a calm, into a fair and comfortable
season. Suppose thou be in the Night of disgrace, blacked and darkened by
wicked ones, as David was: Suppose thou have things laid to thy charge, that
thou never knew, and art forced to repay that which thou never tookest; yet
wait still the good time: after thou have endured a little scowring, all the
soil will tend to thy brightness; and the time comes, that God will make thy
innocence to break out as the light.

Art thou sick in thy Soul, or pained in thy Body, and see no way but
present Death? wait the time, and thou shall meet not only with perfect cure,
but perfect health also: only see thou make Christ thy Physician. God had
appointed a time of Abraham's trial for three days; but the third day turned
his sorrow into joy: in which he had the comfort, both of his son and his
own obedience.

Jonas had his appointed time of sorrow in the belly of Hell, in the bottom of
the Sea, when he was cast out of sight: but at the end of three days he was
cast on the dry ground, and his sorrows and fears were turned into joy and
praises.

The Thief on the Cross was even in the hands of death, his pains and
sorrows increasing: as he felt his life decreasing, how did our blessed
Savior comfort him, and support him with patience? but with this assurance,
that the end was coming, and a time appointed, which should instantly turn
that shame and sorrow into glory and joy, This day shall thou be with me in
Paradise.

Lazarus was not only in the hands, but in the House of Death four days: yet
a time was appointed, even the fourth day, wherein the bands of Death were to
be loosed, and he restored to his former life.

And thus shall it be with all the Disciples of Christ; whose troubles shall
not last always: the longest they can last, is but for this life: and while
they do last, they have the comfort of both those Petitions of Christ; first,
That the Father would keep them in the World; and secondly, that after they be
safely passed through the World, and the troubles and disgrace of it, They may
be where himself is, John 17.24
to behold his glory.

This serves to comfort the godly in their troubles, that they shall be
preserved in them, and from them: The Gates of Hell shall not prevail against
them. First, Satan the red Dragon may create them trouble, so that they shall
want no molestation that he can procure them: but he cannot hinder their
deliverance, nor without leave hinder their peace, no, nor touch an hair of
their head. Secondly, the wicked of the World will see they want no trials or
vexation: but on the contrary, God will see they shall not want seasonable
deliverance; he will not leave him in his hand: And although (such is their
inbred malice) that they would never take off their Rods from the backs of the
godly; yet God will not suffer the Rod of the ungodly always to lie on the lot
of the righteous. Thirdly, Psalm. 37.8.
if their own sins beset them hard, and so dismay them, as though they
should never get freedom: And this is the strongest band of all, which tyeth
them to trouble; and all other troubles were but a play, so that the heart were
persuaded of the pardon of Sin (as the Saints in sickness of Conscience can
confess.) But Sin shall slay the ungodly. Psalm. 34.24.
As for the righteous, the promise is, though they fall, they are not cast off:
Not that their sin does not deserve they should, but because the Lord puts
under his hand, and renews his grace, to raise them to repentance.

Moreover, we are here admonished of the great danger that follows these
Afflictions and Tentations, which they that through impatience forsake the
Word, and Faith, do fall into. Therefore the Lord here shows himself so
careful for his people, lest they should fall into this danger: for their
state which have once forsaken the Word, is much more perilous then it was
before; and into such, as our Savior Christ pronounces in the Gospel, do
enter seven Spirits much more wicked then the first. Luke 11.26.


We must therefore patiently suffer and persevere in all Tentations, and
rather abide all extremities, then once shrink from the Word of Life, lest we
be possessed with seven Spirits more wicked then the first. And moreover, we
must assuredly trust, as we are taught in this Verse, that so long as we have
a desire, and a purpose so to do, the Lord will never forsake us, or suffer us
to fall into this impiety.

For here have we a manifest promise, and a lively description of the Lords
singular care and providence over us: namely, that he is mindful of the end
of our tentations, and afflictions, so that we only continue constant and
patient unto the end. And if that Heathen Poet said, Endure, and reserve your
selves for more happy things; Virgil.
how much more should Christians diligently stir up themselves with mutual
exhortations, to patience, and perseverance? whether they outwardly suffer in
things pertaining to the Body, and to this present Life, or inwardly in
Conscience. For we have a God, which even in Death, in Hell, and in the
midst of all our Sins, can save and deliver us. A Christian therefore must
be readily prepared, not only with strength to stand against the enemy, but
with steadfast purpose also to continue unto the end. For he runs not in such
a race wherein there is any end of his course during this life, but he runs
as it were in a circle, in the which he must have a continual recourse
thither where he first began; Our course and race is as it were in a circle
which has no end.
therefore our Savior Christ says, He that continues to the end he shall be
saved. We must not be then discouraged by the importunity of our enemy, or
overcome with tediousness and long continuance, but we must fight, not only
against the power and subtlety of our enemy, but also against our own
weakness and weariness: for as in them who wrestle with any equal strength;
sometimes the one is above, and sometimes the other, till at length one be
overcome: So is it in this combat in the Christian; sometimes the power of
nature, othertimes the power of grace prevailing: but this comfort we have,
that at the length grace shall prevail, and the power of corrupt nature shall
be captiued under the obedience of Christ. Hence we learn, that it is not
enough for a man or woman to begin well, or to take some liking of religion, as
to reverence Gods Ministers, to desire to hear them, to join with the people
of God in prayer, to bring forth some good fruit in outward reformation of
life, etc. unless he persevere, persist, and go on unto the end, He that
endures to the end shall be saved. Mat. 24.13. Reu. 2.10.
And, be thou faithful unto death, and I will give thee a Crown of life. If a
righteous man leave his righteousness, etc. he that puts his hand to the Lords
plough, Eze. 18.24. Luke 2.21.
and looks back, is not worthy of the kingdom of heaven. Again, It had
been better for them that they had never known the ways of godliness, then
afterward to fall away. 2. Pet. 2.21.
And therefore in the Scriptures, such as have had some beginning, and after
fallen away, are noted to have been exceeding wicked men, as we see in Judas.
Math. 27.
First a Preacher and an Apostle, a man well esteemed, that had excellent gifts
to preach, pray, and cast out Devils; afterward an hypocrite, a thief, a
traitor, a reprobate. Herod had many things in him at first, reverenced John
Baptist, heard him gladly, did many things at his request; yet afterward a
bloody persecuter. Demas once a sound professor (as it seemed) and one that
was dear unto Paul, but afterward left his profession, and fell in love with
the world, etc. and therefore it is a special duty required of every
Christian to continue steadfast. Be thou faithful unto the end, (...). 2.26.
and I will give thee a Crown of life.

Hence we see, that it is a dangerous thing to revolt, and go backward in
matters of religion, to lose our first love. It is a fearful sign of a
reprobate and cast away, when men slack hand, and slip neck out of chollar,
grow careless in the service and worship of God: for a man to grow there is
some hope, though he do but creep in religion, but for a man to go
backward, or to stand at a stay, is dangerous; for it is certain, Not to go
forward in Gods matters, is to go backward, not to increase, is to decrease,
not to grow better, is to wax worse: it is a hard matter to make a good
beginning. We are not easily brought to set one foot forward in the ways of
godliness, but then to trip while we are in our journey, and to wax weary of
well doing: This is a fearful sin.

Let this admonish us all, Mat. 24.13.
as we do love our own souls, to labor for constancy and perseverance,
that we may hold out unto the end: that our works may be more at last then at
first; R^^. ^.
that we be sure to dig so deep, that we lay the foundation of our faith upon
the rock Christ: and for want of this godly care and circumspection ^forehand,
many have at the first given their names to Christ, who afterward when they
were to take up the Cross of Christ, have gone out and turned their backs
upon Christ. Saul began well, but afterward he waxed worse, and in the end
became an open persecutour. Ioash behaved himself uprightly of the Lord. But
after his death he fell into Idolatry. What did it profit Lots Wife to go out
of Sodom, insomuch as afterward she looked back, and was turned into a pillar
of Salt. So then we see here, that it is not enough to begin well, neither is
it enough to proceed well. It is required of us to persevere well, and to
continue in a constant and settled course even to the end.

So that if we look to partake of eternal life and happiness for ever with
God. Reu. 2.10.
We must be constant in the profession of his truth: in all things laboring to
approve our selves unto GOD, keeping faith and a good conscience, which has
the promise of this life, and that which is to come. And we must ever
entertain this holy resolution, that nothing should draw us from God and
godliness. 2. Cor. 1.12
This is our rejoicing (says Paul) the testimony of a good conscience; that
is in simplicity and godly pureness, and not in fleshly wisdom, etc. This
yields unto us much comfort, that our hearts can witness with us, that we
have done our duties in obedience to Gods will.

Verse 4. Do well (O Lord) unto them that be good and true of heart.
THE Prophet says not here: do well Lord to the perfect, and such as offend
in nothing, but to the good and true of heart. The good and true of heart are
they which are of a single, sincere, and upright heart: for these are they
which are most accepted of God, although they also through infirmity do some
times offend.

Here is matter of great comfort to the Children of God, that fall of
weakness and infirmity into the same sin after repentance: and such is the
depth of Satan's temptations, that he tells them that the Children of God fall
not into the same sin again after their repentance, if they do he tells
them, that there is no place for a second repentance, but this is false, for
the promises of God are without limitation of times, or consideration of
sins, or respect of persons: he will receive to mercy all repentant sinners,
whether their sins be committed before or after repentance, whither once or
often, so that they renew their repentance, according as they have sinned anew.
This pardon Christ himself publishes: Come unto me all ye that are weary
and heavy laden, and I will refresh you. Mat. 11.28.
Yea, the Lord inioyneth us sinful men to forgive our Brother seauentie times
seven times, if he turn again and say it repents me.

So that we see, this is a marvelous comfort to all such as groan under the
burden of sin, that have fallen through infirmity into one sin often: let
not such be discouraged, but assure themselves that albeit with Peter they fall
often, yet with him if they repent truly, and weep bitterly for their sins,
the Lord is merciful to forgive them their sins, not that we should live
proudly, presumptuously, stubbornely, and obstinately against him, but if we
fall through frailty, Psalm. 103.
Psalm 103. The Lord knows whereof we be made, he remembers that we are
but dust.

The Child of God not always at one stay.
Hence we learn, that the Child of GOD is not always at one stay: but there
is an intercourse in the estate of a Christian man or woman; sometimes full of
comfort, joy, and peace of conscience, and sometimes again heavy and sad;
yea, full of sorrow and perplexity, even as a man in an ague; sometimes sick
and sometimes well: and as it is with trees, sometimes winter, and sometimes
summer. This is the state of all Gods Children; as David, Joseph, Hezekias,
Job, etc. and continual experience proves this: that the estate of Gods
Children ebbes and flows, has their change when as they walk directly and
uprightly with God, then they have peace and comfort, but when that they start
aside, and commit some wicked sin, then they find torments of conscience,
and great grief of mind.

This shows us, what is the state and condition of the Child of GOD in this
life, he is not so here sanctified, as that he feels no corruption of sin
to hang about him, but rather such a one as feels the burden of his
corruptions, hindering him in this his course of Christianity, under which he
grievously sighs and groans, laboring by all good means to be
disburthened. Indeed it is a matter of great comfort, to feel the graces of
Gods Spirit, as Faith, Love, etc. but no Child of GOD can always feel the
comfort of grace, but as fire that is raked up in the ashes, it is hid from his
feeling for a time, but at the length it will break out again, to his great
joy and comfort.

Well, seeing this is the state of Gods Children here: they find great peace
and comfort, sometimes grief and sorrow: let us not be to much discouraged,
but rather when as by our falls and slippes, we have weakened our comfort, let
us entreat the Lord to renew our comfort again, let us do as a poor
traveler, who if he miss his way, and go out of it, he will hasten into it
again, and trudge and pluck up his heels with all speed to recover that
which he has lost.

So let us when we have sinned and gone out of the way, make have to return:
and as a man that has been long sick, and grown feeble and weak, will use
all means to gather up his crumbs, and to recover his former strength again.
So let us when we have lost some part of our comfort and heavenly strength,
let us I say use all blessed means to recover our former health and comfort
again. Let us pray much, read much, hear much, and meditate much; let us
bewail our former sloth, and make our steps more upright in time to come to
Gods kingdom, etc.

A purpose not to sin, the mark of a sanctified Heart.
Note here, that it is the special fruit and mark of a sanctified Heart, and
of the Mind renewed, to have a purpose not to sin; but in all things to
please God, and to do his Will, to walk with God in all his Commandments:
Whereas on the contrary, Psalm. 50.17.
when a Man has a purpose to live in any known sin, it is a fearful and a
manifest sign of a naughty and wicked Heart: For when the Heart is truly
sanctified, then will be brought this right Spirit, not to sin in any thing:
I do not say, that the Man sanctified and regenerate, does not sin at all;
but he has no purpose to sin, no delight in sin, but bears a constant
purpose in all things to please God: When he can say with David, I have
refrayned my feet from every evil way. Again, He that is borne of God,
sins not; that is, John 3.9.
with full purpose of heart, with delight in Sin: and as they purpose not to
sin, so they endeavor it; they are afraid, and suspect themselves, shun the
Occasions of Sin, Genesis 39.9.
and strive against their own Corruptions, and Satan's Temptations.

This Doctrine does evidently convince the greatest number to be such, as
never had the true Work of Sanctification wrought in them: Their Hearts be
not sanctified, and their Minds are not renewed: Why? Namely, because they
want this mark and fruit of a sanctified heart: for though they hear of
their sins, be told of them, and the fearful judgments of GOD denounced
against them; yet they will not leave them nor forsake them, but will continue
in them; yea, though it cost them the loss of Gods favor, and the loss of
their own souls, let us not deceive our selves. Let us try our hearts by this
rule, whether they be sanctified or not: do thou find a dislike of all
sin, and an hatred of them? Have thou a constant and resolent purpose, no
more to sin against thy GOD wittingly and willingly? have thou a resolute
purpose, by the grace of GOD to walk before him all thy days; this is a sign
of a pure and upright heart, and that it is sanctified. But do thou find no
such resolution, no such purpose? but rather contrary, a purpose to run on
in them, let man say what he can: in Lying, Stealing, Drunkenness, Whoredom,
Ignorance, Contempt of the Word, etc. Say what thou will, profess what thou will, it is a clear case thy heart is naught, it is filthy, not sanctified.
For it is impossible, that a man should have true repentance, and an heart
truly sanctified, and yet keep a purpose to live in his known sins. And
therefore it conuinceth all such to be impenitent sinners and notorious
hypocrites: yea, if they leave many sins, and yet purpose to live in one,
Mark. 6.
it argues the heart is not sanctified. Herod left many, yet lived in Incest,
etc. Know this therefore, whosoever thou art, that if thou take liberty to
thy self to live in any known sin, thou can have no assurance that thou
art yet within the covenant of Grace, Blessedness is no part of thy portion,
He must become a new Creature, that shall enter into the new Jerusalem. For,
according to David's speech, if we regard any one Sin in our hearts, the Lord
will not hear us.

The young man in the Gospel remembered many sins, and justified himself, as
clear from the breach of the Commandments in the second Table; but his
Covetousness, which was in his heart, he remembered not. And therefore, when
our Savior bad him go sell all that he had, and give to the poor, he went
away sorrowful, Matthew. 19.21, 22.
for he had great Possessions.

Wherefore, we must resolve our selves of the great necessity of this point,
of general reformation of all sin, condemning our selves for every sin:
for if we live and lie but in one sin, that one sin is a sufficient
weight, to press us down to Hell. Let us therefore cast every sin away,
which is as great weight, Heb. 12.1.
and lay aside every sin with which we are beset.

This Doctrine may serve for the comfort of Gods Children, who are much grieved
for their sins, and infirmities, when they fail and come short of good
duties, and sometimes start aside; as says Saint James, Iam. 3.2.
In many things we sin all, and the just Man falls seven times a day: but if
thou can truly say, it is against thy purpose, I hate the sin I commit, I
condemn it. I had no purpose to do it, my desire was to please God: then thou
may have comfort, thy heart is sound, God will not condemn thee for it, The
Lord will spare his children, as a father his only son. A child is going to
School, and his purpose is so to do; in the way he falls into some company,
and stays there too long, and plays the truant, but it is against his
purpose: even so the child of God purposes to serve God, and to please him in
all things, and has no purpose to sin; but by some temptation of the Devil,
or allurements of the World, he is overtaken: I do the evil I would not, I
cannot do the good I would, hut I delight in the Law of the Lord concerning
the inner Man. This is Paul's comfort, and this is the comfort of all Gods
children: if they can truly say, I do the evil I would not, I delight in the
Law of God; that God will accept the will for the deed.

Therefore let this be thy comfort: A prisoner that has escaped out of Prison,
would feign go twenty miles in one hour; but by reason of his Bolts and
Fetters he cannot go one mile. It is thus with Gods children: Here they would
feign escape from the prison of sin, and shake off the Fetters of
ungodliness, that hang on so fast; Heb. 12.1.
but so long as the Fetters are on, and they clothed with the garment of the
flesh, there will corruption leake out of them. It is Gods great mercy unto
the godly, that they have freedom of Spirit, that their Souls are at
liberty, and that they can sigh and groan, and desire to be eased.

Phil. 3.4. Our perfection in this life is rather in desires, the^ in deeds.
Satisfaction shall follow desires, and God shall give us more then we desired.
Mat 5.6.
Our perfection in this life, is rather in godly desires, then in a full
obtaining of things desired: yet have the godly this comfort, that where
desires go before, satisfaction shall follow; for the Lord has promised to
fulfill the desires of them that fear him: Blessed are they who hunger and
thirst for righteousness, for they shall be satisfied. Yea, sure it is, how
great soever our desires be, we cannot desire so much as the Lord has to
give us: for he is rich in mercy, able to do abundantly, above all that we
can ask or think.

Example hereof we have in Zaccheus: Luke 19.3.
He desired but to see Christ; and he got not only a sight of him, but
familiar speech of him: yea, Christ went to his House, and dyned with him, and
made him, by grace, the Child of Abraham.

So shall the Lord do to all his Children; he shall give them more then
either they desired or looked for at his hands: For the heart of man cannot
understand those things which God has prepared for them that love him.

Oh the riches of Gods unspeakable mercy! Oh the endless comfort and
felicity of all those that truly and uprightly remember God, and seek his
glory with their whole heart! This comfort we have, that if we ask any thing
in prayer, we shall receive it: Whatsoever we ask, we receive of him,
because we keep his Commandments, and do those things which are pleasing in
Gods sight. 1. Ioh. 3.22.
If we read the Scriptures, hear the Word, etc. blessed shall we be if we
keep it: according to that in the Revelation, Blessed is he that reads,
Revel. 1.3.
and they that hear the words of this Prophecy, and keep those things which
are written therein: Our Goods, Cattle, Corn, and all things belonging to us,
Deuteronomy. 28.
shall be blessed of God, if we remember to obey his voice, and to do as he
would have us: yea, our children shall be blessed after us; Prou. 20.7.
for, Blessed is the upright man, and blessed shall his seed be after him: Yea,
as David speaks, Blessed is the man that meditates in the Law of God day and
night, (...) comfort in the creature: yet shall he be forced to acknowledge
that all the labor under the Sun, Eccles. 1.
is but vanity and vexation of spirit: there is a short abridgement of our
life. Job 6.4.
Man comes into vanity and goes into darkness: it is no better if we do
no more but follow the course of nature. Let us therefore go above the Sun,
seek rest, joy, and contentment in our God, in whom only it is to be found.

As for such as turn back unto their own wickedness, the Lord shall lead
them forth with the evil doers: but peace shall be upon Israel. There has
been of this sort of men ever since the Apostles time which has corrupted the
Church, and with a show of holiness deceived the simple, which because God
punishes them not but spares them, and suffers them to prosper in this
world, become so proud, that they will be counted amongst the holiest, and of
the world are so commonly taken. We see, that not only the godly are mixed
with the wicked in this world, but in the Lords floor also the wheat lies
hidden under the chafe. We must pray therefore, that God would bring these
Hypocrites to light, and give unto them their just punishment, with the workers
of iniquity; then shall peace ensue to the Church of God: for whiles the Lord
powers forth his just vengeance upon the wicked, which vex and persecute his
true members, he gathers together the good and upright of heart, and openly
declares his fatherly good will and tender love toward them.

This doctrine serves to let many men see their folly: they hope to be saved,
and make full account when they die, to go to God: but yet shall never come
there, because they are not in the ways of God. If a man should say he would
go from York to London, and yet shall hold the direct way to Barwicke, would
not every man laugh at him? so is it with him that walks in the path of
perdition, and yet says he will come to Heaven. Ask them what way they walk
in, and they must needs give themselves the lie, if they say it is Gods way.
And in this conceit, thousands are deceived, and slip into their place before
they would, or be aware.

First, Many by-ways beaten by many.
some walk in the blind way of Ignorance, a dark and uncomfortable Way, as
Men walking in the night, in which is no safety nor direction: numbers care
not for the Lantern of the Word, and walking in the night, know not whither
they go, nor where they shall lodge. Ask Papists what way they are in? Oh,
they are in the way of Catholics, in the way wherein the Martyrs and
Confessors died, in the way of their Forefathers, what way soever it be. And I
would this Ignorance were among them only: but (alas) it is the way of too
many, who profess the Light.

Secondly, some walk in the cross ways of Superstition, and men's Devices, as
many of our people; who think Common prayers better in Lent then all the year
after: and some can be devout on high days, and come to Church; but other
days Gods Service is not so effected. And some receive the Sacrament at
Easter, and they were damned if they did not: but all the year besides, the
Sacrament has no sweetness. These are superstitious ways; whereas Gods ways
are the same, and to be walked in with the same affection.

Thirdly, some go in the crooked ways of Humane Reason, Will, Policy, and
Affections, and cannot yield to the Wisdom of God: their own Lusts are their
Laws; who should control them? Here is an infinite number of Rodes, all of
them full of wanderers from God: whereas Gods way is but one, and of Gods
describing, clean contrary to man's corrupt Reason, Will, Affections, and
Conversation.

Fourthly, some go in the detestable and damnable ways of wilful spurning
against the truth: 2. Pet. 2.2.
Many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way of truth shall be
evil spoken of. Is it not damnable enough for men to walk on in the ways of
damnation themselves, unless they rail at the way of truth and life?

Fifthly, some walk in the filthy myrie ways of voluptuousness and
profaneness, as foul Fornicators, Drunkards, Gamesters, Gluttons, Epicures,
dainty and delicate persons, who seem to be made for nothing but idleness, and
effeminate care of their skin, and fruition of their own sensuality and
appetite: to such Solomon speaks in the person of the young man, Walk in the
sight of thine eyes, and in the lusts of thine heart, but know that for all
this thou must come to Judgment.

Lastly, numbers walk in the rugged, stony, thornie, and clayie ways of
Earthlinesse, Covetousness, Usury, and Oppression, setting themselves fast in
the gall and guile of earthly-mindednesse, not having power over themselves to
stir hand or foot to Heauenward: Where their Treasure is, there have they
locked up their hearts too; or rather burying them (for so they may, being
dead) in the earth and earthly desires: the Heaven that they wish for, they
have; what then care they for any way that leads to another?

First we learn hence, that in our Christian conversation there should be a
continual progress in godliness. For as in walking (says Basil) the steps
of the feet by a mutual strife among themselves are changed, in such sort,
that the foot which now is hindmost, is foremost next, continuing always this
motion, till we come to the place of our rest: so should there be in the
Christian such a continual promoouing of his heart toward God, that the
affection which this day is behind, coldest in the love of God, slowest to obey
him, should the next day be made foremost: Bern.
For in this life nothing stands in one state; it is most certain, that he
that goes not forward, goes backward. Yet I would not so be understood, as if
the Christian had not his own fainting and falling in the way of godliness:
yet blessed be God, who keeps our Souls in life; we so faint, that we
reviue; we so fall, that we rise again: of our former Follies, we learn to
be wise; of the experience of our weakness, we gather strength: we walk
then more warily, because so often we have stumbled and fallen: of our sins we
make vantage: he who is truly penitent walks always in sorrow and fear,
because he has fallen so often in fear, least he should fall again.

Secondly, What to be done in our falls.
let us be circumspect both to prevent and recover our selves out of our falls
in this way, by reason of Satan's fierce temptations, the weakness of grace,
and the frailty of the flesh. Many are the false and knocks of the best: Psalm
19.12.
In many things we sin all, says S. James, and who knows his errors: Now
if we will prevent these, we must beware of occasions of sin, as a traveler
steps over stones and rubs in his way. Eve prevented not the occasion of her
fall when she entered talk with the Serpent. We must make a covenant with our
eyes, not to look upon a Woman, nor on the wine in a cup. We must watch over
our selves, both alone and in company, and not run into bad company, least we
come home by weeping cross, as Peter did. Secondly, we must not lie in our
falls: a man in his journey, if he fall and lie still, shall never come to his
ways end: and if he rise quickly, though it hinder him a little, it shall not
be much. The Saints all of them recovered themselves out of their falls, by
renewing their Faith and Repentance. A man out of his way must come back
again: the sooner he returns the less is his labor: Peter presently went
out and wept bitterly, and so was restored to Christ's favor.

Thirdly, suppose thy falls be grievous, and often into the same sins, yet let
them not hinder thee still out of the way. For as the Child of GOD must
neither presume nor purpose sin: so must he not despair of rising, having
fallen into sin, seeing the promise is; that If a man's sins, for
heinousness, be as red as scarlet, upon his true repentance, they shall be
made white as Snow: And the parable teaches, that if a sinner offends
seventy times seven times in a day, and as often truly repent, he shall be as
often forgiven. Fourthly, after such falls, we must be more wary and careful,
least we fall in the same manner. A man, yea, a beast will be more careful,
when it comes by the same place where it caught a fall: ye cannot get it into
the same hole again. David no doubt, would not count the Tribes again, after
that fall in numbering them.

Thirdly, hold on in this way constantly with perseverance: for the end of a
work crowns it, and the end of a way gladdeth and rests the weary
traveler: and this rest is without end. Many set forth on this way, but are
discouraged by the hardness of the entrance: whereas if they were a little
entered, the way would be pleasant, and the yoke of Christ easy and sweet.
Others have gone yet further, but at length look back; yea, go back, when a
man would have thought they had escaped the filthiness of the world: and these
have lost a great deal of labor and comfort. Others, yet farther then they,
as the bad earth, even so far as a man could perceive no difference between
them and sound Christians: and apparent difference was there none but in
perseverance, and yet wanting soundness, have suffered shipwreck even at the
haven, and so their former righteousness is all forgotten: a great deal of
way they had gone, and much work had they rid, whereof they shall never see
crown nor comfort. Oh beware of weariness and relapse! As toward the end of
his way the traveler is most cheerful: so should we, and the rather;
because, first, every one affects a good end, even Balaam: and will we not
endure a little difficulty for it.

Fourthly, seeing there are a number that deceive themselves about their estate
in which they are: thinking that their ways are right, when God knows, they
are the paths that lead to hell: they boast of their supposed good, when
indeed it is nothing but a mere delusion of the Devil to blind the eyes of
their minds, to make them seem that which they are not: they boast and brag
of Justification, and yet live without Sanctification: Such people are out of
the way, and all this while they do nothing else but deceive their own
souls: for he that is Justified, is also Sanctified: and after Justification,
there will follow Sanctification. Would thou then know, whether thou have
thoroughly and effectually remembered thy falls, and art converted, and that God
has Justified thee, in pardoning and forgiving thee all thy sins, and
acquitting thee from the guilt and punishment of thy sins, and that God
accepts thee through Christ as righteous before him, and that thou shall never
be condemned for thy sin: then examine thy Sanctification: Do thou leave
thine ways, and walk in the ways of GOD? Do thou use all good means to
come to salvation, and avoid all occasions which might draw thee to
destruction?

In a word, do thou deny thy self, and wholly resign up thy self to be
guided by Gods Spirit in all things? then thou art Sanctified, and so may
approve thou art Justified, else not. Romans 8.1.
Now there is no condemnation to those which are in Christ Jesus. There is
Justification; who are such as walk not after the flesh, Ephe. 2.10.
but after the Spirit: there is Sanctification. It is the end of our new
Creation and second birth, Psalm. 125.5.
which God has ordained, viz. to walk in good works.

Lastly, in a word, utterly to renounce all sin, to hate, loath, detest and
abhor it: so as to have nothing to do any more with it, but to vow and
resolve against it; and so leave it and forsake it, and daily more and more to
be out of love with it and our selves for it, is a most true sign of him that
has rightly searched himself, and is truly converted: Pro. 28.13.
and such a man shall obtain mercy at Gods hand in this world, and everlasting
mercy in the world to come. Wherefore seeing we have these promises, 2. Cor.
7.1.
let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of the flesh and spirit, and
finish our sanctification in the fear of God. Signifying, that it is not
sufficient to purge our selves in part, but it must be both from internal
corruptions of the soul: as also the external pollutions of the body, and to
labor for the fear of God, without which we are impudent and bold in
committing of uncleanness, which we would not dare to attempt, if the fear
of God were firmly settled in our hearts: teaching us also, not to make a show
of holiness for a time, but to go on constantly, and to finish our
Sanctification, daily proceeding in a holy course: adding more holiness still
to more: that so holding out unto the end, we may receive the end of our Faith,
the salvation of our souls. For he that continues unto the end, 1. Pet. 1.9.
he shall be saved.

PSALM 126. When the Lord brought again the captivity of Sion, we were like
them that dream.
The Argument of the Psalm.
TOuching the Captivity, whereof the Prophet speaks in this Psalm. The
Interpreters do not agree. Some understand it to be meant of the Captivity of
Babylon; some of the Captivity under the Romans, other some do think, that
the Prophet means here, all the Captiuities and deliverances of the Prophet,
according to that promise, that if they should at any time be led into
Captivity for their transgressions, and by repentance should return unto the
Lord, Of what manner of Captivity this Psalm treats.
he would show mercy unto them, and bring them home into their land again: but
in mine opinion, they go near to the sense and true meaning of the Psalm,
which does refer it to that great and general Captivity of mankind under
Sin, Death, and the Devil, and to the redemption purchased by the death and
bloodshedding of Christ, and published in the Gospel, for this kind of speech
which the Prophet uses here, is of greater importance, then that it may be
applied only to these particular Captiuities. For what great matter was it for
these people of the Jews, being as it were a little handful to be delivered
out of temporal Captivity, in comparison of the exceeding and incomparable
deliverance, whereby mankind was set at liberty from the power of their
enemies: not Temporal, but Eternal, even from Death, Satan, and Hell it
self; wherefore we take this Psalm to be a Prophecy of the Redemption that
should come by Jesus Christ, and the publishing of the Gospel, whereby the
kingdom of Christ is advanced, Death and the Devil, with all the powers of
darkness are vanquished. This Psalm being thus generally understood, may
afterward be applied to every particular deliverance.

Verse 1. When the Lord brought again the Captivity of Sion, we were like
them that Dream.
BY Syon is signified that people which had the promise of the coming of
Christ. For Redemption and Salvation was first promised to the people of Syon,
and to the children of Abraham after the flesh.

This people was in bondage under the Law, and by the Law under the Captivity
of Death and Sin. Now if this people complain of their Captivity, and sigh
for their deliverance, what shall we think of the Gentiles which lived in
Idolatry, and in their own lusts, without any Law, and without God, he could
not therefore have signified a more general, and more grievous captivity,
then when he says; That his own people of Sion did long for this deliverance,
which in outward appearance, was most holy, and under David and Saul did
mightily flourish. But behold how lively he sets forth that joy which should
follow this deliverance: we shall be (says he) like them that dream. By this
kind of speech he expresses the greatness of their joy; meaning that this joy
and gladness should be so great, that the heart of man should not be able to
conceive it: as if he should say, when he shall hear of. Yea, when we shall
indeed feel and enjoy this deliverance from sin and death, so far passing
all that we could hope or look for, the joy thereof shall be so great, that it
shall seem to us but as a dream. For so we see it come to pass also, even
in particular deliverances, when God suddenly delivers his Servants out of
any great trouble or affliction: Acts 12.7.
So it happened to Peter, when he was delivered by the Angel out of prison.
Likewise, when it was said to Jacob: Joseph thy Son lives, Genesis 45.19
and rules over all the land of Egypt. He was as one raised out of a dream,
and could not believe it until that it was showed unto him by certain tokens
to be true indeed.

Here then is set forth unto us, the inestimable grace whereby we are
redeemed through the blood of the Son of God: who did not spare himself and
his own life, that he might set us free from the power of the Devil, the
wrath of GOD, Death and eternal Damnation; but man's heart is not able, as is
said, to comprehend these things. The more feeling and taste he has thereof,
the greater alacrity and courage has he to go through all dangers: the less
feeling he has, the more he is shaken with terrors, and at the length looking
back to Egypt with the Israelites, seeking other helps.

Our heart therefore must wholly rest in this Redemption, and we must labor to
have some part of this taste and feeling, which the Prophet rightly compares
to a most joyful and pleasant Dream.

We see here the Jews were so glad of their deliverance out of the Babylonish
Captivity, and their return thence, that they scarce could believe whether it
was not a Dream. Our Captivity was far greater; being under the Curse of
the Law, sold under Sin, Bondslaues unto Satan, and Sons of Wrath: Which
Bondage could we rightly acknowledge, our Deliverance would be far more
grateful then it is. Our Deliverer was not Moses, nor Joshua, nor Zerubbabel;
but the Son of God: of whom they were Types, both in the first Induction of
that People out of Egypt, into that Land; and in their second Reduction back
again. He, by putting himself into the Prison of our Flesh, and in that
Flesh, by suffering that execrable Death, and all the Sorrows of it; freed us
from the guilt of Sin, appeased the wrath of God, abolished eternal Death,
and destroyed the Devils Kingdom. Now, the Son thus freeing us, we are free
indeed. Oh, the greatness of this deliverance should astonish us, whereby we
avoid those great and insuperable evils, which otherwise had for ever oppressed
us.

This serves to comfort all Gods Saints, and all the Elect, who can find this,
that they are redeemed; a comfort of all comforts: for what can comfort the
Heart of Man more, then to think of that glorious Victory in Christ Jesus?
that whereas before they were in the state of damnation, now they are restored
into the state of salvation; whereas before the Devil held them bound, hand
and foot, in bondage and in slavish thraldom, yet now the Snare is broken, and
they are delivered. What can be more comfortable and joyful to the poor
Prisoners, that have lain so long in the Dungeon, have been arraigned at the
Bar, condemned as Guilty, and the Sentence of Death denounced? then to hear
the King, for such a Friends sake, has granted their Pardon: How much more
ought all the faithful members of Christ to rejoice, when as they see that
there was no way with them but Hell, there to have perished, and to have been
damned, Soul and Body for ever: yet that good God of Heaven and Earth, He, for
Christ his sake, has granted this Pardon; that being redeemed, they may live
for evermore.

Rejoice therefore, and be glad, ye which once were desolate, and in
heaviness, lift up your heads with joy, be glad, and comfort your selves
together, for the Lord has comforted you his people, he has redeemed you his
chosen; as Isaiah breaks forth into joy, Isaiah 52.9.
and rejoices: For he that made thee is thine Husband, whose Name is the Lord
of Hosts, and the holy One of Israel; that mighty God of the whole world, he is
the Redeemer: and with everlasting mercy have I had compassion on thee, says
the Lord thy Redeemer. Thus the Lord comfort his people himself, saying,
Fear not, Isaiah 54.1, 5.
be of good courage, for I have redeemed thee, I have called thee by thy name,
Isaiah 43.1.
thou art mine. Again, Rejoice ye Heavens, for the Lord has done it, shout ye
lower parts of the Earth, burst forth into praises ye Mountains, O Forests,
and every Tree therein: I have put away thy transgressions like a Cloud, and
thy sins as a Mist; Isaiah 44.22.
I have redeemed thee. It is a great comfort, when a Man is in trouble, to call
to mind the gifts of God that made him, says Gregory in his Moralls: For as
sweet Ointment does not only delight the Smell, but is a special remedy
against things that smell ill; so the remembrance of good things is a comfort
to a Man in Evil and Adversity, says Jerome. Wherefore to conclude this
Point, I end with that Exhortation of Saint Paul himself: 2 Thessalonians. 4.18.
Comfort your selves one another with these words, and the Lord will deliver
you from every evil work, and will preserve you unto his heavenly Kingdom;
to whom be praise for ever and ever. Amen.

Seeing therefore it is certain, that reprobate persons have no part in this
redemption, nor wicked unbelieving impenitent sinners, but only the Elect:
This serves for to terrify the ungodly, to amaze them, to fear themselves, as
not being in the right way; but such as are under the Curse, in the state of
Damnation, guilty of eternal Death, such as shall be partakers of the second
Death: which is a separation both of Soul and Body from God, and an adiudging
of them to perpetual torments in Hell, where shall be weeping and gnashing of
teeth. Which must teach them to turn from their wicked ways, and return to
God, from whom they are fallen, and labor to use the means of their
salvation, and to go out of themselves, flying to the Throne of Gods Mercy;
most humbly beseeching God for pardon and forgiveness, that so their part may
be in this redemption, and God may receive them into his favor: without which
repentance, they must needs perish, Except ye repent, Luke 13.3.
ye shall all perish: This is that our Savior Christ himself has foretold,
saying, He that shall not believe, shall be damned. Those that know not God,
and obey not his Word, shall be punished with everlasting perdition from the
presence of the Lord, and from the glory of his power. Again, All those shall
be damned, 2 Thessalonians. 1.9.
that believe not the truth, but have pleasure in unrighteousness.

Go to now, ye Rich men, wicked and profane weep and howl for your
miseries that shall come upon you: You that trust in your uncertain Riches,
ye have no part in the Redemption by Jesus Christ. Go to now ye that will not
believe, you that will not amend nor repent, nor leave your filthy lewd
courses; little think you of the Judgment Day, wherein every one of you shall
rise to give up your Accounts, where the Book of Gods Providence and the Book
of your own Consciences shall be laid open before you: and there shall you be
arraigned at the Bar of Gods Judgment; and being condemned as Guilty, as
having no part in this Redemption, you shall, will ye, nill ye, have that
fearful Sentence of eternal Death pronounced against you, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire.

Seeing then that it is proved, that only the Elect are redeemed, and they
only saved; it does teach us to labor to be in the number of the Elect, and
chosen Servants of God: and not only to talk of our Election, and discourse
of it, and reason about it, as many will do, and that too curiously, and more
then is revealed, or necessary to be known; but to labor to gather upon
sound ground, that my part in particular, and thy part ^n particular is in this
Election: that we may say truly, upon good proof, by evident testimony and
infallible Arguments, especially from holy Scripture, every one by himself; I
thank God from the ground of my Soul, I trust I am one whom the Lord has
elected out of that cursed Race of Mankind; I am one, whom among so many
thousands rejected of him, my good God has chosen, to obtain Salvation by
Jesus Christ. This is that which the Apostle Peter does so labor in, earnestly
exhorting all of us to give all diligence, 2. Pet. 1.10.
to make our Calling and Election sure. From which words of the Apostle we are
to note, that it is no trifling matter, or slight business, no matter of
dallying, or delaying, nor any matter arbitrarie, or of indifferency; but a
work that requires great labor, pain, and travel, great industry, and
diligence, a matter of absolute necessity, to make our Election sure. Herein
consists all our hope, in this is continued our happiness and felicity, and
by this are we assured of Heaven, and Life eternal, and that undoubtedly we
shall be saved: have this, and have all; and want this, and want all.

Now, O biectn.
whereas this is commonly objected, If I be elected, it is no matter how I
live, and so of the contrary.

I answer, Paul's words. God has chosen us: To what end; to live as we list:
no, says S. Paul, but that we should use the means, studying true piety and
holiness: Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him before the foundation of the world; to this end, that
we should be holy, and without blame before him in love.

This teaches us to live in a continual course of glorifying of God both in
Body and Soul: for we are not our own, but we are Christ's; 1. Cor. 6.20.
Ye are not your own, for ye are bought with a price, namely, the blood of
Christ. Therefore glorify your heavenly Father both in Soul and Body, for
they are both his. This is the end of our Redemption, and deliverance from our
spiritual enemies, Luke 1.74, 75.
That we should serve God, without servile fear, all the days of our lives,
in righteousness and holiness before him. Uprightly: For the grace of God,
that brings salvation unto all men, that is, all sorts of men, has appeared,
teaching us, that we should deny ungodliness, and worldly lusts, and that we
should live soberly, that is, in regard of our selves: Righteously, in regard
o^ our neighbor: Godly, in regard of God himself. Titus 2.11, 12.
For Christ Jesus he is our Savior, who gave himself for us, that he might
redeem us from all iniquity, and purge us, to be a peculiar people unto
himself. Zealous of good Works: Tit. 2.14.
His blood, which through the eternal Spirit offered himself without fault to
God, Heb. 9.14.
does purge our Conscience from dead works, to serve ^he living God. 1. Pet.
2.6.
We are a people set at liberty, that we should show forth the virtue of him,
that has called us out of darkness into his marvelous light.

Of all the works of Mercy, ^his chiefly ought to be remembered; for it is
the chiefest work that God ever showed to Man: And if any thing will, this
will stay us, and keep us from ^he contagion of Sin. And as it is true, that
none are redeemed, I mean^, none can approve themselves redeemed, but those who
are cleansed from sin, and have a care to forsake sin: so it is as true,
that none do more keep themselves from sin, then those that do daily
meditate of and remember their Redemption; it being the special end of our
Redemption, to cease from sin, and to serve God in righteousness and true
holiness all the days of our lives. Lu. 1.74, 75.
As our Savior Christ, when he had cured him that had been sick thirty
eight years, meeting him in the Temple, he, like a good Physician, gives him
wholesome counsel, and bids him Sin no more: But first prepares him to this
duty, by calling to remembrance his mercy and favor toward him, in healing
of him: John 5.14.
Behold (says Christ) thou art made whole, Sin no more. So if we would
seriously remember the love and mercy that God has showed, in redeeming us by
his Son, and the unspeakable love and care that Christ had on us, to die such
a cursed Death for us; it would make us break forth with a full resolution of
heart, and say by our selves: Behold, I am made whole, I am redeemed; I will
therefore defile my self no more, I will leave all sin, I will sin no
more, lest a worse thing happen to me, and it would make us practice the
contrary virtues. When Paul would have the Ephesians not to have any fellowship
with unfruitful works of darkness, but to walk as children of the light, he
does first put them in mind of their new estate, and makes them to consider of
it seriously, as being a notable means against sin, saying, Ephesians. 5.8, 9,
10, 11.
Ye were once darkness, but now are light in the Lord, walk as children of
the Light, approouing what is pleasing to the Lord, and have no fellowship with
unfruitful works of darkness, but rather reprove them. It is a manifest
note of one redeemed, Romans 6.2.
to be dead to sin: and if we are dead to sin, how shall we any longer
live therein? Forget not therefore this wonderful benefit of Redemption, Psalm.
103.2, 3, 4.
says David to his Soul. And surely, if this love of Christ were truly
remembered, it could not be that we should sin so commonly against him, and so
cruelly handle him by our sins, even by crucifying him afresh again, as we
do.

First, this Meditation, as it is a notable means to preserve us from all
sin; so especially it keeps us from these, and stirs us up to the
practice of the contrary virtues. First, it banisheth all unthankfulness, and
stirs us up to bless and praise Gods Name, who has done so great things
for us. This was David's Meditation and practice, Psalm. 103.4. Luke 1.68. 1.
Cor. 15.57.
My soul praise thou the Lord, and all within me shall praise his holy Name,
and forget not all his benefits who redeemeth thy soul from destruction, etc.
This did Zacharias, thus did Paul, and so will all do that do find and feel
their part in this redemption.

Secondly, this Meditation will keep us from fainting under the Cross, and
make us constant to undergo affliction, and without this we cannot do either.
Consider and remember therefore Christ, Heb. 12.3.
which endured such contradictions of sinners against himself, lest ye be
wearied, and faint in your minds, Verse 1.2.
and that we may cast aside every sin that hangs on so fast, and run with
patience the race set before us, let us look unto Jesus, the author and
finisher of our Faith. Here we see, this is a great means against any sin,
as well as impatiency, inconstancy, and the like, and holds us in a continual
course of doing well, and walking aright in our Christian race.

Thirdly, this is a special duty, enjoined us in the right participation of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, without which we cannot receive as fit
guests, but unworthily eating and drinking our own damnation. And therefore
Christ himself in his first Institution, gave us this in special charge;
saying, 1. Cor. 11.24.25
Do this as often as ye do it in remembrance of me: repeating the same, to
show us the necessity of it.

Fourthly, this gives us comfort in sickness and at our death, and stays us
against despair of Gods mercy, and at our death assure us of endless mercy in
the world to come: besides, al Gods blessings in this life temporally. For if
we remember that he dyed for us, and rose again for us: Some shall also rise
with him from the death of sin unto newness of life here, and to immortal
glory hereafter. For where our head and member Christ is, there also must we
his members redeemed be also: And if when we were enemies to him, Christ died
for us, Romans 5.10.
much more being now reconciled, Romans 8.1.
shall we be saved by him, as Paul says; Now there is no condemnation to us.

Fifthly, it makes us constant in all good duties, steadfast, and immovable: it
makes us rich in all good works, when with Job, we can say, I know that my
Redeemer lives. Job 19.25.
This is that which Paul remembered with thankfulness, and remembering it, did
stir up himself and others to abound in good works, which none can do but
those that cease from sin; 1. Cor. 15.57.58.
Thanks be unto God who has given us victory through our Lord Jesus Christ:
therefore be ye steadfast and immovable, always abounding in the work of
the Lord. For as much as ye know, that your labor is not in vain in the Lord.

Sixthly, in way of thankfulness; beware of turning back to the service of
sin, and obey the precept given to the blind man, as has been showed
before. Luke 7.47.
Thou art made whole, sin no more.

Seventhly, love him much, who has forgiven so much.

Eighthly, study to please him in all things, Psalm. 116.8.
Because thou have delivered my soul from death, mine eyes from tears, and my
feet from falling: I will walk before the Lord in the land of the living.

Lastly, magnify and speak of this great deliverance and salvation, as the
Church did. Psalm. 126.1. Luke 1.49.
The Lord has done great things for us, whereof we rejoice: and say with
Marie; He that is mighty has done great things for me, and holy is his Name.

Verse 2. Then was our mouth filled with laughter, and our tongue with joy.
THis Psalm has in it a singular Majesty, and therefore the Prophet uses
here many figurative or borrowed speeches. By laughter he signifies the voice
of the Gospel, for the Gospel should be to us nothing else but joy and
gladness, especially if we compare it with the Law, for the Law terrifieth and
kills, whose use and office is to break and mollify the hard and stony
hearts of the impenitent, as Ezechiel says; for they must be broken with this
iron Scepter, as it were, and beaten down to hell, as the Psalmist prays.
Let the wicked be turned into hell, Psalm. 9.17.
and all Nations that forget God: For seeing they have a heart of iron, and as
the Prophet says, A brazen forehead, they must be terrified with the
thunderings of the Law; that is, they must be brought to the fear of Gods
Judgment, and filled with the terror of death, as it happened to the people of
Israel at the Mount Sina, when the Law was published by the voice of the Lord.
But they that have a fleshie heart, (that is to say) a soft and tender heart,
may not be killed with the Law, but revived and raised up with another kind of
Doctrine, which the holy Ghost calls here laughter and joy, that is to say,
the Gospel. This is the right dividing of the word, which Saint Paul speaks
of, to preach and set forth to the impenitent and hard hearted, the
threatenings of the Law, the wrath of God against sin, and the terrors of Gods
Judgments, but to the weak and broken hearted, the sweet comforts of the
Gospel, that they that are secure and without fear, may now learn to fear
the Lord, and they that are to much oppressed with fear, may be of good
comfort, and now begin to trust in the Lord. This difference between the Law
and the Gospel is well known, but by experience and practice it is not so well
known: for our infirmity is such, that we are rather touched with the sense of
Sin and Death, then with laughter and joy; that is, the sweet comforts and
joyful promises of Gospel.

And here also we find Satan to be our deadly adversary, which most subtly
disputes with us, touching the Law, and uses such Arguments as we cannot
deny. For when he lays unto us our sins, we are constrained to confess
them: which, albeit sometimes we cover them before men, our Conscience, as a
thousand witnes^es, pronounces against us, and will not suffer us to forget
them, or hide them. Whereof sometimes arises also a doubting, or mistrust,
even in the dearest of Gods Saints. I speak nothing of those which are
manifestly wicked: with these darts Satan pierces and grievously wounds the
soft and tender heart, only because this distinction is not so well known by
practice, as it is by speculation. For if we had this practice indeed,
Speculation is a naked knowledge, without experience and practice.
we should rightly discern between the Law and the Gospel, also between the
Disciples of the Law, and of the Gospel, and beat back Satan with this
answer, Speculation is a naked knowledge without experience and practice.
that like a lying spirit, he seeks nothing else, but to blind and deceive
the heart with falsehood and lies: for where as hard and stony hearts be; those
he does not kill or terrify, but flattereth and fills them with hope and
fair promises, which do not pertain to such heart^ contrariwise, whereas
such tende^ and timorous hearts be, as are too much terrified already, and
therefore should be confirmed and raised up with the promises of the Gospel,
those hearts Satan most of all, not only goes about to afflict and terrify,
but to beat them down also, to utter discomfort: wherefore the Christian man
must learn and labor by feeling, and practice to make this distinction in his
heart, and say unto Satan, away from me Satan with thy lies, when I am void
of the fear of God, secure and hard hearted then come and plead the Law
against me, then will I hear thee, for then that is the time to teach the
Law, but since thou come now unto me with the Law, A good answer to be
given to Satan.
whereas my heart is terrified already with sin and death, I will not hear
thee, for thy doctrine pertains not unto me, but laughter and joy, not
terror and death.

So should Satan be answered when he goes about to terrify us: but by
experience we feel, that when most need is our heart is not able thus to
answer, though we have heard these things before never so often: the cause is
this, that albeit Heaven be ours, and wide open for us, yet such is our nature,
and such is our infirmity, that all this does not make us so joyful, as the
gaping Gulf and horror of Hell does terrify us: so that our cogitation of our
sins does more afflict us, then all the teaching and preaching of the Merits
of Christ can comfort us. Therefore we must earnestly endeavor to learn this
practice, or at the least to attain to some knowledge thereof, and raise up
our selves with these words, That the Gospel is nothing else but laughter, and
joy, which properly pertayneth to the Captives, that is, to those that feel
the captivity of sin and death, to the fleshie and tender hearted, terrified
with the feeling of the wrath and judgment of God: these are the Disciples, in
whose hearts should be planted laughter, and joy, and which only should hear
the voice of joy and gladness in the Tabernacles of the Righteous, and that by
the authority of the Holy Ghost, which this Verse sets forth: for it does
signify, that this people was in Sion, and after the outward show of the
Kingdom, and Priesthood, did mightily flourish: but if a man consider them
according to the Spirit, he shall see them to be in miserable captivity, and
that their tongue is full of heaviness, and mourning, because their heart is
terrified with the sense of sin and death. This is Moses Tongue, or Moses
Mouth, full of Wormwood, and of the bitterness of Death, wherewith he ought
to kill those only which are too lively, and full of security: but they which
feel their captivity should have their mouths filled with laughter and joy,
that is, the redemption and deliverance from sin and death, purchased by the
blood of Christ, should be preached unto them: this is the sense and meaning of
the holy Ghost, that the mouth should sound and show forth nothing else but
great gladness, and those inestimable consolations of the Gospel, with voices
of triumph and victory by Christ, ouercomming Satan, destroying death, and
taking away our sins: this was first spoken unto the Jews for this laughter
was first offered to that people then having the promises: now he turns to
the Gentiles, whom he calls to the partaking of this laughter.

Verse 3. Then said they among the heathen, the Lord has done great things for
them.
THe Gentiles naturally hated and disdained the Jews, and could abide nothing
less then their Religion, yet these Gentiles (says he, when this laughter,
this joy, shall be published, and preached) shall marvel thereat, and shall
praise the great works of the Lord: now the Gentiles would not this do, or
esteem this work of God as a benefit, except they also should be partakers of
the same: therefore when the holy Ghost says, that the Gentiles should
publish, praise, and magnify this benefit of the Jews deliverance out of
captivity, he plainly signifies withal, that they should be partakers of
this deliverance, and that they likewise should extol and magnify this great
mercy of God, this deliverance from Sin and Death. To this do almost all the
Prophets bear witness. In the 8. of Zachary, 23. it is said, That out of all
Languages the Nations should take hold of the skirt of him that is a Jew, and
say, We will go with you. Which place of Zachary seems to be taken out of
this Psalm. In the first of Isaiah likewise, All Nations shall flow unto the
Lord, and many people shall go and say: Come, and let us go up to the
Mountain of the Lord, to the House of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us
his ways, and we will walk in his paths.

O come and let us sing unto the Lord, let us heartily rejoice in the strength
of his Salvation. But the wickeds Come, The wicked Come, but far different
from the godly.
is to Conspiracy and Treason, as we read in the second Psalm; in which
they are more diligent then the Children of Light are in their good: for their
Bodies meet, their Heads meet, their Hearts meet, and they have their Come
always for all their Plots. Such a Come we read of against blessed Jeremy:
Come, says the Wicked, Ier. 18.18.
and let us imagine a Device against Jeremy; let us smite him with the Tongue,
and not give credit to any of his words. Such another Come have Ruffians and
Thieves, and swaggering Fellows, in the Book of the Proverbs: Come, Pro. 1.11.
and cast in thy Lot with ours, for we will have all but one Purse. Such
another Come has the Harlot to the young man: Come, Pro. 7.18.
let us take our fill of love, until the morning, let us take our pleasure in
dalliance, for mine husband is not at home, he is gone a Journey a far off,
etc. But to such cursed Comes, let us never hearken: according to the good
counsel which Wisdom does give us in the Proverbs, saying, My son, Pro. 1.
walk not thou in the way with them, refrain thy foot from their paths. And
let us ever remember what the Psalmist says, Blessed is the Man that does not
walk in the counsel of the wicked, Psalm. 1.1, 2.
nor stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the Seat of the scornful: but
his delight is in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law does he meditate day and
night.

These things do make for our comfort, which are not of the Seed of Abraham
after the Flesh: For albeit the Promise was not made unto us, yet when it was
accomplished, we were made partakers thereof, but by the Jews
notwithstanding, according to the words of the Promise, In thy Seed shall all
Nations be blessed: and, Salvation, says Christ, comes of the Jews. Thus
do we Gentiles pertain to this Redemption, although it was not due unto us:
for to us it was not promised, but came by the free mercy of God, through this
Laughter and Joy, which the Prophet speaks of, published and preached not
only in Sion, but amongst the Gentiles also, which do enjoy all the good
blessings and benefits of God, together with his holy people, as follows.

Verse 4. Yea the Lord has done great things for us already, whereof we
rejoice.
HEre you see one Church gathered together of the Jews and of the Gentiles,
and with one voice magnifying the works of the Lord; That (as Paul says) ye
may with one mind and with one mouth glorify God, even the Father of our Lord
Jesus Christ. For as the Church of the Jews sings, The Lord has done great
things for us; so sings the Church of the Gentiles also: being both partakers
of one Fruit, both known by one true sign, to be the People of the Gospel;
namely, because they are the People of Joy and Gladness, as these words
declare: therefore we rejoice.

Consider now the Kingdom of the Pope, and the horrible abominations thereof:
in the which there was nothing heard, seen, taught, read, or exercised, but
men's Traditions, men's Dreams, which of their own nature can do nothing else
but discomfort and afflict the Conscience: for one Tradition brings forth
another, one observation follows another; and that worst of all is, they are
not only burdens to the Body, but are now become Snares to the Conscience.
Wherefore there was not one jot of this Doctrine in the Popes Kingdom, that
ministered any occasion of joy or gladness to the poor Conscience. Great cause
have we therefore to be thankful unto God for this inestimable benefit, that
we now know the Doctrine of the Gospel to be the Doctrine of Consolation and
Salvation: through the which Doctrine, look how much Joy thou feel in thy
heart, so much thou do enjoy of Life, and Salvation. But if thou feel thy
heart still oppressed with heaviness, the Devil has not yet given over to
vex thee. Wherefore thou must have thy heart well instructed in the true use of
the Law, and of the Gospel, as we have said before; that thou may know,
that the Law ought to be used only against the obstinate, and impenitent, and
that therein consists the true and proper use of the Law.

But when it vexes and terrifieth such tender Consciences as are too much
feared already, it is not rightly used. And therefore terrified Consciences
may in no case hearken unto the Law: for to such pertayneth Laughter and Joy;
the preaching (I say) of the Gospel, or remission of Sins, given unto us in
Christ Jesus.

And to this effect we must beware of the subtle sleights of Satan: who, to
the end that he may spoil us of this comfort in Trouble, endeavors by all
means either to quench the Light of God utterly in our minds, or at least to
darken and obscure it, by precipitation of our unbelieving hearts. Therefore
says David, Surely the Lord will not fail his People, nor forsake his
Inheritance.

Again, thy standing against so many assaults of the Devil, proves, that the
least spark of Christ's lively Grace in a Christian, is stronger, then that the
Gates of Hell are able to prevail against it.

Be therefore comforted, O thou Man of God: For if it had been in Satan's
power to have quenched thy Life, he would have put it out long ere now: Be
assured thou shall prevail, and obtain the Victory, in the strength and
might of that mighty Lord, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Verse 5. Turn our Captivity, O Lord, as the Rivers in the South.
HItherto he has entreated and prophesied of the Kingdom of Christ, and of
the Redemption to be wrought by Christ, and afterward to be published to all
Nations; that thereby might be gathered one Church of the Jews and the
Gentiles: in the which should be preached nothing else but Laughter and Joy,
Praise and Thanksgiving: Now he proceeds further, to describe this Church,
and shows what follows this fruit of Redemption, and this communion of the
Jews and Gentiles; namely, the great necessity of continual and faithful
prayer: like as the Prophet Zachary also joins with the Spirit of Grace, the
Spirit of Prayer, that is, with the redemption which was wrought by Christ, the
prayer of the faithful, and of the redeemed: for although our redemption be
fully wrought, and we redeemed by the blood of the Son of God; yet it is
necessary that we should pray for this redemption, as Christ also in his
Prayer commands us to do, that Gods Name may be sanctified: Mat. 6.
Which notwithstanding we know to be holy and sanctified already, That the
Kingdom of God may come; which is come, and is within us already. Also Christ
says, Father glorify thy Name; and the Father answered, I have glorified it,
and I will glorify it again. Also Saint Paul says, I count not my self to
have attained unto it, etc. he means the fullness of the knowledge of
Christ, and perfect taste of the power of his Resurrection.

This is it which I touched before, that this benefit of the Gospel, this
inestimable gift of our Redemption, and Life everlasting is easy to be uttered
with words, but most hard to be believed with the heart: For we have in this
life not the Tenths, Romans 8.23.
but the first fruits of the Spirit: but the flesh lives fully and wholly in a
manner strong and lusty.

True it is, that we have entered one foot into the Kingdom of God, and have
thereby obtained the assurance of the Promise: These. 4.1.
but we must not there rest, we must draw the other foot after; that is, we
must continually increase and go forward in the knowledge of Grace and of
Faith. And for this cause the Prophet Zachary says, That the Spirit of Prayer
is powered forth upon us: which Spirit requires this increase in us. And S.
Paul says, Romans 8.22.
That the Spirit sigheth with sighs that cannot be expressed; yea, and that
every creature also groaneth for the deliverance of the Children of God.
Wherefore, whilst we are in this Body, which presses us down as a heavy
Burden, and hinders us, that we cannot fully apprehend these things; we
have not only the Spirit of Grace, but the Spirit of Prayer also, that we
might be assured of the grace and good will of God toward us for Christ's sake,
in whom we believe; and yet should not cease to pray, that God would make
perfect in us that he has begun.

Satan never cease to assail our Faith, Hope, and other Virtues, which God
has planted in us. Satan's prerogative
And this prerogative has Satan, because the Grace which is begun in us, is
not yet perfect: therefore he fights so busily against these beginnings,
fearing lest they should come to perfection. Such is the life of Christians
which have already received the first fruits of the Spirit: who by experience
do learn, that these things cannot be fully apprehended, but that in the
mean while they shall oftentimes slip, yea, and sometimes dangerously fall; so
that the spark of Faith, and of the Spirit, may seem in them to be utterly
quenched. As it happened to David in his Adultery; 2. Sam. 11.
wherein they have need of help to raise them up again: as Christ answered to
Paul, My power is made perfect in infirmity. The infirmity is theirs, and
remains theirs, whilst they live; but the power and strength is Christ's
alone: one dram of the grace of Christ, in the soul of a Christian, makes
him more precious in the eyes of God, then any remnant-corruption in him can
make him odious: Therefore is it, that the Lord gives unto them the Names of
his Beloved, his Servants, his Sons, his Saints, who are so only in part.
Both these are true: Those that are borne of God, sins not; and again, If
we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves: the one we have of the
fruits of the New Man, the other of the remnants of the Old Man. Let us
therefore be continually displeased with our inhabitant Corruption, that we
despair not, nor be discouraged: neither let us so complain of our Sins,
that we become false witnesses against the grace of God which is in us. If
there were nothing in us but that we have by nature, our state were most
miserable: but seeing besides nature, there is in us a new workmanship of
grace, from which the Lord accou^ts us new and spiritual men, we have (God be
thanked) matter of comfort.

Let us yet further consider, This testimony of the Spirit is not always
perceived in a like measure of them that have it.
that this testimony of the Spirit is not all times enjoyed in a like measure;
for that were to enjoy Heaven upon Earth. The Lord does therefore in such sort
suspense it, that sometimes he lets his children feel it for their
consolation, and again withdrawes it from them, for their humiliation. When
they feel it, they so abound in joy, that all the terror and threatenings of
Satan, all his promises and allurements are despised of them, and trodden
under their feet: they sing within themselves that glorious Triumph of the
Apostle, Romans 8.32.
Who shall separate us from the love of God? But this joy proceeding from the
fullness of Faith, continues not: the voice of the Spirit of Adoption waxing
somewhat more silent, fears and doubts succeeds in that same heart, which
before abounded in joy. And if hereby the weak Conscience be cast down,
remember, that the more thou art displeased with thy self, the more thy Lord
is pleased with thee: for thy daily pollutions he has appointed daily
washings, in that fountain which he has opened to the house of David, for
sin and for uncleanness: sweep out thy sins every day, by the beesome of
holy anger and revenge, Cyprian.
and water the house of thy heart with the tears of contrition: seeing we
cannot be without some wounds of Conscience, let us daily go to the next
remedy, that with spiritual medicines we may cure them, Chastising our
selves every morning, and examining our selves upon our bed in the evening. The
first fruits of our heart and tongue every morning should be offered to God.
And remember (O man) that thou owe every day the first fruits of thy heart
and tongue to the Lord our God: should thou think of any thing, before that
first thou remember him in the morning, or should thy tongue speak of any
thing before the first fruits of thy speech be offered unto him by Prayer, and
praising of his holy Name.

Thus we see the great necessity of praise, and how it ought to be continually
used among the faithful, if not with the mouth, yet with the heart, and
hearty sighs unto God, according to the words of S. Paul, Colo. 3.16.
Let the word of God dwell in you plentiously: Signifying, that they ought to
be continually exercised therein: not only by teaching the same to others
publicly and privately, but also by earnest Meditation and Prayer, when they
sit at home in their houses, when they walk by the way, when they lie down,
and when they rise, as Moses teaches: 1. Pet: 5.8.
for as the Devil goes about like a roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour:
So are we on every side infirm and weak, pressed down with the flesh, full
of sin, and carrying this treasure in earthen vessels, in the which our faith
is as a tender plant, which because it is not yet come to perfect strength, may
be easily shaken with winds and tempests. We must watch therefore and pray as
Christ commands, that in our daily conflicts we may stand steadfastly against
the darts of Satan, which would drive us to the contempt of God and man.

So do I understand this Prayer, not in the person of the Prophet, as though
he prayed for the Revelation of the Redemption that should come, but in the
person of the faithful which have need continually to pray. The sense and
meaning then hereof is: Lord turn again our Captivity, that is, redeem us,
which have begun to be the New creature, that is, our redemption by Christ is
fully and perfectly wrought: so we may fully and perfectly apprehend, and feel
the same. For there be many things which in this life fight against this
redemption; wherefore it is necessary, that we should be well armed against
them, that we fall not again into captivity. On this wise we must always
pray, that the first fruits of the Spirit, may continually increase in us, and
that we may be redeemed day by day, until the Old man be wholly put away by
death, then shall our Captivity be perfectly changed, even as the rivers or
waters in the South, which by the mighty work of God were dried up, and
utterly consumed. Whether ye understand here the red Sea, or else the river of
Jordan, it forces little, the similitude is this; Like as the waters were
dried up and consumed, so dry up O Lord, and bring to nothing all our
Captivity.

How necessary the Spirit of prayer is, they that have not fought with Satan
do not know, but let us give our selves wholly to the continual exercise of
Prayer and Meditation of the holy Scriptures, as it is required in Luke 21.
Watch and pray continually. And again, Pray continually: for example, 1. These.
5.17.
at midnight, morning, and at noone-tide did David pray. Yea seven times in
the day, all the night long did our Savior pray, not standing himself in
need of the help of Prayer, but setting down to thee an example of Prayer
for imitation: when he prayed for thee, he prayed all night long, Ambrose.
Psalm. 119.
that thou also might learn how to pray for thy self. He therefore that
prays, let him pray always, or if he do not always pray, let him always
have ready the affection of Prayer. Let us then never arise in the morning, or
go to bed, but as duly let us ever be mindful of this duty, let us not
mispend our precious time, let us (I pray you) consider why we live here in
the world: not to spend and consume our time in toys and vanities, but to
serve God, and to seek for comfort and salvation unto our own souls. Let us
therefore so spend it, as we may have comfort in the end.

He says in the 119. Psalm, he prevented the morning watch, thereby
declaring, that he lived as it were in a strife with time, careful that it
should not overcome him. How time posts away, and we should strive with it.
He knew that posts away, and in running by, wears man to dust and ashes:
but David pressed to get before it, by doing some good in it, before that it
should spur away from him: and this care which David had of every day; alas,
how may it make them ashamed, who have no care of their whole life? He was
afraid to lose a day, they take no thought to lose months and years, without
doing good in them, yea, having spent the three ages of their life in vanity
and all licentious manner of living, scarce will they consecrate their old
decrepit age to the Lord.

Let us consider again how David spends the time of his life, that we may
learn of him to be wise. Time a most precious Jewel.
Time is a most precious thing, not such a Jewel among all things pertaining
to this life: by this it may be esteemed, that in a very small moment of time,
an infinite weight of glory may be obtained, and men who have been prodigal
of it, spending years and months without consideration, would have given
riches, yea, all the Jewels in the world, if they were in their possession, for
prerogative of their life one year, yea one month.

How the time of the day should be spent after David's example.
Let us therefore learn of David, how he used his time: when he lay down at
night, he watered his couch with tears, after the examination of his heart. At
midnight again he rose up to give thanks: then after he prevented the
morning watch, that he might meditate on the word of the Lord. Then in the day
time, morning, noone, and evening he made a noise to the Lord; yea, seven
times in the day he called upon God. Happy were we, if so we could spend our
days. For certain it is, when our last day comes we shall have comfort of no
time ill spent, but of that which we have spent in the service of God.

But alas, the coldness of this age, in worshipping the Lord, Cold professors
reproved.
in praising him, who is most worthy to be preysed, is greatly convinced no
time of the night will they spend in prayer: yea in the day time they had rather
do any thing, then be exercised in prayer, and praising of his holy name,
snorting and sleeping in the very time of divine service, when others besides
them are entertaining fellowship with God, by the exercise of the word and
prayer; if oftentimes they whose lips are praising him have their heatts far
from him, how far is thy heart from him, who can not do so much as with thy
lips to praise him when thou should: O man, will thou remember that no time
shall render thee comfort in the hour of death, If they cannot give all they
should give on half of it unto God.
but that which thou have spent in the service of God; and if thou can not
consecrate all thy days, and every hour of the day unto the Lord, yet why
wilt not thou divide thy time rightly, that where thou give one hour to the
world, and the affairs thereof, why will thou not give another to the Lord,
and the works of his worship? In this point the Lord make us more wise, and
give us grace to redeem the time.

A Christian has access to the privy chamber of the great king ever when he
pleases.
And last, to conclude this, that we may be encouraged to prayer, let us
consider what excellent privilege this is, that the Christian as often as he
pleases, has liberty to speak unto the Lord his God. The Persians thought it
a piece of their silly glory, not to grant access easily unto their subjects,
yea not to those of most noble rank: therefore ye see how fearful Hester the
queen was to go in unto the king unsent for: but the Lord out God, Ester.
2.15.
king of kings, proclaims unto us free access, as often as we are disposed to
call upon him, reddy at all times to extend the scepter of his peace, toward
those who seek him in spirit and truth: yea though with David thou prevent the
morning, and rise at midnight to call upon him, thou shall find him even then
waiting upon thee, come when thou will thou shall find him but can not
prevent him. Let us therefore use our liberty well, and see we neglect not to
begin in time our acquaintance with the Lord, by frequent speaking unto him, if
so be we look hereafter for ever to remain with him.

Verse 6. They that sow in tears shall reap in joy.
Amongst other things which properly pertain to the redeemed this also is one,
that they are subject to many temptations, according to the saying of Saint
Peter, By many tribulations we must enter into the kingdom of heaven.
Therefore the profession of a Christian man is rightly called the profession of
the cross; so it behooued Christ the head of his Church to suffer: and the
prophets through inspiration of the Holy Ghost, did testify before of his
passion, and of his glorification which should follow: and how can it be but
that Christians must needs suffer: behold now therefore the miserable image of
a Christian, which is redeemed notwithstanding, he is full of sin, full of
discomfort, and full of death: he is like unto Lazarus lying before the rich
man's gate; he like to Job, oppressed with infinite miseries and calamities:
here then thou will say, who would desire to be a Christian: harken therefore
what Peter says, Brethren, 1. Pet. 4.12
think it not strange concerning the fiery trial, which is to try you, as
though some strange thing happened unto you; but rejoice in as much as ye are
partakers of Christ his sufferings, that when his glory shall be revealed, ye
may be glad also with exceeding joy; for this is the Image of Christ, of his
Church, and of all the brethren, that we should suffer, but look not to the
sufferings and tribulations only, but behold also the fruit that follows,
name-by that, they which sow in tears shall reap in joy,

Our nature obhorreth affliction.
It is not without cause that the Prophet takes so great pains to confirm us
against affliction, because our nature abhors nothing more then it. When
Jesus went up to the mount to preach, all his Disciples went with him, but when
he went to mount Caluarie to suffer, they all fled from him: he has many
Disciples to follow him by profession, but few to follow him by patient
suffering. It is Satan's voice in Peter to our blessed Savior, when he made
mention of his sufferings, Master, pity thy self. And it is his daily voice
in our corrupt nature, so often as we are called to suffering, O man pity thy
self; but the answer given by the head, were also good to be given by the
members, Go behind me Satan: he knows very well, partly by the
quickenesse of his natural wit, and partly by long experience, being now very
near six thousand years old, that man now likes nothing worse then the
Cross: Skin for skin and all that a man has (says he) will he give for
his life, etc. John 1:4.
He has told us himself wherein his strength lies (to wit) that by trouble
he preuayleth most to make man impatient, and so drive him to blaspheme God,
and therefore most of all we are to confirm our weakness against the cross.

Here first we learn that sufferings must go before glory, the husbandmen must
labor, before he receive the fruits, neither is he that strives for crowned
except he strive as he ought. The Prince of salvation was consecrated by
affliction, it behooued him first to suffer, and then to enter into his
kingdom: all that profess him are desirous with the sons of Zebedeus to
sit, some at his right hand, and some at his left, but are not so content, to
drink of his cup, and be baptized with his baptism; they would all enjoy
thee, Barnard.
knowing that pleasures for evermore are at thy right hand, but are not content
to follow thee, they all desire to reign with thee, but not so to suffer with
thee: but this is a prepostrous way, it is to divide those things which the
Lord has joined together: except we first suffer with him, we shall not
hereafter reign with him.

Secondly, let us mark here the different courses of the Christian, and the
Worldling: the Christian by temporal trouble goes unto eternal glory;
Different courses of the Christian and worldling, worth the noting, etc.
the Worldling by temporal glory goes to eternal shame. If you go to the
School of Jesus, the first A. B. C. of Religion, taught you there, will be
this: Matthew. 10:38.
If any man will be my Disciple, let him deny himself, take up his Cross, and
follow me. If you go to the School of Satan, the first A. B. C. of Atheism
taught there, is this: All the Kingdoms of the World will I give thee, if thou will fall down and worship me. The Lord Jesus, through light and momentarie
Afflictions, leads his Children to an infinite weight of glory: but Satan,
through the perishing pleasures of Sin, leads his miserable Captives to
everlasting pain. Therefore it is said by our Savior, of the one, Blessed are
ye that mourn, for ye shall be comforted: And of the other, Woe be to you
that laugh now, for ye shall wayle, and weep.

The end of a Christian better then his beginning.
As there is no comparison between these two; so, blessed shall we be, if we
make choice of the best. Moses esteemed the Rebuke of Christ greater Riches
then the Treasures of Egypt, because he had respect to the Recompense of
Reward: Heb. 11.26.
And shall not we rejoice in our present Afflictions, considering they are the
way unto our Glory? If we sow in Tears, we shall reap in Joy: The end of
the Godly is better then their beginning; For the Light of the Righteous
increases more and more, like the Sun unto the Noonday: They begin with
Tears, and they end with Joy; but the Light of the Wicked is like unto the
Light of a Candle, it shines for a while, and incontinent ends in stinking
Smoke. As Baltazars Banquet was concluded with a Cup of Wrath, so all the
pleasures of the Wicked ends in pain. At that Banquet in Canaan, John 2.
the Lord Jesus brought in the best Wine at the last: But Satan does with his
miserable Banquetters as the Governor of that Feast speaks, he presents his
best first; and after, when they have well drunk, brings in that which is
worse. In the first entry he presents the delightful pleasures of Sin, but
doleful and lamentable is their End.

Gods dearest servants hardly entreated in this life.
Thirdly, we may mark here Gods wonderful dispensation in his working; in
that he entreats those men most hardly in this life, who are most dearly
beloved of him, even his Sons, and his excellent Ones. If ye go up to Abel,
Genesis 4.8.
ye shall see the first sincere worshipper of God mercilessely murdered by
his Brother Cain. Come down to Abraham, named by the Apostle, the Father of
the Faithful, and ye shall see, albeit the Lord blessed him, yet he wanted
not some to curse him. Moses, although he was faithful in all the House of
God, and received this praise, That such a Prophet rose not before him; yet how
often was his Soul vexed with the unjust murmurings of his people against him.
If ye look to the Prophets, our Savior sets down a compendious description
of their Sufferings, in that rebuke of the Jews, Acts 5.52.
Of whom the Prophets speaks, have not your Fathers killed. And again, when
he calls Jerusalem a City, which kills the Prophets, and stoneth them who
are sent unto her.

And as for the Apostles: And in the martyrdom of the Apostles,
Like as they were the Witnesses of Christ by Preaching, so also by Suffering.
It is recorded by many, that Peter was beheaded by Nero at Rome, and that his
brother Andrew was crucified with his head downward, by Agens in Patris, where
he hung for the space of three days, converting many to the Faith of Jesus.
S. Luke testifies, that James was beheaded by Herod, and John was banished by
Domitian into the Isle Pathmos, etc.

Afflictions are no testimonies of Gods anger.
Of all these, first we learn, that we are not to take Afflictions as
testimonies of Gods anger against us, seeing we see, that by them the Lord has
exercised his best beloved Servants ever from the beginning. Wherefore shall
we think strange concerning the fiery Trial, if the Lord should send it
among us, to prove us, as if some strange thing were come unto us? seeing
Affliction now is a trodden path by all the godly that have gone before us: 1.
Pet. 4.12.
and therefore let us not refuse the chastising of the Almighty.

Let us then consider, that we are afflicted no otherwise then the rest of
Gods people are, or have been: and when we consider, that all this comes from
God, as a most loving and merciful Father, for our good; thus we shall be stayed
from impatiencie, murmuring, repining, grudging, coffeehouse, raging,
weariness, fainting, and the like. And this meditation must be both of Gods
punishments which we have felt from time to time in our own persons, and his
punishments of other of his children. Heb. 10.32.33.
Call to remembrance the former days, in which, after ye were illuminated,
ye endured a great fight of Afflictions: partly, whilst ye were made a
gazing stock, both by Reproaches, and Afflictions; and partly, whilst ye
became companions of them which were so used. Take my Brethren the Prophets,
who have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example of suffering
Affliction, and of Patience. Ye have heard of the patience of Job, and what end
the Lord made, etc. Ia. 5.10.11.
Remember them that are in Bonds, as bound with them; and them which suffer
Adversity, as being your selves also in the Body. Heb. 13.3.
Remember (says Christ) the word that I said unto you, That the Servant is not
greater then his Master: Ioh. 15.20.
If they have persecuted me, they will persecute you. We must remember, 2.
Tim. 3.12
that all that will live godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution. And
these things (says Christ, speaking of Troubles and Afflictions) have I told
you before, John 16.4.
that when they come to pass, ye may remember that I told you of them. Let us
remember that saying of the Apostle, Whom the Lord loves, he chasteneth, Heb.
12.78.
and scourges every Son whom he receives. For what Son is he whom the
Father chasteneth not: but if ye be without chastisements, whereof all are
partakers, then are ye Bastards, and not Sons. This did David often, as we
read in the Psalms: this did Jeremiah: Lament. 3.19, 20, 21.
I remember mine affliction* my misery, the Wormwood, and the Gall: My Soul
has them still in remembrance, and is humbled in me; this I recall to mind,
therefore I have hope. Thus we see it is an especial duty, often enjoined us,
which will keep us from despair and other sins, and will teach us humility
in adversity, patience in trouble, hope in affliction, constancy in
persecution, and make us say with David, It is good for me that I was
afflicted: Psalm. 119.71
and with Jeremiah, It is good for a man to bear the yoke in his youth.
Lament. 3.27.


Out of this we learn not to be dismayed at our trouble. What though Satan
rage, and his Instruments trouble us, and that one trial comes, like Jobs
Messengers, upon the neck of another, as though some strange thing had
happened unto us. According to that of Peter: 1. Pet. 12.13
Dearly beloved, think it not strange concerning the fiery Trial which is
amongst you, to try you, as though some strange thing were come unto you: but
rejoice, in as much as ye are partakers of Christ's Sufferings, that when his
glory shall appear, ye may be glad, and rejoice. Temptations and Afflictions
are no new thing: We bear not our burden alone by our selves; the dear
Saints and Servants of God are our Companions herein. And therefore let us
comfort our selves in these things.

And here, for our comfort, if any man be desirous to know whether his
Sufferings be sufferings with Christ, Three things required, to make our
Sufferings suffering with Christ
or not, let him consider these three things: First, how Jesus received the
Cross as a Cup, given to him out of his Fathers hand, neither looking to Judas
that betrayed him, nor to the Jews that pursued him. Secondly, he received it
not grudgingly, but patiently, with an humble submission of his will to the
will of his Father. Thirdly, he suffered for this end, that he might abolish
Sin, and destroy him who had the power of Death. If these three concur in
thy Sufferings, thou may be sure they are sufferings with Christ: first, if
passing by the instrument of thy Trouble, thou look to the hand of God,
tempering and giving it unto thee: secondly, if thou receive it with an humble
submission of thy Spirit to him, who is the Father of Spirits: and thirdly, if
it work in thee a mortification of thy sinful Lusts and Affections.

Comfort against inward afflictions.
And of this we have to make our use in all our Afflictions, inward or outward,
and first concerning inward Afflictions: if at any time it please the Lord to
exercise us with fearful Agonies of Conscience, let us look unto God, who
kills and makes alive, who casts down, and rayseth up. Let us for a while
bear his indignation; he abides but a moment in his anger: if we find that by
them we are more humbled, wakened out of security, and stirred up more
fervently to pray, and that the life of Sin is weakened in us; let us be out
of all doubt, that these inward Troubles are Sufferings with Christ, Luke 22.44.
whose Soul for our sins was heavy unto the death, and his Body did sweat
blood, through the vehement anguish of his Spirit.

And as for outward Sufferings, Comfort against outward afflictions which we
suffer.
they are either such as concerns our Name, our Goods, or our Persons. As for
those which concern our Name, it is a singular policy of Satan, to bear
down the children of God, in the estimation of others: that they who are
glorious in the light of their own Conscience, may be made filthy by the
false reports of others, and so made unprofitable, to do others the good that
they would. But let us in such tentations learn from David to look unto God,
2. Sam. 16.1
and not to Shimei; using the undeserved Contumelies of Men as profitable
means to work in us that inward humiliation, which our manifold sins,
though not against Man, yet against God, requires of us. So shall we suffer
with him, who being the innocent Lamb of God sustained nevertheless great
contradiction of Sinners; reproched to be one possessed with a Devil:
notwithstanding, that he was the very Son of God, filled in his Manhood with
the Holy Ghost.

For sometime they accuse them publicly, and in Judgment.
Laban searched narrowly Jacobs Stuff, to see if he could get any thing
wherewith to charge him: but more narrowly do Worldlings search the words and
deeds of the Christian, seeking whereupon to accuse them; and where they can
find none, yet upon shadows of evil they seek to disgrace them. Moses, a man
approved of God, yet accused as an Usurper: Jeremy the Prophet, albeit he so
loved his Country people, that in secret his Soul mourned for their
desolation; yet did they accuse him of Treason: alleging, that he had made
defection to the King of Babel. Daniel, a man beloved of God, accused and
condemned of Darius his Counselors, as a Rebel to the King. The Israelites,
who returned from Captivity, accused by Toby and Sanballat of Sedition. The
Christians of the primitive Church oppressed with horrible Slanders. The first
Weapon wherewith Satan fights against the godly, is the tongues of the wicked:
for he loses their tongues to speak evil, before he loose their hands to
do evil to the^. Therefore said Augustine, Augustine.
The tongue of the wicked is a daily Furnace, wherein the godly are tried. Let
no man think to serve God in a good conscience, but he must be purged in this
Oue^. Ye are not of the world (says our Savior) therefore it is that the
world does hate you, and speak evil of you. Ioh. 15:19.


And as for their private Surmisings, Sometime they speak evil of the^
privately, and that either maliciously, charging them with sins they have
done, but have repented,
they are of two sorts: sometime they charge Gods children with evil, which
they have done indeed, but whereof they have repented them. And herein they
are malicious, that the sins which God has forgiven, they will not forget.
But this should not provoke us to impatience, seeing they blame us for nothing,
for which we blame not our selves. Why shall we be commoued? Let us not think
shame to say with the Apostle, It is true, I was such a one, but now I am
received to mercy. Augustine.
I will not so love my self, that I will hate him that reprooues me for that
which I have reproved in my self, of whatsoever mind he do it: but look
how far he accuses my fault, so far will I praise my Physician who healed
me.

Sometimes again their surmisings are most false, Or else falsely charging them
with things they never did.
they charge us with things which we never did: but these backe-bitings should
be disdained of us, like the barking of beasts. Who knows with Job that his
witness is in heaven, and can say with the Apostle, that he has a good
conscience within him: what needs he to care for the judgment of men without
him? for God will not fail in due time to clear their innocence, according to
his promise in the Psalms, saying: Commit thy way unto the Lord, trust in him,
and he shall bring it to pass; he shall bring forth thy righteousness as the
light, and thy just dealing as the noone day.

Judge therefore of thy self and others with a righteous judgment: if heaven
approve thee, care not if earth cast thee out: if God justify, who can
condemn: if Christ will confess thee, let thy friends deny thee, thou have a
sure word and promise of God, by which thou may apprehend in sorrow, joy, in
trouble, peace; in nothing all things; in death it self, life eternal. Get
faith, and thou shall clearly behold thy happiness: if all the world should
set it self to make thee miserable, get faith and thou shall think him only
happy whom God so esteems, although the world do disesteeme thee.

Let not therefore the detracting speeches of men interrupt our peace, No
speech of man can make us any other thing then that which we are. Mat. 5.11.
remembering their tongues can make us no other thing then we are: it is the
fan of the floor of the Lord that can separate the chafe from the Corn.

Secondly, their evil speaking commends us to God: blessed are ye when men
revile you and speak all manner of evil of you for my sake: be glad and
rejoice, for great is your reward in heaven. Augustine.
Wtih this meditation did Augustine confirm himself against the detractions
of his adversary, who sought to empaire the credit of his name: he that
willingly would empaire my name against his will, increases my reward. And
David gloryeth in this that the rebukes of them who rebuked the Lord, had
fallen upon him.

I have spoken the more of this purposely, partly, because it is a common craft
of Satan to oppress good men with miss reports: and partly because our
weakness is easily overcome with this temptation: seeing the Lord will have
us to sustain the strife of tongues, let us then strengthen our selves. Let us
so walk through good report that we be not puffed up, and through evil report
that we be not cast down, but that by weapons of righteousness on the right
hand and on the left, we may overcome.

Miserable are those who band their tongs to speak against the godly.
Miserable therefore must they be who bend their tongs to speak against the
godly, and them whom the Lord approues of. That rebuke which the Prophet gave
to Iehosaphat, when he went out to help wicked king Achab: Will thou help
them that hate the Lord? We may turn to those in our time, that are enemies
to the children of God. Will ye hurt them whom the Lord helps? The children of
God in all their infirmities have the holy Spirit for their helper: it cannot
then otherwise be, but in the end comfort must ^e to them, and confusion unto
their enemies: 2. Chr. 19.2
only let those who are troubled by the malice of the tongues of wicked men,
make sure to themselves that they have the spirit of grace and of glory resting
in them, partaker with them of their afflictions: and then let them be assured,
that either their enemies shall become their friends, or then the righteous Lord
shall render vengeance unto those that trouble them. For every cup of trouble
which the wicked fill unto us, they fill with their own hand another cup of
wrath unto themselves; which how ever for awhile they set by them, yet, as the
Lord lives, they shall be compelled in the end to drink them out.

And as concerning the loss of worldly goods, whosoever be the instrument,
learn thou to take it as a cup out of the hand of thy heavenly Father, after
the example of Job, Job. 1.21.
who passing by the Sabeans and the Caldeans, looked to the hand of God: The
Lord has given and the Lord has taken (says he) blessed be the name of the
Lord.

It is not for lack of love that the mother withdrawes from the child the use
of the Pappe, but that she may acquaint him with stronger meat; and if the
Lord take from us these transitory things, it is not because we are not
beloved of him, but that we may set our hearts upon those things which are
more weighty and permanent, which if we do, then are our sufferings with
him, Who being rich became poor, that in all things we might be made rich
in him

And the same are we to do in those troubles which we sustain in our
bodies, Heb. 12.9.
For if (as the Apostle says) we have had fathers of our bodies, who have
corrected us, and we have given them reverence, should we not much rather be
in subjection to the father of spirits, that we might live: And if we can
yield our bodies to Physicians, to be cut or burnt at their pleasure, how much
more should we submit them to the Lord in all humble contentment to be
chastised as he will, seeing he protests himself he does it not but for our
singular profit, that we might be partakers of his holiness.

There is nothing that may comfort a natural man, but Duuid had it, yet cannot
all these keep him from that heaviness whereunto, as witnesses S. Peter the
children of God are subject in this life, through their manifold tentations:
the men of the world are so far from this disposition, that if they have
health and wealth, they marvel what it is should make a man heavy, they are
not acquainted with the exercises of a feeling conscience, they know not the
defects of the spiritual life, and are not grieved at them: being dead in sin
they feel not that they want life, all their care is to eat and drink and
make merry, but miserable are they, for in their best estate, they are as Oxen
fed for the slaughter, woe to them that laugh now, they shall mourn, Mat. 5.5.6.
but blessed are they who mourn now, for they shall be comforted.

Therefore there is a time appointed wherein mourners shall be comforted. Pro.
24.26.
The just man falls seven times a day: that is, into distress, and trouble,
but rises again. The state of the godly, in the Sea of this World, is like
the Sea Euripus, that ebbes and flows seven times a day; it ebbes no oftener
then it flows again: so the godly have as many comforts as sorrows.
According to the saying of our Savior Christ: Ioh. 16.20.
Ye shall indeed sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned into joy. It had been
a great comfort, if Christ had only promised, that their sorrow should be
mitigated; and more, to have said it should be shortly ended: but to say it
shall be turned into joy, Comfort against contempt of men, whereby they scorn
the godly for sighing and tears
ministers abundant consolation and strength in the patient expecting of so
happy a change.

And here, because the profane World makes a scorn of the contrite
disposition of the godly, laughing at their tears, taunting them in their
sighs and sobs; let us look here to David: if it cannot always be an argument
to move men to godliness, yet is it forcible to move God to mercy. The broken
heart, for the grief of Sin, and love of Righteousness, how ever the World
despise it, the Lord will not despise it: yea, it is the Sacrifice of God,
acceptable to him in Christ Jesus.

Seeing then, that all they which will live godly in Christ Jesus, must suffer
persecution; we must hold fast this Consolation, whereby we may, as it were,
season these Afflictions; namely, that the Holy Ghost does here prophecy, That
we must sow in tears: but bids us be of good comfort notwithstanding; for
the more plentiful and bitter the tears be, the greater laughter and joy
shall follow. Like as he sets forth also a contrary example: The World
sows in laughter, but afterward it reapeth in everlasting sorrow, anguish,
and misery. But our Tentations and Afflictions do here endure but for a
little time: Let us therefore patiently suffer; in hope, that in stead of this
painful sowing for so small a time, we shall hereafter reap everlasting
joy, and blessedness. And this also brings great Consolation, That albeit
our whole Life be full of Sorrow, bitter Afflictions, and sowing altogether in
Tears; yet God will suffer no Tentations always to continue: but like as
Storms and Tempests have their Seasons, and afterward comes fair Weather,
as also after Labor follows Rest and Quietness; even so experience does
teach us, that when our hearts have been vexed and oppressed with cogitations
of Desparation, Mistrust, Impatience, before God and the World, for a day, two,
or three, or else longer; God rayseth them up again with some Spiritual
comfort: therefore our afflictions are tempered with some consolations, that we
should know, that God will not suffer us to be altogether swallowed up with
sorrow. He will correct us (as the Psalmist says) but will not give us over
until death.

Let us learn therefore to know these things; and that we must suffer
Afflictions, and sow in Tears: lest when Tentation comes, we be offended,
as though some new or strange thing were happened unto us, and so fly from
God, and fall to despair: and let us hold fast this consolation, that our
Harvest is in Heaven, even Life everlasting, which we shall reap with joy. As
the Wine failed in that Banquet whereat Christ was present; so oftentimes
fails joy even in the heart where Christ dwells: but as in the one he
turned Water into Wine; so in the other will he turn all sorrow into joy. To
have joy without grief, is the condition of them who are glorified in Heaven:
to have grief without joy, is the condition of them who are damned in Hell; I
mean, to be without sense and hope of joy: but the godly on earth have their
joy mixed with grief, and grief tempered with joy; and albeit sometimes they
want the sense of joy, yet do they never want all hope and expectation of joy.

They that sow in tears, shall reap in joy. Reasons moving us to mourning.
And to move us yet more to this mourning disposition, let us consider two
things: the evil we incur, if we mourn not; and the good that shall ensue
to us, if we mourn for the sins of others. As for the first: amongst many
ways whereby the sins of other men become ours, If we mourn not for other
men's sins, they become ours. 1. Cor. 5.1, 2, 3, 4, 5.
this is also one; if we know their iniquities, and be not grieved therewith.
And therefore are the Corinthians reproved, that they sorrowed not for the
incestuous man that was among them: by so doing, they were defiled by his
sin, and became one polluted Lump with him. Ezekiel. 9. all the chapter.
And Ezekiel not only in Judgment determined upon the committers of sin,
but of such also as mourned not for sin: They are inuolued in the same
Judgment, as partakers of the same sins, by reason that they mourned not for
them.

And as for the great good we get by mourning for the sins of the Wicked, If
we mourn, many blessings follow it. Matthew. 5.4.
whereby they dishonor the Lord our God, it is also evident: Blessed (says
our Savior) are they that mourn, for they shall be comforted. When the Heaven
waters the Earth in due season, there follows a fruitful increase: but when
the Earth waters the Heaven, then shall follow a more plentiful Harvest of
spiritual Comfort. And this is done, when a sinner powers the tears of his
penitent Heart into the Bosom of God: Then the Heavens are watered by the
Earth. For the tears of the godly fall not to the ground, but the Lord
gathers them, like most precious pearls unto him, and puts them in his
bottle, and they bring still increase of comfort to such as shed them. They are
sown like good Seed on earth: the first fruit whereof is reaped on earth; but
the fullness thereof, in Heaven.

In trouble it is expedient to look unto the end thereof.
Worldlings wrestle for their corruptible Crown, as uncertain whether they
shall obtain it, or no: but it is not so with the Christian; we run not as
uncertain: we are sure, Romans 8.17.
that if we suffer with Christ, Heb. 12.11.
we shall also reign with him. Though for the present no trouble be sweet,
yet is the end thereof most comfortable; and we are by the eyes of Faith to
look unto it, lest our present manifold Tentations drive us to impatience: For
as he that goes through a strong running Water, is in danger to fall, and to
be drowned, by reason of the dizzinesse of his Head, or Brain, unless he
fix his Eyes upon the Banks; even so shall we be ready to faint in
Affliction, unless we look to the comfortable end thereof. If we shall
look to Lazarus upon the Dunghill, and Joseph in the Prison, what can we judge
them, but miserable men? But if we consider their end, we shall see the one in
Abraham's Bosom, and the other reigning in great glory under Pharaoh in Egypt:
Then shall we say, Verily, there is fruit for the righteous; and we shall find
it true which here the Prophet says, They that sow in tears, shall reap in
joy.

Verse 7. He that now goes on his way weeping, and bears forth good seed,
shall doubtless come again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him.
HOw could the state of the Church, or the passage wherein it walks under the
Cross, be more lively expressed? whereby we may learn so to arm our minds,
that we lose not that Laughter which by Faith we have apprehended; but may
increase and wax strong, and feel this Laughter more and more in us. For
Faith, and the life of Christians, is not Hypocrisy: but the Christian life is
that which is here described; that is, to be exercised with Tentations and
Afflictions under the Cross, and to apprehend the Word. This is our true Union
we must daily increase, because of the Flesh, the World, and the Devil, which
do exercise us with continual Tentations. For except in these Dangers we
have recourse unto the Word, and Prayer, we are gone. The Cross therefore is
the mean, wherewith God will have us, not swallowed up, and consumed, but
exercised; that we may daily grow more and more toward perfection.

To go forth, and weep, and to carry Seed; for so the Holy Ghost calls it:
It cannot be then, but that a Christian must needs be such a Sower as must
reap, not in Laughter, but in bitter Sorrow, and Tears. But thou will say,
Where is then the Laughter which is preached to the Redeemed, whereof David
spoke a little before in the Spirit? For look how much Faith thou have, so
much Laughter thou have also. But sometimes this Laughter is lost, and turned
into Mourning; yet are we not forsaken: for the Promise is sure and certain,
and the Victory over Sin, Hell, and Death, is ours, but yet in hope:
notwithstanding, so long as we are in this life, we remain always in tears
and mourning, as Christ says, Ioh. 16.20.
The World shall rejoice, but you shall sorrow, but your sorrow shall be turned
into joy. Psalm. 30.5.
Heaviness may endure for a Night, but Joy comes in the Morning. Eccl. 3.1.4.
To all things there is an appointed time: a time to weep, and a time to
laugh; a time to mourn, and a time to dance. All times are limited by God to
the faithful; but first for sorrow, and then for joy: only the godly men
truly rejoice with sound and lasting joy. My servants shall rejoice, Exo.
15.27.
and ye shall be ashamed: My servants shall sing for joy of heart, Isa. 65.13.
and ye shall cry for sorrow of heart, and howl for vexation of Spirit: The
stranger shall not enter into his joy: Pro. 14.10.
And it is called the joy of Gods people. Thus the Scriptures ever limit this
joy to the saithfull, Let them that seek the Lord, rejoice. Therefore if they
sorrow, Psalm. 40.16.
they only shall out-grow their sorrow, and their sorrow shall be turned into
joy: as Christ promised the Apostles. Isa. 35.10.
The redeemed of the Lord shall return, and come to Sion with praise, and
everlasting joy shall be upon their heads: Isa. 61.3.
they shall obtain joy and gladness, and sorrow and mourning shall fly away.
Christ has appointed unto them that mourn in Sion, Beauty for Ashes, the
Oil of Joy for Mourning, and the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of
Heaviness.

He that now goes on his way weeping. If now we mourn not, we shall not
rejoice hereafter. It is only Mourners whom God has marked in the forehead,
to save from the Wrath to come. Such a continual Mourner was David; who
protests, that in the Night he watered his Couch with tears, Psalm. 6.6.
and in the day mingled his Cup therewith. Job. 3.24.
And Job in like manner says, My sighing comes before my eating. The Saints of
God are not ashamed to profess that of themselves, which the Mockers of this
Age esteem a Womanly affection: there is nothing to be found amongst them, but
eating, Luke 6.25.
drinking, singing, and a contracting of one sin after another, with carnal
rejoicing. Matthew. 5.4.
But woe be unto them that now laugh, for assuredly they shall weep: the end
of their joy, shall be endless mourning, and gnashing of teeth: they shall
shed tears abundantly with Esau, but shall find no place for mercy. Genesis
27.38.
And albeit the wicked laugh when the godly weep; and greatly insult, when
they which fear the Lord groan under heavy pressinesse: the time will come,
when the one shall obtain freedom from calamities, and the other be compelled
to take their turns, to fall into them. Then he that mourned with grief,
shall exult with joy; and he that triumphed with gladness, shall howl with
desperate woe and sorrow.

Let us therefore go to the house of Mourning with the godly, rather then to
the Banqueting house of the wicked, rejoicing in their sinful pleasures.
Mary's tears pleases Christ better then the Pharisees delicats. Luke 7.38.44.
At one time Simon the Pharisie gave our Savior a Dynner: and Marie, who had
been a sinner, brought him the Sacrifice of a contrite heart; and the Lord
esteemed more of her Tears, then of the Pharisees Delicates. No Banquet
pleases the Lord Jesus so well, as a Banquet of Tears powered from a heart
truly penitent. The Lord is said to gather the Tears of his Children, and
keep them in a Bottle: whereby to tell us, that they are precious in his
sight. For he is not like the fools of this world, who gather into their
Treasures things which are vain and needless.

But alas, how shall he gather that which we have not scattered? Where are our
Tears, the Witnesses of our unfeigned humiliation before God? The deplorable
hardness of heart in this Age, that cannot mourn.
The hardness of heart has ouer-growne this Age, that albeit there be more
then cause, yet there is no mourning. The sons of Cain learned, without a
Teacher, Genesis 4.22.
to work in Brass and Iron, and the wit of Man can make the hardest Metal
soft, to receive an impression: but cannot get their own stony heart made
soft. Yea, the Children of God find by experience, how hard a thing it is to
get a melting heart. The Rock rendered Water when Moses struck it, Number. 20.11
at the second stroke: but, alas, many strokes will our hearts take, before
they send out the sweet tears of Repentance.

Seeing we have so many causes of sorrow: without us, our mourning the
troblesome estate of Gods Church. Nehemiah 1.4.
For herein is our case so much pitiful, that having matter enough of
Mourning, yet we do not mourn. Without us, should not the troublesome estate
of the Church of God be a matter of our grief, though our private estate were
never so peaceable? Godly Nehemiah being placed in the honorable service of
King Artashashte, the Monarch of the World, was not so much comforted with his
own good estate, as grieved at the desolation of Jerusalem. Decay of Religion,
and increase of Idolatry, made Eliah weary of this life. The Ark of God
captiued, and the Glory departed from Israel, drove all comfort out of the
heart of the Wife of Phineas. Amos 6.6.
These and many more may teach us, that the affliction of Joseph should be
matter of our sorrow.

The causes of Mourning within us, are partly our sins, Causes of mourning
within us, our manifold sins.
partly our manyfold tentations. As our sins are contracted with pleasure, so
are they dissolved with godly sorrow. It is the best Medicine, which is most
contrary to the nature of the Disease. Our sin is a Sickness, wherein there
is a carnal delight to do that which is forbidden: and it is cured by
Repentance; wherein there is a Spiritual displeasure, and sorrowing for the
evil which we have done. This mourning for sin, lasts in the Godly so
long as they live in the Body; Romans 7.24.
yea, those same sins which God has forgiven, and put out of their
affection, are still in their remembrance, for their humilia^ion: So that with
good Hezeki^h they recount all their days, and their former sins in the
bitterness of their heart. So long as sin remained in their affection, it
was the matter of their joy: but now being by grace removed out of the
affection, it becomes the matter of their Sorrow.

And our manyfold Tentations
The other cause of our Mourning, is our manyfold Tentations: For this World is
no other thing but a stormy Sea, wherein so many contrary Winds of
Tribulation blows upon us, that we can hardly tell which of them to fear. On
every side Satan besets us with Tentations; on the right hand, and on the
left: that the House being shaken at all the four Corners, may fall down in
one part, or other. No rest nor quietness for us in this Habitation: for the
which, it is best for us with one advice to conclude, that we will remove, and
in the mean time send up our Complaint to our Father in Heaven, as the
Gibeonites did to Joshua: Joshua 10.6
showing him how we are besieged and environed for his sake, and praying him
to come with haste, and help us. Which who so does, shall doubtless come
again with joy, and bring his sheaues with him, as we have heard.

This teaches us not only to sigh and mourn for our present miseries, but
also comforts us with the hope and expectation of Deliverance: Though in this
life we have trouble, yet have we no trouble, without comfort: Blessed be
God, 2. Cor. 1.3, 4.
who comforts us in all our Tribulation; and besides that which we presently
have, it is yet much more which we look for. The men of this World have no
joy, without sorrow; even in laughter their heart is sorrowful: pretend what
they will in their Countenance, there is heaviness in their Conscience,
arising of the weight of Sin. But it is far otherwise with the godly: for
even in mourning they do rejoice, and under greatest heaviness they carry a
lively hope of joyful deliverance.

Always this difference of estates between the godly and the wicked, should
learn us patience: Let us not seek that in the Earth, which our gracious
Father in his most wise Dispensation has reserved for us in Heaven. Let us not
be like the foolish Jews, who loved the place of their banishment in Babel,
better then their Home. Now our life is hid with God in Christ: and we know
not yet what we shall be, but we know when he shall appear, we shall be
like him. The Lord shall carry us by his Mercy, and bring us by his Strength
into the holy Habitation: He shall plant us in the Mountain of his
Inheritance, even the Place which he has prepared, and Sanctuary which he
has established. Then everlasting joy shall be upon our head, and sorrow and
mourning shall fly from us for ever. The Lord strengthen our Faith, that
through these mystie clouds of Affliction, which now compass us, we may see
that comfortable end which God in his Word has discovered unto us.

So that this Se^d, thus prolonged and carried for a long season, is nothing
else but Tentations, continuing and succeeding one after another, one still
following upon another. But what is the end of this continuance? even this,
that they shall possess eternal joy and felicity. As the Author of the
Epistle to the Hebrews does notably declare: Now no chastising for the present
seems to be joyous, Heb. 12.11.
but grievous; here you hear of Tears, nevertheless afterward it yields
the peaceable fruit of Righteousness unto them that are exercised thereby.
Here you hear, that they shall return with joy. Albeit then that this Seed is
prolonged, and deferred; yet it is not so for ever: but the joy that shall
follow, is everlasting. Thus the Kingdom of Christ consists not in the power
and riches of the World, but in eternal Redemption; which we must attain
unto through great Afflictions, and infinite Crosses: wherein notwithstanding
we are supported by the Word, and Prayer, until we come to the fullness of
our salvation in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Therefore every day should we gird up our Loins, remembering that Warning
which the Angel gave to Eliah, as most pertinent unto us: Arise and walk,
thou have yet a great Journey to go. 1. Kin. 19.7.
Of the children of God (says Theophilactus) some are at home in their own
Country, some are in the Journey homeward; but woe unto them who are neither
in their own Country, neither in the way unto it. We are not therefore to
settle our selves here, as if we had no ^urther to go: but must walk forward
through this valley of tears, from strength to strength, till at last we
appear before the face of God in Sion. We are still detayned in Egypt, we
have not yet obtained the Land of Promise: Psalm. 84.7.
How then shall I sing the Songs of the Lord in a strange Land? We are not yet
past the Red Sea, nor the waste Wilderness, nor the fiery Serpents: what
shall we do, but water our Couch night and day with tears, and with fear and
trembling walk on the rest of the way which yet is before us?

Seeing our life is walking, take heed we keep the right way.
And seeing we are in a Journey, let us take heed that we keep the way:
otherwise, our life shall be a wandering from God, not a walking toward God. The
way is Christ: I am the way; John 14.6.
if we abide in it, we shall walk with God, as Enoch did; before God, as
Abraham did; toward God, as David did. O happy turn, wherein Christ is both
the End, the Way, and the Guide. Let us walk after Christ, Bernard.
because he is the Truth; let us walk toward Christ, because he is the Life.
If ye look to the companies of men in the World, ye shall see some, in stead
of following Christ, flying from him; for he who does evil, hates the Light:
Others, where they should follow him, run before him; not waiting upon his
Light and Direction in matters of his Worship, but follow their own Spirit,
doing that which is good in their own eyes: they run with zeal, but not in
the right way.

And we have so much the more to take heed unto the way, For he that walks
after the flesh, shall at length encounter with death. Gal. 6.8.
because every man's course declares what kind of man he is, whether carnal,
or spiritual, and what will be his End: He that sows to the Flesh, of the
Flesh shall reap corruption: but he that sows to the Spirit, shall of the
Spirit reap life everlasting. I am persuaded, there is no man among us who
will not say he would be at the best end, which is eternal Life. But here is
the wonderful folly of Men: the proposed end of their Pilgrimage, whereat they
would be, is Heaven; but the way wherein they walk, is the way that leads
close to Hell. Who will not esteem him a Fool, who in word says his Journey
is toward the South, and yet for no man's warning will refrain his feet from
walking toward the North? but more foolish is he, who professing himself a
Pilgrim, traveling toward heavenly Jerusalem, keeps notwithstanding a
contrary course, having his back upon Heaven, and his face toward Hell;
walking not after the Spirit, but after the Flesh? O pitiful Blindness and
Folly! How many Witnesses of God have forewarned thee in thy life, all crying
to thee with a loud voice, This way wherein thou walk (O sinful man) is the
way of Death: He who lives after the Flesh, shall die assuredly? Yet will thou
not return, nor change the course of thy life, to walk after the living God,
that thou may be saved.

And having once found the right way, Three profitable helps of a godly life.
which may lead us unto God; let us strengthen our selves, to walk in it, by
those three most notable helps of a godly Life, delivered unto us by the
Prophet David, in three Verses of the 119. Psalm. Psalm. 119.


Verse 57. O Lord I have determined to keep thy Word.

58. I have made my Supplication in thy presence with my whole heart.

59. I have considered my ways, and turned my feet unto thy Testimonies.

1. Determination.
Determination is the first: It is a good thing, by settled resolution, to
conclude with thy self, that thou will live godly.

2. Supplication.
Supplication is the second: Except, by continual Prayer, our Determination be
confirmed, and strengthened by grace from God, our conclusion which we take to
day, shall vanish tomorrow.

3. Consideration.
Consideration is the third: and it is profitable to reduce us again into the
way of God, so often as of weakness we wander from it, contrary to our first
determination.

These are the three helps to keep our heart in the way of God: so
necessary, that if without them we do any work, it is not possible but we
shall be snared. And therefore, as in a Ship which is ready to sail, so soon
as the Sails are hoysed up, presently some skillful Mariner starts to the
Rudder: so every morning wherein we rise from our rest, and make our selves
ready to go forward in our Pilgrimage; let us first of all take heed to the
Heart, for it is the Rudder of the whole Body: let us knit it unto God by this
threefold Cord, whereof I have spoken; so shall our ways be ordered aright,
and we shall make an happy progress every day in that way which leads to
eternal Life. By Determination, we begin to keep a good course: by
Supplication, we continue in it: by Consideration, we see whether we be right,
or wrong. If we be out of the way, Consideration warnes us to return again
into it. Happy is that man, in whose life one of these three is always an
actor.

Consideration so necessary, that without it no state of our life can be well
ordered.
Therefore Consideration is so necessary, that without it, no state of Life can
rightly be ordered. The Mariner considers his course by his Compass: if he
neglect it, he runs into remediless Dangers. The Merchant, who advises
not his Affairs with his Account Book, becomes quickly a Bankrupt. The
Pilgrim, who has proposed to himself an end of his Journey, considers every
hour, whether or no he be in the right way that may bring him to his proposed
End: and if he see many ways before him, he stands and advises with himself,
which of them he should choose; neither will he go forward, till he have by
inward consideration resolved what is best. How much more should he, whose
course is to the Kingdom of Heaven, consider his ways, and think with
himself, that every way directs not a man to that Jerusalem which is in Heaven.

Therefore walk on in this way: for it is not a way that can bring a man to
any desired place, but his walking in it: And then a man walks on in this way,
when first he neither goes back, nor stands still: as upon Jacobs Ladder
the Angels were ascending, or descending; none stood still: and the man being
cured of the Palsy, is bid, Take up his Bed, and walk. He that goes not
forward here, is going backward: remember Lots wife, and forget not your own
souls. So that a Christian man is still moving, and proceeding in godliness;
forgetting that which is behind, and pressing hard to the mark that is before
him. And seeing Satan is most fierce in our end, to hinder us of the Crown;
therefore we should be more watchful and diligent to go through: For if we can
labor a while, we shall be ever safe, never fear him any more, never lose
that Crown, which the righteous Judge shall give unto us who love his
appearing. So that a godly life leads a man home to Heaven, the great City of
the great King; the end of which is rest, and glory for evermore.

Therefore let us always be prepared for it, as the good Israelites of God,
with our Loins girded up, and our Staves in our hands, ready to take our
Journey from Egypt to Canaan, whenever the Lord our God shall command us. As
Fowls, desirous to fly, stretch out their Wings; so should Men, desirous to
be with the Lord, stretch out their Affections toward the Heavens. Abraham sat
in the Door of his Tabernacle, We should not soiourn in the Body, like Jonas
in the Ships sides, but like Abraham in the door of the Tabernacle. Exo. 12.11.
Genesis 18.1. ^. Kin. 19.9.
when the Angel appeared unto him; Eliah came out to the mouth of the Cave,
when the Lord appeared unto him. And in like manner we must all rejoice to
come out of the Cave and Tabernacle of this wretched Body, if we would meet
with the Lord: yea, even while as we dwell in the Body, if in our affection
we come not out, and stand as it were in the door of our Tabernacle, but like
Jonas, Jonas 1.5.
sleeping in the sides of the Ship, we lie down in the hollow of our heart,
sleeping in careless security; it is not possible, that the Lord can be
familiar with us. Happy were we, if such affection were in us toward the Word
of God, as here was in David: So should we find that manyfold comfort in it
which he found, What comfort we should find in it, if our affection to ar^s
it, were like David's.
to the rejoicing of his heart. If we receive it when we hear it with a
lively Faith, it shall be to us what ever we desire. If we be in Trouble, it
shall be to us a word of Consolation. If we be in Joy, it shall augment our
Joy. Certainly, if we knew it, we would be more delighted with it: it is the
Seed of our New Birth, it is the Food that conserues an immortal Life in us,
it is a preservative against all Evil, it is the Restoratiue of our Souls in
all Diseases, it is the Staff of our Infirmities, it is our Armor against our
Enemies, it is the Light of our Eyes, even that Day Star that shines in
Darkness. If we walk in the Light thereof, it shall lead us to the
bright-shining Sun of Righteousness, Christ Jesus.

The Conclusion.
LEt us therefore suffer our selves to be guided by him, who is infinitely
wiser then we, and loves us better then we love our selves: and let us
receive this favor of God, that so serving his glory, our glory may also be
advanced. Let us not be troubled nor shaken with fear, when we see the
Persecutors come to the end of their Enterprises, and the Children of God
afflicted: That is to them (says Saint Paul) a manifest token of Destruction,
Philip. 1.28.
and to us of Salvation. Augustine.
There is no greater Curse (says Saint Augustine) then the prosperity of the
Wicked, because it is a strong Wine to make them drunk in their Iniquities,
and to make a heap and treasure (as it were) of the Wrath of God upon them. It
seems to us, that the World goes to confusion, and disorder, when the Wicked
triumph, and the Children of God weep: but on the contrary, that is to us a
manifest token of the just Judgment of God, as S. Paul says, 2. These. 1.5.
that we are also made worthy of the Kingdom of God, for which also we
suffer: For it is a just thing (says he) with God, to render Afflictions to
those that afflict us. And to us that are afflicted, deliverance then, when the
Lord Jesus shall show himself from Heaven with the Angels of his Power, and
with a flame of Fire, to do vengeance upon those that did not know God, and
obeyed not the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; the which shall be punished
with an everlasting Punishment from the face of the Lord and from the glory of
his Power, when he shall come to be glorified in his Saints, and to be made
wonderful among all the Faithful. We are so impatient, so hot, or so
foolish, that we consider nothing but the beginning of the Work of our God:
but we must join them together, and consider the accomplishment of them, as
Saint James teaches us. Ye have heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen
the End which the Lord made, and that the Lord is very merciful, and full of
pity. He that shall set himself to consider in his mind how poor Joseph
was handled, and sold of his Brethren; and how refusing to consent to the
shameful request of his Mistress, he was cast into Prison, and kept there
two years: surely, a man would take pity on him, as on a miserable person.
But let us see the accomplishment of the Work of God: Let us consider him by
this means exalted to the Government of all the Kingdom of Egypt, and then
we shall count him happy above all. If we behold Jesus Christ mocked,
scourged, crowned with Thorns, crucified between two Thieves: who would not
be offended, that the Prince of Glory, and Savior of the World should be so
handled? But let us behold him risen again, ascended into Heaven, and sitting
at the right hand of God, above all Principalities, and Power, and we will
admire and praise the Work of God. He that never saw a Harvest, seeing the
Plough-man taking much pains to till the Earth, to spread it with Dung, and
after to cast fair Wheat into the Field so tylled; he would think that this
Man were mad, and that a Child were to be whipped that should do such a thing:
But seeing the Harvest, he would change his mind, and acknowledge, that the
Husbandman had done an excellent Work. Now this is the time to Till, to Dung,
and to Sow; the Harvest shall follow. Let us not change the course of the
Season, neither let us separate them the one from the other: but let us join
the time of the Death with the day of the Resurrection, and let us assure our
selves, as we have it in the Psalm, that having sowed in tears, we shall
reap with joy. He that had seen poor Lazarus full of sores, Luke 16.9:
at the Gate of the Rich man, and the Rich man at the Table, in all Delights,
and Pleasures, he would not have chosen to be Lazarus, but the Rich man: but
if tarrying a while, he saw the Soul of Lazarus carried straight by the
Angels into Heaven, and the Rich man's Soul go to Hell, he would change his
mind, and would desire to be Lazarus. Let us then derest the glistering state
of cursed Riches, and let us account of the poor and afflicted Condition of
the Lazarusses of our Time, waiting to be carried up into everlasting glory.

The wicked have nothing in Heaven, nor we in the World. Blessed is the man
(says David) whom the Lord instructs, by the power of his Spirit, and by the
Doctrine of his Law, to have contentment and rest in the time of adversity,
while the Grave is dug for the ungodly, for the end of his felicity.

Not to fear death.
Yea, if we were called to suffer Death for the Name of Christ: what other thing
is this Death, but after a long Conflict, the day of Victory; the Birth of a
blessed Soul, after a great Travel; the Haven desired, after so furious
Tempests; the end of a dangerous and troublesome Voyage; the healing of all
Wounds, and Sicknesses; the deliverance from all fear, and terror; the
accomplishment of our Sanctification, the gate of Heaven, the entrance into
Paradise, the taking possession of the Inheritance of the Father, the Day of
our Marriage with the Lamb, and the enjoying of our Desires? Who is then among
us, who feeling with Saint Paul the Bondage of sin, would not cry out with
him: Alas, wretched man that I am, who shall deliver me from this Body of
Death? And feeling the good that Death brings unto us, will not also say with
him, I desire to be dissolved, Romans 7.24.
and to be with Christ.

If Death, wherewith God threatened our first Parents, is a feeling of the
Wrath of God in the Soul, and in the Body, because of Sin; we may well say,
that Death and Life are two Twins, united and knit together, until the
separation of the Soul and Body: and this separation, which is commonly called
Death, is rather the deadly stroke of Death; the Body being then exempt from
pain, and the Soul from vice and corruption, waiting until the rest of Death
be swallowed up in Victory at the day of the Resurrection.

First therefore it is to be considered, that there is no Creature more enemy
unto Man, nor more able to hurt, then the Devil; and indeed he is called the
Enemy, the Murderer, 1. Pet. 5.8.
and the roaring Lion, seeking whom he may devour: but the History of Job
shows plainly, that God holds him bridled, so as he can attempt nothing,
nor go either forward or backward, more then God will permit him: And this
which is more, he has not power to enter so much as into the Swine without
the leave of Christ. What is this then, that we should fear? Men: Are not they
also under the providence, power, and government of God? It is God (said
Hannah, 1. Sam. 2.3.
the Mother of Samuel) who weighs their Enterprises; so as they cannot pass
one Ounce of the Weight ordained of God. It is he that kills, and makes
alive again; which brings down to the Pit, and lifts up again; he
makes poor, and makes rich; he abaseth, and exalts: Psalm. 115.3.
It is he alone (as David says) which does whatsoever he will. Now we doubt
not, but he will do that which he has promised us; yea, and that he has
taken upon him to make us happy.

If then the Doctrine of the Providence of God imports, that he has not
only ordained in his eternal Council the end and issue of his Work, which
is his Glory, and the Salvation of his Elect; but also the fit means,
according to his infinite VVisdome, and requisite for execution and
accomplishment of it: Let us be assured, that there is no creature that can let
or alter his Will: as Saint Paul says, Romans 8.30.
If God be for us, who shall be against us? Let us also be assured, that
whatsoever happens unto us, it is the way whereby he has ordained to lead
us to Life, and everlasting Glory, etc.

Secondly, The end of our regeneration is, that there may appear in our Life
an holy melody and consent between the Righteousness of God, and our
Obedience. Ye have understood here before, that the desire of the heart to
consecrate your selves to God, is a mark of your election, and adoption: but
see ye that this desire may show it self by the works of Godliness, and
Charity. If you make profession that ye know Christ, know ye him according
to the Doctrine of Saint Paul, that ye have not known him as ye ought, if
ye mortify not the Old Man, and put on the New, walking in righteousness and
true holiness. God has drawn you out of the power of Darkness, and has
transported you into the Kingdom of his beloved Son: Walk ye then as the
Children of Light, renounce this cursed Bondage of Satan, show that ye are
faithful, and not Traitors to Jesus Christ, be ye without reproach, and single
hearted. The Children I say of God, unreprovable in the midst of this
crooked and perverse Nation; Phil. 2.15.
amongst whom ye shine as Lights in the World, which bear before you the Word
of Life: show your selves to feel the wholesome Grace of God, which teaches
you to renounce all Infidelity, and worldly lusts, to live soberly, Titus 2.12.
justly, and godly: think in your selves, that the friendship of this World,
is Enmity to God, and that ye cannot be friends to the World, but that ye must
needs be Enemies to God, Have no fellowship with the unfruitful works of
darkness, James 4.4. Ephesians. 5.11.
but rather reprove them: so as your holy conversation may serve for a proof
and check to such as walk disorderly. Remember what God said to Man, Isaiah
33.6.
The fear of the Lord is true wisdom, and to depart from evil is
Understanding. Let the favor of God be our Treasure, walk as it were before
him, as he commanded Abraham. Think that ye are not your own, to live for
your selves, according to your own wisdom and pleasure, but that ye
appertain unto God, that ye might live unto him, and according to his Wisdom
and Will revealed in his Word unto us.

That Man has much profited, who knowing, that he is not his own, has taken
away from himself, and his own reason, all Lordship, Dominion, Rule, and
Power, to resign it to God, and to suffer himself quietly and directly to be
guided according to his pleasure. There is no vice more common, more
pernicious, or more hard to cure, then the love of our selves, and therefore
there is no lesson more necessary then that which Jesus Christ taught his
Apostles, that to be of the number of his Disciples, we must renounce your
selves: renouncing then our selves, hate ye that which is evil, and cleave
unto that which is good, inclined by Charity to love one another, procure
things that are good, not only before God, Col. 3.12.
but also before men, If it be possible so much as in you lies, have peace
with all men, be we as the elect of God, holy and beloved, clad with the bowels
of compassion, of kindness, of humility, of meekness, of long suffering,
forbearing one another, and forgiving one another, even as Christ has forgiven
you, love one another as God has loved you. For herein is the difference
between the children of God, and the children of the Devil, and wherein ye
may be known to be the Disciples of Christ: ye are all members of one body,
let there be no division or parts taking among you, 1. Cor. 12.19
but feel the afflictions of them, that weep, to weep with them, and rejoice
with those that rejoice, to praise God with them.

3. If ye be the Citizens of the Ci^ie of Jerusalem, and will have a sure
dwelling in it, Psalm. 15.
walk in integrity, labor to deal justly, speak the truth from your hearts,
keep you from slandering, covetousness, and all other corruption: acknow^edge
in all men the Image of God, whereunto you owe honor, and help especially
those that are of the household of Faith. Gal. 6.10.
Ye are debtors to your neighbors, of all that ye have, or are able to do, to
be disposers of it, with condition, that ye render to God an account.

Fourthly, honor the graces of God in your Brethren, and cover their
infirmities by Charity, James 1.19.20, etc.
Be quick to hear, but slow to speak, and slow to wrath, for the wrath of
man works not that which is righteous in the sight of God: Do not desire,
hope or imagine any other means to prosper by, then by the blessing of God,
and do not look that he should advance by the aid of his blessing, that
which he has accursed by his mouth: so go forwards in the amendment of your
lives, that this day may pass yesterday: Zeal to the purity of the Doctrine,
with the holiness o^ your lives, that the ignorant seeing your blameless
conversation, and esteeming you by your good works, may glorify God, 1. Pet.
2.12
and embrace the Gospel with you, when it shall please God to call them: have
mind of that great Curse pronounced by the high Judge, against such as
offended any of the very least. Furthermore, rejoice in the Lord, endeavor to
be perfect, be comforted, be of one consent, 2. Cor. 13.11.
live in peace, and the God of Love and Peace shall be with you. But as it is
God that works in us, both to will, and in work to accomplish according to
his good pleasure: so above all things employ your selves, to pray fervently
and continually. Chrysostom
Prayer (says Saint Chrysostom) is the Soul of our Souls: for it also is
the soul which quickens, all the actions of the Children of God. It was the
lifting up of Moses hands to heaven, which strengthened Joshua and his army,
Exodus 17.11
and gave him victory over the Amalekites; and indeed without the grace of
God, that which we obtain by prayer, all that we do is but vanity. Faith is
the key that opens the Cofers of the treasures of our God. Prayer is the hand
to draw it out to enrich our selves. Prayer lifts up our hearts from earth to
heaven, it renueth the memory of the promises of God to confirm us, it
assures us against all that we can fear, it obtains all that we can desire,
it gives rest and contentment to our souls, it keeps and strengthens the
fear to offend God, it increases the desire to go unto him, whom in praying
we feel to be the spring and fountain of all good things: it ingendereth in
us a steadfast dispising of the World, and renouncing of the Flesh, it
represents unto us the heavenly and everlasting felicities, that we may
aspire to the inioying of them. There is nothing more to be desired, then to be
conversant with him, without whom we cannot be happy, but he that will always
be with God, he must always pray or read. For when we pray we talk with
God, and when we read, God talks with us: the more we are exercised in
Prayer to God, the more we increase in godliness: therefore also we may not be
weary or faint-hearted in Prayer, although the Lord defer, to make us feel
the fruit of our Prayers, for we have a promise of him that cannot lie, that
whatsoever we ask of God in the name of Jesus Christ, it shall be given us:
if he defer for some time to make us feel the fruit of our Prayers, it is
for our greater benefit. Let us continue still waiting, knowing assuredly, that
he, according to his fatherly love and bounty, desires our good, can
according to his infinite power give that which we ask of him, and according to
his truth will hear us. He also according to his wisdom knows the fittest
time, as is before said. Bernard.
When we ask of God, (says S. Bernard) even those things that concern this
present life, our prayers are not so soon out of our mouth, but they are
written in his book, and we ought (says he) to be assured, that he will
either give the thing it self which we have asked, or other things which he
knows to be more profitable for us. To conclude, Prayer is the most mighty
and fruifull work of Charity, seeing by it we help our neighbors, present and
absent, known and unknown, great and little, and that both with Spiritual
and Corporal good things, drawing by our Prayers, the blessing of God upon
them. Now the God of peace, that brought again from the dead our Lord Jesus,
that great Shepherd of the Sheep, through the blood of the everlasting
covenant, make you perfect in every good work to do his Will, working in you
that which is well pleasing in his sight, through Jesus Christ. To whom be
glory for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
A NECESSARY Prayer for the great delivery from the Gunpowder Treason.
O Blessed Lord and everliving God, whose mercy is over all thy works, We thy
poor unworthy Creatures do here power forth our hearts unto thee, that we may
neither ungratefully remember thy gracious benefits, nor vngratiously forget
thy severe Judgments, who both in the one and the other, have been beyond all
measure so gracious unto us. We thank thee, O Lord, for all the external and
internal graces bestowed upon us, the Spiritual and Corporal: the
Ecclesiastical and Terrestiall blessings which we have received. O Lord, thou
know, that without thy help we cannot avoid our ruin. We beseech thee, O
Lord, let this thy mercy toward us and our great deliverance, daily put us in
mind to be thankful unto thee. O God, we were without all means to foreknow
such a misery, and without all Judgment to understand such a mystery,
had not thou, O Lord, (of thy great love to true Religion and mercy to us)
given means to discover it: O Lord, if this had not been, we had been blown
up, we had been smothered, we had been dismembered, we had been persecuted,
we had been undone. Wherefore good Lord, seeing thou did bring us to the
graves mouth, but have not given us over unto death; we have imprinted in our
minds the horror of the danger, and excited our souls to thankfulness for
the rescue: and therefore we praise thee, we bless thee, we worship thee,
we glorify thee, and we render to thee all thanks. Honor and power we
ascribe unto thee for this thy gracious preservation: And we beseech thee, O
Lord, still to lend thy helping hand to this Kingdom. To this end we beseech
thee to bless our gracious King James, our supreme Head next under thee: O
Lord make all thy good to go before him day and night; uphold his Crown,
maintain his State: give him continual peace, long life, and much happiness;
mercifully hear him in all his Petitions, and effectually work for him in all
dangers. Furthermore, we beseech thee to bless our Noble Prince Charles, the
Prince Elector Palatine, the Lady Elizabeth his Wife, and their hopeful Issue,
and the righteous Cause; and when it shall make most for thy glory, and their
good, give them victory (O Lord) over all their Enemies. And we entreat thee,
O Lord, still to lend thy helping hand to this Kingdom, and thy assistance to
the Gospel; and ever bless the Persons and Consultations of that High Court
with holiness and safety, that we may enjoy our Lives, and Livings, our
Religion, and our King; and that his Offspring after him may sit upon his
Throne till the coming of Christ Jesus, to our comfort and thy glory: to whom
we offer our selves, our souls and bodies, to be at thy service, for ever and
ever. Amen, Amen.

A Morning Prayer for a Family.
O God of glory, and Father of mercy, eternal and incomprehensible Majesty,
in whom we sinful Creatures do live, move, and have our being: favorably
hear our imperfect Prayers, and mercifully grant our needful suites. We
sinful creatures do sue unto thee for grace, hoping in thy mercy toward us,
which is over all. Keep us we beseech thee this day, as thou have kept us this
night past. Keep us in thy fear, faith, and love, O Lord, turn thy face from
our sins, wherein we have so delighted, and blot out all our misdeeds: alter
our hearts, and wash and cleanse us from all stains and corruptions in the
blood of thy Son: forgive us all that is past, even all the evil that we
have done, or thought; and grant us the assurance of that forgiveness, sealed
up in our Consciences by thy holy Spirit. Kindle thy love so fervently in our
hearts, that we may detest whatsoever is against thee and thy Word. Forgive us
our great contempt, and intolerable barrenness in good works, our soul
unthankfulness, and the abuse of thy graces: and strike our stony Hearts with
the Rod of thy fear, that we may attain unto a due thankfulness for thy
benefits, and a most unfeigned and earnest repentance for all our sins. O
Lord we pray thee send thy blessing upon all our labors, and give us a
willing mind to help them that have need, according to our ability: and so
prepare our hearts in all our businesses, that we may always begin it in thy
Name, and go forward in thy fear, and finish it with thy blessing; that
whatsoever we shall do, it may prosper. Grant this (O Lord) for Jesus Christ
his sake, our only Mediator and Redeemer: in whose Name we further pray unto
thee, saying that form of Prayer that he has taught us. Our Father which art
in Heaven, etc.

An Evening Prayer for a Family.
BLessing, and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and power, and might be
unto thee, O Lord, most high and immortal God, for thy gracious goodness and
mercy extended to us this day past, and always; notwithstanding all our
Wickednesses, which cry daily against us, and our Enemies, that would swallow
us up. We beseech thee (O Lord) be still our God and our Lord, and continue
thy gracious and merciful favor unto us: forgive us all the evil that we
have committed this day, or any time heretofore; teach us to sorrow for our
sins, and separate them from us, that would separate us from thee. O Lord
pardon and forgive us all our sins, remove from us those things which our
Consciences are afraid of, assure us of thy gracious Pardon, and renew us by
thy holy Spirit, that we may unfeignedly hate and detest whatsoever is
displeasing unto thee: and grant, good Father, that we may ever hereafter
serve and please thee in holiness and newness of life. Be thou our shield
and defense against the suggestions, illusions, and temptations of Satan:
against all the allurements and baits of the flesh, with all alterations,
prouocations, changes, and chances of the world, sanctify us with thy grace,
that we may keep our bodies undefiled, as the Temple of the Holy Ghost, and
that our Souls may be defended, cherished, and tendered, as the apple of thine
Eye. Keep us, Lord, this Night from all evil which may happen either to our
Bodies, or our Souls: extend thy Goodness toward all those that depend upon
us, or we on them. Give us quiet sleep, and rest: and when we shall awake,
let all our thoughts and cogitations be holy Meditations on thee and thy Law.
Bless us, O Lord, all the Nights and Days of our Life: and at the end
thereof, send us a blessed departure; and afterward, a joyful resurrection
unto Life eternal. Grant us these good things, most merciful Father, and all
other needful Graces: not only unto us, but unto all thy dear Children
throughout the whole World, even for Jesus Christ his sake: in whose Name we
further call upon thee, as he has taught us in his Gospel, saying, Our
Father which art in Heaven, etc.

A private Morning Prayer.
O Blessed Lord God, great in Power, fearful in Judgment, and rich in Mercy,
which bindest, and no man loses, and loses, and no man binds; I yield
thee most humble and hearty thanks, for that of thy fatherly Goodness thou
have vouchsafed me this last Nights sleep in peace and rest: and again,
loosing the bands wherewith I was tied, have given me power to see this Morning
Light. Now, O Lord I beseech thee, power upon me this Day the Dew of thy
Blessing, that through the operation of thy gracious Beams I may bud forth,
and bear the fruits of true Faith in my life and conversation. Continue this
goodness and mercy toward me, and by thy power raise me from the deep
sleep of all unrighteousness. Discharge me from the works of Darkness, and
cloth me with the armor of Light, that I may walk honestly, as in the Day,
and live soberly, righteously, and godlily, in this present World. Mortify, O
my God, all corrupt affections in me, and pardon my innumerable sins. Fill
me this day with thy grace, that I may spend it to the honor of thy Name. Set
a watch before my mouth, and order my lips, that I may utter nothing
unadvisedly, either before thee or men. Keep my senses within their limits,
direct my will to that which is good, and order my judgment, for the
accomplishing of those things that appertain to my Vocation. O Lord, I beseech
thee, preserve and keep my senses safe and sound, that I be neither corrupted
by prosperity, nor cast down by adversity; nor be too fearful of thy
Judgments, or too bold upon thy mercy: but grant me grace, O merciful Lord,
that I may apprehend all things that come from thee, with a Religious contented
Mind; and in the end of my days, by a lively Faith, may joyfully arrive in
the Land of Promise, the Kingdom of Heaven, through the merits of Jesus
Christ, my only Savior, and Redeemer. Amen, Amen.

A private Evening Prayer.
O Most holy Father, and my gracious God, which give unto all sorts of men
the cheerful light of the Day, that in thine assistance they may follow their
honest Vocations; and likewise sendest the silent Night, that then they may
rest their wearied Limbs, and busied Minds, and so return their due thanks
for thy Goodness: I sinful Creature adore and praise thee for the total
sum of all thy Mercies, whereof I have been this Day partaker. O Lord I am
vile: look not upon mine unworthiness, folly, and wickedness; but appease
thy anger justly conceived against me, and forgive what has been amiss in me
this day, or at any other time, even for his sake who is thy well-beloved Son
and my dear Advocate. Pardon the sins and offenses which I have committed
this Day, in thought, word, and deed, either against thee, or my Neighbor:
Give me grace to water my Couch with Tears, in unfeigned Repentance for all my
former sins; and grant that I may so pass the residue of my life, as that,
in regard of thy Justice, I may retain a holy fear, to stand always in awe
of thee; and in regard of thy Mercy, conceive sure hope never to despair or
distrust in thee. O Lord keep me this Night both in Soul and Body, that I may
with the next Light joyfully rise again, be thankful unto thee, and
carefully walk in my Vocation and Calling, to the glory of thy holy Name, and
the good of my Brethren, amongst whom I live; for Jesus Christ his sake: in
whose Name I further pray unto thee, saying: Our Father which art in Heaven,
etc.

FINIS.
A TABLE, DIRECTING where to find the chief Matters contained in this Book.
A.
Access. The godly have free access to the King of Heaven when they please.
Page 322 Accomplishment. We must look as well to the accomplishment and end,
as the beginning of Gods works. 392 Adversary. See Enemy. Adversity. See
Trouble. Afflictions. Turn to the good of the godly, 97. They humble us for
Sin, 99. Gods Name a Sanctuary for us in them, 115. The fruits of them, 122.
They are but short, 190, 196, 355. God has set a time how long they shall last,
192. which should work patience in us, 193. Impatience in them dangerous, 198.
We must endure them constantly, 199. Our Nature abhors them, 326. They are
no testimonies of Gods anger, 334. Comfort against inward affliction, 340. and
outward, 341 Amendment. The amending of our lives brings endless comfort. 131
Apparel. The vanity of Bravery, gay Attire, and Apparel, 78. Fashion
followers therein taxed. 80
B.
BAckward. It is dangerous to go backward in matters of Religion. 204
Baptism, What a solemn Vow we have made in it, 10. wherein we are made
sworn Servants of God, 10, 11. And have received Wages aforehand of services
to be done, 12. which God will require at our hand. 14 Beginning. A godly
beginning, without going forward, auayles us nothing, 202. The end of a
Christian better then his beginning. 330 Believe. The endless comfort of those
that believe in Christ, 131. The separation Christ will make between Believers
and Unbelievers, 143. Where a few true Believers are, for their sake all the
multitude are called Gods people. 155 Blessing. The way to true blessedness,
152. They are blessed that keep Gods Commandments, 224. The godly make least
esteem of outward Blessings. 170 Body. See Preservation. Bravery. See
Apparel.
C.
CHild of God never at one stay. 210 Christ, a powerful Savior. 56 Christian.
Different courses of the Christian and Worldling, worth noting. 329 Church. The
Rage of the Churches Enemies described, 45. To what the Church may be compared,
46. Gods providence limitteth the time in which it shall suffer, and no longer,
113. None can hurt it, 159. What the state thereof is, 161. since the Apostles
time there have been deceivers in it, 241. The troublesome estate of the Church
causes mourning in the godly. 370 City. See Believe. Commandments. They are
blessed that keep Gods Commandments. 224 Come. The wicked come far different
from the godly. 297 Comfort. See Cross, Affliction, Temptation, Trouble, and
Sin. Confidence. In our greatest Mutations we must put our confidence in God.
162 Constancy. The constancy of Gods Children. 147 Consideration so
necessary, that without it no state of our life can be well ordered. 382, 384
Contempt. Comfort against contempt of Men. 84, 353 Conversation. In our
Christian conversation there must be a continual progress. 247 Conversion. A
true sign of conversion. 256 Corruption. See Flesh. Covetousness. Many walk
in the ruggie way of Covetousness. 247 Creator. Every Creature in their kind
sends us to the Creator. 239 Creature. It is a vain thing to take pleasure in
the Creature. 240 Cross. How a sanctified Cross is discerned. 96
D.
DAnger breeds fear without measure, 23. Past by dangers are to be called to
mind. 44 Day, how it should be spent. 320 Death. The godly need not fear it,
168. It is a Victory, if we suffer for Christ, 396. Life and it two Twins.
397 Degrees. See Psalms. Deliverance. Public Thanksgiving required after it,
15. Application of this to our Times, especially to the Powder Treason, 16, 17,
etc. In what sort we should be thankful for Deliverance from it, 20, etc. Gods
Deliverances to be remembered, 28. God still delivers his, 60, 109, 176. Depart.
How the wicked depart from God, 233. Desire. Our perfection stands rather in
desire, then deeds, 222. God still give us more then we desire. ibid.
Determination, an help to godly conversation, 382, 384 Despair. We should
not despair for our grievous sins, and falls. 250
E.
ELect. No elect Child of God can finally perish, or fall away, 125. We must
labor to be in the number of the Elect. 273 End. The end of a Christian better
then his beginning, 30. See accomplish men. Enemies. We are unable of our
selves withstand them, 27. The faithful still prevail against their enemies,
47. God preserves hi^ from all enemies, 60. David's enemies described. 70
F.
FAith. Not to trust to that which the eye sees, but to that which the word
offers and promises is a matter of Faith. 157. The nature of Faith. 148
Faithful. No force can prevail against them, 58. God has a double care of
them, 186. Their state but weak being left unto themselves. 228 Favor. In what
fort we should remember Gods favor to us. 44 Fall. The child of God cannot
finally fall away, 125. What to be done in our falls, 249. We must not lie still
in them, 250. and must beware of falling again. 251 Flesh. There is fleshly
corruption in the Christian Militant, but he follows it not. 107 Satan's darts
may afflict the flesh, but cannot surmount the Spirit, 173. He that walks
after the flesh, encountreth with death. 379 Fruits. See Heart and Tongue.
G.
GEntiles. The Gentiles being pertakers of the deliverance from sin and death
do magnify God for it as well as the Jews, 295. 296. 299. They and the Jews
are become one Church. 300 Gifts. See Trouble. God. There is all things in God
fit to be in one, on whom we are to place our trust. 140 Godly. What the wicked
are to the godly, 87. They are esteemed in a miserable case by the wicked, 149.
Comfort for them when the wicked esteem them not, 179. What their state is in
this world. 353 Godliness. True godliness indureth great temptations, 96. It
is great gain, 141. We must go on in the ways thereof unto the end of our
lives. 385, 386 Gospel. We should comfort our selves with the Gospel, when
Satan terrifieth with the law, 292. The inestimable benefit of the Gosp. 302
Goodness. We must not trust to our own power and goodness. 231
H.
HEart. Who are the good and true of heart, 207. The mark of a sanctified
heart, 214. We must offer the first fruits of our heart to God every morning.
313 Humility. How humility is wrought in the godly. 71 Hurt. No hurt befalls
them whom Gods love. 86
I.
Jews and Gentiles are become one Church. 300 Ignorance. Many walk in the
blind ways of Ignorance. 243 Impatience. See Affliction. Joy. The Joy of the
godly for their deliverances, 26. Especially their redemption by Christ Jesus,
263. 264, etc. The worldling has no true Joy, 374. The joy which God has
reserved for us in heaven, we must not expect to have on earth, 374. Joy
oftentimes fails the most faithful, 357. The godly have only true joy. 365
Judgments Upon the wicked to be remembered and taken heed of, 88. 89. The
remembrance of them hastens repentance. 92 Justification. How to prove our
Justification. 254
K.
KIng. The godly have free access to the King of heaven. 322 Knowledge.
Speculation a naked knowledge without experience and practice. 289
L.
LAughter. See Gospel and Joy. Law. The office of the law of God, 286, 302.
Satan terrifieth with it, 288. An answer fit to be given Satan, when he
terrifieth with the Law. 291 Life. Our life lies open to Satan's snares, 99.
Three profitable helps for a godly life, 381. An exhortation to a godly life,
401. We must prepare our selves for the life to come, 377, 387. Life and Death
two twins. 397 Lot. The lot of the righteous what it signifies, 182 Love. The
vice of self-love hard to be cured, 404
M.
MAn. There is no cause why we should fear man, 59. Because men cannot hurt us
unless God permit it. 399 Means. See Salvation. Mercy. God compasses his
with his mercies, 165. What mercies the godly do chiefly esteem, 170. Gods
mercies is with his Children in the house of death. 160 Morning. See Heart and
Prayer. Mortal. Man is vain and Mortal. 79 Mourning. The causes of mourning
without us, 370. and within us, 371. Hardness of heart hinders it in this age,
369. Reasons moving us to Mourning, 358. The godly subject to it in this life,
360. If we mourn not now, we shall not rejoice hereafter, 366. The scoffers of
Mourning reproved. 366. 367 Mutations. See Confidence.
N.
NAme. Our only Sanctuary is in the name of the Lord in all our afflictions,
115. Comfort against such as seek to take away our good name. 342 Nets. See
Snares.
O.
Objection. See Question. Occasion. We must be careful to avoid all occasions
of doing evil. 249 Office. What the intent and office of Gods Law is. 287
P.
PEnitent. A true penitent man walks clean contrary to his former course. 237
People. See Believers. Permission. Without the permission of God, neither the
devil, 398. nor men can hurt us. 399 Perils. See Danger and Snare.
Persecutors. We should not be dismayed though we see the Persecutors come to
the end of their enterprises. 390 Perseverance. Arguments to prove Christian
perseverance, 126. Confutation of the Papists in this point, 128. We are
constantly to persevere in a religious course. 202, 252 Pope. See Traditions.
Powder. See Treason. Prayer. The Spirit of Grace and Pray must be joined
together in the faithful, 306. The excellency and necessity of Prayer, 407.
etc. We must not be weary or faint-hearted in Prayer, though God defer to
make us feel the fruit of it, 400. Five godly Prayers. 412 Preservation. We
must remember the manner how God has preserved us in body and soul, 34. The
end thereof to be remembered in eight respects. 35, etc. Preaching. Is a great
blessing to them that enjoy it. 38 Presence. See Trouble. Prevail. See Enemies
and Faithful. Pride. Pride an horrible evil, 70.71. A proud man his own
punishment, 74. The miserable condition of a proud man, 75. The difference
between sins of pride and infirmity, 77. Women exhorted to shun it. 81
Professors. Cold professors reproved. 321 Promise. We ought to be mindful and
credulous of Gods promises. 41, etc. Psalms. The Book of Psalms are an
Epitome of the Bible, 1. Wherefore these three expounded in this Book are
called Psalms of Degrees, 2. They are excellent Platformes of Prayer and
Thanksgiving, 3. The Argument of the 124. Psalm, 4. The Argument of the 125.
Psalm, 133. The Argument of of the 126. Psalm. 258
Q.
QVestion. Three objections or questions answered. First, what the reason is
why the godly are never overthrown, 50. Secondly, how it can be proved they
still overcome, seeing they are often put to death by their persecutors, 53.
etc. The third, whether one that is elected may live as he list. 275
R.
RAge. See Church. Reason. Many walk crooked ways of humane reason. 245
Redemption. The reprobate has no part, in redemption, 270. We must glorify
God continually for our redemption. 276. The Meditation of our redemption is
necessary in many respects, 277. etc. We must pray for our Redemption. 306
Religion. It is not in vain to be religious, 150. A true trial of Religion.
25 Repentance. Remembrance of Gods judgments on others, hastens it, 92. As
sin is a falling, so repentance is a rising, 234. Repentance is a first
death, a first resurrection, and first ascension, 235. It is a work of divine
power, 236. It is no less miraculous then the raising of the dead. 236 Revolt.
See Backward.
S.
Salvation. The means appointed to attain salvation, must be used of those that
expect it. 129, 243, 275. Men's folly herein. 380 Satan. The prerogative of
Satan, 309. He has no power over us but what God permits. 398 Savior. See
Christ. Service. Service to God and Sin diversely performed by the godly, 108.
It is not in vain to serve the Lord. 150 Sin. Comfort for sinning after
Repentance, 205. It is dangerous to live in known sins, 217. Comfort for
such as are grieved for their sins, 219. Service to Sin and God diversely
performed by the godly, 108. In temptations to sin, what we must do, 123. A
purpose not to sin, the mark of a sanctified heart, 214. The secure sinner,
the greatest sinner, 232. There is no rest for a sinner, till he return to
God, 239. We are to shun occasions of sin, 249. We should not despair for
our sin, 250. We must beware of falling into sin again, 251. Our manyfold
sins are causes of inward mourning. 371 Soul. See Preservation. Snare. The
perils of the godly compared to a Snare, 94. Our life lies open to Satan's
Snares, from which God delivers us, 99. and from the Snares of the ungodly. 109
Speculation. See Knowledge. Spirit. To the godly the Spirit of God is a Seal
and Signet, showing they belong to God, 103. The wicked do not receive the
fruits of the Spirit, ibid. Why the Lord in this life gives us the first fruits
of the Spirit, and not the principal, 104. Satan's darts may afflict the
Flesh, but cannot surmount the Spirit, 173. The state of those that have
received the first fruits of the Spirit, 306. The testimony of it is not
always received in a like measure. 311 Suffering. Three things required, to
make our suffering a suffering with Christ. 338 Superstition. Many walk in the
cross ways of superstition. 244 Supplication an help to godly conversation.
382, 384
T.
Tears. God is (though men are not) moved to mercy by tears. 354 Temptations
are Satan's snares, laid to entrap us, 95. The godly endures great temptations,
96. Comfort against Satan's temptations, 165. Neither inward nor outward
temptations can hurt the godly, 166. God delivers them from all temptations,
183, 184. yet they are subject to many, 324. which cause in them inward
mourning, 372. We must pray to God to help us in them, 373. the fruits of
them, 375, 376. they last but a little time. 355 Thanksgiving. Public
thanksgiving after deliverance required, 15. Application of it to the
Gunpowder Treason, 16, 17. In what sort we should be thankful for our
deliverance from that Treason, 20. A godly prayer or thanksgiving for our
delivery from it. 412 Time. How time posts away, 318. Time a most precious
Jewel, 319. How the time of the day should be spent. 320 Tongue. Miserable are
those that bend their tongues against the godly, 348. See Heart. Traditions.
The traditions of the Pope are burdens to men's Consciences. 301 Treason. See
Deliverance and Thanksgiving. Trial. Christ's Members, militant and triumphant,
not to be tried by one Rule. 106 Troubles. The best trial of Religion, 25. God
delivers his from all troubles, 60, 111. The godly glory in them, 65. God the
best help, and first to be sought to in them, 65, 66. We see three things in
them, better then in prosperity, 98. God delivers his out of them by his
presence, 113. and God preserues us in them, 196. The remembrance of Gods gifts
a great comfort in them. 269 Trust. In God are all things fit to be in one, on
whom we are to place our trust, 140. The happiness of such as trust in God,
136. To trust in him, is the greatest service we can do him, 145. He
compasses such as trust in him in all their troubles. 165 Truth. Some walk in
the detestable and damnable ways of wilful spurning against the truth. 246
V.
VIgilancie. Gods vigilancie over his. 172 Ungodly. The state of the ungodly
accursed. 153 Unmerciful. God preserues his from being hurt of the
unmerciful. 166 Voluptuousness. Many walk in the filthy myrie ways of
voluptuousness, etc. 246 Vows. Solemn Vows a Christian duty. 8
W.
VVAyes. Many by-ways beaten by many, 243, We must be careful we keep the
right way. 378, 385 Wants. Gods children should not be discouraged with the
sense and feeling of their own wants, 100. No comfort belongs to the wicked in
the feeling of their wants. 101 Welfare. Gods providence the cause of our
welfare. 39, 99 Wicked. What the wicked are to the godly, 87. Gods Judgments
on the wicked to be remembered and taken heed of. 88, 89 Women. See Pride. Word.
They are happy that delight in Gods Word. 388 Works. See Accomplishment.
Worldling. Different courses of the Christian and Worldling worth noting. 329
Wrath. What we are to do in temptations of Gods wrath. 123
FINIS.
Faults escaped in Printing.
Page 26. line 20, read had. p. 45. l. 14. r. can. p. 193. l. 9. r. or. p ^06.
l 1. r all the days of Ieho^ada. p. 258. l. 10. r. people. p. 283. l. 15. r.
so we. p. 314. l. 4. r. prayer. p. 325. l. 7. r. is. p. 347. l. 15. r. purpose.


