ESSAYS and CHARACTERS. IRONICALL, AND INSTRVCTIVE.

The second impression.

With a new Satyr in defense of Common Law and Lawyers: Mixed with reproof
against their common Enemy.

With many new Characters, and diverse other things added; and every thing
amended.

Expedit castigare, maledicere non licet neque iuuat: affert enim maledictum
vel malidicenti paenitentiam vel vituperationem: Iul: Scalig: de Subt^l*

By JOHN STEPHENS the younger, of Lincolnes Inn, Gent.

LONDON,

Printed by E: Allde for Phillip Knight, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery lane over against the Rowles. 1615.

To the worthy and worshipful my honored friend, Thomas Turnor Esquire etc.
SIR,
YOU did accept the former impression; which, as my second thoughts have taught
me, was a most idle creature; a thing only to be respected in your
dispensation. Diligence and better knowledge, have made it a much better
volumne: you may peruse it therefore again I must assure you, without loss of
time. If you repent a second reading, let me not be reputed what I am

Your truly loving I. S.

To the Reader.
THou art I presume wise enough (whatsoever thou art) not to believe me, if I
should largely seem to praise my self; or to revile iny poor detractor, who
is like the stoeworme, venomous, but blind: continue thy just unbelief, for
dealers in this kind, be ready to outbraue and cousen thee. Nor have thou
reason to allow me more credit then thoso wordlings: for I confess and am not
sorry, thou and I are yet scarce (...): Trust me not therefore further then
thou may discreetly; and then perhaps thou will acknowledge, that if (before)
this work was reasonable, it may be now thought vnamendable: howsoever if any
thinks I needed help to meditate such a trifling labor, I thank him for his
envious good opinion: for I can not wish to be more well commended.

To the namelesse Rayler: who has lenghthened his Excellent Actor, a most
needy Caracter following the wife with a piece of Ingenium nempe quod olet
can^os mores, et constat de pelle sine corpore. I mean a wit which smells of
the Curr, and has no body but a skin.
dog-skin wit; dressed over with oil of sweaty Posthorse.
VNusquisque turpis and inscius and ventosus, maleuolae ac rudi suae calumniae
fretus, alieni nominis ruina, gradum sibi facit ad suam gloriam.

Sed, -- Ille per extentum funem mihi posse videtur
Ire Poeta, meum quipectus inaniter angit
Irritat, mulcet, falsis terrroribus implet
Vt magus: --

You have (I know not upon what acquaintance) been bold with me; and if I
said impudent, your term of imitating would excuse me: pre* thee if thou
be'st honest, or a Scholar, be modest likewise and accuse thy self: I would
be loath to blame thee and loose my labor, unless I know thy nature; which
would perhaps neither thank me nor amend. Nor did I (as one affected unto
sa^cie railing) admit a friends Saytre, but to inform the world that one man's
credit should be more esteemed, then the most generally and worthyly contemned
baser sort of Players: and let discretion teach thee, that all the writers of
this age, must I do not mean the vicious imitation that prouokes Horace to
this reprehension. Quod si pallerem casu biberent exangue cuminum, O ^mitatores
ser vum pecu^, vt m^hi sape Bilem, sape i^ cum vestri mouere tumultus. lib. 1
Epist. 19.
imitate; though some endeavor it, sonse do it without a meaning: the last,
was mine if any; hut hitherto I know not any. My comfort is; I cannot walk
into the City, without being rubbed by some uncleanely person; much less then
can my book travail in the worlds compass, and not be trodden upon by such a
rude boistrous Knave as thou: but as, being rubbed I would not willingly rub
again; so was I not willing that my bo^ke should resist thee; but rise again,
and scorn thee: for all thy attributes savor of madness and of venom. And for
their sakes, I give the Poets laughters to thy stumbling and most wit-lesse
language.

dij te Damasippe deaeque
Ob maledictum mox done^t tonsore; sed vnde
Tam been ne nosti? postquam omnis restua, ludos
Ad medios fracta est, aliena negotia curas
Excussus proprijs.
Hor: Saty: 3. lib. 2. Marti: lib: 5. Epig: 61. Ad Detractorem.
ALlatres licet vsque nos and vsque,
Et gannitibus improbis laceflas:
Certum est hanc tibi p^negare sama^,
Olim quam petis in meis libellis,
Qualiscunque legaris vt per orbem.
Nam tecur aliquis sciat fuis^e?
Ignotus pereas miser necesse est.
Non de^runt tamen hac in vrbe forsan
Vnus, velduo, tresue, quatuor ve,
Pellem rodere qui velint cani^am:
Nos hac a scab^e teneamus vngues.
To the same Detractor.
You may bark loud against us and provoke,
Us, with il-fauourd snarlings till you choke:
Yet questionles the world will dare d^ny,
The fame you covet in our Poetry:
Yes though your libels be dispered abroad:
For why should any know that such a Toad,
Has had a being? thy detested grave,
Will take thee unknown, and a p^teous k^aue.
Yet will this City l^nd the willing power
Of one, of two, of three, perhaps of ^ower*
Who will not fail thy currish hide to (...),
Though I do thee a mangy^ s^aue forbea^e.
In eundem.
Quaenam te mala men's miselle
Rauide
Agit praecipitem in meas nugas?
Quia deus tibi n^n been aduocatus,
Vecordem parat exitare rixam?
An vt pervenias in ora vulgi?
Quid vis? qualibet esse noius optas?
Eris: quandoquidem oration tua est
Plena veneni et pestilentiae.
Catullus.
THus much may persuade thie (Reader) that detractors, nay, Detractors in the
like kind of impudence, have among the best Ancients been a common fortune:
and therefore they be not indeed worth a minutes anguish.

I. S.

A Friends Inuitation: no Flatterers Encomion.
When many are invited to a Feast,
Though the inuiter does not know his guest,
And therefore cannot well provide in have,
One dish so curious, as may please each taste:
Yet if this Host has such a careful mind,
As that he will, for each man's stomach, find
A seu'rall meat; and so provide with care,
Good hous-roome, hearty welcome, and good fare.
Shall we condemn his liberal act and love,
If thank-lesse Inuitants the same disprove?
Some (peradventure) does one dish there see,
Which with his nature does not well agree:
Some other may perchance dislike the feast,
Because it is not all what he likes best.
And so with diverse censures they do take,
Due praise from him who did the banquet make:
Which may discourage him that does intend,
Such careful cost another time to spend.
Yet (worthy Author) let not this dismay
Thee, to go forward in that virtuous way
Thou have propounded; nor let that be lost
Which is so rare. Thou art a noble Host,
And cause thou know not the minds of those,
That shall receive thy feast, thou do dispose
Of things so fitly, that all here may find,
Diverse provisions for each Readers mind.
What if perchance some surfeit at thy feast,
Because they cannot easily digest
Some vicious quallity, which reigns so rife
In vicious minds (made known by their lewd life)
So rife; as you the danger have expressed,
That knowing it, they might the vice detest?
Pity their weakness then, seeing thou do tell,
Nothing to poison humor, but expel.
What if some others will thy feast abuse,
Because it is of seu'rall kinds? resuse
The Founders dignity, because it is known
Men's tastes and palates only be their own?
Thou made it not for only one man's sake,
But all the worlds, if all of it partake.
Take resolution therefore to thy mind;
Add wings unto thy fainting courage; bind
All thy due strength together; to provide
So rare a Banquet; which may long abide
To all men's profit, and the founders praise.
He therefore does inuit the guests that says
This is a Noble Feast; and wishes this,
That he, which of this feast does judge amiss
May (if he wants what is in this combined)
Seek to atchieue the same, but never find.
ANTHO. CRO^YES. of Grayes Inn Gent.

To the nameles Author of a late Character entitled, an Excellent Actor,
following the Wise.
Your bolt so soon shot against my friend this Author* is now returned into
your scandalous throat; beaten back from one too strongly fortifide, for such
choleric distraction to prevail with: he knowing therefore the manifest
disgrace, that might be noted, if he should swagger in the dark with one whom
neither he or any man (as he thinks) ever knew; has only lighted a double
torch (fearing least one, were hardly light enough) to find the Person of such
an obscure vagrant: nor must you further look that he will grace you with
encounter, for (upon my knowledge) he was contented to reward you with the
Poets Maxim --

Istic est thesaurus stultis in lingua sit us Plautus in Poenul.

Vt quaestui habeant male loqui melioribus.
THis have you confirmed in your vnlickt Character, which like the Rats on the
banks of Nilus, has only a forepart, and that deformed; the tail and
hinder-parts be (...) mu^de: Wherein hoping to mend your credit by another
loss, you have presented to the sight of every honest Reader your own
ignorance, and malicious folly: These two, your only darlings, like common
prostitutes, have set up a Vaulting-schoole in your decayed scull; and hanged
their bills up to draw customers: But as they both have been the deadly foes
to learning, so are they the most beloved minions to petty Pamphleters: witness
your ignorant mistaking of approved and authorized Actors for counterfeit
Runagates, or country Players, inueighed against by the Characterist: as also
your derogating from his industruous Labor, applauded by the best judgments.

In regard whereof, take this which follows,

Iras^i nostro non debes* Cerdo libello Mart. lib 3 E^i. 94

Ars tua, non vita est carmine laesa m^o.
Was it or Envy, or the hope of coin,
Or did thy Sister Furies thee enjoin
With thine infectious breath to dim the hue
Of this unspotted Mirror, whose bright view
Dazells thy feeble eyes? or is thy sight
(Fittest to look on dunghills) by true light
so much obscured that thou can not see
The Sun at noon-time shine; unless there be
Thy cloudy spirits interposed; and so
It proves vnfaire whilst thou unfit to know?
Can thou forswear't, and think thy book shall help?
Or that thy Character (the purblind whelp
Of a lean bitch) can lick away these marks
From thee and thy maintaining fellow sharkes?
Noe, noe: who looks, if not (as thou art) blind,
Upon thy excellent Actor, may there find,
In ragged clothes thy poverty of purse,
Of mind and credit thy deserved curse:
And swear most credibly that all was penned
Them to protect from shame, who thee defend
From want: Alas, we know need can excuse
The trade of begging, hangmen, or the stews,
And why not common Players? not those men
Whose souls did keep in R^scius, and then
Left Rome to visit us; believing here
Men should and do excel his action far:
These we account as much as you; who try
With a Ravens voice, to'approue their melody,
And mar their happy fame, which few control.
wherefore then do you bark? could not your foul
Vntutord muse dwell in the suburbs still
(Your wits best subject) or your buzzard quill
Stoop at your wonted carrion game; but fly
To pitch above an Eagles aerie?
Detract you cannot; for things Simply good,
Loose not their natures, though they be withstood
By deep or baser wits: nay all should say,
Things must be excellent because that they
Tasted and did distaste: we know the Kite
Affects stench, and Owls abhor the light:
Deep wits (through envy) others fame disprove:
Base wits by kind do base things only love.
I Will then not wonder that the Players friend,
I mean this hierling can boldly spend
His soggy breath to blow away the curse
Of Statute law: alas a wicked purse
Puts strength into his lungs. I think him blind,
Who cannot see the Kings highway, nor find
One spark of reason that may make him judge,
Betwixt rare beauties and a kitchin-drudge:
And yet he is blameles: they he not contrould
That praise cheap counters and reject fine gold
But rather laughed at: Fools and children may
Before best maskes pre^erre a Puppet play.
I must be plain and will: it is no sin
To turn again when others do begin.
W^r't thou an Eagle, yet the harmless Swan
Dares to encounter thee who first began
To meddle and provoke: let envy burst,
We can defend our self, offend none first.
Will thou then know thy self? for surely yet
The little soul thou have does poorly sit
In her half ruined cell; and through thine eyes
False spectacles, she lovely truth espyes
In feigned shapes: believing it to be
Such as it seems to her, who cannot see
Things truly nor her self, but proudly blind
Judges things base, by baseness of her mind.
You are the cuttle-fish whose inky gall
Spewd into purest waters, turns them all
To the same color, thinking to escape
The searchers eyes, or hide your monstrous shape:
Such a most busy Daw did seem to dress
My I am here enforced to claim 3 Characters following the Wife: viz: the
T^nker, the Apparatour, and Almanack-maker, that I may signify the ridiculous
and bold dealing of an unknown bot^her: But I need make no question what he
is: for his hackney similitudes discover him to be the Rayler above mentioned
whosoever that rayler be.
Characters (unknown) with sauciness.
Could thou lick Homers vomit; or else theirs
whose heavenly raptures bless our modern years
And those to come shall bless; your name might live
In Poets happiness, and well survive
The works of brass and marble: but I know
You cannot be so blessed: for those that draw
Plenty of water from the Ocean store
Empty not it; yet have themselves the more,
which they may call their own: but they that take
From puddles or dull Frog-pits, never make
Themselves nor others happy: all their toil
Is like the gleaning of a barren soil;
Both void of gain and credit: this apply
Unto your self, whose wits best treasury
Lies in Don Quixot, Amadis de Gaul,
Huon of Bordeaux, and those other small
Slight Pamphleters; upon whose bruised wings
Thy feeble muse does ride, and slowly singes
Her tuneles dreams: and labors to obtain,
The bawdy treasure of Mimnernus brain:
Whose travail was in lust-bred plotts; and so
Thou may excel good Homer, who did know
Nothing but that was honest. I might prove
This if I knew thy dealing by the love
Thou have composd; where men might read thy shame
(Thou being disouered) in the Devils name.
And what of that say thou? This I infer,
Such as the shadows such the bodies are.
And sure I think (by thee) that souls do pass,
From one to another as (...)
Did teach his times: for who can hear you name
Hackney^ so o^t but thinks your essence came
Out of a stall^on: or indeed perchance,
A Hackn^y was thy* whole inheritance.
For you perhaps (...) that any Ass,
Or stumbling Coach-horse your souls lodging was
Yet from those rotten carcasses might spring,
Your waspish hornet brains, which buzze and sting
To your destruction; if you ask me why?
When Hornets sting they loose their stings and die:
Which I desire not; but would have t^ee live
To rail at virtuous acts, and so to give
Good virtues luster: seeing envy still
Waits on the best deserts to her own ill.
But, for your self learn this, let not you^ (...)
Strike at the slint again, which can withstand
Your malice without harm, and to your face
Return contempt the brand of your disgrace:
Whilst he does sit unmoved, whose constant mind
(Armd against Obloquy) with that weak wind
Cannot be shaken: for himself does mark,
That Dogs for custom not for fierenes bark:
These any Footboy kicks and therefore he
Passing them by with scorn, does pity thee:
For being of their nature mute at noone
Thou da^st at midnight bark against the moon:
Where may thou ever bark, and no man hear
But to return the like: And may thou bear
With grief more slanders then thou can invent
Or e're did practice yet or can prevent.
May thou be matc^t with Envy* and defend
Scorn toward that which all besides commend:
And may that scorn so work upon thy sense
That neither suffering nor impudence
May teach the cure: or being ouerworne
With hope of cure may merit greater scorn.
If, not too late, let all thy labors be
Contemnd by upright judgments, and thy fee
So hardly earned not paid. May thy rude quill
Be always mercenary, and write still
That which no man will read; unless to see
Thine ignorance, and then to laugh at thee.
And may thou live to feel this, and then groan
Because, it is so, yet cannot help: and none
May rescue thee, till your checked conscience cry
This this I have deserved; then pine and dye.
Mart: lib: 10:Epig: 5. Et cum fateri furia iusserit verum
Prodente clames conscientia, scripsi:
I: COCK.

An Epigram to my friend the Author, of his namelesse Detractor before
mentioned.
Fastus disdaines thy work, because not thine,
But merely drawn forth by another line:
Thou imitat'st he says: well thou mightstone:
For thou can imitated be by none:
Though I dare take thy word, yea'tis well known
there is nothing here but thou may call thine own.
For (like a common thief) the sneaking elfe
Has slander^ thee, that he might save himself.
Aliud Epigramma ad Authorem delibro suo epulo assimulato.
Why should thou strive or study to vpraise
A labor, how to work some Welchmens praise?
Those that have judgment must commend thy skill:
Regard not then though others say'tis ill:
If amongst many they dislike thy Feast,
A bitt of cheese will help them to digest.
Aliud ad eundem de detractore suo anonymo praedicto.
For bear my friend to write against that man
A sharp iambick, who has wronged thy name:
Thou can not right thy self; for he has none:
Nor can have, if he be the peoples Son.
GEO: GREEN of Lincolns Inn Gentleman.

Three Satyricall Essays of Cowardlinesse.
ESSAY. I.
Fear to resist good virtues common foe,
And fear to loose some lucre, which does
By a continued practice; makes our fate
Banish (with single combats) all the hate, grow:
Which broad abuses challenge of our spleen.
For who in Virtues troop was ever seen,
who did (through goodness) against passions fight
Without the public name of hipocrite?
Vainglorious, Malapert, Precise, Devout,
Be terms which threaten those that go about
To stand in opposition of our times
With true defiance, or Satyricke rimes.
Cowards they be, branded among the worst,
Who (through contempt of Atheism) never durst
Crowd near a Princes elbow, to suggest
Smooth t^les, with gloss, or Envy well addressed.
These be the noted Cowards of our age,
Who be not able to inst^uct the Stage
With matter of new shameless impudence:
Who cannot almost laugh at innocence;
And purchase high preferment by the ways,
Which had been horrible in Nero's days.
They are the shameful Cowards, who contemn
Vices of State, or cannot slatter them:
Who can refuse advantage; or deny
Villainous courses, where they do ^spy
Some little fortune to enrich their chest:
Though they become uncomfortably blessed.
We still account these Cowards, who forbear
(Being possessed with a Religious fear)
To slip occasion, when they might erect
Horns of disgrace; or when they do neglect
The violation of a Virgins bed
With promise to requite her Mayden-head.
Basely low-minded we esteem that man,
Who cannot swagger well, (or if he can)
Who does not with implacable desire,
Follow revenge like a consuming fire.
Extortious Rascals, when they are alone,
Be think how closely they have picked each bone;
Nay with a frolic humor they will brag,
How blanck they left their empty Suitors bag.
Which dealings if they did not give delight;
Or not refresh their meetings; in dispight
They would accounted be both weak, unwise,
And like a timorous Coward too precise.
Your handsom-bodied youth (whose comely ^ace
May challenge all the store of Natures grace)
If, when a lustful Lady does inuit,
By some lascivious tricks his dear delight,
If then he does abhor such Wanton joy,
Who is not almost ready to destroy,
Ciuility with curses, when he hears
The tale recited? blaming much his years,
Or modest weakness, and with cheeks full blown
Each man will wish the case had been his own.
Grave holy men, whose habit will imply
Nothing but honest zeal, or sanctity,
Nay so vprighteous will their Actions seem,
As you their thoughts Religion will esteem.
Yet these All-sacred-men, who daily give
Such ^owes, would think themselves unfit to live
If they were Artlesse in the slattering vice,
Even to devour a treble Benefice.
None (for her own sake) favors innocence.
Charity lays a side her Conscience,
And looks upon the sraile commodity
Of monstrous bargains with a covetous eye:
And now the name of Generosity,
Of noble Carriage, or brave Dignity;
Keep such a common skirmish in our blood;
As we direct the measure of Things good,
By that, which reputation of Estate,
Glory of rumor, or the present rate
Of Saving (...) does best admit.
We do employ materials of wit,
Knowledge Occasion, Labor, Dignity,
Among our spirits of Audacity.
Nor in our gain-full proiects do we care
For what is p^ous, but for what we da^e.
Shopkeepers would be thought extremely dull,
Worse then a simple or phantastique gull,
If when they meet a nouice or a man
Of good experience, they neither can
Cousen the buyer with protested love,
Nor with persuading fables him remove.
They would be threatened I think in despite,
Among their fellow-cheaters (who delight
As much in crafty terms as in the ware)
If they should any circumuention spare.
They have a trick to whisper once or twice
And l^aue their voice when they abate the price,
Seeming to tell you they hau^ bargaind so,
As they abhor to let the neighbors know;
When stuff and price do less in worth agree
Then place and meritts where sweet minions be.
Let never truth protect me if my wits
Do not half stagger whilst my fancy sitts
Reuoluing their most licensed couzenage:
They make it the whole practice of their age
To sell and to deceive. The fatherles
(Who had a little stock and craftines)
Have by the Devils means advanced their state
Quickly and richly in a twelve years date:
When true Divines and honest Lawyers may,
After more study shut their books and play:
So much more wealthy is it to persuade
Youth in a servile then a noble trade.
Will you bele^ue me? They have secret charms
By which they do arise to wealth and Arms:
As deep Magicians with a triple sound
Raise wind^ Spirits up above the ground,
So City Tradesmen have the same devise
To eleuate themselves: stuff, couller, prise,
Be made the triple means which briefly can
T^ansforme a Woodcock to an Alderman.
But one among the rest (more wisely bent
Then to approve the way which others went)
Insinuates his third with silken lace:
Both which together got a Mayors place:
Which did reueal^ him then, to be indeed
A thridden fellow in a silken weed.
Thus do they prosper, and when worth dispaires
Breed a slight fortune for consuming heirs:
And among secrets which they closely learn,
They think them best which only they discern:
As if whilst they to hell be going on
It were some joy not to be looked upon:
Thinking (as all men think) that few have been
Damned indeed, if they were damnd unseen
Esteeming death, and horror, sermon-toyes;
If they do softly come without much noise.
Shall usury be thought a godless gain:
Because it helps men with such little pain.
And shall not lazy cheating trades be thought
Alike unlawful, being often bought
With little times expense: they do discharge
All their Professions faculty at large,
If they can walk about their wealthy shopps,
In sober gowns and very hansome slopps,
Now looking on their Wives, then on the ware,
Casting about betimes how to prepare
A place of worship for his infant Son:
Else meditating how they may out-runn
Their neighbors fortune; or beguile the Trust
Of them who raisd their fortunes from the dust:
How they may bankroupt seem, perhaps they
Or of a merry voyage: or they drink,
And beat their servants madly: o^ they sleep: think:
Or a high valued plentious feast they keep:
Or if they think how they may busy be,
They do reuolue their sin-full book, and see
Where they may best amend the figures weight,
And turn a twenty-sixe to twenty-eight.
Then tell me some that know, does common use
A worse or easier gain then this produce?
I will indeed consent; usurious coin
Is not with labor taught, how to purloyne,
So much as the deceit of narrow yards.
An Usurer much busy time discards
Which might instruct his knowledge to receive
A much more impious gain, and more deceive.
He might be busy as our Tra ^esmen be,
To c^eate or l^e: till when I must agree
Their the ^uish business which they reckon best,
Excells the labor of rich interest.
But I am largely clamorous, and shall
Among the titles of inuectiues fall:
For now the times corrupted language gives
New names to whatsoever is or lives
Not suting with our humors and intent:
An honest courage we call impudent:
And impudence has lately took the name
Of thr^uing wit, which does obtain best fame.
Good humble men, who have sincerely laid
Salvation for their hope, we call Afraid.
But if you will vouchsafe a patient ear,
You shall perceive, men impious have most fear.
ESSAY. II.
MAny aspiring fellows you may see,
Who after they and fortune do^ agree,
Come (by brief windings) to be men elect;
Through private means, heaven knows how indirect
To flourish quickly and advance their head,
As if they took possession from the dead:
When all the Heralds never could devise,
From whence the fathers kindred might arise.
Though many call them Nephew, Brothers son,
(because a thriftie garment they have spun)
Who (else) with public shame had bin disgraced,
And all the titles of their love de^ac'd:
But now they flourish and with honor swell,
Whose poor beginnings every Groom can tell:
As if a newfound Whittingtons rare Cat
Come to extol their birthrights about that
Which nature once intended: (...) be men
Who think not of a (...) yielding Ten:
They turn base copp^r i^to perfect gold:
Counterfeit couzening wares be wisely sold.
Men be persuaded well of prosperous fa^e,
Giving much credit to a crafty pate,
But if these cowards durst discover all,
Both how they did their high estates install,
How they began to make a league with hell,
Or how they did in damned plots excel,
Their very lives alone, if they were dead,
Would make another work for (...).
Alas they dare not; these be cowards right,
For whose abortiue deeds the blackest night,
Is never black enough, nor can (...);
Their shame, which lewd posterities ^eueale,
Fine hansome outsides who so highly stand
On the reputed courage of their hand;
Who keep their Pages with such spacious guard:
(Scorning to play without a coated card)
Who keep a large Retinue, or erect
Buildings; in which they never can expect
To dwell, with credit of their famished stock;
Or to maintain the use of one good lock.
These notwithstanding to augment their gloss,
And tu^n some brave expenses into dross,
Will be the servile debtors to a slave,
Who has no remedy, but to deprave
Their fortunes with inuectiue impudence,
Or make Petitions to desray expense.
And yet these mighty V^starts cannot dare,
To pay a single Cross: Except they spare
Their pomp; which gives a luster in the Court,
And in the City makes abundant sport.
Spend-thrisis, and Gallants likewise (who have lands
Which bear all Saffron for their yellow bands)
Those which have only complement, and whoope
In Tauernes; may attend the former troop.
Those that dare challenge any man of Arms,
And seem to bear about them valiant charms:
Belching uncivil Envy, in the face
Of him that meekely contradicts their grace;
As if they carried vengeance in their jaws,
Or executions of the Statute-lawes.
Those men if strictly challenged, quake with fear
Contriuing basely how they may forbear:
And (leaving then a while their pompous pride)
They best bethink, how they may closely hide
Their contumacious heads with privilege:
For when the slat-cap tradesinan does allege
Forfeit of payments (and because at length
His wife, and so the world, does know his strength)
When he procures a Champion to demand
The noble answer of his debtors hand:
And dares my valiant Swaggerer to meet,
His lawful challenge in the open street;
He, rather then he will provoke the strise,
Sues by petition to my plaintifes wife:
Who if she does not very much forget,
Takes down the quarrel, and so pays the debt.
Another sort of cowards you may see,
(Transcending these in a more base degree)
Who to pre^erue advancement, or uphold
Their Families, (without expense of gold)
Will, in promis^uous manner, congregate
Amongst good men, who blockish Papisme hate;
Nay, they will be attentive in the Church,
(All to avoid the law, and penal lurch)
They will con-niue at holy arguments,
And often bear a (...) Parliaments:
They will agree to co^stituted laws,
Which almost (...) to their kin^dome draws,
(All notwithst^nding) they directly ^are
Hope to be saved, as (...) Papists are;
Expecting on some opportunity,
When they may make a traytrous unity:
For all the truth which can excuse their fate,
Is, that they finely can equivocate:
A Cowards doctrine, full of shameless fear,
Insuses joy to their misguided ^are:
And yet no equal justice them controules,
Because they have a Curtain to their souls.
Corrupted Officers, the common cuise
Of public Law, do stuff their gaping purse
With wrongful fees, and grow extremely fat
By their delicious tricks, or lying squat
Up to the ears in pleasant Alchymie:
If these men durst bewray their infamy,
And bring their holiest actions into light,
The day would run to a pr^digious night.
New fees created are, and then the match
Must something take to frame a brief dispatch:
Informers be prevented by a feate,
Which quallifies indeed their boystrous heat,
Although unjustly: Clearkes and other knaves
(Who with their gennerous ruffs the Court out-braues)
Will take a pention, or a quarter fee,
To make their friend from information free;
And (to prevent the mischief) will declare
How other bills already do not spare
To certify the Court a day before
Of that, for which the Plaintiff^ does implore:
So false and fained policy does crack
The crafty meanings that pre-caution lack:
Yet still they gape, and say they cannot save
The many pounds which they so freely gave
To purchase ten times more: for they intend
Only on private meanings to depend.
That waking sighted Runaway, the Hare,
(Which is preserved by a continual fear)
Cannot (by this) protect her innocence,
So much as Officers their lewd pretense:
The Fox an ancient Hierogliphicke was,
In Friars robes to show the common pass
Of smooth hypocrisy, and Church-mens craft;
But now a formal Gown may serve to wast
This badge among our prowling Officers,
Which Name and Habit rightuously inferres
As much compacted Villainy, as meets
Among the Stewards of rich Country Lee^es:
Both Cousen with as great conformity,
As if they held some new fraternity:
Both be so practysd in good Uertues scorn,
As if Atturnies had directly sworn
To match the Officer, and powle the ^leece,
As if they both consisted of one piece.
They both insinuate their sweating pains,
Their common payment: each (alike) constraine^
The hunger-bitten Client to disburse,
Till they have le^t his hopes even with his purse,
Yet will you dare to say those men exact?
No; that were brainlesse: they so well compact
Their polliticke inventions, that the fault
Of asking more then due, creepes to the vault
Of Clearks dull ignorance to purchase leave,
When their discovered proiects do deceive
A Substitute in Courts may rather take
All wrested fees, that gloss may thereby make
The Steward seem less culpable in vice,
When Substitutes are taught by his advice:
And if some one their cousenage does betray,
The Substitute can easily slinke away.
My baudy Proctor likewise, who presumes
To purge men's purses, for venerall Rhumes;
Who threatens penance in a ghostly sheet,
If Clyents (though they strip from head to feet)
Be slack in payment of extortious coin:
This man who studies first how to purloine,
Before he looks upon the civil Law;
This man, who has a prompt and ready paw,
Who loves no Innes of Court, shutting his cracks
And all his rage, vder a nose of wax;
Who, when a fornicator looks awry,
That he the least advantage may espy,
He will officiously attend the Court,
Because he smells out the ensuing sport,
And when a grievous sine afflicts the purse
Of fleshly sinners, to escape the curse,
He and the thrifty Judge cau closely share
The foul taxation, which with pious care
Is well intended to correct the sin,
Establish bridges which decay within,
Releive sick persons, or amend highways,
Or some Religious Chapel, which decays.
But they have other uses to respect,
To buy their ^iuill garments, or affect
The wanton lust of some egregious Whore,
To win new credit, to deceive the poor;
And so deceive the vnsuspectfull time,
For (else) they durst not so insatiate clime
Into the fiery Region; neither dares
Their habit seem acquainted with these cares.
One thing which makes the brag Ciuilian
Account himself to be a better man
Then any common Lawyer, (...), because
The Latin tongue has dignified there Laws:
And well may Proctors love the latin tongue;
For (as of old it has been truly sung)
Men measure goodness by the present gain:
Should Proctors then from loving that refrain?
When to their great content and greater ease
They can expound their latin as they please:
For (as a fellow lately did agree
Who knows their dealing) when you read or see
Adpios vs^s in a Proctors notes,
The meaning is to buy wives petticotes.
Now must I summon Parish-hypocrites,
Who seem attentive to celestial rites;
Who think the Art of him that well does live,
Is all performed, if he example give,
Which may become the Parish: if he pray
Aloude in Chambers, or devoutly pay
The tribute of plain dealing unto all
Who (can to their assistance) Justice call:
If in assemblies he can show good works,
And call offenders, Infidels or Turks:
He thinks he has discharged the final part
Of a religious or honest heart:
Though he does closely keep a virtuous Punke,
Or though (on cautious terms) he can be drunk:
Though in another County, and the name
Of other Agents h^ can schedules frame;
And thinks himself to be a man well blessed,
Though he receives the Sinful Interest:
For this eye-seruing-age is quickly gone
To all deceit, if we lack lookers on.
These be most valiant Cowards, men that dare
Be boldly impious, and yet basely fear,
Least common rumor should observe or think
They be not still awake, though still they wink.
Some false Physicians lie within the reach
Of these, who true sincerity impeach,
Their glasses, glisters, oils, ingredients
(Which hope of lucre oftentimes inuents)
Do carry all (as if a Cowards soul
Kept in their bosoms) to the dead men's roll;
Hiding their fearful practice in the graves:
Lean Death, their operation still out-braues.
Sometimes their crabbed Envy does invent,
Sometimes they kill with new experiment:
For still they err by custom or by chance,
Either by malice, or by ignorance:
And having spent prescriptions to each dram:
He thinks alas sure I protected am,
If now I see our Physic does no good,
Or seeing I have sucked his purse and blood,
If I can tell his friends there is no hope,
Or that he must expect deaths fatal scope:
Then shall I be discharged with credits fee,
And to condemn more lives, remain still free.
They shift their compass to avoid our scorn,
Hiding their actions from the faire-fac'd morn.
But now censorious Critticks do disgrace
Each work they know not, with a scuruy face:
They banish Authors to Barbarian lands,
And fling true solid matter from their hands,
With a disdainful Motto of Non sense:
Although themselves (excepting impudence)
Have nothing to excuse their vanity:
Latinlesse Lawless Rogues, they often be,
Who having past their verdict, will recant:
For their maintaining faculty is scant.
Or ^f these Apish Cowards dare defend,
The vice of Judgment, brings them to their end.
And yet some writers do deserve the name
Of Cowards likewise: they be grown so tame,
With being often handled, often praised,
As they forget their motion, being raised
Above the highest spheres: they think it much,
More then indeed enough, to have been such
As they were once accounted: though they sleep
Follow their ease, and sluggish silence keep:
Nay though they wake, and (which does poison the^)
Follow those errors which they did condemn.
Some worthless Poets also, have the vice
To write their labors as they cast the dice:
If (by addenture) some strange happy chance,
Smiles on their borrowed works of ignorance,
They can bewray their theeuish names, and give
Notice to all, how they eternized live.
But if (presuming on their sickly strength)
They write, and do betray themselves at length:
Then, oh they came into the public press
Against their wills; they dare not then confess
Who wrongs the world with such base Poetry:
Nay, their own eldest sons they will deny.
All hide their vices. Pr^nters also hide
Errors escaped, which makes wise men deride
Excellent wits, deser^ing worthy praise,
when (through distinctions lost) the truth decaies:
But among all base writers of this time,
I cannot reckon up more desperate rhyme,
(Which travails with a fear so damnable)
As Libell-lashing measures: they excel
Only in this; that those be counted best,
Which the foole-Author dares aknowledge least.
These are contemptible enough, and yet
Their lines mask under a sictitious wit,
When wit (as hitherto) was never seen
Truly engendered by a triuiall spleen.
Nor can they thus reform what is impure,
Seeing men so touched, conceive themselves past cure.
well do these cowards thrive, when having blown
Shame to the peoples Ears, they loose their own.
Briefly, it were a thing preposterous,
If rich men, who are nicely covetous,
Should not be trembling cowards; when they think
Upon the joyful pains of death they stink.
Nothing prouokes me sooner to confess
That Athisme is their chiefest happiness,
Then to consider how the very best
Struggle with death, declining to their rest:
One plucks away the hairs which should reveal
His righteous thoughts: another does conceal
The furrowed wrinkles of his tawny skin:
Anorher scoures his stumpes, or does begin
To break the glass with foolish ecstasy,
At the reflexe of Chap-f^lne gravity.
Can th^se, with safety of a quiet mind
(...) up themselves with an ambitious wind
(...), Rumor, Lucre, and Expense,
(...) and good men have no difference?
(...), I have some alone,
They feed a Hundred bellies, I feed one.
Both van^sh to O^liuions cave, unless
Our very thoughts a living soul express:
Which b^ing once admitted, no souls can
Keep their worst secrets from the face of Man.
ESSAY. III.
NO more, no more: now says my honest friend
Be politic; or study to commend
The time, and timelings, least you do bestow
More copious terms then license dare allow.
Content thy self ( Cordatus) I will blame
No reverend Churchmen, neither will I name
One lewd professor, who polutes the grace
Of such a formal and respected place:
I will not name their livings, nor their lives,
Much less their bondage to their hansome wives
As if they durst not show the times disease,
Because i^deed they dare not them displease.
I will not wrong their holiness: and why?
In holiness true zeal you may descry.
Nor will I tax Church vices, least I wrong
The labor which to writing does belong.
For when I have again repeated all
Their vices public, and sins personal:
I shall but reckon the antiquities,
Of Gloss, of Ignorance, and Simonies:
And so repeat things mentioned long before,
Nay things prefixed upon each Playhouse door.
Let them (alas) continue, or increase,
O let them long enjoy a quiet peace;
For they already know the mischiefs well:
They almost scorn such inwards to expel.
And why? they fear taxation: O strange fate!
They who contemn reproves, are desperate.
We cannot hope such persons will amend,
Who may (without control) their vice extend.
Enough, enough, I have bethought so much
Concerning cowards, that my self am such:
I dare not speak my meaning under pain
Of being crossed, of being curbed again.
Why crossed? why curbed? go ask authority
Why it protects peculiar vanity?
And it perhaps will answer in defense;
Crows to themselves be perfect Innocence.
Or (which is more familiar) (...) loves
That humor best, which bitterly reproues
All states, all faculties besides her own:
She favors that, and fears it should be known,
Thouhg it be noted; or with bitter shame,
Has purchasd (e're you write) an odious name.
Men think their fashions and their faces best,
If (in a flattred humor) they be blessed,
To hear men discommend both such and such,
Not naming theirs; although they be so much
Apparent filthy, as no vulgar eye
Would make a question of deformity:
And so superior vices do ptopound
A freedom to their scope, as being sound
In self conceit, if they can save their skin
From being Printed with a public sin;
Though (setting books aside) they do profess
Enough to poison all their names no less.
See how I breath into the spacious Air,
A Theme as spacious: Can my Verse repair
The fruitles errors of men obstinate;
Who cannot freely their own vices hate?
Who rather gainefull vices do condemn,
Because they cannot purchase gains by them?
For in their own offenses they reserve
Such cautions as may closely them preserve.
Well, sir, admit men labor to be wise,
And for themselves do secrets exercise,
Who shall dare contradict such worthy pains
Which fosters credit, and ill terms restraines?
Auant base Hipocrite, go henceforth set
Upon thy pillow, thy close cabinet,
And sleep with all the papers in thy hand,
Which thy most secret counsels may command;
Or I with Spaniards better shall agree;
Or I shall trust a Lapwing more then thee.
Good men dare always have their thoughts expressd,
And to their spightfull haters be confessd.
Although in lawful proiects, wit does teach
A private way, least others should out-reach.
But well, suppose men so directly halt
As they do fear to patronize the fault,
Shall they not seek vnpunish'd to remain,
If actions passed cannot be called again?
We daily do transgress; and some perhaps
Deserve the plagues of lashing after-clap^:
But then, alas! what satisfaction can,
Written reproves be for a vicious man?
You make professions undergo contempt,
And make the least offense so far exempt
From civil virtue, and some new concerts,
That you enforce good fellowship to straights.
So: Have you done (dear Motley?) yes almost;
But stay a little, and behold vncrost,
The reason, why we closely do amiss,
And why we cover sin: the reason is
To frustrate your inventions; which produce,
Nothing halfe-worthy of a well borne Muse;
But triuiall vanities, and time expense,
To tell man's weakness by experience:
You might with more applause bestow more pains
To grace the Mayors Triumphs, and the chains
Which do attend his Lordship to the Hall:
You might the Scottish dignity miscall:
And in some honest, (...), scur^y rhyme
Disgrace or flatter minions of the time:
A rustic, saucy, moral would be rare:
To let the people know you do prefer
Fame and your countries witles love before;
Discretions wealth, and raptures quiet store,
You might provide for Cambridge once again
Scaenes, which might worthy, like it self remain:
And not in terms, as needy as the truth,
Discover haire-braine fallacies of youth:
You might, you might, Seuerus, and detest
To scourge close dealers who be safely blessed:
For I can well resolve; you are the cause
Why men reserve (in acts) a private clause:
You, and your nice observance do restrain
Men, and their actions both, from being plain:
And yet you call those Cowards, who beware
As if they were possessed with childish fear.
Suruay thy self, quicke-sighted formalist,
And then discover that abusiue mist,
With which men shelter any private sin:
Charity always does at home begin.
Now have you ended? then, I answer all
By scorning to excuse or hide my fall;
As thou do urge, if I transgress my square,
I of relapse, not of reproof beware:
And I believe thou likewise wilt amend,
If so thou do not studiously offend:
For that indeed betrays men's dealings naught,
When they do study rathe^ to be taught,
In subtle mischief of a newer mint,
Then to abjure deceits of common print:
For they hate couznage, once entitled old,
Because the Title shows it often told,
And so affoords no lucre; not because
It favors Athisme and corruption draws.
Why do I tax, why do I trouble men,
Or why with noted crimes defile my Pen?
The most notorious Cowards will betray
Themselves, and follyes, though I turn away.
Yes (which is worth my laughter) they accuse
Their closest fears, even while they do refuse
To let you understand their subtle drifts.
They do discover such avoiding shifts,
That you may thence collect some fearful trick:
They study to appear so politic.
As, Fellons brought before a Justice, each
Hopes to be saved, if others he impeach:
And as some Indians dealt, being all amazed
To hear the Spanish guns and forces blazed;
They bought their safety through a fine deceit:
For knowing gold to be the Spanish bait,
They would protest, that fifty leagues beyond
Was common plenty of that yellow sand,
Meaning to turn the fools another way.
And so deal vicious persons: they betray
Another folly, to preserve their own:
Observe, and you shall gather things well known.
Go tell a Churchman he has lost his voice,
Or ask him why he does in strife rejoice:
And he will answer; Lawyers do not speak
So much to purpose, as the Pulpits creake,
Although they do receive fees double twice;
Which far^e exceed my single benefice.
But you must think, divines resolve on this,
To blame-Lawmen though nothing were amiss.
Go tell a Scholar he relyes on chance,
Because he does affect dull ignorance:
And he the worst objection soon auerts
By telling how The times neglect deserts.
Go tell a Maiestrate of morning bribes,
And he, to shallow means, the same ascribes:
But then demand of Honor why she fails,
In giving that which every way auailes
To nourish her beloved sons? And she
Will answer, They profuse, insatiate be.
Ask shifting Russians why they do forget,
To hasten payment and discharge their debt,
Or why they do sufficient men dislike?
And they will answer, Great-ones do the like.
Go tell a Gameller he has cheated long,
Or unto many offered shameful wrong,
And he will answer that himself before
Was often cheated twenty times and more.
Go ask a Drunkard why he follows wine,
Abuses God, or gives a Heathen sign;
And he will quickly answer thy demand,
The Parson was so drunk he could not stand.
Go tell a Hot-spurre he has killed a man,
Go ask him how he does the terror scan:
And he will answer; a Phisitian's free
To murder twenty millions; why not he?
Go tell a fawning wretch he does rely
Upon the slavish vice of flattery:
And he will answer. That the best are glad
To sollow such endeavors, or as bad.
Go tell a whore she does her sex polute
By being such a common prostitute:
And she will answer in defense of fame,
Citizens wives, and Ladies do the same.
Go tell a tradesman he deceiues the day,
Refusing light, deluding every way:
And he will answer to avoid thy curse,
Go further on, you will be cheated worse.
Thus cowards all (not daring to defend
The diverse follies which they dare intend)
Confess themselves, and others do elect
Vices, which none but Devils dare protect.
When I pronounce a Coward, it implies,
Malice and spite be Cowards qualities:
They are inseperate; and why? because
A vicious Coward so exactly knows
Himself unable, that he does decree
To have Consorts as impotent as he:
Because he may a^oyd the mighty shocke
Of men's contempt, ranked with a greater flock:
Whereas perhaps if he were left alone,
His baseness only would be looked upon.
And therefore it is made the next reply;
Others be wicked men as well as I.
But hark you Sir (says one) you have forgot,
To brand our Females with a Cowards lot.
They be a proper Subject: do not spare
Them and their covert dealing to declare:
They be attyred with inuentiue doubts,
And have as many fears as they have thoughts:
They labor daily, yet they do suspect,
They cannot half a hansome face erect:
They paint, they powder, they with toys exceed
Alas! they dare not show themselves indeed.
Night they do honor: then they do obtain
That which perhaps the day calls back again:
They do entice their Husbands to believe
Any thing (then) and any thing to give:
They do entreat, when Husbands scarce reply
But with a purpose nothing to deny:
They nor without advantage do contend;
Nor any Cowards odds do discommend.
Well, well: admit they do abound with fear,
Females for nothing else created were.
They need not of their weakness be ashamed;
When we should blush to hear the folly named.
So, so: but you Reprove impediment,
And tell us what the crafty times invent,
As if authority forgot his whip:
You may be silent, and surcease to nip:
Let sage Authority proceed by course
Of Law, to punish these without remorse.
Then you must bid Authority respect
Things not accounted evil; or neglect
To punish friend-lesse fee-lesse infamies:
And tax brave mischief with seuerer eyes.
Nay that will never be; for tell the base,
And poor offender (who feels no disgrace)
He has offended; and he dares reply,
He took his pattern from Authority.
So shifting be the simple Idiots,
So shifting base be higher Patriots:
And must be ever till they do reveal
Fear to Commit, not study to Conceal.
Essay the fourth entitled Reproof. Or a defense for common Law and Lawyers
mixed with reproof against the Lawyers common Enemy.

Essay. IIII.
MY labor I renew: but having seen,
How ill disposed my former truth has been
I grow a little wiser; and agree
To make an Essay prove an Ironie.
Then what Profession shall I now disgrace?
Reproof is thought to have no better face
Then Impudence or Malice; and is thought
To be a scandal by corruption wrought.
It Is true a thriuing knowledge has by some
Who lacked such happy wit, been thought a scum;
And, under shadow of reproof, has been
Made an extreme derision to be seen:
Nay made a public injury, to please
Them, who should punish the contempt; and squease
That shameful envy, till it does remain,
As empty as the rugged Authors brain,
Alas I am too modest and obscure:
I show in dark reproof what is impure;
And therefore have been blamed: but I will now
Speak with an open zeal; and disauow
The mincing terms of caution: if I fail
To speak my meaning, let me nere prevail
To speak a righteous thought: And if I miss
Opinion of a tempered zeal in this,
I shall account it glory; for the thing,
Needs such a Poets vehemence to sing
Her hat^d trophe^es, that will neither care
To purchase hate; nor will his knowledge spare:
Nay such a Poet that will be most glad,
In her defense to be accounted mad.
In her? in whose defense? thine (sacred Law)
Thine, whose provoking ^arity does draw
My soul unto thy rescue. Thou have made
Way through the bloody and victo^ious blade
Of Danes and Normans, to maintain thy right:
And have preserved thine honor in despite
Of time and conquest: like Religion, thou
Have among persecutions gotten through:
And when prevailing rage of swor^ and lance
Threatened thy titles, (...) did (...) advance:
Nay (which is miracle) thy (...) have
Enforced the cruel (...) to (...)
And think them precious. All (...) war
Which does not learning and men learned spare,
Had not the power to demolish thee:
Nor Time, to which the greatest (...) be
Condemned (...): (...) (...),
That almost does all (...) arts (...);
Nor nice opinion, that does often supplant
The holy truth, and make the best recant:
These (which have ruined others) did increase
Thy native glory, and augment thy peace.
When strict invasion overcame the Land;
Thou had the grace, within thee to command
Nay to entice the flinty Conqueror:
He who had strong sufficience to abhor
Thy bliss-full knowledge, he was well content
To love thee and obey thy Regiment.
Can it be said a stranger did embrace
Thine infant worth; and shall thine aged face
Be now forgotten; and derided then
By those who call themselves thy Countrymen?
It is: and undergoes the shameful mock
Of them who have ^onsum'd their idle stock
Of witty jesting: It is now the way
To keep a Writers credit from decay;
If he can foyst into his fly-blowne stuff
Some twenty Law-tearmes; he has wit enough:
The very basest wretch (who cannot lay
Matter in two years for a ragged Play)
Will tax the Law with errors most untrue,
And teach the folli^s which it never knew.
Poor sneaking fellows who be discontent
With every fashion, art, and argument
(Which does not magnify their witless rimes)
Produce the Law to prove our wicked times.
Then (dearest Cambridge, best in my respect)
Be these examples fitting to direct
Thy ripe inventions? and to tutor thee
Who art, if well awaked, most fit and free
To Tutor all the world? Is plenties date
So much exspir'd that thou must imitate?
What prodigal and riotous expense
Has turned thee bankroupt? Is thy nobler sense
Now punished for mispending former cost?
Or be thy riches by adventure lost?
Have thou not careful been to multiply
Thy precious wealth? or did the parties dye,
Or else run mad, on whom thou have disposd
Thy honored portions? Is thy wealth inclosd
Where none but Worthy men may it behold?
Or be thy worthy Poets cheapely sold
As Bondslaues to detraction? or what then?
Has thy good nature trusted many men
And do they all forget to pay thee now?
Some have enough to spend; but care not how:
And so perhaps thy Poets: have they so?
Good Poets write whether they will or no
And worthily: why therefore do^ not they?
Do thou or nature curse them with delay?
Or does thy bounty turn to poisoned gall?
Else art thou grown so covetous withal
That thou can nothing spare but moldy sauce
To welcome and deserve the Kings applause?
I wrong thee Cambridge with my strict demand:
thou keepst those wits within thy plenteous hand
Who can establish works with easy choice,
Worthy to be commended by the voice
Of God and Angels: but it has been told;
Sound wits are modest; shallow-braines are bold:
And therefore did the law-tearme Poet ween,
To please a public ear with private spleen.
Now O the pity! that a misconceite
O^ some, should all the Law and Lawyers bait.
Content your self says Ignoramus, I
Tax not the Law, but Lawyers vanity:
Nor do I tax good Lawyers, but the rank
Of those who purchase wealth, and yet are blank*
Content thy self slight Ignoramus, I
Am well acquainted with your policy:
You in the Fencers trick are deeply read;
And off^ing at the foot you mean the head.
As does a Rebel who has taken Arms:
He promises to help his Countries harms,
But has a meaning to supprise the town,
And make the total Regiment his own:
Such was thy meaning; to disgrace the Law
Under a colored trick; and wisely draw
That honor to yourselues which follows them.
But shall I tax your meanings, and condemn
Invisible designements? You proclaim
Your meanings in each Tavern: will you blame
Those that believe you when you do rejoice
That Lawyers be offended with your noise?
Trust me, atender mercy does enforce
me to compassion and a silent course,
When any crime, that does deserve the scourge,
Is too much tortured: I had rather urge
Defense for folly, then reproof* when all
Insult upon it; And so much miscall
An easy error, that it gathers strength.
I feel me thinks a happy scorn at length
To add my curses to the vulgar curse,
In the most hateful mischief: It is worse
To ouer-punish crimes then to commit.
I do abhor to exercise my wi^t
On a most trodden Theme: and do account
A sleepy cave better then such a mount.
Me thinks it is noble and most humane too;
If I forbear when I might freely do.
And could that spa^ke of goodness be in you
So much forgotten; that you durst allow
The broad contempt of them, whose happiness,
All common Envy labors to make less?
Did it seem honest, politic, or wise,
Humane, or virtuous to you, to devise
So bad a Project? and to multiply
The times detraction with an open lie?
What will you answer? what will you compose
Able to make defense in vearse or p^ose?
'Troth you had best in some new ballad sing
Your Lib^ll was bespoken by the King.
For no evasion can your wisdom spare;
Except the foolish one; I do not care.
But Ignoramus may conceive that I
Am ouer-ea^nest now; and may reply,
Things are as they be taken; and indeed
Things often be taken worser then they need:
But you and your additions do expound
Your hearty tryumphes unto malice bound:
Seeking (as if you had forsworn the Law
Of reason and of reverence) to misdrawe
That ornament of men; and to annoy
The chiefest Justice and the chiefest joy
That our law does acknowledge: were it so
As the report already seems to know;
You should affixe unto your tainted place,
Eternity of shame and of disgrace.
Scholars (you say) have found themselves agrieu'd*
Was this the fittest way to be relieved?
Perhaps you do account it as your grief
Because the Judge has spared some scholar thief;
And so his mercy has corrupted more:
This might excuse, and get amends, before
Such bold inuectiues: but you do prolong
Your strife; and say your suites have sufferd wrong.
So so: i^patient arrogance will find
The way to quarrel when her eyes be blind.
For though men conquer a malicious heart
And give no causes to complain of smart:
Nay, turn her quickest senses into steel
That (though a cause were given) she might not feel,
Yet, would she (rather then be mute) suggest
Causes of quarrel out of sleepy rest.
Nay, it is a Scholars vice and venial pride
To think his own conceit the surer side:
If therefore he dislike the Laws intent,
We may neglect his tales with merriment;
And pardon what he says: for every youth
In Cambridge s^emes to understand the truth
Of Logic and Philosophy so plain;
That other truth he holds in much disdain:
Or he bel^iues the Colleges know all,
And only truth approues which they so call.
And hearing them dislike the Lawyers brood
When Suites decline, or cases be not good;
He looks no further then the grudging fame:
And is not ready to discern, but blame.
Nay rather All become so valiant
That they abhor to be thought ignorant
Of any truth in Law; because our I Will
Has called it Common; and makes John a Style
The rustic word so frequent in our books:
And therefore with contempt each Scholar looks
Upon the weighty meanings; whose pure light
Has Iron gates to stop their scornful sight.
Though they presume their ^ight can reach the
And therefore they proceed in simple iarrs:
And then exclaim upon the Lawyers sense stars:
When they do loose through idle confidence.
Nay, nay, we need not mar^el though they blame
The Laws proceedings when they loose their game:
For though they win and suffer no disgrace,
Their best opinion of the Law is base.
But it is possible a Poets wit
Should be so fleshed in mischief to commit
Rape with an ye common law
aged Matror; and despoile
Her honored gravity with impious toil,
Except his former sins have taught before
The way to get some Bastard by a Whore?
I cannot think it possible, nor may,
Till proof convert (...) thoughts another way:
He seems (like one in reputation crossed)
By desperate means to purchase what he lost.
Perhaps the Fabulist can tell us why
This Writer took^ a (...) of (...):
And as the Chariot-driuer asked his wheel
Wherefore it creak'd? which answered; I do feel
The want of that, which stopps a creaking voice:
So the loud Ignoramus may rejoice
To learn this answer; and protest with it,
He took mere sound because he wanted wi^t:
but come thou long-nail'd comic, who do claw
And can^t not (...) the substance of our Law;
(For busy fools may Truth may be blamed but cannot be shamed.
blot but cannot sink
Through solid stuff with Aqua fortis (...))
Let ^s a while examine your delight
And search the wo^ds where you most deeply bite
You bring a large confused heap of noise,
(...), writs, and vocal empty toys,
To prove the laws discredit; then you join
A Lawyers hearty love to yellow coin;
And then you snarle against our simple French
As if you had been pepperd wi^h your wench:
And then right harmeles Dulman does inchant
The Scaene; with teaching Latin how to Cant.
O most rare subject and bewitching Scaene^
Able to make the fattest hearer lean;
If he would truly think how little pains
Does fasten credit upon lucky s^raines,
When full deseruings prove unfortunate:
And neither purchase fame, in love, nor hate.
What though a Lawyer does expect his fee?
Does not a Lawyer, that same Angel see
Tempting divines to flatter and belie
The dead, which tempted him to falsify
The living truth? resolve me, which of both
Approches nearest to a ^ewd untroth?
I think it wo^ser to commit the sin
That shall not be rebuked, and which will win
Strength, because uncontrolled; then to protect
An error which the court will contradict.
And if you talk of learning, they alone
Can yield us twenty dunces back for one.
Then was the Lion wise, which gravely said,
Asses may blow the trumpet in our aid.
But you procure the King to laugh enough,
I darde not say to like such thredbare stuff:
For he that scorns our common law in rage
Because the terms are over grown with age
May scorn the wrincles which have smoo-her been
And love a strumpet with her painted skin.
Or he may mock his mothers countenance;
When it grows witherd by continuance:
Law is the kingdoms mother: she by light:
Conceiues, and is deliured of men's right:
And all her phrases which be Malta (...), (...) i^m cecidere, caden^o; Que
nunc sunt in honor vocabula, sivolet v^us. Hor: de art poe.
wrincled now.
Once had a youthful and a lovely brow.
But is it lawful to embase the true
And ancient L^tine, with devises new?
Embase we do not, but enlarge we may;
where words approved will not our sense convey.
Come, come: although you will not understand
You shall be taught to grace your native land;
With yielding love* and honor to defend
Your countries credit; which the laws intend.
Rich natures work most absolute and wise
Does give the liberty which you despise:
You may observe how in this earthly globe,
She clothes each creature with a suiting robe:
The quiet Lamb she does adorn with wool
And makes the Parot fine, a beauteous gull:
But because strength and durance are within,
She clothes the Lion with a rugged skin:
And such an outside does become the part
Of a prevailing, and perpetual art:
An art which has no meaning to respect
A mighty person, and the poor neglect:
An art which in her habit rude, and plain,
Disclaimes to be prouok'd with love or gain:
And with such art is Englands The Common Law.
mother blessed,
Being in all her lively habit dressed:
Therefore I think it wisdom to adorn
The Law with outside which may merit scorn:
That like a wealthy Farmer clad in (...) quisqu^ (...) erat a nature, vberius
etiam a doctrina, (...), ^o magis refug^ebat a legum (...), qui vipribus et
spin^s interclusus tenebatur. Bod^n: praefati:
Frise,
She may preserve her treasure in disguise:
For being like a glorious dame arraid;
Her tempting beauties then were all betrayed
To multitude of Or Students
suitors; and her love
Would more then infinite contentions move:
Look on that foolish thing which many call
A beauteous woman; and behold how all
Spend their devotions* sacrifice their brain,
engage their lives and credit to maintain
that map of coulors: every man may see
Her suitors (though but two) will disagree
About her love; nay striving to be blessed
each will presume he has more interest:
And will the simplest wretch conceive that she,
I mean our Law and makers dignity;
She our almighties minion, can display
Her quick transparance, and not steal away
Men's dear affections? or can she remove
Her veil; and will not her attracting love
Provoke the wisest men to quarrel? yes:
Love a conceit and firm opinion is;
And knowledge does beget amasing doubts:
T^en love with knowledge does inspire the thoghts
To choose opinion: knowledge being wide
Can both maintain opinion and divide:
So then contentions follow: such would be
The force of law, if every man could see.
Admit, she were adornd with costly phrase;
Admit all nations did her merits blaze;
And that the sweetest beauty she can take,
Would neither do^age nor dissension make;
Yet having many suitors, she must mind
The due respect of all, or prove unkind:
which would exceed her large, (but aequal) dowre
If she were courted by more courts then four.
Why then be some licentious Churchmen vexed?
Why be they suffered to abuse their text;
And make the Gospel speak against our Law?
When as the Text (which they enforce to gnaw
Upon a Lawyers credit) does concern
Their own reproach; if they could well discern.
O listen you that have but common sense
And mark with what injurious violence
They do compel the Scripture: I have known
Cynnicks, to such a spightfull blindness grown,
That, on the silly words of Balaams Ass,
They would infer what slave a Lawyer was.
The foreign P^pist is, against our will,
Beholding to our Law, and must be still:
For we and our proceedings undergo
A fury which the Pope and Rome should know:
The witty students do endeavor thus,
With squibbes and crackers against only us,
In such abundance; that their wits be spent
E're they confute a Popish argument.
I cannot guess what fatal curse incites
Their fluent envy, which (in triumph) bites:
But well assured I am, that only they
Whose lives, their guilty meaning, do betray
Despise a Lawyer: when the best Divines
Scorn to be noted by such daring signs.
But others seem as if their hungry mawes
Were crammed with all corruption of our Laws:
And that in choosing of a Text, they mean
To purge their guts, and make their stomachs clean:
^or any Scriptures piece, like Hellebore
Rumbles within them, and does bring up store
Of choleric vomit in the Lawyers face:
Whilst I lament their high and sacred place;
And marvel why the Circle cannot charm^
That frantic method; but be made a Farm
To sow and nourish biting nettle seed
Or slips of (...): rather it indeed
Is grown the charmed fortress, to condemn:
But cannot justify their zeal, nor them.
For most of all their vehemence depends,
On earthly zeal, and prostituted ends:
Either they seek to please themselves and men;
Or to displease their enemy; or then
To credit their own College; or withal
To be accounted sharp and Cynicall;
Or to be great; or to discharge their name
And place least they incur a public shame.
The worthy men, whom no such end attaints,
Shall, if they come to me, become my Saints.
But God forbid their ends should harden us,
To blame the truth, or prove inc^edulous:
We shall a powerful Doctrine best obey,
Not thinking why but what they do display:
Yet I do wish them as a slander by,
Henceforth to learn aright both what and why:
Least seeming zealous, you do make withal
God as a shadow to your secret gall.
It is a thing so common to traduce
The Lawyer, and besprinckle bitter Juice;
That I (before some Preacher does begin)
Dare lay a wager, he will rail and win:
For I have often heard such fuming stuff
Presented to an Audience all in snuff,
That (trust me) I have wondered in my mind,
Whether he spoke before, o^ spoke behind:
And so the Parson spoke (unless I fail)
Who preached of Tobyes dog, that wagd his tail^.
What? shall the sacred learning which aff^ights,
And coniures down the most inhumane sprights,
Be so distracted, with a sudden curse,
That it must raise up spirits, And much worse,
And yet from thence proceed things often good,
As from the fountain of most Heavenly food:
For Scorn it self and Envy must confess
That many, there excel in worthiness:
If Passi^n sometimes did not Zeal condemn,
We should account them Gods, and worship them.
But some in earnest folly over proud,
Most void of matter, will thus talk aloud:
O the most gryping Lawyer who does make
Dissension upon earth; and money ta^e
On this side, and on that side, and does love
His Gold and Money, and dissension; move:
Is not the Lawyers wicked, then I say?
And very wicked brethren? and I pray
Is it not, shameful brethren? Fie for shame
That Lawyers should love money (...) and enfl^me
Their hearts with love of silver, and so leave
Goodness to turn a Lawyer and deceive;
And then like covetous Lawyers -- thus he lay
Out-lawd in breath and knew not what to say.
Let me demand your purpose: do you mean
To cleanse a dish with dish-clouts more unclean?
Resolve me (Poets) you that do bestow,
The most abusiue scorn which man dares know,
Upon the Laws profession: You that take
A pattern by damnations rule to make
The Lawyer seem more hateful; and believe
Hate merits Heaven, which may y^ Lawyer grieve.
I pray resolve me (Poets) do you mean,
To make that rampant and immodest Queen
Your Muse, the Lawyers Mistres? And repair
A place infected with unwholesome air?
What? does a Patient blame Physicians skill,
Because the Apothecary wrongs his bill?
You blame the Lawyers gain, and will not see
How Offices consume the greater see,
For as a Pothecaties bills depend
On the Physician to surcharge his friend;
So, to surcharge the Clyent, Offices
Depend upon a Lawyers business.
Resolve me you divines, whose earnest hate
To Lawyers, makes you practice a d^bote,
Whilst you Si cille Cyn^cus (...) carp^bat homines ^ui pro ^ona (...) sacia
(...), ^t (...) contra samtatem (...). (...): Lib. 6. 268.
declaime against the very sinn^:
I pray resolve me, who has ever been
So fruitles in extreme reproof as you?
Or after long inu^ctiues who did kn^w
So small detraction of the common (...)?
What? do you purpose to amend ou^ life
With bitter malice? can r^uiling (...)
Make Lawyers quiet? O you do amaze
My little brain with wonder: you may please
To see how furious winds do move the seas
And make the Ocean roar; when gentle gales
Add a fair swiftnes to the Merchants sails:
And so does clamorous railing work men's rage
when mild reproof might quicken virtues age.
But you, as many Doctors do, or, can,
Seeming to heal the vice, abhor the Man.
You do pretend with physic rules to cure
The Laws diseases; which might well endure
A potion, (I confess) for you that urge
Might well endure a potion, and a purge:
B^t you pretending wisely to display
The (...) of Lawyers cannot (...) the way:
You know the perfect method to displease;
But neither constitution, nor disease.
You think a Sanguine body, choleric;
And so your potion makes the Lawyer sick:
Lawyers be Sanguine, lively, firm and free:
No marvel then your medcines disagree:
For God himself may this full truth dispearce;
Medcines make sound men froward and perverse.
Admit (which every honest man will say)
That Lawyers do, as all professions, lay
Some part of meaning to increase their state:
And do deserve your Physic, not your hate:
Is therefore the disease so violent
Or they so crazy, that with one consent
You must apply quick medcines all the year?
The Spring and autumn be fit times to clear
A foul gross body: then are they so foul
That all times must the Lawyers art control?
Small physic knowledge may persuade you thus
That things which grow familiar with us
Can have no mighty virtue to prevail:
Though taken seldom, they do never fail.
For neither poisoned sops, nor Opiates can,
Releive, or trouble an accustomed man.
Nor can reproof, enforced with daily care,
Make vicious people better then they are.
You do pretend our health when you reprove;
And we must thank you for your holy love:
But will a pained sick-man safely trust
The physical advice of him, who must
Inherit, when the patient is dead?
You Churchmen know, (and cannot be misled)
That you may claim by gift the next estate
If our laws body did give way to fate.
And therefore all the world may well suspect
Your physic savors of a strange effect.
But all your subtle nips and privy querks
Do prove such poor and vn-preuailing ye^ks,
That you provided have a mastife dog;
Who runs about because he wants his clogge:
But (thanks to wis^dome and our bodies might)
The toothles roaring curre can hardly bite:
I mean your mastiffe Ignoramus now,
Who took his valors breath from only you:
And yet that e^gin of authority,
(which makes the lesser fabric stop and fly)
Might rather be propounded: for conceit
And all upon her lawles pleasure wait.
The world appears most like a Puppet-play,
Wherein the motions, walk, perform and say,
Nothing but what the master will advance;
Though every trick proclaims dull ignorance.
Thus greatness does prevail: what remedy?
Yes, honored Lawyers (whom neglected I
May freely place among the soundest men)
Be still undaunted in your worth and then
Their pitied clamorous malice will prove hoarce
And dumb; while you prefer an honest course.
Vapors be raised and exhalations fly
When the most seruent Sun appears in sky:
Summer and heavenly Sunshine do provoke;
The noisome Fennes to yield an ugly smoke.
which upward mounts, but cannot touch the sun
Although it should above the compass run:
So Lawyers glory (which deserving pains,
Knowledge and study have enriched with gains)
Does move the sordid breath of baser wits
(As does the Sun prevail in muddy pits)
To yield a stinking vapor, not defile
Lawyers with madness, and revenge more vile.
But as the Sun does readily consume
And turn to nothing, the poor vap^ous fume;
So shall the Lawyers bright and purer flame
Of good example, turn contempt to shame.
Mean time (right Lawyers) whom opinion rude
H^th ranked among the baser multitude;
With admiration I salute your peace,
Which has been calm and patient; while the seas
With boystrous fury did assaie to drown
Your dearest hopes, and pull your trophys down
My riper knowledge and experience
Of your most often torturd innocence
So troubles me, that I in serious sort,
Could wisely now forswear to trust report:
My thoughts are all to narrow to disclose
Your manly suffering; which does interpose
The vildest sharp reproof that may be borne:
And so confutes them with a noble scorn.
O I do feel a heart above my power
To save your merits from the fatal shower
Of their detracting spite, and to disclowd
Your virtues lost in the confused crowd
Of headstrong rumor; which your foes invent
To nourish their detracting argument.
This only comforr I will now propound;
Give loosers leave to speak: which is the ground
Of all our foes abusiue speech: for they
Having lost manners and discretion may
Speak boldly and be blameles though they rail
But may their spite increase and matter fail.
Now care and dulnes do my verse bereave:
And so sweet poetry I take my leave.
My greatest follies are already past;
And after noone I shall have breathed my last.
Of High Birth. ESSAY. V.
THINGS curiously Created, differ as much from things begotten, as the first
Man from birth, and artificial bodies from man's issue. Children therefore may
challenge ftom their Parents more prerogative, then workmanship or man's
Invention; for it participates with us in being only, but they in being ours:
for things begotten be originally our own, but things created be ours at the
second hand continually: Else man were two ways excellent, and able to create,
as well as to beget, without pattern or example: but only our Issue is our
own absolute; For man, secluded from the company of men, is by the help of
Nature fit (of himself) for infinite generation, though nothing else: Whereas
truly in matters of Science and manual labor, man, without the help of man,
does nothing. So ignorant he is, and chiefly bound unto imitation, as he
never did nor will, produce that, which depends not on some president: Which
argues the full necessity of being sociable, and mightily condemns these
currish people, who think it all-sufficient, if they can once assume the
pride, to say, they are not any way indebted; or that they be their own
Supporters: And think it the safest friendship to forget Humanity; neglect
Acquaintance; make love an outward Ceremony; nay scarce so much: and never be
offended with a curse so much, as when they must have man's assistance to
restore them.

These are unmindful why man does multeply; Why lawful Marriage was
invented: Or why GOD, tkinking it not enough to work a Union with HVMANITY by
the bond of NATVRE, did also extend affinity to those of another stock; That
INCEST might be vnacted; and by the consequent, that MAN should not engrosse
only the love of his own FAMILY; But seek love among other people that he
might learn more knowledge.

Man therefore thus enabled to produce; it follows by implication that amongst
posterity, some one must have precedence; in which, sons (by consent) have
that Immunity of Eldest: And He, according to usual speech, is called the
Heir Apparent: which is a name so largely taken, as (with it) we imply any
one able to inherit, though not the Eldest. But properly it extends to the
First Begotten, who (in being first) supplies the office of a Substitute to
discharge that which incumbers the Parent; The office of a valiant warrior
likewise, who couets by being first, to take the first charge, give the first
assault, and (above all) to be according to his name, truly forward in the
high Archieuements of honor: so forward, as for any of his Rank to be
before, should be reputed a miserable baseness. It is an observed point of
Nature (among Pliny. (...) Philost^o.
the Ancients) that Elephants, when they pass a river, knowing by peculiar
instinct that their adversaries (for the most part) incou^ter them in the
Rereward, they marshall themselves that the eldest may be first ready to
sustain the violence: which gives a memorable precept to man's Issue, that he
(if eldest) ought rather to protect, then to exceed his inferior kinsfolk;
that, they (because youngest) ought rather to submit, where his good counsel
may assist, then be maligna^t or maintain Faction.

This Theater of man's life, admits degrees of height, in which the eldest is
above the others; and therefore as the Centinell, or Scout (in Atmies) is
vigilant to foresee advantage, and so preserve by diligence when courage of the
rest is little worth: So should superiors in birth be as much provident for
the safety of those, in respect of whom they be superior, as to esteem their
birthright a blessing.

It is therefore no safe conclusion, to say he is the eldest, and so most
excellent; bnt he is the eldest, and therefore should be most excellent: For
in production of the soul it fares otherwise with a man, then with
unreasonable creatures; Among which there needs no better warrant to signify
courage, then the first breed, which signifies the strength of Nature in the
Parents or Breeders. But with Man, (who communicates with a Beast only in
giving outward shape) it is sufficient for him to challenge in his Issue what
himself bestows: As for the Divine Materials of Reason, if sometimes they do
heriditarily succeed to the son of a prudent Father, we may from hence
conclude, that GOD more Nothing so much argues a supreme and infin^te
government of of things, as the diverse event which follows from the same
means and industry.
often dispenses with it, to make man see the true ORIGINAL, rather then Flesh
should challenge any part; or Fathers think they be the sole efficients. For
it is now made a common argument of the SONS folly, if the FATHER be more
then commonly wise. And I am very much persuaded, that this (if nothing else)
may assure the Politician of some supreme disposer who gives warning to his
presumption Nihil dat quod non habet, (...) non habet (...) nam S^ habu^sset
daret. His policies are not his own: For he would then impart the^
haeriditarily to his issue.
through the plague of a foolish Heir; that he may ouer-value himself at his
own peril: seeing he has his own workmanship before his eyes, to argue
against him, and his arrogant couceit. Be it sufficient therefore that cunning
Nature, which principally and commonly works out each natural man's existence
by causes well known, Matter, For me, and Priuatio est (...) ^acuum (...)
principium ^otus: scal: 15. Exerc.
Privation, is not able in things essential, to distribute any parricle
without Divine providence: So the Eldest naturally inherites nothing as by
peculiar claim, but senseless lineaments of body. Howsoever, most convenient
it is, that every one by birth ennobled, either by single priority, or priority
united to noble parentage should seek to accomplish the part of nature undone
in more then complement, civil silence, or common passages; and make the birth
absolute. For Man, a sluggish Creature, (prompt enough to decline after
satietie) seems naturally to be Parts homines sumus non homines. Scal: de sub.
unfurnished, that he might not be vnbusied. So nature has left much
imperfect, to intimate by the vacant absence of some things needful, that man's
labor should make things useful. Nature affoords timber, but workmanship the
structure: the earth produces Ore, but Art the Silver: Nature gives plants,
Knowledge the use: Among all which she does require a more ample and less
supplement, according to the value, raritie or estimation of the thing. For
Chymicks know, the more precious metals ask more pains in extraction of the
true quintessence, then baser Minerals: Gold is the seventh time purified, and
then becomes beautiful: besides the quality of things more precious, ought
still to be made answerable to the things value. Courageous horses be managed
with curiosity: delicate voices be selected to learn harmonies, whilst harsh
and strong voyc'd cryers be ridiculous. Diamonds, not glass, become pure
metal, and rich garments have much costly appearance. High bloods likewise be
the fittest receptacles for high actions; but if a sackecloth be embroydred,
the adiunct may deserve honor, though the groundwork be Plebe^an: and men of
vp-start Parentage may, in respect of brain, take place before Nobility,
though their persons be odious. Our selves and parents, or instructors, be the
secondary causes which protract or abreuiate, enrich or impouerish, our own
destinies. For either we are driven with fatal obstinacy; to ouer-take
fortune through a self-will; else, by the negligence of education, or being
not seasoned in minority, our stupid dullness gives Fortune leave to over take
us through want of providence. High birth is so far from privilege to exempt
any from these, as it approaches near to misery, when shame is vnpreuented;
and makes destiny notorious.

I know no difference therefore betwixt the degrees of Fortune, if Birth alone
makes the comparison. For which is more predomina^t, if one of obscur^ fortune
becomes public by meritts, returning to his first rank if he transgress; or
if one descended Nobly, does but deserve himself, and family, through great
engageme^ts, being ready to desce^d below himself if he miscarry: and be as
public in disgrace, as vpstarts in applause? For this Age of Innovation is
fitter to behold one swimming to a remote shore, the^ to consider how happily
the inhabitants be there delighted: fitter I mean, to see new actions, and
active spirits proceeding, then the maintenance of honor proceeded: and fitter
to behold one falling from a rock, then from a stumbling mole hill. So that if
Noblemen advanced, co^ti^ue so; and ambitious Ge^try, nay or baseness, do
aspire and thrive, I see no difference: if ruin thre^tens both, the last
transcends in outward happiness.

The best similitude which makes diversity, reaches but thus far: I see an
embroydred empty purse, and stoop to view it narrowly, because the outside
glisters: I spurn a greasy (...) before me, and hear the sound of silver: I
take both, keep both, and will esteem the coin above the empty purse, and yet
prefer the outsides a lone not both alike; because the one is capable and
beauteous already, the other does contain already, but can ^euer be beauteous:
No more then vpstarts, though renowned in meritts, can ever t^ke Nobility of
Birth: beause it will demand succession to con^irme antiquity.

So that enobled fortunes (being an outward beauty) shall but make me more
willing (as an embroydred purse^ to see their in-sides; not to enlarge their
value: when as perhaps one basely obscure, shall more purchase my reverence,
though less attract my labor to discover him.

As for the chief ornaments which qualify great parentage, they should be
such a^ make most in the advancement of a Common wealth: which be the
maintenance of public Laws and Justice; they being the honor of a
commonwealth. And well does it (...) that highness makes laws flourish. For
seeing Laws receive their lives from the concordance of Nobility; it must (by
good conjecture) follow, that strength of law (which is a just proceeding)
would, through the countenance of Nobility, receive more credit and reverence.
But oftentimes advancement is so ill bestowed, that eitherit makes men's
disposition worse; or nothing better. As we read of meats dressd among the
African Kings, (and namely by Mulleasses King of Algier,) which meats were
made infinite costly with perfumes, but neither toothsome nor wholesome: And
such perfumed Peacocks, be worthles men dignified. Though sometimes the visible
dignity of persons, does attract sluggish or obstinate beholders with unanimity
or terror.

Thus ignorant men (unacquainted with our state of ques^ion) will often wish
within themselves, That a Dunce or Coward may prevail before the Combat,
because they incline more to the reputation of his posture, fame, or person,
then to his fellows: which love does (notwithstanding) sometimes vanish into
fear, adoration, or a reverend conceit. The very name of Crumwell was able to
disseuer insurrections; so much was he credited with an opinion of sincere
gravity. And it may almost seem a positive truth, that noble and heroycall
spirits are at the first sight trusted with men's best opinions: It is needful
therefore that the merits of a noble birth, should be rewarded sooner, (though
they be less worthy) then of a new proficient* because greatness claims duty
to their persons as well as to their merits. But there is nothing more allied
to faction then for a greatbegotten to prevail in government before his time;
or to attain the greatest ^ignities before he knows their meaning. Such
undeserved honors are of Appi^n noted with a mutinous badge, and a contempt of
public orders: (for says he) when S^lla was dictator, he confirmed this Law
to strengthen his division, that those who did in his desence partake with him,
should be entitled to the state and dignities before their time. To be a man
generally famous, does oftentimes dispense with comeliness of personage, and
purchases full applauded success in every dispatch under the pattent, of
having been generally commended. That many*fold * historian has ob^ (...)
Maximus.
a profitable way which makes the sons of honor famous.

(...) literarum monum^nta,
Ad^uta militaris (...),
Aucta senatorum (...),
(...) illus^rem (...).
To beautify and enrich learning, to nou^ish and help warsknowledge, to
multiply and to advance the power of Magistrates, have made an vpstart (much
more the sons of honor) famous. But if popular fam^ be not gracious, then
ornaments of body, comeliness, and behavior, must be concomitant with
High-birth to relish their employments and beget opinion. For single birth,
without additions, is no general to command an Army, or to (...) with
multitudes: which (in order of reason) should be a Noble and generous intention
because birth is sooner capable of respect only, then base agents.

By this caution therefore did Rosinus. lib: 2. Angelius: lib. 5. c: 13.
the Noblest Romans apply themselves to take the patronage of Plebeians;
accounting it the most honorable entrance, to employ their efficacy of birth,
by the protection of poor Clients, or otherwise illiterate Citizens: The
frequencie of which custom made Nobility famous. High-birth is reasonably to
be commended if it can escape dishonor, though it come short of honor: if it be
made no License for oppression; although it scantly does relieve oppression. But
vices in any kind fastening upon authority, and great persons be most
dangerous: for though they be persuaded to forsake them; yet certain Sinkes
and gutters, (as in great Cities) be still waiting upon bloods of honor:
followers I mean, who be ready to wear the Lord and masters vices for a
special cognizance or favor: and so convey absurdities and humors oftentimes
down from the head into the feet and body. It is an excellent sign of man's
participation with divinity, to discern and judge of nature. This therefore
should be the singular part of instruction among Noble pupils, and all that
would become proficents, to rectify, allay, and augment nature: which cannot
be by a restraint, but by giving free liberty to enjoy all, that so the worst
may be removed: For when we say, Natura currit, we must conceive, Nature has
tasted: for Ignoti nulla cupido. And by the consequent, whilst we dote upon
things absent, our inclination is discovered.

From hence therefore did ^hrma know (...) lou^d the Image of his Satyr,
because when he heard his house was burnt, he asked only if the Sa^yre were
safe: So when we have once enjoyed, and now lack our custom, desire will be
manifest.

It is not therefore wisdom to correct the natures of any, much less of Noble
ones, by keeping them in covert from the worlds e^e, unless they be appointed
for a Monastery For that which we cannot d^e, because we know not, we dare
do freely when we are acquainted. But Nature being discovered, by having
once enjoyed, years will then easily admit a contrariety. And as Wormwood,
rubbed upon the nipple of a Nurses Teate, (...) the ^hilde; so thy detestation,
or continual inuectiue against that vice which thou would abolish in
another, makes it unsavory, sooner then rage or violenc^. For th^se be able to
make him, not abandon the vice, because he abhorres thee; and in despite will
keep it, (...) eye service: whereas (...) being ^ared for its own sake,
((...) is deforme^) the (...) of this (...) may be still beloved.

Vicious men may, without question, be entertained by Princes, and give much
morallitie: provided always, that apprehensiue natures be near hand, to make
applications. For Then as an Apes heart (it self being a most timorous
Creature) being well applied, be^ courage in the patient: So Cowards, Epicures,
and blasphemous persons, may (by good compositions) produce Valiancie,
Abstinence, and Humility in Princes: but poisons be a dangerous physic,
without skillful professors. It is the happiness of some natures to need less
instruction: And amongst all instructions we must be guided by the natures
aptnes some being prouokd most by reading, some by persuasion, some by
reproof, others by company. As in a Fenceschoole, some profit by resolution
wholly, some by rules, some by disdain to be offended, some by seeing others.

Indeed the study to discern Nature in Noble persons, should be equivalent to
their own disquisition of nature in others; for seeing they ought by
superintendence to ouerlooke man, they should be perfect in the Character of
Man: bearing their best Library about them. But vices punishable in a private
man, may have a little tolleration in great persons; because he (having no such
temptations) has advantage in observing a strict honest course: It being the
near temtation of bad dealing in every man, and most especially in great ones
to have a power to commit and to conceal a mischief: they may commit much: it
will not be denied: and if their wisdoms (...), they may conceal more the^
others: The chiefest means they have to conceal, is to (...) against the
crime they honor: By which means, Rosinus.
Seruius Sulpitius Tribune of the people having framed a Law that none among
the Senators should run in debt above a thousand Drachmaes, thought it a safe
License for himself to exceed the quantity: and therefore was he found in
debt, after his death, above three hundred Myriads; amounting to three hundred
times ten thousand Drachmaes. The total duty of men greatly-noble is by the
Laconian Ages^aus.
Prince delivered in two precepts; the knowle^ge to command the knowledge to
submit.

They should represent the Lion, who is noted (above all) to carry a most
valiant head, and a Maiesticke countenance: imita^ing the apparent and
invisible potencie of high spirits.

Besides (that I may continue this Mythologie) the ^ecke of a Lion has no
joints; whereby he cannot look backwards, unless he turns his body: Neither
can Princes, without scandal to their integrity, seem one thing, and do
another; not turn there faces upon virtue, and yet be fugitive in their motion.

The back of Lions carries a magnanimous breadth: And all the noble deeds of
Ancestors, historical examples of Monarchs, with infinite renowned precepts of
former ages, make but one broad backe-president, to strengthen the wisdom of
Princes. The bones of a Lion have less marrow then others; for lascivious
fuel ^iminisheth valor. The want ot pith there fore makes Oak more durable
then Eldar; and contempt of wantonness moves Princes to a more settled
resolution. Lions have an exquisite property to smell out their own
advantage: For it is reported, the male knows when the Lioness has been
adulterous with the Panther, by a peculiar sense of smelling: And the wisest
part of men worthily descended, is to betray their own abuses; for men of this
rank are incident to strong delusions. A Lion sleeps and yet his eyes are
open: So provident high Statesmen, that possess much, cannot have eyes too
many, or too watchful: Neither may absolute man incur security. When Lions
devour, famine does enforce them; And when Kings take the sword, a zealous
appetite, to satisfy forgotten virtue, should provoke them. Neither may
generous Natures be nobly offended, except, as by an impulsive, or sufficient
cause, they overcome; So by a Heroyicke scorn to malice, they can both
swallowe and digest the cause with the conquest. Howsoever it may be
fictitiously reported, that Lions have (by a miraculous feeling) been
defensive to condemned Martyrs; yet may the observation afford thus much
morality: That, as a true Noble man may by no means receive a more excellent
moderation of spirit, and, spur, to greatly-good actions then by a religious
fear; so cannot this be any way expressed better (himself being so eminent)
then in protection of Divine Justice, and good men's causes. It is admirable (if
true) to see how generously Lions have scorned to be base debtors: Insomuch
that it is memorably reported; How Androcles a vagabond captive, cured a Lions
paw; In gratification whereof, the Lion afterward (when Androcles was among
the Roman Spectacles to be devoured) spares, and protects him against a
Rampant Pardall: Which carries a double precept for generous natures* First, a
preseruitiue against ingratitude, where followers have been serviceable; Then
a contempt to be a slavish debtor (if means can avoid it) especially to
base-minded Trades men; who upon single debts enforce a double engagement: Both
of credit and restitution: For if you remain in their books for a commodity,
you must remain likewise in their favor to avoid scandal, reiterations, and
commemora tions among all societies. Such is the common treacherous b^senes of
their conditions, though they protest otherwise: Which may exhort any Noble
mind to believe this Maxim true; He has discharged half his reputation
among men, that scorns the cr^dite of a Citizen, or indeed any man. Another
singular note is fi^ed upon this magnanimous beast above written; his wrath
extends no further then the prouocatio^. And therefore when the Arabian
Soldier, charging a Lion with his Spear, was disapointed of the object, and
ouer-threw himself with violence; The Lion returned, and only nipping his
head little (for his presumption) departed quietly. This being confirmed with
many famous examples, I may infer thus much. If it may seem convenient or
honorable for Nobility offended, to punish, not respecting penitent submissio^
(which may without high offenses seem tyrannical) yet if the punishment exceed
the crime, we may confidently account it beastial, and worse. Again it is
notably remembered, that Lions never run away, except they can privately
withdraw, (being overcome with multitude) into a secure Mountain, or
Wilderness. And I observe that it ill becoms a brave resolution, to enter
himself among proiects, from which he must necessarily recoyle, except he
carries a cautelous eye, and true circumspection. Lastly, I may conclude this
moralized comparison with Aesops controversy betwixt a Lioness and the Fox:
The Fox co^mends her own fruitful generation, seeming to disgrace the Lions
single birth: to which this answer does reioyne: I bring forth one, and yet
that one is a Lion: Which good allusion may remove the curse which some would
cast upon Nobility, because often their children in number be inferior to
common prostitutes: But I am well resolved, that the multitude of children
reares up an obscure family, and bringes an ancient stock to ruin: For among
many base childrens blessings, birth may make variety of fortunes: But among
much Noble posterity, Fortune does challenge a more vaste partition; and makes
a discontented Heir fit for all innouating purposes; So that one Noble
remainder of much antiquity, or one true Lion of a family (if Art and Nature
can be made operative) will be a more safe prop to succession, then the
doubtful variety of children. Men observe it as an infallible rule, that there
have been as many base originals, as there have been honorable descents. For,
as questionless the largest Ri uers be derived from lowely Springs; So birth
and succession have been so basely intermingled, so casually interrupted so
frequently impaired, and very often attainted (though with absolution) that I
may well justify the first principle, and add further: That generally, to
maintain the noble estate of dead Ancestors, requires as much true policy, as
to erect a new Family. For men may clime better by troublesome, rough, and
dangerous passages, then stand tottering upon the eminent spi^e. But to exceed
the pattern of heroicke Ancestry, deserves perpetual commendations. Which
purpose cannot prosper well, except they prevent or avoid oppositions: They
having been the ouer-throw of Kingdoms, and flourishing Captains; because
prosperity is waspish, and brooks no competition, nor almost assistance. The
Plutarch.
Historian therefore says well: None more deaf to counsel then natures
vnthwarted: None more obtemperate to be counseled, then men destitute. As for
that ambitious ecstasy, which makes men indirectly consult of new addition; the
Fable does condemn it wisely: For like Esops Dog, they snatch at shadows, and
loose the certainty, who dote upon such covetous desires. Ambition being like
Amilcars dream: Who at Valerius (...).
the seige of Siracusa was by a Dream persuaded that he should supp that
night in Siracusa: which he interpreting on victories behalf, would not
remove the seige: At length by an excursion he was taken prisoner: which
verified his dream: For he did sup in Siracusa but, as a captive: Ambition
also makes men dream they shall be safely guarded in their proiects: But they
then little dreaming to be guarded otherwise the^ Princes: do verify their
dreams by being safely guarded as prisoners. Or Ambition is like the Phrigian
River historified by Fenestella: Fenest: lib: de Sacer: Rom^e: 1^.
Which water procured Frenzy as desertlesse longing after glory begetts a
senseless dotage.

Presumption also, and Popularitie, be two treacherous co^federates: The first
was never good when a Kings favor was the object: so long as Mines and
Countermines have been the Court-deuises. The last will never be good: So long
as people do but conduct their favorites to the Scaffold, and cry Alas, it is
pity: but who can help it? The first cannot thrive, because offenses with
Kings outweigh merits: The^ how distracted a thing is it, to preserve
adua^cement? security, destroys men sleeping, while they deserve no
punishment, but only because no reward: And policy destroys men waking: It
does consume our lives in iealousies and multitude of fears: which threaten
the most pollitick and highly favored. Popularity is likewise mortal, because
it breeds a surfeit of one dish: nothing but Fame: served in (like Turkish Rice)
by infinite wayters. And shall we wonder if it choakes him, when he deuoures
all* Besides, history has told us that there is eminent Tacius.
danger in the refusal of a Crown: Meaning (as I conceive it) that Statesmen
may be thought too much worthy? and that there is danger in being thought
worthy of a Kingdom where others have more title. The best love therefore that
can be bestowed upon the people, or the best friendship that you can receive
from them, is to suffer them in things indifferent, or not to show a currish
severity: For (like the Hungarian Heyducks) their wrath is prone to mischief,
and their amity is worth nothing in a time of peace: so that indeed to flatter
with them and not regard them, is a sound proposition: For if Coriolanus
contemnes their authority, they can abhor his name, and banish his person: or
at least banish him from prevailing in public assistance. My rule for
popularity, is, that according to the constitution of the party so affected, it
may be nourishment or poison: If he be sound in his affections meaning Gods
honor; applause and popularity conuerts to his encouragement: If ambitious or
selfe-pleasing, it turns to a most harmefull dotage. The safest course (that I
can be acquainted with) to confirm and preserve dignities with good approuall;
is to be immutable, honest, and no reported Politician: For the very name
contains (among general conceits) much powder treason, Atheism, curses of
inferiors, and condemnations of all, except their close minions. An other thing
that does breifely replenish a noble Spirit must be more example, dispatch or
quick perfect motion, then precepts or doctrines: These being the frequent
object, of painful Artists, the other being a Rhetorical inducement to
establish the delight of action: In which nothing draws greater efficacy,
then speediness and fortunate event; though both these rely much upon a
contriuing faculty, which is begotten by a frequent practice. And therefore it
betokens a sluggish fear, and private weakness, when we are loath to
enterprise: For a courageous mind gets perfection through quick desire, above
many men's longer custom: but when appetite fails I perceive no stomach of
Nobility. It may seem somewhat conrrouersiall, whether state-knowledge, or
militant resolutions be more graceful to generositie; And questionless, I
conceive few Roman Senators, or not any (except Cicero) were insufficient to
lead an Army, as well as to deliver an opinion in the Councellchamber: both be
so unseparably annexed, as we may hardly think he aduises the Commonwealth
lovingly, who is afraid to justify the Commonwealths quarrel; when himself
adiudges it lawful. The pomp or magnificence of mighty persons, may now
become a festival day better then common policy: for this age does not so
soon conclude the royal mind, as the fantastic humor, by expense of
needless bravery; accompting that rather magnificence, when we expend our own
about the Kingdoms glory: which by reflexe produces an apparent love, and
fear toward such active spirits. For all men reverence him truly, who is
impartial, and industrious to advance equity, or to confirm goodness with
goodness among all. And howsoever the full stomachs of men will hardly suffer
them to commend such worthy ones alive; yet have their deaths been always
deplorable. whereas polliticke brains with false bottomes, have found a
public curse, which was before restrained with authority. Tacitus gives an
excellent praecept touching the report of Princes lives when they be dead; and
says they raild upon their Emperor Vitellius being dead, whom being alive
they flattred: and yet presently he does annex; The bounty and plain meaning
of Vitellius were his ruin: Both which may seem a riddle: for bounty and
honest meaning be two preservatives for honor: But then he gives a most
lawful reason, because they were not handled with discretion. In a word good
ornaments accomplish great persons: and good ornaments are as a sweet ointment:
now if ointments be powered upon the feet, the savor goes upward into the
nostrill (as Diogines noted) but being rubbed upon our head the vapor
vanishes: and so it often falls out that fruits of knowledge ascend vpwardes
from men of base condition to the nostrills of Princes: whereas the savor and
profit of their own studies dies before them: but ointment powered and not
rubbed upon ou^ head runs down about the garments; and plenty of knowledge in
great perpersons imparts it self to others. I dare not become an Instructo; it
appertains to found Professors: Neither can I reprove; it may incur the
name of Malapert. I labor only, to prove by a persuading reason; Plutarch in
vita A^ at v^ labor et industria (...) culpa^, etc.
which is nothing burbare counsel. As for Nobility, if it bear the name of
Legitimate, it will bear a contempt also (with Agesilaus) to be reproved, when
pains may happily discharge their function. Neither at any time shall high
births aspire to hazardous downfalls, if they ^heophrastus.
esteem honor as the reward of v^rtue, no virtue in it self. And virtue to
men truly Noble is most welcome when it is most difficult; not where necessity
does make a virtue, but where they can do otherwise and will not: for I
account it a sign much nobler when we neglect virtue because we are compelled,
and have not license to meet disadvantage; then if we fear some greater
disadvantage By not being virtuous, and ^o by a compulsion prove virtuous: As I
account him a more virtuously sublimed spirit, who having little means and
poor estate exceeds his compass, only for this reason, because he cannot be
abstinent in abundance, then him who fearing poverty, discredit or il-name
affects parsimony. For I suppose it a more safe position to say; I cannot be
the greatest and therefore will be nothing virtuous, then, I will be a little
virtuous in action, but will have virtuous meaning.

Of Disinheritance. Essay. VI.
IT is more impossible for an unnatural Father to be a true friend, then for
an abused son, to be an obedient son: because I think it is a sound
precept; That he whose disposition finds a soone-moued contrariety betwixt
himself and his undoubted children, must (of necessity) be a man who refuses
all men, except advantage pleades for them; Seeing he neglects those, for whom
nature pleades, if advantage be absent. The same may be inferred concerning all
degenerate kinsfolk, though in a less degree. But for the first I have
observed it generally; that he who was apt for Disinheritance, has been a man
always of as many affections, as there be faces: And as prompt to refuse any,
as to receive any, if he might save by the bargain. Howsoever sub^ects be now
grown so tyrannical, that where pretenses may accomplish their malice, they
cannot think there is a God, or, at least, they think God favors their
proceedings. For calumnious pretenses, and aggrauated trifles have been the
common gloss of Parents cruelty in this kind: Their president is vulgar: for
tyrants never slew without state-Alchimy, or multiplicatio^ of pretended
treasons: neither may Alexander lack occasion, so long as he had a meaning to
kill (...). The hungry Woolfe may call the Lamb his debtor, but a good stomach
is the day of payment, and the Proverb is well verified: Facile est invenire
baculum quo cedas canem.
If thou would beat a Dog here is a staff. So that although churlish
Parents pretend just causes of disinheritance, yet these are quickly found,
soon allowed, and as soon amplyfied. From whence you may gather, that no
spark of natural affection but only a compulsiue maintenance, keeps the
reference betwixt such Parents, and such children. For loving nature and
affection be tractable, of long forbearance, much pity, manifest care; and
keep an established form of affability, with which friends or kinsfolk be
unacquainted: This prouokes an eminent reflexe of love; whereas rough carriage
begets love in Curres, but a conremptible scorn in Noble Spirits. In a
milk-white table, one blot is more visible, then forty in a brown paper: And
in a continued loving usage, one reproof is more preuaileable then fifty in a
usual crabbednes. For common noyses go not beyond our ears; but a sudden
clamor startles the whole man. It is therefore more commendable to follow the
extreme of virtue abounding, then defective: The first partakes with
mediocritie in the nature: but the last is altogether opposite. We may then
more safely allow indulgence, then austerity: because it approaches nearer to
true love. For though indulgence has made children lofty in behavior toward
others, yet (I observe) it breeds a true and vndiuorced affection toward the
original cause. It is therefore an excellent rule, for children, to be any
way restrained without the Parents knowledge, or at least their taking notice:
whereby Nature cannot grudge against Nature, nor yet want reprehension For
howsoever Marcus Cato said well: That he had rather be unrewarded for doing
well, then unpunished for offenses: Yet we have naturally a secret spleen
against the Judge, though we account him righteous and impartial. It must be
expected then, that children do know a difference betwixt Fathers and
Masters; which makes them the more implacable, when they see Nature
impartial. From hence Sertorius, a politic Captain, would not himself
repress the disobedience of his Soldiers; least, howsoever they deserved ill,
yet his correction might take away their loving duty: Which respect made him
suffer the enemies incursions, rather to scourge their insolence, whilst they,
out of a hare-brained lunacie desire battle. And thus the sacred decree of
Correction may be kept inviolate, and the love of children unblemished. For I
am unanswerably persuaded, that Parents wrath diminishes the childs love,
making him servile or else refractory to the doctrine of themselves and others;
because they cannot undertake with delight, so long as frowns and fear be
crept into their fancy. But affable Parents beget truly affectionate Children,
who may endure another man's reproof to mittigate the name of Cockney, and yet
lovingly adore the Father because he was always loving. So then the Fathers
diligent love, and a Tutors modest instruction, may make a seldome-seene Heir
affect his Fathers life without hypocrisy, and prove a venerable wise man.
Without which love apparent, or oftentimes indulgence, I see an eldest son,
in stead of the Fathers blessing, render back sweating curses. I see another
inclining only to the mother; and a third, slip into the disinherited
Fortune.

The comaedian therefore says Terentius. In ^aeauton.
well touching a fathers duty: I ouer-passe expenses, I call not every thing
to a strict account; and that which other sons labor to keep secret, I do
not bitterly condemn in mine, least many things should ^ee concealed; for he
that (through a ^ugged usage) depriues his father (by false excuses) of a
youthful error, will soon deceive others. Indeed mistrust makes children
disobedient: for I do make it a most equal question; whether more men have
deceived others because they have been distrusted; or whether more men have
distrusted others because they have been deceived? It is more auailable then,
to govern by liberality, not base compulsion: for he that thus becomes
obedient, expects only till he may wan^ the witness of his actions. But the
comicall Poet says truly; Patres aequum esse censent nos iam iam a
puerisillico nasci senes. Now for the danger arising by parents unkindness
(it having been propounded, that want of love breeds disinheritance) I will
demonstrate, first how horrible, second vnlaw^ull, and third impossible,
disinheritance may be well accounted. The divorce of marriage is a weighty case,
much forbidden, much controuerted; because marriage it self is made a strict
union; so far, as Husbands seem incorporate with their Wives, being both to
be taken as one flesh. But this union admits many exceptions; neither may any
think their being made one, extends further, then the rhetorical aggrauation
of unity; to insinuate how difficult a thing Divorce will be betwixt two, so
narrowly united: but children have a more exquisite property of indiuorceable;
because they really partake with parents by existence: deriuing a particular
and true strength of body from the parents body. And therefore it seems the
matter of disinheritance is a thing so odious, as (being held improbable to be
acted among the Jews, or any Nation) no Law of Scripture contradicts it.
Indeed rebellious sons are by the verdict of Divine iniunction, to suffer
death, if they shall strike the parents, or rise up against them: But for the
matter of Disinheritance (which far transcends the punishment of death) I
have read no syllable that may give the tolleration of Divinity. Death indeed,
co^paratiuely respected, may be thought the best wages of a rebellious son: for
the act includes his full sentence; because to smite his parent, is to seek the
destruction of his efficient cause: which act keeps within it so much
ingratitude, as heavenly Justice can do no less then remove him who seeks to
remove his begetter; it being an inseparable part of holiness, to pay
offenders with their own coin. But disinheritance so much exceeds death, as it
approches to a continued torment. Death is so far from misery, where men
expiate offenses, as it affoords felicity* because it gives a present
satisfaction, and a present hope to enjoy a good portion; if penitence, and a
satisfactorie mind be companions. But disinheritance, or abdication, does not
only enforce death, but makes the circumstance tyrannical.

A violent death is but an abridgement of nature; but disinheritance does often
bring a violent death, and enlarge the wickedness of nature. I see no
difference betwixt them in the conclusion: for death is an effect commonly of
disinheritance; but no death more excludes all humanity. the case is palpable.
I give directions to a traveler: he arrogantly contemnes my counsel; which
does so much provoke me, as (to amend the matter) I draw him by compulsion to
an apparent ambush; in which, after many sustained a buses, horrible vexations,
and desperate encounters, he concludes his life with infamy; or perhaps
blasphemy. So, currish and cruel parents, by disinheritance deal every way
answerable to this similitude. The horror of which Athisme is the more
amplified, by so much as natural affinity claims a more humane president
then strangers. Banishment or abiuration is tolerable: for it takes original
by public decree, superior counsel, and authority of those, from whom I can
challenge nothing but justice: whereas disinheritance, a National banishment
(transcending foreign exile in the Cause and Manner) proceeds from private
occurrences, that cannot reach so high an affliction; because the nature of it
is equal to, nay above, public justice. Our law has prouidently disliked
the dealing: for it appears by Glanuile chief justice in the reign of Henry
the Second, Lib. 7. Cap. 2. fol. 44. That if a man had lands descended to him,
and (having many sons) desired to bestow some portion of it on some of the
younger; this could not be accomplished without his elder sons agreement: only
for this reason, says Glanutle, that the ^ather (who did oftentimes most doa^e
upon the you^ger sons) should not disinherit his eldest. Now it may well be
esteemed inhumane, when parents punish with rigor, where the Law condemns
not, because in every offense highly punishable, the Law is open: if that
condemns, the Parents love may a little be excused, though he does not excuse
his sons accu^ation; but where himself exceedes the Laws rigor, when the
Law is silent, and becomes Accuser, Judge, and Executioner, we may discover a
damnable flintie heart; apt enough for massacre; seeing he first plays the
tyrant with his own image.

Parents therefore cannot argue and say (except Disinheritance) they have no
remedy for disobedience; seeing there is no crime that may deserve so great
satisfaction, but the Law is all-sufficient to render Justice and save them
vnpreiudiced in the aspersion of Unnatural: which title Disinheritance, draws
with it inseperate. For if we take a view of those impulsive causes which breed
occasion; we shall perceive how accessory Parents be to all their childrens
vices; and by the consequent, how culpable they are to punish that so strictly,
of which themselves be Authors. Shall the best man living suppose himself an
author of things simply good, though in the strength of wisdom, religion and
thoughts, rectified, he does perform them? And shall we not then say, that, a
Father is the impote^t cause of error, when he cannot perform a work of
goodness in his own-begotten, or why shall any man expect things differing from
his end? and by the consequent, why shall any man expect virtuous children? for
if the wisest and religious man could be examined, I know he would confess,
that either Lust or a vainglory, or both together have inter-mixt themselves
with his most pious end of generation: so that if children have any goodness,
they cannot thank their parents as the authors: But if they do abound with
mischief they may thank their parents chiefly. Is it not therefore a strict
dealing when parents will not recompense an injury, by a forgiveness of that
corruption which they themselves imparted? Setting aside the position which
makes Children participate with Parents in vices liable to constitution, we may
(without these) demonstrate, how guilty they are of each notorious crime in
Children, through a pouertye of rectified education. ^or as, in natural
productions, nothing is so absurd, from which Art cannot extract a deer
quintessence; so among natural men, and the conditions of humanity, nothing
is so irregular, from which elaborate and true instructiue method cannot
produce a Divine excellence. Indeed the disquisition of natures is difficult
and much politic labor belongs to the true si^ting of a perverse
disposition. But questionless, the worst natured among all bad men, are, by a
true seasoning of minority, a wise progress, or institution of ripe years,
and an alluring motive of practices well commended; they are capable of
goodness, subdued in mischief, and apprehensiue in a sufficient measure. So
that we must not ignorantly impute the curse of Children to a wrong cause,
seeing it is either the curse of the Parents; not to instruct children at all;
not sufficiently; or not in the true manner. Examples are infinite: Alc^hiades
may include all. He, a voluptuous and sensual Swaggerer, could never be
reclaimed by many strong experiments; till coming by chance to the
Philosophical Lecture of Socrates, he was suddenly converted: such a
sympathy there was betwixt this Philosophers doctrine, and the Disciples
attention; whereas twenty others might perhaps have been frustrate in the
same conversion, though their Precepts had been equal, because there is an
invisible concordance to make them aequiualent.

Which manner of instruction, respecting the quality and person, of method and
Tutors, be matters only appertaining to the Parents charge. Now (if a curse
imposed upon them, be a hinderance to them both, whereby they neither can be
provided of true Instructors or instructions) Shall we accuse the Child as an
Author of the Fathers curse, or the Fathers curse now being, as an original of
the childs future inconveniences?

This being concluded, we may well infer, concerning disinheritance, that
parents cur'ses be the only causes which provoke it (seeing they might
sometimes, but do not, and do not sometimes because they cannot, ingraft
goodness, by their own ignorance) and being so they resemble Heliogabalus, who
having procured his friends drunkenness, would cast the miserable wretches among
tame Bears and Lions, to terrify them when they awaked. But herein they
differ: he was the voluntary cause of his Friends; Parents, the unadvised
cause of their Childrens error: In stead of which mitigatio^, he threw his
friends among tame Bears and Lions: Parents, by disinheritance, throw their
issue amongst rampant Wolves. For besides the perplexed infamy, and sorrowful
perturbatio^s of such excluded Cast-awayes, what shall we conjecture touching
their desperate resolution? Or how shall we condemn, if they be suddenly
overthrown by the full necessity of destruction? Seeing their destitute
fortune inuites them to embrace each glistering temptation, and to shake hands
with calamity. I cannot (for mine own part) comprehend all this without
remembrance and pity of such Parents rnines; seeing they cannot discharge all,
before children have incurred destruction without them. Nothing is written
which does not amplify our instruction (says Divinity) and nothing amongst
all is more effectual then true Observations, except Divinity. Most ingeneous
therefore and full of persuasion, may that Morality be, soon collected from
insensible creatures: They have an excellent and singular love (each creature
in his kind) to nourish up their weak little ones. The hunted Lioness dryues
her whelps before. The pregnant Bear forsakes not her den until she be
delivered; neither do the whelps come forth until they can escape danger.
The Snake swallows her young, if any disadvantage happens. And above all, most
admirable is natures ingenuity, touching that foreign creature, called Su;
which (being persecuted) shuts up her Cubbes in a depending scrip, and so
protects them from the Huntsman. The multitude of examples would be tedious.
^riefly therefore, it is an observed note among them; they never forsake their
infantry till it be able every way like themselves) to prevent mischief. This
may rebuke all hasty-minded Parents, who (notwithstanding the discursiue light
of reason) can cast off mere Humanity, and go beneath a brutish goodness of
Nature, not only to forsake, but to abhor their issue; and leave them
destitute, before they be any way enabled to su stain nature. For children
be indeed thus rejected ever, because they be unable. Might it be so imagined,
that our posterity (like beastial generation) could, when they be at full
growth, require no houses but the veil of Heaven; no nourishment but the next
pasture; no clothing but the Robes of nature, no supportation against misery,
but instinct, and dullness, then Parents might forsake and prove unblameable:
But excellency and sweet composure, demand in us a more respected fortune.
Omitting these indifferent allegations, which some may account Sophistry,
rather then sound precept, because they believe nothing but what Scripture
makes apparent; nor that can be accepted among them, unless no Christian
contradicts it; neither can that which all acknowledge, win oftentimes any more
then weak belief: It shall be therefore sufficient to confute this error in
question, by the soundest proof, and then the unbelief of Humorists will
serve to multiply their condemnations.

We cannot (where things be left untouched in Scripture) assume a safer
pattern then the most absolute quallities of our Maker. First then, that
Metaphorical affinity, of Father and Son, which himself has pleased to
entertain betwixt Himself and his Elected, may serve to instruct Parents
(without question) in all degrees of duty, and inseparate relation.

Now all agree upon this principle, that whomsoever God has once loved, him
he has loved (...) de libe^tate he m^: pag^ 415. (...) quando semell access^
runt ad (...) Sanctorum d^ficere (...) them aliqu^ do poss^nsed (...) totaliter
and sin a ^er. (...) meas nemo ^cte manu me^. Ioh. 10 28.
everlastingly. It is impossible therefore, if at any time there has been
Amity bttwixt Father and Son, that this (being observed) it should fall away
to disinherita^ce. For if Gods Majesty descend so low, as to continue his
love always where He has begun to Love: shall not imitation hereof be
requisite in fathers, who be commanded to love their children, and in whom
nature exacts more proportion, then in the least degree can be imagined betwixt
holiness and fr^ilty? each circumstance appears so manifest, as I know not
how Sophisters can colourably distinguish. A second instance may confirm this
president. God never has forsaken the most wicked Reprobates, till they have
voluntarily forsaken him first: The prodigal demanded his portion, left his
father, and yet the father willingly accepts him being converted. This becomes
far opposite to the practice of our age: so violent is the humor of
disinheriting parents, as they forget common charity, and refuse love with an
extreme scorn of reconcilement. As for the pretended causes which commonly
provoke parents, I cannot any way cuniecture, that they be either half so
infinite, or in the least degree so terrible, as those with which all parents
provoke Omnipotence and therefore I cannot well see how such fathers can claim
the petition of forgiveness, when they cannot forgive their own issue. The
heir of a Kingdom entitles himself not more justly to his Crown, then
eldest sons do to their homely inheritance. Now I observe, that whersoeuer has
been a succeeding government, there, weake-braind, ryotous, tyrannical, and
lewd Princes, have been admitted to their dignities without contradiction. And
does not the blood of common heirs answer to a Kings privilege, in the Title
of Legitimate? Why then shall we not be provoked with such injustice? If
children should receive no more then they deserve: or if they should claim
loves respect, no longer then merits make a full proportion; how should the
liberality of parents, and the prerogative of children, appear? or what
obedience may Fathers ask from such Children, more then from good Apprentices?
(...) could intombe his Mares, when they purchased credit in the swift races
of Olimpiades. Xanthippus could bewail his dogs death which had followed his
Master from Calamina. Alexander could erect a City in the honor of
Bucephalus, when he had been long defended by him in many battles. The Ass
may well (among the Heathen) be adorned with Lillies, Violets, and Garlands;
when their Goddess, Vesta, by an Asses voice, a^oyded the rape of Priapus. If
merits therefore should only challenge the love of parents, nothing might make
a difference betwixt sons and bond slaves: Seeing bare Humanitye, and the Law
of Nations has accounted the honors of One worthy to be honored, nothing
but equal and necessary thanks. Nay, in all ages, so bountiful and
respective has authority been to true merits, as even the desertlesse children
have met with dignity to remunerate the fathers worthiness: Thus did the
Athenians bestow great wages, upon Lysimachus, to gratisie the service of
Ar^stides: And thus the Romans preferred the cause of Marcus Brutus, because
his Ancestors had took the Countries quarrel against tyrants. Shall fathers
then esteem it such a bad custom to dignifie their own begotten issue,
though desertlesse; seeing strangers have done this to congratulate good
fathers? Two examples there be, ancient and modern (worth our memory) that
show the practice of our Theme in question; and afford singular observation.
The first is evident, in the reign of Agis a Lacedemonian King: In whose
principal City of Sparta, the custom had prohibited alienations that
prejudice the Heir: The custom grew to be a confirmed Law: After continuance
there sell a difference betwixt one of the highest Magistrates and his eldest
son: The father was so actually provoked, that he exhibites a Decree to
license Disinheritance; the Decree was established: And afterward (says
Plutarch) covetousness became public: For now men had license to de^
Families and Es^ates, which otherwise should have descended. From hence my
observation is double. The prime cause of disinheritance was Fury: And then the
commodity was rank Covetousness. Lastly, it is apparent by the Tower-rowles,
that (during the reign of Edward the fourth) one Thomas Burdet an Englishma^,
being somewhat innocently condemned to death (about captious terms ignorantly
uttered) in his way to death espied his eldest Son, whom (before) he
disinherited: Him therefore he penitently received; and having now confessed
seriously, that he felt Gods wrath upon him only to punish that unnatural
sin, He humbly begged forgiveness of God, and of his son: The application
of such a paenitent remorse is easy.

Having now marshald up this troop of Arguments, which (I think) are
approueable; some (questionless) will account them white-liuerd soldiers,
dressed up only with a Rhetorical habit: But censure is no less infinite,
then oftentimes odious: Trial therefore shall discharge the integrity of
these; whilst I proceed briefly to muster one troop more, whose courage is
enough animated by their adversaries weakness. For if the Birthright (which
intitles an heir) be inseperate, then the prerogative is also inseperate, for
Inheritance depends upon priority, which being unremovable; the benefit should
remain likewise: It being as monstrous for an Heir to be without
Inheritance, as for a Father to be without a Child: Relations therefore be so
depending, that we may sooner affirm the Son and Father not to be, then
Heirs and Inheritance not to be correlatiues: And by the consequent as
lawfully may we deprive both of Being, as we may permit the one without the
other.

Of Poetry. Essay. VII.
POETRY is called the work of Dictae sunt res naturales quae cunque naturae
ordine fieren^; cum divinitus, insita vi qua subsistunt aptae sunt ad agendu^
vel pa^endum: Verro lib: 1.
nature: I rather think it a Divine alacrity, entertained by the fitness of
nature: For if (in general) a cheerful spirit partakes of a Divine
influence; then this (being spiritually maintained, with a desire to
communicate, and express such quickening inventions) can be no other, being
the soul of alacrity, then an invisible Divine work; which does transport
nature, whilst nature meruailes at the cause. Aristotle.
Philosophy has divided our souls faculty; and makes the Intelligent part our
principal essence: that cannot perish: Poetry depends on that, and a sublime
fancy; they being the helps of our disposal: Or (to speak truly) a Poet
uses every function of the soul: Depending upon which, he must reject
Nature* For Nature perishes, the Soul cannot. Omnis Apollo in vniuersa natura
suam pulsat Citharam. Seal: 836. Exerc.
Nature is then the Hand-maide; but an Infusiue worthiness, the soul of
Poetry. Conceive but this, and Nature will disclaim: Nature imparts her
Faculties by Generation; excluding study and custom: A Poet never is engendered
so, further then a natural Logician, therefore he exceeds Nature. Poema
(vta^t Possidonius) est dict^o numerosa, certa mensu^a constans. atque prosae
orationis speciem excedens: Poesis est sig^ poema, diuinarum et humana: etc.
Laerti: lib: 7. de vit^ philoso: 329.
The Stoics made a difference between Poema and Poesis, a Poem, and Poetry:
Which difference may well serve to illustate the meritorious honor of true
Stage-poetry: That onele being the soul and spirit of Poesis: Other several
Poems, be the limbs and weak dependants of that happy Mistress: For true
representation is the spirtit of fancy; and Fancy is the treasure of
apprehension: The nimbly speedines of which, makes a Poet; and that quick
speediness, is not in any Poem so much apparent, as in a dramaticke turning.
Est enim Poesis significatiuum Poema, diuinarum et humanarum rerum imitationem
complectens. Poesy is a significant Poem, containing an imitation of Divine
and Humane passages: Which imitation here intended, is not in any poem so much
verified, as in a natural Play: And never was in any Nation (it may be boldly
spoken) that elegance and nature observed in Play-composures, which is
inhaerent generally to our English Writers at this day. So that we may inuert
the words of Plautus.

-- nunc nouae quae prodeunt fabulae multo sunt m^liores quae nummi nostri:

And in Nature most equal to these writings, Poetic history approaches
nearest: Consisting in the same degree of fancy; and an invention better
furnished.

We may observe a sweet concordance in this mighty Fabric: All things are
coupled with an allusiue union: Life, is a flash of immortality; Sleep, of
death: Middle age of Summer: Arts also, and ages past, have a similitude with
things inferior, and signify things future. Language is likened to a Casket,
Logic to an Artificers Instrument, Rhetoric to a precious Color: And
poetry likewise has a sit resemblance with prophecy: both be an unutterable
rapture; both be a boundless large capacity: Both be a universal tractate:
Both be co^fined within a small number: Both be discredited with false
pretenders: Both be dispersed among men (originally) obscure: Both be alike
neglected: Both (generally) contemned alike. Neither could prophets at all
times be furnishd to denounce; nor can poets be at all times furnishd to
compose. Poetry is made the conueyance of amorous delights: and certainly it
does bestow much sweetness in apparrelling loue-accents. This only might
discover it for a supreme donatiue, seeing the music in Heaven is an
agreement of souls. Ier^me Sauanarola, the Monkish philosopher, makes poetry a
part of reasonable philosophy; maintaining this, against natural pretenders of
poetry: I will not meddle with his arguments, they are elaborate and learned:
The truth is evident without serious proof.

Verse and Rhyme be things natural: for they be only color and appearance:
But if you value the Phrase and the Materials after the same proportion, as
thinking your conceit able to furnish a poem, you shall indeed perceive it
likewise natural, that is, naked, unpolished, nay the scorn of poetry. A
quick contriuing head may utter laudably, but never was a brain so sudden, as
to compose well without the president of others in the like kind: Nay, take
the most illiterate Writers, (who propound experience and familiar allusions)
they have a time to Meditate, to compare, to dispose. It is with poets and
writers, as with Kings and Maiestrates: princes accounted wise may liberally
incroach on others wealth, and never be accounted tyrants: And poets held
judicious may through lazines orignorance make use of others wits, whilst the
reserved storehouse which helps others, shall be thought an empty stable.

Quicquid delirant reges plectuntur Achiui.

This Art of poetry cannot prove eminent, unless the writer has a rejoicing
heart, an apprehensiue head, and a disclouded fancy. Carmina proveniunt amo
deducta sereno, says the poet:

Verses proceed from a disburthend brain.

It is impossible therefore for one dejected by calamity, or one perplexed with
questions of an other Science, to get perfection in this free knowledge: I say,
perplexed with questions of another Science; because a Poet should rather
copiously discourse of all, by application to a witty purpose, rather then be
exquisite in a particular Art, respecting depth of rule, or quidditie. Notions,
conjectures, and some of the best passages, be more sufficient for him, then a
praecise certainty of rules. Sharp sause procures appetite; but sharp meats
kill the stomach. And doubtless little griefs be prouocations to reu^ue;
whereas a multitude of disapointments, weaken Poetry: because they do embase
the spirits: now poetry is the quickest part of spirit; and therefore soon
distempred: as quick edges are soonest blunted. He therefore who propunds
excellence, must refuse the multitude of questions, and the Carmina secessum
scribentis et otia quoe runt. Our Trist. 3.
vexation of miseries: both be as clogges and fetters to that aspiring
faculty. From hence I may conclude the perfection of this Science does match
the strains of right Alchymie: it being (in both) alike impossible to find
that man who shall directly promise to attain perfection; because impediments
exceed the means. The nourishment of Poetry is good applause: for Poems being
made to allure and bewitch the reader in a lesson of moral precept, must
prosper in their meaning, or be discountenanced: As all professions be, which
make men's good opinions the reward of knowledge: and therefore has England
affoorded few men accurate in historical Poems, because opinion has
vouchsafed to rank her painful volumes among easy and slight labors:
whereas Italians have proved singular proficients in this kind of invention;
because (says Rosinus) authority has graced their elegance. So that
considering our negligence of historical Poems, it may be well observed with
Plautus, in his prologue to Casina:

Ea tempestate (...) poetarum fuit qui nunc abierunt in co^munem locum The
reason (I think) which has wrought in England such a degenerate value of
Poems, proceeded (first) from the professors ignorance and general baseness
but secondly from the stubborn gravity of the best readers; who scorn to
account the best Poems profitable works, because all have hitherto been
accounted slight composures, or at best unprofitable And we imagine it a
weakness to recant an error. Some have certainly contemned the worthiest
labors euenthrough malicious, despair of attempting the like worthily. As in
Cynthia's ^euenge.
another place I have thus noted --

A Poets rapture, Kings have wishd to feel,
Which some despise because incapable.
Howsoever, the base opinion which Poetry incurs among us, has been repaid
with justice: that is, the discredit of our Nation: for our vnder-valuing
opinion has deprived the public of more judicious works then be already
extant: And so the glory of our Nations eminent wit, has been eclipsed with
forraigners. Indeed there be some easy helps for Poets which artists have
not: I have reduced them into this number Morning, wine, beauty, health, and
Music are

The five provoking helps of Poetry.

These together be as the nourishment, not the body: for it is impossible that
these should make a Poet; but only feed the powers of art and nature: which
principally does commend the temperature of Poetry: for as in physic so in
this, such a food such a blood.

These helps therefore having a sweetened puritye, do show a most sweet
compound in the spirit of poems which suckes their quintessence. As for the
private and sensible benefit (which any shall conceive in publishing his
labors) I see none virtuous but this: he may excuse (by them) his silent
nature; and be accounted better, as a Melancholy Poet, then a speechless
fool. Fame and Eminence savor of a fruitless ambition; that will now
purchase nothing for Poetry by preferment, but an opinion that Poetry is his
knowledge, and (it being so) that he is fit for nothing else: or some perhaps;
nay, the wisest, will bestow compassion, and say, It is pity such a pregnant
wit should endeavor so idly. These be the comforts of being famous: let
Doaters be ambitious of it. The deepest poets have neglected verse: I mean
the polished form of verse: but I would sooner love such works in prose; and
heartily entreat such writers, even for their own dispatch-sake, and the
readers also, to abandon poetry, except they can avoid that crabbed style and
form, which weakens any readers appetite and apprehension. Nothing does so
much discover poetry to be a thing of spirit and quick substance, as the
delight it takes to dwell in flourishing and lusty bloods; when life and all
her attributes do most provoke nature: and therefore shell you see men, who have
tasted poetry in their youth, and feel a diminution by impediments of age
laboring most commonly to renew their age: And most of all quicken nature by
the means praemised. Whereas when poetry is in a full growth the known verses
may be well applied: showing it cannot be conceald: Quicquid conabor dicere
versus ^rat. And showing that words will come alone when matter is provided.
Verbaque peouisa^ re^ non inuita sequuntur: Words freely follow a provided wit.

The relish of Poetry is a candied bark: an elegance so sweetened with apt
phrase and illustration, as it excludes rough harshnesse, and all mystery:
controversies and Philosophical questions be therefore improper arguments for
a Poetical tractate: they cannot be expressed with an enticing liberty.
Similitudes be the fit interpreters of Poets: when I affirm this, I do not
approve all similitudes, but such as do interpret: which they cannot do,
except they be more familiar then the thing interpreted. This condemns any,
who from a depth in learning, shall produce the Mathematickes, to illustrate
Grammar: or shall compare things known by repetition to an example in
Astronomy. Poor and Prodigal have been a Poets Titles: these have been fixed
with a contemptiue meaning, but I imagine they advance his quality: for
therefore he neglects wealth, because he feels within himself a Jewel which
can redeem his bondage in the worst calamity. Freedom of Brain and Body is a
Poets music: A peaceable fruition does preserve, and does revive his fancy.
Indeed the liberty of brain makes a Poet: and if that liberty be (...) with
cross ^ortunes of immediate dependence or displeasing casualties, the Poet
has no liberty, but only to respect the times occasion. When therefore a
Reward is moti^e, it makes the labor like it self, servile. Poetry should
therefore (being an impartial free science) be undertaken by the free
^rosessor; a man sufficient in estate: such a one as need not use flattery to
win reward; nor so indite, that things may be dispatched quickly and his wants
quickly furnished; nor so dispatch, that he may rather make things saleable,
through obscoenity or scandals, then approved labor: Because while joyfully
they should int^nd their poems, they be too much interrupted with a
remembrance of their wants, and be compelled to take a ready course: A course
too ready, to be regular: And Hor^ce himself has said it.

Qui paulum a summo dis^essit, vergit ad* ^mum.

And poems made to cherish up the mind

Being not best are of the basest kind.

These mischiefs follow a mercenarie hope: and therefore be mercenary (...)
odious: such (I mean) as are provoked by poverty, and will exact their wages.

Of Discontents. Essay VIII.
PLeasure and Sorrow be the objects of virtue: but disco^tents be may thought
rather the objects of pleasure. Virtue moderates the folly of pleasure and
sorrow: but pleasure so moderated remoues discontents. I reckon discontents
among my private Sorrow may be admitted in behalf of public calamities which
cannot be so well termed a Discontent.
sorrowes^s which amplify my own misfortune; which feel the same (perhaps) a
greater torment for my friends misery, then my own: yes, I am better assured
of my own fortitude to contemn sorrows, then of my friends aptness, to
relish my counsels; or of his own freedom to advise himself: and therefore
his vexation (he being my self) afflicts me more injuriously: because I can
overcome my own, better then His. I call those properly Discontented who are
busy thoughted: who, like brainelesse patients, are almost desperate if
another gives them poison; and yet (being recovered) they will adventure to
poison themselves: for many of this rank you shall perceive, who having passed
the discontents which come by others malice, will (of their own accord) frame
new perplexities: They will conceive things otherwise then they be, and so
nourish a conceit till they believe it real. It is one of man's extreme
ignorant follies that he will fasten his vexation about casual dreams, and
sleepy conceits; not meditating whether, and why he wakes. Opinion is indeed
the mediate cause of discontents; but then a rectified or false capacity
(being an immediate cause of rectified or false opinions) begets a true or idle
discontent. I call that idle, which is begotten of an idle fancy: such idle
discontents are soon expelled; they are causeless Melarcholy, begot by
alteration, dispersed by alteration: But Melancholy, meeting with a real
cause, becomes a settled mischief* Howsoever, nothing (though most worth our
discontent) can be said His or My discontent, unless we so conceive it. For
certainly, a careless resolution may be freed from conscience and discontent
together: whereas perhaps a nice examining head may so ensnare it self with
multitude of thoughts, that the confusion may provoke both: but then a
careless resolution serves worthily to abate such idle, and such real
discontents. For as in natural bodies fasting and food destroy and nourish; so
in our daily proiectes, consideratiue thoughts and careless negligence fasten
and remove. The brain of man is like a pocket Watch, where within little
compass you may find great workmanship* and the brains of best-witted men
are a curious clock; which by the distemprature of one wheel, grows
distempered in every one: and indeed the most curious wits which seek a
reason for every trifle be a distemperature, or affliction to themselves: still
growing less like a Piramide toward the conclusion of their curiosity in
searching. Eu^lides did therefore answer w^ll, when one would press him in
many nice questions of diuinitye; Cetera quidem nescio, ill^d Scio quod dij
oderunt curiosos.

Thus much I know the Gods detest a curiosity; The best Plato Galen. Cicero. D.
Ihom.
Philosophers have left a doubtful number of men's perturbations, some assign
six, some five, some four some eleven. They might (in my conceit) be all
reduced unto a triple number: including likewise the very causes of all
discontent. Imagine therefore they proceed first from iealousies of whatkind
soever; either in being contemned, neglected, or ambiguous of good success:
then from doubts not to be resolved, either through weakness of our
understanding, or intricacie of the question, then from an extreme desire,
either of things difficult or impossible. To iealousies, and such desires, all
are incident; to doubts and questions, Scholars or Scholar* like heads only:
these comprehend the sum of all our crosses: of all our sorrows both in
soul and bo^y: Nay, all more narrowly may be reduced to a desire: For when we
briefly say, He has his hearts desire, we do withal in tend, that he is
neither troubled with pleasure, grief, fear, audacity, hope or anger: The six
turbulent passions reckned by Plato. Our passions be the first causes of our
discontents: And all our passions be suitable or unsuitable to nature: The first
entice, the last terrify our wisdom: And therefore both kinds must be
dealt with wisely, but less hardly, because one medicine ouercomes both. Let
neither good nor evil chances take us unprovided, and we shall be never
afflicted: For either we grow sluggish and careless being pleased with good, or
wholly danted being displeasd with (...) chances* Let us therefore sometimes
willingly please our selves, and ha^ing tasted what such pleasure is, let us
return into the common course of labor: By which means, pleasures will not
be ouer-pleasant and attractiue, when afterward by occasion we shall be again
tempted: And being not so effectual with us, we cannot afterward repent, or
be disconsolate because we did forget our selves. Neither will griefs be over
grievous, if we be sometimes sencible of others grief; not by a womanish pity
(for that softens the heart, and makes it over sencible, inclining to despair)
but by a noble pity, which sees our own (...) in another sufferings, and
makes us worthily abhor^e to be the cause of such sufferings: For whilst we so
pity the wrong which others have committed, we nourish in our selves a scorn
to do the like: These excepted, the saying is true: Misereri and sapere vix
dijs conceditur.

Certainly (amongst all) perplexed questions be to a laboring head, most
troublesome: And less blameable was that sound Aristotle.
Philosopher, who made the Ocean capable of him, because he was not capable of
reason for the Ebb and Flow; rather then such as be ashamed to live, when
either needinesse, fear, ignominy, grief, or disappointments contradict them.
It is mere beastial to dye upon such weak incounters; which might be all
confuted with a Heathens knowledge: But then to dye for ignorance may seem
excuseable: For such a life is beastial, where we are ignorant of reason; and
better is it to be ignorant of reason how to prevent death, then to preserve
life in ignorance: Because I hold it highly monstrous, to dishonor the nice
fabric of a man's body with a brutish soul. The truth is, our discontents of
any kind do mis-informe our judgment; no otherwise then a busy knave, who
(seeing the bad luck of lawful means) does bribe the Maiestrate: and never was
a Maiestrate more easily bribed, then is a judgment (so oppressed) corrupted
We have no liberty to know, much less to judge; no reason to discourse, much
less to put a difference no freedom to conceive, much less to understand,
when Discontents do trouble us. They interpose our brightest emine^ce of
wisdom no otherwise then clouds d^rken the Suns glory: They keep a strong
possession against our virtue and all good society. The most significant Title
they can deserve is Treache^ous: For they breed sensibly an invocation,
begetting in us a preposterous change; and that commonly proceeds from worse to
worse: For being more incorporate with them and their mutations, we challenge
less freedom in our selves, to help our selves. Discontents, like an
extreme disease, be of a shifting nature: They delight continually in motion,
as men vehemently sick do change their beds and chambers. A Discontented man
does and undoes, that he may do again: thinking to loose his humor in
variety, or by adventure (if by nothing else) among many changes to make one
goodone*

But this desire of change corrupts our wisdom with a sencible distraction:
For sour stomachs vn-acquainted with a new food refuse it with many raspings.
So likewise our understanding oppressd with new and sudden objects, does
languish and become affrighted: being not able to digest things in order. We
shall perceive a threefold mischief which goes inseperate with discontents:
For they be ready to seduce our thoughts our words, our actions: We mis
este^me, mis- condemn, mis* attempt, through disco^tented passions. The reason
is manifest: For Discontent being the co^^anion of our thoughts, makes them,
our words and actions, ruled by that; and so become unpleasing, like it self:
Therefore do Male contents undervalue merit in their own opinion: Therefore
(being waspish) they detract from worthiness, therefore they dislike or do
condemn bitterly, and therefore, likewise, do men thus affected, undertake
more venturously the^ wisely. So that Salust has observed well touching the
Character of Cattlines adhaerents, that they were Homines quos flagitium,
eg^stas, aut c^nsciu animus exagitabat. And questionless, such men so inwardly
bitten with their own afflictions, can find no leisure in themselves to keep
affinity with others. Good Sovereigns therefore, loving Parents, honest
Friends, loyal Subjects, wise Masters, have been no Malcontents: For (being
so) it is impossible that such a troubled Fountain should send forth any thing
but off ensiue tumults. There is nothing more does make our enemies rejoice,
then a dejected spirit, and nothing more afflicts our soul then to be sensible
of their reioycings; therefore does that experienced Prophet David so often
wish for a deliverance from their triumph; ^o often does he lament their
insultations. Infinite are those advantages, which may be had against men
discontented: As namely secrets may be extorted from, and treasons may be
infused unto them: It cannot otherwise be: For grief and sorrow sitting most
heavy upon the vital parts, do crush and mortify the spirits; which failing
to convey a nourishment to the brain, it presently grows light and spungy,
fitted to suck up any new matter, and to have the old squeasd from it. And
therefore has a melan^holy spirit some prerogative in thi^ respect; be cause
his time of discontent is scarce distinguished from his daily carriage; for
night is sooner visible in an open Palace, then a smoky Cottage. I may
propound of sorrows, what Celsus does of Cole-worts: being half sodden* they
are laxatiue; but twice sodden, they are binding: So discontents being but
slightly apprehended and entertained, may be a means sitting to prepare the
way for honest applications, and to purge security: But being suffered long to
bo^le within us, they do confirm their own, and also stop the passage of
other worse corruptions. Of Moral and awa^ening Discontents, the wise Solomon
spe^kes, when he resolves positiuely; Anger is better then laughter, for by a
sad look the heart is made better: Melior est i^a risu: quia per tristitiam
vultus* co^rigitur animns delinquentis: And (without question) some natures may
be likened to the blacke-thornes, that flourish best with hail, storm, and
tempest: Or to the Mackerell which cannot be awakened and brought upwards, but
with thunder. But some Favorites there be, so much beholding to Fortune, that
in a whole Age they have scarce learnt the definition of sorrow. In these men
the Proverb is verified; F^oles are Fortunate; and yet agreeable with an
honest meaning: For those (I think) are chiefly bound to Fortune, or
Providence rather who cannot through a good simplicity affect dishonest
practices, and close dealings: It being consonant with reason, that men
ill-befriended with a subtle Brain, should be assisted with some higher
Policy. All that we suffer, is by our Own or Fortunes work: We cannot be
too patient with Fortunes, too much provoked with our own works of sorrow:
When Fortune punishes we have no remedy, when our own indiscretio^ punishes,
we may afflict our selves the longer with a wise fury, that we may learn to
recollect and to awaken our judgment. Some have a resolute contempt for all
adversities; but such a valorous scorn may be engendered by sottish ignorance,
or an incapable dullness, no otherwise then both may be a Drunkards motives in
extreme hazard. As for my self I never felt a sorrow, which I esteemed a
(...), unless it gave no profitable use, either by making me more circumspect
and provident; or acquainting me beforehand with my destiny. The most
honorable dealing with our worst afflictions, is to confute them by a
discourse of Brain, and so exercise our knowledge, for our own advantage,
against the ^oes of Knowledge. And doubtless there is enough left in Nature
(if we could apprehend) to comfort all our troubles: when I say thus I mean
enough as well to settle and confirm a soul shak^n with uncertain doubts, as
to redeem a wretch laden with the worlds misery: Nay if nature affoords matter
enough to confute objections, she must needs yield matter also to remove
Sorrows: For every sorrow of what kind soever, is nothing but an objection to
the mind, which man's weakness cannot answer: As the fortune of a Shipwrackt
man objects death of poverty; the fortune of a man Condemned objects disgrace;
the Disapointed man's fortune, objects unlucky dealing, and so the rest: All
which I purpose at my leisure to recite in method, and to convince their
bitterness: Which will unless* I be deceived, create men (...) to despise
affliction. But in the mean time none among the worst crosses shall
predominate, if sometimes in a lawful humor we do cross our selves: And so
begin to learn the difficult manner of denving our le^d inclinations: which
cannot well endure a disapointment; because they covet a sensual fruition. If
any man thinks these medcines taedious he, may Dyogines his remedy in fewer
words: Fortunae confidentiam, (...): lib: 6. 272.
naturae Legem, perturbationi rationem obijce: Make Confidence resist Fortune,
Law resist Nature and Reason Discontents.

Two Books of Characters.
The first Book.
CHARACTER. I. An Impudent Censurer
IS the torture-monger of Wit, ready for execution before Judgment. Nature
has dealt wisely with him in his outeside; for it is a privilege against
confutation, and will beget modesty in you to see him outface: He is so
fronted with striving to discountenance knowledge, by the contempt of it, as
you would think him borne to insolence, though indeed it be habitual and
comes by negligence of his company, which rather seek to laugh an^ continue,
then to reform his v^nity. A Chimneysweeper may converse with him very safely,
without the hazard of blushing: and so may any that will contemn his
ignorance: Buffets will convince him better then language or reason: That
proves him rankebestiall, descended from the walking Apes; which on the
Mountains seem careful Inhabitants, but at your approach the formality of
m^n only. The Land-theefe, and Sea-captaine, be never le^e out of their way,
but wi^er commonly about their object: They spare to wound poor tr^uellers but
he incounters any thing not worth eye sight. He will seem to cleanse Books
of errors: but take him in his true knowledge, and he cannot do so much good
(...) Fellow that sweepes gutters. A wise man's mind gouernes his body his
mind is only restrained by a bodily fear: And if you hope to be released of
what he dares, you must enforce him to what he dares not; and then you shall
perceive him to be the comicall braggard, or the lingling spur. Lay aside this
medicine and he is incurable, for he is so ra^isht with his own folly, as he
often commends what he misinterprets, and still dispraises* if he scorn the
Author) because he cannot perceive. To commend therefore and discommend what
he conceiues not, is alike tolerable and equal: Neither is it to be admired ^f
he dislikes the soundest works of a good Author: for he regardes not the
works and writings of God himself: if he did, he would embrace charity, and
so censure less. The wild Arabian comprehends him fully: for as the one, so
the other, takes tribute and exaction of all passengers, except acquaintance
and familiars: if any thing makes him praiseworthy, this must, or nothing:
becauses he seems (by this means) moral in friendship and so in some kind
virtuous: But his applause and detraction, are both odious, because abounding
through his mere pleasure: And as some ^luttish people take pleasure in their
own excrements, and relish the pickings of their nose; so he, his own
opinion. When al Trades perish, he may turn Shopkeeper, and deal with
Balance: For in weights and measures none is more deceitful. He ponders
pithy volumes by the dram or scruple, but small errors by the pound. If he
takes courage in his humor, he haunts the Authors company, recites the
work, intends it to some third person, and after he has damnd the thing in
question, he refers himself to the right owner; who, if he be there manifest,
must conjure this devil quickly, or he will seem honest, and give
satisfaction: but call his life in question, and he betraies his guiltiness,
which then accuses him of false dealing howsoever; yes, though he has
commented rightly; for he commends ignorantly, and discommends scandalously. So
delighting in his humor, he makes his Freehold an Inheritance: put it to the
hazard, and he will compound for the title. When he misses the censure of
books, he proves always the most harmeles, deriding, impudent, and absurd fool
in the company: and he takes it for granted still that every conceit being his
own is most ingenious -- let him add folly and I grant him.

CHARACT: II. A Complete* Man
IS an impregnable Tower: and the more batteries he has undergone, the better
able he is to continue immovable The time and he are always friends: for he
is troubled with no more then he can well employ; neither is that less, then
will every way discharge his Office; So he neither surfetts with I^lenesse, nor
action. Calamities, and Court-preferments do alike move him, but cannot remove
him: Both challenge from him a convenient use, no vilde endeavor, either to
swell or despair. His religion, learning, and behavior, hold a particular
correspondence: He commands the latter, whilst himself and both be commanded
by the first. He chooses men as good Musicians choose their Vialls; by sound,
rather th^n by the sight: he may well give his affections leave to wander; for
(like a well-mannd Hawke) they be always within whistling. He holds it
presumption to know, what should be looked, or thought upon with wonder; and
therefore rather then he will exceed, he can be less then himself: accounting
it more noble to immitate the friutfull bough which stoopes under a precious
burden; then applaud the tall eminence of a fruitless Birch-tree: knowing
Humility is a fitter step to knowledge, then presumption. He seems willingly
to seek acquaintance with vice and with temptation, meaning to allure it, til,
without suspicion, he may soon disrobe and disarme it: Like the Sun which
enters to the most polluted place^, but is not any thing the more polluted. Or
having labored to know the strength of folly, he knows it to be his Capti^e.
From hence proceeds his victory, in that he can prevent mischief, and scorn
the advantage of base^esse. His wit and apprehension (like the in (...) air)
will pierce through less cranyes then the pores of a man's body. His
worthiness to be rewarded he may conceal: But his desire to do nobly, in a
better kind, his actions will not suffer to be unknown: by which the world
can judge he deserves, and save him from the scandal of a Cunning Hypocrite.
If merits direct him in the way to honor, they do not leave him in the way to
honor, but are his best attendants to accompany his whole preferment: For to
deserve what he obtaines, and to deserve no more is s^uggish; to deserve after
a thing bestowed, is duly thankful; But a continued merit stops accusation.
He is thankful for whatsoever, he receives by the worlds favor: And he
neglects no profit which the time affoords, by insufficiency to discern it or
to recompense it: For what he observes, passes through the forge of his
wisdom, which refines it; and the file of his practice, which confirms it as
a good pattern: So the interest exceedes the principal, and (which exceeds
all) praises the Usurer. It may seem strange that a complete man is a good
Carpenter: but (take my meaning as you list) his actions are directed by the
Line and Square. The name of guilt (with him) is vanished under the charm of a
good conscience: Which with his eyesight save his taste a labor: for he
knows what experience can teach, but is not taught by experience. He is
faithfully his own friend: and accepts the frienship of others for his own
^ake; but imparts his own for others. When he loves, he loves first: from
hence he chalenges a double honor: For Love and Priority is a two-folde
merit. He lacks nothing to engender happiness; for he can spare nothing that
he enioyes: he enioyes it so honestly and absolutely. And that he has
already, serves to purchase new contentment. For as he lives, his capacity is
enlarged, though before it were sufficient for his other faculties: they be
most numerous when himself is nothing: for being dead, he is thought worthier
the^ alive: then he departs to his advancement.

CHARACTER. III. A good Husband
IS the second part of a good man: he challenges no more nor less from Art or
Nature, then does become his faculty, and give comfort to his Wife; so he does
not (by striving to please) seem low minded; nor by ouer-valuing his
properties, prove a tyrant. His behavior and discourse promise no more then
he means, and may very well justify. He is not altogether to be chosen by
the common weight or standard; for his best parts are invisible. A good Wife
shall know him quickly to be worth her taking: for he will first know her
worthiness. He is not therefore put to much trouble of being denied twice: for
if he thinks he can prevail amiss, prevail too soon, or not prevail,
because he is too good; he has the modesty to refuse first: But otherwise,
if opinion dares suspect, and so refuse him first, he may account it
happiness because he was refused so soon: having (by that means) escaped
one who could not discer^e him. The honor of a good wife makes him no more
unpracticed in the patience of a bad, then if he conuersed with her: so his
virtues be familiar, no^ enforced. The misery of a bad wife likewise has no
more enraged him to discredit all women, the^ the worthiness of a good one
has moved him to be an Idolator: So his blessing is, not to augment his
curse, or curse his blessing. The highest end of his marriage premeditated, is
to resolve how he may desire it without end. He feels not the absence of
youth by a decay in lust; but measures the approach of a crooked body by his
entyre and straight affection. He neither deceiues himself with a foolish
confidence, nor draws a disadvantage to himself, by being distrustful: For
he may be acquainted with those, to whom he safely cannot commit his wealth,
much less his wives honesty, but he never suspects, before he be past
suspicion, and every thing be apparent. He has (notwithstanding) no friend
whom he dares not make his deputy: But if he has not knowledge enough, to
choose a friend that may be trusted; he has no reason to trust a woman. He
seeks rather to be well known then commonly noted: for being known, he
cannot be mistaken; but othewise it is very doubtful. A good Husband (like
the pith which runns in the midst of a body) dissuces himself aequally to the
circumference: imparting aequall care and love to wife and children: Love and
providence be the two cou^terpanes of a good husband. He hates not her, but
h^rs; and that with a hope to make her detest herself, not be divorced from
him: For he couets rather to be daily amending her, then make a new hazard, or
want resolution. He may dislike therefore his wives humor* and love her in
the same quantity. He cannot be chosen, because a better is absent, for you
may find in himself the practitioner and pattern. He cannot therefore be
refused, if he be well known: For being good, he proves the best and being
so, the best Husband.

CHARACTER. IIII. A Contented Man
IS a fair building in the bottom of a Valley: You may discern nothing about
him, unless you approach near, and nothing in him worth himself, unless you
do proceed. There is no land like unto his own conscience: that makes him
sow and reap together: for actions be (with him) no sooner thoughts, then
they prove comforts, they be so full of Innocence. His life therefore is a
continual harvest: his countenance and conversation promise hope; they both
smile upon their object: Neither does the end fail his purpose: for his
expectation was indifferent and equal, according to the means. Events
therefore cannot oppress him; for he propounded all, before he undertook
some; and saw the extremest point of danger, before he did imbarque. He
medles no further with uncertainties, then loss and lucre be alike in
accident: For doubtful things of moment, make men stagger, whilst hope and
fear distracts them. If probable and lawful means deceive him, they cannot
trouble him: for he ascribes nothing to himself, that is above him. When Gods
determinations do therefore disappoint; he neither maruailes, nor
mis-interprets. Neglected fortunes, and things past, he leaves behind; they
cannot keep pace with him. The necessity of things absent, he measures by his
means: but as for things impossible, he could never beg in to affect them.
And in the quest of future proiects, he never does transgress the present
comfort. He can with as much selfe-credit be a Captive, as a promoted
Courtier. Dignities may do him honor, not entice him: Poverty may threaten,
and be peremptory, but cannot overcome. Riches may make his honesty more
emine^t, not more exquisite: He cousens the world in his behavior; and when
he seems disconsolate, he is best contented. He is so far from adding malice
to any, that he can praise the merits of an enemy; without grudging. Anger and
Revenge be two turbulent passions: In him (therefore) the first shows only
that he can apprehend: the last, that he can justly prevent further mischefe.
So he neither does insult through anger; nor satisfy his bitterness by
revenge. Repentance, which with some proves melancholy, with him proves a
delightful assurance: for seldom does he lament things merely vicious, so
much as virtues imperfectly attemped. He undertakes every thing with more
advantage, then any (but himself) can imitate: for being void of troublesome
vexation, his willing mind makes the way less difficult. His policy and
close dealing do not disturb his time of pleasure, or his quiet dreams: For
he can awake with as much delight in day, and sleep with as much solace in the
dark, as either his intimate purpose can awake to every man's applause; or he
concealed to his own safety, and no man's detriment. He does not readily
incur another rage; nor does he rail against himself; for he cannot be
before hand with quarrelsome engagements; n^r rashly run into a manifest error.
He does not therefore (when all approve him) miscall himself, closely, damned
Hypocrite, or lewd villain. He feels more felicity in this, that he can
forbear to enjoy any thing, rather then let* any thing enjoy him; or rather
then he will enjoy any thing indirectly. He is not so self* subsisting that he
scorns to borrow; so shameless, that he borrowes all: nor so alone contented,
that others do not partake in his freedom: or so absolute in freedom, that
he becomes not more absolute by the use of others. He resembles the parish
bells; which keep the same tune at Marriages and Funerals: So a contented man
observes the same Music of content, either in occ^sion of joy or sadness. He
makes more ill meanings good, by good construction, more hapless events honest
by a lawful confidence, and more dangerous undertakings easy, by a calm
proceeding, then the contrary. For (whilst he knows Jealousy as a fearful,
eating, and distasteful vice) he cannot suspect without the cautions of why,
whom, how, where and when. Briefly, being contented, he is content to be happy;
and being so, he thriues best when he thinks best: he does more then he
undoes. He wins more often then he saues: and, like the Caspian Sea, remains
the same unchangeable.

CHARACT. V. A good Emperor
IS the second Savior to Christianity, and a direct center of his peoples
love: his greatness extends, rather to posterity, then is confident of
pedigree. He may be counseled or confirmed, but his election remains
peculiar. His object therefore (to discern) may be infinite, or extra^agant;
but paterns (to imitate) must be supernal; for he acknowledges but one
supremacy and in that remembers a succession: which makes him leave man's
precepts unto frailty, view honor as as thing mediate, himself immediately
next to his Creator, and does only know his high commission a determinable
power, not know and murmr. He does afflict (like lightning) never but when he
is resisted. He lackes nothing of divinity, but Time in his prerogative, the
want of which takes away eternity: so all the honor which relates to him for
Gods sake, conueighes it self to God for his own. His fear does vanish into
love or anger; for he may embrace or conquer, but cannot submit. He preserues
many whom he might destroy; but he destroys none whom he should preserve: for
(like a medicine) he does not naturally draw blood. His royal bounty is as
well prompt to take with honor, as to give with liberty. And as he can deserve
nothing because on him depends every thing: so is he not by any man to be
deserved, because unto him every man owes his whole Inheritance. If therefore
he does forgive where subjects do condemn; or choose when multitudes abandon;
he does but manifest his free desires, and show affinity betwixt himself and
holiness, which rayses from the d^ng hill to the commanding fortune and from the
most obscure disdain of vulgar thoughts unto the state of happiness. Nay
oftentimes this secret in public offices proves true, That men without the aid
of birth, and glory of famous merit, lack only so good an entrance, but have
commonly a better ending: or at least, strive more to attain what others
presume upon. The event therefore makes his large prerogative true wisdom,
which may be mis-interpreted weakness. The Lion, a King of beasts, is
recovered in sickness, by eating an Ape; and a good King by devouring
flatterers. He is the same briefly to his kingdom, that Luc* Florus Lib ^.
cap. 3. fol. 17. actum erat nisi marius ille saeculo contiguesset
Marius was among the Tigurines: all perishes without him.

CHARACT: VI. A worthy Poet
IS the purest essence of a worthy Man: He is confident of nature in nothing
but the form, and an ingenious fitness to conceive the matter. So he approues
nature as the motive, not the foundation or structure of his worthiness. His
works do every way pronounce both nourishment, delight, and admiration to the
readers soul: which makes him neither rough, effeminate, nor windy: for by a
sweet contemperature of Tune and Ditty, he entices others to goodness; and
shows himself perfect in the lesson. He never writes upon a full stomach,
and an empty head; or a full head, and an empty stomach. For he cannot make
so Divine a receptacle, stoop to the fordid folly of gal or envy, without
strength: or strength of brain stoop, and debase it self with hunting out the
bodies succor. He is not so impartial as to condemn every new fashion, or
tax idle circumstance; nor so easy as to allow vices, and account them
generous humors. So he neither seeks to enlarge his credit of bitterness, by
a snarling severity; nor to augment his substance by insinuating courtship. He
has more debtors in knowledge among the present Writers, then Creditors among
the ancient Poets. He is possessed with an innocent liberty, which excludes
him from the slavish labor and means of setting a gloss upon frail
commodities. Whatsoever therefore proceeds from him, proceeds without a meaning
to supply the worth, when the work is ended; by the addition of preparatiue
verses at the beginning; or the dispersed hire of acquaintance to extol things
indifferent: Neither does he passionatly affect high patronage, or any, further
then he may give freely; and so receive back honest thanks. The dangerous
name and the contempt of Poets, sprung from their multitude of corruptions,
proves no disadvantage or terror to him: for such be his antidotes that he
can walk untouched, even through the worst infection. And indeed that
mountebanks preparing oil which kept his hands vnscalded, was a toy of nothing
to this Poets rarity of discretion, which so prepares his mind, that he can
bathe it in the strains of burning lust, fury, malice, or despite, and yet be
never scalded, or endangerd by them. He only among men is nearest infinite: For
in the Duo apud Romanos (...) genera, (...) (...). Lib. 7. de legibus. (...),
and (...): (...) autem sunt dicti a greco (...) quod significat vmb^a^ nam in
vmb^a sicbant and ing^nij (...) exercitaban^ur. Rosin^ lib. 5 cap. 6.
Scenicall composures, of a Tragedy or Comodie he shows the best resemblance
of his high Creator: turning his quick passions, and witty humors to replenish
and overcome, into matter and form as infinite, as Gods pleasure to diversifie
mankind. He is no miserable selfe-louer, nor no unbounded prodigal: for he
can communicate himself wisely to avoid dull reservedness, but not make every
thought common, to maintain his market. It must be imputed to his perfect
eyesight, that he can see error, and auoy de it without the hazard of a new
one: As in Poems, so in proiects, by an easy conjecture. He cannot flatter,
nor be flattered: If he gives Desert, he gives no more; and leaves Hyperbole
in such am a ter of importance: As for himself, he is so well known unto
himself, that neither public fame, nor yet his own conceit, can make him
ouervalued in himself. He is an enemy to Athiests; for he is no Fatist nor
Naturalist: he therefore excludes Luck and Rhyme, from the acceptance of his
Poems; scorning to acknowledge the one as an efficient, the other as an
essence, of his Muses favor. He paies back all his imitation with interest;
(...) his Authors (if revived) would confess their chief credit was to be
such a pattern: otherwise (for the most part) he proves himself the pattern,
and the project in hand: Silver only and sound metal comprehends his nature:
rubbing, motion, land customary usage, makes the brightness of both more
eminent. No marvel though he be Immortal, seeing he conuerts poison into
nourishment; even the worst objects and societies to a worthy use. When he is
lastly silent (for he cannot die) he finds a Monument prepared at others cost
and remembrance, whilst his former actions be a living Epitaph.

CHARACT: II. An honest Lawyer.
IS a precious Diamond set in pure gold, or one truly honest, and a complete
Lawyer: The one gives glory to the other; and being divided, they be less
valuable. Divinity, and corrected nature, make him habitual in the first, but
studious labor, and a discursiue brain make him equal, if not absolute, in
the last* he knows Law to be the Mris. of man, and yet he makes honesty the
Mris of the Law. The first therforemay exceed the last; but the last never has
predominance in him, without the other. He is too divine to be tempted with
fear, favor, Minerals, or possessions; and too divine not to be tempted with
perfect knowledge, and a pitiful complaint: he has as much leisure to
dispute with conscience, in the most busy Term, as in the deadest Vaction:
And he is always more diligent to maintain wronged poverty, then attentive to
allow injurious Greatness: he can as freely refuse a prodigal, or enforced
bounty, as he can accept or demand due recompense: He resorts, to London with
a more full brain, then empty bags, and (at his return) he purses up more
full comfort, then yellow coin. He cannot be so consident as to persist in
error; nor so ignorant as to err by weakness: When therefore (through an
abundance) some knowledge is confounded, his error only proves a doubtful
question; and serves to reduce scattred remnants into method. The multitude of
contentions ma^e not him rejoice in the number, but in the difficulty; that
truth may appear manifest to our progeny. He railes not against the vices of
his profession, but makes his profession commendable by his own practice of
virtue: his Clients disease of being suspended, touches him like his own
sickness; he dares not give a dangerous purgation to dispatch him, nor by
negligence and delay, let the eui^l grow inward and incorporate, to strengthen
it self, or consume the patient. He is therefore exquisite in preservatives
against the consumption; though perhaps he may fail in restoratiues ^o support
weakness. He may well be a president to the best Physicians; for he
undertakes no cure when he perceiues it inclining to be desperate: Nay rather
he is a true subject, that fears and scorns to meddle with counterseit
pieces, further then to resolve being askd (as Goldsmiths are) whether they
will endure the Test. So he makes the cause, and not his Client, the object of
his labor. If he have favor enough to make truth be current, he looks no
further: which he needs not to patch business; nor would he willingly pursue
it: if truth were not often discountenanced. He does therefore at a Judges death
lament the death of his learning not his own private lucre: He can ride the
circuit, and scorn to be circular. He has no leisure to protract time or save
his Clients opinion with jests premeditated, or windy inferences: His modesty
was never below his courage in a good cause, nor his courage inclining to
impucence, though he were still honored with a prosperous event. He owes so
much worship to desert and innocence, that he can as faithfully applaud
sufficient worth, as not insult over, or exclaim against dull ignorance. He is
miraculously preserved against incantations: the strongest spell cannot charm
him silent, nor the most te^pting spirit provoke him to a vain pleading. He
dares know and profess in spite of potency; he dares be rich and honest in
despite of custom: And if he does not grow from a good man, to a reverend
Title, he scorns to be a Traitor and blame tyranny which ouerslips
deseuings; but he descends below his own unworthiness. Briefly, he is a
precious vessel; he indures the rest and the defiance of time: he is a sound
commodity which never fails the Customer: and does heartily confess that
whosoever swarues from this pattern, swarues from honesty, though he be
deeply learned: Howsoever, he thinks a Lawyer deeply learned cannot choose but
be honest; except multitude of Clients oppress him.

CHARACT. VIII. A Detractor
IS his own private foe, and the worlds professed enemy: He is indeed an
obstinate heretic, and if you will convert him, you must a new create him
likewise: he is of the Mahametan sect which has despised all religious Arts
and Sciences, except the confusion of all: so he approues continually the worst
things among many good, and co^demnes that which is iudiciously commended: To
read therefore and refuse, makes up the best part of his judgment. He has an*
impediment Ig^orance. Spite. Disdame. Envy.
in his language proceeding from his heart; which makes him that he cannot
speak well of any man. His five senses have a mortal combat with all objects,
that afford sense, or any thing upon which they fasten: his eye could never yet
behold a woman fair enough, or honest enough, on whom he might bestow the
sincere part of his affection: but he marries one to beget an equal society of
froward children: His ear was never well contented with a delicious tune, for
the left is only open, and that only apt to conceive discords, through a
customary habit; which has rejected all, and therefore will: For that he once
has, and is again minded to discredit worthiness, gives him both reason and
encouragement to continue spightfull: But (to our comfort be it spoken) his
envy ends commonly with himself, or at most, indeauors not otherwise then a
nasty passenger, to rub against, and defile fair outsides, because himself is
loathsome: he stopps his nose if a perfume approach, but can well endure a
stinking draft, or kennell, and embrace the savor: His palate has no relish
except he may discommend his diet, and yet he consumes all to the very
fragments: he touches or takes up nothing which is not blasted by him with a
natural dislike; or at least he will utter the manifest form of discontent.
You must believe him sick or cloyed with sweet meats: for his judgment being
out of taste, he cannot relish. His tongue, the Herald of his imagination, is a
busy Officer, and will (without question) challenge the same reward of him,
that it does of Women, for it dispatcheth the same service, and deserves
therefore (proportionably alike) to be called the maine property of each: he is
not inferior also to a woman in malice; for she is that way limited to some
persons, though vndeterminable in spite: but he transcends; accounting it his
pomp to be infinitely licentious toward all. He railes against the State,
and speaks treasons confidently to himself alone, expecting an event of his
desires: Nay, sometimes he is taken (through the license of his tongue, and a
little sufferance of the company) in peremptory speeches that bring to his
answer: Neither will he hearken to reformation, till he lackes his ears: He
is not (if a Churchman) ashamed to quarrel, first with his Patron, and openly
disclaim against the poor value of his Benefice: If, a common humorist, he
will diminish the worth likewise of a gift, before the giuers face; and looks
to the disconueniences, not the commodity, he getts by possession: If he
commends any man (which is a great wonder) he presently after will recite the
special favor and bounties he has received by him. A slight Arithmetician
may cast up the total sum of his Character: and by substraction (being the
body of his soul) may find him under the value of an honest man, above half
in half: For he lackes Charity, and so comes short of a good Christian: And
therefore is an egregious coward because he scorns to justify, except he
railes against the dead; thither he hastens being unworthy to live longer:
Detractor (...) inter (...) blan^ nor (...) bestias famelicas.
And as Dyogenes has long since resolved, he is the worst among wild
beasts, none excepted.

CHARACT. IX. An Humorist
IS the scorn of Understanding, the traitor to Reason, or the vanity of a
better man: Bloodletting, a good whip, honest company, or reasonable
instructions might (at the first) recover him. But if he continues among
laughing spirits one quarter, the disease will grow inward, and then the cure
grows desperate. If his humor be heriditary, he is more familiar with it,
and makes it the principal virtue of his family: If imitation breeds a habit,
he makes it the pledge of sworn brotherhood, or at least the favor of new
acquaintance: he never is infected single, or with one humor only; for
either he is now admitted to the several orders; or he is prompt enough to
subscribe generally when occasion peeps. You must not dare to discommend, or
call in question, his behavior seriously with his companions; for though you
cannot call the humor lawful, it is sufficient if you can call it his humor.
You may justly forbear to Restrain him; for if he be truly adopted, he
thinks it an especial part to be respectlesse. Tobacco is a good whetstone
for his property: he does seldom therefore forget to provoke his constitution
this way: and (by being insariate) he knows well his humor may escape the
search of reason, by virtue of the mist. He has from his cradle bin swadled
up, with much obstinate and peremptory affectation: It being indeed commonly
the character of his ripest age, to support that freely in his manhood, which
was forbidden in the spark of his minority: he never slips opportunity with
deliberation; he is therefore prompt enough to begin, and the reason of his
act is enough, though only that he has begun; because humor is the motive.
There is nothing within the compass of thought so triuiall, so absurd, and
monstrous, which his vanity will not auerre to be ponderous, decent, and
natural. Neither will he abhor to justify them by his own practice, against
all opposers. He travails up and down like Tom of Bedlam, under the title of
mad Rascali, Witty Rogue, or Notable mad slave: and these attributes be a more
effectual oratory to applaud his humor, then a direct commendation. He will
not sometimes (upon small discontinuance) vouchsafe to acknowledge, or (at
least) know, his familiar friends, without much impertinence and
Interrogatories of their name, or habitation: whilst another time, he dares
adventure his knowledge, and salutations upon mere aliens. He is very much
distracted, and yet I wonder how the frenzy should be dangerous; for he never
breaks his brain about the study of reason or invention: seeing his humor is
the privilege of both: It is therefore sufficient for him to be extreme
melancholy, and most ignorant of the cause or object; and suddenly to be
vnmeasurably frollick without provocation: whilst he is only beholding to a
brainlesse temperature in discharge of his credit. He will converse freely with
Seruing-men and Soldiers within 12. hours; and presently when the ague has
once seized him, he proves tyrannical and insolent toward the silly vermin.
He never brake a vow in his whole life, or brake vows continually: for either
they have not suited with his variety, to be intended, or he has intended
to keep them no longer then might agree with his body which, ebbes and flows
When he grows old, and past voice, he learnes foreign languages: as if
when he had dined, he would devour the dishes. In a word he is a chief
commander of new actions, but no commander of himself; being in his best
bravery but a Turkish Slave, ever subject to desire and appetite: according to
their pattern, he is himself to himself praiseworthy, or elegant; but to
worthiness it self, odious.

CHARACTER. X. A weake-brain'd Gull
IS a needelesse ornament: And yet an ornament to make wiser men more
accounted. Some call him a petulant neat youth; I rather think him a glass
bottle in a gilded case: that is, a fair outside with a brain easily broken.
He takes the upper hand of a fool, nay of a wise man also; and in opinion is
as good as a Courtier. According to Platoes definition he is no man. Plato
defined a man to be a two-legd creature, having broad talents without
feathers; but this above named gull wears feather enough to hide a Helmet. His
education has bin (from a child) tenderly fearful; and the mother remains
still afraid of his fortunes, least his politic wisdom should hazard them
too far: whilst his fortunes hazard his wisdom. He has been always a young
Master, and yoked his ears first to insinuation, under some oily tong'd
servant, or flattering Tutor. he continues love no longer then he finds a
fellow consenting to his vainglory: the dislike of which sooner then any
thing makes him to be choleric, to resolve and fight perhaps: but otherwise
To know he has rich kindred, and to derive a pedigree; satisfy his Valor,
Learning, proficience in Estate or credit with mere contemplation. So much
indeed does he hang upon the pillars of his gentry, as it shall therefore
be the first preparatiue of his acquaintance to salute, and ask What
countryman your Father is, of what house: or he will enquire his demesnes
only (of some neighbor:) and if your body be hansome, your clothes
proportionable, your parents wealthy; he has purchased an everlasting friend
in the beginning. A round oath is valor enough, a foolish Dittie Art enough,
and good fellowshippe honesty enough. He should be bought up in Italy (among
the butchers) for an English Calfe: because he carries his whole prise and
value about him. The truth is, he scorns to be a searcher, and thinks it
enough for his Tailor to meddle with linings. But in the circumsta^ce of making
your clothes, the price of your Beauer and silk stockins, your purpose to
travail, or of your long absence; The Spanish Inqnisition cannot be so
unmerciful. He is contented richly, nay absolutely, to be taken only for a
harmless man. Suppose he has now left the university, and bringes a little
dream of Logic from the College; being arrived at London, he sticks a
feather in his Hat; and it is all one as if he had fastened it in his head: for
his brain, from that day foreward becomes broken. The generositie and noble
carriage of ^is discourse, is to run desperately into the name of some
courageous gallant Knight, or some (...) in favor: if their alliance ^o his
family can be detected he ^iues way with an apparent re^ish. The wisest action
that ever (...) atempted, was to spare much (...) in discourse by fingering ^is
beard or bandstrings: and if ^e bestows much on Tobacco ^e cannot be blamed
much: for ^t has many times freed him from the discredit of a Non plus. He is
very well fitted for all societies, if his outside be suitable; further the^
which he never connersed with himself effectually. Nor can I wonder, though
he pays dearly, and preserues clothes delitiously; seeing those alone are
the maintenance of his whole worth; and therefore you shall perceive him more
furiously ^ngaged about the rending of his doublet, or a little lace, then a
magnanimous box, or a bastinado: And he will enter into a Tavern at the
foreside, though he might go a nearer way, only to discover his gold lace
and scarlet. If his bands and cuffs be sunburned they will not much mis-become
him: for he thinks himself an unlucky Ass, if a painted beauty does not
shine upon him. He is ambitiously given to be promoted, either by some
embassage to divulge his pedigree, and learn fashions, or by entertainment of
some chief Noble-me^ to discover his bounty: But his worst ambition is to
salute the next Coach or Foot-cloth: and he thinks verily that the prize of a
flourishing salutation winns more credit then his Beauer. He will hang out at
the Tavern window as commonly as the sign; that he may see naked breasts and
velvet linings pass along; and wrap their graces in his fancy till the next
Sunns-rising. He shifts his Familiars by the survey of prospect, and
externals; but his directions proceed from the Proverb of like to like, rathet
then Physiognomy. He is credulous and con^ident: the less certainty he has
of a report, the more public he is, and peremptory. He co^mits the best
part of his understanding to a talkati^e Barber: with whom he is the more
frequent; because he thinks to have a curle-pate, is to have a visible wit. He
studies a new fashion by the six months together: and reads Albertus Magnus,
or Aristatles Problemes in English, with admiration. He would be Physical,
and justly; for not to preserve his folly in health, were to deceive the world
of his pattern: but being merry for disgestion, his laughter is exorbitant
causeless, endless, and like himself: But fools of his own fashion praise
him, for a witty Gentleman, or a gentlemanly Fellow. His safest course will be
to marry: nothing makes him so sencible as a Wife, good or bad; till then, the
further he flies from his Caracter, he becomes it the more naturally.

CHARACT: XI. A Rank Obseruer
IS his own Comoedy, and his own Audience: For whatsoever he frames by
experience, he applaudes by custom: But being out of his element, he is an
Eele in a sand bag; for he, wanting the humor of his wrested observance,
falls away into ignorant silence. He is arrogant in his knowledge so far, as
he (thinks) to study men, will excuse him from the labor of reading, and yet
furnish him with absolute rarities, fit for all fashions, all discourses. He is
a very promis cuous fellow; and from thence proceeds the vice which makes him
without difference, comprehend ponderous and triuiall passages under the same
degree of value or estimation. For whatsoever becomes his politic vent,
becomes his understanding. When he does therefore fill up the vessel of his
conceits, he has regard to such things as may be uttered with most advantage,
either of money among the Players, or reput^tio^ among the general Gallants of
our City. He takes account of all hu mours, and through the practice of a
contempt to all, he partakes in all: for he uses what he derides under the
privilege of scorn, and so makes it familiar. So the largest benefit which
others reap, by contemning the vice in himself, arises beyond his purpose or
intention: for he extends to others no further then agrees with his own greedy
constitution; meaning to credit or enrich himself, not amend others: by which
means all his goodness is accidental. He does (notwithstanding) in some
points resemble virtue; but in the worst manner. For being impartial, he
plays the tyrant; and sels the vices of his dearest friends to discovery, by
plays or pamphlets, but is content that they should still reserve them to
their future infamy: So he becomes sooner excluded oftentimes from society,
then his flattering shifts can readily repair. Flattery and insinuation be
indeed the number of his thriuing moral virtues, through which (under a
pretense of fair meaning) he takes occasion to betray the marrow of man's
variety: and this affoords fuel for his bitter derision. His Tablebookes be a
chief adiunct, and the most significant Emblem of his own quallity, that man
may bear about him: for the wiping out of old notes give way to new: and he
likewise, to try a new disposition, will finally forsake an ancient friends
love: because he consists of new enterprises. He makes the best he can of
witty turnings; and therefore he spares conceits worth naming in company, to
make a further benifit. If you desire to know a man of this profession; you
must a while observe him, and he will presently show himself after two
meetings: for he will then talk (as it were) by a chatechisme of discourse:
keeping a certain form of language as if he durst not go beyond the circle.
His capacity is appehensiue in a strange measure: if he were less capable, he
might be more commended. For he i^croches often upon admittance (where things
be well delivered) to multiply his observation and he will verify things,
through a scandalous (...), as if they were now committed. If he conuerts to a
deserving quality, he will propound the credit of a good meaning no stipend
for his vain discoueries. Till the^, he must endure to be suspected, or odious,
whilst he whispers closely among free companio^s: Neither must he hope to
amend this Age or himself; because he never intended the first, and the last
he forgets (though he intended it) through vainglory as being transported
with this pride only, that he has observed, and can observe again. Briefly
he resembles a foolish patient, who takes a costiue pill to loosen his body:
for whilst he means to purge himself by observing other humors, he practices
them by a shadow of mockage, and so becomes a more fast corruption: if he does
not therefore feel the disease, he dies Hid^ bound.

CHARACT. XII. A simple politician
IS a purblind Fox, that pretends machiauell should be his sire: but he proves
a mungrell: he was taken from School before he had learned true Latin; and
therefore in triuiall things only, he partakes with craftiness; because he
lacks true breeding, and true bringing up. He labors commonly for opinion
where he is so well known that opinion would persecute him, without labor:
he thinks religion deceiues most unsuspected and therefore he first seems to
be a zealous Christian. The Church is a principal part of his devotion; and
to be a frequent Auditor, or outwardly attentive is a sure defense (he
thinks) a against Capital error. He is openly kinde-hearted; cries God
forbid. Amen, Christ be his comfort. But rather then he will seem aPuritune,
with indifferent companions, he can break an obscene Jest, be wanton,
sociable or any thing till he converse with a Presitian by whom he hopes to
save: the^ his eyes roll upward, his hands are elevated, commiserating terms
be multiplid, with sighs innumerable: then he rayles against the wicked,
whom a little before he heartily saluted. And after some paraphrase upon the
verse of such an Evangelist, Apostle, or Prophet, he dismisses the Puritan,
that he may laugh heartily. He is therefore much like a bookesellers shop on
Bartholomew day at London; the stalls of which are so adornd with bibles and
prayer-bookes, that almost nothing is left within, but heathen knowledge. His
mind and memory put on the same vizard of greatness, which makes him so much
incline to the posture of weighty labors, that he gives no attention to things
openly recited, though they actually possess him. To be employed therefore
for a Nobleman, is (to him) an infinite trouble, and begets employment with
all acquaintance to discover it: so the bare means to make men think he is
much entertained, costs a time equal to his occurrents. Being to be visited
(though by sure Clients) he has the room of attendance, the Art of delay, and
a visage that seems pitifully interrupted. If he rides to dispatch, the horses
be early sadled and brought into the foreside, that neighbors may observe,
when after five or six hours expectation, he comes like one that was detained
by urgent importunacies. if the company be pleased to laugh at his inhaerent
folly; he does by and by assure you; give me a sudden jest or nothing; some
use your printed jest, I cannot endure it. His best materials to work upon,
be Time, and Place; which if they afford circumstance to let yon understand
his new purchase, his new buildings, the great marriage of his Children, or
entertainment of high personages, or bounty toward an Hospital, it comes
freely and fitly, if openly. When occasions trouble him a little, he loves to
trouble himself extremely; and thinks it a point of reaching policy, to
reprove or amend that formally, which has been allowed by singular good
judgments. If he dares (with privilege of the hearers ignorance) disparage
worth in any, he takes leave of the occasion, and his own policy. This he
takes in honor of his courtship to show he can be ambitious; and build on
others ruins: But this proclaymes him a starued Cannib^ll; who, through the
famine of desert, supplies worthiness with his own excrement of detraction.
His desire and audacitie are at open strife; when he would hut dares not
commend himself, by correcting another faculty: then with a strained
laughter, and a willing palsy in his head, he seems to (...) somewhat is
unsettled; or he makes his elbow signify. that something wants his finger. His
complements are at liberty his friendship lies locked up in prison; the key
whereof he has lost willingly. For if you call him friend before he has
wrested the advantage of an enemy, he leaves you destitute, but more happy
then you believe. If he can seem to forget your countenance, he intends that
you must think him devoted to things above you, or that his brain labors:
and upon this ground he walks when he neglects your salutations, or takes no
notice of your person. Briefly, he is a man of this days profit; he respects
nothing without double interest, and that by compulsion. He is a weak foe, a
weaker friend, or the general shadow of a wiser man.

CHARACT XIII. A Spend-thrift
IS a man eu^r needy, never satisfied, but ready to borrow more then he may be
trusted with: The question of him will be, whether his learning (if he has
any) does out balance his brain, and so becomes a burden; or whether both be
crept into his outward senses: Certainly his Intellectuals of wit, and
wisdom, may be manifest, but are (like the seven Stars) seldom seen
together; they mutually succeed as having vowed to govern by course: Whilst
wit reigns, excess, and riot has the upper hand: But when he recollects
himself, he is wholly metamorphosed; wit gives place, and his extreme of
wisdom, disclaimes the smile of a merry countenance. His only joy is to
domineere, be often saluted, and have many Creditors: his Lordships lie among
the Drawers, Tobacco-men, Brokers, and Panders: But adversity makes him leave
company, and fal^ to housekeeping, and then his servants be vanished into
Sergeants. I dare protest Doctor Anthony will not make Aurum potabile like a
Spend-thrift: The truth is, a spend-thrift can dissolve a monarchy of gold if
he had it. His only flatterers be Conceit and Fancy, which charge Memory
the Steward, to bring no Accounts in till they be casheerd; which cannot be
whilst Imitation is his Captain, or Credit his Corporal. He wooes creditors,
as Gentlemen a fair Sempstres: he will promise much and mean nothing: for he
distributes his words as commonly do Printers. He dreams of being Lord chief
Justice, or at least being eminent, though he lives dissolutely; and has no
Saint but Fortune. He is, and ever will be a quarter behind with frugality; in
which volume he cannot be perfect, because the book is imperfect: for he
still rendes out the beginning of his lesson; being not able to begin a thrifty
course. His Heaven upon Earth is a fair Mistress; and though his means be
large, yet his principal sorrow is the lack of maintenance. He is scarce any
part of a Christian till he goes to Prison: and then perhaps he enters into
Religion: If he does not, I am sure he is dead in law and turns Cloister-man.
The misery of his sense is an old man, and his fathers life troubles him not a
little: Almanackes therefore which foretell the death of Age, be very
acceptable. The hurly burly of his brain is infinite, and he scarcely knomes
what he may freely make an election of. He is most truly like a broken lace,
or seame-rent cloak; ready to be taken hold of, as he walks along, by every
ctooked nail and tenter-hook. His worst bawd is too good a nature, which makes
him incident to false applauses, and carue his soul out among his familiars:
he has multitudes of dear acquaintance, but his dearest friends are ready to
stabbe him: For either those whom he accounts so, be men of fashion; or those
who be indeed so, desire his death, because they see no amendment. He is in
great request, and much enquired; being like a dangerous book still about to
be called in: For he is no sooner out of one prison but he is called into
another. He scorns to acknowledge his debts, but as things of duty, with
which mechanickes are (as he thinks) bound to uphold high birth and Gentry:
but the end proves otherwise. His downfall therefore is not admired, because
he was ever falling; and his bare excuse, makes experience the shadow.
Briefly, he may seem a treacherous friend; for he deals dishonestly with all
that challenge intrest in him; they be his Creditors: And yet he deals more
lovingly with them, then with himself; for when he paies them, he punishes
himself: If he cannot pay, he is punished more then they; and punished
enough, because he cannot pay: For then he consumes.

CHARACT: XIIII. A Ubiquitary
IS a Iourney-man of all Trades, but no sauer because no ^etter-vp: He would
be an Epitome of Arts, and all things, but is indeed nothing less then
himself: If an itchy Tailor gave him not his making, he had (I think)
perpetually been unmade: For if he scrat^h his head, the body calls him; if the
body, then his elbow; if his elbow, then again the body; if the body, then the
head itches: So never quiet, never constant, still doing, still about to do
the same, remains my dooer doing nothing. The worst of Dog-dayes was his
birthday when fleas abonnded, which (from his cradle) have so bitten him, as
till his death he must be tickled. The worm of giddiness has crept into his
private purposes: every hour, almost, gives him a new Being, or, at least, the
purpose to be an other thing then he is. So that I might almost say of him as
Locus enrin est ens, quia est aliquid alicui^s.; est autem non ens, q^ia ens
contin^tur ibi. Exerc* 5. 3. Scalig:
Scaliger says of Locus; that he is Quodammodo ens, quodammodo no^ ens. If a
Country life inuites him he yields: the Court requests him, he yields
likewise: But then disgrace averts him to his study; a Library is gotten: by
this time love has struck him, and he adores the Saint: But then some play
declames against this love; he quickly is persuaded, and follows Poetry. Thus
my vagabond of vanity is from post to pillar transported, because he travels
without a perfect lice^^e. You shall soon discern him by his arguments and
reasons; They (for the principalls) flow from one fountain of ignotance: for
all his proof depends upon I think so, Every man says so All dislike it: His
very conversation is infectious, but never frustrate: for eyrher you must
follow him, and that way you must look to be a looser: or he will follow you,
and then resolve that your intention thriues but badly. No object, no society,
season, thought, or language, comes amiss, or unexpected: his policy
therefore seeks to be rather frequent then effectual; to run about the world
daily, then travel seriously; to see a multitude, before society; and guess
at much, rather then know a little. In his discourse he daunces All Trades, and
flies from field to thicket, as being hunted by an Ignis fatuus. Talk of
Academies and he tells you Court-newes: search into the estate of a question,
and he tells you what new book is extant. If you discourse he still desires the
conclusion; and is attentive rather to the sequel, then careful to understand
the premises. In his behavior he would seem French, Italian, Spanish, or any
thing, so he may seem vn-vulgar; accounting it barbarous not to contemn his
own nation, or the common good, because he loves to be more valued by
seeming singularly precious: His diverse habit only discouers him to be true
English: and to be weary of the place, colors his employment: To live (with
him) is all vanity; and that life alone his dearest happiness: his death
therefore may be somewhat doubtful, because with it he has no Being.

CHARACTER. X. A Gamester
IS Fortunes Vassaile, temptations Anuile, or an Lidi primi omniun in venerunt
ludos t^sseras and sub Atty rege (...) primo qui (...) est eo nomine: (...) fa
me^ decipiehant hi popul^ in vice^ Ludend^ and edendo, (...). (...). 2. (...).
outlandish text, which may be soon transtated into cheaters English: He
affects gaming from a schoole-boy; and superstitiously fore-thinks how his
mind gives him. The elements of fire, earth, and air, be with him alike
predominant; he is inflamed with rage, melancholy with thoughts, iouiall with
fortune: but he never weeps in sorrow or repentance: When he looses little,
you must know he looses much, for he loves that any man should conjecture he
is able: But though his luck be infinite to win abundance, yet can he seldom
have the luck to purchase. If he quarrels, you may protest he looses, and he
must scramble or be b^aton ere he can be quiet: if he make peace you must
meet him in the winning way; and then you might more safely swagger with him:
he loves his own advantage well enough to be a Lawyer, but would make a most
preposterous Judge. The seven deadly sins sleep in his pocket; and he never
draws money but the noise awakes them. Pride, Lechery, sloth, and Gluttony, be
his Sabbath sins, which (out of gettings) he employes on Festiuals, and
Sundays. Blaspemy and murder play the Drawers with him, and bring the
fearful reckoning of his losses; and in steed of Usury, Theft plays the
Scriuener to furnish him with money: He can both fast, and watch, and yet is
far enough from being a true penitent: for curses following, do discover why
the rest was intended. Let him be sunne-burnt and ill-fauourd, yet he has this
privilege, that if he scorns quarrelling and false Dice, he shall be thought
a fair gamester. Fortune makes him her most silly Statesman: she holds him
by the chinne a while, but ere he can recover what he only wishes, he sinkes
incontinent, and worthily, for loss and gain alike encourage him, but never
satissie. Neither cares he to be thought an insatiable fellow: for when he has
in any man's opinion, filled his belly, his bones, are most busy. If he plays
upon Ticket, he knows you are but a simple fellow not able to exact, though
he resolves to pay nothing; so he did never purchase, if not this way, except
he borrowes; and that extends far enough to make him thy debtor at his own
pleasure. If he be perished, his restauratio^ is too feminine, though not
degenerate; for seeing he was ruind under the Goddess Fortune, he may well
claim the portion of a rich widow. If neither she, nor any shee-creature
else be gracious, let him vnpittied prove a Cheater, for he thrust himself to
exile, and went to willing bondage.

CHARACT: XVI. A Nouice
IS one still ready to ask the way, yet far from finding it, though you do
direct him: He is indeed a simple thing of one and twenty, that dares safely be
a pupil to any Tutor. Or take him naturally for a familiar kind of Spaniell,
that may be readily taken up, and stolen away from himself, or his best
resolutions. He is ever haunted with a blushing weakness, and is as willing
to embrace any, as not to be distasteful unto any: he trusts any man's opinion
before his own, and will commit his life to him that can insinuate: you get
acquaintance with him by a bare salutation; drink to him with a new
complement, and you have purchased his entire love, till he be cheated. The
name of Countryman, or civil carriage, vnlockes his Cabinet of intentions,
till you extract the very quintessence. Good Fortunes tickle him without
measure; and he finds no reason to moderate his joy, till he shows the way
for others to disapoint him; and being disapointed he is quiet. He cannot choose
but be exceeding credulous, for he confutes nothing further then his eyesight,
or common sense extends. Draw him to the paradise of taking all in good part;
or teach him to apprehend the worst things well, by screwing in a mere conceit
of your generosity, and he will thrust the ward-shippe of his credit, Lands, or
Body, to your patronage; So you may take relief, and tender Marriage though
his father held not in Knights service. If you misdoubt he should perceive you,
or if you think it difficult to deceive him; compare his Title with his Index,
or both together with his stuff contained, and you may soon discern him: For
either unexpectedly he does betray himself, or false fire will discharge him:
with much a do, desiring to get a Mistrisse, he proves some whores Idolater;
and he feels naturally for the harvest of his chin before seed time. Being a
little boulstred up with sweet heresies of subtle language, and Musical
Tauernes, he suddenly begins (except some charitable hand reclaimes him) to
mistake Tobacco for a precious herb: and oftentimes I think it cures his raw
humor, by operation of the price, without the Physic. You may easily also
drive him to mistake brown paper for Littletons Tenures; canuas, and Red
Herrings, for his Fathers hopp bags and Lent provision. I need not say he
will be valorous; for Parasites and Gony-catchers know, he oftentimes can see
he has been cheated, and yet his modesty will not suffer him to enforce
satisfaction. He is the common stock of Roaring* boys and Sharkes, to remedy
their wants: A bigg protestario^ makes him ye old to any man of outside that
will borrow, as soon as ten theiues with swords and pistols: So that he is
good for nothing but to blunten a Cheaters policy; because he is caught with
so little pains taking. A Spiders thread will catch him: an easy charm will
strip him naked. He will much wonder at a triuiall event, and thinks it
Witchcraft to foresee disadvantage. As for the world, Religion, or natural
causes, he can enquire of them, but difficultly believe reason: In the shutting
up therefore of his folly he does confess the Character, and leaves it to
succession.

CHARACT. XVII. An Epicure
IS the picture of Somebody, or a man of two senses: the Eye and the Palate:
for his smelling property is stuffed with the vapors of a full stomach; his
hands are the instruments of his mouth, no senses; and the belly has no ^ares,
but a trusse to support it: He is his own Tailor, and thinks directly that
more expenses belong to the linings, then to the outside. He will grow friends
with any man, that serves his stomach: If he reads the fable in Aesop how the
members conspired against the belly; he grows empty with conceit of it; and
in revenge (I think) makes the belly conspire against the members. He cannot
stir in business without a Coach, or a Litter; and then he is suddenly
interrupted, if the clock strikes Eleven. He is (whatsoever some think) a
good Physician for his own body; for he still rises from the Table with an
appetite; and is soon ready for another meal of dainties. If he be a
Lawyer, the best meats will soonest corrupt his carcass, and his conscience:
for he feeds immoderately, and will do much for a brace of Pheasants. If he
be a Divine, he preaches all Charity, and disco^mends Gentlemen extremely,
because they leave Housekeeping. He thinks his bed the best study, and
therefore speaks well in the praise of stretching meditations. He accounts
Cookery a delicate science, and preferres the knowledge of confectionary
receipts; to which purpose nothing passes through the throat, till he takes
particular notice of the ingredients. He is troubled much to think, how he
may most readily shorten his life, and not perceive the reason: Therefore he
reuolues continually, what may be most convenient for the taste, and hurtful
for the stomach. He inuites himself to much prouender by accident of
visitation; though he comes with a resolved policy: But he scorns blushing,
like a common smell-feast; and upon true reason: For modest blood (being
clarified and pure) cannot find way, through inch-deepe fatt, when it is
called to answer. He prouokes many solemn meetings, under the title of
Hospitality, when he makes himself (by these means) fitter for an Hospital.
He is contented to bestow broken meat among poor folks, but no money: for
he loves not to depart with that, in which himself has been no taster. He is
the noted foe of famine, and yet he is daily employed about the procreation of
a dearth: for the value of nothing is beyond his ability, if he has present
money, though no more then enough to discharge the present commodity; or
credit to make men trust upon executors. He has heightened the price of
out-Landish-fruits, and has purchased the general name to our Country of
Sweet-mouth'd Englishmen. Marrow-pyes, Potatorootes, Eringoes, and a cup of
Sack be his chiefest Restoratiues, and comfortable Physic: He makes no
dinner without a second course. He is over ruled more by his teeth, then his
appetite: For when they grow weary, he leaves feeding, and falls to drinking:
which argues (unless I mistake) a larger capacity of Stomach then
Understanding. But he does or should tremble, to see meat stuffed with Parsely;
because it represents a Coarse laid out for burial. He keeps a high point of
stateliness in carriage; for he delights rather in a subtle ^latterer, or
secretary, that gives good elbowe attendance, then to hear himself discourse,
or any who neglects to feed his humor; either with commendations, or vailing
reverence to his high fortunes, or with licentious fables, and derisions of his
opposites. If dinner be ended, and you desire to converse with him, you must
tarry till he be awake: for his vast chair, a downy couch, and chiefly a fine
capable seat in the Church, that may confront the Preacher, are three easy and
common receptacles for his full stomach. None resembles death in sleep so
fitly, yet none makes less moral. For indeed his sleeps are full of stink
and rottennes* and so secure, that they rather prove death it self, then a
remembrance. It is Atheneus lib. 1. cap. 1.
reported how Cambletes the gluttonous King of Lydia devoured in a ^reame his
wife while she lay sleeping together in the same bed; and finding her hand
between his teeth when he awaked, he slew himself fearing dishonor: which
story is intended (I think) an epicures moral: for in his idle dreaming life,
he will devour a wives portion, and when he has consumed all to fragments he
wakens: and (fearing discredit) dies unto the world by living obscurely or
pines away in sorrow. Briefly, being true English, he will abhor thirst, and
hunger, because he scorns a Lib* de (...), asserit quam- pri^um esse ^il Panos
and frigoris and tamis patientes.
Spaniard, and his properties.

CHARACT: XVIII. A Churl
IS the superflaity of solemn behavior: And was intended for an allay to
fifty light Iouiall constitutions; but Natura intendit optimum.
Nature being then otherwise employed, he was (against her will) made a
monstrous lump of Humanity; through the negligence of her handmaids: good
nutriment, Terrores and melancholica perturbatio, partum ter^enum, reddit
Johan: Gassanio de g^gant.
and education: or the malice of her enemies, Sorrows and a^frightment. He is
the unsociable son of Saturn, that looks strangely at the face of man, as
if he were another thing then himself. He thinks, to be familiar is to
betray himself; and that the world might plentifully be inhabited, by him
only, and a couple of drudges. If you be civil, he says you are
phantasticke; and friendly language he terms slattery. His learning and advise
be a company of miserable proverbs much of this making; a fool and his money
is soon parted: Wise enough to keep his own: store is no sore: light gains
make a heavy purse: bring not a noble to ninepence: He speaks of sparing as if
he fitted himself to beg in a grate and pray passengers to spare their
charitable alms: And he does readily consent to the prisoners when they beg
in that language. You may offend your self and him, less, if you kill him
right out, then if you discourse with him half an hour. No estate, no
advancement, can remove his humor: for he does not live (whilst he lives not
discontented) but sleeps, or cou^terfeits. He thinks salutations were ordained
to beguile, or betray; he loves not therefore to salute, or be saluted. He
will refuse gifts, that come from reconciled foes and thinks an injury can
never be forgotten. On equal terms likewise, he is heartily unwilling to
receive, except (in glory) he can ouer-value his deserts, by thinking he has
deserved ten times more. A selfe-respect, and a disdain of others, be his
nourishing vices: So he chooses rather to loose a bargain, then to become a
debtor; for he holds it more honor and policy to steal, then to be
beholding. If you enquire his health, or the times news, he dares protest you
are an impertinent, or a shallow companion. He may be called Barbarons by the
same reason that (...) was o called of an Arabi^ word Barbar; which signifies
to murmur, because the peoples (...) a murmu^ing to the first (...).
Barbary was called Barbary: for he does always murmur. Other men's triumph is
his sorrow, other men's sorrow his trumph: for in his conscience he has
rejoiced never, if not in the mis-fortuns of some, or all. The least adversity
makes him think upon a halter: and if you persuade him to patience, by
remembering others crosses, or the necessity of trouble in this life, he will be
worse madded with your council then with his affliction. His counsels and
instructions, makes him show, most like a Chimney set on fire; consisting of
rank* sootie choler: which does inflame and harden whomsoever he deals with;
not warm nor molifie with comforts and persuasions: It is better to perish,
then to crave his help* for he limits himself only to negatiues. His
entertainments be, a fierce dog to bid you welcome, a currish voice to
confirm it, and the way is open for a farewell. The first two be apparent,
the latter he intends: So does he embrace acquaintance or neighbors; but
impotent people he threatens in another kind, with Whippe, stocks, and Beadle,
they only be his familiars and defenders. His Dog, and he, are the only good
fellows, and his dog proves the better man, by being more tractable. He will
prevent you in a commodity, and give more; as also, he dares discredit any
thing, or any, not with a meaning to commend his own, but to endammage others.
He will be shaven all ways to the best help of a deformity: And though his
actions will soon verify the character, yet he will more mis-shape nature by
ill-fauoured Linen, a greasy Felt, and garments made for the purpose; as if
he meant to discover himself by the forehead, least he should not be
known quickly. He is unsatisfied upon the smallest wrong, and will rather
take the laws assignement, though a trifle, then be content with large
composition: yet none does more grumble against the Lawprofessors. He listens
to the death of great Personages, as a Butchers dog to the Oxes slaughter;
rejoicing to be glutted with his entrails, or vices, seeing he is not bettred
by his body of worth, the best food. It ^attens him to hear a prodigalls
consumption, though he partakes nothing in the Booty. If you fasten a gift
upon him, his thanks be liberal (though he does not requite) if he does not
brand you with an insinuating Title: Yet in extremity of his humor he is so
far (as he thinks) from being uncharitable, as he makes the charity of
Counsel, Purse, or (...), things that would (...) ^ittle thank for his
labor: and so he practices them under the rank of such things as do not
concern him: He says therefore, Meddle with me, when I meddle with you. So
that if shame prouokes his wealth to inuit strangers, he has no bountiful
meaning, but a resolution to live by broken meat long after: which does not
savor well, except it be moldy: that, and himself therefore, should be
spent sooner; otherwise they grow visibly odious, but himself more odious then
that.

CHARACT. XIX. An Athiest
IS no reasonable Man: For he will sooner embrace a superficial col^ (...) in
things of moment, the^ (...) into direct causes: As for obuious and common
accidents, he never looks upon them so much with reason as upon matters of
course. In all he does desire, he is little better then a Beast; fore-casting
only to make a good temporal success, and satisfy himself by his own
proiects: and he is therefore no reasonable man, because no religious man: For
Heathens and Barbarians have from the beginning been worshippers of somewhat.
There needs no better direction to know there is a God; then to know that an
Atheist is Gods enemy. If thou can seem to be familiar with him, and enter
into the extremities of ill fortune, or begin to speak of great men's funerals,
or honest men's persecutions, he will insta^tly discover what he beleiues;
being bold enough to speak plainly (if thou can apprehe^d) that virtue,
innocence, and crafty dealing are alike rewarded: That wicked and religious men
have no difference but the Name: That wrongs may lawfully (if without danger
apparent) be repelled with worse wrongs: and that therefore it argues
baseness of spirit, to contemn any preferment of advantage: That expectation
of other, wh^re joy is already present, were dotage, or madness; and that
honesty, which exceeds common form, is singularity. From which Arguments you
may draw the conclusion. If he reserues these precepts among strangers, his
practice will verify the pattern. Take this for a foundation, Every Atheist is
a self-pleasing Epicure though they be not co^uertible. If he inclines more to
Epicurisme then policy; this watchword will be frequent in his cups, Hoc est
vivere, hoc est vivere. But you may still observe, that he contends to wash
away all care with company, discourse and laughter, as if he knew his usurious
creditor (a guilty conscience) waited to expostulate with him at an advantage.
One therefore of this proportion, is more liable to the Law, but less dangerous
to the commonwealth. He bringes most villainy that feels the disease inward;
and confutes his own objections with salacious doctrine. He lives much about
the fountain of Iniquity, and therefore he must propoud that those streams of
custom be tolerable, or leave his profession. He has a natural flourish for
supernatural accidents. He turns Divinity into colorable inventions of
Philosophy. He knows every thing under the name of a natural body: he
believes Nature to be an invisible power, which intended generation for
corruption, and corruption for generation. He distinguishes bodies into simple
and compound, and makes creation a vulgar project obedient to the harmony of
elements. Then, if he knows the meaning of Homogenea, and Hetrogenea, of
corpus imperfecte mixtu^, and perfect mixtu^, he remains largely satisfied.
As for the causes of terrible events, he apprehends the power of Exhalations,
Meteors, Comets, and the Antiperistasis: which very names are able to forbid
all further inquisition. He goes not therefore beyond himself and such as
himself, for an authority: and he esteems it more convenient to think there
is a reason in nature, then to trouble his brain with finding another, when it
exceeds his positions. He never was taken for a friend in society, neither can
he bestow love, because he cannot adventure his person; life being his whole
faelicity. If at any time therefore he intended love, he intended likewise a
Physician; and him, no furtherthen agreed with his own Hum dum radicale: which
must also be understood, if himself were no Physician. He is always confident
beyond reformation. He dies with hope be tweene his jaws, and therefore one
may think him no desperate sla^e: but such hope deceiues him, because he hopes
to live longer. So that like a candles end burning in the socket, he goes out
stinking, with delay, and many faintings.

CHARACT. XX. A Liar
IS the falsest Dial in the Parish: whilst Memory the Sexton, who should keep
language his clock in order, lies drunken in Security, the common A^e house.
Arithmeticke is in him a natural vice; or at least the difficult parts of the
Science: for he can both Substract and Multiply with more ease then speak true
English: He may as well be a Tradesman of any sort by his profession, as a
Knight of the Post, or a man-pleaser. He should (by his qualities) be a good
Gamester; for the one is just in league with a voluntary ignorance, or an
enforced knowledge, as much as the other: He never offends this way, but he
offends double; for he cannot with credit, or knowledge of the Art Military,
think it sufficient to defend with bare affirmance, and the walls of
circumuention, except his cannon-othes be ready planted and discharged. He is
not guilty of his own vice alone; for ^eldome does he avouch that, which his
confederate will not justify: and therefore he prouides adherents for security;
but in his own single opinion he does match Copernicus. His common misery is
well known, it persecutes him with divine Justice, for all his truths
extraordinary, win no belief; because false-hoods are so frequent. He takes
it for granted, that he can grace or disgrace any man at his pleasure: and if
invention or his eloquence were able, he could not want his purpose. It were
Gods due Justice if he should run mad; for he deuides his meaning and his word;
and so distracts himself. Any ad^a^tage accruing to himself prouokes his
faculty; though sometimes a friends love entices him to strange adventures. If
neither the first nor second be opportune, he so labors only to beget
wonderful narrations. He is ready enough to ouer-value himself, his friends,
and his commodity: accounting it a politic strain to set an excellent ^aire
gloss on all; that he may purchase the reputation of a large estate: Which
seems to argue an innocent upright course, not fearing tyranny: But indeed he
does (from hence) deceive the world and dye a beggar, through the foregoing of
estimation.

Let him live about great persons and his best discourses will be lye-blowne
with tales of honor: but turn him to pasture a little into Spain or Italy,
and he will purge himself (in England) of twenty times more then he received.
He ^els no wonder without some preparatiue: as namely, he admits beforehand
what may be: or he begins thus: You may think it is a lie: or, it will seem
strange, but I protest before God, it is very true* But if he be one that
maintains Ordinaries and public meetings in delight of new relations; he
speaks altogether upon credible report; and you shall be the third man partakes
of the nouelty: for he has always talked with one, that was an eyewitness:
if he were not himself the agent or beholder. Sometimes he delights to be a
Isti con^ ^dam (...) glo^ia vbi (...) hai^ in T ^oph^r: lib: Eth^: Cha^: in^
o^: qui memorat (...) era^ ab (...) (...) quae (...) vix (...) obu^ (...).
glorious fellow; and then no letters be conveyed from Italy or France; and no
disgraces or aduancements be meditated in the court without his knowledge. He
may at his election be admitted into the College of Jesuits: but he loves not
to forsake his Country, though he boasts of travailes; and yet he is a mere
fugi^iue. He was originally intended for a Rhetorician; and lackes only a
little instruction: For he is more conversant with Tropes the^ Fi^; and yet
the figure of repetition, is his own natural. Attention makes thee very much
culpable in his reports: belief makes thee apt to err in the same kind. He
is more confident (if he could be uncased) in the rare exployts of Rosac^ere,
and Delphoebo, Amadis de Gaul, or Parismus, then the most holy Text of
Scripture. It is an aequall difficulty to discern his truth and untruth: for
he is nothing but falshhood, yet contrary to falsehood, and contrary to truth:
having more conueyances then a bawdy house, or a suspected victualler. The
truth is, there is no truth in him: let him tell me, that himself lies, and I
will nor believe him. If he should strive for Antiquity, no English Generation
can compare with him: And yet he needs no Herald, for he deriues his Pedigree
immedatly from the devil.

CHARACT: XXI. A Drunkard.
IS in Opinion a good fellow, in practice a living conduit. His vices are like
Errata in the latter end of a false coppie: they point the way to virtue by
setting down the contrary. He is at all points armed for a Knight errant, and
called upon for adventures, every way as full of hazard. This makes him enter
boldly into the Lions, or the Green Dragons Cave; into the White Bears jaws,
the Mermaids closets, the Suns Palace; nay, more, into the devils chamber of
presence. And for his Travails let the, Globe witness; through every corner
of which, he has or can walk at his pleasure. Freedom he challenges, and
therefore scorns to be a tedious customer, till by enforcement, he drinks
upon record; otherwise he shifts his watring place; either to avoid his lowse
the Bayliffe*; or to renew his fountain: the last only pleades for his
commendation, because he proceeds still from worse to better: which
discommends him most, because it nourishes his faculty. The torment of his
eyesight is a frothy Tapster, or a sluggish Drawer with a deceitful pot. The
plagues of his palate be good wines, where he cannot purchase, nor be trusted:
or a Tavern well furnished, that ioynes to the prison door: they vex him, as
a feast vexes the famished, in a strong Castle: or a Lamb the starued Fox,
when Mastiff^s be awake. He never disallowes religion for putting L^nt in the
Almanacke: for Tobacco, a Rasher, and red Herrings, his instruments of relish,
are at al times perhibited. There is some affinity betwixt him and a Chamelion:
he ^eeds upon air; for he does care his word familiarly. He has a cheap
course of breake-fasts, to avoid dinners; which at his pleasure he can spare,
through morning antidotes* the inquisition of these he studies, and looses by
the knowledge. He indifferently concludes, and begins quarrels: that quality
neither much blames nor praises him. He cannot run fast enough to prove a good
Footman: for Ale and beer (the heauiest element next earth) will overtake
him. Opportunity he embraces, but in a bad sense: for he is rather studious to
follow any man's calling then his own. His nose the most innocent, bears the
corruption of his other senses folly: From it may be gathered the emblem of
one falsely soandald: for it not offending, is colourably punished. It serves
therefore for nothing but such an Emblem, except to prove the owners great
innocence, by how much it is the greater: His eminent seeming virtues be his
peculiar vices: For his casting up expenses, and his wisdom over ihe pot, be
his unthriftiness and folly. Sack and strong liquours hardens him in his
custom; according to the nature of a brick: as if he were ambitious to be red
earth, like Adam. He proves the Philosophers opinion of Man, better then any;
for he is animal calidissimum and humidissimum the hottest and the moystest
creature. He were utterly base, if unable to defend his habit: you shall
therefore know him by his arguments. If he inclines to Scholler-ship, they be
these: First, to abandon melancholy; For care, he says, kills a Cat: then to
avoid mischievous thoughts; for he that drinks well, sleeps well, and he
that sleeps well thinks no har^e: he may be thought a fit trauailer in
difficult iournies, for he cannot miss the way; no more then a blind man
misses a picture. His teeth be strongest, because least employed: Hence you may
take the emblem of one truly miserable; who abounds in profits, unprofitable
to himself. A beggar, and he are both of one stock, but the beggar claims
antiquity: the beggar begs that he may drink, and has his meaning: the other
drinks that he may beg, and shall have the true meaning shortly. In the degree
of beggars it is thought he will turn Dummerer, he practices already, and is
for that purpose many times taken speechless. If he goes out in the morning a
libertine Libertinus est manumistus servus. ^x Donati comment: Ter^nti:
or a man lately manu-misd from liquor, he returns at night a prisoner, if he
does return: for he cannot return safely without his keeper: otherwise, he
conuer^s suddenly from flesh to fish, and dives into the mud, or swims in his
own water. These together may prove fasting-dayes to be his natural season.
Whilst he is waking, he purges all secrets; least I therefore by keeping him
awake longer, should err in the same kind, I have now cast him into a dead
sleep.

CHARACT: XXII. A begging Scholar
IS an Artificial vagabond: He took his first degree (as may be imagined) in
the University: But he never thinks himself a full Graduate; till by
Cosmographicall science, he surueys the degrees of Longitude, and Latitude,
belonging to most of our famous Cittyes in England: So he becomes Practitioner
in the Mathematics, though he pretends Divinity by order of Co^mencement,
which might be a safe license among diverse; if the Statute vouchsafed not to
take notice of his roguery. He has from the first hour of his Matriculation
inherited the name of Sharke, by way of a general dependence in the College:
But being perhaps expulsed, or departing in a hungry humor, he travels with a
prompt memory, in stead of other knowledge; and above all things he is wise
enough for himself, to remember his wants. He never looked into Divinity
beyond the meaning of two Sermons; and upon those he has insisted so often,
that he feels no need of another Library. He still pretends (like some single
Phisitia^) the cure of one disease, that is, the cold of Charity, and
therefore (his charitable advise being ended) a bill of receipt follows for
the ingredients: But the disease may be thought to grow more desperate through
the mistaken cure; because the medicine is applied unfitly. His help extends
far and near to fugitive Raga-muffins, under the sign of impotent Soldiers,
or wandering Abraham-men: but his help proves the maintenance of their
function, because it proves his own, by occasion: For being received as a
Secretary to the counsel of vagrants, he conceales much idle property, in
advantage of himself and Countrymen, not of the Commonwealth. If you would
privately know him; you must know likewise, the journey to his friends has
been tediously undertaken; and whilst he bringes his money in question, you
must know he beggs for an answer, and so betrays the doubt of sufficiency:
Howsoever (in public) he insinuates a deprivation; by being too sufficient.
Being admitted (for Hospitality sake) to receive lodging; he has a slight of
hand, or cleanly conueiance, which threaten silver spoones; and leaves a
desperate sorrow among all the household Servants, because he departed so
soon. In the space of a natural day he seldom travails further then to the
next Ale house; that so by degrees he may approach to a great Market upon the
Sabbath. He paies for what he takes continually, one way or other: For being no
customer, he cannot be trusted, except in case of necessity; and then he
pays them experience to beware of such as he another time. He has Learning
to propound the Apostles president for travails, but conscience little enough
to look any further. If his family be not portable, it comes in the rereward,
and awaits his return to the Rende-vouze: if otherwise he be attended with
neither wife, nor maid-seruant; he makes use of both, as he finds himself
able: He is sometime inducted by a simple Patron, to some more simple Vicarage;
But his Tithes and Credit concluding in Harvest, he takes his flight with the
Swallow: He cannot therefore thrive among the promoted begging Scholars,
because he has no continuance.

The second Book of Characters.
CHARACTER. I. A Iaylor
IS the beggars bodylowse, which lives upon the blood and carcass of them which
can worst spare any: He proceeds commonly from such a one, as could not govern
himself, to govern others imperiously: He cannot think of a place, more
suitable with the safe practice of his villainy: No, not among the Roarers, or
the company of quack-saluers. A thief, and a Murderer, be the names which
make him iron mad, whiles himself proves the more exquisite offender: And if
formerly he has bin infamous among all, it proves felicity with him now to
insult over some, and grows the more implacable. At his first induction, he
begins (like all new Officers) to reform Methodically: He may very well seem
a bou^tifull Host, for he detaines his customers whether they will or not but
his bou^ty retireth, when he loses advantage. He is a true Alchymist: no
dreamer in that science: no, not the best proficient has thriu'd better in his
proiections: He does indeed more wisely (by virtue of his stone-walls, without
the Philosophers stone) convert rusty lro^ into perfect silver: He makes men
believe, that the poor captives shall work in daily labor to get a living:
whiles his conjecture is verified in their nightly labor, by working through
the enclosure; or being idle they get livings too many. And by this means he
makes a difference betwixt picking and stealing: for whomsoever he withholds
from stealing he suffers to use picking freely. If he perceiues an open object
of increase, he will himself work the means of disorder by plentiful
liquor, that so a large fine may redeem the quarrel: To which purpose he does
sophisticate his fuming Beer, to breed a skirmish the sooner: and then the
dungeon is a dreadful word, until a competent bribe pacify his humor. He
looks as carnestly and as often upon the palms of hands as if he could tell
men's Fortunes: and the truth is he can give a shroad conjecture by that
speculation. Nothing makes him so merry as a harsh Mittimu^, and a potent
captive: they come like an inscription with a fat goose against newyeares-tide:
but bail sounds a sorrowful retrait: as if the inferior Theife should loose
a booty by composition: and yet he will take his wives suretiship for the more
extent of liberty, because he knows her perfect in the secrets of that
Alchymie. Crueltyes are derived from himself into his whole family. He is a
circumspect companion, and still dreams of an escape: and of a breaking forth
he may well dream, having so many putrified sores in one body: but seldom do
any escape in his debt, though at their breaking out, they be a week behind:
for above one week he never trusts; and not so long, unless the former
advantage will recompense a fortnights arrerages. He has as great a gift in
changing men's dispositions as poverty and courtship: for he can make them beg
that otherwise are ashamed to beg. Briefly, he is in a manner, the Devils
huntsman, who keeps those Beagles either for castigation, because they were
not cunning enough, else for amendment of the Chase. For if he sends them
forth, they prove Graduates, when they escape the Gallows. As for himself,
you may either meet him in the midst of Carrowses among his Customers, or
riding post in mellancholy, to re-imparke his wild runnagates.

CHARACT. II. An Informer
IS a protected Cheater, or a Knave in authoritic, licenced by authority: he
sprang from the corruption of other men's dishonesty; and meets none so
intricately vicious, but he can match the pattern: which makes him free of all
Trades by the statu^e: for this gives him a freedom to seruey all besides
himself. He is a fellow as much beholding to his five senses, as to his
intellectuals: he can diversely employ all his senses about diverse objects; but
commonly they are all occupied about one or two chiefly: the winding up of a
^acke is better then music to his eats in Lent: the steame of a roasted
joint attracts his nostrils unsatiably: the sight of a shoulder of mutton then
feeds his stomach; but the taste and feeling of it, prouokes him to a
dreadful insultation. He is worse then an Otter-hound for a diue-dopping
Ale-house-keeper: and hunts him out unreasonably from his Element of Liquor;
and yet he may seem reasonable honest, for he hearkens readily to a
composition. But whilst he consents to save men harmless (upon terms
indifferent) he makes open way for another of his coat to incroach upon the
like premises. So that he seems to be the darling of some Welsh pedigree: for
he conspires with his own profession, and makes a triumph of the least
advantage, in the very same manner. Let him be a tytle-sifter and he will
examine lands as if they had committed high treason: But then he will be
daunted though he wears a double nightcap in reading the due fortune of his
predicessours Empson and Dudley; except his judgment serves him to mistake the
Chronicle. The lesser Fox works upon simple creatures; and the base informer
upon poor men's fortunes. He promises restoration to a forbidden Alehouse
with an Exchequer license to vex the lustices: whilst he takes forty
shillings, three pound, or upward for a single subpoena, to defend the
Liquor-man, who incurres new charges by trusting in the apparent cousenage. He
takes away the relation betwixt a lawyer and his Client; and makes it generally
extend to the Clearks in Offices; under whose safeguard he has his License
sealed to travail: a foot-post and he differ in the discharge of their
packet, and the payment: for the Informer is content to tarry the next Term
(perhaps) till a Judgment. His profession affoords practisers both great and
small; both bucke-hounds and harriers: the essence of both is inquisition. But
the first is a more thriuing and ancient stock of hatred: for he is a kind of
Antiquarie: the last is seldom meddling with men much above him: howsoever,
sometimes he is casually the scourge of an ignorant Justice.

CHARACT: III. A base Mercenary Poet
IS the most faithful obsequious servant of him that gives most: He subscribes
his definition to all Dedicatory Epistles. If motherwit raisd him to be a
writer, he shows himself a dutiful child and beggs Poems in defense of
Nature: neither can he choose but betray himself to be a cosset, by his odd
frisking matter, and his Apish Titles: which may persuade any reasonable man,
that he studyes more to make faces, then a decent carriage. If he have learnt
Lillies Grammar, and a piece of Ouids Metamorphosis, he thinks it time to ask
his Patrons blessing with some work that savors very much of the authors
meaning, and two or three Latin sentences. If he has seen the University,
and forsaken it again, because he felt no deserts which might challenge a
Benefactor: Then he calls every man (besides his Patron) a despiser of
Learning, and he is wonderful angry with the world; but a brace of angels will
pacify his humor. If he be an expulsed Graduate, he has been conversant
so long with rules of Art, that he can express nothing without the Art of
begging, or public sale: But commonly he is some swimmingheaded Clark, who
after he has spent much time in idle So^nets, is driven to seek the tune of
Silver, to make up the consort. Necessity and covetous hire, bribe his
invention, but cannot corrupt his conscience: For though he undertakes more
the^ he is able, yet he concludes within expectation of others that know
him, and so he deceiues himself only. Gold and Silver only do not make him
a hyerling; but envy, malice, and the means to be made famous: among which
means, the chief be Libells, scandala magnatum, petty treasons, and
imprisonments. He will never for feite his day to necessity, if he writes by
obligation; which happens diverse times when he is the Scriuener and the
Debtor: For the tide of one Pamphlet being vented at his elbowes, with leaning
upon Tauerne-tables; he ties himself to certain limits; within which
precincts he borrowes much, translates much, coins much, converting all to his
project: and if matter fails, he flies upon the Lawyer, or disgraces an
enemy. He may dissemble with the world for he dissembles with himself:
striving to conceive well of errors, though his conscience tells him they be
gross errors: And when he hears his play hissed, he would rather think
bottle-Ale is opening (though in the midst of winter) then think his ignorance
deserves it. His Apologies discover his shifting cou^enage: for he attributes
the vices of his quil to the Ages infirmity; which endures nothing but amorous
delights, close bawdry, or mirthfull Jests: As if the ignorance of any Age
could hinder a wise man's propositions. He makes Poems that consist only of
verse and rhyme in stead of excellent co^posures, with the same confidence that
ignorant Painters make a broad face and a flat-cap to signify King Harry the
eight: confoun^ing (like a bad Logician) the ^orme and the dimention. He is a
fraded fellow, though he seems a Scholar: but is never free of the Company, or
accepted, till he has drunk out his Apprentise-hood among the graund Masters:
and then with an univocal consent, he may commend his Wares, turn them into
the fashion, dress over his old Pamphlets, and not be any way disgraced among
them. If his own guilty judgment cannot approve his own Poems: He thinks
his fortune good enough to make his Reader approve, or dispense with follies:
and upon that hope he dares often publish, and is as often laughed at: but he
has wit enough to serve the whole City, if he makes the Lord Majors
pageants. He presumes much upon absolute good meanings, though the Text be
palpable: and yet where he commends himself best, he is not refractory, for
he still promises amendment, or some more voluminous work, to gratify his
benefactors; but he could never live long enough to finish his miracles. Many
have been accounted traitors who have conspired less against the King then
he: for he lays plots in wrighting to make the King loose his time, if he
vouchsafe to see them Acted. But he is much indebted to the favor of Ladies,
or at least seems to have been graciously rewarded. If he affects this humor,
he extolls their singular judgment before he meddles with his matter in
question: and so selles himself to the worlds opinion. If his hands be no
more active then his head, he is guilty of many a good Scribes idleness, by
making that legible, which (before Transcription) might have bin tolerable
folly. If you be therefore an honest, or generous patron, suffer him not to be
printed.

CHARACT. IIII. A common Player
IS a slow Payer, seldom a Purchaser, never a Puritan. The Statute has done
wisely to acknowledge him a Rogue E^ratum in the last (...)
errant, for his chief essence is, King Agesilaus teaches the resp^ct due to
comm^n players in h^s and were (...). (...) cor: and thinking himself not
graced enough by the kings no tice, as the King passed along, does saw^ily
interrupt him thus; does not your ace know me? (...) said the King, thou art Ca
(...) the Pl^yer.
A daily Counterseit: He has been familiar so long with outsides, that he
professes himself, (being unknown) to be an apparent Gentleman. But his
thin Felt, and his silk Stockings, or his foul Linen, and fair Doublet,
do (in him) bodily reveal the Broker: So being not suitable, he proves a
Motley: his mind observing the same fashion of his body: both consist of
parcells and remnants: but his mind has commonly the newer fashion, and the
newer stuff: he would not else hearken so passionately after new Tunes, new
Tricks, new Devises: These together apparel his brain and understanding,
whilst he takes the materials upon trust, and is himself the Tailor to take
measure of his souls liking. He does coniccture somewhat strongly, but dares
not commend a plays goodness, till he has either spoken, or heard the
Epilogue: neither dares he entitle good things Good, vnless^ he be (...) on by
the (...) ^hen he sait^ (...) with a (...) cant or persist (...) he pretends
to have a royal Master or Mistress, his wages and dependence prove him to be
the Iuxta Plautinum illud (...): quin (...) conductior sum quam tragaedi aut
comici.
servant of the people. When he does hold conference upon the stage; and should
look directly in his fellows face; he turns about his voice into the
assembly for applause-sake, like a Trumpeter in the fields, that shifts places
to get an echo. The cautions of his judging humor (if he dares undertake it)
be a certain number of sawsie rude jests against the common lawyer; hansome
conceits against the fine Courtiers; delicate quirkes against the rich Cuckolda
Citizen; shadowed glaunce for good innocent Ladies and Gentlewomen; with a
nipping scoff for some honest Justice, who has imprisoned him: or some
thriftie Tradesman, who has allowed him no credit: always remembered, his
object is, A new play, or A play newly revived. Other Poems he admits, as
goodfellowes take Tobacco, or ignorant Burgesses give a voice, for company
sake; as things that neither maintain, no^ be against him. To be a player, is
to have a mithridate against the pestilence: for players cannot tarry where the
plague reigns; and therefore they be seldom infected. He can seem no less
then one in honor, or at least one mounted; for unto miseries which persecute
such, he is most incident. Hence it proceeds, that in the prosperous fortune of
a play frequented, he proves immoderate, and falls into a Drunkards paradise,
till it be last no longer. Otherwise when adversities come, they come together:
For Lent and Shrouetuesday be not far asunder, then he is dejected daily and
weekly: his blessings be neither lame nor monstrous; they go upon four
legs, but move slowly, and make as great a distance between their steps,
as between the four Terms. Reproof is ill bestowed upon him; it cannot
alter his conditions: he has bin so accustomed to the scorn and laughter of
his audience, that he cannot be ashamed of himself: for he dares laugh in
the midst of a serious conference, without blushing. If he marries, he
mistakes the Woman for the Boy in Woman's attire, by not respecting a difference
in the mischief: But so long as he lives unmarried, he mistakes the Boy, or a
Whore for the Woman; by courtin^ the first on the stage, or visiting the second
at her devotions. When he is most commendable, you must confess there is no
truth in him: for his best action is but an imitation of truth, and nullum
simile est idem. It may be imagined I abuse his carriage, and he perhaps may
suddenly be thought faire-conditioned: for he plays above board. Take him at
the best, he is but a shifting com panion; for he lives effectually by putting
on, and putting off. If his profession were single, he would think himself a
simple fellow, as he does all professions besides his own: His own therefore
is compounded of all Natures, all humors, all professions. He is politic
also to perceive the commonwealth doubts of his license, and therefore in
spite of Parliaments or Statute (...) he incorporates himself (...) the
title of a brotherhood. Painting and fine cloths may not by the same reason be
called abusiue, that players may not be called rogues: I would have the (...)
Pedant go study ^ogicke.
For they be chief ornaments of his Majesty's Reuell^. I need not multiply
his character; for boys and every one, will no sooner see men of this Faculty
walk along, but they will (unasked) inform you what he is by the vulgar
title. Yet in the general number of them, many may deserve a wise man's
commendation: and therefore did I prefix an Epithet of common, to distinguish
the base and artlesse appendants of our city companies, which often times
start away into rusticall wanderers and then (like Proteus) start back again
into the City number.

CHARACT: V. A Warrener
IS an earthly minded man: He pluckes his living from the earths bowels: and
therefore is his mind most conversant about that element: He lives in a little
Arcenall or watchtower, being well provided with Engines and Artilery: with
which (like another tyrant) he does encounter the enemies of his Inhabitants;
that he may engrosse them all the more entirely: And yet in some respects he
is a good Governor, for he delights more in the death of one enemy, then six
subjects: The reason is apparent: for one foe is able to destroy twenty of his
Vassailes; and so his gains be prevented: Therefore a Polecat and he, are at
continual variance: yet he is charitable and merciful, for if the Pole-cat
turns Ferret and obeys him, none agree better: He does Waiue much spoil by
his midnight watches, and yet he owes no Lord*ship: The truth is, tumblers,
nets, and other traffic do escheate to him, although the owner be living. He
verifies the proverb of plenty: the more he has, the more he would have: for
though his own ground be full of breeders, yet he cannot forbear to have his
hand in private Warrens. He is much, and most perplexed, because pales and
hedges will not keep his Cattle in compass: if he cannot therefore compound
with the neighbors adjacent, he has a trick to affright those that
transgress their limits, by scattering murdered captives (as Pole-cats, and
Weasels) in their places of refuge: And this is a deep quillet in the
profession: Besides this he has little knowledge of moment, except the science
of making Trappes: or circumuention of innocent dogs to feed vermin. The
chief petition of his prayer, is for black frosts, Sunshine weather, and
calm midnights: under protection of the last, he walks fearelesse, with a
pike staff, to exercise the liberty of that season among other men's backsides:
Where he has many nightspels, to the hazard of much Pullen, and indeed all
things thieue able; if he does not play the valiant Footman, and take tribute
of passengers: Neither is he worthy to be such a dealer with nets and Cony
chatching if he could not entrap the Kings subjects: I make no question
therefore that he is worthy of his profession: howsoever sometimes he is caught
in a pitfall of liquor by his companions: whilst they perhaps being Poulterers,
prove tyrannical substitutes, and rob his possessions: but in revenge, he
does often encroach upon the Poul terers likewise with a drunken bargain.

CHARACT. VI. A Huntsman
IS the lieutenant of dogs, and foe to Harvest: He is proudly willing to
govern; and because he finds himself insufficient to deal with men wisely,
he commands dogs; which fawn upon the Master and snarle at strangers. He is
froli^ke in a fair morning fit for his pleasure; and alike rejoices with the
Virginians, to see the rising Sun: He does worship it, as they; but worships
his Game more then they: And in some things almost as barbarous. A sluggard he
contemnes, and thinks the resting time might be shortened; which makes him rise
with day, observe the same pace, and prove full as happy; if the day be happy.
The names of Fox, Hare, and Bucke, be all tracting sillables; sufficient to
furnish fifteen meals with long discourse in the adventures of each. Fox
draws in his exploits done against Cubbes, Bitch* foxes, Otters, and Badgers:
Hare, brings out his encounters, plat-formes engines, fortifications, and
nightworke done against Leueret, Cony, Wilde-cat: Rabbet, Weasell, and
Pole-cat: Then Bucke, the Captain of all, prouokes him (not without strong
Passion) to remember Heart, Hind, Stagge, Roe, Pricket, Fa^ne, and Fallow
Dear. He uses a dogged form of government, which might be (without shame)
kept in Humantie; and yet he is unwilling to be governed with the same reason:
either by being satisfied with pleasure, or content with ill fortune. He has
the discipline to marshall dogs, and sutably; when a wise Herald would rather
marvel, how he should distinguish their coats, birth, and gentry. He carries
about him in his mouth the very soul of Ouids bodies, metamorphosed into
Trees, Rocks, and Waters: For when he pleases, they shall echo and distinctly
answer; and when he pleases, be extremely silent. There is little danger in
him toward the Commonwealth: for his worst intelligence comes from Shepherds
or Woodmen; and that only threatens the destruction of Hares; a welknowne dry
meat. The spring and he are still at variance: in mockage therefore, and
revenge together of that season, he wears her livery in Winter. Little
consultations please him best; but the best directions he does love and
follow; they are his Dogs: If he cannot prevail therefore, his luck must be
blamed; for he takes a speedy course. He cannot be less then a conqueror
from the beginning, though he wants the boot; for he pursues the flight. His
Manhood is a crooked sword with a saw back; but the badge of his generous
valor is a horn to give notice. Battery and blowing up, he loves not: to
undermine is his Stratageme. His Physic teaches him not to drink sweating;
in amends whereof, he liquors himself to a heat, upon cool blood: If he
delights (at least) to emulate his Dog in a hot nose. If a Kennell of Hounds
passant take away his attention and company from Church; do not blame his
deuo^ion; for in them consists the nature of it, and his knowledge. His
frailties are, that he is apt to mistake any dog worth the stealing, and never
take notice of the Collar. He dreams of a Have formed, a Fox kenneld, a Bucke
lodged, or a Heart in harbor And if his fancy would be moderate, his actions
might be full of pleasure.

CHARACT. VII. A Falkoner
IS the egg of an ordinary Goosewoman, hatched up amongst Hawks and Spaniels.
He has in his minority conuersed with Kest rils, and young Hobbies; but
growing up he begins to handle the Lure, and look a Fawlcon in the face. All
his learning makes him but a new Linguist; for to have studied and practiced
the terms of Hawks Dictionary, is enough to excuse his wit, manners, and
humanity. He has too many Trades to thrive; and yet if he had fewer, he would
thrive less: he need not be envied therefore, for a Monopoly, though he be
Barber surgeon, Physician, and Apothecary, before he commences Hawk leech: for
though he exercise all these, and the art of Bow-strings together, his patients
be compelled to pay him no further, then they are able. Hawks are his object,
that is, his knowledge, admiration, labor, and all: They be indeed his idol,
or Mistress, be they Male or Female: to them he consecrates his amorous
Ditties, which be no sooner framed then hallowed: Nor should he doubt to
overcome the fairest, seeing he reclaimes such Haggards; and courts every one
with a peculiar Dialect. That he is truly affected to his Sweethart in her
fether*bed, appears by the sequel; himself is sensible of the same misery:
for they be both mewed up together: But he still chooses the worst penance;
by choosing rather an Ale*house, or a Cellar, for his moulting place, then the
Hawks mew. He cannot be thought less then a spy, and that a dangerous one:
For his espials are, that he may see the fall of what he persecutes: and so
the Wood-cocks perish: if they do not, his Art is suspended. He is a right
busie-body, who intermeddles so much with others affairs, that he forgets his
own: He would not else correct his Hawks wildness; and be so ready to
trample down the standing corn; or make way through enclosures: That argues
him to be Rebellious and vulgar; one apt to strive for liberty. His Manhood I
dare not signify, it remains doubtful upon equal terms, because, seldom
tried with any thing but wildfowle: and then he performs, water-seruice;
perhaps sea-seruice; but both, in some soul manner: By Land he serves, on
horse or foot; on both, to destroy Partrige, or Pheasant. You may truly call
him an extreme bad husband if he lies in a Flocbed; because he meddles so much
with Fowls and does not feather his nest. There is no hope of his rising,
though he does excel; for he rather seeks to make others ambitious of
rising, then himself: and therefore though he frames wings with Daeda^us, he
thereby makes his Hawke only fit to aspire: Yet if any shall (by conjecture)
take a flight from Paul's Steeple; he will (I suppose) as soon as any: for
he proves wiser already in the art of wings then Blad^d. I had rather (in the
mean time) take his word then his oath; for when he speaks without an oath,
he is not troubled with the passion of his Curres, or Haggards; and therefore
cannot so well excuse it, if he breaks his promise. As for Religion, she is
a bird of too high a wing; his Hawks cannot reach it, and therefore not he.
And if he flies to Heaven, it is a better flight, then any he has commended:
There, I meddle not with him; thither he must carry himself: for I can
neither condemn, nor save him.

CHARACT. VIII. A Farmer
IS a concealed commodity: His worth or value is not fully known till he be
half rotten: and then he is worth nothing. He has Religion enough to say,
God bless his Majesty; God send peace, and fair weather: So that one may
gleane Harvest out of him to be his time of happiness: but the Tith sheafe goes
against his conscience; for he had rather spend the value upon his Rea^ers and
Plough-men, then bestow any thing to the maintenance of a Parson. He is
sufficiently Booke-read, nay a profound Doctor, if ^ee can search into the
diseases of Cattle and to foretell rain by tokens, makes him a miraculous
Astronomer. to speak good English is more then he much regards; and for him
not to contemn all Arts and Languages, were to condemn his own education. The
pride of his House keeping is a mess of Cream, a Pigge, or a green-Goose: and
if his servants can vncontrowled find the highway to the Cup-boord, it winnes
the name of a bountiful Yeoman. Doubtless he would murmur against the Aurelius
victor de vir: illust: fo 264. (...) Grachus tribunus plebis, leg e^ tolit, ne
quis quingenta p^us habere t^ugera.
Tribunes law; by which none might occupy more then five hundred acres: For he
murmurs against himself, because he cannot purchase more. To purchase Arms
(if he aemulates Gentry) sets upon him like an Ague: It breaks his sleep,
takes away his stomach, and he can never be quiet till the Herald has given
him the Harrowes, the Cuckowe, or some ridiculous Emblem for his Armory. The
bringing up, and Marriage of his eldest Son; is an ambition which afflicts him
so soon as the boy is borne, and the hope to see his son superior, or placed
above him, drives him to dote upon the boy in his Cradle. To petuse the
Statutes, and prefer them before the Bible, makes him purchase the credit of
a shrewd fellow: and then he bringes all adversaries to composition. If at
length he can discover himself in large Legacies beyond expectation, he has
his desire. Mean time, he makes the prevention of a dearth his Title, to be
thought a good commonwealths man. And therefore he preserues a Chandelors trea
sure of Bacon, Linkes and Puddings in the Chimney corner. He is quickly and
contentedly put into the fashion, if his clothes be made against Whitsontide,
or Christmas day: and then outwardly he contemnes appearance: He cannot
therefore choose but hate a Lib 2. In ^urop: tractatu. Quo Hisp^norum dignitas
en^teat m^gis, illi in app^ratu and vestimentis omnia ponunt.
Spaniard likewise; and (he thinks) that hatred only, makes him a loyal
subject: for benevolence and subsidies be more unseasonable to him, then his
quarters Rent. Briefly, being a good housekeeper, he is an honest man: and
so, he thinks of no rising higher, but rising early in the morning; and being
up, he has no end of motion* but wanders in his Woods and Pastures so
continually, that when he sleeps, or sitts, (I think) he wanders also.
After this, he turns into his element, by being too ventrous hot, and cold:
then he is fit for nothing but a checkered grave: howsoever some may think him
convenient to make an everlasting bridge; because his best foundation has
been perhaps) upon Wool-packes.

CHARACT. IX. An Hostess
IS (if beautiful) the abatement of reckonings, or the second course: if a
widow, she is the iourneys end of a weather-beaten Traveler: if ordinary, she
is the servant and the Mistress; but in general, she is a receiver to all
professions, and acquainted by experience with cookery, or sluttery. Bring
invited to her own provisions, she prepares the w^y to mi^tigate her prises,
either by exclayming upon the hard times, or insinua ting the sublime price of
Mutton. She must be pardoned, though she depart before supper is ended; for
she is modestly ashamd to hear her sinful reckonings. She professes the
kitchen, but takes place in the chamber: and having interrupted the Guest with
a cup of heartily welcome, she signifies his sorrow, though it be manifest
silence she excuses the attendance by variety of guests; and blaming the
Maid-seruants, she commends * That which agrees with a couetuous ma^s gain,
agrees with his conscience, ther^ what (...) against (...) ^rofit, go^s against
his conscience.
her self for the sole agent and you must conceive amiss of the shambles, or
butter-market upon her honesty. Her chiefest knowledge is to distinguish upon
the trades of our belly; and though she condemns a Tailor for lengthening his
bill with bumbast, stiffening, silk and buttons; yet she furnishes her own in
the same kind, with wine* bread, sallets and cheese; and though she seldom
abate the price of reckonings, yet she can give a morsel of her own into the
bargain, if that may satisfy. She chooses servants also that will give the best
content: and that she insinuates though she un doe^ a traveler. She may
abhor drunkenness; but in her own house conceales it, and re ceiues the
advantage: neither dares she reprove her husbands thirsty humor, least she
should loose her freedom; when he resignes his power to laziness, by which
he was engendered. Her husbands sloth makes her employed proudly; being
heartily ambitious of labor, if she can boast well, that her pains alone
keep her husband and his family. She keeepes open house and therefore she
thinks a porter as much impertinent as laces to her placket. If her self be
sponge and cork, she has a daughter or a Chaumber maid of luy. These and
she together make the best of a bad bargain, and therefore she asfoords no
pennyworth which is not the best that can suddenly be bought for money. She
seldom inuites costfree: for she determines to be paid commonly. If
therefore she does inuit, she is a rare woman; neither has she any thing else
to plead raritie. Briefly, she is at^ing of clean linen that is the
warrant of her cleanliness: She makes the welcome of a new, the farewell of an
old Traveler. She hcarkens joyfully to the numerons footing of horses and
having with a quick accent twice called the Chamberlain, she is now busy
about dressing supper.

CHARCT: XXII. A Tapster
IS an infernal: the Beelzebub of a Sellor, and the very motion of a double
Judge. He was engendered by a Drunkards appetite and urine. for nothing but his
desire to fill and empty, has bred a Tapster. He is of a barmy disposition
apt to cleave, and therefore he seeks to be familiar at first sight; but in
stead of friendship he retains the names of customers: only betwixt Brewers men
and him, there passes hungry and thirsty love; consisting of Hollaud cheese
and Rowles in recompense of bottle-ale, and strong Beer. You may call him
swinish, for he bears chief sway among the hog sheads: and claims authority
among them to Iuxta horatianum illud in Epod. 13. Deus haec fortasse benigna
reducet in sedem vice. Castig^ndus est hic Bon^i commentarius, qui delucidat
hasce partiunculas quasi digressi^am consolation^m: at quam sapi^ nunc (...) it
(...) enim hic ost sensus. Deuteronomy sic prouidebit fortaise (...) illa idest dolia
im^leta vinode quibus nunc (...) est loqut, quasi de recentioribus,
reducanturi^ locum buius vetust^ (...), ^ressi amico meo con^ule: et sic potius
opinor intelligendus est ^lle locu^.
^emoue and prefer. Drawers and he live at variance; for he thinks the
grape a disparagement to malt; and therefore he incounters Wine even with the
smallest beer he has, to affright the fortitude of Sack, and Claret: But
(which betrays his stratagems) he gladly makes the Vintuers vessel his
vassaile and Renegad^. Nay rather he farms Diogenes his tenement; and, fearing
he should be dispossessed (I think) he puts in a valorous tenant that will
beat the mad Cinicks brains out if he dares Encounter. His riches are
single, they consist of single money: his profession double, it consists of
double Beer: but then his faculties are again so single, that if he leaves
the sellar, he must beg (...): for ignorance and lazine ^t have bin his
education. Mean time he is kept from Robbery by exchange of single pieces:
and yet he disables himself in exchang unless he expects nothing by delay.
He feels the same sorrow to hear you discommend his liquor, that he does to
see you depart. * It goes against his conscience to see the cup stand quietly;
and against his stomach to see you prefer Mutton before powdred-beefe. He is
a prettier fellow of his hands then any of the guarde: for give him leave to
draw apace, and he will strike down twelve gards. He has an ambitious memory
which cannot deceive him, because he has taught it to deceive others: for his
abundance of memory, and his meaning to get ^ stock, labor to get a
super^^uous twopence in the reckoning. He would make an ass of Kelly if he
were living: Kelly wrought upon somewhat; but this fellow makes money of mere
nothing: for he gets by froth, and emptiness. His brain swarms with a
tempest of bottle reckonings; which makes him careless of hats: least he
should breed an impostume, by enclosing their multitude; else he is afraid
least the hot and moist reckonings he carries in his head, should dissolve his
felt, and therefore he goes uncovered; else to show he reuerences the Cellar
and weekedayes, more then the Church or Sabbath; for then only he plays the
Turk, and puts on: else (which is indeed the reason) he knows all comers
claim his duty, and therefore he walks bare headed to save a labor. He
attributes the scant measure of his Judge, to the Cellars dark nesse, and his
saving nature; but rather then he will justify both, he has a certain slight
or hand to fill the first (...), and so a voyds inquisition. All his conscience
is, that he dares not cast away Gods good creatures; and therefore he preserues
the droppings to make a compound He is an ignoble wret^h: do what you can, he
will couson you with his Can. Of his prayers and religion, I neither find any
thing, nor will I leave any thing, written. But I believe strongly, that in
stead of Praying, he wishes to hear men desirous of Collops and Eggs, or red
Herrings. And therefore I think he should thrive best in a sea voyage; because
he commends the relish of meats seasoned exceedingly. His bladder is more
capable then his greasy pouch; and more immoderately widened. He has nothing
to commend his literature, but Brachigraphy, or the science of short writing,
which he practices upon the barrels head, or behind the door: the meaning
whereof he expounds, but does not discover the rules. If he dares defend his
function in Winter, he must provide an Orator: for he speaks coldly for
himself, as being troubled with a common hoarsnesse to betray his vigilance.
Briefly, you must imagine him a light fellow, and like the cork, which swimmes
with moisture, is supported with liquor, and tied about the bottle or iugges
neck: there, or near about that, you may find him personally.

CHARACT. XI. A Lawyers simple Clarke
IS his Masters right hand, if he be not left handed: or the second dresser
of Sheepskinnes: one that can extract more from the parchment, then the
Husbandman from* the Fleece. He is a weak Grammar^an; for he begins to
pierce, before he can construe well: Witness the Chambermaide. Neither can you
discommend him: for his best education has been at a dull Writing-schoole.
He does gladly imitate Gentlemen in their garments; they allure the Wenches,
and may (perhaps) provoke his Mistress: but then he must be a customer to
Cooks shoppes, and low Ordinaries, or visit the Broaker, to bespeake Silk
stockinges, without which he thinks Gentry does much degenerate. having done
thus (if his cloak did not reveal him by instinct) he might pass suddenly
for a Gentleman presuming on which, and his plausible discourse, he dares
attempt a mistress: but if he chooses worthily, he feels himself worthily
contemned, because he woes with bawdery in text; and with Jests, or speeches
stolen from Plays, or from the common-helping Arcadia. He may be reasonably
commanded by his master in attendance: but if he rides with a Cloak bag,
he thinks himself disgraced behind his back. He may brag of the
University, and that he has commenced; yet he can hardly tell you by
learning the Strabo: ^ib. 1^. ^talus rex Mysiae ^bliotheeam Pergam^ oppleuit
duce^tum mill generibus librorum: In Forum autem vsum pelles ouinae comparatae
fueru^^; q^ae adhuc ob (...) t^ntummodo causam vocantur Pergamens.
first use of Parchment; though it concerns him nearly; for being once in a
College, and now a Clearke, it seems plain that he was an arrant rakehell.
Howsoever, he is otherwise a peaceable companion: for as he continually makes
agreement, so himself sits quietly, by his Emblem of meekness, the
sheeps-skinnes; except the itch troubles him. You can make no question that he
is provided to dispatch readily; for he has his business at his fingers end.
He may pretend Scholership: but all that is nothing unless you compare it with
a Iugglers, and then he may seem cunning: for he does exceed a Iuggler in
the slight of hand: being able by his cleanly conneyance, to remove the
possession of lands forty miles distant. He trembles therefore alike with all
Handicrafts, (though he most valerons) to think if he should offer violence in
the Court: for upon his Palms and Fingers depend his In-comes. He is no vain
Disputant: this knowledge is positive ingrossd, and so upon record.
Self-conceit in works, he refuses: for he labors about nothing which is not
justifiable by Presidents, either of West, his master or a teacher. In the
compass of which three he ties his approbation of wit so narrowly, that I
cannot blame him if he condemns this Character, for (upon my knowledge) he
can find no such thing in the Presidents. Then he does not seem to delight
in a retired life: for he sits always in the most outward room of his
masters chamber. He may be very much tempted to pick and pilser; for Legit vt
clericus cannot be applied to any man so fitly. He is not ashamed of what he
does: for he regards not to have a finger, but a whole hand in the business. To
which purpose you may see his name subscribed in Court, after sealed and
delivered. He does rely upon his masters practice, large indentures, and a
deske to write upon. He can show little or no sign of humil^ty like his
degraded lodging in the tru^ckle-bed; which hazzards many s^eabites, and the
violent air of his Masters feet. Westminster likewise does not altogether not
concern him: he has a motion thither, and a motion there: Thither he moves
by way of iniunction from his Master: there he moves in the common place of
breake-fasts, for relief of his stomach; and if he can match his breake-fast
and dinner without grudging of his stomach, he has his desire. He is a
follower: for he wears a livery, but no servant, for he pays his own wages.
If he be drunken you must say he staggers, to avoid aequiuocation: for when
he is sober he makes Indentures. Serving himself, he serves God by occasion:
for whilst he loves his gain, and serves his desire of getting, he hates
idleness. If his Master thriues, he cannot do amiss; for he leads the
way, and still rides before. He is the Sophister, or Soliciter to an Attorney;
and from himself he proceeds to an Attorney: that is his commencement. So
that a Clearke in thesi, is an Attorney in Hypothesi.

CHARACT. XII. A Pettifogging A^turny
IS a fellow at your command for ten groates, and has no inheritance, but a
knauish form o^ understanding. He is extremely graced if he talk with two
vel^et cloak'd Clients in five Terms: and desires to salute great Lawyers, in
view to purchase reputation. He is indeed the vpshot of a proud ignorant
Clarke, and retains his learning from Paenall Statutes, or an English Little:
on. He does multiply business, as a tinker multiplies work, with mending:
and in a Michaelmas term, he will seem more bus^e about offices, then a
^lea at midnight in the midst of summer. He is a better commodity to himself
then Stockfish (being well beaten.) His chief invention is how he may take
brib^s from both parties, and please both fashionably: how he may cosen his
friends to all advantage, and give the gloss of good dealing: if his
wickedness thriues well, he proves a te^rible Ass in a Lions skin: but
whilst he out dares any man and forgets himself to be a buzzard, his
considence deceiues him: He keeepes a tro^ting pace to signify imployme^t.
Chancery lane is his loome: for in the term he runs nimbly from one end to
the other like a shuttle to weaue mischief. Subpaenaes, Executions and all
Writs of quarrel be his bondslaues. He does naturally exclaim upon Poets and
Players; they are too inquisitiue about his cousonage. He commends Divinity;
but makes the professors simple men when they submit to his mercy: he still
preferres the authority of a Statute where it makes for his purpose (though
mistaken) before God and a good conscience. His Religion is the Kings
continually: And he would willingly come to Church on Sundaies if he had ended
his Declarations. He is in^atiatly given to get by any man he deals with; so
much, that he will scarce borrow ten shillings, unless he may get ten pence.
His chief pride is to be have himself better then he is able, and chiefly in
delivering of his charge at Cou^tleetes: where he assumes much peremptory
state, and knows the audience cannot appreh end where he stole his lesson:
and then though his mind be not in the Dishes, it is in the K^tchin. There is
such a near union betwixt him and fees, that if ignorance has made him spare
a deceit in ouer-burthening his client, he thinks he has not done as he
should do, and that he deserves miserably to be laughed at. His highest
ambition is an Innes of Court, an old rich widow, and the Stewardship of
L^etes, and still he hopes to be the first of his name: He loves lit tle
manners but where he hopes to save, and there he plays the ^ychophant. He had
rather eat still then wipe his mouth: rather (I mean) see^e means to
multiply, then to repent his old couse age. he thinks nature may justify
his dealing though he proves somewhat bold with his kindred; and therefore he
will cousen his own brother before any man. His alms be oulde Shoes for
Broomes: one for another: for without receiving he never gives. His discourse
is commonly attended with a Sc^re facias, and he is ashamed in his heart when
he hears of a cunninger knave then himself. Briefly, he is indeed a mere
Attorney, sit for all turns that any way enrich his Cofer: for he has ^nauery
enough to cosen the people, but wit enough to deceive the gallows. Howsoever
being too busy about his common bait of lucre (thinking to snap at the devils
glowworme, (he is catched in his common noose, the Pillory, from whence he is
delivered: but the Hunts-man marks him for an old breeder.

I might here accuse some excellen^ Atturneys (though they be good patterns of
their countries knowledge) because they ^could not in my former impression take
this Character without scandal to themselves and honesty: and yet I pardon
their mistaking: Because it is no discredit for a good Attorney to be no good
Logitian.

CHARACT. XIII. A crafty Scriuener
IS the curse of man's crafty dealing: He is a curious workman, and may be
free of the Lock-smithes: for full of Instruments he is, and Engines: and
makes Manacles for any man's wearing above Twenty One. His first ambition
commonly is to join forces, and make up his defects of policy, and custom by
partaking in another proiects: Then does he readily aspire to frequented
places, a convenient shop, the notice of his neighbors, and so engrosse
credit, or some text Widow, by the Nouerint of his Grogrengowne: A common
Strumpet never fawned so much on a young h^ire, as he with flattery obferues
the Usurer, and with nice dutiful care to preserve him, makes his rotten hide,
the chief Indentures that contain his Title. Obligations be his best
prayers: for he cannot tie God to perform conditions, or put in suertyship.
His friendship has a Counter-maund of being too honest; which he will obey,
rather then not save by the bargain. He is the safest man from danger in the
ped^gree of rapines; for first, the Gallant lives by sale and Country Tenants;
the Citizen by the Gallant; the Scriuener and the Devil upon both, or all: so
neitherliues by loss with the Gallant, nor upon trust, with the Citizen: His
condemnation is a knot of Seals and their Impression: the first discover to
him a conformed unity; yet none has more hand in the procuring of variance.
The last d^scouers a tractable nature, which gives and takes impression Of the
first (that is to give) he knows no meaning but when he gives the print of his
fist, that it may stick by elder brothers a whole age: Of the last (that is to
take impression) he knows none but a wrong meaning: for the best seal that
imprints love in him, is only the Kings picture; and that love continues no
longer then he beholds it. His quills and instruments betoken peace: you cannot
therefore expect more valor in him, then to win ground by the advantage of
weak Prodigalls, and such as run away from thristinesse: they be most
importunate with him: with them he preuailes most: to them he sels his
extortious nature at the highest value, because they be most willing to make it
their peny-worth. Is it possible he should escape damnation, when his whole
trust and dealing is in great Security? He will suspend his nearest familiars,
and not absolutely resolve them what he is able to do; in hope to purchase a
supper or some provoking remtmbrance: and if he be brought to testify against
his Usurer, he will counterfeit his knowledge, worse then a common Bawd that is
questiond by an Officer about whoores. I know not how he should be trusted in
his dealing: for when he promises to do much for a spe^d-thrifts bribe, he
writes against him soon after, by making that Bond, which he knows will be
forfeited. His memory is his own; another cannot safely trust it, in reckoning
the day of payment: for he reckons what he can save, by renewing the hazard of
a second forfeit, not your los^e by the first: and so he ouer-reaches you, by
ouer-reaching the time, when you trust his memory: If you trust him therefore
you may feel the forfeite, and pay largely for an acquittance. He may perhaps
help a friend in adversity, but he will be damnd first; by helping more for
profit sake then friendship. His learning iumps just with, or falls sometimes
short of an Atturnies; being only able to repeat the asore-said form to
thousand purposes: So all his mystery indeed is nothing to increase his Art,
but his Policy, or plain knavery: And that being served in, to the worlds
banquet, represents a large Foxes head, and a little Sheepskinne in diverse
dishes. It is the total of his Creed, that nothing should be justified, or
called lawful, which has not hand and Seal: that makes him exercise Hand and
Seal, as the warrant for devises of his head and Soul. He never rayses the
spi rit of a Prodigal by charms, but he together rayses the spirit of ma^mon
a Citizen; and then this potent coniurer binds them both fast in a Quadrangle.
He will seem to know the Statute and common Law; but commonly the
construction fails him (for he looks to his own advantage) except the law
has practiced upon his hearing, to teach the comment when he mistakes the Law.
Having at length been a long Auditor to the sweet lecture o^ Usury, he loves
the matter so well, that he becomes proficient, graduate, and professor in the
Science: but after general profession he approches quickly to his center
(from whence he sprung) Nothing.

CHARACT. XIIII. A wrangling Welsh Client
IS a good Iourney-man, if not a good Footman* He is the only friend of
^awyers (i^ they be Welsh begotten) and still sollicites them for a Judgment.
But we may credibly think he will entertain English Lawyers likewise; for he
makes the contention of Wales exceed the wranglings of Norfolk already. His
valor is, that he can by no means carry coals; and is ever therefore fittest
for an action of the case. When he expresses (as oftentimes he does) bounty
to out-braue his aduer^ary before his Counsel, then does he rather and indeed
express a spightfull arrogance; manifesting that he believes himself to be a
kinsman of Cadwallader, though he deriues his pedigree from the dust of
ninetynine generations: and he thinks himself ennobled by the conceit of Owen
Tudor as much as if they had been brothers children. When he visits offices
he will draw such a number of purses (if his adversary be present) that you
may think he has cut or found a douzen in or betwixt Wales and Westminster.
His pride lies wrapped up in a clout between his legs, or in a pocket in the
Armehole: from thence he draws his Angels to feed his Lawyer, though himself
sleep supperlesse. (Howsoever) he is content to be his own Cook; and though
his diet be slender, yet his money and victuals lie within a clowtes
thickness: which might excuse him from a beggarly want of food, but rather
detects him of a beggarly pride. It is impossible he should eat much: for the
least provocation makes him so froward; that you may verily think he has
eaten her pelly full of Wasps and Salamanders, every hour in the day. But he
saues many meals in cheesemongers shops; by tasting often: and when he has
disliked all, he contents himself with a parcel of two peniworth at the
Cha^delors. He makes the Term his time of Pilgrimage, and Offices at Law, the
Shrine where he offers up his douotion: Which (after he has ended his voyage)
amounts to voluntary penance; for he travailes bare-foote. Though he be long
in travail and tarries late, yet nothing can be recovered by default of
appearance: for inundations be his perpetual affidauit: and he swears (...)
was ouerflowed with a witness; when all the country about complaind of drynes.
The profit which he gives to English Law yers, he gives generally to the Laws
profession: that proceeds from his language, which to the credit of Innes of
Court, and Law French, he vtters harshly, with great amazement of beholders.
His body is so proportioned to his mind, and his clothes to his body, that you
cannot find a fitter modele of envy in the most beautiful work of Spencer:
For as (...) pines away her c^rcasse when another thriues, so cannot she be
clothed better then (as a Welsh Clyent is) with spoils of innocence; Erise;
or cotton. The best thing about him worth commendation is, that he cannot long
dissemble his carriage and malice; for he goes without a cloak continually. A
piece of Parchment and a Seal thoroughly paid for, sat^sfies him presently in
stead of judgment; but otherwise he spends his faith upon the hope of costs:
And if he dies before execution, he scarce hopes to be saved.

Many of the nation were offended lately with this Character, which nothing
does concern them; if they had saved their fury, they might have been thought
wiser-men.

CHARACT. XIIII. A plain Country Bridegroom
IS the finest fellow in the Parish; and he that misinterprets my definition,
deserves no Rosemary nor Rose Water: He never was master of a feast before;
that makes him hazard much new complement: But if his own Master be absent,
the Feast is full of displeasure; except in his latter days he grew
rebellious. He shows near affinity betwixt marriage and hanging: and to that
purpose, he prouides a great Nosegay, and shakes hands with every one he meets,
as if he were now preparing for a condemned man's voyage. Although he points out
his bravery with ribbands, yet he has no vaineglory; for he contemnes fine
clothes with dropping pottage in his bosom. The inuitation of guests,
provision of meat, getting of children, and his nuptial garments, have kept
his brain long in travail; if they were not arguments of his wooing Oratory.
He inuites by rule within distance, where he hopes to prevail; not without
some paraphrase upon his meaning. But (howsoever) he seems generous: for
nothing troubles him, or takes away his stomach more, then default of company:
yet in his provision he had rather take away your stomach then fill your
belly. As for his children if he begets above three, he may beget for Gods sake
to store the Parish. And yet his raiment (for the time) must show much
variety, The Tailor likewise must be a vexation to him, or his clothes would
never sit hansomely: But (above all) a bridle in his mouth would serve better
then a Pickadell; for if you restrain him from his objects, and the engine of
his neck, you put him into the Pillory. He has long forecast with his
Sweet-hart in some odd corner of the milke-house, how he may go the
sparingest way to work when he marryes: and he has only that means to make
her believe he is a frugall good husband* but though he meditates a twelve
month, he cannot find wisdom to spare half a yard, in the length, of his
fair troublesome cloak. He must savor of gallantry a little; though he
perfume the Table with Rose-cake; or appropriate Bone-lace, and Couentry-hlew.
He has Heraldy enough to place every man by his Arms: But his quality smells
rank with running up and down to give a heartily welcome: Blame him not
though he prove preposterous: for his inclination was perhaps always good, bu^
his behavior now begins: which is notwithstanding (he thinks) well discharged
if when he dances, the heels of his shoes play the Galliard.

CHARACT: XVI. A plain country Bride
IS the beginning of the world: or an old book with a new Title:

A quarters wages before hand and the title of a Country Dame be the two
Adamants of her affection. She rises with a purpose to be extremely sober:
this begets silence, which gives her a repletion of air without ventage: and
that takes away her appetite. She seems therefore commendably sober unto all:
but she drives the Parson out of Patience with her modesty, unless he have
interest, or be invited: She inclines to stateliness, though ignorant of the
meaning: Her interpretor, taster, caruer, and Sewer, be therefore accidental:
and yet without these, she were an Image to the assembly: all the good
ornaments that she has to grace her when she is married; be the several tunes
of ballades and songs besides half a douzen tales and proverbs, with as many
tales and rid^les; and guilt rases of ginger Rosemary and Ribbands be her best
magnificence. She will therefore bestow a Livery, thoug she receives back wages:
behavior sticks to her like a disease; necessity brings it, neither can she
take pleasure in the custom: and therefore importunacie with re petition,
enforce her to dumb signs: otherwise you must not expect an answer. She is a
courteous creature: nothing proceeds from her without a courtesy. When the
wedding dinner is ended, she has a liberty from that day forward, to talk of
weaning Calves and fatting poultrie among the housewiues to her life's end. She
has no rarity worth observance, if her gloves be not miraculous and singular:
Those be the trophy of some forlorn suitor, who contents himself with a large
offering, or this glorious sentence, that she should have bin his bedfellow.
Her best commendation is to be kissed often: this only proceeds from her without
interruption. She may to some seem very raw in carriage: but this becomes
noted through the fear of disclosing it. She takes it by tradition from her
fellow Gossips, that she must weep showers upon her marriage day: though by
the virtue of mustard and onions, if she cannot naturally dissemble: but good
simplicity has not taught her the Courte-inuention, to squeake loud enough on
her marriage night likewise: So She has little or nothing to confirm her
honesty: besides that which plain innocence affords. Now like a quiet creature
she wishes to loose her Garters quickly, that she may loose her maidenhead
likewise. And now she is laid.

CHARACT. XVII. My Mistress
IS a Magic glass: In which you may discern va^ities of the world, her
self, and other women. She is a most intricate female text; and though her
works be common, yet you may longer and with less perfection study her
meaning then the common law: For she is ready to give a new, before you have
learned the old lesson. She has a multitude of servants and suffers all to
be before hand in their wages that they may still continue serviceable. She
may be truly said afayre one; for like some Fair of a days length her
beauty spreads at morning and vanishes at night. The truth is I first began to
look upon her, because she said she loved a Poet well, and was in part a
Poetresse: for which good quality I might have loved her likewise but she was
only good at long Hexameters, or a long and a short even for varietie-sake;
which came so full upon Ouids amorous vein, that I despised her meaning. You
may well trust her that she will prove fruitful: for she is a vessel made for
burden; and is therefore light in carriage. her affection toward sweet meats
have made her like a sugar chest apt to take fire. She had her education under
a great Countes; and if she could leave the Courtship she learnt when she was
a waiter, she might quickly prove a reasonable good woman. Her body is (I
presume) of Gods making: and yet I cannot tell, for many parts thereof she made
her self. Her head is in effect, her whole body and attire: for from thence,
and the devises there engendered, proceeds her blushing modesty, her innocent
white teeth, her gaudy gowns, her powdered hair, her yellow bands, her
farthingales, and false Diamonds. All these together, and a quick fancy
commend her function: for Fiddlers and Painters be full of Crotchets. She is
well acquainted with games, and is so far confident they be lawful, that
she makes no more conscience to couzzen you, then to handle a pair of Cards.
She is always loose-bodied; conserve of sloes cannot bind her. You need not
make the question whether she can sing; for visitation will teach you, that she
can scarce leave singing. And as for dancing, she will ask the question of
you. She has the trick of Courtship not to be spoken with; to take Physic,
and to let her mountebancke be the best ingredient. She has at idle hours
handled Physic points her self: and if any man adventures on her receipts,
he will hardly escape a scowring. She is better then Greshams Almanacke to
foretell seasons: When she complains of headache, it signifies fair weather:
for then she is meditating to deceive some honest Gull: and when she complains
downwards, of the wind collicke, it signifies an unclean season. suspecting
that a fresh suitor has or may be ill informd of her conditions, she will
protest beforehand that she was once troubled with a six months timpany. Her
wit is Dainty because seldom: and whatsoever is wanting in the present
delicacie of conceit, she makes good by rehearsal of stolen witty answers, even
to the seventh edition. She purposes to travel shortly: But her meaning is to
return with some French commodity; and she will rather fetch it, though she
may be furnished at home, because she loves the cheapest ware, and the
outlandish fashion. She does ambitiously brag of the respect she found
among my Lords followers; and (so hoping to persuade by credit of her
education) she gives any man a gentle warning to refuse her. Her generosity
extends thus far; to bestow love, and look for neither thanks nor
requital: because a Marmoset and little Dog are ignorant of both. These
excepted, she never loved truly. Her moral virtues be a subtle thrift, and a
thriuing simplicity. But whilst she makes the best construction of a matter,
she would make likewise a thousand pound Ioyncture of her behavior only, and
Courtcariage. This bargain is open for any man, who thinks not the peny-worth
doubtful. And yet I must confess freely she has more goodness about her
little finger, then I have about my whole body: I mean her Diamond. Her best
Religion is to teach a Parret the Lords prayer; but the ten Commandments be a
new matter: so that Petitions be more plausible with her, then Instructions at
her own request therefore I give this to her looking-glass.

CHARCT: XVIII. A Gossip
IS a windy Instrument; a pair of bellows, or indeed two: for without her
fellow, she is nothing. These labor jointly as at an Alchymists furnace, only
to beget vapors: she receives and sends back breath with advantage; that is,
her function. Her end is to kindle; That is, to warm, or burn: she can do
both. And being quiet, or not in contention, she is without her calling; that
is, her company. Her knowledge is her speech; the motive, her tongue; and the
reason her tongue also: but the subject of her conference is the neighbors
wife, and her husband; or the neighbors wife and husband both. The modesty
that I could ever observe in her dealing, is thus much only: she must be twice
entreated among strangers, before she takes down a whole glass. She is the
mirth of marriages, and public meetings: but her natural season comes in
with a minced pie, at Christmas; when all may attend with leisure. She carries
her bladder in her brain; that, is full; her brain in her tongues end; that
she empties: It was washed down thither with pintes of Muscadine; and being
there, she looses it like urine, to ease her kidneyes: which would otherwise
melt with anger, if she might not speak freely. Being once a servant, she then
learnt to run, or go apace; that she might tarry and take, or give
intelligence by the way. She aemulates a Lawyer in riding the circuit, and
therefore she keeps a circuit, in, or out of her own liberties: striving to
be both one of the Judges, Jury and false witnesses: for she loves, to be
universal. She contemplates within, that she may practice abroad, and then she
spewes up secrets as if they were mixd with stibium: her reasons be color;
that she dawbes on every Fable: Her truth is, to make truths and tales
conuertibles: tales be her substance, her conceit, her vengeance,
reconcilements, and discourse. Not one woman in the parish shall commonly be
accounted honest without her license: which must be purchasd by consenting to
her motions. She makes every new inhabitant pay the tribute of an inuitation,
before she speaks well of him, or calls him neighbor: And by the virtue of a
special mouth-glew, she cleaues readily to all acquaintance. To talk of
Cookerie, or cleanliness, and to tax others, is her best and only
commendation. Her lungs be everlasting: she cannot be shortwinded: i^ those
would perish, she might be recovered. She is a like dangerous with the Pox, to
the town where she inhabites: and being pledged, or admitted among the females
she infects more easily. If she railes against whoredom, it savors not of
devotion; for she is only married, to escape the like scandal; from the door
outward. She is more fugitive then a swallow: there is no hold to be taken of
her in her own house: A venison Pasty will draw her all over the parish: nay
her nostrill is so quick, that she will discover it though it be Mutton,
within a miles compass; and vex all the neighbors with her impudence if she
be not invited. The burial of a second husband gives her the title of
experience; but when she has out-liued three, she takes authority and
experience both (as a Soldier that has passed the pikes of three set
battles) for granted. Her commendable antiquity reaches not above fifty;
for growing old, she grows odious to her self first: And to prevent the loss
of company; (having lived vainly) she commences hostess: that alone preserues
her humor. A mungrill print would b^st express her Character: for she is
indeed a mungrel woman or the worst part of both sexes, bound up in one volume:
seeing she corrupts the best by the use of them.

CHARACT. XIX. An old Woman
IS one that has seen the day: and is commonly ten years younger, or ten
years elder by her own confession, then the people know she is: if she desires
to be youthful accounted, you may call her Mistres, widow, or the like: but
otherwise old mother, Grandam, and such names that seal antiquity: the first
she takes well, if childlesse: the last never well, but when she can speak
wonders to grandchildren of the third generation. If they please her, she has
old harry sovereigns, that saw no sun in fifty years, to give away on her
death bed. If she be not toothlesse, her teeth eat more then they chaw: for
I presume they are hollow. She loves the upper end of the table, and professes
much skill in Cookery: she thinks it also some felicity to give attendance
about sick persons: but is the common foe to all Physicians. In agues, aches,
cough, and tissickes, she confidently will undertake to cure by prescription:
if her self be untainted. As for diseases which she knows not, she dares
proceed to Dragon-water, Holy-thistles, Worme-wood drinks, and Clisters,
without the help of Galen, or Hyppocrates. if she blushes at the Sun rising,
her color changes not till bed time: and some times though she drinks down
her breakfast, by dinner time her teeth be grown, and she will seem to chew
the cud. She lusts abundantly toward young women, that she may talk as dame
regent; or fall into discourse of childbirth and midwiues. She may as safely
walk amongst contagious Leapers, as into the kitchen; and smells infection, or
perfume with the same nostrill. She has perpetually the pride of being too
cleanl^e or the adherent vice of being too sluttish. She affects behavior in
the brood of youth, and will divulge her secrets of superstition to any that
will be attentive. She has with many complaints of Aches in her hippes bought
an Almanac to know change of weather. Envy is to her an inseparable twinne,
and though it be offensive commonly to few, yet does it oftentimes consume her
self, and starve away her memory.

CHARACT. XX. A Witch
IS the Devils Hostess: he takes house-roome and diet of her; and yet she
pays the reckoning: guilty thoughts and a particular malice to some one person
makes her conceive a detestatio^ of all: her policy of sequestration, to avoid
jealousy of neighbors, detects her envious spirit: for the melancholy darkness
of her low cottage, is a main conjecture of infernals: her name alone (being
once mounted) makes discourse enough for the whole parish: if not for all
hamlets within six miles of the market. She receives wages in her own coin:
for she becomes as well the object of every man's malice, as the fountain of
malice toward every man. The torments therefore of hot Iron, and merciless
scratching nails, be long thought upon, and much threatened (by the females)
before attempted. Mean time she tolerates defiance thorough the wrathful
spittle of matrons, in stead of fuel, or maintenance to her damnable
intentions: she is therefore the ignorant cause of many Witches besides her
self: for ceremonious auoidance brings the true title to many, although they
heartily scorn the name of Witches. Her actions may well seem to betray her
high birth and pedigree: for she does quickly apprehend a wrong before it be
mentioned* and (like a great family* takes no satisfaction which does not
infinitely counterua^le the abuse: children therefore cannot smile upon her
without the hazard of a perpetual wry mouth: a very Noble-mans request may be
denied more safely then her petitions for buttermilke and small Beer: and a
great Ladies, or Queens name may be less doubtfully derided Her prayers and
Amen, be a charm and a curse: her contemplations and souls delight be other
men's mischief: her portion and suitors be her soul, and a succubus: her
highest adorations be Yew trees, dampish Churchyards, and a fair Moone-light:
her best preservatives be odd numbers, and mighty Tetragramaton: these
prouocations to her lust with devils, breeds her contempt of man; whilst she
(like one sprung from the Antipodes) enioyes her best noone about midnight: and
to make the comparison hold, is trodden under foot by a public and general
hatred; she is nothing, if not a Pythagorean; for she maintains the
transmigration of spirits: these do uphold the market of bargain and sale
among them; which affoords all sorts of cattle at a cheaper rate then Banks
his horse, and better instructed: but (like a prodigal) she is out-reached, by
thinking earnest is a payment; because the day is protracted. Her affections be
besotted in affection of her science* She would not else delight in Toades,
Mice, or spinning Cats without deuersity: it is probable she was begotten by
some Mounte-banke, or Wording Poet, for she consists of as many fearful
sounds without science, and vtters them to as many delusiue purposes: She is a
cunning statuary: and frames many idols these she does worship no otherwise
then with greedy scorn: and yet she is a deep Idolater. Implication is enough
with her; to bespeake any man's picture, without his entreaty: for if it
appears that he can provoke her, it implies likewise that he desires to be
remembered by her; and Images be a certain memorial. She seldom lives long
enough to attain the Mystery of Ointments, herbs, charms, or Incantations
perfectly: for age is most incident to this corruption, and destiny preuents
her. But howsoever she be past childebearing, yet she gives suck till the
latest minute of fi^escore and upwards. If she out lives hemp; a wooden halter
is strong enough: unless she saues a labor. But God forbid that age,
simplicity, and froward accusations should be a Witches trial.

CHARACT. XXI. A Pandar
IS the scab of a commonwealth: surfeits raise him to a blister; necessity,
and want of good Surgeons, make him a mattery sore; whilst time and Tobacco
brings him to be a dry scale. He is commonly the vpshot of a younger brother,
who lackes Honesty and Inheritance; or the remainder of a ^rodigall, who has
lost them and himself. His Etymology is Pawne-dare: which intimates, he
dares pawn his soul to damnation; or his stolen parcels to the Brokers. Or
you may call Pandar, quasi pin the door. Bawdy songs and he came both in
together, for he is no generous companion except he can sing, and also compose
stinking ditties. He has been a great hunter up and down in his days, and
therefore (it is no wonder) if toward a decay he become Warrener. Arts he
studies not; neither wishes any but Rhetoric to catch maiden-heads. He is the
devils Countryman or indeed acquaintance: therefore in the devils absence he
proves his Deputy; and welcomes customers with fireworkes: a pipe of Tobacco,
and a h^t Q^eane. He is a corrup^ (...): ^or he has made (...) deriuation of
body. (...) Vsher-like attendance on Public whores has made Coaches frequent;
to distingush them and Private Ones. His valor is expressed in black patches
(much about roaring Boys humor) but playsters, which express him more
ventrous, he conceales. He wishes to be the first teacher of a Nouice: and
(being so admitted his Tutor) he first teaches him to beware of adultery and
theft, by bringing him into danger of both, before he deserves it. And with
those two vices he does first accuse him, because himself is best acquainted
with those two. He may truly boast if he returns from war, that he
returns wounded to the bones; for he was wounded so before he went. If he be
married, he has divorced himself, because his wife was honest, and so means
to continue: or (being dishonest) because she was odiously deformed, not worthy
to entice others* In the vacation time he teach^s his whores the knowledge of
false Dice and cheating, by way of recreation; or he travails to get money
with his Monsters at Sturbridge fair. His Greed is a matter of three Articles,
and them he believes actually: First, that there is no God: secondly, that all
women, and more especially that all Citizens wives, be, or would be, common,
or peculiar whores: and lastly, that all things are lawful, which can escape
the Laws danger: good examples therefore prevail with him, as showers among
the stones they make him more slipperie and studious to deceive the people: For
the more people be seasond with good examples, the more ready he is to intrappe
them; not to imitate. His Fellowships be retired, and within doors: for being
abroad, he is a sober lump of villainy; delighting vnsociably (like a
Cutpurse, and for the same reason) rather in multitudes then civil numbers.
The ^awd and He, are chief co^federats: with whom together, (as occasion
happens) the Constable has standing wages to be an assistant; every way as He
being ready to disturb or not disturb their customers, a^ they shall instruct
him
dangerous as the other two. Bowling allies, di^ing-howses, and Tobacco shops,
be the Temples, which he and his fraternity of Roarers, have erected to
Mercury and Fortune: In the two first, he does acknowledge their Deity: in the
last he offers smoking incense to them both, in recompense of booty gotten by
Chance and cheating. If the Gallows be disappointed of his desteny; they can
blame nothing but his tender bones, which could not brook so long a journey;
or a whores quarrel, whilst Wine was his Leader.

Honest men are afraid of him and knaves and whores be suspicious of him; for
he is an evil spirit* he was never generally commended but when he went to
hanging; then he was commended (doubtless) for a propperman: for every fellow
withan entire doublet is called propper man when he rides to Tiburne.

CHARACT. XXII. A Friend
IS one of the waightiest sillables (God excepted) that English or any Language
does afford. He is nearer to me then marriage, or natural kindred of the same
blood; because love without kindred or ceremony, is more to be admired; and by
the consequent more precious. Marriage and Kindred goes oftentimes no further
then the Name or Body: but friendship is annexed with unanimity. My Friend
therefore is either disposed (as I am) well: or well disposed to make me better.
His multitude of acquaintance does not extenuate his love, nor divide his
affection. His lower fortunes be not distasted, not dissembled, nor swollen
bigger then they be. He must not be employed in trifles and continually, like
a servant; nor with expectation, like a Son: For an absolute Friend will
finish (when importance calls) It a me dijament, tardo amico nihil est
quiequam iniquius. Plau. In (...). Act 13.
before he can be requested. He therefore among all, confutes the saying of
Profferd Ware stinks
Wares profferd: For what a Friend gives freely, either to prevent request, or
to * Inuendibili merci oportot vl^ro emptorem adducere: proba meix facile
emptorem reperit. ib^dem.
(...) a modest silence) incha^ts (...) party. He is much dearer, then my
legs and arms, for he is my body and my soul together. His honor is true
love: which being so, he loves because he will not, and not because he cannot
alter: That man cannot alter, who cannot with honesty disclaim affection; as
being tied with dotage or fauour^ above merit and requital: But friends will
not: which signifies that their love depends upon approbation of the naked man.
A Friend therefore must be freely chosen not painfully created: for iealousies
and fears intrude when favors be not mutual; if favors be the first
beginning. He is manifest to me, whilst invisible to the world: and is indeed
much about the making of this Character; little in worth and little pleasing at
the first sight. He is able and willing, to council, to perform. A second
meeting thinks him fit; A second trial knows him a fit Friend. The mere
imagination of a friends love is an enchanted armor: my heart is impenetrable
whilst I wear the comfort: for whether I survive or dye, my Friend pre-serues
me. Time nor anger can dissolve his amity: for either he submits and I pardon,
or I submit and he pardons. He is like a true Christian, that undertakes and
suffers for Christ's sake as a friend for his friends sake with equal joy, both
credit and discredit, rest and travail. Being once had, a friend is full
enough, and true a needles epithet: for I am his, he mine: and being so, we
are one to another the best or no friends. It is foolish Paganism to worship
the suns rising, which does regard al alike with his Idolaters: and it is crazy
dotage for any to honor that friend, who prostitutes his favor to the Popular
men cannot be perfect friends. (...) seu beatitudo est perfect* (...) bon^m
huma^ actio^: Ethi^.
worlds liking. A perfect friend, thinks freindship his felicity: without
which estimation, the nearest freindship, is but a sociable custom: for man
has never made an action perfect, unless he drew felicity from his actions
nature.

CHARACT. XXIII. A sick Machiauell Pollititian
IS a baked meat for the devil; and a dinner of dainties for Physicians: the
villainy which makes him fit for the devils banquet, is close and private: but
his bounty to prevail with physic is prodigal. He is in security a
Continge^* dicitur quod est, and poterat non esse: possibile, quod non est and
potest esse. Mol: lib. 1. fol. 50
contingent Gull; in death a possible confusion: for sickness looks for him,
before he looked for it; unless he poisons himself: therefore he is taken
unprovided; so, proves a gull: And upon deaths approach, he feels a tumult
within himself because he looked no sooner. He thinks upon his life's
proceedings, either with careless Infidelity, or sorrow to be interrupted: and
he fi^des no shifting policy to answer his loud conscience, but only this,
Art hon^st a bene^iceat (...) in-honest a^ (...)* which being prou^d by many
(...) devises ^s also man in the most no^ table st^ry reckond by (...). P^r
(...) de mag^ nature: of (...) fol. (...). ^estus: quivis homo (...) appel^
(...).
ar^ d^luditur art: meaning that it was lawful for him to cosen the world,
which otherwise would have consend him. Religious I cannot call him; * sacer I
may call him justly: for he among the Romans was entitled sacer, who by the
people was generally condemned; and such is the general fortune of a
Pollitician, when he grows sick and toward a conclusion. In health he was
like the Nymph Echo mentioned in Outds Fables: for he was always deeply in love
with his own policy; but policy (...) ver^ in sonum (...)*
despising to be his safeguard against sickness, he turns (as Echo did) into
noise: for none is spoken of, so much as a Pollitician near his death. It is
delivered, that the (...)* lib. 14. c. 8.
Romans chose no Senator till he had worn his age by likelihood past the
meaning and sense of pleasure: Destiny has taken the same order with a
Pollitician: For he is never admitted to his infernal dignity, til he grows
decrepit; and almost weary of himself. But I admire how poison should molest
him: because he and poyso^ have been the most assured friends and familiars.
The faculties of his soul are much indebted to the devil: for he has
borrowed many dark inventions from his pattern: and therefore like a Bankro^t
he dares not walk abroad out of his body; least he should be arrested by the
devils officers. He may be truly likend to the covetous man; who scorns to be
accounted poor, and is unwilling to be accounted rich: A Pollititian likewise
will not, in sickness nor in health seem careless of religion, as if he wanted
piety; nor scrupulous in conversation, as if he dealt only with Puritans. When
he was lusty and in perfect health, his agents were like the Tinkers dog, which
carries his masters budget and knows no meaning of the tools: but when he
falls sick he makes every messenger know his grief. As Herodot^ lib. 6. Era:
4. 18. si ex capite Simulacri fla^ma (...) ^ore vt vrbem ab (...) cap^ret, c^
vero epec^ore fulgur extiterit id omne fuisse con^ectum quod deus (...) ^ici vo^
Cleomines interpreted the fire which brake from Iunoes Image, so may we
interpret a Pollititians sickness: If it proceeds from his heads devises, as
when he counterfeits to work some subtlety, then we may look that he will
prevail and recover: but when his pains proceed really from the heart, we may
then imagine that he can go no farther. He makes me think of many Gamesters;
who play cunningly while they can loose little; but when they hazard a round
purchase, they prove arrant bunglers: and so the Pollitician is a most accurate
gamester whilst he does only hazard some reparable fortune, but now he
ventures the maine happiness, life, he quails and grows fainthearted. In
health he presumes to be so much a man, that he will govern monarchies and
men: but being (as I have superscribed him) Sick, he shows himself a little
child, which cries most when it is vndressing, and made ready for the Cradle.
His pollicyes were of a fine third, quick and lively: sickness therefore
lumpish, agrees worse with him, then durty weather and silk stockings. You may
perceive when honest men dissemble, easily: for they will seem distracted and
will stammer in conference: because they feel their meaning and their speech
divided; which pulls them two contrary ways at once: But a curious Politician
dissembles more intricately: because he will not listen to his hearts meaning,
when he shadows hate or piety with appearance: and therefore we are much
beholding to his extreme sickness: for then he is so far from coulouring
his anguish, that he discouers many more faintings then he needs. Death and
sickness makes him differ from a vegetable: For as a vegetable consists of Salt,
Sulphur and Mercury; so likewise a Politician excells in three like properties:
Wit, Sudden execution, and Envy: but this makes the difference: A vegetable
yields the qualities, when it self perishes: A Politician, when he is best in
health. No marvel though he be danted when he remembers the next world,
though in a staggering belief: for by the warrant of potions, gloves, sallets,
privy stubbs, and false accusers, he has sent so many thither before him, that
he may justly fear they will sue an appeal against him. Sickness and
importunacy to recover health lays him open to a double mischief; Death and
Dishonor of manhood: For he tha^ craves help where help cannot be afforded,
suffers a double grie^e; want and despair: as he that walks under a narrow
pent-house to shield himself from rain, f^eles a double shower; droppings
from heaven, and euesdropps. A Politician holds that opinion of advancement
which the ^us Lae^us so 140. pars orbis septentrionalis prospera putatur ob
altitudinem
Roman South-sayers held of the Northside: he thinks it fortunate because it
is above the vulgar: and therefore is he most unwilling to decline, because
death makes Mors sceptra ligonibus oequat. Hor: carm* lib. 2.
aequality. Howsoever it is unto him a greater sorrow to meditate the way of
death, then to be dead; for being dead he looks for no disquiet. But after
death his name grows old with being odious, like that unfortunate Rufus F^stus
in breui ar^o fol. 372 captus aute^ Valerianus in dedecore Seruitutis consenuits
Valerian, whose age was long, but taedious and disgraceful.

CHARACT: XXIIII. A Page
IS an abridgement of greater charges, sprung from the destruction of
hospitality and surloignes. He had need be well guarded: for he is too little to
defend himself: and yet he has proved himself a tall champion; for he and a
footeman have driven away many valiant Bucklers, and Blew-coates. When he
serves a Master, it may be the title of his function to be squire of the body,
for he waits near about his person, and carries his weapons: being little he
is my Ladies Jewel: therefore she thinks him precious; and finds no fault
with him but because he lacks weight: which is often times the weak reason why
my Lady lives honest. Though he be little, he has a reasonable soul: but I
can see little difference betwixt him and a Mounkey: they both serve to pass
away time; and almost in the same manner: being either to be whipped or
handled, or to be looked upon. It seems to me that his parents doubted of his
long life; and therefore they take a course betimes that he may know the world
before he dies, and learn experience while he lives: for before he grows to a
yards length, he has wickednede enough taught him, to damn a thrice bigger
body with out original sin. He and a wench differ most in apparel He has
power to entise: for he takes by gift a lease for years of Cupids diety* which
ha^h continuance no longer then he is under growth. Among all of what condition
and degree soever, he will be drunk most early and betimes in the morning: for
he learnes to stagger at twelve and to be dead drunk at fifteen: which is,
to be drunk almost by five a clock in the morning: for fifteen years of age,
is three quarters past four; reckoning four years to an hour from the
nativity. He belongs most commonly to the man; but he is the woman's
play-fellow. He is much about the bigness of Hercules his foot; the
impression whereof (according to Herodotus) amounted to two cubits * (...)
Hercules ostendunt petrae (...) sim^le* (...) ubitali magnitudine: uxta (...)
(...). (...): lib 4. (...). s. 288.
length: But whereas the same author says that the great region of Exampei
afforded little worth noting besides Hercules, his foot, I may protest it
afforded nothing in comparison of a Page: for that being a region of two
thousand miles compass, had only an impression of two cubits: but a Page in the
little compass of two Cubits, has a whole world of Roguery: which he may
perhaps justify according to his Oath because he cannot well discern that
his oath is better broken then kept: and so does nothing against his
conscience. He smells after the waighting-gentlewoman, as Fancy my Ladies dog,
after the great Spaniell-bitch: he proffers sayre, but can do little to the
purpose. He speaks Bawdy freely as if it were his mother tongue: but he
cannot be so bad as his word. And thus by mere chance with a little dash I
have drawn the picture of a Pigmey.

I think it the most unprofitable, inhumane, and wretched baseness, to
multiply the least affliction; much more to triumph in a great man's sorrow: if
therefore thou did expect some sawcynesse, like to the late elegies, under
this title, repent thy folly before thou make it known.

CHARACT. XXV. An honest Shepherd
IS a man that well verifies the Latin piece, qui been latuit been vixit: he
lives well that lives retired: for he is always thought the most innocent
because he is least public: and certainly I cannot well resolve you whether
his sheep or he be more innocent. Give him fat^e Lambs, and fair weather
and he knows no happiness beyond them. He shows most fitly among all
professions, that Natura paucis con^.
nature is contented with a little for the sweet fountain is his fairest
alehouse; the sunny ban^e his best chamber. Adam had never less need of
neighbors friendship; nor was at any time troubled with neighbors envy less
then he: The next groaue or thicket will defend him from a shower: and if they
be not so favorable, his homely palace is not far distant. He proves
quietness to be best contentment, and that there is no quietness like a cer taine
rest. His flock affords him his whole raiment, outside and linings, cloth and
leather: and in stead of much costly linen, his little garden yields hemp
enough to make his lockrum shirts: which do preserve his body sweetend against
courtitch and poxes, as a scare-cloath sweetens carcasles. He gives the just
Epitome of a contented man: for he is neither daunted with lightning and
thunder, nor over ioyed with springtime and harvest. His duly life is a
delight full work, whatsoever the work be; whether to mend his garments, cure
a diseased sheep, instruct his Dog, or change pastures: and these be pleasant
actions, because voluntary, patient not interrupted. He comprehends the true
pattern of a moderate wise man: for as a shepherd so a moderate man has the
supremacy over his thoughts and passions: neither has he any affection of so
wild a nature, but he can bring it into good order, with an easy whistle. The
worst temptation of his idleness teaches him no further mischief, then to
love entirely some nut-brown milkemaid, or hunt the squirrell, or make his
Cosset wanton. He may turn many rare esteemed Physicians into shame and
blushing: for whereas they with infinite compounds and fair promises, do
carry men to death, the f^rthest way about; he with a few simples preserues
himself and family, to the most lengthned sufferance of nature. Tar and
Honey be his mithridates and syrups; the which together with a Christmas
Caroll, desend his desolate life from cares and melancholy. With little
knowledge and a simple says, he purifies ^is honest soul, in the same manner
as he can wash his body in an obscure fountain, better then in the wide Ocean.
When he seems lazy and void of action, I dare approve his harmles negligence,
rather then many approved men's diligence. Breifely he is the perfect allegory
of a most blessed governor: And he that will pursue the tropes invention, may
make this Character a volume.

CHARACT: XXVI. A Tailors man
IS a Conjunction copulative: He makes things hang together; and when his
master seperates, he reconciles. A man would think he might be trusted; for
he goes thorough stitch with business. He sits brooding like a Goose upon the
shop board, and hatches parcells out of pieces. He will be any man's
sumpter-horse, between six and eight in the morning: and he looks for twelve
pence, or a tester to bring men acquainted with their own clothes. He loves
bread by custom; for it is a part of his trade to be a binder He thinks it
no sin to second his Master: and therefore when his master has done
stealing, he begins. He does or may resolve by virtue of his Indentures to
feel a two-folde itch, though his indenture specifies fair usage and clean
linen: And he holds it lawful to shrugg upon the shop-boord, but rather then
he will wriggle before Gentlemen, he dares be bitten to the marrow. The
Basilisk and Eagle cannot match his eyesight: for he can look through buffe,
or three-piled velvet, but with his needles eye. He will stoop to your very
breeches to do you good, though you disgrace him utterly. He carries always
about him the picture of (...): ^ (...) Iuas repetitum vene^ olim, Grex auium
p^umas, mo^eat (...) da a colo^bus.
Horaces crow: but he perceiues no such matter: he wears his apparel by
leave of the peoples ignorance: for if every customer could challenge his own
remnant, he would be stripped naked. He needs not use the Corn cutter; for the
slip-shoe favors him. Call his theft in question, and he condemns himself:
for he pleads ancient custom; whereas Antiquity punished (...) furrunt tem
(...) (...) (...) ^ra (...): ma (...) nec in ^ndestum, e^ con^ qui (...) ^urtum
non manifestum duplionem lui^o. (...) (...): apud (...):
close theeuery of that kind, with a double pain. He has little or nothing
to plead christianity and courage, but sitting crosse-leg'd: Which property
makes him reverence the Knight semplars, and think that his profession has
been of the same order He has no more courage then will serve to commend his
own workman-ship: And you may know as well when a Blackamore is dead, as when
he dissembles by the countenance. He deceiues freely, with small discredit,
and less shame; as some Physicians that be Noble-mens Panders: It is incident
to the profession, and past finding out. He need not wonder why the ^owse
should trouble his, more, then other Trades: for his garments have more seames
then two or three suits together. Or you may think it reason, that he should be
bitte^ outwardly with Lice, because he scorns to be bitten inwardly with
Conscience. Little familiarity serves to make him (as likewise all clownish
Tradesmen) your aequall, without the Heralds pity. Tearing off his apparel,
is the least wrong you can offer him: for he has his mends in his own hand.
He can show nothing to prove himself worth the name of Man; but his
denomination of a Tailors man: Which argues most against him; and proves him to
be a Cowards coward: For being a Servant, he must fear his Master, who
fears all men of spirit. A pair of sheeres and a pressing Iron, are his
chief goods and purchase. You may sooner make his thimble hold water, without
stopping, then his fancy keep one fashion. Briefly he consists of shreds and
remnants; yet oftentimes there goes but a pair of sheeres betwixt him and a
Gentleman: For many Gentlemen consist of outside, in which the Tailors man
takes part.

CHARACT. XXVII. A Fiddler
IS, when he plays well a delight only for them who have their hearing: but
is, when he plays ill, a delight only for them who have not their hearing; and
is always a trouble ^ Diogines calls a bad Mu^itia^ the mo^nings Cock;
because all that hear him, rise, and leave him. I ae^t. lib. 6. ^ol. 176.
to himself, because he hears too much: his head is wider then his brain, by
so much as a Carriers boot is wider then his leg; much about half in half.
He may best endure to fall groueling in a puddle: For it is part of his
profession to be a scraper. He is like the Nomades, a wanderer from his
childhood: there is no certainty of his abiding: he cannot be bound prentise;
for iourny-man-like he travails from place to place, seeking to be set on
work before he has learnt his trade. Being suddenly entertained without
agreement, he is suddenly turned out of doors, without giving offense. He does
enquire out Gentlemen's names and lodgings as if he purposed to lie in wait for
an arrest: and the truth proves little otherwise: For he does arrest men by
their ears though they have been in the Pillory. he has his morning, his
midday, and his evening devotion: Wherein praying for others he finds his own
blessing. His company stand like the foremen of a Jury, to give in their
verdict; and he does always make two or three shillings be cast; or as much as
you please to give him. He is not worth a fiddlesticke without nimble fingers;
and they be the surest good quality to make him suspected. Hope of employment
drives him up to London: and he thinks that an unlucky day in term, which is
not a day of hearing. He bids God give your worship good morrow, in the most
doleful and scuruy fashion; that his music may relish the better. A new song
and a base-Viall makes him. He deceiues with his commodity worse then a
Tobacco-man: For he will utter Peg of Ramsey, and the Mask of Lincolnes Inn,
both for one prise. It is not material how soundly, but how long he has laid
time asleep: for that is indeed his faculty; to be a temporal inchanter. He
is a defended night-walker: and under privilege of Music takes occasion to
disquiet men, who had rather sleep, then hear him. disquiet is not all the
danger he brings with him: for he can send his little spirit of Music upon a
ladder of Lute-strings, into your private chamber: and enforce you to pick
your own pockets that he may depart contented. He disproues the rule in
Logic; quod efficit tale magis est tale: The workman is more excelcellent
then his work: for he has wit enough to tune his Vial though his wits are
always untunable. Fiddlers may have the same conceit, which Potentiae Romanoru
prior (...) viam aperuit, luxuriae posterior aperuit: Paterculus lib. 2.
Scipio had among the Romans: the former Scipio increasd Romes power: the last,
Romes luxury: and Fiddlers at first were instruments of the wars; but now of
riot. He looks more to be commended by the companies ignorance then his good
Music, and more by their bounty then by their ignorance. His brains are
(like the Mackerell) a dry meat; and and therefore they must be butterd with
songs and ballads, or they be worth nothing: the tunes warm his head, and
keep it boiling: he does apprehend tunes (as the Beadle apprehends beggars)
when they be vagrant: that they may work together in the bridewell of his
noddle, to maintain themselves and him. The tippets of his ear be noynted
with an invisible Oil of custom; which serves to catch tunes as birdlime
catches flies; and, being taken, one catches another. He dares intrude by
virtue of his profes^i on, not of his vocation: For he comes without calling:
but he will neither prove a delight nor trouble to any man against his will:
and therefore he beginns thus; Will it please you to have any Music? If that
Music rather please you, call for the Fiddler himself.

CHARACT. XXVIII. An Executioner
IS a husbandman; belonging to that great Lordship of the world a prison. He
goes to cart commonly with us, in these quarters; and sometimes to harrowes
with a hurdle. he has lawful reason to be lazy: for his harvest and seed
time are at other men's appointment: malefactors are his grain; which sowes it
self in mischief; while he sleeps and dreams of no such matter: the sheriff
his landlord appointes the time of reaping: the ground about the gallows is
his garden plot: from whence he gathers. Hemp, Flax and woollen dressed ready
to his hand. Upon that fruitful bowgh the gallows, he does ingraft his
medlars: when he gathers them he contents himself only with parings: for
knowing that their inwards be good for nothing til they be rotten, he buries
them in the ground, that they may ^ipen and wax mellow: but he cannot look to
enjoy them: for they be never fully ripe until the resurrection. The blood of
^arles and Barons, are as a fruitful rain to him: for it betokens and begets
his plenty. With saplesse worme-eaten trunkes of ^ereticks, he makes a
bonefire; to signify Gods gracious deliverance of our king and kingdom, from
the like danger: and when the peoples heads (like to the tops of trees) are
over laden with sour fruit, he prunes their head* branches in the pillory.
But when he pares away the top close to the trunk and body, it must be
intended that the body and soul will flourish better within a while after.
Vilaines turn hangmenn, as Serpents turn Dragons: a Serpens n^Serpentem com
ederitnon fit Draco,
serpent eats a serpent, before it is made aDragon: and a villain hangs a
villain before he may be called Hangman. He does observe state in his action:
for his place of presence is exceeding well hanged. The tailor cannot cosen
him: his wardtobe affords choice of garments. He resembles the government of a
notable tyrant* he looks to the bringing up of his favorites, and helps to
their bringing down: he has many dependant followers: for (as the proverb
says) hangman leads the dance: but he behaues himself toward them like a
cruel master: for when they have once showed him a slippery trick, he pulls
their cloth over their ears, and turns them out of service. He is one of
the most dangerous ignorant people (except the Mayor and Aldermen) that keeps
about corporations: there is no dealing with him under the prise of a broken
joint* you may well think his weapons are unmercifully; for his Hangers are a
deadly torment. He can dispatch and Execute past amendment: but the meaning of
advise he knows no^ for who can tell me of a hangman that gives counsel? he
was never so much in love with his trade as when the man preferred Tyburne before
Burmuda: and I am half persuaded that if he had but a balladmakers poetry, he
would sooner make an Epitaph for that friend to the gallows, then any prince
in Christendom: till he turns poet he may be thus furnished.

Here lies a wretch so loving to the rope,
He chose it rather then Bermudas hope:
I blush to think the fellow here remains,
He was soworthy to be hanged in Chains.
A Postscript.
THe press has, in stead of pressing faults to death, begotten many faults in
spite of all my diligence: It shall be therefore the weakest part of thy
judgment (reader) to discern the superfluity and defect of points, words, or
letters. And for the few Latin quotations added in this last copy, it is left
altogether to thy discretion, to think I meant to acknowledge every part of
allusions: And to distinguish this from the learning which lies, in
mother tongue translations: But beware of trusting the margents; for they be
shamefully corrupted by the printers negligence. Turn over to the sixth
impression of S. Thomas Ouerburyes wife; and you may find the mad-Dogs foame
specified in my title sheet.

FINIS.

