A PREFACE TO THE KINGS HYGHNES.
IF I HAD NOT OF long time past conceived a sure trust, and great confydence,
most noble prince, of your synguler ge^tylnes, and accustomed humanity, which
daily to the great comfort of al your servants and subjects, your highness
declares openly, I would never have used such boldness and audacite, as to
exhibyte and present this my rude writynge, unto your gracis most indifferent
judgment. For much and long I have doubted with my self, whether hit should
pertayne unto me, other by word or by writing, to touch any such matters of
weight and grauyte. For as on the one side, many things moved me' to keep
silence, considering mine own state, condition, and degree, and how late I was
admytted to the service of your majesty, and how little expert I am in
matters of polycie: so on the other side, diverse things styrred me, to open
mine affecte and purpose, unto your grace plainly. For moved I was much by
this your great and synguler humanyte, wherein among all other princely virtues
your highness excellyth: moved I was also by the high judgment, which by the
goodness of god above other princis is to you given, in all matters of tru^
religion and of just polycy: and above all moved I was by the present state of
our country and weighty nature of things perteining to the same now in
controversy here among us: In the redress and due order whereof (as I think)
stondeth the chief point of all pryncely honor, and another in abundance of
gold, silver, nor tresure, nor yet in any worldly power, but even as the
honor of god, as much as is set forth to man's judgment, consysteth and
stondethe in the dew order of all this sensible world, which with our eyes
daily we behold, so the tree we honor of all princis upon earth, rests
chiefly in the order and redress of their commynalties, by the providence of
god to their governance committed, to this end and purpose, that all their
subjects in concord and unity may inioye such quietness and felicite, as they
are brought forth unto, by the goodness of god and nature: so that this being
mouyd, and reasonyng with my self of such things as perteyne to your gracys
honor chiefly, to the which I shall serve ever during my life faithfully, I
coud not te^pre my self, nor as me thought in no part satysfie my bounden
duty, except by some mean I should open mine affect to your gracious
majesty. For greatte sorrow I conceived as soon as I entered into my country,
after my long absence and peregrination, obseruyng such disobedience and
diversity of opinion, as here among your subjects was growing in by
corrupt judgment, to great confusion, and to the great breche of christian
unity, while your grace by your high wisdom and polycye studied to lay and
stablyshe certain grou^des and fundations, to the restoryng of very, true, and
christen unite much necessary. wherefore sone after I began with my self to
reason of certain causes and occasions, out of the which chiefly as it appeared
to me, sprang all this controversy and disobedience lately shewid here among
us: and somewhat to consider I began also the manner and mean how al such
discord and diversity of opinion utterly put away, we might as members of one
body, being couplyd together, and knytte again in unity, run in one course
and after one fascion: the which discourse and reasonyng, because I lacked
co^modite to open to your grace presently, I gathered in writing, and so
presented it unto your majesty, declaring thereby mine opinion, and by what
mean we all your subjects with mekenes and humilite, living together in due
obedience, might restore and conserve this christen unity. This was my
purpose, only in no point thinkyng than to have my sentence and writing abroad
publyshed. And though it be so, that for the most part such men as be in heart
most desirous, to have their writings set abroad to the face of the world,
commonly use this kind of excuse, coueringe their affecte and studi of glory
with one honest pretext of sobrenes and humility, to say they wrote either for
their own exercise secretly, or for the private pleasure of their friend
only, whereby they avoid and eschew al note and suspicion of pride and
arroga^cy: yet to your highness most noble prince, this may I say truly, and
without al color affirm plainly, that at such time as I presc^ted this my
writing unto your grace at winchester in so^mer last past, I though nothing
less, than to publyshe it to the common judgment, though in every man's mind
the thing to be fyxed I desired heartily: but I thought plainly, partly for
because I judge not my writynge to be of that sort, which are to be set out to
light, and partly because I se the world al ready with over many books and
writings troubled dangerously, whereby though much knowledge of the truth be
opened and brought to light, yet by lack of discretion, and by much
arrogance, there is grown in withal in Christis church a great brake of
christian charity: I thought I say plainly, and to me it appeared sufficient,
specially concerning such matters of weight and gravity, to your hyghnes only
by my writing mine opinyon to declare, and the affecte and desire, which I have
long noryshed in my heart to s^rue your grace withal, in some part thereby to
testify. For sith the time y^ I have had any reason and judgment to consider
the end, to the which al true subjects ought to refer all their acts and
deeds, I have ever fashioned my studyes after such manner, that I might thereby
according to my bou^de^ duty, in some part serve your highness and my country,
to the which stirred and moved I am now much by the time, wherein I trust to
se, by your high wisdom and policy, of al such abusion, as by process of time
is grown in to our church and congregation, a holsom, quiet, and just
reformation: whereof though the begi^ning has be^ somewhat rough and full of
difficulty, yet I trust the providence of god, vsyng your highness as chief
mynister to the same, shall at the last, all things so order and dispose,
that they shall proceed, both to the co^myn quietness of us your subjects in
this present age, and to the great comfort of al your posterite. So y^ as well
for the steying of the one part of such disobedience, to be conceived in the
hartis of some other of your subiectis, which might minister a great occasion to
the pla^ting of the rote of a sedition, as for the te^pering on the other part
of a blind and an arrogant opinion, lately conceived by lyghtnes of judgment,
which might bring in among us much confusion, I wrote this thing, declaringe
thereby unto your highenes, what I thought in the matter, and how as I said
before, both I my self was affected, and how at the leest I would wysshe the
hartis of your subiectis after like manner to be i^structed: for y^ which cause
I conceived this exhortation unto your people, instructing the^ to such
obedience as is dew to your pri^cely authorite. This was my purpose at y^
beginning and full intent, nothing less having in mind, as I before recyted,
then to publishe the thing abroad to the world: but now sith it has pleased
your grace most noble prince, by your high wisdom and most indifferent
judgment, the thing to aproue, which I have written, and by your goodness it
to accept and allow, I shall not fear to set it forth to the common redynge
and indifferent judgment of your subjects openly, nothing dystrustynge, but
that by the gracious goodness of him, who governs al, it shall thus appreued
by your gracis authorite, in some part help, both to restore and confirm here
among us true obedience and christian unity, whereby we al your true subiecies,
being obediente to your hyghnes, as to our supreme heed under Christ here in
this church and congregation, shall both in this age live in perfyt quietness
and tranquillite, and herafter also, to the them that shall succeed, leave a
quiet common well, to the common comfort of all our posterite, and at the last
with heavenly unite atteine and enjoy with our heavenly head Christ, the only
head of the universal church, everlasting felicite. This hope I have fastened
i^ mi heart, nothing doubting at al, but y^ y^ goodness of him, whose prouydence
has ordained your grace to reign in our time, lighting your heart with such
knowledge of truth, as few other christian princis have in our days, shall
inspire in to your most noble mind, the right judgment of all convenient
menes, whereby your highness the better may the same truth set forth to his
honor and glory.

TO THE REDERS.
FOR BICAVSE I HAVE here following somewhat more brefely than the nature of the
thing does well suffer, comprised and gathered unto the people a certain
instruction, whereby they might the better be induced to such unity and
obedience as is of them most justly required: I shall most Christen
reders, here in this prologue, open unto you a lyttel more at large, what is
the nature of this obedience and unity, to the which we be so straytly bound
both by goddis law and all good civility: and touch also somewhat the cause
which has chiefly moved me to the conceyuynge of this mattier and purpose.
But here in the beginning to the intent the thing may the better be perceived,
I do you require a lyttelle to lift up your eyes with some consideration, to
wey with your self in some part the divine power, wisdom, and providence,
though the thing fully to conceive far surmounteth all man's wit and
imagination. And first this is open and manifest, The prouydence of god.
that all this sensible world, wherein is contained this wonderful variety and
nature of thingis, Genesis 1.
is nothing else but as a certain shadow of goddis goodness and divinity, or
rather a glass of the divine majesty, whereby to man's judgment and capacity
is opened, the infinite power, Psa. 18.
and wonderful wisdom of him, who by his high prouydence governs and
rules all. For whither so ever you cast your eyes, other above unto heaven,
there beholdynge that heavenly body in his synceritie, other here benethe unto
the earth, there considering of nature the wonderful variety, you shall ever
see, of that power and providence in every thing most certain argument and
sure testimony. Whereof I think no man can doubt, who with any
consyderation, lokynge into this glass, there stands in marvel and
admyration. For first there shall he see the infinyte nombre and multitude of
sterres ever keeping their certain course and mouyng without al instabilitie,
there shall he se the son, the moon, with all the other planettes waueryng
abroad, now to this part of the world, now to the other, to the comfort
and creation of all mortal things subject to corruption: there shall he see
the wonderful virtue and influence of the same, by the which as by chief
instruments the goodness of god works al things. Here in the lower world
garnyshyng it with this variety, wherein stands all natural beauty. ye, and
yet ferther, if he into this glass diligently look, there shall he see, of the
four elements, of the fire, the air, the water, and of the earth, the most
meruaylous nature, so knytte by dew proportion in a certain equality, that
though they be by nature most diverse and full of contrariety, yet they are
cowpled and joined together, as it were in a natural concord and unity: there
shall he see the earth, as foundation and ground, susteyning the rest, hanging
in the mids after a wonderful manner, and about the same the sea continually
rollynge, with his certain and sure ebbynge and flowynge after a strange
fashion, giuinge to man's wit no small cause of marvel and great admyration:
and finally to say, there shall he see of all beasts, fyshes, and fowls, the
meruaylous nature and propretie, by the which all, the divine power spredeth
her goodness, according to the nature of things and their capacity: so that to
him who so ever into this glass diligently does look, may remain no doubt of
this heavenly wisdom and prouydence, whereof in every thing here in this
world set forth to goodis honor and glory, appears so sure toke^ and so
certain sign, for in every thing shyneth the image thereof, every thing here
is a glass of the same. And to me this thing, considering and reasonynge
with my self of the goodness of god and of his providence, though the things
before touched mynister thereof sure proof and sufficient argument, yet it
appears, that nothing more clearly declares the same, than man's actis and
fashion of living here in policy, all be it many men have taken thereby
great argument to the contrary, in so much, that when they have seen many men
long to continue in worldly joy and prosperity, whom they have judged most
worthy of al adversity: and contrary, other of great perfection and virtue to
be oppressed with all wretchedness and myserie. This I say, wha^ they have seen,
they have plainly thought, no providence to be nor governance of god, but all
to be left to man's will and tyranny: To the which opinion they slypped, for
lack of judgment and good co^syderation: for who so ever weyeth man's acts
groundly, (...)
and of his life the hole process, he shall find most manifestly, and by
reasone shall be constrained plainly to confess, that this high prouydence is
not only declared by such deeds and acts of man, as appear to the world to
be good and virtuous, but also much more by other, which seem pestilent and
pernicious, and to all virtue contrary. For this seems to be a certain
truth and sure, that even like as god by his infinite goodness, these
erthequakes and general fluddes, by the which many cities and hole nations often
times be ouerflowe^ and sonke, ever tourneth to the good order of the rest,
and conservation of the holle in a natural tranquillite: so vice reygning in
man's life for a time, ye open war and sedition, his goodness co^uerteth to the
setting forth of virtue and to his honor and glory. For such is the nature of
that infinite goodness, that nothing it will suffer utterly to be ill, but out
of al imperfection and vicious effects, or more truly to say, vicious
defectes, his goodness pyketh out ever some good. As by example, this thing to
declare, this dyuelyshe nature of the dyuell, who above al other things is
most pestilent and pernicious, the goodness of god uses to good, as to drive
man by fere at the lest to flee from sin and wretchedness, and his cruelty
and malice he uses also to declare his justice and ryghtwysenes, as by the
miserye of vice he drives man often to the love of virtue, and to conceive the
felicity thereof: like as he does many times, by sycknes of body and
adversity, bring man to health and prosperity, and by the tyranny and
wretchedness thereof, he induces man to perceive the nature of good polycie, and
of al quietness and tranquillity resting in the same. Even like as by blind
and folyshe superstition he styreth often times man to follow sincere and true
religyon. And thus all thing, which appears in ma^s life to be plain ill, and
viciouse, his infinite goodness turns to good: and out of all thing he pyketh
some good. Genesis 11.
For if there were any thing which by nature were ill, than were not he infinyte
goodness, the which without co^tradiction can suffer no ylle. Wherefore plainly
to say even as I think, these things which to the world, and to the common
judgment of man seem ylle and most pestylent, of the goodness of god, and of
his high providence, minister unto men most sure argument. The which thing I
have here now touched to this purpose and end, that where as many men now
adays, considering the state of the Christen polycie vexed with so much
sedition and heresy, fear much to see shortly thereof great ruin and decay,
I would have them to alter that opinion: And to stand fully in this
persuasion, that this diuysion by sects and contrary opinion, reignynge among
christen nations, the goodness of god shall turn to his honor and glory, and
to the setting forth of his true religion, the which long and many a day has been by simple superstition much obscured and hid: ye and though it were so
that in folyshely fleinge this superstition, we should a while slyppe into the
contrary, that is to say, the contempt of religion, yet I doubt not but the
goodness of god in time convenient, would reduce us at the last to the mean,
and bring unto light the knowledge of his true religion, as he has done in all
times from the beginning of the world unto this day, by lyttel and little ever
drawyng man's wekenes to the true way. And this manner with us I dout not but
that his goodness will use now in these days, and so inspire and give light to
the hartis of his christian flock, that they all with concord and unity shall
to his will be obedient most mekely. This hope and trust I have fyxed in my
heart, wherewith I much comfort my self. And though there be here in our
nation growing in, a certain division, by corrupt judgment and false opynion,
yet I trust we shall not so far slyppe from gooddis providence, that it may
take among us any such rote, whereby shall spring any sedition, or of good and
civil order any ruin or destruction: but contrary, if we as members of one
body, run all together after one fashion, I trust at length surely it shall
minister a great occasion, to the setting forth of Christis true religion.
For the which cause now, I have conceived this lyttel instruction, exhorting
our people to unity and obedience, the lack whereof in the state of
Christendom has been a great cause of much division, and specially in the
country of Germany, where as by the folyshe auoydyng of superstition they have
slipped into greatte discord and sedition, whose example I trust shall be to
us a spectacle, ministringe unto us no small instruction, specicially if we
consider groundly the cause and fu^dation of all their controversy and
sedition, the which doutles, rose of things in no point necessary to ma^s
salvation, but about ceremonies and traditions, to the which many men blinded
by superstition, leaned none other wise, thanne to Christis word and gospel,
they did not discern with right judgment, betwixt things of themself good
and necessary, and other, which are only for the time convenient to a certain
policy, but all things of long time received, by custom, and general
decree, some of them took as goodis law indifferently, and some all turned up
so down indiscreetly. Wherefore such persons as by the examination of them to
goddis word, found therein much abusion, first the rest could not well
bear, but noted them of herisie, and as mouers of sedition: by the reason
whereof, sprange y^ great division, whereby the country was divided into many
and diverse sects, but now by the providence of god each one spyeng the folly of
other, they begin to fall unto the mean, that is to say to Christis true
religion, gyuinge to goddis word the full authority, that preachinge without
abrogation. And as for ceremonies and traditions, they suffer as things
conueniente to maynteyne unity, where as they repugne another to goddis word,
nor to good civility: the which thing if they had done at the beginning, they
should not by their blyndnes have fallen to such confusion, nor by their
folyshe correction of the abuses of the church have brought in such a
division. How be it I doubt not, but that the providence of god has suffered
this thing for the institution of other, for we may as I often rehearse, take
example of that folly, and run to gyther in one course with obedience and
unity, the which if we do, we shall doubtless shortly se the providence of
god, so work, that out of our church and congregation, we shall se plucked up
al superstitious abusions: as contrary, if we proceed in our corrupt judgment
and lately grown in division, we shall without fail slip to like confusion.
For the avoiding whereof, I have directed to the people this rude instruction,
mouynge them to obedience and unity, whose nature now sommewhat to touch,
remains in the second place.

Wherein brefely to say, this you shall understand, that obedience in all
times, The nature of obedience.
and with all nations has ever ben reputed, the chief bond and knotte of all
virtue and good civility, and not only among us, which be of the christen
flock, lighted with the spirit of god, but also among the gentyl
philosophers, ladde only by the course and power of nature, with whom
obedience was ever noted to be as the mother of al virtue and honesty. For
when the affectes in man's mind sensual drawinge him to pleasure and vanity,
be so obedient to reason, that betwixt them is no repugnancye nor rebellion, but
reason ever has dominion, leadynge man to his naturalle dignity, than is he
set in high felicity, than lives he in perfyte quietness and tranquillity,
as far as man may obtain in this mortal life full of frailty. Like as
contrary, when reason being over run, affection does reule by disobedience,
then man, as he were falling down out of goddis order and providence, who
appoynteth reason to his governance, slyppeth into infinite misery and
wretchydnes, and never enjoys tranquillity and quietness, but dyuersly torn
by diverse desires, Roman. ^.
lacks all comfort and swetenes of this life. So that by this, hit is
euidente and plain, what power obedience had with the gentylitie: but of us,
which be lyghted with Christis doctrine obedience of an another sort is
required. For our obedyence is not reuled by such a sklender reule, as man's
reasone is, which is for the most part so blinded with corruption, that
seldom it sees the clear truth without affection: but the line of our
obedience is reasone it self, the very word and son of God by Christ to
us ^oman. 1.
declared, the will of god in his scriptures opened. By this line and rule we
must square our affection, to this al, reason and affection of man set apart,
we must be obedient, to this we must give faith, sure trust, and also
confydence. To stable this obedience Christ was made man, ^^b. ^.
the which both by doctrine and deed he most plainly toughte, the which to
confyrme with many words, here is no place, specially considering that all
holy scripture is fulle of the same, as it is to all men open and plain.
Wherefore here perauenture you will say, that obedience to goddis word is
required: no man douteth, no man is ignorant thereof, but which is goddis
word, and the true sense thereof, unto the which we ougthe for to be
obediente, here lies the double, this is not unto all men plain: for sum
men herein say one thing, and some say an another, in so much, that we
know not to which sense and to what thing we should give our obedience, and
whether we should rather be obediente to general counsaylle, or to our princis
authority. This perauenture you will say. For the answer whereof, though in
the exhortation following, I have at large handeled the thing, as the chief
mattier thereof, yet here in this place somewhat I will touch, both how you
shall comme unto the true sense of goddis word, and also what obedience you
ought for to give both to general counsel and princis authority. And
first this you shall understand, as a sure ground to the resolution hereof,
that such things, to the which we owe our obedience, and are bounden unto,
other by goddis word, general counsaylle, or princis authority, be of.iii.
sorts, and of.iii. diverse kinds, for other they be of their own nature, good
and profitable: or contrary, by nature ylle and dampnable, or else
indifferente, which of them self be another good nor ylle. As by an exaumple,
such things are good, Things good of the self.
not as appears to man's corrupt reason, but such as be by goddis own
word defyned, by the which rule only we must examyne what thing is good with
right judgment: as to trust in god and in his only goodness, to love him
above all things, and thy brother as thy self, these with such other,
expressed by goddis word, are by nature good, and Profitable. As contrary,
^hinge^ if ^f them self.
such things as by the same word are prohibyte and forbydde, are by nature
ylle and damnable, as to distrust the mercy of god, and doubt of his goodness,
to have thy brother in hate, or wrongfully to couete worldly riches. Things
indifferent I call all such things, ^hinge^ of them self in ^^^fferent.
which by goddis word are another pro^bthyted nor commanded, but left to
worldly polycie, whereof they take their full authority, by the which as time
and place requires, they are sometimes good, and somtymes ill: As to eat
flesh the fridaye, and after the customed manner to keep the holy day, to go a
pylgremage, and pray unto saynctis, these and other like, I call things
indifferent, and nothing necessary to man's salvation, though they may be
well used and after a good fashyon, as I shall hereafter more at large open and
declare. Among the which also I nombre this great matter of the popes
superiority, (...)
which so troubles many weak consciences. For as I judge it not so ill and
damnable, that all our forefathers, which have been obedient thereto this.vii.
C. years therefore be damned, so I judge it not so good, that obedience thereto
shall be necessary to them which should be saved, as I have at large declared
in the matter following, and opened therein fully mine opinion. But now to the
purpose, this and all other like, which be not in scripture expressed by
commandment, I note to be things indifferent, the nature of whom is of this
sort, which is highly here to be observed, that though of them self, they
be another good nor ill, nor to them we owe none obedience, yet when they be set
out with authority, by them which have hole rule in any kind of policy,
whether it be in the state of a prince or populare: than the people are to them
bound, ye by the virtue of goddis own word, who commands expressly his
disciples to be obedient to commune policy, when so ever thereby is commanded
any thing, which is not repugnant to his precepts and doctrine, ye and
though hit were contrary to their own private profytte, pleasure, and
quietness, ye or contrary to a worldly right wisenes: yet would he have his
disciples, Iuce. 20.
and the professors of his name ever to be obedient with humility and
mekenes, wherewith as with a peculiar mark, he has marked his flock. Marc.
(...). Iuce. 18.
And so now this ground presupposed, I shall make answer to the doubts
before moved: and first to them that be unlearned, to whom I have directed
chiefly this instruction, this I will say, that scrupulous and exact knowledge of
things contained in goddis scriptures, is nothing so necessary to iduce them
to obedience, as is mekenes and humility, which is among many other things
to them which be rude, the chief way, whereby they may attain to the true
sense of goddis word and doctrine. For the which cause as I think in the
counsel of Nece, the su^me of our feythe, containing such poyntis as be
necessary to every man's salvation, was reduced unto certain artycles, and so
propowned in Symbalo, (...)
in the common Creed to all christen nations, as a thing sufficient to be had
in heart and mind of all men, without ferther enserche or inquisition, in the
rest ever gyuynge obedience to the order and custom in every country
received with concord and unity. So that we may judge, as hit appears to
me, Romans 13.
that to the unlearned people and body of every commynaltie, without ferther
knowledge, sufficient hit is, every manne doing his office and dewtie, as he
is called, and by goddis prouysion thereto appointed, here in this worldly
polycie, stedfastely to hang upon the commune order, leanyng thereto
constantely, ever comforted with the same feythe and expectation of the ever
lasting life, hereafter to be had in immortality, and not by our own
merits, but by the mere benefytte and only goodness of god, (...)
who to us so trusting in him, has made such promys of his benignity. This
is the most sure knotte, as I think, of all christen cyuilitie, this
generalle knowledge of things necessary joined with mekenes, I think
sufficient to the v^lerned people: in all other things, which be
^^^^^fferente, ever gyuynge obedyence to comm^n authority, and gladdely
herynge them which are directed and appointed for to preach Christis
doctrine, whereby they may both confyrme and increase daily their faith. And
where as sum of them preach ^one clean contrary to annother, by the
reasone whereof sum of you may be perauenture brought in to sum doubt,
this you shall understand, that their controversies and contrariety, for the
most part be, concerning things indifferent, and seldom of such, which
be necessary to man's salvation. Wherefore their controuersyes therein ought
to trouble you nothing at all. For men, the which are of learning and
letters, in such mattiers never did yet accord nor agree in unity, it is
enough that they accord in the artycles of our feythe: and as for the rest,
let them prove their wits after their own pleasure, mind, and liberty.
Wherefore their folly therein and controversies needs not to mynyster any
occasyon of scrupulositie to the unlearned people and rude, but ever they
taking the generalle points and artycles of Christis faith, with mekenes and
humylitie, must in the rest give their obedience unto such things, which
be decreed and made in the common policy.

But now I will speak somewhat of the obedience that you shall give unto the
common authorytie, and also what to general counsaylle, here brefely I will
touch. And first this is sure, that in all kind of polycies among christen
nations, The order of obedience^
the word of god must be of chief authority, that must have therein the
first place and preemine^ce. Wherefore if any thing be decreed contrary to
that, by any worldly policy, it must be utterly abrogate and boldly disobeyed
with all constancy. For such barbarous tyranny may not be suffered in christen
civility: But contrary, what so ever is decreed in any policy, nothing
repugnant to Christis doctrine, and to his simplicity, to that ever obedience
is required, wherein rests a great ground of christen civility, to the
which point, if any private person repugne seditiousely, moved by any scrupule
of conscience conceived folishely, if he may another be brought to knowledge by
good instruction, nor yet to just obedience with dew admonition, he is not
worthy to live in that common policy, nor to be a member thereof, as one that
abhors from all good order and civility. For to the obedience of princis
and of all other commen orders and politic we are bound, after they be ones
received, by goddis own word and commandment. And such things as by their
own nature be indifferent, are made thereby to our salvation necessary, so that
this remains a sure truth, that to al such things as be decreed by princely
authority, to goddis word nothing contrary, we are by goodis word bound,
after they be received and stablyshed: to the which we must gladdely be
obedient with humility, ye though they be contrary to such things, as be
propowned by general counsel and assemble. The nature of generalle counsayse.
For the which this is to be observed, that though counsel general and
universal assemble of all christen nations, be a thing not necessary to the
conservation of Christ's faith and doctrine, for as much as it was conserved
in his most purytie almost.v. C. year, without any such congregation: yet
for because it was of wise men and politic brought in, to the auoydyng of
schism and heresy, and stablynge of christen unity, I think it not to be
rejected. For as it is great superstition and playnfoly, to judge it necessary
to man's salvation, ye and a great token of infidelity and of dystruste in the
goodness of god, who has promised to al men in all places, and at al times,
eternal salvation, Matt. 7.
when so ever and where so ever with faithful trust they call for the same: so
it is a toke^ of great arrogancye, and lack of christen humility, hit utterly
to refuse, when so ever hit is taken as a collation, and a conferring to
gether of learned men for the invention and trialle of the truth, concerning
such things as pertayne to relygion, as hit was at the first institution, at
the which time the things driven out by counsel general, were of none
authority, unto the time that princis in every nation did receive and
stablyshe them in their countries, by the consent of the same, as it is evident
by diverse laws imperial, by the which such things as were conceived in
counsel general, were authorized and confyrmed. Wherefore to compare these
authorities to gyther, with boute of preemyne^ce of the same, it is small
reason. For as much as such things as be propouned by general counsel and
assemble, be of none authority among the people in any country, till they be
confirmed by princely power and common counsel. Wherefore this follows surely,
that the same authority may such things reiecte, when time place and other
occasion, that does require with good reason: This therefore seems to me a sure
conclusion, that rather we ought to give obedience to that thing, which is
decreed by common authority in every nation, then to such as is propowned by
general assemble and universal counsel. For such things are but counsels
in deed, and bind no man, till they be by common consent received, the which
ever by the same may be also dissolved, and specially touching such things
that are indifferente, the which at the first counsels were ever omytted and
left to the order of worldly policy: but after that the sea of Rome took this
heed over al christen nations, by little and litel in general asse^bles, they
began to define and handle things pertaining to y^ worldly policy, for the
mainteining of ye pomp and arrogance, the which they atteyned to by p^tense of
religion. Wherefore the counsels succeding the same heed, smellid thereof, and
sauorid much of worldly vanite, but if they had continued after y^ first
institution, only medlyng with y^ interpretation of scripture and things
pertaining by necessite to ma^s salvation, I think to this day no christian
prince nor nation would in any point have made to the^ any contrary
co^stitution: but now since that popes in general counsels, contrary to the
order of y^ same, have med led with matters pertaining to worldly policy,
meruayl it is not to se, princis decre contrary, to whose order touching
things indifferent, the people in every nation, are more bound, tha^ to such
things which are but only propouned as cou^selsi general counsels, and
universal congregation, as shall appear more largely herafter: and this
concerning obedience here in this preface to be observed, to the^ y^ be
unlearned I think sufficient, and as for the^ y^ ar learned, they know how to
answer to this matter better tha^ do I. How be it I would counsel every man
learned in scripture, whose conscience is troubled with any scruplosite
conceived by any thing decreed by common authorite, here in our country, well
to wey the thing, wherewith he is troubled, with dilligent exai^ation thereof,
whether it be upon a ground necessary to ma^s salvation, or else upon a thing
indifferent: and above al to be ware, and diligently to take heed, y^ another by
authorite of man, process of time, nor contrary custom, he suffer not him self
so to be blinded, nor deceived by siplicite, y^ he with right judgment ca^ not
po^der goddis word indifferently: and where as he fyndeth controversy or great
difficulty, to try out the true sense of goddis word and doctrine, in his
scripture tought: let him with a meke heart come to him, of whom comes all
heavenly light, (...). 11.
who has promised to all men never them to fail, which mekely demand of
him the knowledge of truth with ardent affecte inserchynge the same: for
mekenes is the only way and the strayt gate of the entree to Christis
mysteries. For except we base our stomakes full of arrogancy, we can not
conceive the swetenes of that heavenly simplicity, whereof make hearts only and
humble are part takers. For as to pride and arrogance Christ ever resistith, so
to lowlynes and humility, his grace ever he communeth, (...). 11.
that he exalts and sets in high dignity, even as pride, he ever
depresseth and puts under foot. So that by this gate we must enter, which
few men find, if we will follow him, and to the mysteries of his doctrine
take the true way: for except we be as children lowely and meke, (...)
without all corrupt affection, there shall to us be no gate open, to bring us
to his kingdom and heavenly perfection. This is the true trace, wherein he
must tread, who so ever fruitefully will seek the true sense of goddis word,
the which who so enters, doutlesse shall find, to such scrupule of
conscience a synguler remedy, without ferther expectation of general counsel
and decree: and never shall fere to give obedience to such things as be
decreed by common authority, specially seeing they touch only things
indifferent, nothing necessary to our salvation: as I think it shall be evident
unto al the^, who will thoroughly read and indifferently weye such things, as I
have gathered in this little Instruction: and than I shall not dout, but that
we shall run all together in one course in christen unity, Christen unity.
which shortly to touch stands in this point chiefly. We must conceive if
we will be true professors of Christ's doctrine, a certain brotherly love each
one toward other, iugynge our selfs to be borne of one father, Johan. 13.
Galatas. 3.
nouryshed of one mother, members of one body, hanging of one heed, lokynge
for one reward, promised unto us, living to gyther in this unity. We must
think that our master Christ descended down from the bosom of his father,
to stablyshe this concord and unity, in the hartis of all them, Johan. 17.
which purpose to be inheritours with him in his kyngedome of heaven
euerlastyngely. We must think, that by this only is the way to immortalytie,
the which if we do, I doubt not, but that all such division as hangs over
our heedes, which might bring in confusion into this our country and
polycie, we shall right well avoid and eschew, lyuinge together in due obedience
and perfyt unity. For the which I shall not cesse to pray unto him, who has
promised surely to give the light of truth to all them, which demand it
mekely. And the same I shall require of you all, to whom it shall chance to
read this instruction, and of this to make a sure conclusion, that if we with
mekenes and humility, faithful love and charity, seek out the true sense of
goddis word diligently, Matt* 21.
we shall surely it find, and such light thereof receive, that though we never
here of pope nor cardynall, nor yet of counsel general, yet shall not we be
destitute of such truth and light as is necessary to our salvation. But here
I will make an end, and trouble you with no longer preface, remyttynge you to
the instruction, for ferther declaration.

AN EXHORTATION TO the people, instructynge them to Unity and Obedience.
AS IT IS TO AL OTHER creatures, by the power of God brought forth into this
world, naturally given by his goodness to desire their end and perfection, the
which they be ordained unto, so it is to the nature of man, who of al other
here in earth is most noble, and of dignity most excellent, as he that is
with reasone indewed, the most heavenly thing, whereof bodily creatures and
erthly, may be parttakers, by the which as by the chief instrument, he may
seek and inserche al convenient means, whereby he may attayn the better to
such end and perfection, as by the goodness of god to him is appointed: and
all though this desire be to all mankind common, and ever has been of what
religion so ever they be, yet we most, christen people, which be of Christ's
flock, and lyghted with the spirit of god, make profession of his name, above
al other ought to be thereof most desirous, as they which have by the singular
benefit of god, a more sure knowledge, and a more sure ground, to lean unto,
the^ any other people in earth, for we have the express and manifest doctrine
of god, by the which we are taught and instruct the straight and sure way, to
the attaynynge of our felicity, the which stands another in worldly honor,
pleasure, nor high dignity, no nor yet in any secret knowledge of subtle
philosophy. For than it should not be common but to few, (...)
and the multitude of christen people should be excluded from it: But according
to the hole course of the doctrine of our most loving master Christ, it
rests only in faithful love and charitable unity. (...).
This testifies our master him self, in his gospel by his own word,
commaundynge us above al other thing in this Act. 4.
charitable unity, to be coupled and knytte together, none otherwise than he
is with the eternal father in divinity. To the which agrees all the process
of the doctrine of Paul, ^ala^. 3.
the true interpretour of the mind of Christ, who ever exhorts us, as we be
members of one body coupled to our heed Christ, (...) 1.
so with faithful love of him to live to gether in this charitable unity,
which is the end as he faith of al precepts and laws, as the tynge wherein
stands the perfection of a christen mind: from the which no man of what
state or degree so ever he be, at any time is excluded. For this pathe is open
to all men that will it seek, whether they be pore or rich, young or old,
sick or hole, this way they may enter. And by this way to their perfection
and felicite they may attain: of the which dear friends you may highly
rejoice, gyuing thanks to the goodness of god, who by our master Christ has
so declared this way, and so indifferently opened it to us al without exception
of any person, Romans 3.
or preferment of any certain kind of life or degree, that no man there is,
but he may be parttaker of this perfection and felicity. For as dear is he to
god, that is a plowman or labourer of the earth, as is the most royal king
or prince in his high majesty, if he love his master Christ with no less
affecte than does he. Ep^e. 6.
As dear is he to Christ who is a cobblar, as is the greattest philosopher, if
he with his simplicite, have no less trust in the promysses of god, than has
he with his high philosophy. AS dear is he to god, Coloss. 3.
who is a marcha^t abroad in the world trauaylynge for his life, as is the
monk in his cloister most religious, if to the word of god he give no less
trust in his tranaylle and business, thanne does he in his trauquillitie and
quietness. And in conclusion of what sort, craft, or condition so ever man be,
though in this polityke life and worldly, there be great diversity, yet before
god, who looks into the heart, there considering the sure faith and trust in
his promysse and word, there is no regard of person nor degree: Rom* 12.
but to all proportionably according to their faytfull love and charity, he
gives his high reward and eternalle felicity. This is a sure and stable
ground of our true religion: this is the comfort of all faithful hearts, of
this rejoice you, most christen people, in this fyxe your hope: and you shall
find therein great and inestimable quietness. Lean to this anchor, and you
shall easyly pass the storms of this world: stable this in your hearts, and
in the miserable and wretchyd state of this life, short and transytorie all
adversity you shall bear with equal mind and right patiently. For to him
that has unfeignedly Christ printed in his heart, and is armed with the faith
and sure love of him, who governs al by his high providence, all worldly
aduersite, which comes not to him by his own negligence and faut, is to him
turned into joy comfort and plain felicity: (...), 12.
and this is the greattest benefyte that man's mind may receive here in the
earth, of the doctrine of Christ, of the which benefyte every man desires to
be partaker: for every man desires quietness of mind, every man iugeth therein
to rest all felicity, there is no man so mad and so with out sense, that
above all thing in his heart desires not to inioye and embrace this
quietness and tranquillity. Wherefore dear friends this appears to me a
thing most meruaylous and wonderful, to see us all, so desirous hereof, and
so few to take the streyghte way to the attaynynge of the same, but led by
bypathes, sum by vain pleasure, sum by ambition, and sum by curious
knowledge, and cloked superstition we run to our own ruin, plain myserye,
and destruction.

In so much that sommetyme when I do consider with my self the nature of man, and his excellent dignity, he appears to mine eye, of all other
creatures most wretched and miserable, who by the goodness of god being
ordained to so hye felicity, by his blind folly falls to so manyfeste
miserye. For the which cause, though I have many times with my self in a
manner lamented the state and condition of man, who so lightly slyppeth from
his dignity, yet never more than now of late I have been constrained to the
same, by the reasone of a greatte blyndenes raygnynge among us, here in our
countreye, whereby this charitable unity, in the which restethe our felycitie,
and quietness of mind, is greattely broken and dissolved, by the which
blyndenesse this spirytualle body, this church of Christ, whereof we be all
members, if by true and faithful love we be knytte to our spiritual hedde,
Ephe* ^.
is disseuered and in sondrye parts divided and rent. For what unity may
there be judged to rest among them, where as that one estemeth an another to
be an heretic, or at the leeste a scysmatyke? What christen concord and
unity may in those hearts reygne, where as one judges an another to be a
foolyshe Pharisee, or a superstitious papyste? one to be of the new fashyon,
and him to be frantycke: and an other of the old, and him to be foolyshe
blind and diabolike. How may these minds with such iugementes one of an
other in love be knitte to gether, (...). 1.
and be of one sentence in Christ, the which above all thing Paul does
require: How may such minds be as it were me^bres of one body? how may they
receive the light of the spirit, which be in spirit so divided? undoubtedly
by no mean: for there Christ does not reign no more than light in darkness does
shine, where as is another concord peace nor unity, wherein is grounded al
christen policy: (...)
For upon this faithfulle unity and love in Christ, and upon this charitable
faith in him is builded Christis church, and this is the stone, whereupon it
was first founded: This is the rock, whereby it is sustained: this is the key,
which shall make open to us heaven gatis, against the which nothing may
prevail. Wherefore friends considering that this unity is the principalle
ground of all Christen life, which seems in some part by our own blindness
lately to be broken here among us, to the intent we may somewhat the better
among our selfs, by the grace and favor of the holy spirit of god, of whom
comes all unity, both restore and conserve the same with quietness and
tranquillity, I shall now at this time first gether certain causes of the
dissolutio^ and brake of this unity, and so afterward adioyne certain means,
which by the goodness of him that governs al, may in some part help to the
restitution of the same, that so consequently we as members of one body, by
spiritual love coupled to gether and knytte to one heed, may at the last
somewhat the better attain to our felicity. This process I will use.

How be hit in the first beginning this you shall understand, that I can
not by words most christen people, declare unto you the sorrow of mind, which
lately I have conceived by a common blyndnes, here reignyng among us, which
takes fro me in a manner al swetenes of life, the grefe whereof is greatter than
I can express, and the cause why brefely I shall by your patience, first in
some part touch, because hit is somewhat to my purpose: I have all my life
hitherto, for the most part, given my self to the study of letters, occupienge
my self in diverse kinds thereof, both in secular studies and in holy
scripture, but ever referrynge all my labor and peynes to the knowledge of
Christ, as to the end, of right to be proposed to all christen minds:
having this hope and comfort ever before mine eyes, at the last to employ my
labors taken in the same, here in my natyfe country, to some use and profit
thereof. This was the thing that made all my labors ever to seem light: and
this hope was ever the chief comfort of my mind: for borne we be al, and
brought forth of nature, not only to live as brute beasts do, serving the
body, but such gifts of mind, as god of his mere goodness has given unto
us, Galat, 6.
to employe echeone to the profit of other, and so to live in perfyte
civility. This end I ever looked unto: This was the chief comfort I had in
this world, and as me seems no small comfort to any honest mind. But
now friends sythen I am lately out of Italy, where as I have been many years
in studies, hither returned into my countreye, and have taken sum experience
of your manners here at home, I am almost, plainly to say, deprived of this
comfort, I am almost put out of this hope. For such blyndenes I have
observed to reign among you, such division, such discord of minds, that
folly hit were for me, among such troubled hearts to conceive opinion to
inioye this, most desired of all men, that is, quietness and tranquillity: in
so much that if it were not for the greatte goodness and high wisdom of our
most noble prince, who nothing more tendereth in earth, than the conservation
of this unity, ye and if it were not for the greatte opinion, which I have
ever had of you most christen people, whom I have observed always religious,
and desirous of truth, I should utterly be put in despair, and should more
gladdely flee from my country, and from your conversation, than here to tarry
among you without hope and comfort of quietness in such tribulation, and in
such prepetuall myserie, as undoubtedly we shall be wrapped in, by our own
blyndenes, except in time we resist the same. For this blyndenes has so
corrupt our judgments, that to the corruption thereof, of necessity, by the
ordinance of god, Ep^e. 4.
must follow confusyon, and of all quietness and of sweet christen living
plain destruction. For the which cause, whatte sorrow I have inwardly
conceived, I can not now outwardly by words express: in so much that if I
had not sum hoope to tempre this sorrow, my heart could not supporte the
vehemencye thereof, but the goodness of our prince greattely does comfort me,
whom I think by the high providence of god, to be given to us in this time to
remedy this common, and pernicious blyndenes, reygnynge in us. For day nor
night nothing his grace has more in mind, than the manner and mean, to take
away this blyndenes from our hartis: and most like a chrystian prince, no
thing he more studyeth, thanne to conserve among us, this spiritual and
christen concord and unity, no thing he more takethe cure of, than to remove
al such things, as to his high wisdom does appear, to be impedymentes, or
in any part lettes or hyndraunces to the setting forward of the same, by the
which yet somewhat I am styrred and moved to conceive mine old hope again,
to the which also much moved I am by the goodness of your nature, most
christen people, whom I perceive to be as dilygente and studyous of the
truth, and as desirous to have knowledge of the sincere and pure religion of
Christ, as any nation upon earth, and in no men I se to be more prompte redy^cs
to receive the same, than ever I have observed in you. Wherefore in this part
also great hope I have, that when you be instruct plainly and clearly of such
blyndnes, as reigns among you, right gladdely you will fly from the same,
avoiding with all diligence the causes thereof, and promptly admitting the
remedies of the same: the which purpose if you ones conceive and stable in
your hearts, it is not to be vouted, but the goodness of god shall set it
forward, (...)
and bring you out of this dangerous blyndenes, which now so reygneth in
your stomakes, mortified and cold for lack of charity.

But now to the purpose, after that I have in sum part declared the affecte
of mine own mind, I shall breuely touch and declare this common blyndnes,
which reygneth among us, and so recite certain chief and principal causes,
whereof the same blynd^es has taken his foundation and ground, to thentent
that somewhat the better, such remedies as by the goodness of god, and
providence of our prince, shall hereaf^^r be applied to the same, may take
effect, and ^rynge forth their fruit, to the common comfort of all christen
hearts: the which while I do, I shall beseech you pacie^tly most christen
people, to here me, and with indifferent judgment, by no affection corrupt, to
wey such things as I shall set before your eyes. But here some of you
peraue^ture shall greatly marvel most christian people of this my purpose and
enterprise, so boldly to affirm and to take upon me, to declare such
blyndenes to reign among us, specially in this time, wherein by the judgment
of many wise men, the truth is declared and opened to our eyes, after such
manner, that we plainly condemn all our forefathers of ignorancye, gyuynge
thanks to all mighty god, for so manifest declaration of truth now in this
age by his goodness to us opened: To whom this I will first in the beginning
say, that all be it some things by the goodness of god, and diligent prudence
of wise and polityke men, are brought to light, which before time from our
forefathers were covert and hyd, yet of such moment and weight they be not in
deed, wherefore we ought to condemn all the antiquity: and all our
forefathers for the ignorance thereof, utterly to cast into the deep pytte of
hell: nor yet of such sort they be not, that by the invention of them, we
may justly so glory, as by them to be delivered from al blyndnes and
ignorancye, for yet blind we be, and except we take diligent cure, in this
blyndnes Blyndeness^
we shall dye. For that blyndenes is almost incurable, to the which is joined
proud arroga^cy, so that of this doubt there is none, that al though in this
our age many things are brought out of darkness to light: yet of such nature
they are not to be judged, that we should thereby be constrained to confess, of
truth to have the clear sight. This benefyte is to great for our age to bear,
wherein as it appears to me, by discord, diversity of iugementes, and
contrary sentence, truth is almost overthrown, and driven away, which is of
this nature, ^phe. 4.
that she never will appear, but only in such hearts, which without
corrupt affection be pure and sincere: therefore to pronounce blyndnes to
reign in us I will not fear, and now proceed to declare the same: wherein
first most christen people, this you shall understand, that of all kinds and
sorts of ignorance and blyndnes, which occupies our minds, I will not now
speak. For that matter were over large to entreat, and not convenient to your
ears to here: For as much as ignorance and blyndnes, after the sentence of
the ancient learned men, to whose mind I do therein agree, is the fountayn and
mother of all vicious affectes and myserie. For man does nothing that is yuel,
Pl^^^in Ti^^^ A^^^. Eth. 7.
but he has some pretext and color of good, whereby he is induced to the
execution of his deed. For this is a sure ground, no man wyttyngly and
wyllyngly will do him self hurt, nor no such thing which is to him yuell,
except to hsi judgment it appeared good: so that ever by some falls persuasion
reason is corrupt, and blinded with affection. But this blindness in ordryng the
natural affectes and desires to natural reason, which ever has been common to
mankind, and ever shall be during this world, I will set a part, even like
as I will also, the ignorance and blindness of the nature of thignes, which
comes by lack of knowledge of letters, and high philosophy, whereof our nation
is somewhat rude, and much more I fere shortly will be, by a contempt of
letters, which daily growethe in among us. Of these. ii. kinds of blyndenes
I say now at this time, I will not speak, but I will touch. ii. other kinds
of this blyndnes, concerning pure religion, and true honor of god, which are
more pernicious to al ciuyle order and polycie, than the other be, of the
which the one brings in, the disobedience to common law stablyshed by
common authority, the other the contempt of religion, which is the foundation
and ground of al good and true policy. The first I may call a superstitious
blindness, the which by long process of time, is roted in our stomakes under
the pretense of religion: The second me seems may well be called an arrogant
blind nes, which lately is grown in here among us, by lyghtnes of judgment,
contrary to all religious opinyon, and Christen ciuylitie: the which both so
manifestly reign in our hartis, that this thing to declare by long process
and many words may plainly appear superfluous. For as tou chinge the
superstitious blyndnes of many, we have had lately among us lamentable
experience, to al honest hearts grievous and sorrowful, of the which many words
now to speak, I can not without great sorrow: for a sorrowful case it appeared
to me to see such men, so notable, both of virtue and learning, as by common
fame, some of them were reported to be, which lately have suffered, so sturdely
to stycke in a manifest superstition, that rather they should chose to lose
their lives, than to be removed from their opinion, wherein they stood so
styffely, under the persuasion of true religion: For it appeared to them to
pertayne to the religion of Christ, by necessity the bishop of Rome among al
christen nations, to have such superiority, as of many years he has,
abusing their patience, usurped upon them: In the defense whereof, as it had been an article of the faith, they boldly, with more patience than wisdom,
suffered their death, the which thing in deed as hereafter shall appear, is a
plain and manifest superstition, and spryngeth out of superstitious blyndnes,
bringing forth pernicious and sturdy obstinacy, with disobedience to princely
authority, and to laws authorysed by common counselle and good policy, to
the obedience whereof, we are bounden by the laws of god and of nature, so long
as they stand in full strength and power, with no repugnancy unto the same.
The blyndnes of these persons I am sure all you most christen people, of heart
do lament, and specially of sum of them, whose fame of learning and virtue,
throughout Christendom was spredde, but as you ernestly lament and sorrow the
blyndenes of the same persons, so I trust you will with all heart and
mind, avoid such superstition and blind obstinacye, and suffer it not to
take any root and ground among you, whereof might succeed ruin both to us
and our posterite, of this thing in many of you, which conceive the matter as
it is in deed, with dew obedience in heart admittynge the same, I doubt
nothing at all, but certain I am, that their example shall be to you of small
moment and weight: in so much that to speak any word of that matter to some
of you, after law stablyshed thereupon, and learned judgment declarid therein,
semith to me almost superfluous and labor in vayn. But yet for as much, as some
other there be among you of less knowledge, and weaker conscience, of this
thing hereafter in his place I shall somewhat say and open to you at large my
sentence therein, But now I will return again, ferther to descrybe and
declare unto you this superstitious blyndenes and blind superstition.

And first to thentent ye may better perceive the rest of my communication I
shall shortly touch, as much as shall be expedient to my purpose, the
difference betwyxt true and perfyte religion, and falls and vayn superstition,
for the which brefely to say without long disputation,

True religion is this, (...)
with sincere and pure spirit to honor god, and with most reverent love and
ardent affection of heart and mind to worship the divine nature, by Christ
in our days to mankind declared, as author of al things, fountain of all
goodness, and governor of al. This teaches us our master Christ, the very
true doctor of all true relygion, in his gospel, instructynge the woman of
Cananee, (...)
fervently desiring the knowledge thereof, where he says unto her, that the
very true worshyppers of god be such as in spirit and truth worship him in
heart. For like as he is of nature spiritual, and nothing but truth, so he
delyteth in such honor and worship, as in truth of spirit comes out of
the heart, and spiritualle power of man, and not only out of his lyppes, or by
any other exterior signs declared: It is the honor of heart that he does
require, who only looks into the heart of man, with him there is no place of
dissimulatio^. wherefore above al thing as the course of his life and doctrine
openly declares, (...) 2^.
Hypocrisye him most hyghly displeasyth: for as god is sincere and pure
truth, so accordyngely with falls feigned hypocrisye, he is most offended: so
that true religion is with the inward affect of heart, the true honor of
god, though it be set out also, to the face of the world, by outward token
and ceremony. And this we learn of our master Christ: The which thing also his
apostel James plainly confyrmeth, where as he says, Jacob. 1.
that pure and clean religion stondeth in brotherly love, and every one to his
power helpyng each other, to commune the gifts of god, to our common comfort,
and so liftyng up our hearts from all worldly affection, to put our hole
confidence and trust in his goodness, living in him and not in our selfs,
there setting all our comfort and joy, loving him with heart above all
thing, and all things for him. In this christen people, shortly to conclude,
stondeth the purity of true religion, in so much that he of what state and
condition so ever he be, yt thus loves god, as maker and governor of al, with
reverent dread of brekynge his precept and co^mandme^t, ever beryng to him lo
uyng fere and fearful love, with heart obedient to the same, This man I say is a
pfyte religious man, though he be another covered with saint Benets cote, nor
yet with saint Francys: ye and though he be at ploughe and the carte, and
labourynge the ground, yet may he be as perfect in religion as the most
perfyte monk living in his cloister. But here friends I would not ye should
of me take occasion, to condemn all these monastical sorts and kinds of
religion, which for the conservation and setting forward of this pure and
perfyt religion of Christ by holy and reverent fathers have been inverted and
co^stitute, long and many years by common authorite among us received: for
this opinion I would not have you to conceive, which abhorrith from christen
civility. But by this mean I shall induce you, to perceive somewhat the better
this blind superstition, which is a plain contrary to pure religion, the
which as you have hard requires ardent love of god, myngled also with some
reverent fear: for every christen heart must fear to break and transgress
the commandment of god. Wherefore we must bear toward god both fearful love
and loving fear, the which thing as you shall now here, (...).
has minystred the ground to all superstition, which brefely to say is
nothing else, (...)
but a scrupulous and a seruyle manner of the honourynge of god, conceived in
the heart of man, by ouermoche fear of the transgression of the commandment
of god, which brings in corrupt judgment, making us to judge that thing,
to pertayne to his honor and true religion, which does not in deed, but
hangs only of man's constitution. As by example, some of us are so
superstitious, that if they here not.iii. masses every day in the honor of the
Trinity, though they have busynes of great necessity: yet greuousely they
judge them selfs to offend the majesty of god. And some if they cross not
them selfs at saint Iohn^s gospel, or kiss not the paxe in the mass time,
think in that day scante to speed well, such is the superstitious fere in
many men's minds, which has given occasion to so many sorts and kinds of
monasticalle lives, and solitary religion. For many men consideringe the
dangers abroad in the world, ministered to them by manyfolde occasion, and
weyinge with them selfs their own fraylnes and imbecillitie, whereby they
perceived they could not resist the common pleasures and vanities of the
world, and so fearyng to be trapped thereby, fled into wyldernes and
solitary places, auoydyng the worldly company, there living at the first,
in greatte quietness of mind: by whose example many other moved, by lyttel and
lyttel, grew to a great company, and made in wyldernes as hit were a little
polycie, among whom at the beginning both virtue and learning, came to great
perfection, in so much that other observing their constaunce and austeritie
of life, lyuinge abroad among the common pleasures, beginning to distruste to
their kind of lives, fearyng the displeasure of god, with ouermoch dread of
living abroad, judged superstitiousely the pcrfection of Christis religion, in
that solitary kind of life only to remain, by the reason whereof that no^bre
now in our days is ouermoch grown, which so have filled monasteries, that
many cities almost be left void, to the great ruin of common civility. But
of this hereafter, and to return to the purpose, now after that by these
few words, somewhat I think you do perceive, what is true religion, and what
superstition, and wherein they differ. For as true religion is the honor of
god, with reverent fere of disobeying of his precepts, so superstition is a
scrupulous honor myngled with ouermoche and seruyle fear, with meruaylous
disquieting of the weke conscience and blind, the which by corrupt judgment
takes such thing to pertayne of necessity to the honor of god, which in
deed nothing so does, but hangs only upon man's consent: so that by this I
say now you shall be induced plainly to confess, much blind superstition to
reign in your hearts, as I shall now partly note. For all sorts and kinds
of superstition, here to prosecute, should be ouerlonge, and nothing necessary
to my purpose: sufficient it shall be some to descrybe, the rest leauyng to your
own examination.

And first think not you, that like as there has been some to the great
sorrow of honest minds, which lately blinded by superstition, have iuged the
unity of Christis church, utterly to be broken, by pluckynge from the pope,
his usurped power over us and superiority? so there be some other of no less
blyndnes, which if the organes should be plucked out of the church, and the
curyous singing tempered and brought to a conuenyente mean, ye or if the
prayers commonly said among us in temples in a strange tongue, of the people
not understand, should openly be rehearsed in the mother tongue, to the
entente that the affecte of the heart might thereby rather be styrred, to the
true honor of god, which I say would likewise judge with no less
superstition, Christ's relygion utterly to be over turned. And further if to
priests the mynisters of goddis word, liberty were granted by common
authority, to marye and take wives for the avoiding of Fornycation, would
they not think, that christian purytie were utterly than extincte? ye and if
the holy days and masses also celebrat upon the same, were brought to less
nombre, than would they say, Christ were utterly driven away. And yet ferther
if monasteryes should be mynisshed, and of them the foundations altered, ye
though it were to the high setting forward of virtue and learning, yet would
many of you think, Christis relygion utterly thereby to peryshe. Such is our
blyndnes, such is our folly. And what trow you concerning the sacraments, that
many of us have not also of them very folyshe and superstitious opinion,
lokynge only to the outward sign and ceremony, nothing considering the
inward and heavenly mystery? Be there not some among us think you, that would
judge their children not to be well baptized and christened, if they were not
dipped in the fount quite over the heed, whereby the child often times co^ceyueth
his death? and yet this is but a rite and a custom, diuersely used among
diverse nations, and nothing perteining to y^ substance of the sacrament. Be
there not some also, the which if their friend were sick, and in daungier of
life, and so at the last taken by death, before the priest could aryue to
minister to him, the host, and extreme unction, would plainly think and judge
that he should die a damned soul, and sore lament therefore, the departure of
their friend, as though in such a case, the will and purpose were not
sufficient. Be there not also some, the which in confession, if for lack of
memory or a little negligence, they did not recyte all their deeds with the
circumstance of the same, would plainly judge, void the absolution? Yes
undoubtedly. Of this sort among us there be diverse and many, which by
manyfolde superstition, have their judgments so corrupt, that al be it that
by the power of princis and common authorite, the abuse of such things,
whereto they have been long accustomed, should be reformed and brought to better
frame, yet in their hearts and minds they would not well bear it, but still
against such alteration and refourmyng to true religion, would murmur and
grudge, moved by their blind superstiiton: such is their madness and gross
opinion, they do not well ponder and wey, the nature of politic things and
indifferent, which be of this sort, that in process of time by littell and
littell ever grow to unjust extremity, in so much that of necessity they
require prudent reformation: against the which they sturdely armed with
superstition, ever repugne, because they lack right judgment, to discern
betwixt things worldly and politic, and things which hang of the necessite
of nature, and of the scripture and gospel of god, the which things contrary
to the other, which by nature be indifferent, never admyt change nor
innovation, no nor yet tempering by dispe^satio^, as hereafter in his place
more plainly I shall declare. But now I think dear friends, in some part, by
this which I have said, our blyndnesse and vain superstition, which thus
reygnethe in our hartis, is open unto us, in so much that hereby you may
perauenture be styrred, to find by diligent examination of your own
consciences, many other sorts of this superstition, the which all to
correcke and amend, let us not cesse continually to pray to him, who is only
author of all true religion. And this now consequently I shall proceed, in
like manner, brefely to touch, the other kind of blyndnes, which reigns in
us no less thanne does this, and with more hyndrance to all good order and
civility. For yet better it is, blinded with superstition, to admyt such
things to be of the law of god, which be not in deed, than by arrogant
blyndnes, to derogate the authority thereof, and so bring in the contempt of
religion, which is the common gate of all myserie and myschiefe both private
and publyke. For in that mind or in that common weal, Roman. 1.
where as is no respect of god and good religion, there al things must needs
run to ruin and confusion.

And first to declare what I mean by this arrogant blyndenes, (...)
this you shall understand, that like as superstition is scrupulous and
servile honor of god, coupled with ouermoch fere, so contrary this blyndnes in
religion, is by a feigned and dissimuled honor of god utterly separate from all
fere and dread of his punishment: in so much that such men, in whose minds
reigns this arrogancy, if hit were not for fear of man's law, would
bring to ruin all order and policye, they would have all things which
nature has brought forth to the common comfort of man, to be in common,
judging this inequality in possession of things, where as sum have to
little, and some over much, to be plain ageynste Nature, and manyfeste
iniurye, they would in all things serve their own fantasye, they would in
heart be subject to no ceremony, law, nor man's tradition: for that they
say agreethe not to the liberty of a Chrystian manne, who is free from all
bondage of law, and subject to no ceremonye, the which they say be only
snares and stays unto weke minds, nothing agreing unto their dignity.

Thus with greatte words many of us booste and blow, even as though we were
equal with sayncte Poule, for because that we can rehearse certain of his
words perteynynge unto the same liberty, but the mean time we serve our
affectes, and to them in all this liberty be utterly subject more than any
slave unto his master: for whether so ever they draw us, thither heedlonge we
run, and them wilfully we follow, making no resistance thereto: wherein dear
friends what arrogant blyndenesse this is, True liberty. Galat. 4.
manifestly I trow you see: this to brag in words of christen liberty,
being so subject to vain affectes and all myserye, from which a heart that
inioyith that liberty, is nete and pure, in no point serving thereto, but by
spiritual comfort so is confirmed, that all such affectes he treads under
foot: wherein stondeth this liberty, which makes a man obedient with a
glad heart to all ceremonies and laws, whereof by this arrogant blindness a
great sort of us be manifest despisers, as you daily not without sorrow, who
so will aduerte, may by experience both here and see. For sum there be among
us, which of their own foolish fantasy, generally all traditions do
condemn, though that they be never so good and conueniente to the
conservation of the spiritual policy, as undoubtedly many of them be: All
ceremonies they have in derision, and call them plain hypocrisy, though
they were never so well of holy fathers ordained and institute, to stire the
devotion of simple minds to christen purity: all ecclesiastical laws they
utterly abrogate, though they be yet among us received and authorized by
common authorite, all counselles they utterly condemn, as things governed and
ruled by plain and manifest tyranny, and as for pilgremage and veneration of
saints they have for plain idolatry, and so likewise purgatory and praying
for them which be deed they repute folyshe simplicity: fasting also they in
no case will admyt, though it has been approved of al antiquity: Holy days
they will admit none, fearing peradventure the occasion of the remembrance
of god, whom though in word they besily confess, yet by their deeds they
utterly him deny, and out of their hearts plainly him cast, (...)
according to the nature of this blind arrogance, which under the pretense of
religion despyseth the same as vain superstition: like as also under the
pretext of justice and good policy, it covertly subuerteth all good order and
ciuilite. And as for the sacraments, thynk you to the^, some of this sort have
any reverence, the which they judge to be only as doom signs? truly none at
al: in so much that and if it were not for the goodness of our prince, whom
they se steadfastly stand in the defense of the same, they would sure before it
were long, as ryghtes ecclesiasticalle and ceremonies, utterly condemn them
also, and put them quite out of memory. For such is their pestilent
persuasion, that all thing they would as it seems bring to confusion,
nothing admittynge at all, but that which is in scripture expressly
contained, which they also will vuderstonde after their own fantasy, to the
contrarienge whereof if you bring the sentence of any ancient doctor, as of
Jerome, Austyne, Gregory, or Ambrose, their authority by and by they trede
under foot, saying they were men, to whose judgment they be nothing bounden
at al: And if you begin to reason with them to convince the^of this their blind
arrogance, straight way your reason they shake of, saying it is drawn out of
sophistical philosophy: and so after this manner many of us our arrogant
blyndenes, blyndely defend, from the which by no mean we will be delivered,
but sturdely stand in the defense of the same: which things friends is soore
to be lamented. For these men under the presence of liberty, covertly purpose
to distroye all christen policy, and so in conclusion bring al to manifest
ruin and utter confusion. For what can you look other of them, which so
arrogantly despise all ceremonies, rytes, and ecclesiastical laws, al wholesome
customs and traditions, but at the last also the certain ruin and
destruction of all christen purity, and true religion? And if it were not that
by the high wisdom and policy of our prince, I have greatte hoope and sure
trust some remedies shortly to be provided, whereby our hearts shall be purged of
such blindness concerning religion, Galat. 3.
I might me seems make a sure conclusion, that shortly we should* se brought
in here in our country by this our own blyndnes, our own confusion, the
which now as one of the effects consequent, and of necessity annexed to the
same, among other I will brefely show. For friends of this be you assured,
this blyndenes of religion reigninge in our hearts, as I have declared, partly
by superstition, and partly by arrogant opinion, ^. (...). 4.
can not long continue without dyuellishe effects, of the which some we se
all ready, to our great sorrow put before our eyes, and some I will touch,
which all men do not observe, though some of them be all ready put in effect,
and some by all conjecture are like to succeed, except by his prouydence
chiefly, who governs all, they may be from us aduerted and utterly turned
away.

What marvelous effects, how diverse and strange this dyuellyshe blyndenes
works in man's mind, I will not, no nor if I would I can not all express.
2. (...). 4.
For even as god him self is nothing but truth and wisdom, so the dyuel is
nothing but blyndnes and folly: and as god by wysedom, (...) of Bly^denesse.
as by the chief instrument works all that is good both in heaven and earth,
so the dyuell by blyndnes works all that is evil, here in man's life: and
with that as with the chief instrument, impugneth ever be^yly the works of
goddis wisdom and prouydence, as by example, by the blyndnes coming of the
lack of knowledge of things he makes man's mind rude and ignorant, lettynge
him thereby from the admyration and contemplation of Nature, and of all power
thereof, whereby else he might be styrred to consider the bountyfulle goodness
of god, of whom nature takes all her virtue and power. By this blyndenes also
he brings man to the obedience of his vain and beastely affectes, by the
reason whereof he never tastethe of the swetenes of virtue, and into that
gardein he never does enter, ye or yet if he do, there he can not tarry at all,
but straight way is cast out again, to that Eve being over obedient.
Genesis. 3.
This I could confyrme by many places of scripture, But I will not now tarry
thervppon, nor be about to express unto you the hole course of this dyuellyshe
blyndnes, nor the romblyng effectis, which the dyuell by this instrumente
brings forth here in the miserable and wretched life of man, to the common
destruction of all virtue order and civility, whereof he is by his corrupt
nature ennemy: but I will somewhat touch only certain effectis, and them somewhat
open to you, the which this blyndnes in religion, which I have showed, ye or
rather we in our life daily and plainly do show, to reign in our hearts,
partly by vain superstition, and partly by arrogant and light opinion, has
and does daily bring forth here in our country. And first as touching the
effects of blind supstition, what it has done all ready it is to you al, more
manifest tha^ needs declaration. For what disobedience to common laws, good
and expedient to the wealth of this realm, Ro^ ^3.
and what disobedience to the princely authorite, to the which by goddis law
straytely all true subjects are bounden, has lately been showed, and has
succeeded as an effect of this blind superstition, we dear friends to the great
sorrow of such minds, as of heart desire the common quietness, these days paste
have seen in them, which nothing fearing the cruelty of pain, have to the
world testified by their death their disobedience, moved by vain and falls
superstition, which grew in their hearts, and there was stablyshed under
pretexrte of true religion: by the which persuasion they more boldly than
wisely, by the judgment of wise men, suffered their death. So that in this
plainly most christen people here you may se, the most dyuellyshe effect of
this superstition, which induced men of such learning, of such wit, and of
such perfectnes of religion, as some of them which suffered, were noted to be,
so to be disobediente to common authorite, and so wilfully to repugne against
the same that more gladly in their superstitious opinion they ran unto
death, and with more patience sufferynge the same, seemed it to desire, then
many of us desire the swetenes of this life or pleasure thereof. Such was their
blyndnes, which so blinded their hearts, that contrary to al course and law of
nature, they gladly that thing suffered, that man naturally ever does abhor.
But as I said herein you may se the great strength and power of sturdy
superstition, which so has ouerru^ne y^ wits of witty persons, colored
with the spice of religion, that al power of nature they utterly overcame: but
of this effect I will speak no more, trusting that the example of these shall
give unto you all sufficient warning and monition, to avoid all such blind
superstition, and yet hereafter in his place I shall not pretermytte somewhat
to say concerning the instruction of your weak conscience and knowledge in this
behalf. For what disquietnes reigns in these hearts, which by superstition
are corruptly infecte, by the reason whereof they be as it were into diverse
parts rent, I will not be about here to express, but leave it to the judgment
of them, which feel the^ selfs vexed therewith. For here was my purpose, only
to touch this effect of superstition, to the declaration whereof, these few
words as I think have been sufficient. wherefore consequently I will now
proceed to other, which needs longer declaration, for as much as all men do
not them observe, for privily they be cropen into our bosoms, and daily does
more and more there increase, the things be such, that I would you might them
justly deny, but of your own hearts I shall have testimony, your own
conscience shall witness with me.

And brefely to say, this it is, as well by the blindness of this dyuellyshe
superstition, as by this pestilent and arrogant opinion, there is growing in
among us here a corrupt judgment one of an other, by the reason whereof, each one
in heart iugeth other to be, either pharisee or heretyke, papist or sch^smatike,
to the which judgment consequently is annexed division, and so to the same is
succeeded of the very true and spiritual unity, a manifest dissolution and an
open bracke thereof by dissension. That this is true I shall in as few words as
I can manyfestly declare. For if I should particularly and at length prosecute
this thing, I should be ouerlonge and tedious to you. Wherefore I will touch
only as it were certain common places and general grounds, whereby we are
slypped into this pestilent and dyuellishe division of spirit, by the reason
whereof, sum of you may perauenture be moved to consider the corruption of
your own iugementes herin. (...)
And first in the beginning this you must take for a manifest truth, that all
such which ouermoche gyuinge to traditions, ceremonies, and ecclesiastical
rytes, and customs, stycke to them as to things stable by nature unvariable,
and of necessity to the salvation of man required, without the which the
grounds of Christis religion may not be conserved, (...)
all such I say lening to a false persuasion, err, and have conceived thereby
a great ground of a corrupt judgment. For this is sure, that rites,
ceremonies, and customs of the church, according to time, place, and nature
of the people may be varied, as things of them self another sure nor stable,
ye and necessite it does require. For even as al diet to al men for bodily
health, is not agreeable nor convenient, so all ceremonies to all nations for
good religion be another mete nor expedient. Wherefore the sturdy defense of them
in private persons contrary to common authority, comes undoubtedly of a
folyshe and corrupt judgment, and roteth superstition: Like as contrary this is
of no less truth, that all such persons, which traditions of fathers,
rytes, and customs utterly condemn and despise, because they find them not
in holy scripture plainly expressed, and so therefore affirm them to be
pernicious to all christen civility, and as burdeynes of conscience, Matt* 23.
judge them of their own heedes utterly to be cast away: All such I say of
the other side be in no less error, and have by this ground and opinion
founded a more corrupt judgment, tha^ have yet the other, thereby runnynge into
a contempt^ of religion. For to this judgment is annexed the ruin of al
christen policy, which is conserved and much maynteyned by rytes and
customs ecclesiastical, ye the grou^dis of scripture and the very doctrine of
Christ without these brefly would greatly decay, and I think by littell and
little utterly vanyshe away. For as much as the weak vulgar minds of the
people ever have benne after this sort, that without sum exterior and
outward signs and ceremonies, their simplicity could never be lad to true
religion, nor of god to conceive the divinity. Wherefore of this ground as I
said, ryseth a corrupt and a pestilent judgment and mother of all impiety:
and out of like persuasion it springs, that many men say, that these rytes
and customs ecclesiastical, are maynteined only by them, which take profit
and lucre thereby, and of such they were first constitute, ordained, and
stabled for that purpose and none other, which is also a manifest and falls
opinion. For many of these rites and customs were invented of them, who were
both in doctrine and life, dispisers of all worldly gain, ^hell. 2.
profit, and pleasure, and looked only to the preferrement and increase of
virtue and of true religion, and after also were stablyshed by common law and
general counsel in every congregation. This can not be denied of any man,
which with indifferency, and sincere mind, nothing blinded with affection,
weyeth things as they be in their own nature. But sum of us blinded with
such persuasion, yet proceed ferther, and plainly do affirm, that prestis to
have possession, is utterly against Christis doctrine, and his true religion,
litell considering how that to receive the gift and benefit of any man, given
with charity, nothing repugneth to Christis doctrine, nor to his simplicity:
and how that al such donation and gift was brought in, and stablyshed, by men
of perfyte charity, to this purpose that bishops, pristes, and al religious,
should holly being intent to the preching of goddis word, thereby be maynteined
in quietness and tranquillite. This they consider not, but lokynge to the abuse,
whereof doubtless is great need of reformation, and therewith blinded, blindly do
ru^ne to the condemnation of the thing without reason and judgment. For this is
a certain truth and sure, that the perfection of Christis religion rests not
so much in the refuse of all possession, and wylfull poverty, as it does in
the straight use of these worldly things, with perfyte charity. Ye and though
in the beginning the prechers of Christis word, were poor and had nothing,
which was conueniente to that time, when mankind was utterly drowned in
worldly vanity, yet now in this age, after the stablyng of Christis religion
so long and many years, I see no cause why, such poverty should be so
necessary, and that possession should be so contrary to christen perfection.
Wherefore this persuasion bredeth in our hearts a corrupt judgment and a
pestilent division, by the which sum of us are slypped to a more corrupt and
pernicious ground, which is to flee the order of generalle counsel, and of al
interpretation of scripture there commonly received. For to this succedeth in a
manner the ruin of scripture it self, the authority whereof declared to man
commonly, hangs much upon general counsel. For though the truth of goddis
word dependethe nothing upon the judgment of man, yet the declaration
thereof, to the face of the world, hangs much thereon: in so much that these
which we have and take to be the true gospelles, and to conteyne the very
doctrine of Christ, we know not surely so to do, but only by feyth and
confidence that we give to the definition of general counsel and consent of
the same: In so much that if diverse nations should dissente in the grounds of
scripture, (...) 15.
and in the interpretation thereof, refuge should we have none convenient to
chrystian policy, and mete to conserve the polyticall unity, if from
generalle counsel we should take away all order and direction, and to that
give no obedience at all. This therefore to judge is plain arrogancye, and the
streyghte way and certain to bring all to uncertainty: so that boldly I
dare affirm, that this perswasyon, has set in many of us, of many things
corrupt opinyon. And thus, whatte by superstition, and what by arrogant
opinion, many of our judgments dear friends, are foul and perniciously
corrupt, by the which we are now induced by false and blind persuasion, to
conceive each one of other an odious and a corrupt opinyon: by the reasone
whereof, sum of us are called of the new fashyon, and sum of the old,
sum phariseys, and some schismatykes, and some also plain heretics: As by
example this somewhat to declare such as repugne against the pride of Rome,
gladly shaking of the yocke thereof, and wyllyng to receive some new doctrine,
to the comfort of their minds: such, as new fangled persons, be noted of
other to be of the new facion, ye and such as besye them selfs in redynge of
new books, and scripture, freely condempnynge many of the old customs, by
process of time grown to great abuse, though their purpose be never so good,
yet shall not they escape the note of an heretyke, or else of more gentylnesse,
they shall be called but a schismatike: wherein I dout not to pronounce, that
they be evil judged, and that they which so judge, have conceived of them a
corrupt judgment. For the most part I dare say of them, which be called
of the new facion, like true and obedient persons both to god and their
prince, would gladly with common quietness, the alteration of certain
ceremonies and customs of the church, to the increase of all virtue and of
true religion: and yet contrary they are iuged, even like as many other, which
are noted to be of the old facion, because they not gladly set forward this
new mutation, but sommewhat styffely stycke in the old ceremonies, and rytes
of the Church, wherein they have benne of youth brought up, and taken of
their fathers the same customs, not condempnynge lightly the constitutions
ecclesiastical: these I say, are judged of other to be superstitious and
pharisaicall, folyshe and papisticall: the which also I dare with no less
boldness affirm, than I did of the other, that they are mysiudged: For of them
the most part undoubtedly, though they some thing stycke in the old
customs, as things of long time received for good order and polycie, yet
when so ever it shall appear by common counsel here in our country, them to
change and utterly to abrogate, substitutinge other by common assent, they
will ever be glad as true and loyal subjects, to all such to be obedient,
but in the mean time, though like quiet modest and obedient persons, they
stand in the old, they are not to be blamed as pharisees, but rather deserve
praise, therein declaring their duty and obedience, from the which lightly
they are not moved, according to Poules counsel with every new invention, by
light brains brought in, (...) 15.
contrary to good order and al civil constitution. wherefore without fail many
of those of the old facion, are of the new likewise mysiudged and wrongefully
taken, as they be of the other: and so, though some of the old facion be
peradventure yet plain superstitious, for superstition so shortly will not be
pluckid utterly out of mind, ye and though sum of the new, be in heart of
true religion utter dispisers, as if it were not for fear of death, I think
plainly they would to the world declare: yet I doubt not but the most part
both of the new facion and also of the old, of the truth be right studious,
and of true religion much desirous, and daily do pray unto him, who is the
only fountain of all virtue and truth, that it may please him, so to light
their hearts and conscience, that by his grace delivered from blyndenes, they
may at the last se some sparkle of his light and truth: of the which now one
judges an other to be no parttaker at all, but echeone blyndely iudgethe other
to be blind, each one judges other to err, and to be slypped from the true
and catholic faith, the which some by new facion pretend to bring in:
Diuisyon.
and some by the old study to defend, so that by this contention, while every
man besily endeuoreth him self, to maynteyne among us this true and catholic
faith of Christ, the mean time is under growing secretly in our hearts this
lamentable division, the very bracke of the ground of Christis religion,
which is founded and grounded upon unity, whereof here is among us a plain
and manifest dissolution. For he that thinks that in those hearts rests
christen unity, where as one in heart judges an other to be an heretic, he
is plain frantike, and lacks the common sense: he is either blind, or
plainly will not see, the which thinks, that with such contrary and
corrupt judgments may be conserved this spiritual unity, which requires
our hearts as in a common band, to be knytte and coupled to gether in charity:
whereof betwixt the new facion and the old our hearts are so void and so
cold, that I think many of us there be, which without grefe would see,
their christen brother to hang upon a galowes tree. Such envy and malice of
one to an other is growyng in among us, that I can not se how we may justly
be called members of this spiritual body of Christ: in the which as by
charity all partis do flouryshe and grow in unity, receyuynge grace and
spiritual comfort of that heavenly heed, so by malice and rancour, the same
fall in diuisyon, and for lack of that spirit received of that heed, run
into manifest ruin and destruction. The experience whereof here among our
self daily we se, where as you may perceive, one nothing glad to help an
other, though he be in extreme necessity: one nothing prompte to give succor
to other, though for lack thereof he should incontinent dye, one not ready to
instruct an other, though he judge him to be in greatte error and folly: one
not ready to bear the weakness of an other, though he be of greatte
simplicity: but contrary one denyethe help and succor to other, every one
fleethe the instruction of other, no man gladdely nor wyllyngly admonyssheth
his christian brother, but suffers him to err, and has him in derision. For
such is the division growyng in by folyshe simplicity and arrogant opinion,
that one of us in no mean may abide of the other any brotherly admonition, but
ever one has an other suspecte, that with some corrupt and new opinion, he
will infecte his judgment, and bring him into some pernicious error,
contrary to Christis catholyke faith and religion: Thus in spirit and heart
we be divided, and of this spiritual unity is grown a plain bracke and
dissolution, which is an effect consequently following the common corruption of
our iugementes, which we conceive one of an other: the which thing is open
unto all them that delight not in their own blyndenes, and will not lift up
their eyes, this for to see. For all such, which with christen hearts be
desirous of the common quyetnes, and of the restitution of this unity, wherein
with charity all Christis members ought to be knytte, thereby inioyinge their
sure and certain felicity, this can not deny. And sorowfulle I am, that
the thing of it self is so open to every man's eye: in so much that many
men of greatte wisdom and prudence, greatly do fear, that to this breach of
this spiritual unity, growing in by lack of knowledge and charity, shall
succeed the ruin of good order, and of the just common policye: to the
conjecture whereof, by this manner perauenture, which I shall brefely touch,
they may be moved. For as much as all good polycye is ever grounded upon
concord and unite, upon the which as upon the sure and only durable
foundation, all politic order is edified, al civil constitutions be ordained
and stablyshed: Therefore where as that ground fails, having therein any
bracke, all the rest by reason and necessity, must fall to ruin and miserye.
For as al stories the very glass and true image of the life of man, plainly
testify, there was never common weal, which long did endure, which laid
not of this ground a sure foundation, And to the conservation hereof, ever put
not most diligent cure. But what should we seek confyrmation of this by story,
saying our master Christ of his own mouth this has pronounced, (...), 12.
that no comminaltie, where as reygneth this dissolution of unity in heart,
may long endure without ruin and destruction: whereof we have seen in our own
days sorrowful example and lamentable experience, here of our neighbors in the
country of Germany, where as for lack of prudente respect to the
conservation of this unity, manyfestly has succeeded ruin of the common
polycie and wonderful confusion: in so much that among them selfs within
the space of.vi. months there was slain above an hundrede thousand me^. This
to all the world is open, no man can it deny, and now they be so divided by
sects and heresies, that scant the shadow of true religion remains in that
confusion. And all this has succeeded by the judgment of men of wit and
polycie, because there was not in time respect to the bracke of this spiritual
unity, whose error I doubt not, shall be to our example: by them we shall be
instruct in time to provide for the breach of this unity. For the thing is
not yet so depely roted here among us, but that by the favor and help of
him, who is the very hedde of all unity, by the hye wisdom and prouydence
of our prince, who as the chyefe offycer and mynyster here under Christ,
nothing more studieth then the conservation thereof, ye and by the goodness of
your own nature most christen people, who I am sure to the restitution of
this ground, will be most pliable, and with all diligence endeavor your
self thereto. This breche is not yet so great I say, but that by all these
means shortly and surely stopped it may be, by the which we all as it were
in one course knitte together as members of one body, may run to gether with
this unity, whereby we shall surely at the last attain to that end and
felicity, the which the hye prouydence of god, of his mere goodness, has to
us ordained and appointed.

And to the intent we may somewhat the better attain to the same, putting
away this our blyndenesse reygnynge amongst us, both by false and vain
superstytion, and also by arrogant and light opinyon, with all the pestylent
and dyuellysshe effects annexed to the same: I shall now consequently of this
our blyndnes gether certain causes, whereby our iugementes are thus corrupted
by such falls grounds as we have conceived: that so at the last, avoiding the
same with common quietness, we may the better both restore and conserve among us
this heavenly unity.

And here most christen people, this you shall understand, that like as of
all blyndnes reygnynge in us I have not before spoken, so now in this part of
all causes thereof, (...) of (...).
I will not make mention, for such kind of philosophye is not according to
your capacity. For nothing there is here in this world, which is brought
forth and made of only one cause, but like as the things be of nature diverse
and varyable, so of many and diverse causes they take their creation, many
causes run to gether in certain course and order, to the bringynge forth of
all thing here in this world, subject to all corruption: and so the diverse
effects both in man's body and also in mind, spring out of diverse
occasions, as to our purpose now at this time, this blyndnes which I have
declared to reign in our minds, comes not of one occasion, but of many and
diverse: of the which certain after my judgment most convenient before you to
be opened, I will now touch, as brefely as I can, gyuynge you some occasyon
thereby peradventure, to the inue^tion of other, and avoiding of the same. And
first one greatte cause of this blyndenes reignynge among us, I note to be
unwise masters, 2. Pet. 2. Preacner^.
foolysshe teachers of relygion, indiscreet preachers of the gospel of god,
which by their madness and frantyke folly, ye and by their lack of judgment
and discretion, have brought you out of all good facion, they have been a
great occasion of this common blyndnes, which should bring you to the truth,
and show you the light, they have led you into miserable darkness, and almost
put out your sight: It is they that of many years have grafted in your hearts
and stabled superstition, it is they which of long season by their fonne
doctrine or rather fonne folly, have much corrupt your iugementes. For the
people in every common weal be rude and ignorant, having of them self small
light of judgment, but ever in simplicity, as sheep follow the herd, so
follow they their masters, ever treading in their steps, whether so ever
they go indifferently: For the which cause the ancient wise men and old
philosophers, Plato rep. 5.
were wont ever to say, that look of what sort, what nature so ever they be,
which are masters, teachers, rulers, and heedes in any city or polycie: of
the same sort and nature of necessity, must be all the rest of the
comminaltie. For their lyfes, doctrine, and deeds, be to the people chief
example and rules: their doctrine is their bokis, their lyfes he their common
glasses, wherein they with diligence ever be tootynge and lokyng, and to their
example as much as they may, they ever form and facion them selfs in all
things and in all kind of life, but specially in form and facion of religion:
for thereof, of all other thing, the people of them self have leest judgment,
and be of the same most ignorant, as a thing which most hyghly passes the
common capacity of man. For the which cause all the antiquity ever referred
the institution thereof, to heavenly power and to goddis divinity, as we most
christen people surely do of ours, the which our master Christ receyuynge of
the high wisdom of the heavenly father, has most plainly and clearly and in
few words described unto us, and by his apostels instruct us therewith, no
man excludynge from the mysteries thereof, they which be common to all men's
capacity. For the gospel is a doctrine of simplicity, (...) gospel. Galat. 5.
and nothing but faithful charity, a doctrine so manifest and plain, that
if it were as easy to fulfill and put in effect, as it is to conceive and to
understand, I think there is no man so rude, nor no man by nature so
ignorant, but he might attain to the highest mysteries, and to the highest
knowledge necessary to the salvation of man contained therein. For such was
the purpose of our master Christ, Matt. 13. Corin. 1.
to prescribe a doctrine to all men kind, open and common. Wherefore he made
rude fyshers, and ignorant persons, the first prechers teachers and doctors
thereof. But now dear friends, though this doctrine be never so plain and
full of simplicite, never so clear and manifest of it self, yet it is by the
curiosity of our masters and teachers thereof, now of late years so obscured
and hid, so cloked with subtyl interpretation, so mangled by contrary
exposition, that many of us now be in greatte perplexity, much dowbtynge of
the truth thereof, utterly ignorant of the ground and foundation of the same.
For where as the chief masters and teachers have preched and write, contrary
one to an other, how should ignorant and simple minds conceive any ground and
sure stey, whereto they might lean for succor and comfort? How should they
find any certain truth therein? where they here their masters in such
controversy, while sum of them set up the authority of old tradition,
rytes and customs, as things necessary for the conservation of good polycie,
where other utterly do them abrogate and damn, as things pernicious to all
perfyte and true religion: and some purgatory and praying for them which be
deed, plainly do condemn, and some openly admyt, some pilgremage and
veneratio^ of imagis, as thingis of idolatry manifestly deny, other them
preach and set in full authority. But what should I here be about to recyte
al such things, wherein our masters be i^co^trouersy seeing that to al me^ I
trow they be surely known? in so much that many of the people commonly say,
that they will no more here prechynges, till the preachers among them selfs
better agree: they will no more give their ears to such masters, which bring
them into so manifest perplexity, and some of them have induced into this false
superstition, and some to the contempt of true religion, so that a great part
of our blyndnes and corrupt judgment, we may most justly dear friends
attribute unto the indiscreet preachers, and of Christis doctrine blind
masters and techers: who have not ben content with their tongues only their
blyndnes to common abroad and testify, but also with their pen writing the
same they have descriued, and so the iugeme^tes of them which have been a lyttel
lettered, with their folly by writing declared, they have most perniciously
infected: some by their eloquence, man's law, ceremonies and rytes, customs and
traditions, so have exalted, so set a height, that many simple minds thereby
are persuaded, the sum of Christis religion in them to remain, or at the
lest so by them to be maynteyned, yt to their ruin or alteration, shall
succeed of true religion the plain decay or innovation: Some other contrary by
their books have them so depressed, and utterly condemned, that they boldly
affirm the mayntenance of them to bring in, of all sincere and pure
christianite the utter destruction, by the which Christis glory so has been of
long time obscured and hyd, that the world (as they say) has given more to
the outward works and man's tradition, than to lively faith and trust in
Christis passion: so that after this manner, as well by foolysshe books as by
fonne preaching, you good people ar brought in a great mammering, your
symplicitie seems to be much blinded by their curiosity.

How be it friends this you must now consequently take, that all be it great
causes of your blyndnes, be these indiscreet prechers, these curious and
arrogant teachers, yet you may not al attribute to them, you be not your
selfs clean without faut: If you your selfs some of you I say, had not sturdy
hearts, and full of obstinacy, Obstinacye.
by this superstition folyshely conceived, though of many years it has grown
in your stomakes, yet it should not so there be roted, and so styffely of you
be defended, that to common authority you should give no place: This declares
in many of us to be great and manifest obstinacy: like as in some other of us,
easy it is also to see, great lightness of mind, and of judgment instabilitie,
Lyghtnesse.
which with every blast of new doctrine of our new masters, be overthrown
and led, and to every light persuasion lightly give place, leaving by and by all old custom and ceremony, which is no less fault than in superstition to
be sturdy. Wherefore to excuse your selfs most christen people holly by your
masters, as many of you do, justly you may not. For though in them be great
fault, 1 Corin. 3.
and perauenture more damnable than is in you, yet you your selfs be not
clean without blame. For these unwise doctors of religion, neither with
their proud arrogancye, nor yet with their superstitious symplicitie, if they
found not in your hearts a prompt redynes to receive their opinion, never should
have place to fasten in you their folyshe doctrine, they should not lightly
stable in you any point of vain superstition, nor yet in your hartis any
contempt of good and true religion. For like as the sede cast in the ground
never brings forth fruit, except by nature the ground be apt and mete
there unto, so the doctrine of preachers does never neither edyfye nor
dystroye, Matt. 13.
except in the hearts of them, to whom it is communed, there be found to the
receyuynge thereof sum promptnes and conueniency. The fault whereof is to our
selfs holly to be imputed, for though as I said before, the vulgar people
be much ignorant, and of judgment very bare, yet they be not of nature so
naked set forth here into the world, but that certain seeds in their
hearts they have planted, certain sparcles of knowledge there they have
grafted, which if with any mean diligence they will set forth and till, some
judgment they shall have betwixt good and evil, some discretion they shall
attain, to discern the good preacher from the vain, some knowledge they shall
have to perceive him that preaches well virtue and honesty, from him that
precheth his own folyshe fantasy, by some token and sign they shall discern
him: that is arrogant and sedicious, from him that is meke and virtuous. And of
this perauenture here after in his place, because I judge it much to you at
this time expedient and necessary, I shall somewhat say, concerning the
difference betwyxt the good preacher and the evil, and how you shall know
one from the other, which shall be no small help to deliver us from this
blyndnes that we now be in wrapped, mysiudgyng one an other, whereof now in
some part the causes you see, which is in deed nothing hard to perceive,
and I would to god it were no less hard to find and apply remedy: but even as
it is in the body of man to find the disese, and the cause thereof, (...)
though it be not easy nor light, nor to every man open and plain, yet it is
not so hard, as it appears to me, as with prudent experience to apply
remedies to the same in time and place convenient. And so here likewise in this
our purpose now to note these causes of our blyndnes, as prechers obstinacy,
and leuitie of mind, was no greatte difficulty, but open to every man's eye:
but to find out remedies convenient now to the same, applying them to the
restitution of this desired unity, this is not light, this is not in my power,
this is not of my wit nor capacity. Wherefore a great part of this thing
commyttinge to the providence of god, whose order and governance to lack I
trust yet our sins have not deserved, and a great part to the hye policy of
our most noble prince, whose cares, studyes, and thoughts lie holly therein. I
shall now in the rest move, exhort, and instruct you, most christian people,
with certain things, the which for the most part lie in your own diligence,
and be put in your own power, where by you may if you will, endeavor your self,
as I doubt not but ye will, greatly set forward both the restorynge, and
the quiet conseruing of this so much of all men desired and praised unity.
For though it be so that out ward remedies by foreyn causes adhihyte, may to
this purpose give much preferment, greatly promoting and setting forward the
same, yet this can not be douted, (...). 3.
but that in your selfs sto^deth a great part of the hole matter, as in whom
the ground and foundation thereof holly does lie, none other wise than it does
in them, which labor in bodily disease, in whom you see, that all be it
physicians by medicines and other out ward remedies much do confer to the
health of their pacientes by good experience ministrynge the same, yet a great
part of their restitution lies in them selfs by good diet, quiet order, and
other good governance temperynge their affectes, without the which all craft
of phisyke little does avail. And yet here in this purpose dear friends we
are in much better case than they be, which are vexed and labor of bodyly
disease: for as much as we have the presence of our physician, the heavenly
spirit and divine power ever attehande, Matt. 28.
more ready at all times to minister us remedies, than we by our own blyndnes
and negligent folly let, be thereof desirous. Wherefore as I said, much lies
in our selves both to restore and conserve this heavenly unite, we must
dispose our selfs with heart and will utterly to cast away this blind
superstition and arroga^t folly, and with diligent endeavor and cure form our
judgments with right knowledge and convenient obedience, that we may thereby
the better, avoiding the dissolution of the unity spiritual, without al
confusion of policy annexed thereto, as members of one body knytte to one heed,
here in this life inioye common quietues, and hereafter eternal felicite,
whereof you al most christen people by nature are fervently desirous, the which
desire I trust in you shall never be found vain, but bring forth at the last
such fruit and perfection, as to such ardent desire and noble affecte is due
and convenient. For of this be you certain and sure, that the infinite goodness
of the divine power never leueth such hearts desert 1. Pet. 2.
without succor and help, which with fervent desire and sure affiaunce,
faith, and trust annexed thereto, diligently seek and inserche thereby to have
the knowledge of truth and honesty. And let this be a sure ground stabled
in your hearts, of the which you shall never be deceived: for god never suffers
them by any means to be deluded, Psalm. 30.
which put their affiance and trust in him, as I doubt not but you do.
Wherefore I will now proceed unto my purpose.

All though it be so most christen people, that some of us by blyndnes as I
have showed before, have our iugementes corrupt, the which thing daily also
openly to the world we testify, yet except affection to win own country
utterly blind me also, this I think I may boldly and truly affirm, that for
the most part universally, there is among us as true christen simplicity
and good religion, as there is in any other christian nation: or at the least,
this I may say, that to have the same stabled among us, in will and desire
we give place to none other: And of this we have ever had the fame, sith
Christis doctrine was first among us preched and taugth. wherefore at the leest
this will as presupposed, I take to be in us, and take it also as no small
ground to the rest, Plato.
which I shall say. for as wise men write, he has now half atteyned virtue
and honesty, that of him self brings good will and desire, to the
attaynynge thereof. And our master Christ also this ever as chief ground, ^han.
15.
requires in us, the rest by his spirit in our hearts ever fourmyng:
Therefore now this presupposynge I shall proceed to prescribe and declare unto
you certain general grounds, whereby you may concerning some such things as
now in these days be in great contention, and so of the brack of this
spiritual unity a great occasion, so form your iugementes with conuente^t
knowledge and obedience, that you may be in some part better delivered, both
from vain and falls superstition, and also from light and arroga^t opinion,
wherein such judgment as by long redynge of scripture it has pleased god to
give unto me, and such as I think al christen hearts to be fourmed with all,
both by conuenience and necessity, such judgment I say I shall as it were
in a little table brefely to you propose, besechinge you all with the same
hearts therein to look, and with the same affectes, the same to read that I
write hit withal, the which I testify god, who only sees the heart and
privy thought of man, is the very same, wherewith I have instruct mine own mind
and conscience: Requiryng you also that if I shall appear unto any of you in any
part to err, and corruptly to judge, that it will please you with the same
mind to admonyshe me thereof, that I write to you with all. For ever I will be
to hyer judgment conformable. And for because I write not to them, which be of
great lernyng, to whose wisdom the things are better known than they be
unto me, I will use no long process nor clerkely disputation, but to you
most christen people, which be not greatly lettered, I will direct my
communication, gatheringe in few words the sum and pithe of such things,
as I shall judge convenient, to your knowledge and capacity.

And first to the intent you may see of christen life the excellent dignity,
and what end chiefly a christen heart ought ever to look unto, and so first
surely to lay this ground and foundation whereunto ever we must much of the
rest of our communication, resolve and refer, as to the chief end and
principal of all, you must a little lift up your eyes, and as it were out of
hyer place, diligently behold the life of man, and there in with some judgment
look, where you shall find that in man here in earth, by the prouydence of god,
set to pass a short and transitory life, there be as it were.ii. polytees.ii.
diverse manners of living.ii. diverse ways and fashiones of passing this
pilgremage, of the which the one is heavenly spiritual and godly, the other
civil, ^ Corin. 3.
natural, and worldely: what I mean by these.ii. lives, I will brefely to you
declare. This civil and worldly life, (...) politic (...).
is to man natural, and by nature to him convenient, wherein he has by the
only and mere benefyte of nature, such seeds and plants of truth and
honesty in his heart roted and planted, the which, if by his own negligent
folly, he suffered not by affection to be over run, but with dylygence would
follow and nourysshe the same, they which I say should undoubtedly bring him
to such dignity, as to the excellencye of his nature by nature is dew and
convenient, but because man is no angel, but has a body frail and
corruptible, subject to affectes and all corruption, therefore law civil and
politic rule entered into this life, and therein of necessite took place, The
necessite of laws.
which is drawn out and stabled upon the grou^des of nature, by her benefit
in man's heart planted and laid, to the which grou^des, civil laws and
ordyna^ces by wise and prudent policy, stabled in man's life, so long as man is
conformable, so long as man is by them governed and led, following them
with obedience, other for fear and dread of punyshemente ensuynge their
transgression, or for hope and trust of perfyte pleasure or any other worldly
thing annexed to their diligent observation, so long I say man lives like a
civil polytike and worldly man, and such manner of living brefely to lay, The
spiritual life.
I judge to be this cyuile natural and worldely life, whereof now we speak. An
other life there is, which I called heavenly spiritual and godly, which is
above the common course of nature, not receiving her grou^des of nature, nor of
the common reason of man, but of very reason it self, of the very certain and
true reason of god, which is the very son of god, Johan. 1.
by our master Christ joined to the nature of man, and by him to the world
opened. This reason is the very word of god, and god him self by Christ to
manne kind showed, whose doctrine his disciples by mouth taught, and by
writynge have left to our instruction. How be it here you must understand,
that to the knowledge of this reasone, by man's reason man him self can not
attayn, ^ Corin. 1.
to this he is blind, nature is not sufficient, but to the attaynyng of this
reason, reason subdued, faith must be therein to him as it were a gyde, faith must
give him judgment and sight, and be as it were his eye, faith must show unto
him all the secret mysteries there in: ^ebre. 11.
and shortly to say faith must lay al groundis in this life, as nature did in
the other. And like as in the civil and politic life fear and hope ever
led the politic man and worldly, to the observation of his laws: so in this
very heavenly and spiritual life, faith and love, led man made spiritual,
making him by love to laws obedient: in so much that at the last by
faithful love and charitable faith, man is brought to sure felicity, Galat.
5. (...) liberte.
and stablyshed in true liberty, that is to say, he is thereby delivered from
all corrupt and worldly affection, he is then free from sin and death, them
utterly tredynge under foot, he is then delivered from all danger and fear
thereof, than he in this mortal life passing the state and condition of man,
Philipp. 3.
lies like no mortal man, but lives like a Christ, like a god in earth, and
like reasone it self, never giuinge place to any affection, than he inioyeth
such spiritual comfort and pleasure in heart, as is much easyer for them to
co^ceyue, which have had gust and experience thereof, tha^ for any man by words
to express this thing, we which commonly give place to worldly affection,
and with the burdeyn of this body suffer our selfs to be oppressed, as it were
a far of, only do se. And even like as we behold the heavenly bodies, the
son, the moon, with the other sterres, and planettes, having no sure
judgment of the nature of them, nor yet of their quantite: so of this
spiritual and heavenly life, we se as it were in a cloud and afar of the hye
perfection and excellency, but the true judgment thereof we do not conceive,
being blinded with bodily affection, 2. Timoth. 1.
and holly intent to ihis worldly polycie, by the besynes whereof and vanity,
we utterly forgette this our high perfection and dignity, the fulle
declaration whereof I will not here attent, nor it is not my purpose: only
this I would by these few words lead you unto the consyderation with your
self, of pure christianity, the which after this rude and brefe description
of these.ii. lives, which I have gathered out of the doctrine of Poule, shall
not be much hard for you to conceive: for though these.ii. lives of their
own nature be distinct and diverse, for as much as the one is common to all
mankind, for whether they be Jews, Matthew. 5.
sarasynes, Turks, or Mores, in some polycie they must agree, without the
which is no civility: though I say in them self, they be diverse, yet in us
christen men, they in one must perfitly agree, they must consent, and in the
perfyte couplynge thereof rests the conservation of this spiritual unity,
the which of necessity does require in common policy a certain consent and
sure agreement. For this is a sure truth, that worldly policy qualifyed with
charity, Christen ciuyly^^*
is thereby converted into christen civility, in our life, which be christen
men, one of them is the way to the other, one of them to the other is so
knytte and joined, that the one without the other can not long endure, the one
without the other shortly will decay. For even like as the civil life politic
and separate from peace and unite, long by no mean may be maynteined without
destruction: Tit. 3.
so the spiritual life and heavenly without respect of common polycie,
shortly by necessity shall fall to confusion. Wherefore this must be taken as
a sure and common ground, that in all christen civility of greatte and high
necessity to all such things, as by common authority are stablished and
founded, without repugnance to the spiritual unity and manifest doctrine of
Christ, the people must ever be obedient, to all such things with glad
heart they must ever agree and consent. For of this we have in Christis
doctrine in many places manifest commandment, ^ebr. 13.
both of Peter and of Poule in their holy epistles, ye and Christ him self
said, he came not to break such things, as by common law were received, but
rather to stably she, confirm, and make perfect the same, Matthew. 5.
as both his life and his doctrine manifestly declare. Roman. 13.
For where as before christen men observed laws only by fear of punyshement,
Christ would have his flock to be obedient and fulfill the same only by love,
and by none other outward respect. And therefore his doctrine is as a corner
stone, agreinge to al polycie, and determyneth therein no certain kind at al,
but as well may the perfection of Christis doctrine be fulfilled in that state,
where as be many heedes and diverse polyticall, as there as is but one chief
and principal: So long as policy and laws thereby stablyshed and set, break
not the grounds of spiritual unity, there is no repugna^ce to be made of
those which be humble subjects, 1. Pet. 2.
meke and obedient to such things as be received by common assent. This thing
dear friends I often inculke and rehearse, because if it be well and thoroughly
perceived, and in our hearts surely grounded, it shall minister unto us a great
ground and occasion, to pluck up by the rotis this false superstition, which
in these days disquieteth so many men's feeble and weke consciences without
reason: And specially if to this we join an other ground, whereby you shall be
brought most christen people somewhat to conceive a diversity and plain
difference, betwixt such things as be of plain necessity, and of them self
by nature good, and such as be only of a certain co^ueniency, and by nature be
indifferent. The lack of the judgment and discretion whereof, has given great
occasion to stable in many men's hearts this vayn superstition, and is also no
small cause of proud arrogant opinion. For the conceyuynge whereof, this dear
friends you must understand, that like as I said before in the life mere
polytike and worldly, there be certain grounds, which of necessity, must
ever be conserved, and never suffer dispensation: and other things there be,
which as time and place does require, ever by law civil and polycie may be
altered and suffer abrogation: so in the godly life and spiritual, there be
also certain grounds, wherein is founded this spiritual unity, which by no
man's policye may be changed, but ever must stand stable and firm without
innouatio^. And other things also there be, which by common authority may
be removed, abrogate, and utterly put away, and sto^de only by conueniency,
and have their power only of the consent of the hole congregation: as by
exaumple, this thing to declare somewhat more at large, (...)
grou^des these be of the polytyke life, honor to be done to the divine
nature, which governs all, reverence to be had to our parents, which have
labored to bring us into the light, cure to be had of those which come of us
by natural procreation, to be beneficial to them, which be in necessity,
and to repel from our selfs all injury. And in conclusion all such things
which of law civil stablyshed, takes not full power, but have their
strength of the true judgment of natural reason, pure and not corrupt by
affection, all such be grounds in natural law: things resting in policy and
civil constitution, being of nature indifferent, be infinite, and for the
time and place ever variable, as sum times things of marchandyse to command
to bring in, and sometime the same to prohibit, sometimes money of the people
by tax to be gathered, and some time the same contrary to restore, is to good
policy right convenient. Like as in some places, the eldest son to succeed
in the hole inheritance for the maynteynyng of the family, is of some judged
good policy: and in some other places it is plain injury, so that al such
thing as time and place with other circumstance does require, so ever they be
by the judgment of wise men and politic, to be changed of conueniencye, when
to them is given full authorite to alter and change them with free liberty.
And like manner in the life spiritual certain grounds as I said, there be,
which must ever be taken as fyrme and stable, Roman. 5.
as Christ to descend from the bosom of his father, to be made man for man's
redemption, the faith and trust in him and in his promyses Gala. 5.
to be sufficient for man's salvation, the workis of man civil without
faith, not to be of power to serve to man's iustifycation, Tit. 3.
the mysteries of Christ by his sacraments to faithful minds to be
co^muned. And brefly to say, al such things as in Christis gospel by express
co^mandme^t, either of our master Christ, or of his holy apostles and
disciples be to us given and taught, all such be of mere necessity, and not
indifferent, and by no power in ^eth suffer abrogatio^: but contrary al other
thiges perteining to this spiritual polycie, which be not contained in y^
gospel expressly, Matt. 15.
or deduced of the same surely, as rites customs and traditions of fathers,
having no ground but only by p^scription of time, al such may be alterid by
good order and policy, wha^ it shall appear to the^ which have authorite so
convenient, as the forbiddig of scripture to be red i^ y^ mother tongue, and in
the churches so to be rehersid, sometime was not without consideration, where as
now to many it may otherwise appear, as it does of pristes marriage, foundyng of
chantries, (...)
buylding of monasteries, popes pardons, institution of holy days, which al
with many other of y^ same sort and nature, to wise me^ now a dais apere
plainly to be growe^ to an iniust extremite. wherefore to alter the^ it is
thought not with out great cause highly expedient, and to the institution of
Christis true doctrine very profitable and convenient, the which by man's
constitution and ceremony is undoubtedly much obscured, and the purite thereof
almost put out of memory: in so much ye many men being in that behalf somewhat
superstitious, judge in these co^stitutions and ceremonies to stand much of
Christis religion, to the which persuasion brought they are for lack of this
discretion betwixt things of necessite, and such as be but only profitble and
conveniently for the time institute, to the conservation of the other which be
grounds necessary, of the which sort without fail be al rites and
constitutions ecclesiastical: and yet I do not thynk yt by and by they be
utterly to be condemned, as many do with arroga^t opinion, because they be not
of this necessity and in scripture expressed. For our master Christ, of whom I
take this ground, where as he in diverse places puttith difference betwixt his
commandment and man's tradition, Matthew. 23.
he I say him self commands us contrary, byddyng us to fulfill his
commandment, and yet not to leave and utterly pretermyt the tradition, for such
things which of long custom have been received are not so without order to be
plucked away, but they require good consideration and pondering of some
manifest detriment and hurt, Ephe. 4.
to very true religion, before they be utterly put away, and not after the
judgment of every light brain so to be condemned, as things pernicious to al
christen ciuilite. For all though some of the^ be very un profitable and to true
religion an open i^pedime^t, yet some other there be which be as good and
convenient menes, to induce rude and simple mi^des to co^ceyue the mysteries of
Christ, and to keep as by signs the memory of the same. Notwithstanding, this
again is true, upon the other side ye none of the^ be of such necessi te, yt
the altering of the^ should bring in utterly the ruin of religion. Wherefore
with such superstition and sturdy obstinacye, they ought not to be defended,
as many men think, for lack of the sure conceyuynge of this ground, which
now you have hard in few words touched, the which ground if it had been
stabled in the hearts of some of them, which for their disobedience by
superstytyon conceived, lately have suffered, they would not peradventure so
heedlynge have run to their death, the which they so gladly suffered,
induced by corrupt opinion: for persuaded they were, that the unity of
Christis church could not by any case maynteyned be, without this long
usurped superiority, which the bishop of Rome has of many years by the
simplicity of christen people be magnified in, and that such a heed should be
stablyshed by the word and doctrine of Christ, here in his church of
necessytie, and not to be a thing of nature indifferent: and that he should
also be the vicar of god and universal judge of all christianity. This was
their persuasion, which is the chief key of all superstition, this is as it
were the fountain and ground of all other like abusion. wherefore all be it
that this ground by the hye prouydence of out most noble prince, and by common
authority here in our nation, be so utterly abrogate and pluckid away, that
among you most christen people there is none I think so far from wit and
judgment, that will theragaynst repugne, but as true subjects be thereto
obedient: yet for the instruction of some weak consciences, which by some
falls persuasion, perauenture may yet be troubled with some scrupulosite
thereof, I have thought convenient now in this place, as I promised before,
somewhat to say touching the chief points, whereby I have fourmed mine own
judgment with knowledge and due obedience, to the intent that you also most
christian people, conceying the nature of the thing as it is in deed,
indifferent, may with heart and conscience be thereto gladlyer obedient, and not
only by fear of common punishment. Wherefore the nature of the thing as it is
in it self plainly, as far as my wit and learning will serve, in few words
I shall open unto you indifferently.

After the time that I had exercysed a part of my youth in secular studies
and in philosophy, and thereby formed my judgment with some knowledge of nature,
and of things perteynyng to the manners of man in the civil and polytike life,
I took straight forth holy scripture in hand, thereby to instruct my mind
with the light of the doctrine of Christ, the only comfort of true and
faithful hearts, to the which end al my labors and studies in other kind of
letters I ever referred and directed, as to the thing, which all Christis
scholars ought ever to look unto. But as soon as I had exercysed my self a
few years therein, and some light of judgment by the comfort of Christis spirit
gathered in the same, whereby I might the better discern things, which stand
in worldly polycie, from the grounds of scripture and pure christianity: and
as soon as I had conceived with my self the perfection thereof, the sincere
simplicity contained therein, and the quietness of faythefull hearts and pure
consciences, which to the stablysshynge thereof, was surely adjoined, I began
with my self sore to lament, to se and consider the state of y^ world
commonly, how far it was slypped from that heavenly perfection, and celestial
conversation, and both with my self diverse and sundry times, and with other
with whom in studies I was co^uersant, of the causes thereof I began to
consider and reasone? in the enserchynge whereof, all be it many and diverse
causes I found, which now to rehearse were over long, and not to my purpose:
Yet this I will say dear friends now unto you, that few other I se of gretter
efficacy, than this usurped long and many years superiority of the pope,
which for the maynteynynge of his authorite under the cloak of religion, has
brought in among christen nations much falls superstition, and for the
mayntenance of his hye pride and cloked tyranny, has among christian princis
many times to the greatte ruin of common quietness, set greatte division. For
who is he that of storye has any consideration, which plainly both not see,
how few christen princis there be, which for the set tynge up of this
arrogance, has not ones one again an other drawn their swerdes, to the great
effusion of christen blood, and ruin of all good ciuilytie, ye and yet which
is worste of all, they have been persuaded thereby to set up Christis honor
and religion; O lord what a blyndnes was this reignynge in princis hearts, and
what a superstition one christen man to kill an other under the pretext of
Christis religion? And as for the abuses of that authority as well in pardons
and dispensations as in inter dytes and excommunication, I think there is no
man so blind, no nor yet nation so far from judgment, nor so far from the
commonsense and true consyderation, the which that does not see, and
observe. For among christen men no nation there is, which being obedyente to
that authority, has not felt by pyllynge and polling, and tyrannycalle
exaction, ever covered with the pretexte of religion, of these abuses the
plain and manyfeste experyence. This thing I have observed dear friends long
and many a day, not without greatte sorrow and dolor of mind, and yet
sum hope ever I have had ones to see, of these things a just and a true
reformation, as well in other countries and nations as here at home in our
own nation. This hope I had, wherewith I very much eased my sorrow and
doloure, living in great desire to see the thing put in effect. Wherefore
dear friends now of late, at such time as I returned out of Italye, hither
home to mine own country, here to finyshe in quietness the rest of my life,
seruyng our prince, if I were in any point able, to the which end of youth I
appointed all my studies: when I returned I say, and saw this thing partly
put in effect, which I so long desired, the which desire I testify god was
to his honor, what joy, what gladness in my heart and mind, I thereof
conceived, I will not now be about to you by words largely to express. But
this I will say unto you, the gladness that I conceived of pluckynge away this
superiority, was not so much for the stopping of the profits, which to the
imparyng of this realm, was no small thing, wherein the most part of men's
eyes are chiefly fyxed, as it was for the hope I had of the reformynge of
common religion, and of the purgynge of vain superstition, wherewith many
simple minds here in our nation, have been greatly infect: the chief cause
whereof has been this superiority of the sea of Rome: in so much that this I
think truly I may say, that even as Rome by mekenes and charity, was the
first occasion of communynge and propagation, ye and stablyng also long and
many years of Christis doctrine and true religion here in our nation, so now
the same by pride and arrogance, by process of time has been the chief and
principal occasion, of ouermoche extollyng man's tradition, and the very open
gate of all superstition, so that now by the stopping of this gate, great hope
I have ones yet to see, Christis doctrine restored again to the pure and native
simplicity, and to the old simple purite. And to the conceyuynge of this hope
much moved I am by the hye virtues of our most noble prince, whose highness
boldly I dare affirm, no thing more desires, than the restitution of Christis
true doctrine here in our nation, and that to see flourishe in the hartis of
his subjects, declaringe in life the fruit of the same. To this tends all
the cures, thoughts, acts, and deeds of his royal majesty. Wherefore me
seems not without a cause my hope is conceived, if this be true that all
antiquity has approved, such as be princis, such be their subjects, whose
trace ever follows all the comminaltie. Seeing therefore our prince to be of
this purpose and desire, and of such judgment and policy, that best he
knowethe the mean of the restitution hereof, why should not I conceive this
gladdenes, and stable hit in my heart? why should not I rejoice, or rather why
should not all we be glad and rejoice most christian people? Truly we ought to
give thanks to almighty god, by whose providence, we have this noble prince
now reigning in our time. And surely I doubt not, but that the goodness of god,
who has inspired his heart with light and judgment to conceive the ground of
this popes superiority, and to his honor to pluck hit down, shall also give
him the same light and grace to find out all convenient menes to the
mayntenance of the same, that it may proceed with a common quietness both to
the comfort of our present age and of the posterite, and that so thereby
hereafter may succeed the restitution of the pure doctrine of Christ and
sincere religion, with the pourgynge of all falls and vayn superstition: This is
my hope and this is my trust, of the which as I said at my return here into
my country, great gladness I conceived, the which contynually I nouryshe in my
heart, with sure hope daily the same to increase, how be it herin I find the
nature of man's affecte, and that to be true which of the wise and ancient
Socrates, often was rehearsed, that in man's affecte, pleasure and peyn, sorrow
and joy, were never separate, but as the parts of a ring ever coupled
together, and ever knyt one to the other, as it were by a common chain. For
though it be so that of this act of pluckynge down this popyshe authority,
most justly as me seems I have conceived this gladness, yet it is not
perfyte and sincere, there is in my heart a certain sorrow myngled with the
same, which has much defaced my gladdenes and joy. For sorry I am and of the
very heart, to se that thing which you all most christen people, I am sure
with no less sorrow lately have seen, that is to say, to see so noble an act,
so good and so profitable, so open a gate to the restoringe and stablyshynge
here among us a very true and common weal, which could never lightly have
had place, standing this outward and tyrannical authority. For ever it
should to ye prince have been a let and an obstacle, at such time as he should
attempt any refourmynge of true religion, to see I say against so noble an
act, such men repugne, such men to be disobedient, whose virtues I ever
trusted should have benne to our prince, to wchynge the restitution of his
true common weal a chief instrumente. For what virtues were in sum of them,
superstitious symplicitie set a side, all the world knows. Wherefore such
virtues so to be corrupt with superstition, that thereby they should be induced
to be disobedient to their prince, and to such wholesome laws, I can not but of
heart sore to lament, I can not but be sorrowful, that such blyndnes should be
joined to such knowledge, and such virtue should be blurrid with such vice, and
such an act so wisely conceived should be blotted with disobedience so
folyshly declared. This makes me sorry and sore in heart to lament, and truly to
say not so much for their causes, who for their disobedience, according to
the course of law, justly have suffered, as for yours most christian
people, whose simple and weak consciences, not able peradventure well to
conceive the nature of things, as they be in deed, by their disobedience and
sturdy obstinacy, may in some part perauenture be moved to conceive of this
act some scrupulositie, by the reason whereof in you may succeed, disquietnes
of mind, diversely drawn by diverse obedience. Wherefore partly to the avoiding
of mine own sorrow conceived by suspicion of your simplicity, and partly to do
my duty in setting forth of so manifest a truth, I shall as brefely and
clearly as I can set before your eyes, the nature of ye thing, vsinge therein no
long scholasticall disputation, and this process observe. First I will show
unto you, that this superiority is not of the law of god, prescribed unto us
for the necessity of our salvation, but yt it is a thing indifferent, the
disobedience whereof, brings not to our sowles damnation. Secondly I will
show you, how it first grew in, as a thing convenient, and to the
conservation of the unity of Christis church expedient. Thirdely I shall
declare how that as it has been many years usurped, it is to the very
spiritual unity, another necessary nor yet convenient: and so I trust
sommewhat the better your consciences shall be delivered, from such
scrupulositie, as may take from your minds christen quietness and unite.

And first most christen people this is of you al as most open and manifest, to
be taken as a sure truth, that all be it the old testamente, wherein god to
the people of Israel declared his first will, be called the scripture of god,
and his very law: yet for as much as Paul testifies, 1. Corin. 10.
all things to them as in a shadow grossly there to be showed, according to
their rude capacite, the which to us after clearly were opened by our master
Christ, to whose glory all the law tended. Ephe. 1.
we therefore may say all the law of god in Christ to be as in a sum
contained, Coloss. 1.
who is the perfection and end of all law, it is he only that in the old
law was figured, and now in the new law of the gospel openly is to us
declared: in so much that this boldly we may affirm, goddis law holly and
perfitely in the gospel to be contained, for as much as Christ, in whom all
law of god is fully as in a so^me gathered, is there to us clearly taught,
Roman. 8.
and nothing to be necessary to our salvation, whereof in ye gospel we have not
express mention, or at the least out of that deduced by some certain reason,
and open demonstration. For as touching the traditions of faders, though they
be much expedient to the increse and maintenance of Christis gospel and
truth, yet of such strength and power they be not, Marc. 7.
that to their observation, we be of necessytie bounden, under pain of utter
damnation, nor yet they be not of any such necessity, that to the alteration
of them, ye or utter abrogation, ensues by and by the ruin and destruction of
all christen civility and religion. Wherefore though it were so, as it is not
in deed, that this superiority of the pope, were to us by tradition descended
and given, yet it is not of this nature and necessity, that without hit we can
not attain to our salvation. For by such bond no christen nation, at any
time received any man's tradition. This therefore we may affirm now dear
friends, as sure and true, that if we can not find this superiority clearly
unto us in the gospel expressed, nor of the same manifestly deduced by clear
interpretation, it is not to our salvation of hye necessity: the which thing
to seek, and out of the gospel to pyke, I think is like, as to seek and to
pyke darkness out of the light. Against the popes authorytie.
For to my judgment all thing there indifferently weyinge, all appears plain
contrary: in so much that to me considering the so^me and hole course of
Christis doctrine, he seemed nothing less to go about, than to stablyshe
among his disciples, and among them that would make profession of his name,
any such superiority: but leuyng all such things to princes worldly polycie,
purposed to draw the hearts of his scholars from all such ambicious and vain
desire, and turn them to the sight and co^templation of such things, as be
celestial, and of nature pure and everlasting, separate from all this worldly
vanity, ever wylling them to hang upon the desire of such things, Ma^^. 23.
as brethren to gether knytte in a certain equalite, utterly excludyng al
contention for any manner superiorite: he ever taught his disciples as members
of one body, coupled together in perfyt love and unite, to hang upon him only,
Joan. 17.
as upon the true heed and fountayn of al such things, as they should ever
desire, leauyng the order of al worldly things, as I said, to such as by
office have cure of the same: for as much as that perteyneth to worldly
policy, whereof he would have his disciples to have in a manner contempt, and to
be in the world as out of the world, and rather to refuse al such besy
policy and careful study of transitory things, tha^ thereby to be let from
the office of pure christianity, which chiefly does rest and stand in this
with despisynge of all such things, with fervent heart and affection ever to
desire things, Matthew. 19.
everlasting and eternal. To this runs the course of al Christis doctrine,
which by his mouth he taught, and by his disciples to us in writing has left,
in so much that of his doctrine to gether, that among his disciples, he should
stable any such superiorite, and so thereby to derive it to the bishop of
Rome, is manifestly to turn al thing up so down, and to the clean contrary:
the which thing Christ him self in diverse places of his gospel particularly
does teach and express. For where as his disciples not yet perfyte nor
lyghted with his spirit, but having a lyttel of the spirit of the world,
strove among them self for superyoritie of place, he made answer,
instructinge them this, Princis of the world, and other, Marc. 10.
which have not as yet the heavenly guste, strive for such things, as they
which have their hearts fyxed therein. But you whom I would have to conceive
other desires, shall not do so, for as much as all such contention comes of
plain arrogancye, from the which I would have you utterly to abhor, and
stablynge in your hearts by humility, the contempt of all such things,
contend always to the desire of the heavenly and celestial, to the which if
you will attain, even as this child here stondynge among you, (...). 19.
lives in simplycite utterly without care of worldly vanity, so must you
leaving aside all contention for all worldly thing, and all superiority,
bear hearts pure without affection, ever lokynge up to the heavenly
conversation, therein setting all your comfort and joy, after this sentence
Christ answered to his disciples, stryuynge among them selfs for
superiority, moved by ambition: wherein he manifestly declares, that if he had
purposed to stably she among them any order of superiority or degree, he
would then moved thereof have made some mention, commandynge the rest to give
obedience, to such heed and order: but in all the course of his doctrine, you
shall never find any mention or memory of such institution and polycie. For
this is a sure thing of you all to be taken as most true, The ^nde of
Christis doctry^^*
that the chief point of Christis doctrine stondethe in this, to persuade all
those, which would be his true disciples, this to conceive, as a chief
ground with obedience to al worldly policy, not being contrary to ye glory
of god, 1. Corin. 7.
to use these worldly things as passingers and pylgrims, nothing restinge
thervpo^, and to be in the world, as out of the world, and to use this life
as a mean to life, whereof this is but a shadow, putting no affiance nor
trust therein, but holly to hang upon him, who is the only fou^tayne of all
goodness and truth, Matthew. 10.
and with the desire thereof to have their hearts ever inflamed, with utter
contempt of all such things, which thereto do put any obstacle and
impedimente. This undoubtedly is as it were the mark, which our master Christ
has before our eyes set, whereat he would have us ever continually to shoot:
this is as it were the haue^, to the which he would have us to direct our
course, saylyng in the troublous storms of this life: and this to stablyshe in
our hearts was his chief purpose, and so to institute in us the spiritual life
and godly, whereof before I have made mention: And as for the worldely life and
polytike, he came not now to stable nor institute, which by the benefyte of
nature he had before sufficiently founded, but he came to bring us to an
higher perfection, and to make us plain spiritual, treading under foot all
things temporal. And this is not my fantasy and dream, Christ by his own
word manyfestly did express it many times, Johan. 17. Luc. 22.
saying, He came not into this world to reign nor to rule, but to minister unto
us heavenly doctrine, and to exhort us to contemn those things, which so
blind commonly man's heart, he said often, his kingdom was not of this world:
which is most manifest in this, that he never taught one point of worldely
policy, but ever refused the institution and direction thereof, as to him he
made answer, which required the division of his inheritance by his judgment,
saying, who has made me a judge in such matters, ^uc. 12.
the which to redress is not my purpose? and to him that presented before him
a piece of money with the image of the emperor, (...). 22.
he bad render that to him, for therewith I have nothing to do, but to god give
thy heart and affection of pure mind, whose image is there prynted and set,
as of him, who is only lord thereof. This ever he refused the cure of such
things, as pertayne and belong unto the cyuile and polytyke life, and yet to
them he was ever obedient, as the hole course of his life manyfestly does
declare. He was circu^cysed and purified, (...). 3.
he kept the sabbot day, and was baptized, he paid tribute to the prince, ye
and to the hole law was so obedient, that according to the course thereof he
suffered his death, the which all he did for our instruction, teaching us
never to dispyse, M^^^h. 27.
nor to be disobediente to such thing as by common authority is commonly
received, but ever with humble and meke obedience, thereto contend, and desire
to attain the fruition of such things as never shall fail nor decay.
Wherefore dear friends, saying that the doctrine of our master Christ is of
this sort, ever drawing us from the love of this world to higher
consyderation, forbyddynge us utterly all contention for any superiority of
order and degree, leaving all such things to civil and worldly polycie, the
instytution whereof he ever refused, as a thing base and vile compared to that
doctrine which he ever taught. All this considering I say, and well
ponderynge in mind indifferentely, to affirm, that Christ stablysshed among
his disciples any such superiority, making thereby Peter chief heed, and
also consequently the bishop of Rome, that he thereby upon all christendom
should be a chief judge, and upon all princis and laws to have authority
with interdites and dispensation, them to tempre and reule at pleasure, ye and
upon the word of god alone to have power of interpretation: this to my
judgment, when I weye the thing with my self, appereh to me, more than
madness and extreme folly. For this passethe all pride and arrogance, this is
above all tyranny, Christen nations were never so mad, by any open decree or
consent in counsel generalle, ever to give to any one manne, such authority:
but undoubtedly by the symplicitie of christen people, and by the patience of
good princis, ye and by the arrogancye and pride of those, the which have used
and occupied the Sea of Rome, it is growe^ by little and little into this
intolerable tira^ny: the which after this sort as it is used, to affirm to be
of the law of god, and of necessite, is plain contrary to the law of god, and
much to the obscurynge of his glory. But if you will se dear friends the
authority of Peter, which to all other apostels was equally given, without
any superiority, shortly I shall declare it unto you.

Like as the life which Christ came to institute, and stablyshe in the hearts
of them, which would follow him, was of an other sort and degree, of a hyer
purity and excellency, than was the life of them, which looked no ferther than
to things present, drowned in all worldly and vain affection, and followed
only the course of the life politic, whereof I spoke at large before: so is the
power and authority, that he gave unto them, which with sure faith and
trust in his word, followed him and his doctrine, of an other sort and
greatter excellency, than ever before Christ was given to man in this world,
or stablyshed by any policy, there was never before him such thing given to
mortal man. For to whom was hit ever said, what so ever thou byndeste or
loosest in earth, the same in heaven shall likewise be loosed and bound? And
yet to Peter this power was given, and to all the apostelles with equalite.
There was never before Christ emperor in Rome, nor sens Christ prince out of
christendom, whether he were great turk or sowdan or among the mores any
king most mighty of power, that ever had any such dignity, to none of them
all was ever given such power. For their power and authority, rests only
in the lordshyppe and dominion, governance and rule of those things worldly
unstable and transitorye, the which al as vile by nature and of small dignity,
Christis doctrine techeth to tread under foot, and to a hyper degree he
lyfted the hearts of his disciples, Joan. 10.
and so gave them higher authority, Matthew. 15.
as to lose manne from all myserie of sin, though the sin were never so
great, and to set him in sure state of felicity: and who so ever he were and
of what nation, The anthorite of Peter.
condition, state, or degree, all indifferently to lose from sin, if they
will with perfyte faith and sure trust in Christ profess his doctrine
following ever the perfection of the same. To this faith and trust being in
Peter and in the other apostels our master gave this divine power, and this is
the very key of the gate of heaven, which as you se opens to all men the gate
indifferently, there is no man excluded from entering therein, Galat. 3.
but all, putting their holle affiance in Christ following his doctrine,
shall be admytted without difficulty.

This is a meruaylous power to man given, to pluck man so miserable and
wretched out of al myserie, and to put him in the state of felicite: And with
this power our master Christ sent forth his disciples, instruct with his
spirit, to all the world, by the prechynge of his doctrine to turn them out
of their wretched trade and misery, and to wake them out of their dream: for
drowned mankind was with worldly affection, and finally to put them in
remembrance of the benefytes of god and of their dignity, and that so by his
doctrine they at the last inspired and styrred up, might attain to their
felicite. This was the chief authorite and power, to thapostels by our master
given, to the puttyng in use whereof he institute certain mistical sacraments,
whereby man should be styrred to receive grace and favor of almighty god, The
sacraments.
and so com often to the memory of the great benefytes of the goodness of him,
which he by his grace has above all other to us of his flock specially
opened and communed. To this tend all the sacraments of Christ institute, to
bring us I say to the remembrance of such benefyte, as he to all them,
which by sure says hang upon him, has surely promised, as I shall more
plainly herafter declare. So that dear friends in few words to conclude, this
high power and greattest that ever to mankind was given in earth, to the
apostels of Christ given was this. First, of al myserie of ^ynne man to
release, not as of them self, but as of the ministers of god, so to all other
to be derived, (...). ^.
who so ever in Christ would put sure confidence and trust, as in the fountain
of al salvation: Ma^^ 6.
and then so this doctrine to preche to al mankind indifferently, as to the
creatures of god, only to his image formed and made. by the hering whereof, they
at the last considering their own dignite, might be brought out of all misery:
and so thirdly by the co^munynge of the mystical sacraments thereof, might
thereby inspired with grace and the heavenly spirit, Luc. 22.
be styrred to the memory of his infinite benefyte and goodness; which to us
not deseruyng he has communed, by the reason whereof consequently, we delivered
out of this misery and wretchidnes, might attain undoubtedly to such
felycitie and quietness, as he of his mere goodness has to us by his word and
promise appointed and determined. This is the authority and power in these
few words described, which Christ in his gospelle to his apostels has
communed, and so co^munid that indifferentely to all without inequality, he
stablyshed it in them, ye and in all other which with like faith and
confidence in him believe, and succeed in their place, leaving al worldly
vanities aside, and tredyng them under foot, hang only upon him, as he that
has above al other ye true superiority, and is of all churches the very true
heed. And that this is a certain and sure truth, of the gospel in many places
we have most manifest testimony, where as Christ instructing his apostelles to
the preaching of his word, says unto them all without exception of any,
Matt. 18*
what so ever ye loose in earth, the same in heaven shall be losed: and also
what so ever you do there bind, the same in heaven shall be bounden also, that
is to say, who so ever he be, to whom you preach my word, of what countreye
or nation, sect or religion, if he by your preaching turn to the confession
of my name, trusting thereby faithfully to have salvation, to him you shall have
power to declare, that he is thereby delivered from bondage of all sin, and
loosed from it by my virtue and power, to him communed and declared openly by
you, whom I make the ambassadors of my will: ^. Corin. 5.
And like wise whom so ever you see to deny me in earth, despisynge my
doctrine by you preached, and refuse the confession of my name, all such by
this same power, you shall utterly condemn here in earth, and to the same my
will in heaven shall be agreeable, and the same shall confyrme. After this manner
our master spoke to his disciples, gyuynge them power to the prechinge of his
word. To the which sentence also in an other place his words do agree, which
he spoke after his resurrection, when he sent forth his apostels, to preach to
all the world, inspirynge them with his holy spirit, after this manner saying,
How at your going forth upon this heavenly embassage you shall receive the
heavenly spirit, Joan. ^0.
by whose grace you shall have with all this power, that whose so ever sins ye
lose, the same shall by and by be released to them, and whose so ever you bind
and judge not to be relesed, they shall with the bond remain, as much to say,
as what sin so ever it be, or what sort or condition be the sinner of, so
that he with sorrowful heart confess the same, trusting by the goodness of me
only to be delivered from his myserie of sin, if you by the spirit, which
I have now given unto you, judge him to be released in earth, your judgment
shall be confyrmed in heaven, and if by the same spirit, which I have to you
given, you judge him contrary to be worthy of condempnation, to that my will in
heaven shall agree, and with this power now I send you forth. These words
declare most christen people manyfestly, that this high authority, by Christ
was undoubtedly given to his heuenlye messangers and apostels, when he sent them
forth to preach his heavenly doctrine, by the benefyte whereof man should be
quyte delivered from al kind of sin and myserie: but that this same was to
all them given equally, this is not to all men so manifest and plain, this many
men deny, affirmyng y^ to Peter it was given with a prerogative of excellency,
and so thereby to the bishop of Rome, in whose place he only does by their
sentence succeed, they attribute a superiority. This they say and only they
say, but as for sure ground of scripture, their sentence to confirm, plainly
there is none. For as touching this, which is of al other, most chief, Matthew.
18.
that to Peter Christ spoke particularly, gyuynge to him this power, that was
undoubtedly, because he being of faith more fervent, and as it appears of
greatter stomach, ye and as it should seem also by many signs, of better
utterance and eloquence. For the which cause he of the old interpretours of
scripture is ever called the mouth of the apostels: he I say having these
gifts, spoke before the rest, and so to him particularly Christ said, he
would give the keys of the kyngedome of heaven, but he said not, that unto him
alone he would give them. For after when he gave them in deed, he spoke to all
indifferentely. And ferther yet this same power which he said he would give to
Peter, was not of any other sort, then that, which he gave to al other, as it
appears by the wordis, but even all one, and runnyng to the same effect, as to
release and bynd sin with like authorite, and thereby to make open the gates
of heaven. Therefore to affirm such prerogative, only because he spoke to
Peter particularly, seems a weak and a sklender ground, seeing that he did
not say that to him alone, he would give such authority, and beside that when
he gave it in deed, he than gave it equally. And yet more over, he that
indifferently weyith the same place, with the circumstance thereof, shall find
plainly, that speaking to Peter he spoke also to all, as he for all answered.
For even as the question was not asked of Peter alone, but of al equally, so
necessaryly the promysse of power to al was at the same time indifferentely
opened, though Peter as spokes man to the rest, only made answer: but Peter
alone had not that faith, the which is the foundation and sure stoone,
whervppon Christ builded his church, to the which was made the promise of
this power, but of that feythe they were all indifferently, though Peter with
more fervent affect out wardly it declared, and the faith it was that Christ
found in them, which moved him to make the promise of that high power, the
which he after gave indifferently to all other, which with like faith are
sent forth and appointed by his church and faythefulle congregation, to
preach the fruit of his heavenly doctrine abroad to the people, Luc. 22.
to their comfort and salvation. Of this place therefore to gether any
prerogative of power to be given to Peter, is but a weke conjecture, and a
feeble ground, and like to ye same which is gatherid of an other place, where
Christ said to Peter he had prayde for him, yt his faith should not fail, and
that after his conversion he should confirm his brethern, the which words he
spoke to the comfort of Peter, forseinge by his providence the wekenes of his
faith and imbecillitie, which he showed above the rest of his apostels.
Wherefore beside the common comfort, which he gave to them al, yt they should
sit with him in his majesty, at the extreme judgment of al, to take out of
Peter's heart, the despair thereof, whom he knew should after deny him, and
thryse deny him, he promised his faith should not fail, and that by the
occasion thereof he should confirm his brethern, to put faith in him, whose
goodness was not so offended with such infidelity, but that by sorrowful
heart and repentance he shortly recovered his favor again. Whereof al christen
hearts may take a notable example and syngular comfort, to the avoiding of al
desperation: but as for any superiorite of power hereby to be given to Peter,
to all them which indifferently weye the circumstau^ce of this place, it can
not but appear a weyke ground and feeble conjecture: and yet weyker is this,
which of an other place of the gospel as most principal is taken, where as
Christ demanded of Peter, whether he loved him more than the other of his
apostels, ^^n. 21.
the which he affirmed, to whom Christ then said and commanded, that he
should than feed his flock, and that he rehearsed thrice to gyther, whereof is
thought manifest all the hole matter. But in this leaving other answers of
many wise me^ made, I will show you my sentence and judgment, that Christ
there intended no such thing at all, nor to stablyshe in Peter any superiorite
thereby, was nothing his purpose, as it seems manifest for as much as he said
only feed my flock, not addyng or puttyng to any argument or token of any
higher power and authorite, but only thrice rehearsed that thing, which is the
common office of all his apostels, and of al other, which be appointed to be
preachers of his word, the which thing as it seemed by inculcation he would
fasten in Peter's heart, ye and so consequently in the hearts of all them,
which of his name will make profession. That thing I say he would fasten in
heart, which is of al his doctrine the chief ground and foundation, that is to
say, that who so ever by mouth and outward confession, profess to love
Christ, and to be a sheparde of his flock: then must he in deed, and by
outward demonstration openly declare, when occasion requires, the inward
affect, to the intent that the word and deed may in effect agree. For he that
by mouth says he loves Christ, and by deeds does him deny, Tit. 1.
he is no mete disciple of the doctrine of Christ, nor mete apostle, nor
sheparde for his flock, for his confession does not profit nor edify the
inward affecte of all christen hearts, may not only in words, Matthew. 23.
but in deed be declared: without the which thou show thy self to be an
hypocrite, Hypocrisye,
and a dissemblyng professor of Christis doctrine, the which hypocrisy above
all thing Christ does abhor, and has as ennemy. Wherefore as I think,
Christ asked Peter thrice of his inward affecte, and was not content only
with the outward confession of love by mouth, which may by dissimulation be
covered and cloked, but gave him commandment to feed his flock, with that
faith and with his heavenly doctrine: and so in effect to declare his love, the
which though Christ without deed outward who lokith into men's hartis, right
well does know yet to the comfort of other, and to their instruction, we must
ever as occasion requires: so declare our inward affecte, with love and
charity by outward works to the profyt of other. This doctrine may well be
taken of this inculcation and often rehersall of these words to Peter, but as
for any superiority of power, thereby to attribute unto him, plainly to me
seems a dream, where as of power is made no mention. Wherefore of the grounds
of scripture, and of Christis gospelle dear friends no man can take sure
argument of this prerogative, as by these places ye may see, which are
among other of all most chief and principal. For of the rest be taken yet
more feeble conjectures, the which have many years troubled all the world, and
blinded these popes with arrogance, and in all other stabled much
superstition, to the greatte ruin of Christis pure doctrine and of all good
religion. Wherefore friends saying that the manifest doctrine of our master, so
plainly sowneth to equalytie of power, in all the apostelles indifferently, and
only by light conjectures men may be ladde to the contrary, I wotte not
why we should so styffely defend this authority, so febly founded, and so
wekely, as you partly have hard by scripture grounded.

And most specially saying that the practyse of the same authority in the
time of the apostelles, which moves me above all other arguments, out of the
gospel drawn, and words of Christ written, is utterly contrary, ye and many
years so continued in the beginning of Christis church, the which I shall
now breuely to you also declare, whereby you may better be instructed, thanne
by argument out of scripture drawn, wherein lies much controversy. For this
is to be thought as a certain truth and sure, that the apostelles so
inspired with the spirit of god would never put in practice thing contrary
to the doctrine of their master Christ, which they had so newly received, and
so stablyshed in their hearts. Wherefore though Peter like as he ever did in
the presence of his master, show him self most prompte and ready with
faithful heart and love to serve him in all thing, so after his Ascension up
to his father, showed him self most studiouse in the preaching, and in the
first stablynge of his new and godly doctrine, ever redye to preach and
common the same, to the foundynge of his church and faithful congregation.
Yet this ye shall find in obseruyng his acts and practyse of his life, and of
all other Christis apostelles, that he another of him self preched this doctrine,
any prerogatyue of power, above other using therein, nor yet they any such
thing gave unto him, in setting forth the same. As of the first act,
which the Apostelles did, hit is very euydente and plain, when they
should supply the room of Judas, (...)
Peter only did purpose the thing, which after they performed, by election
and common authority, gyuyng to him no prerogative at al of any higher power,
sauinge only that he as most eloquent and bold proposed the matter, which
they fynyshed by their common assent. And after the same manner in the creation
of Diacons, this order was observed, when certain were appointed to minister
in lower office to the hole congregation, while the apostels occupied them
self in prechynge of Christis doctrine: (...)
this thing was not done by the authority of Peter alone, but by the common
agreement of all the rest, which at the beginning of the church, were in
that little congregation. And at such time as the gentyles began to receive
the doctrine of Christ Peter did not by his authority command or appoint,
which of the apostelles should god to Act. 8.
preach unto them, to the increase of Christis church, but he him self with
John were sent forth of the other this office to do: which argues, that
above the rest he had no authority, for than he might of him self have done
that thing which he did not, but with the authority of the hole congregation
was sent forth with John^, and with equal authority together they preached,
to the common edification of Christis church, in no point showing any
prerogative therein. But this thing is yet much more evident, by the
entreatynge of a controversy, which at the beginning rose in that little
church, the order whereof if you observe with diligence, you shall most
manifestly see, that to Peter was given no prerogative of authority: The
controversy rose by the reason of some which preched to the gentyles, that
circuncision Act. 15*
was necessary to their salvation: this thing being in great controversy,
was not defyned by Peter's authorite, but referred to Jerusalem to the counsel
of the apostels, wherein this order was observed. Peter first declared his
sentence and mind, how that this circuncision was but a ceremony, and to the
salvation of the gentyles nothing necessary: after whom spoke Poule and
Barnabas to the same sentence, but after them all, James gave judgment of the
thing, declarynge of them all the common sentence, and sent it forth by
writing, not as a thing determined by any prerogative of Peter's authority,
but by the assent of all together, agreinge in unity. Whereby ye may se dear
fre^des, that Peter, as it were giving place to James at Jerusalem, in that
time showed no argument of any hyer authority, but rather contrary of that
place hit should seem, that James should be of greatter authority, for as
much as he pronounced the common sentence and judgment of all. But after mine
opinion, another James was heed, nor yet Peter, but all with equal authority
and one assent, labored most besily, to common abroad this heavenly doctrine,
to the salvation of man in every country, this of their acts is most
manifest and clear.

But above all other yet to me of the deeds and doctrine of Paul this does
most manifestly appear: And first that he in Arabia, Syria, and ^ala. ^.
other places, as he him self testifies manifestly, this I say shows most
surely, that Peter was then no such heed of the church, as many men dreme,
that of him as vicar of Christ, al power should be derived to other. For then
Poule without his institution, would never have attempted to preach, not
having of him his authority, the which is judged to be of such necessite,
that the denienge of his superiority, should bring in everlasting damnation.
And beside this look what he did at Antyoche, where as Peter using a little
man's policy, gave place to the wekenes of the Jews, withdrawynge him self
from the company of the gentyls and their facion of life, was boldly of Paul
reproved, ^ala. ^.
as one that should with such ceremony and dissimulation, offend the liberty
of Christis gospelle, which indifferently to the manners of all nations should
be accommodate and applied, without respect of ceremony: this he did
manifestly, which I think he would never have done, if he had judged in
Peter to be any such high authority, but rather he would have confourmed him
self to the doctrine of his heed, having such superiority, being the only
liefetenaunt and vicar of his master: but plainly he judged no such thing,
he never conceived no such power above other in Peter to rest. The which is
also of an other of his deeds more yet manifest, he says that Galat. ^.
after he had long time preached the gospelle of Christ among the gentyle
nation: He ascended to Jerusalem, there to confer with Peter, and other there
being the pyllers of the church, not because he doubted of his own doctrine,
whereof he was so sure, that if Peter had preched contrary, ye or any aungel of
heaven, thereof he would Gala. ^.
have had little regard, he had his doctrine of so sure a ground: but he
ascended only gyuing place to the wekenes of them to whom he preached, whom
he thought rather to win, having his doctrine to Peter's, and other there
being of great fame agreeable, the which he did in deed. For of them he says,
though they were never so greatte, by such collation to him self he had no
profytte, no thing he there learned, that by the goodness of their common
master Christ he had not learned before. Wherefore he says, he departed
from Jerusalem, not as one that took Peter for any hedde or gouernoure of the
church of Christ, but as one of equal authorytie, having his doctrine and
power of the very same ground, that Peter had made with him, there with
James and John^, Galatas 2.
as it were a leage, a confederacyon, and a socyetie, ye and as a companyon
with him nothing inferior in power, agreed together, that even like as they
chiefly should enterprise their office, to exercise among the jews, inducynge
them to the truth of the gospel, so would he and Barnabas his companyon go to
the gentyles, them by all menes to allure to this heavenly doctrine of their
master, and so as it were the hole world deuydynge among them with courage,
pourposed it to subdue, and bring mankind from the study and cure of these
vain things frail and transitory, to the desire of such things, which by
nature be everlasting stable and sure. This ye se dear friends by Poules acts
and deeds, how in Peter he never knew no such superiority nor prerogative of
power, nor in no place nor time did submytte him self thereto: the which
also by his doctrine, he clearly did confyrme, as in few wordis I shall now to
you declare. The so^me of Poules doctrine and the chief point thereof, (...)
which he received of his master, stondeth in this, to persuade us despisyng
al things worldly and transitory, (...)
using them as we had them not at al, ever to look up to them which be
eternal, and in them to have our eyes surely fyxed, and distrustinge our own
power, works, and deeds, Tit. 3.
as things by the which we can not ever lasting life deserve, put our hole
trust and affyance in Christ, by whose only goodness we may attain our
salvation, (...)
hangyng upon him faithfully, as upon the only heed and fountayn of all good,
2. Corin. 5.
of him only lokynge to take light and grace, Roman. 12.
whereby we may in this life walkyng as in a pylgremage, knytte to gyther all by
charity, as by a common band, and like members of one body coupled in
spiritual unity, by the mere benefyte of our heed, and his infinite goodness,
at the last attain to our perfyte end and felicity, 1. Corin. 2.
there inioyinge such celestial comfort and heavenly pleasure, as another tongue
can express, nor heart of man think. This is in few wordis as hit were the
sum of the doctrine of Paul, wherein ye see the chief ground to be, Ephe. 4.
the faith and sure trust, that we must conceive of this heed our master
Christ, by whose mercyfulle goodness we shall be saved, and not by our own
works, another by circuncision, sabbotte day, Ephe. 2. Galatas. 5. Colo^t. 2.
nor ceremonye, but only by the faithefull love, that we must bear to that
heed, ever obedyente to walk in outward works, according to his
commandment, which with love we must do, one ever thereby helping an other,
to the intent that we all together may so at the last be cowpled in deed to
this heed, of whom now here we hang, which is our only comfort. Of this
heed I say Poule makethe often and much mention, as of the thing which is
most necessary to our salvation, but of any other heed here to be chief in
his church, Ephe. 1. Colos^. 1.
as his vycar in earth, to whose judgment as to his own all the world should
be obediente and conformable of high necessity, he never speaks word, he
never gyuethe to us any sygnification: which I think he would have done, if
it had been so necessary to our salvation, and to the unity of Christis church
so strong confirmation. And though to sum peradventure this argument appear
weyke, because it seems not well to follow, Poule makes no mention thereof,
therefore it is not so: Yet to me consyderinge the thing as it is, with the
circumstaunce thereof, it appears almost a sure demonstration, saying that
Poule making so much mention of the heed of the church of Christ,
inculkynge it so often as a thing most necessary, if he had thought, that
Peter had been an under heed of Christ him self, as some say now in his
church stablyd, as necessary to the conservation of the unity thereof, I
think I say in some place he would have made mention thereof, or else plainly
his doctrine had been insufficiente, lacking the declaration of that thing,
which to the stablynge of Christis doctrine, is of so high necessity. But
this Paul never did, but the contrary plain. For he never took Peter for
hedde of his Church: which thing also I am sure Peter, if it had been put
to him, would have utterly and clean forsaken it, specially after that sort
to be of such necessity. (...)
Paul took him as his compaignion equal with him in power and dignity
spiritual, both two despisers of dignity temporal. I am sure, if Peter were
alive, that he would think nothing more contrary to the doctrine of his master,
than to affirm of such power any superiority, as now is to him against his
will ascribed to be of such necessity, that without it the doctrine of
Christ should run to ruin and decay. And that man without the confession
of such power, should fall to sure perdition. This I am sure Peter would
abhor and Paul also, This they Ephe. 4.
would think to be plain contrary to the simplicity of Christis doctrine and
unity. Wherefore friends seeing that another the places of scripture
indifferently weyed, nor the practyse of the same in the time of the apostels
to the world declared, serve to the ascribynge of any prerogative of power to
Peter, or above the rest any superiority, and seeing also that both the
deeds and doctrine of the most divine Interpretour of Christis gospelle Paul,
sound to the contrary, as I have manyfestly showed, I see no cause why we should
of such necessytie, attrybute to the bishop of Rome such superiority,
that the defection from the same, should blotte any nation, with the crime of
heresy or of scisme, and so consequently induce any scrupulous suspicio^ of
everlasting damnation. But plainly to say, the assertion of such supiorite,
after this sort appears a great madness, extreme folly, and plain superstition:
the which thing though of scripture it self as I have towched, be manifest
and plain, yet the same I will in as few words as I can, fearing leest I
shall be tediouse therein, both by storye and probable Argument declare unto
you, and so it shall be manyfeste, that this thing is not of such greatte
necessity, to the conservation of the union of Christis church, as many men
blyndly do judge.

And first herein to me it apperethe a thing much meruaylous, by what mean
this thing to be of so great necessity, should enter in to men's fantasies and
minds, specially of lernyng and judgment, consideringe that from the time of
Peter until the time of Syluester bishop of Rome, in the reign of
Constantyne, about the space of.iiii. hundrethe years, of this heed with such
superiority was no mention at all. For this by certain storye is known, that
all that time the bishops in every place chief and princypalle, as
Jerusalem, Antioche, and Alexandria, were both chosen and institute of the
hole congregation, or else by the priests, to whom was given of the multitude
such authority, and no mention is had all that space, that they ran to the
bishop of Rome, as their common heed and superior, which at the same time
was rather, as by probable conjecture we may gather, long and many a day,
inferior unto the church of Jerusalem, and Alexandria, I mean not in power
and authorite, for therein was sure equality, but in virtue and knowledge of
Christis doctrine, which in Alexandria and in Antyoche, as nere to Jerusalem,
took first greater ground, than it did in the city of Rome, whose pride and
worldely polycye many a day, much resysted to the truth of the gospel, and
that heavenly humility therein to us taught, the which nothing was agreeable to
the imperial pride, in the emperors then reygnynge. Wherefore christen men
there secretly in corners made their assembly, and privy profession of Christ's
name, auoydyng the persecution of the wicked emperors, whose arrogance was
clean contrary to Christis simplicite. And thus at Rome it continued without
great increase of Christis doctrine long and many years, where as at
Alexandria and Antioche was at the beginning much more open profession of
Christis name and doctrine, the which may well be gathered of the multitude of
learned men and religyouse, whereof at the beginning of Christis church was in
Alexandria and Egypt, in Antioche, and in the parties of Greece, as story
makes mention, far greatter nombre, than there was at Rome, or here in the
weste parties of the world, where as Christis relygyon took more slow
encrese, than it did in the east, where it began. For at Rome until the
time of Consta^tyne it never took so notable increase, his virtue goodness and
authority, much altered the policy of Rome: for his fame and example
greattely styrred y^ hartis of the common people, whose iugementes ever much
follow theyrs, which be in authority, by their example much they form
their minds, their trade of life they study to express: so that until this
good emperors time, though before at Rome it had a good ground, yet it was
not so stablished by authorite of prince it did not so florishe in the face of
the world, but christen men lived there in much subjection, and specially at
the beginning, when for their relygion, they suffered much misery, and
persecution. But now to the purpose, all this space of three or four hundredth
years, another the bishop of Jerusalem, nor of Antioche, no nor yet Alexandria,
never showed argument of any superiority of power dew to the bishop of Rome
by the doctrine of Christ, they never gave to him of necessity, and of the
gospel dew any point of obedience, they were not institute, nor made by his
authority, they never came to his judgment for sentence, as to the vicar of
Christ: but often times by collation, they took one of another the truth of
scripture, and thereof the true interpretation thereby they found out, to that
ever gyuynge dew obedience, but of that high superiorite, all that time was
no mention, no word, nor by story and little sygnyfication? which is also
most manifest by the celebration of the first counselles generalle, which
were congregate by the princelye authority, without mention of any such
superiorytye, given to the bishop of Rome, the which thing to prove is more
open thanne now needs any declaration. Wherefore hit can not be thought, to
be of suthe necessytie, specially seeing all that time at the beginning of
Christis church, whenne the doctrine of our master was most pure, and not
corrupt by man's inuentyon, but as hit came from the fountain, sincere and
clear, was entered and stabled in the hearts of them, which thereof made
professyon, there is no storye made oone title of mention, of any such
superyoritye to the bishop of Rome to be given, no nor yet to none other,
specially that it should be of such high necessity, that without it
Christis doctrine could not stand, the which to all men that have eyes,
and consider the storye of the beginning of the church, stood than in greatter
purity, than ever hit did, sens the time that we have had this one head,
stablisshed with such authorytie and power, the which thing is so manyfeste
and plain, that no man considering the antiquity, and comparynge it with
the posterity, may deny this. For this to the world is open, in so much
that this thing to be of necessyte to the salvation of man, as many men dreme,
now also to confyrme with much argument and reason, appears utterly
superfluous. How be it this I will say, a great lykelyhode that this should
not be necessary is this. First, that all the aunciente and good Interpretours
of Christis Gospel among the greeks, whom I judge to have more light in the
holy scripture, as they had in all other letters and lerning, than any other
nation, that ever yet received the trewthe of Christis religion, the which
without proof here of me, is open by their works to all men, that with
diligence them will read. Al these I say with one consent, keep silence of this
authority to be given to the bishop of Rome of such necessity, in their
works thereof ye shall never find mention, the which is not like, they would
have done, if they had judged it to be so necessary a thing, and a gospel
truth of Christ institute, and stabled: beside this if this ground were true,
then should all the Indians all these thousand years have run heedlyng to
damnation, which never took the bishop of Rome heed of Christis church and his
vicar in earth, nor of him never took tradition, and yet they have been, ye and
yet be now in our days, under Preter John^, their king and heed, of Christis
doctrine devout and true professors, and with us in all the grou^des of
scripture utterly agree, in ceremonies and rytes ecclesiasticalle, there is
much diversity, as it is necessary, according to the nature of the country
and people. The same thing might be said of them in Armeny, which never would
be obedient to the bishop of Rome, but had among them their heed, whom
they called their catholyke, as he that was a true professor and maynteyner
of the catholyke faith. The same also might be said of the Greek nation,
which never would confess the obedience to the church of Rome, to be
necessary to the salvation of man. Wherefore chiefly by the bishops of Rome,
they were most unjustly noted, not to be as members of Christ's universal and
catholyke body. But now al these nations, Indians, Armenians, and Greeks
utterly to condemn, and separate them from the benefit of Christis passion,
wherein they have had ever their chief comfort and trust, only for because
they would not, nor were not to this heed, as to the vycar of Christ obedyente:
All these I say to condemn and cast them into the deep pytte of hell, seems
plain madness, and most blind arrogancye: and I pray god, that they which
so blyndly do judge, be not for their own judgment rather to be condemned.
For this judgment has no ground neither of scripture, nor yet of reasone, but
is a plain blind superstition. For as I have showed you before, that thing
to attribute to god of necessity, under pretense of religion, which in deed
is not so, but hangs only upon ma^s co^stitution, is most plain and manifest
superstition. Wherefore dear friends, saying that neither scripture, storye, nor
good reason dryueth us to confess this superiority that time taken as of
Scripture necessary, for than his decree had been right foolysshe, by law
to stablyshe that, which of the gospelle doctrine should be so necessary. But
to the purpose, he then was made heed, but not by authority of the general
counselle, but only of the emperor, who by his prudence and policy, thought
it expedient to stablysshe one heed, to order such things and put in
effect at all times, which were by general counsel conceived and decreed
concerning the interpretation of scripture, the controversy whereof at the
first beginning was only there entreated, and no other thing perteynynge to
polycye: Such things were ever left to the judgment of Princis, and of
every commynaltie: and there the dyuersitie of opinyons in scripture were ever
brought to a certain unity and concord. This Authority only had the
bishop of Rome at the first beginning of his superiority, as it apperethe
by generalle counsaylles, and with this he continued many years, never
attentynge farther, until at the last by long wars and much greatte
dyuision among princys, the Empire of Rome fell in much ruin and decay, the
which gave the first occasyon to this greatte heddy power and authority of
Rome. For as the Emperor decayed by proud dyuysyon, so the pope increased by
simple superstytion. For to that authorytie which first he had of
Constantyne, his successors in the empire added much more, gyuynge them
privilege and possession, with much worldely authority and iurysdyction,
thynking thereby much to honor god, whose vicar in earth he soon after began
to call him self. For as soon as this authority, by emperors was
stablyshed, than he of him self began to call general counsel, and there
many other things to decree beside scripture, which were judged partly to be
good for the conservation of Christis doctrine, as diverse decrees, and
ecclesiasticalle laws, and partly for the mayntenance of this unity of heed,
which then appeared for the avoiding of schism and division, to the world
almost necessary, and specially after that purgatory after a new facion was
invented, and surely judged to be: for thereby chiefelye began his reygne,
then came in pardones and reservation to his own see, than crope in the
difinition of things by his hye authority, than entered excommunication and
interdytes upon all princis and christen nations: for after that the emperors
by simple superstition came to that point, that to the popes they judged them
selfs to be subjects, and not to be in full authority, till before his
presence they were intronised and crowned, what other prince could there be,
which should not judge him self inferior to the power of him, which by him
self was almost able to make an emperor? So that brefely to say, and not over
For there is one unite spiritual and an other politicalle, upon the which as
upon the chief grounds, (...)
is stablyshed al polycy, both spiritually and worldly, whereof you should
nothing marvel at all, if ye could conceive the wonderful nature of this
unity, whervppon is found the hole ingyn of this sensible world, as in the
which all the parts thereof both in the heuenlye bodies and in the erthely
creatures, are as in a chain coupled and knytte: and yet ferther the very
nature of gods divinity, as far as man may thereof any thing affirm, as
grounded in the same. For god is no thing but unity, and unite is god, ye and
this incomprehe^sible nature of the most marvelous trinity, in unite is
founded. but this as a thing passing our capacite, we will set a side, and
meruayll no thing at all, that in this unity, whereof not without cause so
much mention we make, rests as in the ground al good and virtuous policy,
and is thend to y^ which al good laws and ordynaunces ever must look: And as
in the spiritual life, we must ever most regard this unity spiritual, so in
the worldly must be had respect of the polyticall, (...)
the which brefely to deseribe is nothing else but a concord, agreement and a
consent of all them which be in one polyce, to the receyuynge and putting in
use such laws, (...)
constitutions, and ordynances, as by polityke wits are devised to the
conservation of the worldly quietness and tranquillyte to the which as to the
chief end, only ever looked they, which without the light of Christ, have
in any countries stablyshed any polycie. For to this end looked Plato, where as
in his devised common weal, with the community of things, he pourposed above
all thing to ground therein this unity. To this end looked the aunciente
Greeks, and the wise Romans, with all their ciuyle constitutions, stablyshyng
good order in their cities and towns. The other unity spiritual is of an
other sort, Spirytuall unity.
and brings man to an higher consyderation, which is this, all obedience
presupposed and taken to all civil and polytike rule, a certain consent of
spirit and mind, Ephe. 4.
and as it were with one heart a heuenlye conspiracye, to the attaynynge of
heavenly things, which by god are to manne, putting his only trust by faith
in him promised and appointed, by the hope whereof he treading under foot all
worldly vanities, 2. Corin. 4.
ever lives in desire of heavenly things and celestial, the sure trust whereof
gives to man's heart inestymable quietness, and makes him to be obedient to al
worldly policye, and though hit be not good, yet patiently it to bear, this
hope and trust gives man such courage, that all worldly things he easily
has in conte^pte, vsinge them only in this life as in a pylgremage, Hebre. 13.
where as we have as saint Paul says, no dwelling place. This spiritual
unity was stablyd in his flock by our master Christ, 2. Corin. 5.
good polycie. How be it this in few words I shall declare, that this heed
with such power as has of many years ben thereto attribute, is in no point
convenient to the co^seruation of this unite, but rather a great occasion of
the breche of good christyan ciuylitie. This remains in the last place now
to be declared, wherein I shall not need long to stond. For who so ever
consydereth with him self the usurped authority, in dispensynge with the good
and catholyke grounds and canonyke, propowned by general counselles, and the
selling of the same, the interditynge of countries and nations upon worldly
causes, with excommunications chiefly sent out for the same, upon the good
christen flock, I think he shall find and shortly se, that this superiority,
as it has been used, is little convenient to christen civility: specially if
he ioyn to this the authorite by perdons abused, and plucking souls out of
purgatory, with the reseruyng of causes to his own power, and definition of
causes by apellatio^ referrid to his popely authorite. These things who so
co^siderith, he shall shortly perceive, what inco^uenie^ces among al christian
nations does rise of this heedy authorite, and what blind superstition is
thereby grounded in all Christis religion: For though in every particular church
and proui^ce it be convenient to have one heed to govern, for the avoiding of
confusion, wherefore bishops were institute above all priests in every church
cathedral, as testifies al antiquite, yet by like example thereof to induce,
the same to be so convenient in the hole body, as it is in every part, is
plain folly, and not without manifest lack of judgment. For where as in the
hole body of Christis church be so many sundry nations, and therein beside the
diversities of tongues and manners, so diverse polycies and ordynaunces of laws,
that one man thereof to have knowledge and experience, which is required to the
right judgment of causes, it seems impossible. How should it be thought
convenient in such a body to constitute one heed with such authority, to
whose judgment in all causes to him deuolued and brought, all the rest of
christian nations should stand and be obedient? For though he were a man of
most hye perfection, and of wisdom most polytyke, seeing that the
administration of Justice and equity stands a great part in the knowledge
of the particular circumstaunces of causes, how should he to so many nations,
of whom he has no knowledge nor experience, give justice with truth and
equity? For it can none other wise be, but that one man and one head, so
ignorant of things, not having particular instruction thereof, shall be
impotent and lack power, be he never so good, to satisfy all such persons
and causes, which by appellation out of diverse countries and nations, should
thither be referred: by the reason whereof should succeed many iniust and wrong
judgments, as we both by old story, to whose governance he committed his
church, as to his very vicar in deed, ever faythefullye have trusted upon him,
with sure faith and confidence. Wherefore friends if we with louinge heart one
to an other, hang upon him as upon the head and only fountain of all good,
and passing this life in the use of these things traunsitorye and vain, as in
a pylgremage, ever desiring to come to our home, there to enjoy things
stable and sure: doubt ye not but we then governed by his spirit, his only
vicar in earth, though we never knew pope nor cardinal, shall keep his true
unity, which is conserved, as by the chief ground, by faithful love in him
and loving charity one to an other, every one glad to succor other, every
one glad to instruct other as his christian brother. This we may do
without mention of the bishop of Rome and knowledge of that heed, and so
conseruynge the grounds of scripture and of the gospel of god, which are but
few in nombre, easy to be kept in memory, whereby living in christen
ciuilytie with obedience to our prince, and to all such things as be
stablyshed by common authority here in our nation, we may at the last attain
to our felicity, though we never here word of this superiority, which is a
thing of nature indifferent, by the reason whereof it takes his power and
strength, of the common consent of man and agreement, and so some christian
nations may it receive and maynteyne, and some hit reiecte without offense of
any grounds of Scripture necessary to man's salvation, and without any
breche of the christian unity, Schysme and heresye.
by schysme or heresy: to the which should ensue everlasting dampnation.
For heresye and schysme are not justly to be ascrybed to any nation, 1.
Corin. 1.
except they slyppe from the manyfeste grounds of scripture in the gospel
expressed, or in general counsel received by interpretation, where as of the
words of scripture was gathered diverse sentence and variable, concerning
such things as of necessite perteyne to man's salvation, of the which sort
this superiority of the bishop of Rome, which he has by the patience of
christen princes long abused, is none, as I think now is open clearly to you
all. Wherefore dear friends I doubt not now at all, Obedience.
but that ye considering the nature of this thing, as hit is in it self,
which is not of necessity to man's salvation, but a thing indifferent, which
may be received, and may be reiecte by common consent, I doubt not I say, but
that ye will without scrupule of conscience, of heart thereto be obedient, ye
and to al other thing, which by common authorite here in our country hereafter
shall be decreed, concerning the reformation of al such thingis as perteine to
religion, and to the purgynge of vain supersticion: I dout not but that the
redress of all ceremonies in the church, customs and rites ecclesiastical ye
will gladly we ought rather to give obedience in such things to princely
authority here in our nation, tha^ to such things as be propouned by general
assemble and congregation, (...)
where as is no power of commandment in things indifferente, but only
instruction and brotherly exhortation, whereof Christis doctrine takes all his
ground and foundation, without any civil punyshement or compulsion. For
Christ requires the heart, to his word frankely and freely gyuinge obedience,
ye and the end and perfection of his doctrine and commandment, is to induce
man by love to virtue, causynge always his disciples, that thing to do by love
only moved, which other observe for fear of punyshement. For the which cause
as I think, such things as were propowned in the first counsels long and
many a day, were not called laws, byndynge man with authorite, but only canons
and certain rules, wherewith man freely customing him self, might be gentilly
induced to follow the trade of virtue and honesty. And this to be true, (...)
declares a law made of the emperor Justinian, whereby to such rytes and
customs ecclesiastical, as from the sea of Rome and general assemble, were
derived to many other nations, he gives power and strength of laws, setting
them in full authority, the which before bound no man, but were received at
liberty. Wherefore it appears, that such things, as by generalle counsel
are propowned, and to christen polycye thought convenient, be of no strength,
power, nor laufull authority and oblygatorie, until they be of every nation
received by common ass^t, by the virtue whereof they may ageyn be dissolved and
utterly abrogate, as time and place prudently considered, the same shall
require. This you must think, and this you must do, with mekenes and
obedience, most christen people, if you will be of the christian flock. And
so after this manner friends, formyng your iugementes, and fleing from al
superstition, you shall among your self, much set forward the truth of
the gospel and of all good religion, and so consequently living to gether in
brotherly love, every man in his office doing his duty, we shall at last by
concord and unity attain to our end and perfyte felicite.

And thus I trust most christen people, that you now after this
consideration had with your selfs, as well of the spiritual life, with the
power therein of Christ given to all them, which by perfyt faith trust in him
only, as of the worldly and cyuile, with man's constitutions devised by policye:
and also that you now after ye have herd somewhat the difference betwixt
things of necessity to be received for man's salvation, and things, which
be but only of me^ devised, for the conservation of the same, I trust I say,
now this consideration had, that you se somewhat the mean, how that ye shall
instruct your worldely punyshement, to none you would then be obedient, but
all which is contrary to your appetites in your hearts you would despise, and
so the very laws of Christ, ye and Christ him self, shortly you would
little esteem: for this contempt of all tradition, shall induce in many such
arrogance, that all they shall judge to stand in man's opinion, and so neither
Christ, nor his gospel they shall willyngly defend, but rather fly from
the confession of his name, then therefore to suffer death and worldely shame.
For such is the nature and malice of man's heart, that if you take ones from
him relygious obedience, and fear of relygion conceived by long custom and
process of time, he shall by little and little, by arrogant opinion, fall in
to the utter contempt, and inward dispysynge, of all true relygion, and so
live without any inward fear in heart of god, or hereafter of any punishment:
to the which what will follow, all the world does see, for then needs must ensue
the ruin of all civil order, and of all good worldly polycye, whereof good and
true religion is the most stable and sure foundation. Wherefore friends for
the instruction of your judgments in this behalf also, and for the avoiding
of this evil, which is yet worse than the other, for better it is to man, and
more agreeable to laws of god, and nature, to suffer vain supersticion, than
to bring in corrupt contempt of religion: somewat I will herin now to you say.

And first this you shall understand dear friends, as a common ground, that
al be it rytes, customs of the church, and traditions, ecclesiastical laws
and decrees, and brefely al things beside the gospel and doctrine of god
received among christen nations, be of this sort and nature, that they be not
of necessite to be receyuyd, and as the gospel necessary to our salvation, nor
to them of necessity we are ever bounden, under pain of damnation, but as
time and place requires by common authorytie, in every country and diverse
polycie, they may suffer abrogation, and may be altered and moved by the
pleasure and common consent of the holle, in every church and nation, where
they be received: yet you may not with the contempt of this popes authority,
and under the pretense of the same, all them by and by, of your own hedes
utterly condemn, without exception, as things pernicious to Christis
relygion, but tarry ye must a while, temperyng your tongues, and be not to hasty
of your iugementes, until the time they be abrogate by common authority, and
other in their place substitute by common assent. For this is a certain and
sure truth, that ceremonies we must have, Rytes and customs ecclesiastical.
rytes and customs, all may not be left, the which be so convenient menes
to induce rude and simple minds, to memory, and to the conceyuyng of the
mysteries of our relygion, that if they were utterly wyped we call relygyous,
argues and declares manyfestly other much lack of reason in them that so
do, or little regard of Christis relygion, of the which who so ever with
right judgment consider the beginning, shall plainly see, that Christis
religion was much like unto this monastical profession, and under princis and
rulers of the world took the first ground, and first beginning, after the
manner of this solytarye life, wherein live these which ^e good religious men.
For how sayncte Ihon Baptyst, (...)
who was the first preparer and messanger of this heavenly life, lived in
myldernes and solytarie, all the world knows: and how our master Christ
with his apostelles lyuyd much after the same rate, and ever taught the same, I
do not say as our fat monks do now, Man 19.
but as in a monastycal life with the dispisynge of all worldly things and
transitory, all they that read the gospel likewise do se: And of the acts of
the apostles it is most manyfeste, how all that professyd Christis name
lived, (...)
having al things in common, as many do yet in these monasteryes, and long
after in Egypt and in Arabye, in Spry, and in Greece, al those which were most
notable masters of Christis doctrine, and in life professed the same, liuid in
wyldernes and solitary, dispisyng of the world, al vayn plesures and
tra^sitorie, not only in wordis, but in life and deeds, to y^ which of such
thing was ever most justly given more credit: and afterward in Rome it grew
in by such a manner of secret profession. For long it was used among them
there, that all such as would follow the doctrine of Christ left all worldly
comfort, and fled to this solitary life, there learning in prayer and
poverty this, as the chief ground of our religion, with the hope and comfort
spiritual received of our master and his doctrine, to despise this life and
things tra^sitory, ever lokynge to an other, and there to inioye things
stable and sure. And this by little and little under great princis and rulers
of the world our relygion so grew in, by the providence of god, until at the
last it was spread over all, and occupied a great part of the world, as to
all men it is open and plain. But yet this is also sure and ce^tayne, that
among all nations, after it was stabled, some there were ever from the first
beginning, which made profession of this solitary life and monastical
relygion, some ever judged thereby to draw nere to the steps of their
master, and somewhat nere to follow the first institution, of the doctrine of
Christ, then they do, which live abroode among the pleasant troubles and
paynefulle pleasures, here in the common life: of the which sentence and mind
have been always many ancient wise and holy men, perfyte both in virtue and
learning, as Jerome, Austyne, Gregorye, and Basylle, with many other, whose
names to rehearse were superfluous. wherefore dear friends this hole kind of the
which because you can not find in scripture mentioned, (...)
you thynk of christian minds it should not be affirmed, and that it is but a
popysshe invention. Wherein friends undoubtedly much you err, and over boldly
judge, for though the pope therein has his power mysvsyd to the mayntenaunce
of his own glory, as he has done in many other things beside, whereby he
has long illudyd simple minds, yet the thing in it self was of no pope
inuentyd, whereof is mention with the famous and notable doctors of our
religion, both latynes and greeks, before such time as the pope had among al
bishops any superiorite, and much before it grew to this intolerable
tyranny: these ancient masters of Christis doctrine, as much as they may
of a tradition, say and affirm such a place to be, wherein man's soul shall be
purged from all spots of worldly affection, printed therein by the immoderate
love and pleasure had in worldly conversation, before the time it may attayn
the eternal fruition of everlasting things, and with aungelles to inioye the
heuenlye meditation. But of this sort to be as in our days it is of many
folyshely affyrmed, among the old authors there is no mention, none of them
judge it to be such a place, out of the which any popes power may deliver
man's soul at his pleasure. This thing semethe to be an invention of man of
late years, and of the old fathers no tradition. wherefore after that manner it
to deny I think were none error at all, but the thing utterly to take away,
seems to come of much arrogance, and greatte lack of judgment and reasone:
for that thing to deny constantly, whereof there is no certain ground nor
sure, is plain folly and lack of discretion. For as to affirm purgatory to
be, there is no ground of suretye, so it to deny has much less certaynte,
for scripture gives sure argument to another of them both. wherefore as to
affirm hit to be, as an article of the faith, and to the salvation of man to
be of necessite, I think it great folly: so to deny it to be a wholesome
tradition to the conservation of the christian life much convenient, I judge it
to be plain arrogance, specially considering that to the assercion thereof we
have the consent of many ancient greatte learned holy and virtuous men, whose
example and judgment, I would rather move you to lean unto most christian
people, and to their sentence rather to be conformable, than to certain light
wits, another fourmed with lernyng nor judgment, and which is chief of all,
void of virtue, to assente, and to them to be pliable, whose lyghtnes both in
this and many other things has benne a great occasion to the corruption of
some of your iugementes, and hereafter except you be ware shall be much more.
For under the color of bringing in lyberte from bondage of tradition they
would induce you to admit only fete, the which of sum of his disciples was
nothing approved, he taught us a greatte ground for the admission of all
such inward and abundant devotion, though the outward deed appear to the
world a superfluouse operation.

And as for prayinge to saintis is a thing, which has been long and many
years received both of the greek church and latyne, (...)
not as a thing to the which we are bounden by the express commandment of
god, but as a thing consequent thereto, (...)
for in scripture exaumple we have one, to desire an other to pray for him,
which sayncte Poule did often and many times, (...).
whereof is gathered consequently to be a thing likewise conuenyent, to desire
them, whose virtues are of Christ approuyd, to pray for us, that we al
together as members of one body, may receive grace of our heavenly heed. And
thus to pray to saynctes in no part does derogate the honor of god. For
the praying thus to them is to pray to god, and is nothing differente in
effect, but to pray to them as of whom we should trust as of authors and
gyuers of that thing, which we by prayer demand and desire to get and
obtain. This were by the honor of them, to pluck down the honor of god,
(...)
and plain ydolatrie, and this is forbid in holy scripture, as the other manner
is, as a thing agreeable thereto, conveniently received, though it be not of
high necessite. And so brefely to conclude in this matter, to have in honor
images of saints, as things, whereby you may be put in mind and stired to the
following of their virtues, both in life and manners to express the same, is
no point of idolatrye, but among christen men a thing of great conueniency
to be received, like as pilgremage and prayenge to them also is not to be
condemnyd, but as a thing whereby we hyghly honor god, to be admyttyd: thereby
declarynge to him our humble and meke hearts full of charity, where every membre
requiring the help of each other, hangs upon that common heed and fountain
of all goodness. After this manner prayeng to saints, has ever ben received of
all the antiquity, from whose steps christen people, let us not in every
thing lightly slyppe, but rather follow them in such things as be good and
convenient, than without judgment to reject al things which be of nature
indifferent, approuyng only them which be of hye necessity: and by the
express word of god to us in his doctrine taught, as many of us do, which is
as I have often said, as a common fountain of the corruption of our
iugementes, to the taking away of many such things, which have been of many
good men and wise, stablyshed to the setting forth of Christis doctrine with
charytable unity. For of this ground it spryngeth also that some men forbydde
utterly to pray for them, Prayer for the dead.
the which be deed, because it is not in scripture contained expressly, and
because when they depart they go incontinent either to heaven or to hell, how
be hit of that they be not sure, nor to the denyinge of purgatory, as I said
before of scripture, there is no certain ground: but to scripture after the
sentence of holy fathers, the contrary is rather agreeable. But let it be,
that there were no purgatory at all: Think not you dear friends, that it is
a conueniente thing, and to charity conformable, that every man should desire
after death good to his friend, and by prayer to god, to open his loving
mind, that he boothe in life and also after his death constantlye ever
bears toward his brother? There was never nation so rude and barbarous, that
would forbydde one to wysshe good to an other both a live and deed. Wherefore
among us christen men, which are sure that our friends after death shall
remain other to pain, or pleasure, among us I say to raygne any such
opinyon, that we should not pray for them, and wyshe them to be partetakers
of the good, and not of the euylle, apperethe extreme maddenesse and most
rude unkindness: specially seeing that we have no certaynetye, whether hit
pleasethe god to take them other to pain, or to pleasure. And though that
this be true, that to the one certainly, they are by the prouydence of god
determined and appointed, yet we thereof being uncertain, in desiring and
wyshynge to them the best, can not do but well, in as much as we declare thereby
to god the charity of our hearts: ye and ferther I shall say to you, though
the prayer that we make for them that be deed, should not be to them
profitable at all, for as much as they be other in state of grace or
damnation, yet in our prayer I think never the less our master does delight,
and takethe to his honor our aboundante deuotyon and fervent charytie, as he
did the ointment of Mary, which was to no man profitable. Therefore seeing that
beside the consent of many of the ancient doctors, our masters of our
relygion, the thing in it self appears so convenient to reason, to humanyte,
and above al to christian charity, I se no cause why we should it so reiecte as
a thing to the doctrine of Christ nothing conformable, to the which
undoubtedly, and to very christian charytie, it is much agreeable, the which
friends if you also judge and in heart think, you shall increase among your
selfs brotherlye love and unity, and much more if some of you would after the
same manner tempre your judgments in many other things of the same sort,
which over lightly ye condemn, because they appear to take their grounds of
this popyshe authorite, of the which though many things evil have issued and
spro^g, yet this ca^ not be denied, but much good was also to us derived fro
the same, them as in goddis commandment. For if a man had dear friends, (...)
all the faith which is in all men, and as saint Poule shows most manyfestly,
of that sort that he might thereby remove mountains out of their places, yet
if he had not joined thereto a charytable heart and mind, ever prompte and ready
to show the same in effect and outward deed, as occasion is ministered, that
faith nothing should to him avail at all: (...)
like as contrary, if one man worked all the outward works in the world, if
they were not in faith roted and grounded, to him they should nothing profyt
nor help, so that another deeds alone, nor yet naked faith without charity, be
not sufficient means to bring man to his salvation, but charytable faith
and faythefull charity, (...).
be required of hye necessity: this is the ground, this is the end, and in
this stondeth the hole perfection of all christian religion. Wherefore avoiding
dear friends the great blonderyng now^ a days made of faith and works, in
few words this I shall to you say: If you will be of the flock of Christ, and
of the nombre of them which be true professors of his name, you must not
only by mouth and in word your faith testify, (...).
but in deed the same also to the face of the world declare to his honor and
glory, not judging your own deeds to deserve your salvation, but that ever
referryng to his only goodness and mercy. This Christ teaches us by his own
mouth, where as he says in his gospel, that such as by mouth only call
unto him, confessing his name, shall not by and by enter to the kingdom of
heaven, but all such as in effect and in deed fulfill the will of his father,
there shall have place. So that friends of this you may be assured, that it is
not inoughe for us to say, I believe well, and the^ care not what ye do. A
more pestilent opinion, and more pernicious to Christis doctrine was never I
trow among men then this, to say that faith alone, without charitable
works, is sufficient to man's salvation. For this I will say to you of the
doctrine of sayncte Paul, that it is another our faith, be it never so great,
nor yet our works, be they never so many, Tit. 3.
that can deserve our salvation, it is the mere goodness and mercy of god, which
shall be our salvation, the which he of his only goodness has promised to give
us, if we believe faithfully in him, and trust in his promysse with faythefull
heart, and in outward deed obey his commandment, and walk in the same: so
that as much are we bounden to work as to believe, and yet another of them
both, no nor yet both of them to gether, be able to deserve our salvation, but
this only lies in the goodness of god, to whom it has plesed to make us this
promysse, that if we trust in him with faythefulle heart vnfaynydly, and in
outward deed follow his commandment without hypocrysye, we shall have
everlasting life: unto des of our heavenly doctrine, but ever in all such
things, which by nature are indifferent, and be not of the express
commandment of god: we must conceive this judgment, that when so so ever it
shall appear to them, which be in authorytie prudente and polytike, any such
things to alter and change, as time and place require for good polycie,
thereto ever to be obedient with mekenes and humilite, as soon as they be
changed by common authority. In the which things also we must use in our
judgments this temperaunce, them never to condemn lightly, and with
arrogant opinion judge utterly to be cast away, though they have been in use
never so long, until the time that by common counsel they be abrogate and
judged to christian policy to be nothing expediente, by them which have of
such things perfyte judgment: the which if we do most christian people
with prudence observe, we shall by this mean so form our affectes, and in
some parts so correcke our judgments, that as of the one side we shall
avoid al blind supersticion, so we shall of the other side eschew all
arrogaunt opinion, and so consequently some what remedy this common blindenes,
(...)
which thereby is chiefly grown among us, to the great ruin of Christis
heavenly doctrine, and his spiritual unite. This mean we must follow and
ensewe, if we will attain to our felycyte, of the which dear friends maruayle
you nothing at al. For by a certain mean the armonie of this hole world is
contained in this natural order and beauty: by a mean al civil order and
polycye is mayntayned in cities and towns with good civility: by a mean
man's mind with all kind of virtue garnysshed, is brought to his natural
perfection and light: And by a mean all true religion without impyetye or
superstytion, is stablysshed and set forth to goddis honor and glory in
all chrystian natyons and countries: ye and so by a mean we shall, most
christyan people, chiefly avoid this dangerous diuisyon grown in among us,
by the reason whereof, sum are judged to be of the new fashyon, and sum of
the old. For whan^e that one sees an another, ever to such thing gladdely
conformable, as by common counsaylle is determined, made, and decreed, never
repug^ynge in heart thereto, nor yet condempnynge arrogantly all soche things
as have benne received long and many years without discrecyon, but ever
abiding the sentence of common authorytie, the mean time freely thereto being
obedient: when every one I say this sees in each other, I can not tell how
any division should grow in among us, I can not tell why one should call
an other pharisee or yet heretic: If we would after this manner and mean agree
in judgment, the supreme head here of our church, (...).
which apperethe to many of you strange and new, because of the long
custom of many years. If you consider with your self the nature of the thing,
as hit is indede, there is in hit nothing another strange nor new. For what
strangenes is this, a hole congregacyon and perfyte, as this is of our nation,
to elect and chose them a heed polytike with free liberty, which may with
his high wisdom direct and redress all such things as pertayne unto
christian polycye? This has benne ever common and in use, sithe the first
institution of Christis church. And though that christen pryncis and nations
have long stand in this polycye and obedience to Rome, yet to that they be
not bounden, that the defection from it and disobedience should induce
suspicion of heresye or schism, which are then only to be imputed, when
any pryuate manne or holle nation slyppethe from such grounds of scripture,
as he of necessity required to man's salvation: of the which sort the
defectyon from the popyshe authoryte is not to be judged nor thought. And this
thing most manyfestly prouethe a law made of the most Christian emperor
Iustinyan, (...).
wherein he gyuynge pryuiledge to Constantynople, openly decrees, that church
no more to hang of the sea of Rome, as it seemed to do from the time of
Constantyne: but that the archeby shop there should be chosen of his own
church, having authority also to create and institute other bishops under
the same see, without runnynge to Rome for authorite. whereby you may most
clearly se, both that this superiority of Rome, was not at that time judged to
be of such necessite, and of the law of god, as now many think: and that
the emperor also was head of that church, having full authorite to order all
such things as perteyned to christian polycy, as by many other laws which
he made, it is most manifest. Wherefore friends our prince here, who is of no
less authoryte in this our church of England, than was the Emperor
Iustynian at Constantynople, this authority of Rome so to bring to order, and
as supreme heed in the polycie of our church, this thing to stable, need not
to you appear another strange nor new, seeing the like has been done of
christen emperors before this long and many years. Fear ye not therefore
most christian people, to this act to our nation so good and profitable, of
heart to give obedience, the which doubt ye not, but god shall so govern by
his providence, that it shall go forth to his glory, comfort and profyt both
of the present age and of all the posterite. And ever have you this in mind,
that to all such thing as is decreed by common counsel and authority here in
our nation, you that be unlearned and ignorant, not having your conscience
formed with light and knowledge, you judgment, which is the true preacher of
Christ and religious, from him that is the preacher of the world arrogant and
seditious. (...). 15.
For chari^ie, as hit is the sure mark of all the chrystian ^locke, so it is
much more the sure note and sign of him that should trewely preach Christis
doctrine. For if his life first, which is chyefe of all, and also his word
to that do not sownde, if to that it do not agree, you may boldly conclude
both him and his doctrine of all christian hearts to be eschewed, (...) 2.
and to be avoided none otherwise than heresye. And yet ferther if you perceive
him, ceremonies traditions and rytes of the church so to maynteyn as things
necessary to the salvation of man, ye or contrary them utterly to damn, as
things pernycious and contrary to Christis religion: than make you a sure
conclusion, (...)
that he lacks much discretion, and is other folyshely superstitious, or else
arrogantly sedicious, and no mete precher of Christis doctrine. who ever with
charity precheth such things as perteyne to goddis glory, ever most
studiousely setting forth the same, and out of the works of nature, wherein y^
goodness of god spredeth her self, the true precher ever when he therein
beholds, somewhat he piketh, whereby he moved, declares gods honor and
glory of his name: (...). 3.
and likewise out of the ceremonies, used in Christis church, the which
without good teaching are but dumb signs, he ever gadreth sommewhat, whereby
he induces manne to the memory of goddis benefyte and mercy. But above all the
true preacher ever besyly endeuoreth him self about the grounds of
scripture, and such as be of necessytie necessary unto man's salvation,
them to stable in all chrystian hearts, and of them to make sure ground and
fundation: And as for all other things, which stand in man's polycye: he
ever therein induces and teaches obedience to common authority, nothing
against the same superstitiously nor arrogantly defending, nor yet all thing
beside the same arrogantely condempnynge: but ever in all his preachynges and
teachynges he settethe before his eyes, as chyefe end, concord and unity,
unto the which he ever directs him self, and his oracyon with prudente
symplicitie, avoiding all diuisyon, which is the mother of all confusion: and
so at the last inducynge the contempt of these worldly things vain and
traunsitorie, he persuades the fervent love and desire of things everlasting,
the which are steadfast, sure, and stable, and also are to us promised, of the
mere goodness of god, if that we will with sure faith and trust of the
obteynynge thereof be ever to his commandment conformable and obediente. This
teaches he chiefly, which is the true and perfyte preacher of Christis
doctrine, whom to discern and judge, shall be nothing hard to you dear
comfort and joy, whereof this is but as a shadow, and an image: the which if
you do most christian people, this I dare say and boldly to you affirm, that
all be it we never hereafter know another pope nor cardynall, no nor yet here
of counsel general of all christian nations, yet may we, living together in
faithful love and charitable unite, lighted by the spirit of god and his
heavenly doctrine, hanging only upon his benefyte, pass this life in most
pure and perfyte christianity. This we have expressed by the mouth of our
master Christ in his gospelle, who surely promyseth this to every multitude
gathered together in his name, (...)
and to every faithful congregation, that when so ever they assemble to gyther
for his glory, with perfect faith and trust in him, with charity demanding
light of truth to pass this life withal to his pleasure and honor, they
shall never lack knowledge of such thing, which shall be necessary to their
salvation, they shall never lack grace to defend them from all such thing as
shall led them to everlasting damnation. Wherefore most christian people,
saying that the benefyt of god is so open unto us, and the light of his holy
spirit so common, that no man is excluded from it, but he only that so will:
let us not drownyd in vain pleasure, by our own negligence suffer our self
to be depryued of this goodness: let us not being corrupt with worldly affection
suffer our self to fall from the dignite of our nature, and run to our own
destruction: let us not suffer our self by any pestilent and diuellyshe
dyuision lose the infinite benefit of Christis passion: but let us with one
faith in him in perfyt concord and unity with sure trust and hope hang
upon him as upon the only head of al christianity: let us every one
supportyng and bearyng the imbecillite and wekenes of other, echeone be glad to
admonyshe his christian brother, let us every one be glad to help and
succor each other with charity and pure affecte: and than undoubtedly we shall
both in this life have quietness of mind and tranquillytie, and here after
have the fruition of such joy and comfort as god by his prouydence has
ordained to the nature of man in immortalytie, the which I beseech him, of
whom comes al light, so to light us in this life, that we may all as members
of one body, hereafter knytte to our heavenly heed, enjoy commonly.

FINIS.
LONDINI IN AEDIBVS THOMAE BERTHELETI REGII IMPRESSORIS EXCVSA. CVM PRIVILEGIO.

End

