THE DOCTRINE AND USE OF REPENTANCE: NECESSARY TO BE PRACTICED AND USED of all
who look to sing the song of Moses, and the song of the Lamb beyond the
glassie Sea: Revel. 15.23.

PREACHED IN SUNDRY Sermons in the Parish Church of Alhallowes Bredstreete in
London: By RICH. STOCK.

LVK. 13.3. I tell you: Except you amend your lives you shall all likewise
perish.

crowned rose ornament, or printer's device of Felix Kingston (McKerrow 332)

AT LONDON Imprinted by Felix Kyngston, for Edmund Weauer and William Welby,
1610.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE WILLIAM, Lord Knolles, Baron of Greyes, Treasurer of
his Majesty's household, and one of the Lords of his Majesty's most Honorable
privy Counsel.
RIght Honorable, the former Treatise, which within these two years I
presented unto your Honor, I compiled out of two worthy works, written in
Latin, by that worthy servant of Jesus Christ, and famous light of the Church
of Christ, Doctor Whitakers, against two sworn slaves of Antichrist, Campian
and Dureus, and I brought them by your Honors appointment, into one volume,
and translated them into our own tongue. The subject of it was faith, the
defense of the true Catholic faith, as it is held in our Church, and all the
Churches of God, against those Catholic deprauers of it. And now I offer unto
your Honor (a free will offering) a Treatise of practice, and obedience,
containing the doctrine of repentance, Isai. 22.12.
Calling to weeping, and mourning, to baldnes, and girding with sackcloath. A
point of that necessity, that Christ makes man's salvation, or damnation to
depend on it: Luke 13.3.
Except you amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish: and of which
Chrysostom speaks thus: Non cecidisse grave est, sed post lapsum non
resurrexisse, satanicum and pernitiosum est. Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad pop. An^och.
It is no great thing to fall into sin, but it is devilish, and deadly,
after the fall not to rise again: whereupon the Lord says, Ierem. 8.22.
Is there no balm in Gilead? is there no Physician there? why then is not the
health of the daughter of my people recovered? Yet happily may it seem to most
men, to be an untimely birth, to be brought forth now in the days, and time
of our Isai. 22.13.
joy and gladness, slaying of oxen, and killing of sheep, eating of flesh,
and drinking of wine: and if that was wisdom in Abigail, 1. Sam. 25.36.
not upon Nabals feast day, not when his heart was merry within him, to
acquaint him with heavy news, and mourneful tidings of David's wrath and
resolution, but to stay till the feast was ended; it may happily in me be
judged a point of folly, while our feasts lasts, yea in the midst of our
rejoicing, to offer to your Lordship, and the view of others, this tractate of
sadness and sorrow, mourning and humiliation. My apology is at hand, my defense
not far to seek.

The case is not alike, and so our course may well differ; for with them the
danger was well over, David's wrath was well appeased, so that she might with
safety watch a fitter opportunity, to communicate those things unto him. But
with us, and our times, the danger is imminent, our David is not appeased;
Isai. 9.12.
For his hand is stretched out still; so that delay were now very dangerous,
and not to hasten to the practice of it, very pernicious to men's both present
and future state.

Skillful Physicians have their time of the year, of the Moon, and of the
sign, which they hold best and fittest for letting of blood, cutting, searing,
and administering of purging potions; yet if they see the state of the sick
patient cannot well abide so long vndealt with, but in some diseases it be
dangerous to delay a day, nay but a few hours, (as in a pluresie) they will
open a vein, though the sign be in the vital parts, which in their general
practice they hold unfit, and often joined with great danger: neither do men
usually reprove them for it, unless it be out of their ignorance. Can I then
of any man be justly blamed, if I offer this spiritual Physic to all, and be
S. Paul's preacher 2. Tim. 4.2.
Out of season, even now as it were to let the sick blood, when the sign is
very nie the heart? Seeing if we had no particular occasion, by Gods
judgments, yet the general condition of all, who are mortal, and the
general infection of all, who are sinful, and the absolute necessity of this
duty, which being not taken in hand in time, but deferred a day, nay an hour
or two, may as much danger the spiritual estate of the soul, as omitting of
bleeding in a pluresie, may the health of the body. Seeing the Scripture
speaks but of one time or day, of turning unto God, which time and tide being
not taken, there is no turning of the tide again, no revolution of the time,
but that though a man may live with Esau many a year after he has lost ye
opportunity of the blessing, and of repentance, to seek it, and that with a
fountain of tears, Heb. 12.17.
Yet he may not find place to repentance. It cannot then upon the point be
unseasonable, for me to call for this in every season; which at no time can come
too soon, nor yet too late, so it be serious, and true: but the occasion being
let slip, cannot be recovered again, if a man would give a world for it.
Besides, I am not without president of the like. For the holy man Job, Job 1.5.
called, and commanded his sons to sacrifice, and so to repent (for thitherto
the burnt offerings he made, led them) not at the end of their feasts, when
their seven days were over, but every day, lest that should fall out which he
feared, that they should sin against God, though it were but in their hearts,
(so careful was he) a thing easily seasing upon the heart, hands, and tongue,
when the rebel flesh is pampered with full diet, and many dishes, and the mind
with pleasures and delites transported out of it self; yea and fearing also,
that which after fell out, lest if they deferred their repentance, and seeking
of reconciliation, they might be overtaken with death in the very act of their
feasting, Verse. 18.19.
as they afterward were, when they began their courses of feasting, even in the
first day. Has not that also some resemblance with this, John 19.41.
that Joseph built his sepulcher in the place of his pleasure, his garden, as
knowing how easy it was for him in his pleasures to forget himself, and his
end? And if we be men of the same matter, and cast in the same mould, yet their
holiness exceeding ours, this doctrine of humiliation, may not be unfit for us,
not only to be known but practiced, lest if we defer it, it should fall out
with some of us (as it may well with all) for any Writ of privilege we can sue
out, that we may with Jobs sons, be taken before our feasts be over, and
ere ever the time of feasting come.

If this season be unfit, because the time is our feast, yet being the doctrine
of mortification and renouation, of putting off the old man, and putting on the
new, of making 2. Cor. 1.17.
men new creatures in Christ Jesus, when old things are passed away, and all
things are become new; I suppose it to have a special fitnes for the time.

Now this I offer to your Honor, to continue the signification of my duty,
begun in the former, as by a freewill offering, when the other was enioined by
your Honor, and so could not so effectually intimate my duty. Yet in this I
respect not duty only, but desire of your Lordships spiritual, and eternal
honor, which must be obtained by walking this way, or else there is no way to
compass it.

I undertook to handle this point publicly, at the request of diverse of my
auditorie, who had often heard me press the necessity of it, and yet not so
distinctlie conceiving the nature of the thing, desired I would divert my
ordinary course of preaching, and handle this point at the full, and in all the
particulars.

I now have written it by others importunity, who desired it for a more
public good, and offer it first unto your Honor, which I desire might have
not the least, but the best part, and profit in it, and by it.

May it please your Honor to hear thus much from me, that this duty belongs
to honorable Personages, men of your place, as well as to the poorest pesants,
as the precepts of the scriptures, and the practice of King David; Solomon,
Manasses, and others do prove. The reason of which is, because now though
there be difference of men, as there is of counters, while the Merchants
account lasts, some standing for pence, some for pounds, some for hundreds
and thousands: and as of plaiers while they are upon the stage, some going for
rich, some for poor, some for knights, some for kings while the play
continues; and as of trees in the forest, some are oaks, some elmes, some
poplers, some thorns, some briers and brambles, while they stand growing: yet
when the account is ended, when the play is finished, when the trees are cut
down, specially burnt to ashes, there will be no difference at all. So, and
more it will be after death, when men shall al appear before Gods judgment
seat, that there will be no difference, specially in respect of God; for then
shall the poor appear without their rags, and the rich without their bags,
Kings without their crowns, Nobles without their ensigns of honors, Bishops
without their rochets, Judges without their commission, Sergeants without their
coifes, Lawyers, Ministers, and other scholars without degrees, and signs of
order, yea every man as naked as he came into the world, and more naked then he
went out of it, by as much as his winding sheet, coffin or tomb comes to.
But every man shall have the works of his person, place, age and condition
with him; he that has eschewed evil, and done good, he that has mortified
the flesh with the lusts thereof, and been renewed in the inward man, (the very
pith and marrow of his repentance) Romans 2.7.
He that by continuing in well doing, has sought glory, and honor, and
immortality, shall have eternal life; whereas he that has but pampered the
flesh, and took all care to fulfill the lusts of it, renewing nothing, but
retaining old Adam Verse. 8.9.
Disobeying the truth, and obeying unrighteousness, shall have indignation,
and wrath, tribulation and anguish, etc. whether he be Jew or Grecian, one or
other, whatsoever he be, Verse. 11.
for there is no respect of persons with God.

If I be blamed for bringing this doctrine to the Court, and commending it to
your Honor, as well as preaching it to the common people, this will be my
defense.

And thus hoping of your Honors good acceptance of this small new years gift:
praying the Almighty to renew you by his spirit and grace, through faith and
true repentance, that you may not only continue honorable upon earth, in the
Kings Court, but your Honor may be multiplied in heaven, in the Court of the
King of Kings: I humbly take my leave.

Your Honors Chaplain in all humble duty, RICHARD STOCK.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER, SPECIALLY THE Rector, and parishioners of
Al-hallowes Breadstreet.
THe rod of Gods judgments, has now been long upon us for our sins, which
the abuse of Gods mercies, his patience, and our long peace has brought out:
So that we may well hope, that they have wrought in us that of Elihu in Job,
Job 33.16.
to wit, that they have Opened the ears of us, even these corrections, which
he has sealed: whereby we will willingly hear and receive this doctrien of
repentance, unless that of Elies sons, (which is not to be thought of
without fear and trembling) should be verified in us, 1. Sam. 2.25.
That therefore they obeyed not the voice of their sather, being the Lords
Priest) because the Lord would slay them: So we should not obey the voice of
Gods Ministers, because the Lord has a purpose to destroy us.

Which lest it befall us, it stands all and every one upon to repent, or having
repented, and yet sinning again, James 3.2.
(as who sins not in many things and daily?) to renew his repentance, and
do it again, and again. As often (says Chrysostom) Quoties cecidens in
foro, toties ex^ges: sic quoties peccaueris, toties peccati poeniteat.
Chrysostom. hom. 9. de poenitent.
as thou fallest in the streets, so often thou will rise again: even so, as
often as thou committest sin, so often thou should renew thy repentance.

The Physicians have a preservative against the plague, which consists of
three ingredients: The medicine is called flying; the ingredients are these:
Cito, long, tarde; fly soon enough, fly far enough, and make slow haste
to return. By which notwithstanding that men sometimes escape the pestilence,
yet they remaining in their sins, are often overtaken with a greater plague:
and are in the case which Amos speaks of; Amos 5.19.
As if a man did fly from a Lion, and a Bear met him: or went into the house,
and leaned his hand on the wall, and the serpent bit him.

But the Prophets and Saints of God, have a contrary preservative, not against
this plague only, but all other, either to keep themselves untouched of them,
or at least to turn them to their good. And this they call not flying, but
returning; the ingredients of this are two, laid down every where in the
Scripture; Cease to do evil, learn to do well, eschew evil and do good.
Yea this is both a restoratiue and a preservative, by which men may remove the
present, and prevent greater judgments to come.

Now for the instructing of you in the nature, and for the directing of you, in
the use and practice of this medicine and duty, at the request of some of you,
I labored in public to deliver this doctrine, for the benefit of all who
heard me: and now at the importunity of some, I publish it in writing, to the
profit, I hope, of many more.

The order I have used is as familiar and plain, as I could, laboring to
profit rather the most, then to satisfy the learned. I have begun with the
description of it, and have examined the several particulars thereof; then I
have proceeded to the essential and natural parts of it; from them to the
causes of it; from the causes, to the subject and parties to whom it belongs,
and who ought to practice this duty; from these unto those seven inseparable
fruits or effects, which the Apostle S. Paul in the second Epistle to the
Corinthes has delivered unto us. 2. Cor. 7.17.
Hence I have descended to the time and place, when and where this duty ought
to be practiced. Finally, I have labored to remove some of those principal
lets and impediments, which Satan casts in the way of all men, when they
shall but once mind their way to his holy duty.

I cannot say, I have brought here any thing new and unheard of; For there is
no new thing under the Sun: Eccles. 1.9.
For matter I mean; yet for the manner and particular handling of it, I know
none, who has descended to the capacity of the meanest, as I have endeavored,
to my power and for my skill, to do.

What do our Lawyers plead now, but that which has been pleaded in former
times, the same statutes, the same rules of law, the same book cases? only
they apply them to the particular causes, and fit them for the advantage of
their clients. What do our Physicians prescribe now, any thing but that which
Galene, Hippocrates, and other Physicians have done before them? the same
simples and compounds, the same purges, and preservatives, the same cordials
and restoratiues; only by their experience and skill, living among us, they
discern of the state of the patient, of his age, strength and temperature, of
the disease, whether new or old, begun but now, or inueterate; and so they
increase or diminish the simples, or the quantity of the^, making the^ either
milder or sharper, as the state of the party, and disease do require. As little
able are we to bring any new thing, but only fit them to the times and
occasions, seeing living in the same ages, we may the better be able to do
it, though we be many degrees inferior in gifts and knowledge. That I then
profess, is the more particular, and familiar handling and applying of these
things, which others have worthily delivered, for the benefit of the Church of
God.

I have endeavored to confirm every point by the word of truth, and have
added (after my usual manner) confirmations and illustrations drawn from
reason, similitude, and the sayings of the Fathers; not to strengthen the
Scriptures, but to help and benefit the hearer and reader, to whom all is
little enough, to make him hear with attention and delight, to conceive with
profit, and to carry away for practice. If any dislike my alleging of Fathers,
(as some have done my using of reasons to confirm the truth and doctrine, but
with very little reason, as I suppose) I must pray them to give me leave to use
them, till I can see that unlawfulness, which they affirm to be in the
practice, and to censure me in charity for the use of them, as I do them for
not using them. I know well there may be an abuse in the quotation of these; as
there may be in citing of Scripture; when either ostentation of memory, or
reading shall be joined with it; or when, as Hierom speaks, Eruditionis
gloriam declinando, eruditissimus habebatur. Ill^ ^aiebat, Tertu^ani, istud
Cy^ani, hoc Lac^tij, illud Hi^ est, etc. Hie^ epist. 3. ad ^od. Epitaph. ^potia.
One affects to be accounted learned, by eschewing the glory of learning;
That, says he, is it which Tertullian speaks, that Cyprian, this
Lactantius, that Hilarious, etc. Or finally, when they shall be like lights at
a great feast, which take up all the room upon the table, and leave little
place for dishes of meat to be set on. I will look as well to my heart in the
use of them, as God shall enable me, and when I shall see the hurt of them, I
will as much endeavor to avoid them; in the mean time, I will make the best use
I can of them, to edify the Church of God.

Those places which I have here used, I have set down in the treatise in our
own tongue; but, I confess, not so advisedly, in the margent, I begun to set
them down in their own, and having so done for three or four sheets, I saw
it was not so profitable for those whom I most aim to teach, namely the
simple; yet I have continued on that course for an uniformity: yet knowing
that many understand the Latin, who do not understand the Greek, though I
have used some of the Greek Fathers, as Justin Martyr, and Basil, and somewhat
out of those parts of Chrysostom, which we have in Greek, yet have I set down
the Latin only, lest I should be troublesome and unprofitable to more.

Many testimonies out of the Scriptures I have urged diverse times, and in
several points, even one and the same, for one place will prove many things,
and has many branches. The Lawyers will urge one and the same law, or book
case to several points, in pleading of the same cause, because of several
branches in it, and they are blameless. I hope in the use of the word, we may
have as much liberty, and yet not seem to have idle repetitions; and the
rather I have affected this, for the benefit of the simpler sort, that the
places of moment may be more familiar unto them.

Now not to detain you any longer, from the Treatise it self; I beseech you
read it with attention, labor to know the particular points with judgment,
and to practice them with conscience. And the God of grace so persuade your
hearts, and so open them unto it, that you may be like the citizens of Abel,
2. Sam. 20.22.
who at the persuasion of one wise woman, cut off the head of Sheba the Rebel,
and cast it to Ioab, who blew the trumpet, and all the armies returned from
their siege and sacking. So you may cut off your sins and cast them to God,
that the armies of his judgments may at length retire from the city, and our
land, and his hand be no more stretched out. And that Isai. 1.19.
You consenting and obeying, may cate the good things of the land. And
repenting and amending, and doing your first works, the candlestick be not
removed out of his place. Reuelat. 2.5.


Your friend and servant for Jesus sake, Richard Stock.

THE DOCTRINE AND USE OF REPENTANCE.
TO the end we may instruct our present age in the nature of Repentance, which
for the most part little understands the doctrine of it, and less practices
the duty: we must first show them what it is; which may thus be described:

What repentance is.
Repentance is the constant turning of a man in his whole life from al sin
unto God, arising from true faith and the true knowledge of a man's own
spiritual estate, ever joined with true humiliation.

Repentance is a turning.
When I say it is a turning, I say it by the authority of the Prophets in the
old Testament, and of Christ and his Apostles in the new, which is manifest by
their preachings and writings. Isaiah says, Isai. 9.13.
The people turns not unto him that smites them, neither do they seek the
Lord of hosts. Hosea exhorting the people to repentance, says, Hosea 6.1.
Come and let us return unto the Lord. And again, Hosea 14.2.
O Israel return unto the Lord thy God, for thou have fallen by thy iniquity.
Likewise says Jeremiah: Ier. 4.1.
O Israel if thou return, return unto me. As much has Ezechiel: Ezech.
18.30.32.
I will judge you, O house of Israel, every one according to his ways, says
the Lord God; return therefore, and cause other to turn away from all your
transgressions. The like is also in the 32. verse. In the new Testament the
word used to express this, signifies, to change the mind (whereupon the change
of the manners will follow.) John Baptist says, while he prepared the way for
Christ; Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of heaven is at hand. As if he should say, Return
from an evil mind to a good. And our Savior Christ uses the same word,
Matthew. 4.17.
Amend, for the kingdom etc. The Apostle Saint Paul expresses the meaning of
both these when he says, The Gentiles were taught Act. 26.20.
they should repent: and if you ask him, what that is, he expresses himself
thus, and turn to God, and do works worthy amendment of life. By all which
it is manifest that repentance is a turning.

I say further it is a turning of the whole life. Repentance a turning of the
whole life, or from all sin.
In nature there are four kinds of turnings or mutations. One is in substance,
called generation and corruption: a second is in quantity, either from the
greater to the less, or from the more to the fewer, and contrary, called
augmentation and diminution: a third in place, when things change places,
called local mutation: a fourth in quality, when things change from one
condition to another, called alteration. Now here is no change in substance,
for the party sinning and repenting is the same, and has the same body and
soul, the same faculties and powers both of soul and body: neither is there
any change in quantity, for the change from greater sins to less, or from
more to fewer, is not repentance. Nor is there any change of place, for sin,
like a man's sickness, is carried with him, and change of place, as change of
beds, does not free him, or make him whole. Being then none of these, it must
needs be the change in quality, that is, when one and the same man is changed
in the condition both of his soul and body, from iniquity to righteousness,
from all sin to the living God, both in the inward man and outward
conversation. Which is manifest by the Scripture, as first for the inward man:
Ezekiel speaks from the Lord: Ezech. 18.31.
Make you a new heart, and a new spirit: not in substance, not in quantity,
but in quality. Hence Moses promises to his people the blessing if they shall
Deuteronomy. 30.2.
return with all their heart, and with all their soul. Hence it is that Joel
speaks Joel 2.13.
of renting the heart and not the garment. And Jeremy Ierem. 4.4.
of taking away the foreskin of the heart. True repentance then is the change
of the heart and inward man: but that is not all, there must also be a change
of the outward man, as well as the mind; the understanding, the will, and
affections must be changed, so must the eyes and the tongue, the hands and the
feet be changed also. Therefore Daniel persuading Nebuchadnezzar to repent, he
says unto him: Daniel 4.24.
Break off thy sins by righteousness, and thine iniquities by mercy toward
the poor, let there be an healing of thy error. As if he should say, it is not
true repentance unless a man break off sin, and do the contrary good, and
be reformed in the outward man. So Zacch^us Luke 19.8.
when he turned to God, what did he? even break off his oppression, gave half
of his goods to the poor, made fourefold restitution to those he had wronged,
and so was turned in the outward man. The like might be said of Peter, Mary
Magdalene, and others, who were turned as well inwardly as outwardly, and both,
and so accounted true repentants, and their repentance good: when as the
repentance of Ahab and Herod were not good, nor saving repentance, being but in
the outward man only, or but for some sin, and not a whole conversion.

The reasons that prove repentance to be such a turning are two: Reason 1.
The first, because man, who at the first was made a goodly creature in the
image of God, having fellowship with him, whereby he was one with God and God
with him; by sin was separated from God, there being a partition made betwixt
them, as Isaiah says; Isai. 52.2.
he being alienated and estranged from God and become the child of wrath, as
S. Paul speaks, Ephesians. 2.3. and 4.18.
and was made like the prodigal son, gone from his father into a far
country, even become the straied, yea the lost sheep. Now when men have grace
to repent, then they begin to renew this fellowship, to recover this image, and
to be reconciled to God; therefore I call it a turning again to God, and a
change of the condition.

Reason. 1.
2 I say it is of the whole life, or the whole man, and from all sin, because
one sin separates from God as well as many, and all parts are to be reduced
to God, as well as one, one faculty of the mind as well as another: for if
the outward man only be turned it is but hypocrisy and Pharisaicall, and the
inward cannot be turned, but the outward will follow; neither can any man
forsake one sin, to be at one and reconciled to God, which will not be
willing and careful to leave off and forsake all.

Now the use of this is double: Use 1.
First, if repentance be a turning, and such a turning as is spoken of, then
many men deceive themselves in their judgment of repentance, and think that to
be it, which is not, and that they have it, when they have nothing less. For
many think in repentance of nothing less then turning, and when they would
seem to repent, never endeavor to turn. Some think repentance is only a
sorrow and sighing, when they are by any means checked and reproved by man,
or afflicted by God; but then why should not carnal and worldly sorrow be
repentance; when carnal men mourn for the loss of wife or child, or some
loss by fire or water, sea or land? Some think it is a little weeping or
grieuing, when they are made to see their sins, or rather the punishment due
to them; but then why did not Esau repent? Others conceit that a little
humbling of themselves, to hang down the head like a bulrush, to fast certain
days and to put on sackcloth, is repentance; but then why was not Ahabs
repentance good and true? Others deceive themselves by an opinion that good
words and good purposes is repentance; but then why should not those sick men
repent, who have many goodly promises and purposes, which they never perform
nor bring to perfection, if once they have crept from under Gods hand, and have
worn away the circles of his strokes? Others think it only to be confession,
contrition and satisfaction; but then what should let that Judas repented not?
But some will grant us that it must be a turning, and will practice a change,
yet that is but from one sin to another, as the prodigal man leaves off his
prodigality, and gives himself to the practice of covetousness; one man
forsakes infidelity and falls into idolatry, the greater wound, as Augustine
speaks; another, being a carnal Gospeller, or an Atheist, falls from these to
Popery and superstition, as a sick man does out of a tertian into a quartane
ague: or if they turn from sin, yet not from all sin, but as Herod, who
obeyed in many things; as Nahaman, who looked that God should be merciful unto
him in one thing; as Agrippa, who had but his almost, and not altogether: So we
see many civil men repent, who change words and outward acts, but not their
hearts and the whole man, being therein the hypocritical Pharisie, making the
outside of the cup clean, but leaving it foul and fi^thie within. But some
men may go forward and begin to return in soul, and change the inward powers
and faculties of it, not indeed from sinfulnes to holiness, yet from ignorance
to knowledge, and from vice to virtue, as many heathen men, specially
Philosophers, have attained unto. But all these deceive themselves with the
shadow of repentance without substance, some having made no turning at all,
some but an imperfect and partial change.

Use 2.
2 This should teach him yt would repent indeed, to endeavor to change
himself, even his whole self, his own heart and outward man, doing (as
Chrysostom persuaded the people of Antioch) Homil. 80. ad pop. Antioch: Quod
in antiquis domibus facere solemus, cum fuerint putrefactae, putrida
subtrahimus, and supponimus noua, and a continua cura nunquam desinimus. Si
sueris antiquatus a peccato, per poenitentiam te renoua.
as men use to do in old houses, when they were rotten, they take away the
rotten posts and put new in their places, and have a continual care to keep
them in repair. So if he be grown old and rotten in sin, he must renew
himself by repentance, even both the outward and inward man, still changing
from some and from al sin, and that in all the faculties and powers of his
body and soul and parts of his life. And in this endeavor though a man's best
way is to begin with the inward man, as in purging a channel, the best is to
begin in the fountain and the spring head: yet lest the hardness and
difficulty of the work may discourage him, make him faint in it and give
over; I would deal with him, as schoolmasters do with children, which teach
them the easiest things first, though they be not so needful and profitable:
and persuade him to begin with the change of the outward man, being easier to
compass, then the change of the inward and disposition of the mind. He must
then call himself to an examination for the sins whereun to he is addicted;
and finding them to be fornication, adultery, drunkenness, theft, usury,
oppression, swearing, or the like; he must make this resolution, utterly to
forsake them all, and for ever, be they (as no doubt they may be) never so
sweet, bring they in never such pleasure or profit; yet must he turn from them
all and utterly break them off. And to that end carefully avoid all manner of
occasions and prouocations entising and drawing to these sins, by which he is
either put in mind of them, or tempted to commit them. By which care, God
assisting of him, the weakest man that is subject to any sin, may get the
mastery over it, when as he that is furthest from that sin, may easily be
overtaken, if he avoid not the occasions. As a weak man may keep his treasure
long, that can keep his doors shut, and thieves out, when as a strong man
shall be soon robbed of it, if he let in the thieves. Now when he is able to
abstain from these, then must he endeuoury contrary good works, as we heard
Daniel counseled Nebuchadnezzar: Zaccheus practiced, and Peter persuaded his
repentants: Act. 2.38.
Amend your lives. And this done, then must he proceed to the reforming and
purging of the soul and all the faculties of it; for to the reforming of the
outward act may he attain, and yet never repent. Yet say I not that he shall
lose his labor, for he may by it procure to himself the favor of God for
some forbearance and sparing in temporal judgment, or obtaining of some
earthly blessing, as Ahab did. But if he would truly repent he must endeavor to
purge the mind from ignorance, his will from frowardnes and perverseness, his
affections from corruptions and uncleanness, and labor to have knowledge of
the mysteries of salvation in his understanding, uprightness in his will,
holiness in his affections; not only abstaining from gross sins or living
unblameable before men, but from all small and secret sins, by keeping a good
conscience in all his ways in the sight of God, not leaving some sins only
but all, not doing some good only, but laboring to do all known duties,
circumcising the flesh and the heart, making not only a new hand, a new soote,
a new eye, a new tongue etc. but specially a new heart and a new spirit. And so
his endeavor shall be to some purpose, and indeed the practice of Repentance;
provided that this turning be without a returning to his sins again: for as
the whole man; so the whole life must be changed, and not for a day or two but
continually: for as he that was sick, and is recovered, to whom ye Physician
has prescribed a diet for preservation of his health, must keep it not a day
or two, but during the time by him prescribed left he have a relapse, which is
always most dangerous: So he that has repented must observe the diet
prescribed, to abstain from all cuils, and do the contrary good, and that
constantly and continually, which is the time our heavenly Physician has
prescribed. Then shall he find that true to him which Christ spoke to Zacheus:
Salvation is come to his house and to his heart.

Now to proceed in the description; Repentance proceeds from faith.
In the second place I say, that Repentance proceeds from faith, that is,
none can repent nor practice this duty of Repentance, but those who have faith
and grace: or repentance that is true and sound, holy and acceptable unto God,
ever comes from faith, I mean not the faith of devils, nor a temporary faith;
but a true justifying saving faith; no repentance can be accepted unless it
have this root from whence it comes, that is, true faith, which is manifest by
that of Malachie: Malach. 3.7.
Return unto me, and I will return unto you. Where he promises them pardon
and acceptance, if they would return, by the hope of that, to draw them to
this; the ground and motive to make them return is an assurance of pardon,
showing that when once they are persuaded and assured that God will pardon,
they will soon return unto him. John Baptist says, Matthew. 3.2.
Repent: for the Kingdom of God is at hand. The like says our Savior Christ:
Matthew. ^.17.
Amend your lives: for the kingdom of heaven is at hand By which they make
grace and the promise of salvation the cause of repentance, that is, when they
are received and apprehended, which is not neither can be, but by faith: and
though repentance in these places is placed before the promise, yet is it not
in nature before faith, neither would they teach any such thing, but that when
they once believe it, then they must and will repent. And to this purpose let
the consequent words be well waighed as John has them, Matthew. 3.3.
Prepare the ways of the Lord, and make his paths straight. Which is the very
sum of repentance: which words are taken out of the Prophet Esaias, Esaias 40.3.
who in the first and second verse, was commanded to preach the glad tidings of
the Gospel, showing that these must first be believed before they could
repent, The Prophet David also teaches no less: Psalm. 130.4.
But mercy is with thee, that thou may be feared. Where he observes that no
man can ever embrace God to fear and reverence him, but he that is persuaded
of his favor, nor give himself to the obedience of his law, but he that is
persuaded the things he does will please him. Lastly, the Prophet Hosea notes,
that repentance comes of the hope of the forgiveness of sinues. Hosea 6.1.
Come let us return to the Lord, he has smitten us, and he will make us
whole. And a certain truth it is, that if the Scriptures be searched, we shall
not find any to have truly repented, which had not true faith.

Now the reasons of this are diverse. Reason 1.
1. Because this duty of repentance in every man's conceit and also in truth is
very difficult and hard, and man had need to have some thing to whet him on to
it, and make him willing to go about it; and what inducement better then this,
hope of pardon, or assurance of remission? which is faith, being, as Ambrose
says, Incentiuum poenitentiae. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
the prouokement of repentance; for who will seek to an enemy for help, or
of whose favor and kindness he is not persuaded? Will any sick man, says he,
Nemo^se curandum praebeat, qui contemptui se, non compassioni, medico suo putat
suturum. ibid.
commit himself to such a physician to be cured, whom he thinks will contemn
him rather then condole and pity him? So no man will repent and turn to God,
but he that has some assurance of mercy and acceptance.

Reason 2.
2 Because without hatred of sin, there can never be any true repentance. Now
hatred of sin rises from sanctification: for an unsanctified man, may leave
sin, but not hate it, as sin; it is only holiness that hates iniquity. Now
there can be no sanctification without justification, and this cannot be but by
faith, by which men are united to Christ, and apply him unto themselves; then
no repentance without faith.

Reason 3.
3. Because no man can repent and turn to God, except he be first turned of
God, and after that he is turned he repents. So Ephraim says; Ierem. 31.19.
After I was converted, I reponted. The first act of a man's conversion is
faith, after that hope, then love and obedience: for as a prisoner, which lies
in hold for debt, or some deadly offense, if any man come unto him and promise
him to pay his debt, or discharge him, he first believes that he is willing and
able to do it, then he hopes for it, and lastly, he is as it were dissolved
into love, and seeks to do all things that will please him. So in a repentant
sinner, he first believes that God will do that he promises, namely, pardon
his sin, and take away his iniquities; then he rests in the hope of it, and
from that, and for it he leaves sin, and will for him for sake his old course
which was displeasing, and do that which is pleasing and acceptable unto him.

Reason 4.
4. Because true repentance is ever acceptable to God, now God accepts no work
of man, which does not arise from faith: for, says the Apostle, Hebr. 2.6.
Without faith, it is impossible to please God: therefore if a man will
perform true and acceptable repentance, he must have faith.

Ob. Ahab repented, and his repentance was accepted, for it obtained a
blessing, yet had he never any true faith, therefore repentance may be without
faith.

Ans. Ahab never had true repentance, and so his repentance is nothing against
this point: for I speak here of fauing repentance, which he never had; and if
it pleased God, yet it was but as a father speaks in general: Semiplena and
ficta pene obedientia, quandoque hactenus placet deo, vt ad tempus iram
remittat, and poenas corporales mitiget. August.
That half and fained obedience sometime so far pleases God, that for a
time he will remit his anger, and mitigate temporal punishments: But never for
matter of salvation. Again, God showed himself pleased with Ahabs repentance,
such as it was, to encourage his own to exercise true repentance; who may
thereby be assured of a gracious acceptance, and liberal reward from him, who
leaves not these unrewarded. But finally we say Ahabs repentance proceeded from
faith: which is thus made true; there is a double faith, one saving and
justifying, another temporary, that is, such a faith by which a man believes
for the present something that God has said is done or shall be; so Ahab
believed that God would do that which he had threatened, which made him repent,
and so his repentance proceeded from faith; there is a double repentance
answerable to this double faith, a temporary repentance arising from a
temporary faith, and a saving repentance from a saving faith. Such as the
faith is, sitch is the repentance.

Ob. 2. Again, some will say, that Repentance uses first to be preached, as
the course of the Scripture and the tenor held by all Preachers of all times
does show, who have first called for it, and then for faith.

Ans. To clear this doubt, we must consider three things, 1. the order of
nature, 2. the time, 3. the manifestation of them. In order of nature faith
goes before; in the manifestation of them, repentance is first; in time they
are both jointly together. For by order of nature, first a man's conscience must
in some sort be settled, touching his reco^ciliation with God by Christ, before
he can repent. As Ambrose says, Nemo recte possit poenitentiam agere, nisi
qui sperauerit indulgentiam. Ambros. de poenit. lib. 1. cap. 1.
No man can rightly repent, unless he hope for pardon. So that first Gods
favor is apprehended, and remission of sins believed, then upon that comes
repentance, alteration of life, and conversion. But for manifestation,
repentance both to a man's self and to another goes before faith, for it is
sooner discerned then faith. Justification is like the sap hid within the
bark, when as repentance as the bud, speedily shows it self, before leaf,
blossom, or fruit. Lastly, if we respect the time, neither of them is one
before the other, but are begotten in a man both at one instant, for faith is
not begotten to day, and repentance to morrow, or some days after, but he that
believes instantly repented, though it be not so perceived, no not of him that
possesses both. As the thunder crack and lightning are both at one and the
same time, yet is one discerned before the other. All that this shows or we
would prove by is, is this, that none can seriously and truly repent, but he
that knows he is Gods, none can know this but he that has his grace and this
faith.

Ob. 3. Further it may be some will object, that many a man by the terror of
his conscience is subdued and brought to obedience long before he has faith or
grace, or has tasted of it; and so it arises not from thence.

Ans. I answer, this is no other then that which may come of nature from the
knowledge of good and evil by that conscience of sin which remains in man
since his fall, being but a seruill sear of punishment and of the anger of
God; which though it he not a proper work of Gods sanctifying spirit, nor any
part of regeneration, yet is it a step toward it, and to be nourished,
because it is as the needle to the thread, for it makes way for the true feere
of God.

Use 1.
The first use of this is, to confute those who think repentance goes before
says, which opinion, by the grounds that have been already laid is
manifestly false. Besides, it is certain that repentance is the work of a
living man, of him that is spirituallie living no dead man can repent, But he
that is with out faith, though he have a name to live, yet is dead: for, Habac.
2.4.
The just shall live by his faith. No life then without faith, and no
repentance without life; so not without faith, seeing repentance is the work
of a living, not a dead man. There may be an outward reformation of actions and
word, an inlightning of the mind and understanding, a changing of the will and
affections from vice to vert^, but no change of the heart from sinfulnes to
holiness. That, a natural man may have; this, only a spiritual: that, a dead
man may perform; this, only a living man. Finally, repentance is a purifying
of the heart, a mortifying, and crucifying of the flesh: and what shall purify
the heart? is it not faith? for whom will a man crucify his beloved sins,
inortifie his flesh and affections? will he do it for any, but for him of whose
love he is specially assured? Then can it not be before, but must needs follow
after faith.

Use 2.
2. This conuinceth the of error who think that faith is a part of repentance;
but it cannot be that the root and the fruit should be both one thing, or one
a part of the other. The strongest reason they have is, that faith and
repentance are ever loyned together, without faith there can be no repentance.
But if this reason have any strength, then is faith a part of the Sacrament,
seeing it is as unprofitable without it, and conjoined they must be where any
fruit and comfort will be had. Again, if conjunction make it a part, why
should not the soul be a part of the body? which is not a body, but a
carcass without it; why not the light a part of the heat in the sun? why not
faith part of hope and charity? seeing they are not, nor cannot be in this
life without it, though charity may be and is without them in the life to come.
Besides, the scripture has made them directly distinct: Mark. 1.15.
Repent and believe the Gospel. And Paul says, Act. 20.21.
he preached Repentance toward God, and faith in the Lord Jesus. Then can it
be no part of it, but the root and beginning of it, whence it procee death. For
when the mind of a man has once by faith imb^aced the goodness of God and
remission of sins by Jesus Christ, then in liew of thank fulness to God, he
will address himself to the alteration and change of his life, to the putting
off the old man, and putting on the new: they are then not as parts one of
another; but as cause and effect, faith the true cause, and repentance the
necessary effect.

Use 3.
3. This may confute that point of Popery and popish schoolmen, who have
distinguished attrition and contrition, coining both namea and things after
their own f^ncie without, Scri^ture. Now attrition, they say, cannot merit;
but contrition, if it be fall, does merit remission of sin and justification.
But this must needs be salfe, because no contrition or repentance can be good,
unless it come from faith; if it be without it, it is sin, and how should
sin merit? It is sin, for says our Savior Christ: Matthew. 7.17.
A good tree brings f^orth good fruit, and a corrupt tree ^ings forth evil
fruit. And again, Luke 6.45.
A goodman out of the good treasure of his ^art brings forth good, and an
evil man out of the evil treasure of his heart brings forth evil. So that
contrition, though it be good in it self, yet coming from a bad tree, which
every man is; who is not sanctified and made good by faith, it must needs be
evil and sin; specially seeing our Savior says, John 3.6.
That which is borne of the flesh; is flash. Which is true both of men and
their actions, whosoever is borne, and whatsoever is done of a natural man, is
corrupt. So contrition, if it come from a natural man, one not sanctified by
faith, must needs be corrupt, and cannot merit remission of sin. But if this
contrition proceed of faith, and so be good, it can as little merit remission
of sin, which is before it. For a man no sooner believes but he is justified,
no sooner justified, but he has remission of sin, which though he know not,
or feel not, yet has he then never the less: for if want of feeling or
ignorance of the being of any thing, should argue the not being of it, then
children in the womb should want life and reason, because they have no
knowledge or feeling of either. It is not then as they falsely imagine, that
men first repent, and from the merit of that comes remission of sin: but
men first believe and apprehend remission of sin, and then do they repent,
then do they forrow and mourn for sin, and turn unto God from those things
which are displeasing unto him.

Use 4.
4. This will prove every ignorant, unbelieving, profane man, to be without
true and saving repentance: for his ignorance and prophanenes tells every man,
that whatsoever is in his heart, yet faith is not there; and so he being a
dead man cannot bring forth the works of the living. Though therefore he should
mourn and weep, as much as Esan, and sorrow and grieve as greatly as Judas,
yea and reform in many things as Herod, yea all the outward man, as some
Heathen men have done, yet has he not repented. Then you will say, to what
purpose should any man do any such thing? Because God has commanded these,
and they are means to obtain that which is true repentance. Not that any man
can merit grace at the hand of God by this, or yet make himself more capable
of grace, seeing his nature remains as corrupt as before; but because God
has enjoined men to do what they can in renewing themselves, and to approach as
near unto grace as they can, although they cannot by any labor or endeavor,
without the work of Gods spirit attain unto it. All should use the means and
hope to obtain grace; yea none can hope to obtain it who use not the means;
though some use ye means and do not obtain, and others not using the means
do obtain: That with the means and without it the whole glory and praise
might be given to God, whose spirit blows where it lists.

Use 5.
5. The last use of this is, to persuade every man to labor for true faith, if
he have it not, or for the increase of it being had, still endeavoring to
maintain and nourish it, if for no other end and reason, yet because it will
bring forth in him true repentance not to he repented of, and renew it in him
every day, as his sin renews, and make it acceptable unto God: for if it were
possible a man could repent without this faith, yet should it not be well
pleasing to God, specially not for salvation and spiritual good and comforts.
It is not to be denied but that the best men have many secret and privy
corruptions in them, which must be mortified; yea many a regenerat and holy man
may oftentimes fall into many gross sins, and how should they recover
themselves without the medicine of repentance? but how should they repent
without faith? by which they are living men able to do the works of the
living, and truly repent: for the obtaining of this then, must they hear the
word with all diligence, for Romans 10.17.
faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. And for the
nourishment of it, still must they hear it with reverence, for it is, as
Chrysostom says, as oil to the lamp to keep it burning. And the more care
must they have for the preservation of this, because the life and being both of
this and all other graces depends upon it. Serpens non minimum cu^ si corpus
inciditur, modo caput suum integrum seruet. Sic tu praeter fidem caetera
perdere non cura. Chrysostom. homil. 24. in Matthew.
Then as the Serpent of all things is most careful for his head, because he
knows that though he be cut and mangled in the body or any part of it, yet if
his head be whole, it will cure all the wounds of the other members: such
wisdom ought they to have, to labor above al things to keep the faith whole
and sound, because if any thing else take a wound this will cure all the rest;
but if this once suffer shipwreck, it will cost them much before they can
recover it again, and make themselves whole, all other graces decaying and
perishing with it. For this then must they chiefly labor, that they may not
once but every day renew their repentance.

The third thing in the description of repentance is, that it arises also from
the true knowledge of a man's spiritual estate.

Repentance arises from the knowledge of a man's spiritual estate.
True saving repentance arises from the true knowledge of a man's own
spiritual estate; and none can repent but they who have this knowledge; which
is proved by the course which was ever taken by those who labored to bring and
induce offenders to repentance, for they labored ever to set before their eyes
and to make them see the condition wherein they were. The Lord himself when he
came to visit Adam, who had now sinned, and to draw him to repentance, took
this course with him; saying unto him, Genesis 3.9.
Adam where art thou? that is, in what a case art thou: see and know that
howsoever thou art in the same place, yet thou art not in the same condition,
and take notice of thy miserable condition, that by it thou may be drawn to
seek to me and not to fly from me. So the Prophet Nathan 2. Sam. 12.1.2.3.
etc.
being sent to King David to bring him to repentance, he took a course to make
him see his sins, and his own miserable estate, by a familiar parable wisely
applied, which made him see and confess his sin, and seek by true
repentance for the pardon of it. So the Apostle Peter Act. 2.36.
in his first sermon after the ascension of Christ, endeavored to make the
Jews his auditors to see their sins in crucifying the Lord of life, and
their wretched estate for that fact, that he might, as the success was, draw
them to repentance. So Christ himself with the Church of Laodicea, to the end
he might make her truly repent, labored to abate her pride, which blinded her
eyes, and to make her see that she was, wretched and miserable, and blind and
poor, and naked. Reuelat. 3.17.
And this Ephraim speaking of her self, shows, that it was the cause of her
repentance, Ierem. 31.19.
When I was instructed, I repented. As if she should say, when my eyes were
open, that I saw my own condition and estate, then I repented. By all these it
is clear that repentance arises from ye knowledge of a man's spiritual
estate. But to conceive this point more fully, we must understand that there
are three parts of this knowledge, or three things are required to make a man
know himself and his estate thoroughly. 1. That he know his sin. 2. That he
have the sense of his sin, that is, of the punishment and curse due to his
sin. 3 The knowledge of his own inability to free himself, either from the
sin, or from the punishment due to sin. The first of these is, the
knowledge of a man's sinfulnes, his natural sinfulness, that by nature without
temptation he is inclinable to all evil, and utterly unable to do good: Then
his inward sinfulnes, that is, his secret motions which should be toward God
and agreeable to his law, are altogether auerse from him toward sin and
disobedience; these are his thoughts, lust and concupiscence of the soul:
Lastly, his outward actions both his sins of omission and commission, his
apparent evil, and his imperfect good things. The knowledge of all which are
to be had by the law, for Romans 3.20.
by the law comes the knowledge of sin. The 2. part of this knowledge is the
sense of sin, that is, the knowledge of the curse and punishment due unto sin,
for that is it which makes sin sensible to a man. Thus God dealt with the
wicked when he had laid before them their sins, as it is in the 50. Psalm.
verse. 18. Psalm. 50.18.
When thou see a these thou runnest with him, etc. Then he threatens his
judgments against them, verse. 22. Verse 22.
I will tear you in pieces, etc. To make them the more sensible. Now these are
either spiritual plagues, or ourses upon their bodies, goods, wives, children,
friends, or upon their name, memory and posterity. All which may be found in
the Word, as Deuteronomy. 28. and such like. The 3. part is, the knowledge of a man's
own inabilitie, either to free himself from the sin, or the punishment due
unto it: that howsoever he may by his natural strength repress the rage of
his corruption, prune and lop it, cutting off the superfluous bows and
branches of it, yet the root and the whole body will remain still in his
heart and soul, and will as occasion is offered break forth into all his
members. And this is it which made David to repent and pray so earnestly to the
Lord to purge him: Psalm. 51.2.7.
Wash me thoroughly from mine iniquities, and purge me from my sin. And
again: Purge me with hyssope and I shall be clean. And that he is as little
able to avoid the punishment, either by hiding himself, or by any wit or
powet, or any means whatsoever: which was in them whom Peter preached to, and
made them come with this note to Peter and the other Apostles: Act. 2.37.
Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? The like was in the jailer,
who came trembling to Paul and Silas and said, Act. 16.30.
Sirs what may I do to be saved? So that it is manifest that the knowledge and
sense of sin and the conscience of a man's own inabilitie to free himself
from either, will make a man turn to God and repent.

Now the reasons of this truth are these. Reason 1.
1. Because the ignorance of a man's estate is seldom or never separated from a
false opinion of a man's good estate, of his inward holiness and integrity of
nature, of the goodness of his actions, having a show and semblance of some
good. Now a man in his error will never seek for the change of his estate. As
he that thinks himself whole, though he be heartsicke, will never seek to a
Physician, or use any means to mend and better himself. But when he knows
his estate, and sees how falsely he was conceited of himself, then will he
hasten to seek change and amendment. For as a state cannot be continued if it
were good, unless it were thoroughly and fully known; so being unknown, can
it not be amended, being now amiss.

Reason 2.
2 Because though the fight of sin would not drive them to this men not
disliking sin by nature; yet the sense of punishment would, because every
thing naturally fears the destruction of it self, and would by all means
preserve it self; much more man, who discerning in this case, that his
escaping must be by turning, will address himself to it, for the safety of
himself.

Reason 3.
3 Because though the punishment would not move him to this duty or remove him
from his sin, so long as he felt it not, because he might hope by some
means to escape it, as by hiding and covering his sin, or by fleeing I know
not whither, or by Gods mercy and indulgence for some bounty to religion, or
charity to the poor, or such like: yet if he once come to know, that as he
can free himself no more from his sins, then a Leopard from his spots, and a
black More from his skin: so can he as little free himself from the
punishment of sin by any other means whatsoever, it being impossible that
God should let him go unpunished, because he cannot be unjust, and so be
brought into a strait as Baalam was; then will he endeavor to perform
repentance, by which only he may escape and flee the vengeance to come.

Now the use we have to make of this point is this: Use 1.
First, to inform us that the world and the Church has many thousand
impenitent sinners, such as never have repented, neither yet (in the case
wherein they are) are they capable of repentance, because they are ignorant of
their spiritual estate; and that which is worst, they cannot be persuaded to
look into it: though they often cast up their estate to know what it is, I
mean their worldly estate, yet they never balance their spiritual estate,
being either slothful and negligent, or else being possessed with a false
opinion of the vnnecessarines of it, or with fear of the desperateness of it;
like as bankerupts who are not able to pay a penie in the pound, dare not look
into their estate, lest they procure grief and coffeehouse to themselves.
Whatsoever the cause is, the thing is not done, and so they are without the
knowledge of it: and whatsoever they think of themselves, if impenitent
sinners must perish, they cannot be safe, feeing they cannot repent; which
they cannot do, as long as they are ignorant of themselves and of their
spiritual estate. If any man think it strange, that man, who knows so many
things should be ignorant of himself, when this is proper and peculiar to him
to know himself; 1. Cor. 2.11.
For what man knows the things of a man, save the spirit of a man which is in
him? he considers not that when the object is nie to, or laid upon the sense,
it nothing so well discerns it, and the eye of the body, though it behold
all other things, yet it cannot see it self, or some parts of the body which
are nearest unto it. So the mind of man compassing the whole world, sometimes
the heavens and things above it and in it, sometime ye earth and the bottom of
it, and things under it, yet is it ignorant of it own estate: like many
Gentlemen travelers, who know diverse strange and foreign countries, and yet
are ignorant of their own: every one being better conceited of himself then
there is cause, neither finding his defects nor discerning his corruptions;
which procee death from self-loue, which makes a man too well affected to
himself; and so judgment following affection, he never discerns rightly of
his estate, but thinking he has no need of any change, never goes about it.
But by the particulars this will more appear. For many cannot be persuaded
that they are so corrupt dynature, but their nature seems to them to be pure,
beautiful, and glorious, thinking it no more corrupt, then it was created by
God, and then it was in Adam during the time of his innocence. Hence are those
opinions of perfect inherent righteousness, justification by works, and merit of
works, of the power of pure naturals, free will and such like, which Papists
and other heretics have invented and maintained out of the natural or affected
ignorance of man's estate. Again, for outward actions, they think that those
works, which have any show of goodness, although they be never so imperfect,
corrupt and hypocritical, yet they are good and may be meritorious to deserve
earthly and heavenly blessings. Further, for mean and ordinary sins they
think them venial and light offenses, not to be accounted of, or avoided;
they think their good meaning to be as good as perfect holiness; their own
righteousness perfect and absolute, so that they say in effect: Revel. 3.17.
I am rich, and increased with goods, and have need of nothing. The Church has
many of these, as also as many who are without the sense of sin; ^o persuade
themselves there is no such punishment for sinners, such curses as are spoken
of, neither is God so provoked to anger to inflict punishment upon offenders as
the ministers tell them he is, which they falselie ground upon the patience of
God, which he generally uses towardsall, who although they go on in all manc^
of disobedience and wilful breaking of his commandments, adding one heinous
sin to another, and showing open: contempt of him; and of his word, yet they
estape unpunished, and live as merrily in the world as the holiest man does,
and at death die as peaceably as he that lived best: so the patience of God
that should lead them to repentance, they make as a means to keep them back
from repentance. But say they have the sight and sense of sin, yet are they
persuaded that they can and are able at their own pleasure to purge themselves
both from their natural corruption and outward act of sin; and so the
sickness, which a man can cure himself of, is nothing so grievous unto him.
And for the punishment, they think they are able to escape it, either by their
cunning conueying and covering of their sin, or by the great mercy of God
who delights not in the misery of man, and his confusion, but in their
salvation, and so will be eafilie entreated by their pitiful moaning, to
pardon their sins; and if not, to bestow on them the crown of glory, yet to
remit them the punishment deserved; or at the worst that may fall, they can
free themselves by their works of mercy and other satiffactions; and so say
there is no fear, but bless themselves in their hearts, saying, Deuteronomy. 29.19.
We shall have peace, although we walk according to the stubb^en^sse of our
own hearts. Many thousands there are who are thus ignorant of their estates,
either in some of these or in all, neither are willing to come our of this
ignorance, but in time of health and prosperity spurn against the plain
ministry of the Word, as ^h^ which would give them a view of themselves,
crying against the Ministers as the woman against the Prophet, 1. King. 17.18.
What have I to do with thee? Art thou come unto me to call my sin to
remembrance, and to stay way son? So, what have we to do with you, are you
come to call our sins to remembrance, and to slay our sou^? And against the
word as a salse glass; that as she ^loohed her self in ^glasse, and appeared
to her self no more deformed their (...) was, yet more then she was ^nceited
of her self, broke it and (...) under foot: so spurn they against the glass
of the word, as if it made them more deformed then they are indeed. All these
under (...) are in the state of impenitechcie, and so in the state of
perishing, because they cannot, or they will not see themselves and know their
estate, that they might be brought to repentance.

Use 2.
2 This may persuade men, who would repent, that they may fly from and escape
the vengeance to come, to labor for this knowledge of their estate. The
Philosophers knowing that men are all together ignorant of themselves, used to
set this precept, K^s; thy self, in the beginning of their moral ^utions.
They are worth the in^s (...) that every Minister should (...) and every
Christian should learn to know himself, and his estate, in the things before
spoken of. And this must he do by looking into the law of God, whereby he may
see himself to be a most vile and filthy leper, defiled in nature, in soul
and body, in mind, will and affections, in thought, word and all his actions
with all manner of sin, so that he may cry out with the leper, I am unclean,
I am unclean. But if he will do it as he should, he must not only look to
the letter of the law, which expresses only capital sins, from which he
happily will clear himself and wash his hands, but he must seek into the
spiritual meaning of it, set down by Christ Mat. 5. and other the Prophets
and Apostles, whereby he shall see (...) his original sin, and his (...)
transgressions, his inward corrup^ (...) the filthy, unclean, and disley a^
motions of his mind, will and affection, and his outward, his vain, foolish,
and filthy talk, his leaud behavior, dishonorable to God and injurious ^
men, his sins of ignorance and wilful rebellions, hi^ (...) of youth (...)
riper years, h^ (...) ^ns, and (...) commissions, yea^ best (...) culpable
either quo^tem, or (...) finem, in respect of the fountain, that they
proceeded not from faith, or in respect of the end, that they were done more
for his own glory and gain, then for the glory of God, and good of his
brother: which when he shall once discern, the same law will show him the
black tail of sin, all the curses that are due unto it, and no less make
him perceive, that he is not able to free himself from the guilt or the
punishment of sin, from the contagion which follows it, or the curse that is
due unto it. By which he may be made to come trembling and with fear, and
accuse himself before the throne of God, and by a true renouncing of all his
sins, and a true turning from all his former wicked cour^ and carriage,
truly repent and be g^usly accepted of God.

(...) description of repentance the last thing is, that this turning is ever
loyned with true humiliation; which not essarily follows upon the former, for
as the error and false opinion of holiness and happiness, does make a (...)
pround, pro^ptuous and confi^ (...); so the knowledge of a man's ^hed and d^able
estate and sin^ condition, will abase him by humbling him. Now of this first in
general, then more particularly. Generally,

Repentance joined with true humiliation.
True repentance is ever joined with true humiliation; none can repent but he
is truly humbled by the sight of his own wretched and sinful estate, which
is manifest by the exhortations of the Prothets calling to repentance, as in
Joel: Joel 2.12.
Therefore also now the Lord says, turn you unto me with all your heart; and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. And again in Isaiah the
Lord complains that the people did not repent, Isai. 22.12.13.
And in that day when the Lord God of hosts did call unto weeping and mourning,
and to baldnes, and to girding with sackcloth, beholdioy and gladness, slaying
oxen, and killing sheep, eating flesh, and drinking wine, eating and drinking,
for to m^ we shall die; showing thereby the because they were not humbled,
therefore they did not repent.

Hence is that of Micha: Micha 6.8.
He bath showed thee, O man, what is good and what the Lord requires of thee;
Surely to do justly, and to love mercy, and to Humble thy self to walk with
thy G^ Hence is that exhortation of P^ 1. Pet. 5.6.
Humble your selves therefore vn^ might is hand of God, that he may (...) you
in due time. And S. James says; James 4.7.
Submit your selves to God. This also is proved by as many as repented, either
truly or temporarily, either the practice considered, or the parable; now the
practice may be feene in David, who being reproved by Nathan for murder and
adultery, 2. Sam. 12.
repented and humbled himself under the hand of God; so Ahab though he had no
sound and saving repentance, 1. King. 21.
yet his humiliation was answerable to his repentance. So did the Ninevites
Iona. 3.
humble themselves by fasting and sackcloth. The like may appear by the
parable in the Gospel, Luke 15.18.19.
where Christ sets out repentance under the state of the prodigal son, who
coming home to his father, humbles himself, in saying to his father that he
was not worthy to be called his son. So the Publican comes and humbles
himself and smote himself upon the breast, Luke 18.13.
and would not lift up his eyes to heaven: the (...) may he seen in Peter, in
Mary and others. By all which examples it is manifest, that wheresoever there
is repentance there is humiliation.

and this stands with reason. Reason 1.
1. Be^ true repentance rises from the sight and knowledge of a man's estate,
how wretched and sinful it is, which makes him hunble; for whereas the (...)
and false opinion of a man's holiness does puff him up with pride and makes
him confident and presumptuous; on the contrary, the true knowledge of a man's
estate, and of his sins will humble him: therefore this repentance coming
from the knowledge of a man's essate, must needs be joined with humiliation,
from which knowledge there arises a double fruit, which is, repentance, and
humiliation.

Reason. 2.
2. Because he that repents, receives grace from God and finds grace and
favor with him, which ^elie the humbled do, and not the proud, as Saint James
says: James 4.6.
God resists the proud, and gives grace to the humble.

The uses of this point follow after (...) manner: Use 1.
First, we may then pro^nce of many that they are without repentance, many even
without the temporary, and many without the true fauing repentance, because
they never came where humiliation gre^, not the bastard one, and much more, not
where the true and natural (...) miliation is to beg had, and (...) had it: For
they never had these seares and those cares, those pal^gs and gripes, which men
that have been humbled, have had; they never (...) to confess and acknowledge
their sins, and condemn themselves, but puffed up, as black^ers with wind,
so they with a windy and proud conceit of themselves, and their (...) estate,
like the Pha^isie; and to this they easily come, and so are kept from
humiliation, being blinded by (...) opinion and conce it of their (...) good
parts of nature, of their (...) an^gi^ by good leducation dock in^trat, of
their good works they have done to God, and to their ^ighbour, how many ways,
and (...) how great charges they have maintained learning, set forward
religion, served God and relieved the poor. These conceits so blind their
eyes and ouershadow all their senses, that they make and pronounce themselves
not sinful, but holy, just, and innocent. Another thing also that blinds
them, is a comparing of themselves with those who are more sinful, and in some
respect notoriously sinful: and then the opinion of their own holiness
which before was any thing doubtful, is now put out of all controversy, and
they exempted not only from the rank and rout of wicked men, but canonized
Saints in their own conceit. The picture of these is the Pharisie, who stood
and prayed thus with himself, Luke 18.11.
O God I thank thee that I am not as other men, extortioners, unjust,
adulterers, or even as this Publican; I fast twice in the week, I give tithe
of all that ever I do possess: where both these delusions are found in him;
whereby he was without humiliation, and so justification, and conse^uentlie
repentance. And this is the case of most men which are by these or the like
means pussed up with pride; for is not this the speech of many a man; I thank
God I am not so wicked as such a man, I am not an Adulterer, a drunkard, or a
whoremonger: I thank God I love the Church well, and I desire God to love me
as well, as I love the Church? But let these men consider what became of the
Pharisie, he went away not justified, because he was just in his own sight;
so all these men that with these things are thus lifted up with pride, though
they be thus justified in their own sight, yet they stand as condemned persons
before God; for he that judges not himself, God will judge.

Use 2.
2. This may further teach us how necessary this humiliation is, seeing there
can be no repentance without it, and therefore ought every one to labor
against the former delusions, that we be not deceived by them, and so kept in
a proud conceit of our selves and heuer attain, or enjoy repentance. Now these
delusions are overcome and abandoned thus: The first if they consider that all
their good works be they never so glorious and many, co^ing from a corrupt
foun^n^e, of an unrepentant and unbelieving heart are accounted sins before
God; for (...) says S. Paul, Romans 14.23.
What soever is not of faith is sin. Whereupon Augustine says, Infideluer
misereri, vitium est and peccatu^. August. contra Julian. Pelag. lib. 4.3.
To ^se compassion without faith is sin. Understand, that the sin rises not
from the act of compassion, but from the privation of faith, and so of other
things: Again, they must know, that their consciences will tell them, if they
put the question to it, that that they do, is not from any manner of love,
either of righteousness, or to God and man, but from self-love, pride,
vaineglorie, etc. by which they must needs be corrupted, and so no reason they
should be proud of them: yea, as Gregory says, Rationi consentaneum est, vt
metuas bonis operibus, quam in ijs glorieris. Gregor. moral. lib. 9. 11.
There is more reason they should fear for their good works, then glory in
them. But the other delusion may thus be a^oided: If they would consider that
other men's sins will condemn themselves, not justify them. And that in
sinfu^nes they are as far beyond others, yea and happily much further; then
they are short of them: therefore if the one give them cause of pride, the
other may justly give them cause of humiliation: for as it is in temporal
things, a man that is rich comes into the country, among his poor
neighbors, he is there a great man, and all must be at his command; but if
he come unto the kings court, he is no body in comparison of those that are
there; so in spiritual things, thou being amongst wicked men, and seeing them,
thou beginnest to justify thy self and sais^, I am not an ^surer; nor an
oppressor, nor a drunkard, etc^ but on the contrary, compare thy self with
others, as with Peter, with Paul, etc. and thou shall see how fa^re thou come
short of them; and if the one make thee proud; let the other make thee humble;
by which means thou may come to be humbled before God, and having
humiliation thou may have true repentance, and so be in the state of
salvation, for whilst thou art proud thou art void of repentance or of saving
grace, and so out of the state of salvation. Yet let me note condemn every one
that has pride in him, for who can say he is free? but him that does not
condemn pride in himself; for he that condemns this sin in himself, as
he does other sins, is not guilty of it: but he that will stand to justify
his prido, this man is void o^ humiliation, and being void of humiliation is
void of repentance, and so out of the state of soluation.

But now particularly to proc^ed further in this humiliation. It is double,
inward and outward. First of the inward and of the soul.

Humiliation double, inward and outward. 1. Jnward humiliation.
Inward humiliation is in the soul and affections, and is this; when a man is
ca^ down and his loftines abased, in shame, sorrow, and fear, at the sight of
his wretched, wicked, and sinful estate. These three then are in true
humiliation; the first respects sin only; the second, sin and present
punishment; the third; punishment to comes Shame arises from the sight and
sense of a man's own filthy nakedness, as the Scriptures calls it, that is, of
his sin, and the defi^ing, which it pollutes a man withal. Sorrow is grief
conc^iued either of sin or punishment, or both; If for sin only because it
is sin, not respecting the punishment, but making a man of this mind that if
there were neither hell, nor accuser, nor Judge, yet he would be humbled and
brought on his knees for his sins, because he has offence^ solouing and so
gracious a father, and patient God, then is it godly sorrow, but if only for
the punishment or ^utses due to them, and now present and upon them, it is but
worldly sorrow. If both these concur in a man, it is, the state of a true
repentant; for both may be, and are, in respect he consists of flesh and
spirit, (...) old and new man, the one some owing for the sin, the other for the
punishment. Fear is a grievous sense and apprehension of some ^ill to come,
for (...) is ever joined with the expectation of the thing feared: Now that
these three are joined with repentance is manifest thus: As first for shame,
Ephraim says thus of her self: Ierem. 31.19.
After that I converted I repented, and after that I was instructed I swore
upon my thigh: I was ashamed, yea even confounded because I did bear the
reproach of my youth: So the Lord by his Prophet calls the people of the Jews
to the remembrance of their sins and to be ashamed: Isai. 46.8.
Remember this and be ashamed. And the Apossle Paul says, Romans 6.21.
What fruit had ye then in those things whereof ye are now ashamed? Secondly,
for sorrow, and for godly sorrow, (...) Paul speaks thus: 2. Cor. 7.10
Godly sorrow causes repentance unto salvation not to be repented of: Such as
David had, as is manifest by those two Psalms 32. and 51. Psalm. 32. and 51.
Such also had Peter, Now worldly sorrow was such as Judas and Achab had.
Thirdly for (...): It was in the Jews, who repented at the preaching of Peter
and Acts 2.37.
were pricked in their hearts and said, Men and brethren, what shall we do to
be saved? The like we may see in the Iayler, who came trembling to Paul and
Silas and fell down before them and said: Act. 16.29.
Sirs, what must I do to be saved? Now these several instances I give, not as
if one of these only were in them, and that humiliation is in one alone, but
because in some, one of these three is more perspicuous, in some, another more
manifest.

Now the reasons proouing that the repentant must have those, and has them, if
so be he truly repent, are these:

Reason 1.
1 Because when he was a carnal man, being in a senseless security, he
neither knew nor considered what sin was, neither saw he the deformity of it.
That as Adam saw not his nakedness in the state of innocence, so not he in the
state of fecuritie: but being entered into the state of repentance, his eyes are
opened, and he conceiueth of sin as it is indeed: and then judges he
himself, in regard of it, the most abject man of all, unworthy of their
company or: to come in their sight. He is like to a man, that while he was in
the dark, had his face and his ruff, and garments mar^ello uslie bespotted
and besmired, of which he was not ashamed: but coming to the light, and
seeing them, he blusheth and is ashamed, and accounts himself not fit for men's
company: for now his eyes are altogether upon his spots, or the rents of his
garments, and such like. So is it with this repentant; for now his eyes are
fully bent on his own sins, he has fresh remembrance of them and of all
the circumstances, aggravating the heinousness of them, so that none can be so
feuere a Judge of him, as himself. And hence it is that many men live a long
time; some 20. some 30. some 40. or 50. years, and take themselves to be very
honest men; but when once they ^e out of their security and are made to see
their estate, they are ashamed of themselves, and think none more deformed and
vile then they: so that thus it appears that shame and true repentance go
together.

Reason 2.
2. Because else he will never change and forsake his sin, at least as he
ought, that is not ashamed of it, nor sorrowful for it: whereas if he be
ashamed and sorrowful, he will put it away with indignation, even as the
Jews were commanded Isai. 30.22.
to cast away the couerings os silver and the rich ornaments of their Images of
gold as a menstruous cloth, saying unto it, Get thee hence; and as Ammon did
Tamer, 2. Sam. 13.15.
whose hatred was greater then his love wherewith he had loved her, and said
unto her, Get thee hence.

Reason 3.
3 Because if he have not fear, his change will not be constant, seeing how
willing soever the spirit is, yet the flesh is weak, and not so weak as
wilful, which being but a servant and like to an unchaste wife, must be subdued
by the fear of the rod, and kept from folly for fear of after-claps.

We see the doctrine, we must now consider what use we are to make of it. Use 1.
1. Then is this a hard saying for many: for it excludes them out of the
number of repentants, when hardly any of these three, is to be found in them,
whereas all must be, or else they cannot be truly penitent; For many men may
we vpbraid, as the Prophet does the people of God, saying unto them, Ier. 3.3.
Thou have a whores forhead, thou would not be ashamed. Such defending,
excusing, and lessening of sin is practiced among me^. And if they happen to be
ashamed of some notorious sins, condemned of al, yet never of ordinary sins,
which are customable with themselves, or daily seen amongst men. Or if
sometimes before men, because their presence is more sensible, yet not in
respect of God and his Angels, who do more abhor sin, and the filthiness of
it, than any man can, because they are more holle and pure. Besides, sorrow
they have none; if any, it is but as some men laugh from the teeth outward; if
it come to any bitterness of the heart, then is it but worldly sorrow, soon
cured by worldly means, and never godly sorrow, or sorrow according to God for
the sin: which appears, because they cannot endure to have that sore rubbed
on, or to have that scarre showed unto them: And therefore they loath the pure
and plain preaching of the law, as the Elephant does the clear waters, being
privy of his deformities in his face. And as much do they abhor the
preaching of judgment, because they would not be wakened and feared. And
therefore when the ministers by the preaching of the word come near unto their
consciences, and lay open their sins, they then cry out that they drive
them to despair, when it is not they, but their own sins; neither comes it
from the word, but from their corruptions. So that these men while they cannot
endure the law, by which they may be made fee their sins and sorrow for them,
they are men in a miserable case, withunto humilation, and so impenitent, and
consequently in thestate of damnation.

Use 2.
Moreover, this may teach us what to judge of these men, whom we see smitten
with sorrow and fear, humbled under the hand of God, having in them the sting
of conscience or the compunction of heart, which they had at the preaching of
Peter, Acts 2.37.
crying, Men and brethren what shall we do to be sa^ed? that we must not
judge them as (...) men do, who have no fense of these things, as men subject
to foolish and me ancholilee passions, but rather bothinke them not far from
repentance, if they have it not alreache. We cannot happily judge infalliblie,
because we cannot discern of the it sorrow and fear, the cause being hid,
(...) so may be deceived when we think it is godly sorrow, and is not. But if
we can find no reason to the contrary to judge otherwise, then know that by
this means God is beginning to work repentance in them, and to make them new
men. And howsoever it may seem strange to those who have had no experience
thereof; yet how should it be otherwise but that mortal and weak man, at the
sight of his own sins, and the apprehension of the wrath of God due unto
them, I say, how should it be, but he must needs be troubled with sorrow and
fear? seeing our Savior Christ who was a man without sin, and standing but
in our stead and apprehending and feeling the wrath of God but for our sins,
was so troubled and grieved, that he sweat water and blood, and cried out, My
God, ^y God, why have thou forsaken me? If he, I say, was thus dish essed, then
think it not strange that weak mortal man, when he sees his sine and feel
hithe wrath of God due unto them, should be smitten with sorrow and fear. And
know it is not any man's part to triumph other them, as commonly men do, and
make a mock of them; which is the practice not only of profane men but of
those that profess civil honesty, telling us apparently that they never felt
any such thing, for if they had they would lay to their helping hand to comfort
them.

Use 3.
Lastly, this may teach every man to labor for this humiliation, even this
which is inward: If it be but such sorrow and grief as the wicked may have,
and so may be without true repentance, yet it is a means to let in the other:
but if it be true sorrow, sorrow according to God, it is as certain a
companion of true repentance, as the heat is with the light in the Sun;
being as needful to salvation, as it is often needful for the preservation of
the bodily life, that the patient be by detraction of blood brought to a
swound, and even to deaths door; so it is needful, (and much more) that this
repentant, for the procuring of this spiritual life of the soul, be by
sorrow and fear cast down, even to the gates of hell, as being forlorn and
in a most wretched estate. Example hereof we have in Ezra, who was so far
humbled for the sins of the people that he said unto God: Ezra 9.6.
I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God, for our
iniquities are increased over our heads, and our trespass is grown up unto the
heaven: so ought every man when he comes before God, to labor to be ashamed
and confounded in himself for his own sins, and think that it belongs unto
him whatsoever he is, not only to be ashamed when he is in the sight of the
world and in the view of men, but when he is in his secret chamber or closet,
when none but God can be an eie-witnes thereof: thus were Adam and Eve ashamed
of themselves when there was not a man nor a woman more in the world to look
upon them, yet were they ashamed of their own nakedness when they beheld the
same. And to this shame must he join sorrow: sorrow for sin and for the
punishment that belongs unto it. But if he would have that which God requires
and will accept, he must labor for that sorrow which the Gospel commends,
which proceeds from the consideration of the goodness of God, that is, because
he has offended so good and so grations a God.

Some may say, what measure of sorrow do you require every man to have?

Every man's sorrow should be answerable to his sins, all men's sorrows are
not alike, neither is it necessary; indeed that every man should have sorrow,
that is necessary, but there is a difference to be found among men, arising
thus: Sometime from the greatness and smalnes of their sins: for as a burden,
the heavier it is the more it presses down; so the sins of men the greater
they are the heavier they are, and the more they humble men and press them
down with sorrow, so that according to a man's sins so is his sorrow. The
difference of the sin makes dissimilitude in sorrow: some men's sins are like
botches that are soon cured with the pricking of a needle, others are like
wounds or sores that will not be cured without the lancing of a rasor; so some
men's sins are cured with a little sorrow, others must have more. In all, the
rule of Chrysostom is general: Secundum peccatorum proportionem sit tibi
lachryma. Si magnus est lapsus tuus, mayor sit lachrymarum tuarum correns. Hom.
22. ad pop. Antioch.
According to the proportion of thy sins so should thy tears be. If thy
sin be great, greater must be the streams of thy tears. Sometimes also
there is a difference according to the present afflictions and judgments that
are upon men, either when their afflictions are greater and their conscience
agrees with them, as the cause and effect, for then Prou. 18.14.
a wounded spirit who can bear? or else they are less, and their conscience
not so checking or accusing them, and then the spirit of a man will bear his
infirmities, and so is his sorrow the less. Sometime there is a difference,
because some men the Lord deferres longer before he shows them grace and
favor, oftentimes to prove their patience, or to make them pray more
earnestly, which makes their sorrow the greater; and another man calls, and
God shows him grace and favor presently, that he is scarce known to go by
the way of sorrow to repentance. So we read of Lydia, Act. 16.
for we read nothing of her sorrow, but of her conversion. Lastly, there is a
difference, because some men have often bin in the school of repentance, and
have been often humbled, others have never before been humbled. Now as to him
that has bin often under the Physicians hand, and is daily taking some of his
receipts, more gentle medicines are sufficient, when as he that never was, must
have sharper potions: so must it be with these. From these or some such like
causes there arises a difference in men's sorrows: but howsoever, of every man
there is required sorrow for his sins, or else no remission of sins: but
for the quantity of it (for me) he must be his own Physician, seeing he, and
not we know the greatness of his sins. For even in some diseases Physicians
who prescribe the medicine, leave the quantity to be taken at the patients
discretion. Then let every man examine himself in this case, and if he have
found that he never passed by this gate of sorrow and humiliation, he can never
come to the throne of grace. Has any man lived 20. 30. 40. or 50. years, and
yet can never say that he was sorry or ashamed before God for his sins? he is
doubtless in the state of impenitencie, and has not received the remission of
his sins, but all his sins from his cradle unto this day, are written
before God in a pillar of marble, with a pen of iron never to be blotted out,
until he have obtained this. Then let him labor to get a heart and eyes to
see his sins, and to apply to himself the curse of the law and the wrath of
God, to make him seek to God in humility, that he may obtain his mercy; for
until he be come to this condition, he deceives his own heart, if he think
he have obtained mercy; but being thus humbled, and having shame, sorrow, and
fear, he is in the state to find mercy, comfort, and glory.

Outward humiliation is double, verbal, and real.
Having seen the inward humiliation, we must proceed to the outward, which is
also double, verbal, and real. That which is in word is called confession.
The real belongs to the whole life and all the actions of it. But first I must
show that there ought to be an outward humiliation.

Men ought outwardly to humble themselves.
He that repents, must not only have an inward, but an outward humiliation,
not in soul, but in body, and other carriage of his life, manifested by that
of Joel: Joel 2.12.
Therefore now also says the Lord, turn you unto me with all your heart, and
with fasting, and with weeping, and with mourning. Also by that of Isaiah:
Isaiah 22.12.
And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call unto weeping, and mourning, and
to baldnes, and to girding with sackcloth. Examples hereof are many, 2. Sam.
12. 2. Sam. 24.
David often repenting, humbled himself outwardly: so Ahab that had but a
temporary repentance, yet he had an outward humiliation: so the people of
Niniuie, what outward humiliation had they? The Apostle Peter and Mary
Magdalon; all of them have been humbled, as in soul, so in body, which
manifest, that wheresoever there is true repentance, there is also the outward
humiliation.

And this has reason to confirm it; Reason 1.
1. because the Lord will be served, both by the soul and the body, seeing he
has made both, and redeemed both; for, 1. Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought for a price, therefore glorify God in your body, and in your
spirit, for they are Gods. Now repentance being a part of Gods service, and a
means to glorify him, must as well be performed in body as soul.

Reason 2.
2. Because as unity and agreement is pleasant and acceptable unto him betwixt
man and man, so much more would it please him, that a man agree with himself.
Hence in the law was forbidden, sowing diverse seeds in the same field, making
garments of half linen and half woollen, mourning in a festival time, as
Nehemiah Nehem. 8.9.
with the Priests and Levites that instructed the people, said unto them, This
day is holy unto the Lord your God, mourn not, neither weep. How indecent and
unacceptable then would this disagreement be betwixt the soul and the body,
that when the one weepeth, the other should laugh, when the soul is humbled
with sorrow and fear, the body should be puffed up and swell in joy and
pleasure?

Reason 3.
3. Because it will further his repentance, namely, for the mortification of
the flesh, and the corrupt lusts of it, and bringing it into obedience to the
spirit, for it requires abstinence from pleasure and abundance of diet,
whatsoever is above necessity, yea often the abating of that. That as horses,
the more plentifully they are fed, the more fierce and intractable they are,
when as by withdrawing their prouender, they are made subject to their rider;
such is the flesh, by abundance made to rebel. And as a servant that has too
much laid upon him more than he can undergo, reprocheth and reuileth his
master: so the belly too full, corrupts the mind and understanding, as
Chrysostom speaks; Hom. 45. in Matthew.
but when it is abated of that, it is brought into subjection of the spirit and
soul.

Objection.
Here may some object, that our Savior Christ wills men when they fast,
Matthew. 6.16.
not to look sower as the hypocrites, for they dissigure their faces that they
might seem unto men to fast; Also that of the Prophet Joel, Joel 2.13.
Rent your hearts and not your garments, and turn unto the Lord your God. And
that of David, Psalm. 51.17.
The sacrifices of God are a contrite spirit. By which places it seems that
the Lord requires the inward humiliation, and not the outward.

Answer.
I answer, the inward is the principal which God requires, but he will also
have the other, and in requiring of this more principally, he reiects not
that. The inward is more in request with God, as the outward with man, in their
services. Yet as man would have both, so God will; though principally he
require the inward; and if he seem to reject the outward, the cause is, for
that he finds it severed from the other, and done in hypocrisy, which he
abhors as much, as he did a dead carrion or carcass, brought to him for a
sacrifice under the law, when he required living sacrifices; such are these
when the soul is not humbled with the body. Yet in some cases the outward may
be omitted, as when by using it men shall incur the suspicion of hypocrisy,
and a desire of vaineglory, in which respect Christ our Savior forbid it. But
rather the reproof is, because private things are done publicly, and such as
should be betwixt God and himself, are acted in the view of the world.

Now for the use of this: Use 1.
upon this we may justly fear, that many men are far from humiliation, and
so from repentance: from inward, because they so much detest the outward; a
thing they neither will nor do practice: for we may well fear that they who
do not the less and the easier, will not do the greater, nor practice the
harder. Now it is a far less and easier thing to practice humiliation in the
body then in the soul, in the members then in the heart, as it is easier to
bend a bough, then the body of a tree, specially then the root. And besides,
men be naturally hypocrites, and more apt to perform the outward humiliation;
which being not found, gives us fuspition that the inward is far from them.

Use 2.
2 To persuade men to labor for this, that their outward humiliation may be
correspondent to the inward, as we find the apparel of men is agreeable to
their coditions and course of life. And therefore this inward humble repentant
must put on a black mourning weed, that as he is in soul and conscience cast
down by the sight of his sin, and sense of the wrath of God; so he may behave
himself accordingly, and express his inward humiliation in all his words,
deeds, and in the whole course of his life: which he ought to labor for, as
for the reasons before, so because it will be very profitable for him in
respect of the inward; for the confirming and increasing of it. For as it is in
all other parts of holiness, the more they are practiced by the body in life
and action, the more they are confirmed and increased inwardly in the soul: so
the more that a man gives himself to the use of all outward exercises of
humiliation before men, the more does he humble himself in the sight of God.
Therefore labor for this, that thou may increase thy true humiliation to thy
comfort. All this while I speak of particular and ordinary outward
humiliation and repentance, which is not necessarily required that it should be
done publicly. It is a thing that has been observed in many, that they
break forth into tears and sighings in the congregation; I simply condemn
it not, I would judge charitablie of it: but yet if I may advise them, I think
it fit they abstain from such outward things in public place, and do it
betwixt God and themselves, rather when they are alone, knowing not what
construction others may make of it. Sighs may come suddenly upon a man, but to
do as some do, to sit in the face of the preacher one whole hour together
s^ghing and sobbing, and their eyes sh^l of tears, will breed some
suspicions, as if they did it to be seen of men. Let particular mourning then
be in the secret chamber betwixt God and thy self; but when the whole
congregation has cause of mourning, and does sanctify an assembly for that
end, it may well be done, and ought to be performed of particular men in the
public place, neither can it be justly censured in an evil sense.

Verbal humiliation is confession.
Now to the particulars of this humiliation, and first of that which is in
word, which is called Confession.

Confession.
Confession of sins is a part of humiliation, and ever joined with true
repentance, they can not be truly humbled and repent, who confess not their
sins unto God. And they who repent, must and do confess. Hence is that
saying of Solomon: Prou. 28.13.
He that hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and
forsakes them, shall have mercy. Thus David confesses his sins unto God,
and says: Against Psalm. 51.4, 5.
thee, against thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight: Behold I
was borne in sin, and in iniquity has my mother conceiuedme. So the same
David, 2. Sam. 24.10.
after he had sinned by numbering the people, and was touched in heart for it,
he confessed unto the Lord that he had sinned exceedingly in that he had
done: so Nehemiah bewailing the captivity of Jerusalem, said, Nehem. 1.7.
We have grieuouslie sinned against thee, and have not kept thy commandments,
nor the slatures, nor the judgments which thou comm^odest thy servant Moses.
So Danel confessed and said, Dan. 9.5.
We have sinned, and have committed iniquity, and have done wickedly, yea we
have rebelled and departed from thy precepts, and from thy indecent.

Reason 1.
Now the reason of this truth is, first, because confession is a part of
humiliation, For every man is charie of his own credit and estimation, and
cannot endure, from any other to hear any thing that may impair the same: but
it is utterly against his own stomach, to utter any thing any way tending to
his own disgrace, to cast mire in his own face. Hence he covers his faults
by all means possible; but if he cannot stay that, he will be sure to keep
his own counsel. So that whenever a man is brought willingly and plainly
to confess his sins, it is a great argument and proof of his humiliation.

Reason 2.
2. Because there is no repentance without this, for he will never forsake and
turn from his sins, who will not confess then: for as it is with the body,
he that will not confess to the Physician the meat where of he surfeited, it
is apparent he never means to forsake that meat; so he that will not
confess his sins and acknowledge that to be the cause of his hurt, will
never come to forsake them.

Reason 3.
3. Because there will be no pardon else, for God couers, when men vn^uer and
acknowledge, he iustifies when men condemn, he pardons when men accuse
themselves, And if any man plead non est of act^m, and deny his deed and his
debt there is no reason he should have the (...) of grace.

Q. To whom must this confession be made? Ans. To God But is the^ no confession
at al to be made (...) Yes there is ^ciuill confession, and an Enclesiasticall
confession. Civil confession is when a malefactor confesses to the Judge, a
servant to his master, or a child to his father. So Achan confessed to Iosuah,
Gehazi confessed to his master. But there is besides another civil confession,
when one man confesses unto another an offense committed against him, which is
also lawful, and taught by the Apostle S. James when he says, James 5.16.
Acknowleege your faults one to another: which is not meant of a sacramental
confession, as the Papists would have it, witness even their own Cardinal
Caietan, who in his Commentary upon that place observes, that it cannot be
understood of the sacrament of Confession, because the Apostle does not say,
acknowledge your faults to the Priest, but one to another: therefore the
meaning of the Apostle is, that when a man lies sick, to the intent that they
come to visit him, may the more carnestlie pray for him, there should pass a
mutual confession of the offenses committed one against another.

The Ecclesiastical confession is, when a man has committed some public
offense, as adultery, or perjury, etc. he is censured by the Church to stand
in an appointed place in the public assembly, and in a public manner to make
confession of his fault, and to ^estifie his repentance, that the congregation
may be satisfied, and he received into their favor and love again.

Q. But is there none other particular confession? Ans. There is no other of
any absolute necessity, but by consequence it may be necessary, that is, when
a man is distracted in his mind and is discomforted, and can find no comfort
in himself, nor is able to apply unto himself the comforts of God, he is bound
to confess his grief to some who is able to apply unto him the promises of
the Gospel, for the delaying of his spiritual malady, as much as a man that is
bodily sick and cannot cure himself, is bound to send for a Physician, and
show him his grief, that he may help to cure him. But so, as he is not bound
to any one man, or that he must needs be a Preacher or a Minister, so he make
choice of an able man, well experienced, trusty and secret: for often times in
the matter of conscience, or distraction of mind, a private man may give more
comfort then many a good Preacher. As in the body, in many diseases an
experienced man who has been subject to, and cured of them, can better tell
how to help and cure another, then a learned Physician, who is without that
homebred experience: so many a private man, by his own experience of the
terrors of his conscience, and the gracious comforts he found from God in due
time, can better tell how to administer a word of comfort, and shall more fitly
do it, then many a learned. Minister, who never had the like terrors, and so
not the like experience. As the Apostle speaks generally: 1. Cor. 1.4.
God has comforted us in all our tribulation, that we may be able to comfort
them which are in any tribulation, by the comfort wherewith we our selves are
comforted of God. And this confession we speak of is a necessary thing, for
all such as be in the condition mentioned, whether they be learned, or
ignorant, whether of the Laity, or of the Clergy, even to one as well as to
another. For oftentimes it may fall to a Minister to have this trouble of
conscience, and distraction of mind, so that he shall not be able to administer
comfort to himself. Basil has such a saying, That a Physician (be he never
so skillful or expert) yet being fallen into some disease, may by reason of the
passion or extremity of his sickness, which may breed and bring oblivion of his
Art, be often not able to help himself, but be forced to seek help of
another: so a Minister may be in that condition, that he may be driven to seek
help and comfort of another man, and so had need to confess as well as
another.

But some will demand what I think of the confession of Popery, which is
pressed upon men to be made of al sins, and that to a Priest upon pain of
damnation.

Answer.
I think of it as an excellent policy, and full of humane wisdom, and as the
greatest means for the upholding of Popery, that the world affoordeth, except
the Inquisition: for by this means they know the hearts, affections and
dispositions of men, by which they can tell how to provide for themselves,
either for the greater increasing of themselves, or for the preventing of a
mischief coming upon them: but for the thing it self, there is no tittle in
the Scripture to prove it: for that in the Epistle of James James 5.16.
they are at a jar among themselves about the meaning of it. It is true that
Bellarmine does press it to this purpose: but the words are so pregnant for a
brotherlike and mutual confession of one man to another, for the forgiving of
private injuries, that both Cardinal Caietane, and Scotus confessed the same.
Bellarm. de poenit. lib. 3. cap. 3. Caiestan. in Iam. 5.16. Scotus in 4.
sentent. did. 17. quaest. 1.
And for the thing it self; it was a custom in the Church sometimes; but it
happened that there was a noble Matron dishonored by a Deacon in the Church of
Constantinople, Zozomenus.
which thing highly displeased the people. Whereupon Nectarius Bishop then and
there by the consent of the Bishops of that time and the rest, did abolish it
out of the Church: and if it were abolished for that one fact, how much more
should it be abolished for so many of the like committed in popery, which is
the very nurcerie of all uncleanness? And therefore to conclude, as Augustine
said, Quid mibi ergo est cum hominibus, vt audiant confessiones meas, quasi
ipsi sana^ uri sunt omnes languores meos? Curiesum genus ad cognoscenda^ vitam
alienam, desidiosum ad corrigendam suam. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 3.
What have I to do with men, that I should make confession to them, as if they
could heal all my sores? It is a curious kind of people, to search into other
men's lives, but most slothful to reform and correct their own. Could ever
any man have prophesied more truly of the Priest of popery? being such a
curious kind of people, whose labor is to know other men's states and sins,
but are careless to know their own, and most sluggish and negligent to reform
their own.

These things thus explained, we must now come to the use. Use 1.
First, it may well be thought that many men are sarre from repentance, seeing
they are far from this duty and part of humiliation, I mean confession. It
may be generally, that they are sinners as other men, they will not stand with
you to confess, but not in particulars; which comes partly out of the love
of themselves, and partly out of the love of their sins. Therefore Job says,
Job 31.33.
I have not hid my sins as Adam, concealing mine iniquity in my bosom: The
latter part Tremelius reads: Abdendo ex dilectione mei iniquitatem meam.
hiding my iniquity out of my self love. As if he should say, self love is
the principal thing why men smother their sins, and do not confess them.
But in most men there is a more impossibility unto this duty, because they
know good and evil, sin and righteousness no further, then they have by that
light and knowledge which remains in them, since the creation, nay in many of
them that is darkened by custom and other corruption: but as for the law of
God, where they should indeed see themselves, they are altogether ignorant, and
will not look into it, neither of themselves take the pains, so they will not
endure the reproves of their Ministers, nor be showed their sins, but are
like many prodigal wasters, who run so far in books, that they cannot abide
to have a bill of accounts brought them; and like a timorous and foolish
patient, which finding his wound to be very deep, would not endure the
Surgeon: whereon what ensues but a festering of the part, and a dangering
of the whole body? So to these damnation ensues, because they cannot repent,
seeing they cannot confess. If any think this is hard, and false that a man
should be condemned for this, seeing David says, Psalm. 19.12.
Who can understand his faults; I answer, that for him that does his best
ondeuour to know his sins, and keeps a day book for his spiritual estate,
as for his worldly, if he know not many sins and never confess them, yet
has a particular repentance and confession of his known sins, and would no
less repent and confess the other, if he might come to the knowledge of them;
from him God will accept a general confession and repentance for such as be
not known. As David in the same place: Cleanse me from fecret faults. But for
others who are wilfully, and more then negligently ignorant of their estate and
sins, they shall not be accepted, by a general repentance, because they
never repent truly of known sins, for if they did, then would they repent
them of that ignorance, and seek to reform it.

Use 2.
The second use does teach men to practice this duty, to go to God and to
confess to him, and against themselves their own sins; this is the way to
pardon, so that howsoever the proverb is, Confess and be hauged, yet without
this there is no repentance; and here it is true, Confess and be saved.
Therefore should they not let shame or any thing else keep them from this
duty, but shame themselves, seeing they may say of themselves as Augustine of
himself: August. Conses. lib. 4. cap. 16. Non erubui prositeri hominibus
blaspbemias me as, and latrare aduersus ^te.
I was not ashamed to profess my blasphemies before men, and my barking
against thee. And so now they should not be ashamed to shame themselves before
God by consossing and accusing themselves. And in this duty this repentant must
know, that there is required of him that he be an examiner, an informer, and
a Judge. First, an examiner, he must examine himself, and search his ways,
without which there can be no knowledge of himself and his own wretched
estate. Thus they holy Ghost by Jeremy says, Lamen. 3.40.
Let us search and try our ways and turn again to the Lord: No returning
but after a search, which every one knows that ever did repent. Likewise this
is that the Prophet Zephanie has: Zeph. 2.1.
Gather your selves, even gather you O nation not worthy to be beloved; where
a word is used which signifies to search narrowly, as a man would do that
searches for gold in a mine of earth, where much earth is, and but a very
little gold oar: noting that it is not enough to find out gross and palpable
sins, but even those which are accounted less, and to epsy secret faults
and privy corruptions. And in this search he that would do it as he ought,
must first find out two things which the world dreams not of. The first, that
the guiltines of Adams sin is his sin, in eating the forbidden fruit, and
that he stands to answer for it before God because he was in his loins: As
Saint Paul says, Romans 5.12.
That as by one man sin entered into the world, and death went over all meant,
forasmuch as all men have sinned.

2 That in every man by nature are the seeds of all sin, even in the best
natured man: for what is else original sin, but a want, not of sin, but of
all good inclination, and want of all goodness, and a deprivation and pronenesse
not to some but to all evils, and not the pronenesse, but the seed and spaune
of all, even of the sin against the Holy Ghost? And that even the best and
most regenerate men will tell us, that they find in their natures, an
inclination to the most foullest sins in the world, if shame, fear, or the
grace of God did not restrain them; who know well enough what ado they have
with their corrupt natures, to keep them within the compass of obedience.
That so with Augustine, they account, Omnia peccata sic habenda sunt tanquam
dimittuntur, a quibus deus custediat, ne committantur. August.
All those sinner, from which Godkept them, that they did not commit, as if he
had pardoned them to them. And when they see the foul sins of others, they
think that these would have been their sins also if Gods grace had not
prevented them. And these when a man has found by search, then must he look
to his sins committed indeed and whereinto he is sallen. And in this search
it is not enough that he find out works of his hands, and words of his mouth,
but the thoughts and imaginations of his heart. Seeing repentance must be, the
change of the whole man, of the inward as well as the outward. And if these,
then the least of a man's life. And this is not to be found out by consulting
with Satan, his own flesh, and the world, who are all deceitful counselors,
and helpers, and will tell a man all is well. But he must behold himself in
the law, which is the true glass and flatters none, which is the perfect rule
and will show every fault, and all things which are covered. And by that time
he has made this search, he will have provided enough to play the part of an
informer by, having matter enough to draw up a bill againft himself, and an
indictment: which he must do, accusing himself before God, by making a
simple, plain, and full confession, al excuses, pretenses, and shifts being
laid aside, without either concealing any sin (that he can come to the
knowledge of by all his search) though it be never so great and heinous, or
omitting the circumstances, whereby the hainousnes of it may be aggrauated, as
time, place, and manner of knowledge, or presumption, or obstinat malice. As
David confesses of himself, Psalm. 51.3,4,5
I know mine iniquities and my sin is ever before me. Against thee, against
thee only have I sinned and done evil in thy sight, that thou may be inst
when thou speak, and pure when thou judge. Behold I was borne in sin,
and in iniquity has my mother conceived me. The same may we learn by the
example of Ezra, who said: Ezra 9.6.
O my God I am confounded and ashamed to lift up mine eyes unto thee my God,
for our iniquities are increased over our head, and our trespass is grown up
unto the heaven. And by this time shall he have just cause to ascend from the
bar to the bench, and there play the part of a Judge against himself to give
sentence of himself, condemning himself, not to imprisonment, or to the
galleys or to any such slavery, but to hell, death, and damnation: not as the
prodigal son only, who said Luke 15.18,19.
I will rise and go to my father and say unto him, father, I have sinned
against heaven and before thee, and am no more worthy to be called thy son,
make me as one of thy hired servants; Nor as the Publican: Luke 18.13.
who standing afar off would not so much as lift up his eyes to heaven, but
smote his breast saying, O God be merciful to me a sinner: But further with
Daniel to say, Daniel 9.7.
O Lord, righteousness belongs unto thee, and to us open shame, as appears
this day: yea and that to him belongs nothing, but a portion with the damned
angels in the burning lake: and by this means he shall have true humiliation,
and be partaker of true repentance, and so have pardon, as S. John says, 1.
Ioh. 1.9.
If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful, and just, to forgive us our
sins. Would thou have pardon for thy sins? come then, and confess them
unto God, who is just and will forgive them all. And as the Apostle says, 1.
Cor. 11.
Judge your selves, and you shall not be judged of the Lord: He that will not
judge himself, God will judge. Would thou avoid the accusation of Satan,
and censure of God, then accuse, and condemn thy self before him, and he will
not condemn thee. As many as are careless in this, and remain in the
ignorance of their own sins, and will not search them out, nor accuse
themselves before God, they may know, that one day they shall be searched,
accused, and condemned, because they would not do it themselves. We are (says
Isidore) Isidore.
Gods bailiffes, and must give an exact account of our bailwicke. Therefore we
ought to keep a book of accounts. This book is our conscience. In this must
be written all our sins both small and great. This ought every man to know
particularly, that being thoroughly informed of his own state he may be able
to judge, accuse and condemn himself, and that even now while it is the day
of acceptance and salvation; else afterward, will he, nill he, this book of
his conscience shall be laid open, and all his sins made manifest, when
there shall be no time for confession, no tine for remission, but only for
confusion and condemnation. You oftentimes look upon the books of your
worldly accounts, you keep them diligently to know your states, and see your
debts, that you may in due time discharge and take order for them, and avoid
the danger to come. Do I condemn you in this? nay rather I approve it; but let
me say this to you; If you be not careful of your accounts spiritual, and to
keep the book of your conscience, to look to your debtes here also, and seek
the discharge of them, both the danger, you think not of now, shall come upon
you, and these books of your earthly accounts, and this care in keeping of
them, shall rise up in judgment against you and condemn you. Folly were it
for me to persuade men before a temporal Judge to confess their offenses,
Seeing there (as Chrysostom says) Chrysostom. hom. 20. in Genes.
if any do confess before he be accused, he pulls sentence and condemnation
upon his own head. But such is the goodness and clemency of our merciful God
and Physician of our souls, that if we prevent our adversary, I mean the
devil, (who shall in that day stand face to face to accuse us) in this present
life before we come to Gods judgment seat, confessing our sins, being our
own accusers, we shall be numbered among stilust men, much more be delivered
from our sins. And as he says in another place: Chrysostom. ser. de poenit.
confess.
Why should we be ashamed to confess our sins that he may pardon them? does
God therefore command them to be confessed, that after the manner of men he
might punish us? he does it not to punish us, but that he might pardon us. Then
here is life and death set before you, salvation and destruction, put forth
your hand and take whether you will. But if there be any love to your fowls,
if any desire of salvation, on, if any fear of condemnation both of bodies and
souls, then lay hold of this first part of humiliation, confess and
acknowledge your sins, and judge your selves, yt you be not judged of the Lord.
And thus much of outward humiliation, in word, which is confession.

Now secondly outward humiliation, or real humiliation, consists, first, in
mourning, and tearea. Secondly, in the abstaining from the use of all outward
and earthly pleasures which cherish the body, and transport the mind out of it
self, as gay apparel, pleasant company, liberal diet, etc. Thirdly, in
giving satisfaction or restitution.

Real humiliation, in mourning, abstinence, and restitution.
Real humiliation then consisting in tears, abstinence, and restitution, is
joined with repentance. They who repent have these, though a man may have them,
and not repent: for tears, that of Joel; Joel 2.12.
Turn you unto me, says the Lord, with fasting, and with weeping, and with
mourning. And that of Isaiah; Isaiah 22.12.
And in that day did the Lord God of hosts call unto weeping and mourning, and
to baldner, and to girding with seek^l^th. Example here of we have in the
Israelites, who when they repented are said 1. Sam. 7.6.
to draw water and ports it out before the Lord, meaning that they wept in
abundance, as if a man had drawn water out of a well, and powered it out before
the Lord, so they drow reares from their eyes. So Mary M^dalen washed our
Savior Christ's feet with her tears. So of the Apostle Peter it is said that
he wept bitterly. If we admit the conceit of some men, that think they know
somewhat in nature, they say they were scalding tears, not as some men shed
for joy that go warm down the cheeks, but they were scalding, and sharp
tears, such as come from grief and sorrow. For that which stands in
abstinence from the use of outward pleasures, and earthly delights, as gay
apparel, pleasant company, liberal diet, and such like, that of Joel is
fit, Joel 2.16.
Let the bridogroome go forth of his chamber, and the bride out of her bride
chamber. Now there must be a proportion betwixt public, and private
repentance. Hence is that of Paul, 1. Cor. 7.5.
who wilseth the married folks at no time one to de^d another, unless it be
with consent for that time, wherein they are to give themselves to abstinence
and (...). Hence the Prophets when they ^d the people to humiliation, called
for fasting: And so David did, 2. Sam. 12.17.
when he was reproved by Nathan, he humbled himself, and refused to eat
meat with the Elders of his house. So the people of Niniuie, when Jonah
threatened destruction, Jonah 3.
they gave themselves to fasting, put on sackcloth and mean apparel, even
from the King that sat on the throne, to the meanest of the people. Lastly, for
restitution, which is to be performed in some cases: consider that the Lord
after he had taught the people how to repent, tells them that they had not
truly done it, because, Micha 6.8.10.
The treasures of wickedness were in the house of the wicked. That is, those
riches which they had gotten by sin, by oppression, by deceit or usury, they
were still remaining in their houses and not restored. And our Savior Christ
says: Matthew. 5.23,24.
If thou come to offer an offering to the Lord, and then remembers that they
brother has ought against thee, first reconcile thy self to thy brother, and
then come and offer thine offering: that is, if thou have offended him in wond,
go and confess thy faults unto him; if in deed, restore to him that thou have
wrongfullie taken from him. Thersore Zacheus, to testify his true repentance
in embracing Christ, stands forth and says: Luke 19.8.
The half of my goods I give to the poor, and if I have done wrong to any
man, I restore him fourefold: which was a true note that Christ and salvation
was come unto his house. So then by all these it is manifest that true
humiliation, joined with true repentance, has always these tears, this
abstinence, restraint, and restitution.

Now the reasons which further confirm this truth, are these:

Reason 1.
1. Because howsoever that is true, that bodily exercises profit little, 1.
Tim. 4.8.
in respect of themselves: yet seeing they help to other good things, as to
stir up the affections, or beat down the flesh, and bring it in subjection,
to make men's prayers more fervent, or their humiliation more faithful, or
confession and repentance more feeling, they are lawful and necessary to be
performed.

Reason 2.
Because Christ sweat water and blood, and shed his precious blood for their
sins, it is reason that me^ should shead tears, and weep for their own
offenses.

Reason 3.
Because brave and costly apparel does lightly puff up the mind with pride,
and tickle it with vain and foolish pleasures: whereas mean apparel puts
a man in mind of that mean and woeful estate wherein he stands; and so
humbles him.

Reason 4.
Because a dainty and full diet, as at the first entrance by heating the
body, it inflameth the soul, stirring within it excessive joy, pleasure,
boldness, confidence, and presumption: So after it puts it into a new temper,
lulling it asleep in senseless security, and even drowning it in a drowsy
forgetfulness, both of God, and of it self, which Christ well knew, when he
gave such a caveat, saying: Luke 21.34.
Take heed to your selves, lest at any time your hearts be overcome with
surfeiting and drunkenness. As if he should say, Take heed you give not your
selves to a full diet, for that will cause you to forget your end, and so the
day come on you unawares: when this then makes a man to forget God, and
himself, he must needs be far from that humiliation, that he ought to
have. So that in reason he that would be humbled, should have a restraint in
diet.

Reason 5.
5. Because without restitution the sin is not forsaken; left it is but not
forsaken and repented of, and so is no repentance, but, as Augustine says, Non
agitur poenitentia, sed fingitur. Aug. epist. 54. Macedo.
They dissemble repentance, but do not repent: for if it be a sin to take,
then is it a sin to keep. And because this will argue a man to be humbled,
when he is content to lay open his shame thus, and to incur ignominy
withmen, and thus to abject himself, his credit, and estimation, at their
feet, with whom he has continual emulation for credit. This, I say, will be
a probable testimony of his true humiliation.

Objection.
Some may say then, what reason have Protestant Preachers, to condemn the
fasting, and whipping, and humiliation practiced in Popery?

Answer.
Chrysostom says, Chrysostom. hom. 3. ad pop. Antioc.
That fasting is a medicine: but though the medicine be a thousand ways
profitable, if an unskillful patient uses it, (and as I may add, an
unskillful Physician prescribe it) it may turn to a poison, and not a
medicine. So some of these things are good, profitable, and necessary to
humiliation: but as they are prescribed by their unskillful Priests, and used by
unskillful men, they are poisons and not medicines, and make their humiliation
unprofitable: because they oftentimes command them things, when they are
crossing to God, that at set times they must be done, though God call and give
occasion of the contrary. As for example, they must fast, though God give
cause of feasting; and mourn, though he give cause of joy and laughter. Is it
not then justly reproueable? And besides, they do that which they have nither
precept nor practice, or example for in the Scripture, unless it be in Baals
priests, that lanced and cut themselves. And lastly, their end of doing is
sacrilegious, which makes it abominable to God and man, that is, to omerit
salvation, and satissie the justice of God. Do we not then justly condenine it
as a poison, and not approve it as a medicine?

Now for the uses of this doctrine. Use 1.
If this be so, how can they think then that they have repented, who were
never yet thus humbled? when as thus far they may go and not repent, but not
repent without it. Unto how many may God say, Where are your tears and
mourning? and not, why cover ye my Altar with tears: for though they can
mourn and weep in abundance for the loss of earthly friends, and riches, and
for the displeasure of men, yet do they never weep for their sins, or for
that they have displeased God. They have saved him the labor of putting their
tears into his bottel, and wiping their tears from their eyes, but little to
their gain; yea many of them have counted the^ children and fools, who have
wept bitterly with Peter, for their sins. Such shall weep, if they do it not
here, when the others shall rejoice, and their weeping shall be fruitless and
unprofitable to them. Again, the same persons, or the like, though they could
often change their attire, and put on mourning weeds for the death of friends,
yet could never find any time to put on mourning apparel for their sins, to
leave off their gay, garish, wanton and whorish apparel, not the space of one
day for their sins; that they might the better be humbled within. If that be
true of Cyprian, as I think it most true, their case is heavy: Non resipiscunt
mulieres, quae Christi indumenta negligunt, and sua ornamenta quaerunt.
Cyprian. de lapsis.
Those women never repent who neglect the garments of Christ, and affect only
their vain ornaments. Many days can they sequester themselves from the sweet
company of their nearest friends, for worldly respects, profit, or pleasure,
and such like; yet not one day can they sequester themselves, that they might
mourn for their sins; either a family apart, as in Zachary it was prophesied
should come to pass, Zach. 12.12.
that the land of Jerusalem should bewail every family apart by themselves;
or every man alone. Oftentimes, for the health of their bodies, for the
remoouing of diseasos, or the preventing of some one or other, they could leave
their meals; but could find no time to do it for their sins, that they might
tame the flesh and subdue it, that it might be pliable to the spirit, that as
principal and accessarie, they might be both humbled before God. Often they
have been content to lose many an ounce of blood for the health of their body,
but yet could never be content to part with a pound or a shilling of their
coin to make reftitution for the health of their soul, but living, and dying,
the treasures of iniquity are found in their houses, as we heard before out of
Micha. Micha 6.10.
These fear to shame themselves with bringing home, and never remember the
shame they must endure, when all secrets shall be laid open, not to a few, but
to all the world, when it will be too late to make any restitution. And though
they have now courts and pretenses for it, as provision for wife and children,
or necessity of the Common weal, or color of this or that law, yet one day
it shall appear, that all these are but pretenses, when it shall be known,
whether our reproves for sin be just, or your couerings of sins be good,
when as one of our souls and bodies shall pay for it in hell: either ours for
preaching falsehoods, or yours for not practicing restitution here.

Use 2.
The second use serves to persuade men to labor for this outward humiliation,
as to confess their sins, so to bewail them with tears, not before men,
nor in the congregation, which some may do in pride, and hypocrisy of their
hearts, who cannot weep betwixt God and themselves. But men should go out as
Peter did, and turn themselves to the wall, as Ezckias did: and then if they
draw water before God, looking upon him whom they have pierced, there may be
comfort in it. As I think there may be tears and no repentance: for some men,
as we say of women, have tears at command; so may there be repentance in
other some and no tears. But when a man can weep every day, upon any occasion
of worldly grief, and cannot upon the consideration of his sin, the great
displeasure of God, the unspeakable torments which Christ endured for him,
etc. it is some suspicion he is not humbled, and so has not repented. If he
that cannot weep for worldly causes, being so dry brained, have a
dispensation not to weep, yet he that can, has an obligation to do it.
Therefore the Prophet when he speaks of sorrow for sin says, Zach. 12.10.
That a man shall lament for it, as a man mourns for his only son. By which
he shows, what a great deal of sorrow is required, and deep sorrow will
hardly be without tears. If there be a vent at the bung of a tearse, or
hogshead, it will soon run at the head; but if it be close stopped there it
will scarce run at all. So if the heart be pierced, the brain and the eyes
will run ever in their time and place; which must be labored for. As also
there must be a restraint and abatement of their gorgious, and gay apparel;
for though I think not that Christians ought to use any strange or unusual
attire, as hair, sackcloth (such as was proper for the times when God enjoined
them) and so to make themselves the common bie word of the people, and their
private repentance public; yet as much as may be, without any public note,
they must abstain from brave and costly garments, because (as has been said)
they were but given them, as couers of their shame, and cannot look upon them,
(saving that custom has taken away sense) but they must remember their sin,
as the prisoner by his fetters and manacles, is put in mind of his offense. And
if that saying be true of a Father, Chrysostom.
that common experience tells us is true, that when women become suitors for
their husbands, to obtain pardon of their offenses, then will they not follow
princes courts, decked in all their bravery they can, but in mean, and
mourning weeds, with much modesty at least, if not with great baseness; how
should they then be arraied, when they secke pardon at Gods hand; both men, and
women, and all sorts? And the better to humble themselves, they must seclude
themselves from their pleasant, and deliteful company, and take less pleasure
in their dearest friends, whose friendship as it often lesseneth, and asswageth
the pain of the body, so does it the grief of the mind, and suffers not a man
to grieve, or not as he ought; therefore says Jeremy of such a man; Lament.
3.28.
He sits alone, and keeps silence because he has borne the yoke upon him.
But in these abstinences, and among them howsoever some of the learned think,
that fasting is not necessarily joined to every repentance, but is only for
special occasions, and times of misery; yet seeing that a full diet does most
affect the soul, and disturb all the affections, putting them besides all
moderation, and due regard of the estate wherein men are, and driving it, as a
mighty tempest does a silly ship, hither and thither, from one extreme to
another; it is requisite they be wary how they fill the belly, and pamper the
flesh, but that they use all sobriety in their whole lives, which may be a
kind of fast; yea often better. As Hierom says: Parcus cibus and venture semper
esuriens triduanis ieinnijs praefertur. Hieron. ad Furi. epist. 10. cap. 4.
A spare diet and a belly ever rather hungry then full, is better then a fast
of three duies continuance. So may we say it is a great help to humiliation,
and so to repentance. As also we may not unfitly apply that of S. Paul, who
says, 2. Cor. 4.16.
That though the outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily. And
so persuade men as Physicians counsel their patients, that they would, (when
they intend to take Physic) incoenatos dormire, to go supperlesse to bed, or
with a light supper, that the strength of the medicine, may immediately meet
with the hurtful humors: to do the same in this, where these answer one
another, Vulnus and medicina, peccatu^ and poenitentia. Chrysostom.
The sickness and the remedy, sin and repentance. Now if the sinner have been
injurious and offensive, true humiliation requires satisfaction, and
restitution, as before. But thou will say, how shall I do? I am not able to
make restitution. Art thou not able with all that thou have to make it? Then
consider this, that when the like doubt was made in the law concerning a thief
that had stolen from another man, Exodus 22.3.
either openly or covertly, in buying or selling, or the like; what the Lord
commanded, namely, that he must to the uttermost he could make restitution; if
he could not, he must himself be sold to be a servant that he might perform
it: teaching us, that restitution by some means must be made, if it can any
way be; and that a man must leave himself nothing to accomplish this. But thou will say I have wife and children to maintain, etc. what shall become of them?
their maintenance and restitution cannot both meet together. I fear me thou
art far from humiliation, while these doubts prevail with thee: for tell me,
have thou not a soul and a body to save? and do thou care more for thy
wife and thy children, then for them? Who would not, says Augustine, Quis non
vt viueret continuo, perdere voluit vnde viueret? eligens potius vitam
mendicantem quam celerem mortem. August. epist. 54. ad Macedo.
willingly lose that by which he lives now, that he may line continually?
choosing rather a beggarly life then a swift death. Rather then, pull down the
peacockes feathers of thy wise and children, that go so gay and so proudly;
for all that thou pretendest is nothing else but to maintain them in pride and
vanity; I say, rather choose to leave them to the wide world, and make
restitution of that thou art able, then to cast away thine own soul: would
thou not impouerish them to save this from perishing? specially seeing if for
them and by their means thou make no restitution, they are partaker of thy
sin. I dare say this boldly, says Augustine, August. ibid.
that he who does not compel another to restitution, as much as he can, he is
partaker of the deceit and the sin. How much more he that hinders him from
making of it? Besides, consider and thou shall see many, who lived before thy
time, who in respect of wife and children have made no restitution, that they
might leave them rich, and flourishing in the world, and tell me, if they have
not come to extreme poverty, at least in the second and third generation: God
so cursing evil gotten goods. Then thou will think to make thy son happy,
according to the proverb, by going to the Devil, and yet shall he be indeed
miserable by the curse of God. But what if a man have nothing? This is a
dispensation: and as the proverb is, Where there is nothing to be had, the
King must lose his right: even so here; and repentance is then sufficient, so
that thou have a mind, that as God shall make thee able, thou will restore. But
it may be that thou had gotten thy goods wickedly before thy calling to
Christ; now if thou should begin to make restitution, thou will say, it
would either dishonor thy calling and profession, or give some enemy
advantage over thee, for thy hurt. I answer thee, first it is no more shame
for thee in the eyes of honest men, then it was for Samuel and Zacheus to
proffer and perform it: to whom it was no blot, but an honor. The worldings
proverb indeed is; It is a shame to steal, but a greater shame to bring home
again. Yet account thou that no shame to thee in some honest manner to bring
home again all that which thou have stolen by deceit or oppression, or
howsoever, seeing others are honored of all ages for it; specially in as much
as no restitution is damnation, and restitution is the way to salvation.
Again, I do not so urge this, that of necessity a man must-shame himself;
for it is lawful for a man to provide for his credit, so he do the thing, and
be as wary in the manner as he can. For example, if thou have deceived thy
brother secretly and unknown to him, which was sin in thee; thou may make
him restitution again unknown to him, and that be a righteous thing in thee.
Yet more particularly in one instance for the rest: Thou art a trades man, and
the party injured trades with thee still, restore him that thou defraudest him
of, either by weight, measure, or price, or howsoever, in the same kind,
secretly, as Joseph's steward put Jacobs sons money in their bags and sacks;
and do this at times by little and little, till thy conscience which checked
thee before, tell thee thou have done him right, and restored him all. But take
this caveat with thee; beware thou flatter not thy self and restore not all,
because no man knows whether thou do or not: for he that is the searcher
of the heart knows all. But if thou want opportunity to do it secretly,
rather then it should not be done, thou must do it publicly, and that upon no
less penalty then damnation. For the contrary must needs be to that of
Christ to Zacheus, That no restitution excludes salvation out of thy house and
heart. For, as Augustine says, Non remittetur peccatum, nisi restituatur
ablatum: sed cum restitui potest. August. ibid.
the sin shall not be remitted, if that which is taken away be not restored,
when a man has ability to restore. For if it deserve damnation to take any
thing from a man wrongfully, as doubtless it does, then is it as dangerous to
keep it, being taken. Think it not then, in these cases of injustice, enough,
that when thou humblest thy self before God, thou shead tears for them, or
fast and perform such things, unless also thou make recompense for the wrong.

The parts of repentance.
Having spoken of the description of repentance, we must proceed to the parts
of it, and as Augustine says in another thing: Aliud est adiutorium, sine quo
aliquid non fit, and aliud est adiutorium, quo aliquid fit. Aug. de corrupt.
and gratia.
There are some helps without which a thing is not, and some by which it is. So
I may say, there are some things which may be called the part of another,
without which it cannot be, and others by which it is, and of which it
consists. Of the former kind are faith, and the knowledge of a man's self,
and the inward and outward humiliation spoken of, which may in a general
sense, be called parts, because it cannot be without them, though most of
them may be without it: of the latter are these two, mortification of the
flesh, and vivification of the spirit, called by the Prophets, leaving of evil
and doing of good, of which it consists, and which wholly make it: of which
in their order I will now speak.

The first part of repentance, mortification.
Mortification is the first part of repentance, whereby the repentant does not
only change, and take away sin from the eyes of men, (which yet he does)
but also purges the heart, crucifieth the flesh with the corruptions of it,
and takes away sin from the eyes of God. Hence is that of David, Psalm.
34.14.
Eschew evil, that is the first part of repentance, and do good, that is the
second part. Solomon also says: He that Prou. 28.13.
hides his sins shall not prosper: but he that confesses and forsakes them
shall have mercy. And the Lord says to the people by his Prophet Esaias: Esaias
1.16.
Wash you, make you clean, put away the evil of your works from before mine
eyes, cease to do evil, learn to do well, etc. On which place Chrysostom
speaks thus: Hom. 5. de poenit.
What need all this copy of words? Had it not been enough to have said, Purge
your selves, or take evil from your selves? Why then does he add, Take away
the evil from before mine eyes? He answers: That it is because Gods eyes look
otherwise then man's do, who looks but into the face, but God into the heart.
And so denies that to be true repentance which is for ostentation, in the
outward man, but would have it to be approved in his sight, which searches
the heart and raines, and consequently a purging of the inward man. Hence are
those exhortations in the new Testament: as first that of S. Paul, who says,
Galath. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh with the affections and lusts
thereof. And the same Apostle to the Colossians says: Coloss. 3.5.
Mortify your members which are on the earth, fornication, uncleanness, the
inordinate affection, evil concupiscence, and covetousness, which is
idolaetrie. Again, he counsels Timothy 2. Tim. 2.22.
to flee from the lusts of youth, and to follow after righteousness, faith,
love, and peace, with them that call on the Lord with pure heart. Hereupon
repentance is called an escaping out of the snares of the devil. 2. Tim.
2.25.26.
Instruct them that are contrary minded, proving if God at any time will give
them repentance, that they may know the truth; and that they may come to
amendment out of the snare of the devil, etc. And the author to the the
Hebrews calls it, Heb. 6.1.
Repentance from dead works: that is to say, from al works which bring death.
And so touching the inward corruption, S. Paul wills the Ephesians, Ephesians.
4.21.22.
to cast off concerning the conversation in times past, the old man that is
corrupt through deceivable lusts. So that the first essential part of
repentance is mortification of the flesh, which is further proved by these
reasons:

Reason 1.
1. Because every true repentant is partaker of Christ, and has embraced him
by faith, and by it is ingrafted into him: which he cannot be, but he must
partake of his death, and the power of it, which will work in him the death of
sin, he applying it unto himself by his faith: it will be like the plasters of
Surgians, which mortify the members, for the more easy cutting them off.

Reason 2.
2. Because else he can never be renewed or brought to new, and true obedience
to God, seeing the affections and corruptions of the flesh are an enemy
against God. As the Apostle Paul says, Romans 8.7.
The wisdom of the flesh is enmity against God. That is, says Ambrose, the
corrupt lusts of men are at enmity with God: called wisdom, because men that
have these corrupt affections think themselves the only wife men of the world:
The whole corrupt nature is not an enemy, but enmity it self with God, and
against him, for as an enemy it is ever contrary to the will of God, and
cannot consent to it. Then the first entrance of obedience must be the taking
away of these, and the mortifying of this corruption. But it must be
understood that when I say the repentant mortifies sin, I speak of all sins,
not whole sin, for every sin must be in part mortified, though no man can
wholly mortify his sin; the body of sin may be destroyed, but the stumps
of sin will remain in every man to go to the grave with him, as it came out
of the womb with him.

Use 1.
1. The first use of this doctrine is to teach us, that if this be a part of
repentance, then is it not so easy a thing, as the world takes it to be to
repent, and turn from sin; for if it were only the turning and changing of
the outward act of sin, the leaving of all these vain, and idle, lascivious,
and wanton speeches, of the act of oppression, usury, adultery, theft,
profaning of the Sabbath, swearing and a thousand such like, wherewith the
life of a man abounds: yet is it not a thing so easily compassed, as men do
dream, because of the profit, pleasure, and delight, which they bring unto
them, as experience teaches every man, both in himself and others. But when
that is had it is nothing to the other. If this be so hard, what is it to kill,
crucify, and mortify, a man's affections and sins? as dear unto him as his
members, and therefore so called, Coloss. 3.5.
Mortify your members. If it be a hard thing for a man to endure a little
drawing salve, which draws away the corrupt blood and humors which hinder the
healing of the wound, what will it be to endure plasters, and corasiues which
should eat to the very bone? And if a man cannot endure the mortifying of one
member of one joint, how shall he endure the mortifying of all the joints of
the hand, or of the body? Such a thing is repentance, and the mortification of
all the lusts of man, as near and dear as members to him. Therefore you
deceive your selves, when you think that repentance is so easy a duty, that
you can perform it when you are old and sick; seeing now when you are young
and strong, and in health, you cannot endure the mortifying of one member, how
will you endure then the mortifying of all, or of those sins which are as dear
as members?

Use 2.
2. Again, this serves to teach us that many men deceive themselves, with an
opinion and conceit of repentance, and that they have repented, when they never
had the first part of it: many never having any change at all of any act, or
way wherein they have walked, and the most never came to killing, and
crucifying, nor to any mortifying of any sin, or any affection; which is as
if a wounded man, who has a festered wound, which has long been so, should
think that because a Surgion has but once blowed upon him, he is surely made
whole, though he never felt either his drawing salues, or his eating corasiues,
or his mortyfying plasters; nay when he has perhaps driven him away by
raylings speeches, or casting bedstaues, or such things at him, when he once
came near to touch his wound: but howsoever he so think, would not all men
judge him to be in a dream and deceived? Then how do these dream, and are
deceived that thus persuade themselves of repenting, when they have not the
first part of it; nor ever could endure that the sword of the spirit, or the
biting or eating salues of the law and judgments of God, should come nigh
them, but either endeavor to drive away these spiritual surgions, or to
withdraw themselves from them? Do they not, I say, dream? and that they shall
one day know, if ever God open their eyes, as he will either here or in hell.

Use 3.
The third use teaches that every one must endeavor for this part of
repentance, namely, to mortify their lusts and affections, of covetousness,
pride, anger or any other corrupt affection whatsoever it be; for if sin be
not killed in you even while ye live, ye are but dead. Therefore if ye would
live here and live for ever, mortify these members, crucify this flesh with
ye lusts thereof, for one of these two must of necessity be, either your sins,
lusts and corruptions must die, or your souls must die; if you will save
these, they must perish; if you mortify these, they shall live. Therefore if
ye have any care for the saving of your souls, then crucify the lusts and
affections of the flesh. It is the wisdom of Travelers, warrantable by the
law of nature and nations, of God and man, when they are set upon by thieves,
who will not only take their purses from them, but put them in fear of their
lives: it is, I say, their warrantable wisdom to kill, rather then to be
killed: So should it be your spiritual wisdom no less warrantable and
commendable, when in your travel to heauenward, you are assaulted by your
corruptions and lusts which cleave fast unto you, which will spoil you of your
saving health and spiritual salvation, and will indeed kill you, unless you
crucify them; it should be, I say, your wisdom, to kill before you be killed,
and to crucify that, which will else bring condemation unto you, and to your
souls. It is then, if I may so speak, in your free choice, whether your
sins shall die, or your souls. Romans 8.13.
If you live after the flesh you shall die; but if you mortify the deeds of
the body by the spirit, you shall live. Therefore as our Savior Christ says,
(persuading men to take away their lusts) Matthew. 5.29.
If thy right eye cause thee to offend pull it out: If thy right hand make thee
to offend, cut it off: for better it is for thee that one of thy members
perish, then that thy whole body should be cast into hell. Christ applies it
to adultery; I may apply it to anger, or any other corruption whatsoever. And
may say, whatsoever infirmity cleaves fastest unto you, though it be as dear
unto you as your right eyes or right hands: rather then they should cause you
to offend, to endanger your souls, cut them off and cast them from you: yea,
put them away though it be with violence and blood, even crucifying and
mortifying them, that you may escape that destruction they would else bring
upon you. Blessed shall you be if you reward them, as they would have served
you, yea happy shall you be, if you take them and dash them while they are
young, against the stone, that is, Christ; for wherewith should you better
obtain the favor of your Lord and God, then with the heads of these enemies of
him and your own souls? 1. Sam. 29.4.


The second part of repentance, vivification.
The second part of repentance is vivification of the spirit, or rising again
to newnes of life, which we call regeneration. When the repentant is renewed,
his mind in holiness, and his carriage and life with sincere obedience: or thus;
Regeneration is when the repentant is changed in mind, will and heart. The mind
and counsel disallowing, and condemning the evil already committed, and
approouing of the good to be done. The will rejecting, and declining from the
evil, allowing the good, and inclining to it. The heart and affections hating
and detesting that evil, and affecting and loving the good: after which
follows inherent holiness, and sanctity, wrought in men: called the new
man, renewed in Christ; and this breaks forth in outward good works, and the
practice of obedience. That this is so the places before named do testify.
David says; Psalm. 34.14.
Eschew evil, and do good. So the Lord speaks by Esaias: Esaias 1.16.
Wash you, make you clean, cease to do evil, learn to do well. Hence is
that of Ezekiel: Ezech. 18.31.
Cast away from you all your transgressions, whereby ye have transgressed, and
make you a new heart, and a new spirit: that is, the heart must be renewed. And
as Christ says in the Gospel: A new commandment I give unto you; that is, a
renewed commandment; so here the Lord says, make you a new heart, that is,
renew your heart. So the Apostle S. Paul says to the Ephesians, Ephe. 4.23.24.
Be renewed in the spirit of your mind, and put on the new man, which after
God is created in true holiness and righteousness. The same Apostle to the
Colossians says: Colos. 3.10.
Having put on the new man, which is renewed according to the Image of him that
created him. Likewise Christ said to Nicodemus: John 3.4.5.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of God. Which
was not as Nicodemus conceived, that a man should be borne again of his
mother, but he must be borne of water and of the spirit, he must be a new
creature. And for the outward man, S. Peter persuades the men of Israel,
saying, Acts 2.38.
Amend your lives and be baptized. By all which it is manifest, that
wheresoever there is true repentance, there is this second part of it, namely
regeneration: which I also manifest by reason thus:

Reason 1.
1 Because the repentant is in Christ, and so one with him, and so must needs
be a new creature. 1. Cor. 5.17.
He is also ingrafted into him, and by that partaketh of his spirit, then of
his life and holiness; yea being partaker of his death, he cannot but partake of
his resurrection. Hence is that of S. Paul: Romans 6.5.
If we be grafted with him to the similitude of his death, even so shall we be
to the similitude of his resurrection, and by his spirit be renewed to newnes
of life. Whereupon it is that Christ is said to be, Revel. 3.14.
the beginning of the creatures of God, that is, the beginning of every man
that is converted.

Reason 2.
2 The second reason is, because he that repents is turned to God: for so says
Jeremy, Ierem. 4.
He that returns to him, has renewed fellowship and union with him, which he
lost by his sin: but this cannot be, if he be not renewed, and walk in the
light. As S. John says, 1. John 1.6.7.
If we say we have fellowship with him, and walk in darkness, we lie, and do
not truly. But if we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have
fellowship one with another. Then it follows that they, who are turned to
God, must needs be renewed. But it must be understood that this regeneration
is not perfect, so that man is not perfectly holy by an inherent holiness; but
as whole sin is not abolished, so neither is this regeneration perfect, and
sanctification wholly obtained. Therefore the Apostle says: Romans 6.12.
Let not sin reign in your mortal bodies. He does not say, says
Augustine, Let not sin be in your mortal bodies, for that cannot be obtained,
but let it not reign, that is, let it not have dominion and rule over you. And
again he says to the Galathians; Gal. 5.17.
The flesh lusts against the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh, and
these two are contrary: by flesh understanding norruption, by spirit the
regenerate part. Now these two are contrary, and while a man is in this life,
he shall never be free from this fight; the experience of all regenerate
teaches the same. Yea even S. Paul himself found this; Romans 7.23.
That the law of his members rebelled against the law of his mind, leading him
captive to sin. And he was never perfect, and free from this inward
corruption. If you ask then what is taken away by Christ? I answer, we must
consider two things in sin: 1. The guilt of sin, which the Schoolmen call
the form of sin. The second is the corruption of sin, which they call the
matter of sin. We say that in every regenerate man, the guilt is taken away,
and the form of sin is wholly gone, but the matter in part remains; and
when we speak of mortification, we do not say that a man that has repented,
has all his sins and affections wholly mortified, but so far as the
strength and power of them is broken and weakened, but the stumps of them
remain still. As the Apostle to the Romans says; Romans 6.6.
By Christ our old man is crucified, that the body of sin might be destroyed.
Not that sin is utterly gone, for that cannot be in this life, but the
strength and power of it is destroyed. Now if sin be not wholly mortified, a
man cannot be wholly regenerated, therefore they are both mixed together, for
the corruption of the one is the generation of the other, and if the whole be
not corrupted, then part must needs be regenerate, for all things are but
here in part, and must after be perfected. And the Lord has so dealt, to leave
corruption in men, to the end he might humble them in the sight of it, and to
sharpen their prayers. This use the Apostle Paul made of it, 2. Cor. 12.7.
when he had the buffet of Satan, and the prick of the flesh to humble him, and
to make him the more fervent to God by prayer, to give him grace to overcome
it. So has God ordained that men should not come to perfection in this life,
to humble them in the sight of their sins, and that their prayers might be
made unto him with more earnestnes and feruencie, for strength against their
infirmities. And here we may apply that of Augustine, distinguishing men into
three sorts: Some (says he) August. cont. Iul. Pelag.
are only spirit, without the sight of the flesh, these are the blessed in
heaven: others are only flesh without the fight of the spirit, these are men
unregenerated, for their sin rules very peaceably: others are partly flesh,
partly spirit, and therefore they find a fight betwixt these and a wrestling
in their hearts, these are they who are regenerated and renewed by the spirit
of God, consisting of flesh and spirit. Which is the state of the most
regenerate in this life, who though they have attained to the greatest measure
of holiness, yet neither are they nor can be without their measure of
corruption.

These things then thus explaned, let us consider the uses. Use 1.
And first, this teaches; us that if this be the second part of repentance,
and that there is none which is true, sound and saving repentance, but it has
necessarily these two parts: as there is no man but be has, and consists
of soul and body, and one part makes not a man: then not only profane and
wicked men, are without repentance, but many others also, who have made a good
reformation in the outward man, and have a show of this godliness, but not the
power of it; doing all this but for some sinister respect, upon some vain
glory, pride or conceit of merit, or expectation of reward, or such like. For
in their minds they disallow not the evil, that they in former times
committed, because it is evil, neither now approve the good, because it is
good. Again, in their wills they reject not the evil, and decline from it
because it is evil, nor allowing the good, and incline thereto, because it is
good. 3. In their hearts they hate not the evil, because it is evil, but as
the dog casts up his vomit, because it is troublesome; nor love and affect
the good, because it is good, but for that it brings good to them. And that
which is worst, in all these they approve and gratulate themselves; which
argues that they are far from this true regeneration which does these for
Gods sake, because they are good, and checks a man when he has erring or
indirect affections to them, and conceits of them; and so shows that they are
far from regeneration, and inward holiness, which leaves outward things and
appearances, because they are like that which it self is in deed and in
truth. And that for all this outward reformation, such men have not artained
to true and sound repentance. And though this is not so apparent to men, that
are afar off, and converse not with them, yet is it to them that shall be
nigh them, and see their conversation, who may easily diseerne it by their
speeches, the messenger of the mind, Jndex animi.
and by their carriage, when for a greater good, or benefit, they will soon
neglect the good, yea commit the evil, which they have seemed to have
forsaken, and not be smitten for it in their heart, but even wipe their
mouths, as the harlot in the Proverbs, as if they had done no such thing;
which befalls not to a regenerate man, who though he may and do sometimes fall
into the like sins, yet is free from such deep security, and not without
the checkes of his conscience; which though he may smother for a time, yet will
they have their fruit at length in him as in David.

Use 2.
The second use is, to persuade every man, to labor to be regenerated and
renewed in the whole man, as he has bin corrupted in the whole; and to be
resolved, that though he cannot indeed be wholly renewed, yet must he be so in
the whole, that is, in some measure in every part. For no man must look to be
renewed here in that measure he was corrupted, either in the inward or the
outward man, and so to attain to perfection of holiness; but the true repentant
beginning by a little and little, both may and ought to increase more and more
toward perfection. As it was with Naaman, when he was purged from his
leprosy, his flesh came again as the flesh of a young child: so when as man is
purged from the leprosy of sin, he begins to be renewed as a child
grows, who has all the parts of a man, but not the perfection of any: so
has this true repentant, all the parts of regeneration, but not any one in
perfection: he has all parts somewhat reformed, though not wholly reformed; I
say, he is both in the will, mind and affections, though not perfectly. For
this must every one labor, and though his grace be but small in the beginning,
yet must he not be discouraged, for it is the state of all the children of
God, that a long time corruption will be greater then grace, a long time there
will be more chafe then corn in them. But if he in the mean while dislike
his corruptions, and bewail his defects, he may assure himself he has his
measure of regeneration; for no man can do so in truth, but he that is
regenerat. Yet let no man think that because he has somewhat, and is in part
regenerate, therefore he has enough, and so fet down his rest, as if he
need go no further; for then shall he deceive himself, seeing the true
sanctifying grace is seed that will and does increase and multiply; not salt,
that remains and makes barren. If men then do not increase and grow in
their graces, they have good cause to suspect them to be rather counterfeit
then current: If they do increase, they may be assured their graces are of the
right stamp indeed.

But some man will happily demand, how much he is bound to increase, or what
measure of increase will prove his graces to be true? I answer him, that
according to the means God has given him, and the time he has lived under
those means, and the opportunity he had to use them, so much ought he to
increase. For as in temporal things every man grows according to the means
he has, and the time for the use of his means: so in spiritual things every
man that has true grace, ought to have it still increasing; and he may be
assured that if it be hid in a napkin, and continue without increase, it is not
true grace. So that many men who pleased themselves because they have had some
beginnings of good motions, now and then, in which yet they have not gone
forward, nor increased answerable to their means, have deceived themselves,
while they have judged them true and sufficient. As the Lord said to the people
by Hosea, when they had good motions in them, which were soon smothered: Hosea
6.4.
Oh Ephraim, what shall I do unto thee? Oh Judah how shall Lintreate thee? for
your goodness is as a morning cloud, and as the morning dew it goes away. As
if he should say, Thou have many good motions, and good desires, but they are
so soon extinct, that I, know not what to do with thee. So may he say to many
a man among us, You have many good motions and desires, but they are but
desires; many good beginnings, but no proceedings; yea all is scattered as the
cloud, and vanished as the dew; what shall I say unto you? surely no otherwise
then as deceivers and hypocrites, and curse you as the sigtree in the Gospel,
that you never prosper more. But lest any such thing befall us, and seeing an
increase is required of us, Phil. 3.13.
let us forget that which is behind, and eudeuour our selves unto that which is
before, Hebr. 12.1.
running forward in the race that is set before us, Phil. 3.14.
and following hard toward the mark,for the price of the high calling of God
in Christ Jesus. And thus much may suffice for the parts of repentance: in the
next place we must proceed to the causes of it.

Chrysostom having made three sermons upon this matter of repentance,
begins the fourth thus: Assidue in ea^, etc. Chrysostom. hom. 4. de poenit.
It is the continual cust ome of shepheads to turn their sheep into those
pastures, where they see the grass is long and plenteous, and thence not to
drine them, before they have eaten up all. Whom we will imitate, and this
fourth day also feed our sheep in this pusture of repentance, and we will
not begin any other matter: for the place affords much prosit, very much
fruit, and withal great store of joy and comfort. As that Father imitated
those shepherds, so will I follow his example, and walk in his steps,
continuing in this fruitful, necessary and comfortable matter, till I have
communicated the whole unto you. The causes of repentance.
I must proceed then, I say, in the next place to the causes of repentance, or
of this change and conversion; namely to the efficient cause, and final: for
of the matter and form has been spoken in the description. And first of the
efficient, which is either principal, or isntrumental. The first is God, the
second is either without man, to wit, the word, or within him, his faith, or
coming from him, his prayer.

The efficient and principal cause of repentance is God.
For the first, which is the principal efficient, it is God; he is the author
of man's repentance, and his conversion: whatsoever means may be used and
applied for that purpose, yet is he the principal worker of it in the heart of
man. For proose hereof we know the speech of Ephraim: Ierem. 31.18.
Convert thou me and I shall be converted. Where she acknowledges God to be
the author of her conversion. So like wise that honor was given unto Christ,
that he should give repentance and remission of sins unto men. For so says
Peter of him: Acts 5.31.
That God had lift him up with his right hand, to be a Prince, and a Savior
to give repentance to Israel and forgiveness of sins. Likewise when Peter had
showed unto the people the vision that he saw, and the mercy that God showed
unto the Gentiles: Acts 2.28.
They all glorified God saying: Then has God also to the Gentiles, granted
repentance unto life, Hence is that of Paul to Timothy: Instruct them (says
he) 2. Tim. 2.25.
with meek^esse that are contrary minded pr^o^ing of at any time God will give
them repentance; etc. So Noah prayed: Genesis 9.27.
God persuade Iaphet to dwell in the (...) of Shem. That is, God convert his
heart, that he may be of the Church, and not of the wicked. Also it was the
Acts. 16.14.
Lord that opened the heart of Lydia, that she attended to the things which
Paul spoke. Paul spoke for her conversion, and the Lord opened her heart and
converted her. And Christ in the Revelation says: Revel. 3.9.
I will make them of the Synagogue of Satan, to come and worship before thee.
Meaning that he would make the wicked to be of the number of the Church, and
convert them to himself. By all these it is manifest, that the principal
worker of repentance in the heart of man is God himself. And it must needs in
reason be so.

Reason 1.
First, because true repentance, has as a principal part of it, the
conversion of the heart and inward man: and to do this requires as much power
as to make it; for there was then no resistance of corruption, but here now are
all contrarieties, the whole man being corrupted: when then it was an infinite
power that created man, it must needs be an infinite power that also must
convert and create him anew.

Reason 2.
The second reason is: Because man is by nature dead, having neither power, nor
will to be converted. And as S. Paul says to the Ephesians: Ephesians. 2.1.2.
That even then when we were dead in sins, God has quickened us together in
Christ. Then as no man can raise up a dead man, nor he quicken himself, no more
then Lazarus could being in ye grave, but it must be the voice of Christ, and
his power that must do it; so must it be only God that must convert the heart,
and work this repentance in it.

Question.
Why does God then in many places command men to repent; and return unto him
if they have no power or ability of themselves to do it, but it be his gift
only, which they cannot have, unless they receive it from him?

Answer.
I answer with Augustine: O homo in praeceptione intellige quid debeas habere.
De corrept. and great. cap. 3. Iubet aliquae quae non possumus, vt nouerimus
quid ab illo petere debemus. De libero arbit. ad Valent. cap. 2
O man understand in these commandments of God, what thou oughrest to have: So
what thou oughrest to do. And again he says: God commands some things which
we are not able to do, that we might know what we ought to big of him. And
therefore when he says, Return unto me, he would have our hearts sound with
an echo again: Lord convert thou us, and we shall be converted, Lord turn
thou our hea^ ^s, and we shall be turned. So that the Lord does not command
because we can do, but because we ought to do, and should seek to him for
grace to do it.

Use 1.
God is then the worker of every man's repentance and conversion: which first
serves to confute a point of Popery, which teaches that men have a great
hand in their own conversion. And that they may take and resist the grace of
conversion: which we say is false, because (as I have already proved) God
gives repentance. Therefore these speeches and comparisons of theirs, we
reject as false, when some of them make man by nature, like one in fetters, so
him in his corruptions, which being stricken off by grace, he can presently go
of himself. Some, as the half dead passenger from Jerusalem to Jericho:
others, like a sick man, which has the power of walking, but being faint he
cannot unless he have one to help him, or to lean upon. So man has power,
say they, but it is a little languishing, which if it be helped but a little by
grace, he can will, and do of himself that which is good. But all these and
such like, if there were a thousand of them, are overthrown with this one
point: that it is God and his grace which conuerteth the hearts of al men.
Neither fear we to affirm this notwithstanding that they object, that by this
means we make a man as a block and a stone; for so we say he is by nature,
in respect of any goodness, and that by the warrant of Ezekiel, who says in the
person of God, Ezech. 36.26.
I will take away the stonia heart out of your bedie, and I will give you an
heart of flesh. Showing that a man before his conversion, has a heart of
stone, and of himself has no more power to convert himself, then a stone
has. Yet notwithstanding, he is not in althings so a stone, but that there is
a difference; for a man is a stone in respect of the action, but not in respect
of reception; or (as the Schoolmen say, a stone in respect of form, but not
in respect of matter. For a stone or a tree is utterly incapable of this thing,
and has no means to receive it, but a man has power to receive it, and is
capable of it, for he has a mind, a will, and affection, that is capable of
the work of God, which these ereatures have not: But it is God only that
works upon these parts and powers of man, and makes them new and good; it is
he only that conuerts him and works repentance in him.

Use 2.
The second use serves for comfort to us touching all those who are yet
unconverted, notwithstanding their great corruptions and vntractablenes,
resisting the spirit of God, specially in all outward means, that a man would
think it impossible that they should be converted to God; yet it is God that
conuerteth, who is able to overcome all the corruptions of man, neither shall
they hinder where he will convert, but if he call they shall come, if he draw,
they shall run after him: for he is infinite in power, and cannot be resisted.
Who would have thought that Saul, so great a persecutor of the Church, who drew
into prisons all that called on the name of Christ, and went from place to
place breathing out threatenings against the Church? yet this great Conuerter of
al men (even God) overcame all this corruption, and broke through all these
impediments, and gave him repentance. Good cause then have we to hope of many
wicked and desperate sinners, that they may be converted, because God; the
changer of all who are changed, is able to overcome all their corruptions. So
that ye Ministers ought still to hold on to exhort them, and the church to pray
for the^, notwithstanding all their oppositions, because God, when and where he
will call, cannot be resisted. The Church (says Augustine) Non oraret
ecclesia, vt daretur infidelibus fides, nisi deum crederet, and anersas and
aduersas hominum adse conuertere voluntates. De bono persevere. lib. 2. cap. 23.
would not pray, that faith might be given to Insidels, but that it believes
that God is able to convert both the auerse and the poruerse wills of men unto
himself. Which must still encourage her to continue to pray for them, and to
hope that he will hear her, as well as he has been entreated by the Church
for others, and make them (though they be of the Synagogue of Satan) Reu. 3.9.
to come and worship before her feet.

Use 3.
The third use of this doctrine will be for the comfort of that man which is
converted, who knows himself indeed to be so: for he cannot be ignorant
how perverse and auerse from goodness he was, how against the hair he was
converted, how all his infidelity and iniquity did not hinder Gods purpose.
Then may he be assured he cannot fall away, God will never suffer him to
perish; though he have corruption enough to effect it, yet let it comfort him
that there was more to hinder his calling, all which God overcame and made him
willing to be changed, and did convert him: so that this less corruption
cannot make this calling of none effect; specially while corruption does not so
choke grace, but that still there is a desire to cleave unto God, and some,
though weak, endeavor to be preserved. If God was found of him, when he
sought him not, nay if he found him when he fled from him, and called him when
he liked his corruptions well enough, and when though he prayed for his
conversion, saying, Thy kingdom come, yet it was with him as with Augustine,
who thus prayed; Da mibi castitatem and contiuentiam, sed noli modo: timebam
enim ne me cito exaudires, and cito sanares a morbo concupiscentiae, quam
malebam expleri quam extingui. Confess. li. 8. cap. 7.
Lord give me chastity and continency, but I would not have it yet: for I did
fear lest thou should speedily hear me, and forthwith our my wound of
concupiscence, which I rather desired might be fulfilled then extinguished: So
that he could have desired to have lien still in his corruption, and yet God
overcame that, and pulled him out of the fire, and, as Lot out of Sodom, by
violence: how much more will he save him now, when he seeks both him and it,
as men do for silver and riches? Did he ever give a man an heart to pray for
any thing rightly informed according to his word, and meant not to give him the
thing? Doubtless no. And if he intend the gift, who shall hinder him for
giving? Augustine says: Horum si quisquam perit, fallitur Deus, sed nemo eoru^
perit, quia non fallitur Deus: horum si quisquam perit, vitio humano vin citur
De us, sed nemo little perit, quia nulla re vincitur Deus. August. de corrept.
and great. cap. 7.
If any of these perish (speaking of the elect, to whom he has purposed
salvation) God is deceived: but none of these can perish, because God is not
deceived. And again, If any of these perish, God is overcome by humane
frailty and corruption: but none of them perishes, because God can be
overcome by nothing. But beer is comfort, he that was powerful in their
conversion, will be powerful also in their preservation, that nothing shall
overcome him, nor pull them out of his hands, Ioh. 10.28.29.
for he is greater then all.

Use 4.
4. The fourth use is to inform us, that if repentance be the only work of
God, then is it not in a man's own power to repent when he list; so then what a
madness and folly is it for any man to sin wilfully, presuming that he can
repent when he pleases? If it were in his power to repent when he would, yet
to be thereby the more emboldned, and presumptuous in sinning; were it not
great folly? Would we not reprove him of folly, that because he has a pill
in his closet, or balm in his power, should therefore surfeit, or else wound
himself with a sword, because he has that which will cure him? But if he had
neither of these helps in his own power, but they were in the hand of some
Apothecary, or such a Physician, who, for some injury committed against him
hates him; were it not much more madness and folly then to surset and wound
himself? So in the matter of repentance, if it were in a man's own power to
repent when he would; were it not some folly for a man to sin, because he
has a remedy? But seeing it is not in his own power, but in the hand of God,
who must needs hate him for his sin committed against him, with a high hand,
and for his hardness of heart, who will not repent, when he calls him to it,
but will go on in his presumptuous sinning against him; what can it be but a
double and treble folly? And howsoever he accounts others fools, who make
all their life a continual practice of repentance, yet indeed is there no
fool to him, and one day he shall know that he deceived himself with a vain
hope, sinning with purpose of repentance hereafter, and not indeed repenting or
seeking it then when God called him to it; but delaying still off, thinking
that the last day of his life, or the last hour of that day would be time
enough for his repentance.

Object.
Some will here say that the Scripture is plain, that at what time soever a
man repents, God will accept it.

Answ.
But know, yt a sinner cannot repent when he would. If thou had the power of
repentance in thine own hand, it were somewhat, but it being not in thy
custody, but in Gods to dispose of, and to give when, and to whom it pleases
him; in this case for thee still to live and dwell in sin, it is but a
delusion of Satan, whereby he would bring thee to damnation, so leading thee on
in a fools paradise, until he have brought thee to hell. Was it not a folly
for the five wise virgins to slumber, having their oil ready at command,
knowing not how soon the bridegroom would come? But were not the five foolish
virgins thrice fools, that having no oil, fell asleep and neglected it, till
the bridegroom came, and then they would have bought, and knew not where to get
it? So if a man had the oil of repentance, to forsake sin, and to turn unto
God, in his own power, it were somewhat less folly to defer it; but whereas
he has it not, what folly and madness were it for him to defer it, till
Christ come, or death come, when he would be glad to buy it with a thousand
worlds if he had them? and shall not know where to have it, or how to obtain
it.

Object.
But thou will say, God is merciful, and so will give me repentance when I
seek for it.

Answ.
I answer thee with asking thee how thou know God is merciful? I know thy
answer, the Scripture every where tells us, that God is merciful. And does
it not also tell thee that he is just? See thou what makes with thee, and not
what is against thee? Is it the mercy of God to give repentance to them that
seek it? and is it not the justice of God to deny it them that contemn it?
Therefore as thou find God is merciful, so thou shall find the same God
just, who in his justice will deny thee repentance when thou seek it,
because thou regardest it not when he offered it. Art thou acquainted with
those Scriptures which declare the mercies of God by calling thee to
repentance? and do thou not know that place of the justice of God which
says: Prou. 2.14.
Because I called and ye refused: I have stretched out my hand, and none would
regard; 26.
I will also laughut your destruction, and mock when your fear comes. 28.
Then shall they call upon me, but I will not answer: They shall seek me
early, but they shall not find me. Then may thou have time and space to
repent, yea and tears to shed for it, and yet never obtain it. For although
Esau lived many a long day after he had sold his birthright, and sought it
again with tears, yet he never obtained it. There is but one acceptable time,
which being neglected, is as a bird escaped out of the hand, or a shaft shot
out of the bow, not to be recalled again. Do not then neglect it. It may be
this, even this is the acceptable time, this is the day of salvation; if thou
neglect it, and as it were contemn God, when he calls thee now in the time
of thy health, it shall be just with him to contemue thee when thou art sick,
and when thou call to him in thy necessity to stop his ears against thee.
Therefore do not deceive thy self to put off thy repentance, as it is the
practice of many thousands to their own destruction. Augustine says: Spera^do
and desperando pereunt homines: sperando male in vita, desperando peius in
morte. August. hom. 2. inter.50.
By hoping and despairing many men perish: by hoping ill in their lives, and
despairing worse in their deaths: promising to themselves health that all shall
be well with them, and that there is no fear nor need as yet to repent, or to
seek for it, and so they are led on till they come to die, when they find
nothing but despair. Or if they die quietly in their beds, and as it were, go
singing to hell, what then have they gained by it? To conclude and shut up this
point as I began it, the only worker of this grace in our hearts is the God of
grace, and not we our selves: Cor curare solus potest qui finxit sigillatim
corda nostra. Chrysostom. hom. 4. de Poenitent.
He only can cure our hearts, which did frame and fashion them one by one.
Therefore to him must we look and suffer him to work upon our hearts; yea we
must pray instantly unto him, that as he has given vsspace to repent, and
calls us continually to it, he would work it in our hearts, and make us able
to do that which he requires, that so we may escape that he threatens, and
enjoy the good he has promised.

The isntrumental cause of repentance.
The next thing to be considered of, is the instrumental cause by which God
works repentance in the hearts of men. And that is either outward or inward.
The outward is the ministry of the word.

The word is the isntrumental cause.
So then the doctrine is, that God works repentance and conversion in the
hearts of men, by the preaching of the word ordinarily. The preaching of the
word the outward isntrumental cause of repentance.
I say ordinarily, for he sometimes when it pleases him, works it by some
other means, or without any means at all. That this is the ordinary means, is
proved by Paul's words unto Timothy, 2. Tim. 2.25.
who exhorts him to Instruct them with meeknes that were contrary minded,
proving if at any time God would give them repentance. Noting that the author
and giver of it is God, but the means, by which he does work it, is the
ministry of the word. After this manner, Acts 16.14.
The Lord opened the heart of Lydia at the preaching of Paul, that she attended
unto the things which Paul spoke, and so she was converted by Paul's preaching.
So the Apostle Peter says: 1. Pet. 1.23.
Being borneanew not of mortal seed, but of immortal, by the word of God:
etc. Like wise Saint James says, James 1.18.
Of his own will begat be us, with the word of truth. And S. Paul says to the
Corinthians, 1. Cor. 4.15.
That in Christ Jesus he begot them through the Gospel. And the Lord says by
his prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 23.29.
That his word was like a fire, and like a hammer that breaks the stone. Al
which places do prove that the word is the ordinary isntrumental eause of a
man's repentance, and conversion; as also these reasons consirme it.

Reason 1.
First because it is so powerful, and pearcing, as the author to the Hebrews
says, Heb. 4.12.
That it is lively and mighty in operation, sharper the^ any two edged sword,
etc. Which power it has not from any inherent quality in it self, or from
man that preaches it, but because of ye supernatural power of God, who, as
the Apostle says to the Galathians, Galath. 2.8.
was mighty by Peter in the Apostleship over the Circumcision, and was mighty
by him also toward the Gentiles. Noting that when men are converted by the
preaching of the word, and it is powerful to that purpose, it has it not of
it self, but from God: but howsoever, it is indeed powerful, Psalm. 19.7.
and does convert the soul.

Reason 2.
The second reason is, because faith is one immediate cause, and beginning of
repentance. Now faith is begotten by the word: therefore repentance also must
needs come by the word. As touching faith, the Apostle to the Romans says,
Romans 10.17.
Faith is by hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Therefore preaching the
word being the cause of faith, it must needs be the cause of repentance. Causa
causae, causa causati.


Reason 3.
The third reason is: Because the conversion of men is the seal and only
miracle that the Gospel now has. And it is usual with the Lord in working
miracles to shadow them by outward means that he might conceal his own
work, specially from unbelievers. As Solomon says, Prou. 25.1.
The glory of God is to conceal a thing secret. Then it is his glory to cover
this miracle by this outward means, 1. Cor. 1.21.
and by so foolish and base a thing as preaching is in the eyes of the world,
to work this great wonder, and to save men, designed by Satan to destruction.

And when I say the word is the isntrumental cause of repentance, I exclude
not the law, as that which helps to this, though properly it work it not:
for by bringing men to the sight and knowledge of their sins, and miseries,
it prepares them for the receiving of that grace, and mercy, which is
propounded in the Gospel, as an eating corasiue which makes way for a healing
medicine. But the Gospel is the message of glad tidings, and mairing the
promises of pardon ^dre^sission of fumes, is that which especially works it,
or that which does thoroughly work it in men.

Use 1.
Now for to make use of this truth unto our selves. First, This may teach us,
that their case is fearful, that are without the preaching of the word,
because they are without the ordinary means, and so without hope to come to
repentance; as Jews, Turks and Infidels, that are deprived of the word, and
they that live in corners where the sound of it is not heard. It was a
fearful curse when Christ said unto his Apostles, Matthew. 10.5.
Go not into the way of the Gentiles, and into the cities of the Samaritans
enter ye not. And now that some have found mercy which sought it not and others
are still left in their darkness and horrible blindness: it is no less
fearful when God denies still the ministry of the word unto them, and
says as it were unto his ministers preach not there, for it is as if he had
said, I will not have these converted, as Augustine says: Quoniam vt crederent
non erat ijs datum, etiam vnde crederent est negatum. Aug. de bono
perseuerantiae.
God has denied unto men the means whereby they should believe, because he
has no purpose that they should believe. And so God has denied to men that,
by which they should be converted, because he has not purposed their
conversion. Then wheresoever men want it, either by the judgment of God
denying it to them, or by their own peevishness, withdrawing themselves from
hearing the word, or else not harkning to it, having ears not boared, but
given to drowsines and sleepiness and so they want it, though they live in the
midst of it, such an estate is a fearful sign as if God had no purpose
they should he converted.

Use 2.
2. Secondly, this teaches us to acknowledge the happy condition of that
people, or that nation or place, wheresoever God has vouchsafed the preaching
of the word, to wit, that it is a mauifest proof he has a people there that
he would convert, and has a desire to save them. As he said to Paul in the
Acts, when he was at Corinth: Acts 18.18.
Fear not, but speak, for I have much people in this place; Arguing that he
had a people there whom he meant to save, and therefore he sent his word to
them. So whersoeuer God sends his word, and gives, his ministers gifts, and
conscience to preach the word unto any nation or people, it is a sign he
favors them, and that he would have them converted and be saved; though not
every one that hears it (for many have this but to make them more inexcusable
and to increase their judgment) but only those to whom he gives hearts and
ears open unto it; which if it be so great a favor from God, then are we to
acknowledge the mercy of God, that has sent his Gospel amongst us, and given
gifts unto men to preach the same unto us. For wherefore has God given his
Ministers knowledge to preach the word? is it only for themselves? No verily,
for as they are men they could be saved with as little knowledge as others.
But God has given them gifts for the gathering together of his Church, and for
the conversion of others. And here we are to be stirred up to walk worthy of
this benefit, lest it be removed, and taken from us, and given to a nation that
will bring forth better fruit. For though we may be already converted by the
benefit of the ministry hitherto inioyed, yet what shall become of our
posterity, eue^ of so many thousand infants or sucklings, if they may not have
ye means by which they may be converted? If the^ we have any love unto the^,
that as they are our children by nature, so they may be the children of God by
grace, let us labor to walk worthy of this mercy, that we may leave it to
our posterity, as our sathers left it to us (which doubtless will be the best
patrimony) that as we begat them to the world, so the word may beget them to
God, and we may with them be glorified together.

Use 3.
3. Thirdly, seeing that God begets us unto him by the word, then ought
every one, who has any care to attain to this, to take out, and learn that
good sentence of S. James: James 1.19.
My dear brethren (says he) let every man be swift to hear, slow to speak,
and slow to wrath. Consisting of three special, and spiritual aphorisms: 1.
Be swift to hear, that is to say, Take all occasions, and opportunities that
may be to embrace the truth. 2. Be slow to speak, take heed of a spirit of
contradiction and reasoning against the truth delivered. 3. And slow to wrath:
be not apt to be offended, when thy sins are reproved. For the first, every
man ought to learn it. The wise man in his book of Eccles. says: Eccles.
11.6.
In the morning sow thy seed, and in the evening let not thine hand rest: for
thou know not whether shall prosper, this or that, etc. So ought a man to
take all occasions to hear the word, for he knows not at what time God will
bestow this mercy and grace of repentance upon him. It may be, even then when
he sought worldly blessings, and followed after profits and pleasures, if he
had been as careful and eager to hear, he might have obtained this, and God
would have wrought it in his heart. Happily his thoughts are, if he take not
that opportunity for worldly things, he may not a long time have the like
again; and never thinks that it may be his case in this thing. But let him
remember that Jacob had the blessing when Esau was a hunting: and so that many
attend to this and obtain salvation by it, when he is a hunting after
pleasures, and profits and such like. I know God is able indeed to touch him
and call him whersoeuer he straieth, and without these means; and I know that
that is the thought of many men's hearts, which makes them so to neglect the
means as they do, and all because some were so called. But these men must
know, that as God ceased to feed Israel from heaven extraordinarily, when he
had set them in the land of Canaan, and gave them means to live ordinarily;
which if they neglected they could have looked for nothing else but to famish
and perish: So has he in this; neither may any man look for such
extraordinary things, who neglects the ordinary. For such wicked tempting of
God, will provoke him rather to leave him to himself, to be hardened and made
more obstinate, than to work extraordinarily for him. Therefore must he be
swift to hear, that so using the means (specially with conscience, and
diligence) he may obtain the blessing. Yet must he not be so swift in this,
as slow to speak; I mean not, slow to speak of the word in conference with
others, but not to speak against it, nor to quarrel with it, questioning and
reasoning against it: as it is the manner of some, who will be swift to hear;
I say they will hear much and often, but withal they will reject every thing
that is not directly to their minds (as if a minister must be a tailer, to
shape every garment after their crooked loins, and lives) or else they will
question with this man and that concerning such a point, but never will once
question with their Minister, or him of whom they heard that, which argues
they have only a spirit of contradiction, and no desire to be instructed,
seeking to entrap, or disgrace the Minister, and not to be caught and turned
themselves; whereas if they were slow to speak, better fruit, and more
benefit might they reap. But specially if they be slow to wrath, and be not
offended when they have their sinnnes touched. Not as some who are like
Stephens hearers, who heariug some thing that pleased them not, Acts 7.54.
Their hearts brast for anger, and they gnashed at him with their teeth. For
touching such men, experience teaches us that which James affirms: James
1.20.
That the wrath of man does not accomplish the righteousness of God. For few or
never any of these, while they are themselves, and come not to deny
themselves, come to any degree of repentance, and so not to regeneration. That
which Chrysostom then has of the reproouer, will have the same use in the
hearer: Quisquis alios vult reprehendere, animam suam ab omni temeritate and
arrogantia, qua^ maxim libera^ faciat. Nam vt medici ossa putrida and accensa
secturi, non ira se replent, quando curatum eunt, sed tunc maxim
tranquillitatem animae seruare student, ne forte obsit arti turbatio. Chrysostom.
aduersus Gentes.
He that will take upon him to reprove others, must have special care to
free his mind from hastines and arrogancy. For as Surgions when they are about
to lay open, or cut off rotten and inflamed bones, do not fill them selves with
anger, when they go about the cure, but then speciallis endeavor to have their
minds quieted, lest happily the disquietnes hinder their art. So he would have
reproouers free from wrath and anger, lest it shouid hinder them from doing
that good they might else do. And so, say I, for hearers and the reproved,
when they come to hear ye word, they should put on the spirit of meeknes, and
hearken diligently to the word of God, James 1.21.
and not be offended at the Minister, or at the word, when it speaks not as
they would have it: but mark this exhortation of the Apostle; and remember,
that to the end they may receive the word to be converted by it; They must be
swift wheare, slow to speak, and slow to wrath.

The inward isntrumental cause of repentance is faith.
The second isntrumental cause of repentance is faith, within us, wchich is,
as one says, the mother of repentance, which brings ir forth, as the word is
the begetter, and so may have the name of father. But of that has been spoken
in the description of repentance.

The isntrumental cause from within is prayer.
The third isntrumental cause or special means by which repentance is
obtained or renewed, is prayer; faith within us, this from within us, is the
means of it: I say, by faithful prayer, and earnest invocation of the name of
God, men obtain this gift of God, to repent. Hence it is that David when he
had fallen into sin, knowing that he had not repentance in his own power,
prays so earnestly to God and says: Psalm. 51.10.
Create in me a clean heart, O God, and renew a right spirit within me. And
Ephruim uses the same means for his conversion, touching whom the Prohpet
Jeremy brings in the Lord thus saying: Ierem. 31.18.
I have heard Ephraim lamenting thus; Thou have corrected me, and I was
chastised as an untamed calfe: convert thou me, and I shall be converted, etc.
And Jeremy prays in his Lamentation for himself and his people thus:
Lament. 5.21.
Turn thou us unto thee O Lord, and we shall be turned, renew our days as of
old. By all which places it is apparent that prayer is a means, by which
repentance is obtained from God, and that men of old have sought it from him;
And reason they had to do so.

Reason 1.
First, because it is Gods gift: now his gifts he gives to men who desire
them, and so seek for them by fervent prayer; for defire will make them ask,
and that with earnestnes. For most commonly where the heart affects, there
(as one says) the hand touches, and the tongue talks, yea and that with
earnestnes and intention. Seeing then God gives repentance, but not undesired,
desire and prayer must needs be a special means to come by it.

Reason 2.
Secondly, because God works this in men by his spirit, it affecting, moving,
and changing men's hearts, and therefore it is called the spirit of
regeneration, and sanctification, by S. Paul to Titus,: Titus 3.5.
He saved us by the washing of the new birth, and the renewing of the holy
Ghost. Now this is to be obtained by prayer, as our Savior Christ in the
Gospel of S. Luke says: Luke 11.13.
If ye that are evil, can give good gifts unto your ohildren, how much more
shall your heaueuly father give the holy Ghost to them that desire him? Hence
is that prayer of David: Psalm. 51.12.
Restore to me the joy of thy salvation, and stablish me with thy free spirit.
The spirit then is Gods finger to work repentance, the means to obtain the
spirit is prayer: therefore is invocation of God a special means to obtain
repentance.

Object.
Here may some object: If prayer be a means by which men come to repentance;
how should an impenitent sinner pray? or pray that he may be accepted? and so
at all, or any time be converted?

Answ.
I answer, that an impenitent man is either such as never repented, or such as
having repented, is relapsed, and fallen into some sin. This latter, though he
have diminished his graces, has not utterly lost them by his fall, and so
having them (though in smaller measure) he may pray for the renewing thereof.
The other sort of impenitents is double, either the Heathen and Infidels, who
indeed cannot pray in faith, knowing not the Gospel, of whom is that spoken by
S. Paul to the Romans: Romans 10.14.
How shall they call on him, in whom they have not believed? and how shall they
believe in him, of whom they have not heard, etc. Or they are young, and newborn Christrans, who may be endued with some knowledge, and may pray, though
not as they ought, nor as the faithful of better understanding do: I say they
may have some general faith, though not a special, express and distinct
faith, by which they may be able to pray, as Carnelius did, who prayed and so
had faith, as Augustine says: Cuius acceptae sunt eleemosynae and exanditae
orationes antequam credidisset in Christum: nec tamen sine aliqua side donabat
and orabat. Nam quomodo inuocabat, in quem no^ crediderat? August. de praedest
Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 7.
His alms were received, and his prayers heard, before he believed in Christ:
yet did he not give and pray without some faith. For (says he) else how did be
call upon him, on whom he had not believed? Meaning that he had a faith,
though not a distinct faith, as afterward he had by the preaching of Peter. Now
prayer from these or the first kind of men, who need repentance, may obtain
and prevail with God for this gift. And now I pass to the uses of this point.

Use 1.
The first whereof is: That if prayer be a means to beget repentance; then
may we see hereby whence it is in part that many men never repent, nor turn to
God, but go on still in their wicked and wandering courses; namely, because
they never once pray for it. As therefore S. James says, James 4.2.
Ye get nothing, because ye ask not; fo may be said of these men, they
obtain not, because they ask not, nor seek it. Many other things they may be
heard asking of God, and sometimes a little coldlie the remission of their
sins, and more earnestly the remoouing of a punishment, or judgment; but they
never desire, or pray heartily for repentance. Which arises either from the
blindness of their minds, or the corruption of their affections, sometime from
the one, and sometime from the other. Some men happily think so well of
themselves, that they need it not, and where there is no need, or no need felt
and discerned, there will be no seeking not desiring. No man desires that,
which he already inioyeth. Now to have, and not to want, Nemo appetit quod
habet.
differ not much; and what is prayer, but a desire and seeking to have that we
want? which want they not discerning they pray not, and praying not it proves
they discern not their need. Whosoever, says Bernard, Quisquis non ardenter
desideret poenitentiam, videtur operibus dicere, non indigere se poenitentia.
Bernard. in Vigil. natiu. Dom. sermon. 2.
does not earnestly desire repentance, he seems to say by his practice, that
he has no need of it. Some again though they discern they need it, yet they
think they can repent when they list, and that it is a thing in their own
power. Now he that has need of any thing, and can supply his own want, or is
so persuaded he can do it, when it shall be fitting for him, he will never
ask it, or seek it elsewhere. And this is that conceit which possesses most
men, and so makes them never seek, nor pray for repentance. Some again are
so corrupted in their affections, and in such love with their sin, that they
ask not this, because they are loath to part with that; or if they pray, it is
coldly, and carelessly, to teach God to deny. As a little before we heard
Augustine confess of himself, that whilst he was in his sins, being loath
to part with them, he prayed God to give him chastity, but desired it not in
his heart, but was afraid lest God would hear him too soon, because he
would live in sin still, to fulfill the lusts of his flesh. So these men have
many sins of pleasure, profit or delight, and they pray to God to give them
repentance, but they desire it not in their hearts, because they are loath to
part with their sins. Or admit they go about to make a change, yet as
Augustine says of himself; Non placet ire per istas angustias. August.
Confess. lib. 8. cap. 1.
They are loath to go such a strait, narrow, and painful way, by crucifying
the flesh and mortifying the members. And so they pray not, or they get not,
because they ask not, or ask amiss.

Object.
But some man may object here, what need men ask, and pray for repentance,
seeing God gives it to many not asking, as he gave it to Paul and others?

Answ.
I answer, that this is no dispensation to free any man from this duty. It
being a sin for a man, not to pray for the things which he is bound to have:
though God then do give him them undesired, yet is he to be humbled in
soul, when he has them, for not praying for them: And so no doubt they were
that truly repented. Besides, Gods extraordinary dealing is no rule for
ordinary things, nor any warrant for a man to neglect ordinary means. As it
is no warrant for a man to neglect provision for his life, because the Lord
extraordinarily fed the Prophet by ravens. Yea rather men should thus infer,
that if to them he gave it, not seeking it, and if he was found of the^ that
sought him not, how much more will he be found of those, who seek him, and
give to those who ask it of him?

Use 2.
The second use is, to persuade men, to use this means by which they may thus
obtain repentance, or renew it; not only to frequent the hearing of the word,
which is one means, by which this may be wrought in them, but fervently also
to call upon God, who is powerful by his word, that it may be effectual
hereto, and that he would turn their hearts, and do that which is his proper
and glorious work, namely, to drop into them his grace, which may mollify
their stony hearts, and to quicken their souls being clean dead in sin. And
this ought they to do not seldom, or coldly, or negligently, but often with
vehemency of affection, and with all importunity, giving no rest, night nor
day to themselves, or to God, till they have obtained their desire. For this
importunity how it will prevail, Christ shows in Saint Lukes Gospel by the
parable of the unrighteous Judge, Luke 18.5.
which though he feared not God nor reverenced man, yet because the widow
troubled him, by her importunity, he would dee her right. And to whet them
on, they ought to labor to see their want of it by reason of their own
sinful and wretched estate, together with their inabilitie to perform it of
themselves, who cannot make one hair white, or black, nor remove any wrinkle
from their faces, much less change their souls. They may be able to pray to
God as Augustine did: August. Confess. lib. 1. cap. 5. Augusta est domus animae
meae, que venias ad eam, dilatetur abs te: ruinesa est, refice came, etc.
The house of my soul is very little, how can thou come unto her? do thou
therefore enlarge it: It is very ruinous, do thou repair it: It has many
things which may offend thy holy eyes: I confess and know it: but who shall
elense it? or to whom rather should I pray then unto thee? Specially seeing the
holy man Job says, Job 14.4.
Who can make it clean, that comes of an unclean thing? As if he said, no
man. And yet David says to God, Psalm. 51.27.
Wash me thorowlie from mine iniquity, and cleanse me from my sin. And
again: Purge me with hyssope, and I shall be clean: wash me, and I shall be
whiter then snow. And he that shall thus pray shall obtain, he that shall
thus wrestle with God, shall undoubtedly overcome. For if men who are silly
worms, stand so much upon their honor, that they think it a disgrace, that
any man should say, that he had in vain asked help at their hands: as we
read of the Senators of Rome in old time: Shall not God, who is as able as the
richest, and as willing to give as the frankest, yea, and has as great care of
his glory, as any man has of his worldly worship and renown, think it a
disgrace that any man should go from him, with this discomfort, and say, I
have in vain afflicted my soul, humbled my self at his footstool, repaired
to the place of his presence, and called upon him faithfully, and can get
nothing? And the rather should we thus frequently pray, because God has so
often granted grace to men, even whilst they asked it; and does touch their
hearts and souls by his spirit, in the very instant, while they are thus
exercised in earnest prayer. For as the Smith strikes the iron while it is
hot, or fit to receive any form or impression: so God, although he could
imprint his grace in the coldest and hardest heart, or most flintie
disposition, yet he rather does it when the affections are stirred up by
hearing of the word, public prayer, or by some private Christian exercise of
reading, singing, praying and such like: and then chiefly sends he his
spirit and works, and thereby conuaieth grace unto men. Therefore there
should be more care had in coming to the public assemblies of the Church,
and prayers thereof, and in stirring up our affections to pray unto God, seeing
at that time especially he gives grace unto men, and if we be not wanting to
our selves, he will not be wanting unto us. He then that rejects these, and
goes on carelessly and negligently, if God do not give him repentance, but
leave him in the blindness and hardness of his own heart, he has none to accuse
but himself. And thus much for the efficient causes of repentance, whether
principal or isntrumental, without us or within us, or from us.

The final cause of repentance Gods glory and a man's own good.
Now we must proceed to the final cause, and end of repentance, which is
principally the glory of God, and then the good of the repentant, either
temporal, or spiritual; either present or to come, as the remoueall, and
preventing of punishment, or procuring of some good, as earthly blessings, and
eternal happiness. I say, all men ought to confess their sins, and humble
themselves, conde^ning all their ways in the sight of God, and study and
labor for the mortification of the flesh, and true regeneration, that they may
glorify God, by that change and new life, and procure good to themselves
spiritual and corporal, temporal and eternal. Which is manifest by yt in the
book of Joshua: Joshua 7.19.
when as Achan had sinned, Joshua bids him give glory to God, and confess
his sin. And the Apostle Paul says in the Epistle to ye Romans: Romans 3.23.
They have all sinned, and are deprived of the glory of God: as if he had
said, they are deprived of that, by which God is glorified. And if we consider
of repentance as it is beneficial unto man, S. John says, Matthew. 2.7.
that repentance auoideth judgments to come. So they that heard Peter preach,
were such as by repentance did avoid the judgment to come. And our Savior
Christ says, Luke 13.3.5.
Except ye repent ye shall all likewise perish: where he notes, that where no
repentance is, there is no escaping of judgment. And the Prophet Ezekiel
says: Ezech. 18.13.
Make you a new heart. Why will ye die, O ye house of Israel? which is not meant
of the temporal death, but of death eternal. So then by all these places it is
manifest that the end of repentance, is the glory of God, and the good of men.
And not without good reason.

Reason 1.
First, because the glory of God ought to be the end of all men's actions: as
it is to himself, the end of all his works, and he made them for his glory;
so it should be to men, the end of their works. And therefore S. Paul to the
Corinthians wills them saying: 1. Cor. 10.31.
Whether ye eat or drink or whatsoever ye do, do all to the glory of
God. Now this being so principal an action of man, ought also to have this end.

Reason 2.
2. Secondly, because by repentance sin is removed, which procures evil to
men, and hinders good from them: and such men are in the state of
sanctification and holiness, which has the promises both of this life and that
that is to come, and which is the way to the kingdom of of glory, and so to
salvation, though not the cause; and so man's good is procured by it.

Use 1.
The uses which we may have from this end of repentance are these: First, this
may teach us to see that many men's repentance is faulty, not in other things
only, but in this also: who when they either have it indeed in some measure,
or else but a show or semblance of true repentance, yet they never think once
of this end; the glory of God is the furthest thing in their thought. Hence is
it, that in a judgment from God, when they are feared, or afflicted, they
grieve not that they have dishonored him, but only that they have dipleased
him, and procured such hard things to themselves, and so repent only to avoid
or remove them, and never to bring any glory to him. Which makes many men
who hope of repentance, to take liberty to sin, when once they are freed. As
Ahab did, who when he was punished, thought he had displeased God, and so
sought to please him again by his outward humiliation, that he might escape
the punishment, but never thought of the dishonor he had done to God, but
returned to his old sins again. Men commonly do but humble themselves as
mariners do, who in a storm and in the danger of shipwreck make long prayers
and large promises unto God; but if they have once escaped to the land, and
recovered their spirits, they return to their old distempers and disorders
again: so many men who are crept out of a judgment, return again to their
old dishonoring of God; which proves plainly that in their repentance they
only respected themselves, and not the glory of God at all, or at least not
principally, as they should.

Use 2.
2. Secondly, this does admonish every one, not only to repent, but to do it
with that affection he ought; and to propound the just end of it to himself: to
wit, principally the glory of God; that as at first he dishonored God by his
sinning, and opened the mouths of men to blaspheme the name of God, as David
made the Heathen to blaspheme by his adultery: and as the Lord to deliver his
name from repro^h slew David's child, and smit it with death; so should he
aim at the glorifying of God, and freeing him from any imputation, by
crucifying his sins, and mortifying his corruptions, and with David offer
unto God a contrite and a broken heart, as a sacrifice acceptable, and labor
to show forth his works of renouation, that men may see them and glorify God.
And then in the second place, to aim at his own good, specially spiritual
and eternal salvation, and then temporal preservation. Neither of which can
he do in truth, if either as some, so he return again to his corruptions,
and think, because of repentance, he has liberty to sin, Cum poenitentia
reinedium peccati sit, non peccandi incentiuum. Vulneri enim medicamentum
necessarium est, non vulnus medicame^to; quia propter vulnus medicamentum
quaeritur, non propter medicamentum vulnus desideratur. Ambros. de Poenit. lib.
2. cap. 9.
when as repentance is a remedy for sin, and not a provocation to sin. For the
medicine is necessary for the wound, and not the wound for the medicine;
because men seek the medicine for the wound, and not the wound for the
medicine. Wherefore he that shall wound himself with sin, because he has a
remedy, tempts God, and does rightly aim, neither at the glory of God, nor
the good of himself. But he that indeed has these ends before his eyes and
in his heart, will leave his old sins and corruptions, and deny them all,
and strlue to his power never to fall into them again. Ambrose tells us a
fable, and gives us the moral with it. Ambros. de Poe nit. lib. 2. c. 10.
There goes a tale, says he, of a young man who had been entangled with the
love of an harlot; at length wearied with her society, he departed from her,
and went into a strange country. Then his love being worn out, he returned,
and estsoones he met with his old friend, but did not salute her: she wondering
at it, supposed he knew her not. The next time therefore she met him, she said
to him: I am she I was. To whom he answered: But I am not be I was. Egesum. Sed
ego non sum ego.
The moral is this, that the Lord said well (says the Father) Matthew. 16.24.
that if any will be my disciple, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross and follow me. Therefore if we will be the disciples of Christ, we must
deny all our old companions, our old sins and corruptions, forsaking them
all, and walk with Christ: so shall we not only propound to our selves these
ends, but also in some measure procure them, causing other men by our true
conversion and holy conersation to glorify God; and also preparing, and
obtaining in the end by the mercy and promise of God, good things both
spiritual and temporal for our selves.

Having thus spoken of the description, parts, and causes of repentance, and
seeing much more may be added, as Ambrose says, Ne velut semesas verborum
nostrorum epulas reliquisse videamur. Ambros. de Poenit. lib. 2. cap. 1.
lest we should leave as it were the dishes of our words and discourse but
half eaten; The persons to whom repentance belongs.
I must yet prosecute it further, and in the next place speak of the parties
in whom this true repentance is wrought. For as the Apostle says, that all
have not faith, so repentance is not common to all, that is to say, true,
sincere, and saving repentance; for there is a repentance of Ethnicks and
Infidels, who for fear of punishment, and sometime for love of virtue, may
leave their sins. And there is a serious repentance of the wicked, but it is
but temporary, as that of Ahab, which is but worldly sorrow that brings forth
death. And there is a repentance of hypocrites, which is fained and
Pharisaicall, only in the outward act. But of none of these do I speak, but
of true repentance, such as is described before; touching which this is the
point to be observed:

Only the elect can truly repent.
That true, sincere, and saving repentance is only of the elect; and that none
can repent, and truly turn to God from their sin but they who are elected of
him. And this is a book case, proved thus. First in Isaiah, Isa. 59.20.
where the Lord promises the Redeemer unto them that turn from iniquite in
Jacob: So that only they for whom Christ died, can repent. So the Apostle
Peter says: Acts 5.31.
God has made him a Prince and a Savior to give repentance to Israel. That
is, to the true people of God. Hence it is that the Apostle Paul to the Romans
Romans 2.5.
speaks of some that cannot repent through the hardness of their hearts.
Likewise the Author to the Hebrews excludes many from repentance, and says,
Heb. 6.4.
That it is not possible that they should be renewed by repentance. This
further has a probatum est, as we say, for it is never found in the
Scriptures, that any truly repented, but such as were Gods by election and
grace, and such were David, Peter, Manasses, Mary and such like, who truly
repented because they were his, whereas others never could, because they were
not elected of him. Therefore this is a thing only proper to the children and
elect of God: which truth stands with reasons also out of the word of truth.

Reason 1.
The first is, because repentance and remission of sins go together, and to
whom one belongs, to them both appertain: therefore are they joined together
by the Apostle Peter: Acts 5.31.
He shall give repentance to Israel, and remission of sins. But remission of
sins is proper to the elect of God, and is only a benefit bestowed upon his
own: As in the Apostles creed we believe it to be a priulledge only
belonging to the Church and her members: Therefore repentance is likewise
only theirs.

Reason 2.
The second is, because true repentance, the spirit of regeneration, and true
faith ever go together, and are inseparable; for from these it arises, and
comes, as has been showed: now only the elect can have these, and those who
are Gods. As says the Apostle to the Romans: Romans 8.9.
They that have the spirit of Christ they are his. And none can have faith but
those that have Gods spirit. And S. John says, John 1.12.
To as many as receined him, and believed in his name, he gave power to be the
sons of God. Then if faith and the spirit of sanctification, be proper only
to the elect, none but they are likewise capable of this benefit of repentance.

Reason 3.
The third is, because repentance in this life, and salvation in that which is
to come, are necessary consequents one of another: whosoever repents, shall
be saved: and whosoever is saved did repent: but salvation is only of the
elect, therefore repentance is proper to them also.

Question.
Why then is repentance preached to all?

Answ.
Because the Lord only knows who are his, and who belongs to his election,
and not man; and therefore though there be many wolves within the Church, as
sheep without; yet must (as Augustine says) the Minister preach to al, because
often wolves are made sheep, and for ought that he knows one may be called as
well as another. For as Augustine speaks of faith, so may I of repentance:
Posse habere fidem, sicut posse habere charitatem naturae est hominum: habere
autem fidem, vt habere charitatem gratiae est fidelium. August. de praedest.
Sanct. lib. 1. cap. 5.
The nature of man may have and is capable of faith, as it is of charity: (I
ad, of repentance) but it is a proper grace of the faithful to have faith and
charity. (I add here also, repentance.) And sometime men most unlikely are
wont to have faith and brought to repent; and others whom men would think God
had chosen, are rejected. As David in the eyes of Samuel was farthest off from
the kingdom of all the sons of Ishai, yet he only was anointed: so oftentimes
he that is most likely in the eyes of man, by reason of a civil course of
life, is farthest from repentance. Who would have thought that Saul a
persecuting Pharisie should have bin converted, and many other civil and sly
Pharisees and Scribes been left in their sins? yet so it was. By which it
appears, that many more unlikely are called and converted, when others more
likely are left in their corruption. And thus the question being resolved, I
come to the uses of this point.

Use 1.
And first this is but cold news for many men living in the Church, and lying
in their sins, in their hardness of heart and impenitencie; yea when they are
such, as by the means, which draw others to a consideration and search of their
ways, and to a reformation of their lives, they are more hardened, and further
from returning: as namely by the judgments of God, and the preaching of the
word. This may be cold at their hearts, they can have no assurance that they
are Gods: I do not say, that they are not his at all, for not simple
impenitencie, but final obstinacy, is a proof of that; but they can have no
assurance that they are his, while they are in that condition: yea rather they
have just cause to suspect they are not his. Such men especially, as when they
are persuaded to this duty, answer, some in words and some by their carriage,
what needs this? or to what end is it? our sins are now past, neither can we
effect, that we should not have fallen; that that is done, cannot be undone;
why then should we mourn or afflict our selves? These persons consider not,
that though the action be ceased, yet the guilt remains, which is an
obligation binding them to eternal destruction, and leaving in them the
corruption and deformity of the soul and all the faculties of it. But if they
would reason rightly, they should conclude the contrary to that they imagine.
One comforting a certain Philosopher, mourning for the death of his son, used
this argument to persuade him; that by all his lamentation he could not remedy
that which was done, and revive his son: to whom he answered, Yea this
especially I grieve for, that it cannot be otherwise. So should they mourn
that they have offended, and that it cannot be otherwise compassed, but that
they have offended and transgressed the law of God. Others there are who seeing
their sin prosper with them, and God using it well, and accomplishing by it,
what he would have come to pass, ask why they should vex and trouble
themselves. As those men did, of who^ S. Paul to the Romans speaks, who said:
Romans 3.7.
If the verity of God has more abounded through my lie unto his glory, why am
I yet condemned as a sinner? Which also was the voice of Lea, who said: Genesis
30.18.
God has given me my reward, because I gave my maid to my husband. See,
because God did not curse her, she blessed her self in her sin. Many men when
they see sin prosper, bless themselves in it, and never bethink themselves of
sorrowing or repenting. As if men might abide in sin because grace does
abound, or good may come of it; but whosoever conclude so, the Apostles
sentence is, Romans 3.8.
their damnation is just.

Use 2.
The second use serves for matter of comfort to as many as are partakers of
this grace and gift of true repentance, because by it they may be assured they
are of the elect of God, and of the number of his. A thing that many men would
know, and for that purpose fall to search into Gods secrets, and so often to
lose themselves (as the proud Eagles lose their eyes, looking upon the body of
the Sun, not content with the beams of it:) whereas with more safety and
less labor they may find it nearer hand. What folly is it for a Merchant to
traffike far for a commodity, and with danger of obtaining it, when he has
done all; when he may have it at home? Even so is it great folly for a man to
climb up into heaven, and to search curiously into the counsel of God, for
his election, when as he may have the proof of it within himself: namely, if
he have a new heart and a new life, if he have truly repented, and be renewed.
This is the brand and mark of all Gods sheep, he that has it may be assured
he is his. As the Apostle to Timothy says: 2. Tim. 2.19.
The foundation of God stands sure, and has this seal, the Lord knows who
are his, and let every one that calls on the name of Christ, depart from
iniquity. That is to say, if a man do repent, and forsake sin, he shall know in
himself whether he be the child of God or no. Again to the Colossians he
says: Colos. 5.24.
They that are Christ's have crucified the flesh, with the lusts thereof: whence
also this will follow, they that have not crucified the flesh, with the lusts
thereof, they are none of Christ's. Would thou know now whether thou art
Christ's or not? then examine thy self, whether thy lusts and affections are
crucified or not. If they be not, but sin have as much sway and force in thee
as ever it had, and is not subdued, nor the body of sin destroyed in thee,
thou art none of Christ's. But if the flesh and corruptions thereof be subdued,
mortified and crucified, then art thou Christ's. And, as the standers by said of
Peter, Matthew. 26.73.
Thou art one of his, for even thy speech bewraieth thee: so may all beholders
say of thee, Thou art one of his: yea thou may vnfallablie say to thine own
heart; I am his, for my repentance, my mortification and sanctification does
seal up the same unto me.

We have seen thus in general the parties to whom repentance is appropriated,
that is, the elect: now more specially we must consider them. The elect are of
two sorts, either such as are uncalled, and as yet natural men: or else such
as are called and regenerate; both these have need of repentance and must
repent. And in the first place we must speak of the first.

The natural man must repent.
The natural man and he that is yet not called must repent, and repentance is
very needful for him; which we prove thus: They were natural men to whom
John preached: Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand. So were those unto whom Peter
preached, Acts 2.38.
saying; Amend your lives, etc. Likewise those to whom Christ preached, Luke
13.3.5.
saying, Except ye amend your lives, ye shall all likewise perish. Of whom
also Saint Paul speaks, 2. Tim. 2.25.
willing Timothy to instruct them that are contrary minded, proouing if at
any time God will give them repentance. Natural men then who never repented,
and yet do belong to the election of God, ought to repent. And for good
reasons.

Reason 1.
The first is, because all the elect shall enter heaven, and shall possess the
joys the, which cannot be, unless they be regenerate, and renewed by
repentance. As our Savior Christ said to Nicodemus: John 3.5.
Except a man be borne again, he cannot enter into the kingdom of heaven.
What must he enter into the womb again? No: But except a man be borne of
water, and of the spirit. Then he must be a regenerate man, and therefore a
repentant man, that he may enter into heaven.

Reason 2.
The second is: Because every natural man, as he is such an one is but the old
man, has the image of Satan, and is as like him, as an egg is to an egg. But
he must be a new creature in Christ, and have the image of God, which is not to
be had, but by repentance. For to put off the old man and put on the new, he
must pass by these straits of mortifying and crucifying, as, says Augustine,
August de Doctrine. Christ. lib. 2. cap. 16.
the serpent is said to put off her old skin, and receive new strength, being
streined or pressed by the straitnes of a hole, by which she passes.

Object.
But some may object the saying of our Savior: Luke 15.7.
That there shall be more joy in heaven for one sinner that conuerteth, then
ninety and nine just persons, that need no amendment of life. Then it seems
all must not repent, nor have need of it.

Answ.
I answer, that there are none so just, that need not to repent. For if we
respect men before their calling; then S. Paul says, Romans 3.10.23.
All have sinned, and there is none righteous, no not one But if we respect men
called, it is not against this point: and if we should understand the place of
them, the resolution is easy, that it is spoken comparatiuelie, in respect of
sinners that never repented: That they need not so much repentance as the
other. As a house once repaired well, will not need so much repairing, as that
which never was repaired. But if the place be understood of Angels, as Ambrose
does interpret it, it is nothing to men. If it be understood of the Pharisees
and hypocrites, which thought that they had no need of repentance, and by that
had the more need, as Augustine does expound it; Aug. in quaest. Euang. lib.
2. cap. 23.
it makes nothing against this, but that all natural men have need of
repentance. Which may for use of it teach this thing further:

Use.
That they are in error; who think of themselves, or speak of some other, that
they have no need of repentance, they live so ciuillie, vprightlie, and so
vnblameablelie, and deal so truly. But these must know, that all this civil
carriage, without faith and repentance, is nothing else before God then a
beautiful abomination: Matthew. 7.18.
For a corrupt tree cannot bring forth good fruit: and if ever God open their
eyes, and give them new hearts to see and discern better, (as men come out of a
dungeon) they will wonder and marvel at their palpable and gross darkness they
were in before. In the mean time, that which Christ says in Matthew, may be
spoken to them: Matthew. 5.20.
Except your righteousness do exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall not enter into the kingdom of heaven: and yet were these
Pharisees as civil as they can be for their lives. Two things deceived the
Pharisees, and so do deceive them, that they think they have no need of
repentance: First, because they have some good motions and dispositions, many
good things that they have gotten by custom, and do many good works, and are
at much cost for the worship of God, the help of the poor, and the
furtherance of religion and learning: which does so ouershadow and cover their
corruptions, wherein they are, that they think they cannot be mended.
Secondly, they compare themselves with some notorious sinners, and finding
themselves in a better condition, they are as canonized Saints in their own
opinion, who doubtless need no reformation. That this is the mind of our
mere civil honest men, shall appear if we set them by the Pharisie in the
Gospel, who had this speech; Luke 1^.2.
I am not as other men are, extortioners, unjust, adulterers, or as this
Publican. Is not this the voice of many a man? I thank God I am not like such
a man (comparing himself with some notorious sinner) but I love the Church,
hear sermons, receive the Sacraments, pay the Minister his due, and give alms
to the poor, deal uprightly, oppress and defraud no man, etc. which formal
Christianity and civil honesty does so blind them and ouershadow their sins,
that they think themselves not to stand in need of repentance, and so they
lie still in their corruptions and sins. But every one must labor against
these corruptions, and know that this repentance is absolutely necessary for
them, and that meat and drink is not more necessary to keep their bodies
from famishing, then this to preserve their souls from perishing.

We have seen hitherto that the natural man has need of repentance: now must
we see what is to be judged of the regenerate, concerning whom this I affirm
and deliver:

The regenerate man must repent.
The regenerate man must repent, as well as the natural, he also has need of
it, as well, though not as much. Repentance is required in him. This is
manifest by that in the Revelation. The Church of Ephesus had many good things
in her, Revel. 2.5.
yet she decayed in graces, God exhorts her therefore, verse 13.
to remember from whence she was fallen, and repent. Even so in the same
chapter was it with the Church of Pergamus, verse 14.15.
and yet because she had those among her that maintained the doctrine of
Balaam, as also of the Nicolaitans, therefore she must repent. The like also was
commanded to the Church of Sardi. He says, Chap. 3.2.
Be awake and strengthen the things that remain that are ready to die; for I
have not found thy works perfect before me: remember therefore and repent. So
likewise Ephraim the people of God, Ierem. 31.18.
having fallen from God, and being become as an untamed heyfer, she comes and
prays, Luke 15.
Lord convert thou me, and I shall be converted. And our Savior Christ by the
two parables, one of the lost sheep, that was brought home upon the shoulder,
the other of the prodigal son, manifests that there is place of repentance
for men falling into sin after regeneration. Examples we have many: David a
man after Gods own heart was again renewed by repentance, when he had fallen
by sin. So Peter that was even the chiefest among the Apostles, in respect of
gifts and graces, falling into sin, was renewed by repentance. Then it is
manifest that repentance is necessary for those that are called and
regenerate. And for this we have good reason.

Reason 1.
The first is, because the most regenerate man that is sins. S. James says,
James 3.2.
that in many things we sin all. And Solomon says, Eccles. 7.22.
that no man in the earth is so just, that sins not. And our Savior Christ
teaches every man, even the most perfect, to pray for forgiveness of his
sins, and that every day, as the conjunction of the third and fourth
petitions shows. Matthew. 6.2.12.
Therefore must there be a renewing of repentance, and a new application of the
salve to the sore.

Reason 2.
The second is, because no man is so regenerate, but he has many corruptions
still continuing in him. Therefore S. John says, 1. John 1.8.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and truth is not in us. And
many such like places there are, proouing that then only when a man goes out
of his body, at his last day and death, is he freed from the body of this
death, or the stumps of that body. For though corruption came in a moment, by
one sin, yet is it not cast out in a moment at one time. The image of God was
lost in a minute, yet is it not repaired again in a man's whole life time
perfectly, but as houses are long in building again, which are ouerturned in
an instant. Now then for the mortifying of those corruptions, and the renewing
of the other graces, the regenerate man must still exercise repentance.

Use 1.
The first use of this doctrine, may serve to confute their error, who deny
repentance to men, which once professing, or being regenerate, after through
infirmity fall away and seem to deny Christ, in time of persecution or
trouble, and conclude that such men cannot be renewed again by repentance, who
for their ground use the words of our Savior Christ: Matthew. 10.33.
He that denies me be foremen, I will deny him before my father which is in
heaven. Therefore, say they, he that denies Christ, there is no place for him
to repent. The answer is, that Christ speaks there of a final denial, and
of one that does persist to deny him to the end. But otherwise, for a man to
deny Christ in some extremity of persecution, is not the thing there meant;
but, as Isaiah says, Isai. 29.13.
They draw near to me with their lips, but their hearts are far from me: So
these on the contrary may come near to God with their hearts, though their
lips be far from him: for such may be drawn to deny him in word, but
believe on him in their hearts; of whom we may say, that Vicit eos poena, non
auertit perfidia: negarunt semel, sed quotidie confitentur: negarunt sermon,
sed confitentur gemitibus; eiulatibus, fletibus, liberis, non coactis vocibus.
Ambros. de Poenit. cap. 1.4.
the punishment overcame them, it was not treachery that turned them aside:
they denied him once, but they confessed him daily: they denied him in word,
but they confessed him by their sighs, groans and tears, yea they confessed
him freely, and not by compulsion, as they denied him. Then no reason they
should be rejected, and not received. Nonne ita istud est, ac si quis captiuum
victa vrbis populum abducat? Captiuus abducitur, sed inuitus: qui in alienas
terras necessitate contendat, intimo tamen non migret affectu: patriam secum
animo vebat, quaerat copiam quemadmodum reuertatur, etc. Ambros. ibid.
For is not this as when an enemy takes a city, and leads the people
captive? They are led captive, but against their wills; by force they go
toward another land, but (...) affection they never remove from their own:
they carry their country in their hearts, and they seek opportunity how
they may return. What then? when such shall return, is there any who will not
persuade to entertain them, though with less honor, yet with more propension
and alacrity, lest the enemy should have wherein to insult and triumph? If
thou pardon an armed man, who could not resist, would thou not pardon him, in
whom only faith does fight?

Use 2.
The second use which is more proper to the doctrine, may serve for a matter of
comfort to those who make conscience of sin, who yet after they have
repented, fall into diverse sinues, and sometime into the same again, and
again: and then are in doubt with themselves whether they may be renewed again
by repentance: for them, and for their instruction and consolation are these
things written; That repentance is for the regenerate, who both ought, and may
repent, which thing presupposes a fall. And therefore has God set down the
fall and rising of many that others may gain by them, says Chrysostom,
namely, Chrysostom. hom. 4. de Poenit.
that looking upon their falls, who were more excellent, they themselves may
be made more wary, and look better to their standing, and by view of their
falls, and rising again, they may gather comfort, that they also may be
restored to their former estate. For though sometimes in the bodily diseases,
a man beholding the sick, may participate in their infirmity, will he, nill
he: as by looking upon those who have sore eyes: yet not so in the soul,
especially when a man is troubled and distracted for his own wants and
infirmities, but he is rather cured by this sight of others men's falls.
Thesemust know then, that though they hauefallen, after their repentance and
regeneration, yet they may rise again by the same means. Therefore let them
look to Abraham often falling into a lie, and yet rising again. Let them
consider David a man after Gods own heart, who having abundance of his spirit
yet fell, and that groslie, from one sin to another, from a second to a third,
and so from one sin to another, until he had eleven sins joined together. I
accuse not the just, but I glorify God, says Basil. Non accuso iustos, sed
Deum glorifico, Basil. mug sermon. de Poenit.
I add to him, I would comfort the weak. And out of him I say further: Let
them ask Christ wherefore he came unto us, and he will tell us, he came not
to call the righteous, but sinners to repentance: make them sinners, and he
came for them. Now none has benefit of Christ, but by repentance. Again, Ask
him what he carries upon his shoulders, he will tell thee, the lost sheep.
Ask him for whose sake they rejoice in heaven, and he will tell thee, at the
conversion of a sinner. The Angels will rejoice, and God will embrace them with
joy; why then should any forbid them to seek unto Christ by repentance, or
they discourage themselves? But more pregnant is the parable of the prodigal
son, urged also by Basil: A man had two sons, they were two and both sons.
Were they sons? then thou can not say, it was the returning of a man that was
never called. The younger of them having his portion, spent it in riotousnes
amongst harlots, yet he returned again to his father, and was received to
favor. See there, a son falling, yet see a son rising again: and his father
embracing him before ever he could speak a word. So that if thou do but
consider of these, thou wiltneuer cast off hope of thy renewing again by
repentance, or of being received again. Thus every man should labor to
comfort himself, and to make this benefit, by the infirmities of others.

But now these men that are in this doubt, have these following objections
against this truth and themselves. The author to the Hebrews says: Heb.
6.4.5.6.
For it is impossible that they who were once lightened, etc. if they fall away
should be renewed again by repentance: And again; Heb. 10.26.
If we sin willingly after we have received the knowledge of the truth,
there remains no more sacrifice for sin. Hereupon they infer, that a man
falling after he is called, is not to be renewed again.

Ansvv.
To this I answer, that it is true which the Apostle says, that a man that
has bin enlightened, and has tasted of the good word of God, if he fall away,
it is not possible he should be renewed again by repentance. But the meaning of
the words is that, which must stay and comfort a man. Ambrose would thus
interpret them; Ambros. de Poenit.
That it is not possible, (that is to say) with men, but with God it is. But
the words will not carry that meaning. The Rhemists, they interpret it and
say, the Apostle does not speak of a thing that cannot be, but to terrify,
and affect men withal, and to make them take heed of falling, he tells
them, it is not so easy a thing to be renewed, but they must endure a while
the penance of the Church. A ridiculous thing it is that they should invent
such things to establish their own fancies, as if the spirit of God did want
words to express himself. But these words are understood of the sin against
the holy Ghost, and not of a man falling only willingly, or presumptuouslie,
but of a man falling utterly away, and that obstinately and contemptuously
against Christ and against the truth. For if we look diligently into the
place we shall see it so; Verse 6.
If they fall away, they shall not be renewed, seeing they crucify to
themselves again the Son of God, and make a mock of him. Now he that so
sins, and has such a downfall, as that he makes a mock of the sufferings
of Christ, the only salve of his sore, it is not possible he should be
renewed again. And as for that which the Apostle says: If a man sin
willingly, after he has received knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more sacrifice for sin: I answer, that the place is not simply understood
of those who sin willingly and fall into sin: but of those who fall from the
truth, and cast from them willingly that one sacrifice, which is the only
sacrifice, namely Christ; to them verily there is no other sacrifice left for
their sin, whereas there is no other sacrifice fit or able to take away any
sin, but Christ being once offered. Therefore he says not, there is no
remission, but, no sacrifice: showing this to be the meaning, of sinning
willingly, that is, willingly rejecting the true sacrifice for sin, which is
Christ and the Gospel, which does offer this sacrifice to all: for such a sin
then is no sacrifice, and so it cannot be pardoned, being the sin against the
holy Ghost. Finally, I say with Ambrose, in answering the former place,
conferring S. Paul's practice in the Epistle to the Corinthians, with this
preaching of his: Nunquid Paulus aduersus factum suum praedicare potuit?
Donauit Corinthio peccatum per poenitentiam: quomodo hic potuit sententiam suam
reprehendere? Ergo quia non potuit, quod aedificauerit, dedestrucre, non
contrarium dixisse cum, sed diuersum aduertimus. Quod enim contrarium est,
seipsum impugnat; quod diuersum est, distinctam solet habere rationem. Ambr. de
Poenir. lib. 2. cap. 2.
Shall we think that Paul could preach against his own act? he forgave the
Corinthian his sin upon repentance; how could be then here reprove his own
judgment? Therefore because he could not destroy that he had built, we must
conceive that he spoke not things contrary, but different, which may well
stand tegether, not which overthrow one another. Otherwise it is manifest, that
the Saints of God who have sinned voluntarily and against their conscience,
upon their repentance have obtained remission. Now that which has been may
be, as well as nothing is new, which has not been.

Object.
But secondly these object against this truth and themselves, that they cannot
read in the word of God of any one who has fallen into one and the same
sin diverse times, and was again recovered and renewed by repentance. But,
saving their judgment, I think I can show them some presidents of such as
have been called, and yet have fallen twice into one sin, and been after
renewed. Let them remember with me the father of the faithful, Genesis 12.
Abraham denying Sara to be his wife, and yet rising again. Genesis 20.
And after in the twentieth chapter he falls into the same sin, and yet
rises: here is a faithful man falling twice into one sin, and yet rising
again. So the holy man Job confesses that he had twice fallen into one
sin: Once (says he) Job 39.38.
I have spoken, but I will answer no more: yea twice, but I will proceed no
further: yet was he again renewed. Therefore let no man despair in himself
though he have fallen, and that often, but that yet he may be renewed again
by repentance, for the covenant of God is general and perpetual: general,
without exception of sins, and perpetual, without limitation of time; for
great sins as well as for small, and for all sins as well as any, and for
all times as well as once. To what end else was that repeated of God? Exodus
34.6.7.
The Lord, the Lord, strong, merciful and grations, slow to anger, and
abundant in goodness and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving
iniquity, transgression and sins: Wherefore does the spirit of God thus
repeat iniquity, transgression, and sin, if it were so, that a man falling
after his calling, were not to be renewed by repentance? and where were the
gracious goodness of God? But admit the ground of this temptation were true; yet
is it as certain a truth, that a man falling into several sins after his
repentance, may rise again and be pardoned; and though one sin again
willingly, yet also be pardoned: why not then falling into one and the same?
Nay if Peter fell three times together into one sin for the kind of it, but
every time differing in the quantity of it, yea and the last the greatest, and
after all this yet found mercy: why may not a man, though he fall again into
the same sin yet find mercy again, and the third time? It may be which
Princes a bar, in their proceedings; if they have pardoned a man for a great
offense, why they should not grant him a pardon for the same, nay not for a
less. But with God it will be no bar at all: for he being infinitely more
merciful then men, and yet requiring this of men: Luke 17.4.
Though thy brother sin against thee seven times in a day, and seven times in
a day turn again to thee, saying, It repents me, thou shall forgive him:
what needs any to doubt, but he shall find mercy and forgiveness with him,
if he can and do repent and return? By all this I give not liberty to
sin, nor encourage any man to transgress; I only comfort them who have
sinned. That seeing repentance is appointed for the regenerate, as well as for
the unregenerate, to renew those that are fallen, as well as to renew those who
were never yet called; they should not doubt but to find mercy whenever they
sought the Lord, if so be they sought him in truth.

Use 3.
The third use of this doctrine is to teach us, that if there be repentance to
all, and they have need of it who have been regenerate and renewed, then is
there a necessary use of the preaching of the word, as well to men that are
called, as to them that are not. This must be unto them instead of Christ's
look upon Peter, Luke 22.60.61.62.
and the crowing of the cock, which may make them remember themselves and go
out and weep bitterly for their sins. The end of preaching was not only to
beget men, but to uphold men also and renew them after their slippes and
falls. For he that is in the best estate in this life is but as a ship, which
if it be neglected it will rot in the haven, and if it be kept never so
carefully, it will still need some repairing. So every man in this condition,
if he be negligent, he will soon be corrupted; and be he as careful as he
can, he shall need some repairing: for living in a corrupt age, and in the
company of wicked men, he cannot choose but gather corruption: how then shall
he be renewed? must it not be by repentance? But how shall he repent, and be
stirred up to this duty, though he were as perfect as Peter, if he have not
the look of Christ and the crow of the cock? I speak this in respect of
those who account the preaching of the word after the Church is gathered, not
so necessary, supposing it a needless thing that the people should have so
much knowledge. But I must tell them that knowledge is not so much gotten by
preaching, as by reading; and that the special end of preaching, is not so
much for knowledge, as for grace and sanctification; and that a man may have
knowledge, and want sanctification, yea he may in part be sanctified and yet
be far short of that he ought to haues which doubtless is to be increased
by the same means it is begotten, which is preaching. There is then perpetual
necessity of it: which made God say of his church: I will water it every
moment: Esaias 27.3.
that is, make it bring forth fruit and increase: yea, and the rather, seeing a
man is subject to a continual decrease in his soul, as he is in his body,
and to lose of the degrees of grace and sanctification which have bin begotten
in him by the preaching of the word. Where upon Chrysostom says: Non sicut
reliquae arts, ita est docendi vis. Argentarius enim qualecunque vas excuderit
and reposuerit, tale postridie reuersus iterum inueniet: and aerarius and
marmorarius, and artificum quisque quale proprium opus dimiserit, tale rursus
recipiet. Non tales vos inueniamus quales relinquimus, sed postquam susceptos
labor multo reformauerimus, and correxerimus, and effecerimus feruentiores,
egressos negotiorum circumstantia vos vndique circumcurrens rursus peruertit
and mayor em nobis praebet difficultatem. Chrysostom. hom. 13. ad pop. Antioch.
The Art of teaching and hearing is not like other arts. For the goldsmith
what work soever he frames and casts in a mould, and lays a side; the
next day when he returns to his work, he finds it as he left it: and, so
the Black smith and the Mason, and eue^ie artificer; look in what condition
they leave their work, in the same they find it. But we do not find you, as
we lefe you, but after that with much labor we have reformed you, and
corrected you, and made you more zealous, you are no sooner departed but the
multitude of businesses does beset you on all sides, and corrupt you, and
makes our work more diffioult then before. Reason then and good cause is
there, that as men cate again and often, for the repairing of the decaies of
the body, so they should hear often, for the renewing and repairing of the
breathes and decaies, which Satan and the world have made in their souls. But
how should they: hear without a preacher, and preaching? men even after their
rene wing and repentance are still subject to sin and sall, and as subject to
lie long in it, even many a week, and many a month, and years, if there be
not means affolded to waken them, though they be very grievous and fearful
falls and sins where with they are overtaken: as it was with holy David, who
for the space of 40. weeks, or there abouts, lay in his sins, that he had
committed, both adultery, and murder. And howsoever he was a Prophet of God,
and enlightened by the spirit of God, yet lay he all that time in security,
never soundly repentiug nor renewing himself till by the voice of Nathan he
was awaked and recovered. And if he, so rare and excellent a man, how much more
may others lie in their sins without ever returning or renewing themselves, if
they have not some Nathan, some Seer, some Preacher or other to awaken them out
of their sleep and security? As necessary then as their repentance is, and
the perpetual use and exercise of it, so necessary is the preaching of the
word, especially seeing men may not stand at a stay, but, (as has been showed)
they ought daily to increase more and more, till they come to that age and
perfection, whereunto God has appointed.

Hitherto you have heard of the nature, parts and causes of repentance, and
lastly of the parties to whom it belongs, and who have need of it. Seven
signs or effects of repentance.
We must now proceed in the next place to speak of seven things inseparable
from repentance: which the Apostle Paul has in his epistle to the Corinthians.
His words are these: 2. Cor. 7.11.
For behold (says he) this thing that ye have bin godly sorry, what great care
it has wrought in you; yea what clearing of your selves: yea what indignation:
yea what fear: yea hoy great desire: yea what a zeal: yea what punishment.
Whether we shall call them effects, or fruits, qualities or properties,
affections or consequences of repentance, ye learned differ, the name is not
greatly material, when it is manifest they are things inse parably joined with
repentance, so that there is no repentance, where they are not in some measure;
and where they are, there is certainly repentance: of them then will I speak
in order. If I may acquaint you sinst with the, conceit of some, who think
that the first of these seven respects both good and evil, which is cara.
The three next evil onlys the first, which is clearing of your selves,
respects evil pastethe second, which is indignation, evil present, the
third, which is fear, evil to come: The three last they will have to respect
good only; which are, desire (...), punishment; But I mean not to tie my
self to their sense, neither would I bind others. And I will speak of them
as the Apostle has laid them down. The first the Apostle called care, or some
interpret it, study. It is thought to be that which is opposite to sloth and
security. So that where as a man that is without true faith, repentance, and
sense of sin, is marvelous secure and careless, either to avoid evil and
sin, or to do the good that he ought: he that has this, is on the
contrary full of care, and full of thoughts, how to avoid evil, and sin,
and keep himself from being corrupted and defiled, and to do the contrary
good: whence we may gather this.

The first sign or effect of repentance is care or study.
That every one, that has a godly sorrow, and true repentance, is not
slothful, but diligent; nor careless, but careful, to avoid all sin;
especially such as he has humbled himself for, and has repented of, so that
he does not only leave them, but he is also studious and careful to avoid
the^, which is manifest by this place of S. Paul to the Corinthians: What care
it has wrought in you: which place Ambrose interprets thus: Qui poenitet
solicitus est, ne denuo peccet.
He that repents is careful he sin not again. As also he is most careful
to do that which is good, and not only does, but is careful to do. This our
Savior Christ persuades the Church of Ephesus unto: Revel. 2.5.
That repenting she should remember from whence sne was fallen, and repent and
do her first works. Not only works, but first works, alluding unto men that
first enter friendship, they are then most careful to do duties one to an
other. To this purpose I take it, that may be applied which was spoken to the
Minister of the Church of Sardi, Revel. 3.2.3.
using two words, Be awake and watch: where he calls them to repentance, and
to show it he would have them awnke, and watch, which notes the carefulnes
here quireth. And these commandments are not clouds without water, words
without grace, for by them, to all his he gives that he calls for, and they
requesting have it, which is manifest in them who have truly repented. As in
David his carefulnes, and watchfulnes appears, by his manifold prayers, and
the earnestnes of them, to be kept from evil, and for grace to do the good;
such a smoke argues fire within. The like may we see in Peter, in Manasses,
and Marie, and in all those that have repented. And to this purpose I may
apply the saying of the Apostle Paul writing to the Ephesians: Persuading him
that had been a thief, Ephesians. 4.28.
and had stolen, to steal no more, but rather labor with his bands: because
idleness caused him to steal, therefore he requires this diligence, and care
to avoid the sin, and for to do the good. And reason also teaches us, that
it will be so in all who truly repent.

Reason 1.
1. Because he that has truly repented, has a true hatred of the evil and
of sin, and a sincere love of the good and of righteousness. Now as well the
one affection as the other, breeds care and deligence. As we may see in
those which be enemies: where and whom they hate, how careful and diligent
are they to do them a displeasure? so on the other side in friends; where a
man loves, he is as careful and diligent to do him good in matters to his
power. The like may I say of Metchants for their gain, and of mothers for
their infants: they are most careful to avoid their loss, and defend them
from evil, and to do them the best good they can, and all this out of love. So
trne repentants having the hatred of evil and the love of good in them, will
with all diligence and care avoid the evil, and do the good.

Reason 2.
2. Because the true repentant finds that much is forgiven him, and hereupon
loves much. According to that saying of Christ, touching Marie, noting a
reason from the effect to the cause. It is a proof, Luke 7.47.
Much was forgiven her, because she loved much: and therefore she loved much,
because many sins were forgiven her, as the second part of the verse she
weth: Then the repentant having much forgiven him, loves much the forgiuer:
which will make him careful and diligent even to avoid all things that may
displease; and to do that which may be pleasing and acceptable: which may
further instruct us thus:

Use 1.
1. That if this be a sign, an effect and fruit of repentance, insepar able
from it, as the light is from the sun, it will argue and convince many men,
who boast of repentance, to be without it indeed, and never to have had it,
seeing they live in the carelessness of the flesh, and sleep in security all
the days of their life, spending nights and days, weeks, months and years,
in vanities, idleness, fond delights, pleasures and voluptuousnes, in negligence
of all duties, forgetfulness of God, and contempt of all good things. Is not the
boast of such men a vain brag, when they say they have repentance? do they
not give the Apostle the lie, when he says, that he that repents has
carefulnes, to avoid sin, and to do the thing that is pleasing to God, and
they are every where secure and careless? If they believe it not now, they
shall one day know, and believe it to their no small cost. Others there are who
boast of it, and live not as these, for their lives are full of all carefulnes,
watchings, labors, and endeavors, but all is but for the world, and the flesh,
being careful for it to fulfill the lusts of it, to satisfy their lusting,
coveting, vaineglorious, ambitious humors: But careless to know good or evil,
and more careless to avoid the one or do the other, showing no hatred nor
love therein, arguing no persuasion of forgiveness, because there is no care of
performing any duty. Many can be content for vain glory or other respects,
to inuit Christ in his Ministers and members to eat with them, as Simon did
in the Gospel of S. Luke, Luke 7.36.
who notwithstanding loved him nothing so dearly as Mary, for he had not, and
they have not, so much forgiven them: nay indeed they have nothing pardoned
unto them, because they never repented.

Use 2.
2. This is to teach men by this first sign and fruit to try their
repentance, and to seal it up to them, by their care they have to avoid sin,
and to do that which is acceptable to God I do not say by avoiding all; or
doing all good, which is not possible; but by their care of both, and in both,
which care is in all that have repentance, and is fruitles in none, but
compasses much, though it effect not all. Many here indeed will brag they
have this, yea all who challenge repentance to themselves, will also lay claim
to this: But whether their title be good or no, they shall know it by these
notes: First, if they be studious and careful to know what is sin and
righteousness, pleasing or distasteful to God; for how can they do, or pretend
care of doing, who have not care of knowing? For, as Augustine says:
Jntellectui fides aditum aperit, infidelitas claudit. August. epist. 3.
Faith makes way for understanding and knowledge, but unbelief keeps a man
from it. So to obaying and doing, knowledge makes way, but ignorance shuts
it up, and excludes men from it. And if men be not studious of knowledge, they
speak absurdly if they boast of practice, for none can do his masters will
that knows it not. 2. If this care be in them, they will watch to avoid all
the means and occasious by which they may be overtaken with sin, especially
such as they have found themselves ouertake^ withal before, and in former
time; as pleasure, delights, company and such like. For as he that would not
fall into the water, will not walk too nie the brim of it; and as men avoid the
air where the Cockatrice lays her eggs, because she poisons the same: So
will will these men do in these things; and not answer as some did Basil:
Bona lex, sed dulcius peccatum, etc.
The law is good, but sin is sweeter. To whom he replied: Pleasure is the
devils hook, drawing men to perdition, the mother of sin, and sin the sting of
death. And especially the former, for which they have smarted already, for if
a fish be once taken with a hook, it will be afraid to bite again: how much
more should man have this fear, and indeed the more his care after repentance
is, the more he will avoid these. 3. If this care be in them, they have their
whole conversation generally good and upright; though they have their slips,
and infirmities, yet they are but strangers unto them, as it is in the parable
of Nathan: 2. Sam. 12.
who said unto David that he had many sheep, and his neighbor but one, and
there coming a stranger unto him, he spared his own sheep, and took that one
of his neighbors for the entertainment of that stranger. Of which place Basil
has this interpretation: Recte peregrinus dicitur hic hospes, non enim talibus
assuer at David. Basil. lib. de Poenit.
This guest was well called a stranger, for David was not accustomed to such
sins: So is it with them, their sins are but strangers unto them, they
accustom themselves only to that which is good, and so do and may approve
their care, and their repentance, by their conversation. But he that dwells
in sin, and makes it an ordinary custom to sin, good things coming but
as strangers to him, he can never seal up his repentance to himself. But if
he have this study and care of knowledge, together with this wariness of all
the occasions, by which he has been overtaken in the bypast times, and this
consiant conuersing in the ways of God, then he certainly has this study or
care which the Apostle makes an inseperable companion of repentance, and so
may be certain he has repented; otherwise as Christ says, Luke 13.
Except you repent you shall perish: So unless he have this care, he shall
certainly perish.

The second sign or effect of repentance, clearing of our selves.
The second sign or effect thereof, is in our translation called, clearing of
our selves: 2. Cor. 7.2.
yea what clearing of your selves. Ambrose reads it, as if it were,
confession, whereas some read it, excusing; for repentance has no excusing
but confession, says one. The word is Apology or defense. The meaning is not,
that a penitent man, for the avoiding of God judgments, should either deny the
offense, or lessen his fault, which cannot stand with true repentance. But the
defense here spoken of, is a defense against sin and Satan accusing him; when
as one by a deprecation, and desire of the pardon of his sin, (accusing
himself to God, and so desiring pardon) has obtained it, by which he may be
able to make his defense against sin and Satan; and this I take to be the
meaning of the word: whereupon I ground this:

Clearing of our selves, or defense, the second sign or effect of repentance.
That sorrow according to God, and true repentance, brings forth in the
repentant a clearing of himself, and a defense by deprecation. That is to say,
when a man has the feeling of sin, and finds it, and Satan accusing of
him, he cannot abide and bear that accusation, but is disquieted until he
have gotten the pardon of his sin, therefore he flies to God, and prays to
him for the forgiveness of his sin, with as much feruencie and earnestnes, as
for the weightiest thing in the world, confessing the action, and indictment,
but desiring the pardon of it, by which he may be able to answer his
accusers. So says the Apostle there, the defense which he speaks of being
against these, and that which defends him, being to be had from God. Thus
Hosea taught the people, by deprecation and prayer to get that where with they
might answer their enemy, when he bad them pray the Lord to take away all
iniquity: Hosea 14.2.
that being pardoned they might defend themselves against the accusation of
sin and Satan. This was also the practice of Daniel, first to confess his
sins and accuse himself to God, and then he said, Dan. 9.18.19.
O Lord hear, O Lord forgive, etc. Likewise David comes and entreats God
for pardon of his sins, as a fruit after repentance. For when the Prophet
Nathan had been with him, Psalm. 51.1.
and told him his sin was forgiven him, yet it seems he had not that
assurance, by which he might boldly answer his enemies and defend himself,
and for that it is he there prays so earnestly. So the prodigal son, being
long in a vain course, when his conscience began to accuse him, and his sins
were brought to mind by his sorrows, and penury he suffered; he came to his
father in close words, desiring the pardon of his fact, by way of accusing of
himself, saying, Luke 15.18.19.
Father, I have sinned against heaven, and against thee, and am not worthy to
be called thy son, make me one of thy hired servants: That by this means
being received to favor, and having obtained mercy, he might defend himself
against all accusers. These with the like testimonies and examples prove this
defense or clearing of a man's self, to go necessarily with repentance. And
reason it is it should do so.

Reason 1.
1. Because the repentant is still subject to sin, though not so much as
before, and more subject to the accusation of his conscience, being now awaked,
which before was asleep, and to the pursuit of Satan, he being now out of his
hands: for as Pharaoh more hatefully pursued the Israelites when they were gone
out of his kingdom, then before; so does he them, and so finding that he has
no friend but God, no marvel if he seek to him for the more favor and
assurance of his love, that he may be able to defend himself. Even as
prisoners and felons, the more inditements are put into the court against them,
and the more the evidences do press the same against them; the more earnestly
they sue for pardon, that they may clear themselves of all those accusations,
and defend themselves against their pursuers.

Reason 2.
2. The secodd reason is, because he more and more sees his state and
corruption better then before when first he repented, by oueruiewing again his
life: as by the reading over again that which a man has written he better
spieth ye faults in it: And so his sins appearing by his second thoughts of
them, that may be able to defend himself against all accusations whatsoever.

Now upon this second sign or effect we infer these two uses: Use 1.
1. It manifests that many a man never had this godly sorrow, who never
sought thus to clear or to defend themselves; but contrarily have gone about
to defend their sins, either by denying it, or putting God to his proofs, as
they did deal with him in Malachie: Malac. 1.6.7.
Wherein have we despised thy name? wherein have we polluted thee? Or by
defense, as Jonah did, who when God asked him if he did well to be angry,
answered, Jonah 4.
that he did well to be angry even to the death. Or by a cautelous answer, as
Cain did, who when God asked him where his brother was, he answered: Genes.
6.9.
Am I my brothers keeper? Or by a good purpose, like unto Abimeleck, who when
he took the wife of Abraham, said, Genes. 20.8.
he did it with an upright heart. Or else by putting it upon others, as Saul,
who when he was commanded of God to slay Amaleck, and destroy all his cattle,
being reproved of Samuel for not doing it, laid the fault on the people, 2.
Sam. 15.
that they had spared the best things, etc. Or if none of these will serve,
then is that of the Elephant well moralized in them, and as it were verified:
for he being guilty of his deformity, cannot abide to look his own face in
the clear water, but flies it, and seeks the muddy and troubled channels: so
they know their souls are so filthy, that they dare not so much as to come
where they shall be made to see themselves, but desire that which will dawbe
them up. But if all will not serve, but that they are again and again made to
see their sins, and their conscience is awakned to accuse them, either by the
word or by some affliction vexing them as the evil spirit did Saul; then they
seek to dispatch away such thoughts, by music, and mirth, pastime, and
dalliance, as Saul did the evil spirit by David's playing upon a harp; and so
increase them more and more, and cause them to ranckle inwardly. These are like
debtors, who being clean out at heels: as we say, seek shifts to put off
the clamor of their creditors for a day or a week, and seek no protection for
themselves, no way to clear themselves: but when they know their creditors
have entered actions against them, and feed Sergeants to arrest them; yea when
they are arrested, they only seek to corrupt the Sergeants, or get them into
a Tavern and make them drunk, and so get from them, and then they think all
is well: So these being far in debt, and arrested by an accusing conscience,
all their care is how to be eased of it, how to corrupt it, or to make it
drunk with pleasures and delites; and then they think all will be well. But
in the mean time all is worse then naught with them, for they are without true
repentance, which has not a defense of sin, but an accusation of sin, and
takes a course to clear the person, and to get a defense and protection
against all accusations and accusers.

Use 2.
2. By this may a man try his repentance whether it be good, or no, and
whether it be true or false, if it have this fruit in him, that having sinned
since his former repentance, as he cannot but sin; if then (I say) he shall
seek to clear himself with God, and get a defense for himself; not if he
clear his sin and defend it: but if after his fall and committing of sin,
he find sin to him as the Prophet Zachary speaks, Zach. 5.7.
as heavy as a talent of lead, and that he find no quiet within himself, but
accusing and burning, till he has gotten into some place, where he may
lament and mourn for his sin, and so accuse and condemn it, and entreat the
Lord for pardon; as the guilty and condemned person at the bar cries for
life, when his accusers call upon the Judge for sentence against him: yea if
he be like an unjust, but a wise Merchant, who having run himself so deep
in debt, by taking up of every man, while he could have credit, to maintain
his pomp and state, that he is able to pay little or nothing of it, and sees
that his creditors come upon him, will yield his person to none of the^, nor
divide his state among them, but lays out a great part of it to get a
protection from the Prince, that he may not be touched of any, and till he have
it will never lie from the Court gate, or the Presence Chamber door: So if he
never lie from God, be never out of his court, or from the presence chamber,
but still solicit him with prayer, till he have a protection and a defense
against Satan, and all who would or can lay any thing against him. Whosoever
has this sign, has questionless the thing; and in whomsoever this effect
is, the cause is fure in him also, and he has undoubtedly repented.

The third sign of repentance, Indignation.
The third sign or fruit of repentance is indignation. This is numbered among
the other, as S. Paul has set them down: 2. Cor. 7.11.
which some men restrain and refer to the Corinthians, understanding it of
that indignation or anger, where with the Corinthians were angry, and very hot
against the sin of the incestuous person, which before they favored, or
wincked at. Whereunto though I cannot simply subscribe, seeing I know no
reason why this should be restrained, more than the other, and not be general
to them and to all true repentants: yet thence we may see what is the meaning
of this word, namely, to be angry with, and very much offended, yea to be
out of quiet with ones self that he committed such a thing, so that though
before he liked it well enough, and approved himself in the sins he
committed, yet now he hates every sin he falls into, both loathing it and
abhorring himself for committing of it. The point then to be observed is this:

Indignation the third sign and effect of repentance.
That true repentance, begets, and brings forth indignation, making men angry
and hot against those sins, which before they liked and favored, and to hate
those they loved before, and to be displeased with those which were pleasing to
them, yea to be angry and out of patience with themselves, that they were
such wretches and so careless to be overtaken with them, and to take on, as
it were, with themselves that they have slipped into such sins. Which as the
Apostle affirms in this place, that their godly sorrow had brought forth
indignation: so is it to be seen in other examples. David repenting for his
two capital sins, what indignation had he? Psalm. 51.
The 51. Psalm. for the first can show, being the monument of his bitter
mourning and lamentation for it to God, and his grieuing at himself. Likewise
when he saw the wrath of God come upon the people for his sin, what
indignation he had with himself for the sin, his words will express: Behold
Lord (says he) 2. Sam. 29.17.
I have sinned, yea I have done wickedly, but these sheep what have they done?
let thine hand I pray thee be against me, and my fathers house: So we may see
Job crying out: Job 39.37.38.
I am vile: I have spoken once, yea twice, but I will do so no more: And again
he said: Job 42.6.
Therefore I abhor my self and repent in dust and ashes. So likewise in
Esaias, the Lord speaking of his peole that should repent; he makes this an
argument that they had repented, when they should pollute the couerings of the
images of silver, Isai. 30.22.
and the rich ornament of their images of gold, and cast them away as a
menstruous cloth, and say unto it, Get thee hence. Yea even those images,
Isai. 31.7.
which their own hands have made: showing the indignation that they should
have with themselves for their sins. So when Ephraim repented, this was the
effect of her repentance: Ierem. 31.19.
When I converted I repented, and after that I was instructed, I smote upon my
thigh, I was ashamed, yea even confounded, because I did bear the reproach of
my youth. Likewise the bitter weeping of Peter, and the carriage of Mary
Magdalene manifest the truth of this doctrine. Lastly, this is that which the
Lord notes should be in his people when they had repented: Ezekiel. 16.63.
Thou shall remember and be ashamed, and never open thy mouth any more because
of thy shame, when I am pacified toward thee for all that thou have done. Then
this indignation goes ever with true repentance, and is inseparable from it,
which these testimonies prove; and the reasons also ensuing will confirm.

Reason 1.
1. Because he that has truly repented, is reconciled to God, and is become
his spouse, his friend and his child. Then can it not be, but he will dislike
that which has displeased him, and be offended with himself for that, which
may make any breach betwixt God and himself. For so we see in any of these,
that when they have done but the least thing that may offend, they take on
greatly with themselves, and the more, where more love is.

Reason 2.
2. Because now he knows how sin makes a separation betwixt him and his God,
abandoning God from him, and withdrawing his heart from God, and therefore is
displeased with it, and angry with himself for it. As a chaste spouse and
modest Matron is offended with her self, when she has looked, or spoken, or
done any thing amiss, which makes her husband to withdraw himself from her,
or steals her own heart from him.

Reason 3.
3. Because he that has repented is regenerate, and so made holy, therefore
he hates and abhors sin, for it is natural to holiness to abhor and
loath sin. Hence is that of Lactantius: Natural bono est, ad alterius
peccatum moueri and incitari: sicut natural malo, lapsu alieno gaudere.
Lactan. de ira Dei, c. 17.
It is natural to good to be moved and affected with the sin of another;
as it is natural to evil to rejoice in the fall of another, Then much more to
be affected with, and grieved with his own evil and sins, yea with himself for
them. This indignation the^ in all proof and reason being an effect of
repentance, may, as the former, instruct us thus:

Use 1.
1. That many men persuade themselves, and are deceived by their own hearts,
thinking that they have truly repented, when the time is yet to come that ever
they were angry and offended with themselves, for the sin they had committed;
or disliked and hated their sin. Nay many, and most live still in their sins,
and love them, because they bring them in, pleasure, honor, gain, etc. As some
Courts have liked of, and hountenanced Informers, because they bring sacks to
the mill; and as the Pope does the stews, because of the reuenew he receives
thereby; so they like of their sins, because of that good which comes of
them, as they account good, and therefore they will not leave them, neither can
they dislike or hate them. Yea oftentimes when they are gauled or grieved for
them by some reproof of conscience, or by the word, by some affliction, or
judgment, as beggars ever and anon are by their sores: yet as they will not
have those sores cured, because they are a cover for ease and idleness, and now
and then bring them in a penny; and therefore cannot endure the Surgeans but if
they be forced to receive some plaster, they will pull it off specdilie
again, when his back is once turned: so is it with these men in their sins,
they dislike them not, they would not be cured of them, nay they dislike them,
who would help to pull them out of them. And therefore as Demetrius cried out
against Paul, Acts. 19.25.
amongst his crafts-mates, because he would overthrow their craft, by which
they got their goods; so do these men against all them, which would overthrow
their trade and custom of sinning. And if this be a sign of true repentance,
and an inseperable fruit, such men deceive themselves if they think they have
repented. Moreover, some men there be that can leave their sins, who yet
never did, nor do loathe them, or were angry with themselves for them; but
therefore only left them, either because they found loss and damage by them;
as the young man his joy and prodigality, when he grows in years or because
strength of body and ability fails them, as the adulterer his folly; or
because they have felt the smart of them, as when the hand of God, or the sword
of the Magistrate has met with them. But that these never disliked their
sins is manifest, for they have but changed prodigality for covetousness,
which argues no true dislike of sin, or indignation: for that is as well
against love, as another, and if against any, thou against all: whereupon these
men when they have strength, return to the stews again, and when the hand of
God is once removed from them, to their former sins. They were offended with
this, not with their sins, and therefore never truly repented. To these we
may add also all such, as talk of the sins and infirmities of their youth
with joy, or without indignation, so showing directly that they have left them,
but not repented of them.

Use 2.
2. This may comfort as many as find this indignation, and anger in them
against themselves and their sine; who though they be over come sometimes, by
their passions, and their pleasures of sin, and by other means drawn into it;
yet when they have done, they are offended, and in a fume with themselves, and
angry, and dislike it, and can say in truth that which S. Paul did, Romans 7.15.
I allow not that which I do: for what I would, that do I not: but what I
hate, that do I. Even as Ammon after he had abused his Sister Tamen, 2. Sam.
13.15.
he put her away with indignation and hatred: yea with more hatred, then ever
he had love to her before: So if they put away their sins with more batred,
then ever they loved them and affected them before: which if it be indeed for
sin, because it is sin, and because they have offended God, as a father,
not only as a Judge, it is true indignation. For this hatred and indignation,
must be like his sorrow, which if it be true, is such as grieves for sin
principally, because it is sin, and makes one then to grieve, when there is no
conscience to accuse, no devil to terrify, no Judge to arraigne and condemn,
nor hell to torment, yet then is he cast down, because he has offended, a
loving, merciful and long suffering God. And again, when the anger and
indignation of a man is as well for secret sins, as open; for small, as
great; for such as are condemned by the law of God only, as for those which
are punishable by the law of man: this affection if a man can find to be
within him, he may assure himself that he has true repentance.

Use 3.
3. This may encourage men to labor for, and nourish this indignation in
themselves, this wrath and hatred against and of their sins. They may hate no
person, but they must hate their sinnee, or them for it. If a restraint be
touching ye hatred of their person, there is liberty for the hatred of the
sin, and especially for a man's own sins; for if he have not the hatred and
indignation for his own, the other for other men's is but hypocrisy, if he be
not more angry with a less sin in himself, then a greater in another. We are
forbidden to let the Sun set upon our wrath in respect of men that offend us,
Ephesians. 4.26.
but not of sins where by we offend God. In our hatred of them, the Sun
must both set and rise, and it must upon them still remain, for he shall ever
have more peace with God and more assurance of his love, that is most out of
peace and most angry with himself, and has the greatest indignation in
himself for his sins. As Phineas was then most acceptable to God, when he
had showed it against the sin of Zimbrie and Cosbie: So shall he be that shows
it most against his own sin, by which he has dishemouted and provoked God.

The fourth effect or sign of repentance is fear.
The fourth effect, and suit of this repentance, is fear, for so says Paul:
2. Cor. 7.2.
yea what fears: that is to say, a certain awe of God, when a man is afraid
to displease him.

There is a double fear, one filial, and an other fertile, differing thus; 1.
In respect of the object, which is sin: Filial fear fears sin as sin,
and because it is sin: servile fear fears punishment rather then sin, and
sin in respect of punishment. 2. In respect of their grounds, for filial fear
fears God, because he is gracious and merciful: feruile fear fears God
because he is lust, and powerful, and able to putrish for sin. 3. They
differ in regard of their attendance, for filial fear is joined with love,
such as good subjects bear to good Princes, and ordinarily children bear to
their parents: but servile fear is ioyued with hatred, such, as servants bear
to their cruol inasters: this makes a man flee from God and get as far as
he can out of his sight: the other makes a man draw nearer and nearer to God,
and press upon him as far as he can with reverence. Now here I understand
the Apostle speaks of filial fere, because he speaks of men in the state of
grace, and of an effect of the grace of repentance and regeneration. So that
then in the fourth place I observe this: that

Fear the fourth effect or sign of repentance.
True repentance brings forth in men fear, that is, an affection fearing
sin, because it is sin fearing to offend God, because of his mercy and
goodness, and benefits received; not flying or departing from God, but drawing
nearer unto him, when they have offended him. So says the Apostle here. The
same also is manifest in David who being a thirst, desired the water of
Bethlehem to drink, whereupon three of his worthies, brake through the host of
their enemies, and brought him some of (the water: but David would not drink
of it, 1. Chron. 11.18.19.
but poured it out, for an oblation to the Lord; and said, Let not my God
suffer me to do this: should I drink the blood of these-mens lives? for they
have brought it with the ieopardie of their lives. This shows that it was the
sin he feared, and not the punishment. So likewise the Prophet Hosea says:
Hosea 3.5.
Aftorward shall the children of Israel convert, and seek the Lord their God,
and shall fear the Lord and his goodness, in the latter days. So says the
Prophet David: Psalm. 130.4.
There is mercy with thee O Lord, that thou may be feared: Likewise the
prodigal son, Luke 15.
when he repented, his fear made him come to his father to confess his sin.
And Marie sought Christ for his goodness, Luke 7.
though she had lead her life in wickednesses, and was smitten for them, yea
and foucken with fear, yet her fear made her press upon Christ. These all
teach us that repentance is accompanied with a filial fear; which thing these
reasons also confirm.

Reason 1.
1. Because every true repentant, is a true child of God Now at is the nature
of a child, as to obey of love, so to fear to disobey of love. For all fear
(says Bernard) Seruilis est timor Auamdiu ab amore non mane. Bernar. Cant.
sermon. 83.
is servile, if it flow not from love. And again: Qui de amore non venit
honor, non honor sed adulatio. Ibid.
The honor and reverence which comes not from love, is no honor but a
formal fanning.

Reason 2.
2. Because in the (...) repentant, Gods love be areth sway, as self-love did
before therefore as that made him sometimes restrain his corruptions, for hope
of good, or fear of punishment: so this now makes him fly, and fear sin,
because God is good. There is one man (says Bernard) that Est qui confitetur
Deo, quia potens est: est, quoniam sibi bonus est: est, quia simpliciter bonus
est. 1. Seruus est and timet. 2. Mercenarius est, and cupit sibi. 3. Filius
est, and desert patri. Bern de diligendo Deo.
confesses to God and reuerenceth him, because he is potent and mighty:
another, because be is good to him: a third because he is simply and
absolutely good. As it is in the Psalms: Psalm 118.1. Praise ye the Lord,
because he is good. The first of these is a servant, and fears: the second is
an hireling, and desires for himself: the third is a son, and gives honor to
his father. And indeed as he that loves another, is afraid out of his love to
offend him, even so is it with such a man toward God.

Reason 3.
3. Because the repentant has a persuasion of the love of God to him; which
he knows from his own love to God, which he finds in himself (this
rising as it were from the reflexe of that heat) and therefore he will fly to
GOD, and not from him, even when he has offended him.

Now upon this thus taught and proved, I ground these uses, crossing some, and
comforting others.

1. This is a hard saying for many, in whom there is no fear, or at least but
a slavish and servile fear, which is manifest thus, because they hate sin
only for the punishment; that is, they like and love their sin indeed, but
sometime restrain the committing of it, in regard of the danger that may ensue
of it: as he that has a mind to eat some kind of meat, that the Physician
has forbidden him, and is hurtful, abstaineth only, because he dares not
touch it for fear of further inco^ueniences. Or then only they abstain from
it when they feel his hand, or fear an imminent judgment, or have the fresh
remembrance of some one which is newly removed. Or only for fear of the
evil, or hope of good. The whippe, scourge, and rod causes the hypocrite as
an ass, a fool, and a slave, to forbear, and leave sin. And the wages only
makes the hireling to do so. Again, because their fear is joined with
hatred, such as servants have to their bad and cruel masters, and therefore
they would get themselves from God, as fugitive servants. Like unto Hagar, Genesis
16.
that was enforced to fly from her cruel mistres. Therefore says one, the
wicked are troubled after sin, that they cannot get themselves far enough
from God; as the godly are on the contrary distracted after their offenses,
that they cannot come near enough to God; those being afraid to be found of
God, as these to lose God. Augustine compares the wicked to an unchaste and an
adulterous woman, who fears her husband, but it is because she loves her
naughtines, therefore his company is not delightful but burdensome, and
living ill, she is afraid of his coming, lest he find her, and find out
her naughtines, and lightness. Lastly, because their fear is joined with hatred
of God, and so, as, Quem metuunt oderunt, and que^ oderunt perijsse cupiunt.
whom me fear they hate, and whom they hate they desire might perish: So they
fear and hate God, and could desire he were not. And such a man is not only an
homicide, but a deicide, wishing there were never a God to punish him; or at
least, Deum sua peccata vindicare, aut non posse, aut nolle, aut ea nescire:
and sic vult Deum non esse Deum, qui vult Deum aut iniustum, aut impotentem,
aut insipientem esse. Bern.
that God either could not punish his sins or would not, or did not know
them. And so he could wish God were no God, who would have him either to be
unjust or unable, or ignorant. And thus hating God, he is at the most, only
possessed with a servile fear. And so cannot otherwise, without lying to his
own soul, persuade himself, but that he wants true repentance, whose
fruit is a filial fear.

2. This is for comfort, where this filial fear is, and to them who have it,
for they by it may be assured they have the true godly sorrow. Now this is to
be discerned by the contraries of servile fear; because they who have this
filial fear do hate sin because it is sin, and would not commit it
though it might be done without danger, as a man that loatheth any meat, will
not cate it, though the Physicians assure him he may do it without surfit,
because he has a lothing and dislike of it. Again, they dislike not the
outward act, and external work only, but also the desires, motions, and
affections tending thereto: they hate them though they cannot avoid them. It
grieueth them to offend, yea to be provoked to offend, so good and gracious,
so merciful and loving a father, who has ever been so good and gracious unto
them. Their fear is ever joined with love, such as good subjects bear to good
princes and children to their fathers, and therefore they seek to press as
near to God as they can, and dare with reverence of his majesty, (like the
prodigal son, who came to his father, and willingly yielded himself into his
hands) being troubled that by reason of their sin they cannot come near enough
to God, fearing to lose God. Wherefore Augustine compares these to a chaste
woman, who loves and fears her husband, and lives with him in good sort,
and would never have him out of her sight, yea she so loves him, that she
fears to offend him because he is her husband, she fears to give him any
occasion to grieve, or to make him depart from her: So where there is this true
filial fear of the children of God, there is all careful avoiding of offense,
there is all watchfulness used, that no cause be given of grieuing him, or to
make him depart; there is al desire to enjoy his presence continually. Which
things whosoever truly finds in himself, he may know himself to have this
fourth effect of true repentance, yea to have repentance it self, and so to be
in the state of salvation.

The fifth effect and fruit of repentance, is desire.
The fifth effect and fruit of this repentance is desire; yea what desire;
which is a fervent affection to God, and his word, 2. Cor. 7.2.
and to spiritual and heavenly things. That this should be understood of a
care to reform himself, as Ambrose would have it, I see no reason, seeing it
were then but the same with the first. Or that it should be a desire to show
their love to Paul, in desiring to do what he desires, and commands, I see
as little reason for it; nay there is good reason against it, seeing this
desire is not particular to the Corinthians, but general to all repentants, as
the other effects were. I then take it for a fervent affection to God, and his
word, and to spiritual things. From whence this will arise; that,

Desire the fifth sign or fruit of repentance.
True repentance brings forth a desire, and fervent affection, to God, and
his word, and all holy and spiritual things. This is manifest by the example
of the Iayler, Acts 16.
who after he was smitten with sorrow and true repentance came with this note
to Paul, saying, Acts 2.36.37.
What shall I do to be saved? being full of desire and this affection. The like
desire was in those to whom Peter preached, and it brought forth the like
words; Men and brethren what shall we do to be saved? This also was in David,
who professed of himself thus: Psalm. 42.1.2.
As the Heart brayeth for the rivers of water, so pants my soul after thee, O
God. My soul thirsts for God, even for the living God: when shall I come and
appear before the presence of God? Thereby showing the earnestnes of his
desire after God. So our Savior Christ notes this affection to have been in
those who were converted and repented at the preaching of John, saying: Matthew.
11.12.
From the days of John Baptist hitherto, the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. The Apostle Peter also calls upon
new repentants and newborn Christians, that they, Peter 1.2.2.
As newborn babes, would desire the sincere milk of the word: as if he said:
Are ye indeed newborn by repentance, and regenerated, then desire the milk
of the word, as the child desires the breast. This also is manifest in the
Canticles, where is expressed what a desire the spouse of Christ had unto her
husband. Draw me (says she) Cantic. 1.3.
and we will run after thee: the king has brought me into his chambers: we
will rejoice and be glad in thee, we will remember thee more than wine, etc.
And David says; Psalm. 19.97.
O how love I thy law! it is my meditation continually. See in all these and by
all this, how this desire and repentance have and must go hand in hand; yea
and that also with good reason:

Reason 1.
1. Because the repentant has tasted of God, and his word, his goodness, and
the sweetness of it, wherein he can find no satietie at all, he can never have
enough, he is never satiffied, but the more he has, the more he may, and the
more he desires still. As Augustine confessed, after his calling when he had
repented, and begun once to taste how good the Lord was, that he tasted too
late of him: Sero te amaui pulchritudo tam antiqua and tam noua, sero te amaui.
August. Confess. lib. 10. cap. 27.
I have loved thee too late; O thou beauty most ancient, yet ever new and
fresh, I have loved thee too late. So questio^les he thought he had tasted too
little; and so shall all think who have once truly begun to taste of God, for
there is no satietie, and a man cannot have his full apprehension of God and
his word, till he come to enjoy him face to face, and til he come where he
shall hunger no more. If any one object that of our Savior Christ which he
spoke: John 4.14.
Whosoever shall drink of the water that I shall give him, shall never be more
athirst: Therefore there is satietie of these spiritual things. I answer, he
means not that a man should have such satietie in them, as that he should
desire them no more, but that while he tastes of them, he should thirst after
no other. As a man whose palate tastes of that meat or liquor which delites
it, desires no other, but yet thirsts and hungreth after that still: so he
that drinks of Christ's water, shall find that contentment in it that he does
not desire any other, though he thirsts still for this.

Reason 2.
2. Because the true repentant is enlightened with some knowledge more then he
had, of God and his word. Now as a man increases in knowledge, so he does in
love: for by his knowledge he apprehends more causes of love in the thing
loved. Then as men are hardly drawn to love without cause, so where they see
cause they love; and where there are more causes, they love more. And hence it
is that the repentant has more love to God and his word, because he sees now
more causes why he should desire and love them, then he did before when he
lived in ignorance. Now from this point we may learn these things:

Use 1.
1. That it is no wonder that there is so little love and desire, to be found
in our age, toward God and his word, and of spiritual things, seeing the
doctrine and practice of repentance is so little known and used: yea and that
it is so, this will prove it; 1. Because all the desire of most men is set
upon the world. Now you know in a Conduit, the more water goes by one pipe,
the less must needs go by another: yea and as Christ says, that a man cannot
love both God and Mammon: so not the word and the world. Again, they mightily
and miserably complain of too much preaching and teaching, thinking the
laborers too many, which Christ thought too few, or else that they are too
diligent: murmuring as it were against God, that he has in some sort and some
places fulfilled his word that he spoke by Isaiah: Esaias 11.9.
The earth shall be full of the knowledge of the Lord, as the waters that cover
the sea: meaning the means of knowledge. Which must needs argue that these
complainers are no lovers of God and his word, but have souls loathing this
light food Manna: and so though it grieve me to speak it, more then I know it
will them to hear it; yet I must tell them, that this little love to the word,
nay this loathing of it, does manifestly convince them to be without true
repentance, and so to be in the state of damnation, and in the snare of the
Devil, which has taken them at his will.

Use 2.
2. This will lead us to a fit mark and note, whereby every man may know
whether he has true repentance. Thou know thine own heart, so do not I,
but God knows it, and judges. Then can thou not deceive him. Therefore
examine thine own heart whether thou have this desire in thee, or not: whether
as a newborn babe thou desire the sincere milk of the word, and hunger
after spiritual things, as after spiritual treasure and riches. Do thou in
some measure follow David, whose love to the word of God was not only a wonder
to others, but to himself, saying, Psalm. 1 19.
Lord how love I thy law! Or if thou can not find this desire in thee, then
do thou dislike thy self and bewail thy dull affections after spiritual
things? Be thou then comforted in it, that it is some token that thou art
partaker of repentance.

But thou will demand, how thou shall know whether thou have this desire or
no; seeing every man is apt to challenge this unto himself, who has nothing
less.

Answ.
I answer thee, that thou shall know it by this, if thou find no satietie in
heavenly things, but the more thou tastest of them, the more thou desire; for
as the truth and the word of God is not unfitly compared to the waters of the
sea, which the deeper thou drawest from the bottom, the sweeter thou shall
find them; so the more knowledge a man has in spiritual things, the more
delightful will they be to him, though in the beginning to the taste of a
natural man they are bitter and unpleasant, till he be changed. So again may
they be compared to the same waters of the sea, which the more a man drinks of
them, the more he desires still: So the more a man truly tastes of the word
of God, the more he shall desire it still, he will never be satisfied, and
he thinks he can never have enough. He then that finds this in himself,
may be assured that he has repented: for this desire being present, godly
sorrow cannot be absent and wanting. But alas many men are like the woman of
Samaria, who when Christ had said, John. 4.15.
Whosoever drinks of the water that I shall give him, shall never thirst
more, presently prayed him, saying, Master give me of that water that I may
thirst no more, nor come hither to draw: understanding and dreaming of
material water, such as she daily needed for the body: So do many men; now
for when we talk of the desire of spiritual riches, they will talk of
earthly; and whereas they should desire those things, that concern the spirit,
all their desire is for the world: how should there be true grace in these
men? how should they have any assurance that they have repented? when they are
like unto those in the Gospel that were invited unto the kings feast, who had
their several excuses, that they might absent themselves. Luke 14.
One said that he had taken a farm, and he must go and see it; another had
bought a yoke of oxen, and he must go and prove them: and another had
married a wife, and he could not come. So many a man says, my profits let me
that I cannot come to hear the word of God, and my pleasures carry me
another way. Some other again will say, when I have done seeking the world,
when I have overcome such a business, another time, or another year will I
come to hear the word. O miserable estate! where is that love and desire, and
that longing after the word which is required in all repentants? Ambrose says:
If I should offer thee gold, thou will not say, I will come to morrow, but this
day thou will take it: no man will defer, no man will excuse. Redemptio anima
promittitur, nemo festinas. Ambrose.
But the redemption of the soul is proffered and promised, and no man
hasteneth. How truly may that speech of the Father be spoken of our times? for
earthly things no man will take time til to morrow, but greedily they will seek
for them, and not stay till they be offered them. But for spiritual things
most men's states are weak, and like men ready to break, they are taking
order for two, three, four, and six months, and then are they as far from
any good sufficiency, or further then they were before. But to conclude, if
true repentance bring forth desire of these spiritual and heavenly things, as
their condition is fearful who have it not, so is theirs happy and
comfortable, who unfeignedly find it in their hearts: for it does certainly
seal up unto them their true conversion and new birth, by which they are
living creatures in Christ here through his grace, and shall live with him in
glory, through his merits in the life to come.

The sixth sign and fruit of repentance is zeal.
The sixth fruit and effect of repentance is zeal; yea what zeal. This zeal
is opposite to luke-warmenesse, contrary to cold, it is heat. He is cold which
is profane, an enemy to piety, and the works of holiness. He is lukewarm,
that has some fancy, or love to good things, some righteousness in the
outward act, or some common, or cursorie inclination, therewith contenting
himself, as judging his case to be as good as the best, and can endure to go
no further: He is hot or zealous, who is fervent for the glory and worship of
God, and the works of piety, and is sorrowful when he sees the defect of
the^, in himself or others. Our point then to be noted is this:

Zeal is the sixth sign and fruit of true repentance.
True repentance brings forth zeal, that is, makes men zealous for God,
and his worship, zealous of piety, and good works, not to do them carelessly,
and negligently, but it makes them do, (though with great labor and cost, yea
danger and hazard) those things which they see, they ought to do. This is
manifest in this place, as also in many other. As in the Revelation Christ
says to the Church of Laodicea; Revel. 3.19.
Be zealous therefore, and amend: noting that where zeal is, there will also
be repentance, and amendment of life. Did not David's repentance bring forth
this zeal, 2. Sam. 24.24.
when he would be at cost with God to procure his worship, and would not offer
a burnt offering unto the Lord that should cost him nothing? for whereas if he
would, he might have offered a free offering unto him, yet he would not
receive it for nothing, but would give the price thereof. Acts 19.18.19.
So may we see this zeal in those men that were converted by the preaching of
the Gospel at Ephesus, they were enforced to take their books, which were of a
great price, and to burn them, that thereby they might glorify God by
spoiling of those things which were before the cause of his dishonor. The like
may be said of Paul and Peter, Marie, and other repentants, who have had this
zeal, as is at large recorded in the Scripture: and how in reason should it be
otherwise?

Reason 1.
1. Because the true repentant is Gods, and chosen to life, honor, and
happiness, which this thing, namely, that he is repentant, does manifest unto
him. Then may we allude to that which David says, in defense of his dancing
before the Arc, in his zeal, when he was derided by Michol, giving the reason
why he did it, because, says he, 2. Sam. 6.21.
The Lord has chosen me, rather then thy father and all his house. So in this
case, if he for an earthly kingdom was so zealous for God, how much more ought
those so to be, that are chosen to a heavenly kingdom?

Reason 2.
2. Because he is regenerate, and made again, and if the first creation
required as much, as David says: Psalm. 100.2.3.
Serve the Lord with gladness: and he adds the reason, Because he has made us
and not we our selves; much more does this second. The more excellent the one
is than the other, the more zeal is required for the one, than for the other.
Bernard compares them thus: Qui primo secie, secundo refecit; in primo dedit
me mihi; in secundo dedit and se mihi: cui debeo me propter me, debeo plusquam
me propter se. Bernard. de diligendo Deo.
He that made me first did secondly remake me; in the first, he gave me my
self; in the second he gave me himself: to whom I owe my self for my self,
I owe more then my self, for that he gave me himself. He that is first set
up by a man, ought to be marvelous careful, and as it were zealous for him;
how much more he that being a bankrupte, and many pounds worse than nothing, is
discharged of all, and set up again? So is it in this, for men by sin are
worse than nothing, and being (as it were) set up by God again, what zeal for
the Lord ought they to have? etc.

Reason 3.
3. Because he being redeemed, knows the price of his redemption, how dear
it cost God, and Christ, and why they paid so dear for him. Namely, as Paul
to Titus says, Titus 2.14.
That the redeemed might be a peculiar people to God, zealous of good works.
That is the end why God gave so great a price, as the blood of his own son,
that we might be a peculiar people, zealous unto him. Then they that know this,
in liew of that mercy, will grow zealous, and think that they cannot be too
zealous for him, that has paid so great a price for them.

Use 1.
Now by this truth, for the use of it, we may first condemn our age, as that
which promises, or performs little repentance, because there is so little
zeal amongst us: for seeing repentance brings forth zeal, where there is
little zeal, there is little repentance, and where no zeal, there no
repentance. And that I may justly challenge our age of want of this zeal,
appears thus, because it is grown to that in our times, that nothing is so
much condemned, as the zeal here spoken of: Zeal for any thing and any
person, save for God and his truth is reputed commendable, and in any course
save in the way of piety. They are commended, who are zealous so their prince
and his crown, and accounted good subjects; so they who are zealous for their
captain and his honor, and esteemed good soldiers; so they who are zealous
for their father and master, and his credit, and are reckoned good sons or
servants; but if they be zealous for God and his glory or service, they shall
be reviled and derided: yea Papists if they be devout and zealous in their
superstitious vanities are commended of many; and yet Protestants if they be
zealous and forward in the way of truth and godliness, they are scorned and
mocked, as Isaac was of Ismael, even of those who live in the same kingdom,
city, Church, and house. The people condemn their Minister, as too zealous,
and on the contrary, the Minister the people, as too forward; so the master,
the father, the husband condemn the servant, the child and the wife, and these
again the other. How may we think then that they are zealous themselves?
verily if they were they would not condemn zeal in others, nay they could
not. For though a man in his hypocrisy may condemn that evil in another
which he allows in himself, yet can he not condemn the good he is endued
withal, for good cannot but reloyce and delight in her like. Therefore to prove
these void of zeal, we need no further proof or evidence, then their
condemning of zeal, in others. When then we have so many condemners of zeal,
we must needs have many void of zeal. Few we have who can say as Iehu, when
he met with Iehonadab, saying unto him when he took him up into his chariot: 2.
King. 10.15.16.
Is thy heart upright, as mine is toward thine? then give me thy hand, and
come and see the zeal that I have for the Lord of hosts. Few, I say, that can
take others into their houses, chambers and company, and show them how zealous
they are for God and his glory, in reading and conferring of the scripture, in
prayer and other practice of piety: nay, they can rather show them how zealous
and fervent they are for their pleasure and profit, for themselves and their
own states. But the zeal for the Lord of hosts they condemn in others, and
therefore cannot have it in themselves, and so cannot have true repentance.

Use 2.
2. By this may every one try, whether they have repentance or not, even
whether they have fire or no, by this heat. If they be not cold, nor
lukewarm, but strive to be hot, and zealous in Gods service, and in the way
of piety, respecting rather what God calls for, then fearing what men
condemn. Object.
But there may well be zeal without repentance, neither is al zeal good, for
there is a bad, as well as a good zeal: how will zeal prove it then? Answ.
I answer, it is true, that as the sea water and the rain water agree in the
matter, yet they differ by diverse qualities and properties, as sweet and salt,
thick and thin, light and heavy: So a good zeal and bad are both affections;
but they differ in many several things. And first, as the Moralist speaks, of
other affections, that they are so far good, as they are guided by wisdom,
and kept within the bounds limited by it: and on the contrary, they are evil,
when they pass those bounds: So in this zeal, it is so far good as it is
governed by true knowledge and faith; and so far bad, as it is deprived of
this. As the Apostle Paul says of the Jews: Romans 10.2.
I bear them witness that they have the zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge: that is, their zeal was not ruled by reason, nor grounded upon the
word of God, but according to their own fancy: teaching us thereby what is
good, and what is bad zeal. Zeal is then evil and bad when it will not be,
nor is ruled by true knowledge (that is, not subject to the word) but by
custom, tradition, our own affections and wills; and of this may be said, as
before, Romans 10.2.
that such have zeal, but not according to knowledge: and they may be prayed
for, as Christ prayed for the Jews: Luke 23.34.
Father forgive them, for they know not what they do. And this zeal argues
no repentance: but that which is according to knowledge, submitted to the word
of God, is good, and will prove a man to have repentance. Again, zeal
consists of two affections, love and sorrow; love for the glory of God and
his service; sorrow when it is not performed. May we compare spiritual things
with earthly things? wheresoever there is this love it is speedy for the
compassing of that it desires. Therefore we read when Shechim loved Dinah,
Jacobs daughter, Genes. 34.19.
he was speedy in compassing that, by which he might obtain her, though the
thing was very sore and grievous which he was to do: so where there is this
affection in the heart of man, it makes a man forward, and speedy to procure
the glory of God, and to accomplish his service. Secondly, love has another
property; wheresoever it is, notwithstanding all difficulties,
discouragements, or dangers, yet will that man go forward for the procuring of
that he loves, and dreadeth not for any fear or discouragement, so he may
obtain the thing he affects. So it is said of Jacob, he served seven years
for Rachel, and being deceived by her father, in giving unto him Leah in stead
of Rachel, he was content to serve seven years more, Genesis 29 20.
and yet those years seemed unto him but a few days, having borne the cold of
the winter, the heat of the summer, the chilling of the Moon, and the burning
of the Sun, the dangers both by night and day; and all this was because he
loved her. So if there be this love of God in men, it will never shrink for
all difficulties that may be; he that has it, will not faint, nor be hindered
with all lets and impediments which may fall out, as the reproaches and
indignities which men, Satan's accomplices, will be ready to cast upon him;
neither will he think the time long, nor the labor too much for it, but go
through, and through travel and pain, that he may procure the glory of God,
and advance his worship and service. Therefore whereas men pretend zeal, let
them examine themselves according to this affection, and try whether there be
this love in the heart or not. Thirdly, he that has true zeal, he has this
affection of sorrow, mourning when he cannot obtain, or procure the glory of
God as he would. We have begun to compare heavenly things with earthly, and
spiritual with carnal, may we once more proceed? It is written of Ammon that
when he could not enjoy Tamar, whom he loved, 2. Sam. 13.2.4.
he was sore vexed and fell sick, and grew lean day by day, because he
could not enjoy her; these effects had his love in him. So when there is true
love to God and his glory, there if men cannot further it, as much as they
would, if they cannot enjoy his word, if they see him dishonored, and false
worship established, they will pine and grieve and fall away. As it is said,
Psalm. 69.9.
The zeal of thy house has eaten me. And as Elias said, 1. King. 19.10.
I have been very zealous for the Lord of hosts. He was so stricken with
sorrow, that he was ready to die, because he saw not the glory of God go
forward: so that where there is true zeal, there is also this affection of
sorrow and mourning. Then let every man examine himself, by these three rules,
whether he have this affection within him or no, and so whether he have
repented: if he have not this affection, at the best he is but lukewarm, and
even such an one whom God will spue out of his mouth, and cast out of his house:
but having it truly in himself, he may be assured he has truly repented, and
so is regenerate and holy, and shall both abide in the house of God all his
life, and be afterward received into his everlasting tabernacles.

The seventh sign or fruit of repentance is punishment.
The seventh sign, or fruit of repentance is, revenge or punishment; yea what
punishment: which some restrain particularly to the Corinthians, 2. Cor. 7.11.
as they did the former effect, indignation: understanding it of that
punishment, which they inflicted upon the incestuous person; that whereas as
before they spared him, now admonished, they executed the censure of the Church
against him, and excommunicated him. Which admit it be true, that it may be so
understood, yet it carries with it another general sense, seeing al sin is
to be punished, wheresoever it is found, and specially should men begin with
themselves. This being then a sign, or fruit of repentance, it must begin, and
be in a man's self. It differs from indignation, because that is in the
affection, this is in the action: that is a just conceived anger toward
himself for his sin, and hatred of the sin; this the punishment of
himself for those sins, and a taking as it were, a iustreuenge of himself
for them. Which is when men have offended in yielding too much to their own
desires, pleasures, delights, and profits, then for the freeing of themselves
from the evil of sin, they deny some things to themselves, which otherwise
they might lawfully use for their comfort: which if they do not, they shall,
in the punishment which God shall bring upon them, taste the bitterness of that,
that seemed sweet unto them. The point then is this:

Punishment is the seventh sign of repentance.
True repentance brings forth punishment or revenge. That is, he that is
truly penitent does holilie and justly punish himself, and is revenged of
himself for his sins. Which as it is manifest in this place, so also in
diverse other places: as first, some do not unfitly apply to this purpose that
place of S. Paul to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 11.31.
If we would judge our selves, we should not be judged: Which though in the
general it be spoken of the whole conversion, and of the whole act of
repentance, with all the appurtenances, yet the whole will carry this
particular. Thus David repenting, 2. Sam. 12.16.17.
punished himself in his humiliation for his child, and his sin, who
besought the Lord, and fasted, and lay a whole night upon the earth, and would
not for that time receive any meat for his refreshing. Likewise another
example in the same man may be seen, when in giving way unto his lust, 1.
Chron. 11.18.19.
he had desired the waters of Bethlehem, and after did see it was brought with
the lives of his three Worthies: to take a holy revenge of himself, he would
not drink of it, but powered it upon the ground, for a sacrifice to the Lord.
Likewise, we have the example of the woman, Luke 7.38.
that showed the fruit of her repentance, having before abused her eyes to
uncleanness, and her hair to vanity, by laying it out to the enticing of youth
to folly, when she had repented she took a holy revenge of her self, and
used her eyes as a spring to yield water to wash Christ's feet, and her hair
to be as a towell to wipe them. So likewise those cunning men that were
Necromancers, Acts 19.19.
being converted by the preaching of the word to repentance, would burn those
books that were before dear unto them, for a revenge upon themselves for
their sin, showing both an indignation in the affection, and a just revenge
in the action. Thus then and in these and such like has repentance brought
forth this revenge or punishment; and reason it should:

Reason 1.
1. Because the repentant now discerns two things which he saw not before: 1.
Gods love to him. 2. His dislike and hatred of his sin. Now then for his
love, he takes punishment, and an holy revenge of himself. It is necessary
(says Ambrose) Necesse est vt quis vindicet eum, cuius erga se sentit
assectum. Am bros. in hunc locum.
that every one should take revenge and punishment for him, whose love and
affection he perceives to be toward him. For so shall he show love again.

Reason 2.
2. Because by this he may prevent Gods punishment of it. For the Apostle Paul
says: 1. Cor. 11.37.
Judge your selves, and ye shall not be judged. As if he should say, judge
not your selves, and ye shall be judged of God: but take this revenge on your
selves, and judge your selves, and God shall not judge you. He does not speak
this as if it were any redemption or satisfaction for the punishment, but
because it was Gods counsel and purpose, by chastening and correcting of them,
to shake them from their security, that being put in mind of his anger, they
might be more wary afterward. Which man doing by this voluntary revenge,
preuents God, that there is no need of any such admonition from him: for as
diseases are cured by contraries, so are these evils.

Object.
Why then (may some object) are not the penances, pilgrimages and other sort of
punishments lawful in popery, or why should they be condemned as they are?

Answ.
I answer briefly (for it has bin answered at large in the point of
humiliation) that we condemn them, because in some of them we may say, that
they are spoiled in dressing, and use the proverb much more truly here, then
men do in their choler, when their meats distaste their palats; God sends
meat, but the devil sends Cooks. God has ordained some of these, but the
devil has stirred up men, to corrupt them severally, to make them distaste
God. Namely, that whereas God commands, or allows them to be done, and that
men shall do them; to the end they may dislike God, and be made unprofitable
to the actor, the devil has taught them to make that publik, which should be
private, and so by ostentation, or hypocrisy to mar the act; yea to use them
at such times, as the Lord calls to the contrary; yea to think by them to
merit remission of sin, at least of the temporal punishment: which as it is
ignorantly taught by their priests, (seeing remission of sin goes before
this, a man having no sooner believed, and repented, but both the guilt and
punishment are remitted, even before he can perform any such act as this) so
is it sacrilegious to Christ, who has freed us from both, whereas this makes
his sufferings and merits imperfect, and for one of them only. And this is like
that Colloquintida, 2. King. 4.38.
which spoiled the whole pot of pottage, which was made for the children of the
Prophets. These are like good medicines, which being not taken in their time,
season, and quantity, are poisons rather then medicines. But others of them
are will worship, things without warrant, precept or practice, and so good
reason there is, why we should condemn the things and reprove their authors.
And now I come to the uses of this seventh and last sign.

Use 1.
1. If this be so, how can many men persuade themselves that they have
repented, when there is in their affection, no indignation against themselves
and their sins, and in the action no revenge nor punishment? they have done no
execution upon themselves or their sins, they never yet restrained or bridled
their lusts, for all their offending by them in whoredoms, uncleanness, and
wantonness. They never yet abated the vanity, and excess of their apparel,
which made them offend against that sobriety, which becomes women, 1. Tim.
2.10.
that profess the fear of God. They never yet fasted a meal or two, a day or
two, because they offended in gluttony, drunkenness, and excess. But rather
like those whom the Prophet Esaias speaks of, who said, Esaias 56.12.
Come I will bring wine, and we will fill our selves with strong drink, and
to morrow shall be as this day, and much more abundant. Or else like unto him
that Solomon speaks of: Prou. 23.35.
They have stricken me, but I was not sick: they have beaten me, but I knew
not when I awoke: therefore will I seek it yet still. These and such like
cannot persuade themselves they have true repentance; or if they do, it is a
deceitful persuasion. If the Corinthians had been still indulgent to the
incestuous person, and not have punished him, and excomunicated him, would ever
the Apostle have acknowledged them to have truly repented? surely no: and when
as they never took any revenge of themselves for any sin they have
committed, shall God acknowledge them for true repentants? questionles no: and
that shall they one day know when God will judge them, because they have not
judged themselves.

Use 2.
2. This may teach men (to the end they may be persuaded their repentance is
true, and to seal it up to themselves) both to search their hearts for this,
and to labor still it may be ^ound in them, even this punishment, and revenge.
If they have been, or they be Judges to themselves, and excutioners for the
Lord against those things wherein they have offended him, and have been
revenged of themselves, and their sins for the Lords sake. As having offended
in gluttouie, they revenge themselves by fasting meals, and days. If by
whordome and uncleanness, they be revenged of their lusts, and flesh, by
reforming, and brideling of the^, by some lawful severity afterward. If in
covetous catching, and polling of other men's goods, they will be revenged of
themselves, by restitution, and deminishing their store. If in using excessive
pride of apparel, by withdrawing from themselves such costly attire, as might
happily otherwise be worn, both for their calling and ability. And so in all
things taking a godly revenge of themselves, and of the flesh for withdrawing
their souls from God, and making them to do that which is contrary unto him,
dealing in this case, as a chaste woman would do, who being married to a
certain noble man, absent, and unseen, should be persuaded of some baud, or
pandor, that another is her husband, and so being credulous, should take him,
dwell with him, and use him as her husband. But after, understanding better,
and that she was abused by this leaud woman, how would she handle such a
deceiuer? with what indignation would she look upon her? how full of wrath
would her heart, and countenance be? how would she be revenged of her? she
would think it too little to drink her blood, and tear her flesh, but by all
means would torture her, who had so deceived her, and brought her into that
pollution. So the soul, whose eyes God has opened, and enlightened, by which
she sees her lawful and true husband, for whom she was created, and sees
also, how by the deceit of the flesh she was drawn, to affect and embrace, to
love and live with that which is contrary to God, and give that unto it which
is Gods: how can she abstain from this holy revenge? how can she choose but
afflict the flesh, that she may revenge this injury to God and her self? By
which this will be manifest, that such a soul has repented, and returned.
Provided that all this be done of men without any conceit of merit, or
satisfaction to God for the sin, or punishment, but only as an effect of
repentance, to seal the same up to themselves, and by this to prevent sin to
come, that they may prevent the judgments of God: that finding out the depth
of the wound that sin has made, they may thus remove the causes, and
extinguish the remnants of it, taking away the occasions, and preventing the
reentring of it again, and so prevent Gods hand, which would otherwise smite
the^; not to be satisfied in the course of his justice, (which was effected by
Christ; neither would he touch us for any thing past, if by perfect forsaking
of sin, we were fully joined unto him) but to drive us by bitter sorrow, to
purge out that sinfulnes and those remainders which our precedent sins left
behind them, in respect whereof we are not yet fully joined to Christ. And so
having this sign as the others, may be assured they have truly repented, are
regenerated, and have Christ in their hearts, as the shepherds were sure, when
they found all the signs the Angel gave them, that that was he they found in
the cratch: and so may they be assured that when death shall come, they shall
(as Simeon prayed when he had Christ in his arms) Luke 2.16.
depart in peace, and enter into glory.

The time of repentance.
Now from these signs and fruits of repentance, we must proceed in the next
place to the time of repentance, when men ought to perform this duty. And
first of the general time of repentance.

This life is the only time of repentance.
In this life and upon the earth there is only place for repentance, men only
can here repent and turn to God. So much that place of Timothy proves, 2.
Tim. 2.25.
Instructing them with meekenes, that are contrary minded, proouing if God at
any time will give the repentance, etc. Whereby it appears that this
repentance must be in this life, because the ministry of the word is only of
use in this life. Again, in the Revelation Christ speaking of Iezabel, says,
Revel. 2.21.
he gane her time and space to repent. Meaning, he had let her live to repent;
if he had cut her off before, he had taken from her the time of repentance.
This is insinuated in the parable of ye figtree in the Gos-Gospel, Luke 13.5.6.
where our Savior Christ says, Except you repent you shall al perish: whereupon
he does infer the parable, that (...) and bestowed all the cost that might
be, and yet it brought forth no fruit; the Master of the Vineyard commanded it
then to be cut down. Insinuating, that if they did not bring forth the fruit
of repentance before they were cut down and died, they should never do it.
Also the preaching of John Baptist witnesses the same, who says: Math. 3.10.
Now is the axe put to the root of the tree: therefore every tree that brings
not forth good fruit is hewn down and cast into the fire. Also the Lord
speaks by the Prophet Ezechiel: Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I delight not in the death of a sinner, but
that he turn and live. Turn you, turn you from your evil ways, for why
will ye die, O ye house of Israel? Cyprian thinks that this place does
prove, Cyprian. lib. 3. Testimo. aduersus Iudaeos ad Quirinum.
that repentance is only to be performed in this life, because God says, that
he will not the death of a sinner, but rather that he return: noting that if
he do die, then the time ^s p^st, therefore he desires his turning before he
dies. S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 5.10.
We must ^ll appear before the judgment seat of Christ, that every man may
receive the things that are done in his body, accor^ing to that he has done,
whether it be ^d or evil. Whence I gather, that every one at the general
judgment day must give an account of ye things done in his body in this life,
but nothing of things done after this life. Which place with the other prove
that repentance is an act to be performed in this life only: and reason it
should be so:

Reason 1.
1. Because repentance is a fruit of faith, and is performed of none but they
who have faith; it neither goes before faith, neither can come afterward, when
faith is ceased and is no longer; but in this life only faith has a being,
and not in that life whith is to come for both faith and hope cease to be after
this life. For S. Paul says, 1. Cor. 13.13.
Now abides faith, hope and love, even these three: but the chiefest of these
is love. The reason is, because faith and hope end in this life, when a man
has obtained that he believed and hoped for; but love is everlasting: faith
then ceasing in this life, which is the tree that brings forth repentance,
repentance being the fruit must needs cease.

Reason 2.
2. Because the essential parts of repentance cannot be performed but in this
life; which are mortification, and regeneration; there being afterward no
corruption, and sin to be mortified, namely in those who have right to
repentance and are the subjects of it.

Use 1.
The first use of this doctrine is this, to reach us, that if there be no use
of repentance after this life: then is there no use of Purgatory, such as the
Papists speak of: for men die either repentant, and so not capable of that
place; or unrepentant, and so deserving a worse. For afterward is no place for
repentance, and then for no redemption and deliverance; for their satisfaction
being a part of their repentance, and no repentance but in this life, therefore
after this life can be no satisfaction. For, for them by commutation of
penance, to free men from the pains of Purgatory, is absurd, for that
commutation cannot be without repentance. This error ^me^h to rise from the
practice of the Church, who in the more purer times of it, when they had
excommunicated any for a public offense, and ha^ for him a long time of his
repentance, that is, to manifest it unto the Church, if before that was
accomplished, they saw surficient signs of his repentance, they sometime
remitted, (...) esse of it. And upon this and (...) this grew these
satisfactions and commutations. But that was only a mitigation of the
punishment, which the Church had designed, and yet not without repentance; but
never of that which God had appointed, did they remit or think upon to change;
which these malepartly do, at least according to their own doctrine; and that
without repentance, there being no repentance after this life nor place for
that. But as Justin Martyr says; Post animae e corpore egressum, statim fit
bonorum and malorum distinctio: ducuntur enim animae, ad loca quae eis digna
sunt ab angelis: bonorum quidem in paradisum, impiorum vero ad inferiora loca,
vbi custodiuntur vsque ad resurrection em. Just. Mart. quaest. 75.
After the soul is departed out of the bod^e, eftsoons is there made a
distinction of good and evil: For the souls are carried by the Angels to
those places which are worthy of them and are fitted for them: the souls of
the good are carried into paradise, but the souls of the wicked are carried to
hell, where they shall be kept till the resurrection.

Use 2.
2. This will afford comfort unto as many, as have cruelie repented; which
comfort stands in this, that though their lives be short, and not so short,
as uncertain, being not certain of one day or hour, being tennants at will;
yet let death come when it will, they are provided for it, and may give it
entertainem^t with cheereful countenances. And as Danid said of Ahimaaz, 2.
Sam. 18.27.
he is a good man, and comes with good tidings: so may they say, that have
repented, of death, let it come, it brings good tidings unto them, because
they are at peace with God, and in favor with him; for they know that every
thing shall turn for their advantage, death it self shall be an advantage to
them. This made the Apostle Paul desire to die, Phil. 1.23.
because he might be with Christ; when he was once assured that he was
reconciled to God. A malefactor, who has offended the law, and for the same is
taken and committed and in danger of death; yet if he can a week before the
Assizes get his pardon from the prince, then though, all the other prisoners be
full of terror and grief, yet he wishes every day, for the day of assizes,
because he is then sure to be acquitted. So a man that has repented, by which
he has assurance of pardon and reconciliation with God, needs not fear this
day of affise or judgment, howsoever others may fear and quake when death
comes, because they must not only depart from men, but in stead of their
society, shall have the devil to terrify them, and hell to forment them, and
the whole wr^ (...) God laid upon them for their impenitence; where as he, I
say, that has repented shall not need to fear, neither van evil death, nor a
sudden death: (...) a sudden death, because if he have repented, no death can
come suddenly to him; nor yet an evil death, for what evil death can come to
a man that has lived well, and has truly repented? That is not, says
Chrysostom, Non heaest male mori, violenta morte finiri, sed in peccatis mori.
Chrysostom. hom. 5. ad pop. Antioch.
to have an evil death, to end his days by a violent death, but to die in his
si^es, which no repentant does Like to that which Hierom reports of Hikarion,
comforting himself against the fear of death, when he said to his soul:
Hilarion animam agens eidem dicebat: egredere anima mea, quid times?
septuaginta prope annis seruiuisti Christo, and mortem times? Hieroni.
O my soul go out of thy house of they, why are thou afraid? these seventie
years almost have thou served Christ, and do thou yet fear to die? The
like, I say, may a repentant man shy to his soul: Go out my soul, (...)
should thou be afraid to go to him, with whom thou are reconciled, and
from whom thou have a (...) barge of all thy sins? It is for them to fear to
die, who have never repented, who never served Christ, but have been the slaves
of their flesh and Satan; seeing whose they were (...), his shall they be
dying: It is (...) for him to be unwilling and fearful to go ^ce Christ,
who believes that he shall begin to reign with Christ, because he has here
suffered and crucified his flesh and his lusts for Christ, and his love.

3. This may teach us that if there be no time for repentance after this life,
then is it a fearful condition, wherein many men are who contemn repentance
when they are called to it. And no marvel if death be so fearful to them. For
thence is the fear of death (says Chrysostom) Jude timor mortis, quia non
viuimus in asperitate Christianis congrua, sed so lutam and mollem am amus
vitam. Chrysostom. hom. 6. ad pop. Antioch.
because we live (...) in ^steritie fitting Christians, but lead a delicate
and voluptuous life: Even such a life as all they who put far from them
repentance, have made choice of to themselves, and so cannot but be pressed
with the guiltines of their consciences, seeing they never took the way to
have any discharge: but are like to a malefactor that has neglected the time,
and has not gotten his pardon, till the day of Assifes come, when it is too
late to seek for it; must he not needs be in great fear and horrible
distractions? much more fearful must it needs be to these, who have neglected
the time of repentance, and so of obtaining their pardon even till the very day
of their judgment; To these, as Bernard says, Si illis dicitur, cras and
egrediemini, comminatio non consolatio erit ista. Bern. in vigil. natal. Do.
sermon. 2
if it should be said to morrow you shall got out, it should be a commination
and no comfort: yea and to conclude, as the (...) father speaks; Si tales
moriendo non tam egressi dicendi sunt, quam ingressi: qui non in lucem, non in
libertatem va dunt, sed in carcerem, sed in renebras, sed in infernum. Ibid.
These dying in this condition, are not so much to be said to go out, at to
go in: who go not into the light and into liber the, but into prison, into
darkness, into hell.

The particular time of repentance.
Now we will proceed to the particular time of repentance, which is double;
first, present, it must be done instantly without delay: 2. Continual; it must
be done constantly and every day. And first for the present and the speed of
it.

Repentance must be present and speedy.
Repentance must be done speedily without delay, or deferring from time to
time, or from one day to another. Which is manifest by the Scripture. David
says: Psalm. 95.7.8.
To day if ye will heard his voice harden not your heart: As if he said, if
you will repent, you must not defer it till to morrow, but it must be done
while it is called to day. And S. John says: Matthew. 3.2.
Repent, for the kingdom of God is at hand: And our Savior Christ says;
Matthew. 6.33.
Seek ye first the kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof. The Author
also to the Hebrews says: Hebr. 3.13.
Exhort ye one another while it is called to day, etc. This counsel the
Prophet Esaias gives us: Esaias 55.6.
Seek the Lord (says he) while he may be found, call upon him while he is
near. All which and many of the like kind prove that repentance ought to be
without any delaying or putting off, and not without cause:

Reason 1.
1. Because the deferring of repentance; if ever it be performed, breeds
more matter of hearty, and bitter sorrow for sin, so that the present delight
will never answer, nor counteruaile the future pain and grief; or if it
never be performed, then do men but sill up the vials of Gods wrath, and heap
up judgment to themselves, as S. Paul says in his Epistle to the Romans; Romans
2.5.6.
But thou after thine hardness, and beart that cannot repent, heapest up unto
thy self wrath against the day of wrath.

Reason 2.
2. Because by deferring, a man may be deprived of the meants, by which God
usually works this repentance, and regeneration, which is the word; for they
see it is translated from place to place, from one parish to another; from one
land to another, and this is that whereby God usually works it: which if it
be taken from them, how can it be expected they should come to repentance? or
who shall work it in them? for if they neglect the means, it is p^esumption to
hope God will work it without the means.

Reason 3.
3. Because the longer he deferreth it, the harder will it be for him to
repent, partly because he grows more in sin: for it is not to be denied,
but that men generally, and naturally, as they grow in strength, wit and
worldly wisdom, so they grow in sinfulnes, hardness of heart, and other
infidelity. As the drunkard does not quench his thirst, nor satisfy his
appetite, but increase the burning thirst of his body, and insatiable
temperance of his mind: (...) sinful and worldly pleasures, the longer they
are enjoyed the more greedily they are desired, and more obstinately preferred
before God, and spiritual graces. And partly because sin will take the deeper
root, and the longer the tree grows the hardlier it is removed, for the
root is the deeper, because custom will add to nature, and so will prove
irresistable, and almost not to be reformed. Of a perverse will (says
Augustine) Voluntate peruersa facta est libido, and dum seruitur libidini,
facta est consuetudo, and dum consuetudini non resistitur, facta est
necessitas. August. Confess. lib. 8. cap. 5.
rises lust, and lust being obeyed, grows to a custom, and while custom is
not resisted, it grows to a necessity. And so by this delaying of
repentance, it is made almost impossible, at least marvelous difficult and
hard.

Reason 4.
4. Because late repentance is not so acceptable, partly because it is seldom
true repentance: and partly, as Basil says, Si aetate prohibitus a peccato
disistis, debhlitati gratias agendum. Basil. exhort. ad Baptis.
If a man leave sin when age and weakness hinder him for following of it, we
must thank his weakness, and not him. What thank is it to renounce the world,
when he is leaving of it? to mortify his members, when they are mortified by
sickness? when it is like, sin rather leaves him then he leaves sin?

Reason 5.
5. Because by repentance a man is regenerate, made a new man, and as it were
renews his youth. Basil. exhort. ad Baptis.
Now if a Physician should promise to make an old man a young man, what speed
would he make to take his diet? So ought men in this case to make speed to
return unto God, when repentance has that effect that of old men, it makes
them young and new men. If men will run to a Physician that can but cure the
body, how much more ought they to make speed to God by repentance, when they
shall by this means be made new creatures in Christ Jesus? And thus much for
the doctrine and the confirmation of it both by the word and by reason. Now
follow the uses.

Use 1.
1. This reproves the corruptions of men, who living in the sound of the Word,
and being made to perceive and discern the necessity of this duty of
repentance, yet still defer and prolong it, being not so wise in their
generation as the children of the world are in theirs, who take the time and
opportunity. The Merchant buyeth while the Mart lasts, the soldier fights
while the battle indureth, the husbandman sows while it is winter, reapeth
when it is harvest, makes hay when the Sun-shineth, the smith strikes while
the iron is hot yea Ierem. 8.7.
and the Stork, and the Turtle and the Crane know their appointed time: but men
know not their time of returning unto God, or they do neglect it, though they
be continually called upon, and hear the voice of God; Ephesians. 5.14.
Awake thou that sleep, stand up from the dead, and Christ shall give thee
light. Yet they like drowsy men sleep still in sin, and answer nothing else
but Nisi tantum verba lenta and somnolenta, Modo^, ecce modo, sine paululum:
sed modo and modo non habebat modu^, and sine paululum, in longum ibat. August.
Confef. lib. 8. cap. 5.
those remiss and drowsy words; Anon, behold anon we come, let us alone a
little: but this anon and anon has no neasure with it, and this suffer me a
little is drawn out to the length; till Satan's general practice prevail
against them, which is to deceive careless sinners, by promising them time
enough: as raking usurers are wont to give day to young heirs, from time to
time, till at last they wind their inheritance from them. These never think
that impenitencie is a sin, and a sin against the Gospel, greater then that is
against the Law, making all their sins more sinful: as the Author to ye Heb.
affirms of it, Heb. 2.2.3.
these remember not how hard sin will be removed, when custom is added to
nature, as a twofold cord to bind sin unto them. And as Zophar said to Job of
a wicked man, Job 20.2.
that his bones are full of the sins of his youth, and it shall lie down
with him in the dust: as diseases after they are entered into the marrow and
bones are incurable, insomuch as they go with men to the grave: so does sin
with the unrepentant unto his death. These remember not how hardly Satan can
be cast out, when he has kept a long time possession, nay how unwilling they
will grow by this continuance, to go out of his bondage. As a captive who has
been laid long in prison, has both less means, and less desire of liberty:
for his captivity by long continuance is made more familiar. These forget that
sin, and the strength of it is increased, partly because it makes grace
weaker, as a disease does nature, and partly because it brings in more, as
one sin brings in a second, and that a third, and so it is hard contending
against two or twenty. These remember not how old age and sickness will be
most unfit for this, because it is indeed hard and difficult, and a heavy
burden, and a hard duty, when as age and sickness are a burden, not to be
borne of themselves, yea when the grasshopper will be a burden; Eccles. 12.5.
and when they are not able to put off or put on their apparel, how shall they
put off sin, and put on righteousness? Yea if they would then go about it,
and were able to do some thing against their corruption, yet Satan joining
himself in more malicious diligence to keep them from it, then before, when
as he sees the time draws near, wherein he must attain his purpose, or
else for ever fail of his desire, how little in such weakness shall they
prevail against him? These remember not that they may be deprived of the
means, whereby this is to be wrought in them, God taking it from them, or
keeping them from it. And if it was not effectual to convert them when they
often had it, what hope can they have to be turned without this? Oh, but some
will say; sicknesses may work it, for it puts us in mind of our end, and
it opens the ear, that before was shut. But medicines are for the diseases
they are ordained, and if the medicine cure not the eyes, which is ordained for
it, and has a virtue to cure it, what shall that do, which has no such
power? Admit it puts men in mind of their end, and so that they were
certainly assured to die to morrow, yet S. Paul in his epistle to the
Corinthians speaks of some, who thought of dying to morrow, and yet no such
thing was wrought in them; for they said, Cor. 15.32.
Let us eat, and drink, for to morrow we shall die: Which shows that men
are never a whit the nearer by that assurance of death, to their conversion,
which is only wrought by God, not by the means of sickness, or fear of
death, but by the preaching of the Word, which is Gods ordinance. But admit
they have the word, and the Minister coming to them: know they not that many
sicknesses, shuts the care, as well as others open it? And may it not be
just, that they which had a deaf ear to God in their health, should be made
deaf by him in their sickness? or that he should lay upon them a kind of
lethargy, and drowsy sickness, so that they cannot be awaked to hear two
sentences together? or give them a crasie and diseased brain, that they shall
be able to conceive nothing, or remember nothing? Finally, these remember not
that they may have such hardness of heart, that they cannot find repentance,
though they seek it with tears, as Esau did. Lastly, they remember not, that
if they could do it, yet how ungrateful, and unacceptable it should be to
God, that when they can no longer serve sin, and Satan, they should offer
themselves to God, when they were weak and blind, and lame, and sick; Mal.
1.4.
Cursed is he that has a male, and sacrifices to the Lord a corrupt thing. As
if he should say, Cursed is he that has strength of years, action of body,
and affection of soul, and spends it in the service of the flesh and Satan,
and offers to God his old age, his weak and feeble body and soul; and it is
like to be the more unacceptable, because it is rather for fear of punishment,
and hope of reward, than for any love they bear to God. To conclude, Basil
urging this point, says, Sic and Cain sacrificia offerre solebat: primum
quidem pro propria voluntate, etc.
Thus Cain offered up sacrifices to God, first he served himself, and then
brought to God: but God rejected both him and his sacrifice. So let him, that
shall thus serve God, and thus sacrifice to God himself, when he has first
served the flesh, the world and Satan, with all the strength and liuelihood of
his body and mind, and bring his weakest and worse parts to God, look to be
rejected of God.

Use 2.
2. This may persuade us to labor for speedy repentance, to follow the
counsel which the Angel gave to Lot going out of Sodom, saying, Genesis 19.17.
Escape for thy life: so flee for thy life, thou that art a Christian. And the
better to stir thee up to this, consider these two things: the folly, and
the difficulty of procrastinating repentance, and turning to God. The folly
appears, first, because prescription and custom often prevails against all
law. For when a man has enioied and possessed a thing long, he has eleauen
points of law, and will by occasion of long possession keep it: so will sin
and Satan do with thee. Folly then it is, not to make speed to take forth an
Eiectione firmae against them. Secondly, what madness is it for a man that is
fallen into some pit, or filthy puddle, to lie still and not to hasten out?
Sin is as filthy as any puddle: madness then it is and folly to defer the
coming out of it. If sin (says Basil) Si res honesta est peccatum, hoc
vsque ad extremum custodi: si patranti turpis ac nocens, quid in eo perseueras,
quod perniciosum est? nullus enim bilem euomere quaerens, maiorem eam ex mala
intemper antique diaeta reddere cogitabit. Basil. exhort. ad Baptis.
be an honest thing, then keep it to the end: but if it be a filthy and
hurtful thing to him that commits it, why do thou continue in that which
is hurtful? for no man that desires to ease his stomach of choler, will
endeavor to increase it by a bad and intemperate diet. It is a marvelous
madness, that an Ass should fall into a pit, and his master will instantly lift
him out, and yet when he that is a Christian is fallen into this pit of
filthiness, he cares not to come out. 2. It is a folly to use
procrastination in those things whose times and opportunity pass, as in
transplanting of plants, in grafting of fie^ces, in taming of beasts, in
instruction of youth; for the time past will hardly be recovered: so is it in
this, there being but one appointed time for it. Take heed (says) Basil) Vide
ne te tuorum consilioru^ pigeat, cum te sera nihil profutura poenitentia
ceperit. Disce prudentiam exemplo virginum, etc. Idem ibid.
lest thou be ashamed of thy own purposes, when thou shall find that late
repentance will profit thee nothing. Learn wisdom from the virgins, who are
therefore accounted foolish for that they neglected the time, when they might
have had oil, and spent it in riot and sleeping, and were after shut out and
excluded from the presence of the bridegroom.

Now the difficulty appears: 1. Because custom is another nature, and as
hard it is for a man to change, that he is accustomed to, as to alter natures
course. Hence is that of Jeremy: Ierem. 13.23.
Can the black more change his skin, or the Leopard his spots? then may ye
also do good, that are accustomed to do evil. Hence also is that of Basil:
As a man cannot unlearn his mothers tongue, so can he hardly leave the
custom of sin. 2. Because natural faculties will be spent in a man by
which God ordinarily works: much harder is it for a man to grow rich, when he
has spent his fathers patrimony, then when he has those foundations and
helps. 3. Continuance in sin adds to the weight of sin, as a burden is
increased by adding to it. If then it be difficult in youth to leave it, much
more in age. 4. Because at the death of a man he has many impediments, as the
infirmity pressing of him, the care of disposing his earthly things
possessing of him, his wife at one ear, his children at another, all which
hinder him that he cannot so freely think of his soul, and sin: yea and
perhaps, few or none will be found, when he is careless himself, to call upon
him, and put him in mind of his wants. Who shall, says Basil, Basil. ibid.
admonish him, (that is possessed and oppressed with a mortal disease,) of
things necessary then to be remembered? Shall his nie kindred? but these cannot
for grief. Shall strangers? but these will contemn him. Shall friends? but
these will be fearful to trouble him, by putting him in mind of any such
things. And so having many impediments, and few or no furtherances, how
difficult will the duty then be unto him? 5. It is just with God to contemn
that man dying, that contemned him living. And Chrysostom says, Vt moriens
obliuiscatur sui, qui dum viueret oblitus est Dei. Chrysostom.
Let this affect a sinner, That he who while he lived, was forgetful of God,
when he is a dying shall be forgetful of himself. Make speed then, and repent
betime, which is the best way to overcome sin and Satan. The best way to kill
an earth lie serpent is to bruise his head, not his tail; and the best way to
overcome Satan, will be in the beginning, in life, not in death. Let us the^ not
put it off from day to day, and from one time to another. For it is not to
morrow that God requires, but to day: for he says, Heb. 3.15.
To day if ye will hear my voice harden not your hearts. Put it not off till
you have disposed of your goods and worldly affairs; for ought not thy soul
to be more dear to thee then all things in the world? then take time while
thou have it, lest thou repent with tears too late, and so have no benefit by
it. Remember there will be a time when there will be a judgment without mercy,
when if thou neglect this day of salvation and acceptable season, thou shall be
cast to hell, and there shall lie in misery, howling and crying out, Oh
miserable wretch; what did I mean that I did not confess my sins, repent and
turn to God, when I was on earth? now I see others partakers of the heavenly
joys, and I thrust out and cast into these miserable torments: when thou shall
be enforced to say: Oh how iustare Gods judgments? I was spoken unto, but I
would not hear: I was instructed, and entreated by the Ministers of Christ to
repent, but I stopped mine ears against their admonitions. How do I now
justly feel that, which nothing could make me to fear? But to end this
point, I suppose I have not spent my breath in vain, but that there are many
here, upon whom these things have wrought, and in whom they have begotten good
purposes of repenting and forsaking their sins; now I beseech you by the
mercies of God and the merits of Christ, and I charge you by the love you owe
to your selves and your souls, that you smother not these motions, but make
much of them, and quench not the spirit, withstand not this call and
exhortation of God. Let it be enough, that he has stood thus long knocking at
the doors of your heart, and has not been let in. It is more then time, you
give over to abuse his patience and long suffering; and to day, while it is
called, to day, hearken unto his voice, lest you afterward be hardened through
the deceitfulnes of sin, when you shall not be able to repent, though there
may seem to be some desire in you; and when he will not be entreated, because
you came not when he called you: nor will open unto you, because you were not
ready at his coming.

The second particular time of repentance is, that it be done constantly, and
every day. And so the thing is this:

Repentance must be the daily and continual practice of a Christian.
Repentance is not once or twice to be performed, it is not the exercise of a
Christian for once or twice, a day or two, but it must be the continual
exercise of him. The Author to the Hebrews says, Heb. 3.7.13.
To day if ye will bear his voice. And again, Exhort one another daily while
it is called to day. As to day admits no delay, so it admits no interruption,
but this speaks to every man, as yesterday, so to day, and so to morrow, so
long as there is to day. And S. Paul says, 2. Cor. 4.16.
That though our outward man perish, yet the inward man is renewed daily: what
is this renewing, but regeneration? which is a part of repentance, and being to
be done daily, therefore there must be a daily repentance. Again, S. Paul
says: 2. Cor. 9.18.
We all behold as in a mirror, the glory of God with open face, and are
changed into the same image from glory to glory: noting that when we are
changed, it is not done in a moment, but from glory to glory, that is, from one
degree to another. And David says, Psalm. 119.176.
I have gone astray like a lost sheep: seek thy servant, for I do not forget
thy commandments. And as one says, What is the whole life, or what are the
whole actions of the godly, but repentance? for they are departings from evil,
and certain renouations or new obedience to God, or at least ought to be. And
Christ has taught us daily to say, Matthew. 6.12.
Forgive us our trespasses, arguing yt there must be a continual repentance, in
that this prayer is to be said every day, having reference to the petition
going before, that as we must ask every day for our daily bread we eat, so
must we daily ask for the forgiveness of our sins. Now there can be no
remission of sins, where repentance is not. Then must it be continually
practiced, and that for good reason:

Reason 1.
1. Because all men, even the best, are still subject to fall, and to be
corrupted, therefore they must still rise, and be purged: for living in an
infected air, they cannot but draw corruption, though they are never so wary
of themselves. Yea, seeing (as Chrysostom says) Ecclesia est Paradisus, ibi
est serpens in sidians, Eua seducens, and Adam seductus. Chrysostom.
the Church is as Paradise, where there is the Serpent besetting, Eve seducing,
and Adam seduced: So here is the devil inducing, and the flesh seducing; the
soul then must needs transgress.

Reason 2.
2. Because a Christian man's life is, Via, semita, cursus, vbi eundum, non
standum, and qui non progreditur in via domini and nou proficit, is deficit.
a way, a path, and a walk, therefore in this way a man must not stand, but
go, he may not sit down but go on, and grow to perfection, and he that does
not increase, does decrease, for there is no standing at a stay. Now this
increase is wrought by repentance and renouation. Therefore he must needs
exercise regeneration, and repentance, and that not for a day but his whole
life.

Object.
Repentance is never separated from godly sorrow, but mourn we cannot always,
seeing the Apostle wills us, Romans 12.15.
to rejoice with them that rejoice.

Answ.
I answer, that these two may well stand together, because they are exercised
about diverse objects. A man may well rejoice in God, and mourn in himself; he
may well rejoice for another man's good, yet mourn for his own sin, or
evil; he may have sorrow mixed with joy. As a man when he has escaped
shipwreck and is got to the shore rejoices in his own safety, but seeing his
friend suffer shipwreck and cast away, he cannot but mourn, and instantly be
thus diversely affected: so that both these may well stand together.

Object.
But sometime we must sleep, and then we cannot repent, for then all actions,
and senses cease.

Answ.
I answer as Paul did some men for indifferent things: Romans 14.6.8.
He that observes the day, observes it to the Lord: and he that observes
not the day, observes it not to the Lord: He that eats, eats to the Lord,
and gives God thanks: and he that eats not, eats not to the Lord, and
gives God thanks. So may I say, he that sleeps, sleeps to the Lord, and
gives God thanks. For even by our sleep we obey God, who has so made our
natures; and if we receive it as we ought to do, we do then perform an
action, whereby we do glotifie God, for thereby were are made fit, and able to
perform service unto him, and so we not only sin not, but do good then.

Object.
Some again may object, and say, that repentance is physic, and that is not
to be taken every day, for if it be it will do more hurt then good.

Answ.
I answer, it is true, it is compared to physic, but similitudes do not
hold in every thing, they run not upon all four: therefore though it be like
physic in some things, yet in other things it differs. Men take physic
but seldom, because their bodies are not always distempered: but for the
sickness of the soul it is contrary, for that sickness seaseth upon a man
continually, therefore he must use repentance always. Besides, physic for the
body is not used daily, because no man can take physic so warily, but
oftentimes it will take away good humors, as well as bad; but it is contrary
in repentance, for it takes away al bad humors of the soul, and leaves the
good behind. Therefore there ought to be a continual use of it, and that to
good use and purpose. But now I come to the uses.

Use 1.
1. This serves to reprove all such as repent, or practice this duty of
repentance, only by fits with intermission, only taking it up as a tertian or
quartan ague, every other day, who divide their time betwixt God and the world,
begin in the spirit, but end in the flesh, who being gone out of the Sodom of
sin, do not go forward in their journey, and practice of this, but with
Lots wise look back, with a desire to enjoy the pleasures thereof; which
proves directly, that their repentance was never good, not because they fall,
which is incident to all, but because they still practice not this duty of
repentance, to rise again. And hence it comes that these men prove far
worse, then they who never made any such show of repentance, and much more
secure. For as it is with a salve applied to a wound, which wants a virtue to
heal, the sore and venom of the disease, ouercomming the virtue of it, the
wound does more fester, and ranckle inward: so this spiritual salve applied to
souls wounded with sins, not curing them, they wax worse and worse: or when a
salve is not continued, but the wound is suffered to take cold, and to ranckle
inward; so it is with them that are not cured by this spiritual salve, they
grow worse and worse. As men roused out of sleep, with some stirring noise or
unusual sound they presently start up and are amassed; but after they have been
sometime acquainted with the noise, they can sleep secure lie and not be much
disquieted: so awaked out of their carnal security by the threatenings of the
law, as it were by canon shot, thundered in their ears, at the first they begin
a little to be affected, but after falling asleep again in their sins,
these fearful sounds nothing disquiet them, but they are much more secure.

Use 2.
2. This may persuade us as to begin with the first, so to hold on with the
last, to be both speedy and constant, in the practice of this duty of
repentance, by which we may assure our selves, the rather that it is true, when
it is constant, and not variable, and by fits. If we find it oftentimes
difficult, and that when we have overcome one, straightway there rises up
another; nay if like the monster Hydra, when one head is cut off, many others
arise, at least appear; yet must we continue. For men that desire health, do
not give over their physic, if they see their disease grow, but the greater
it is the more they seek after the means, and do more frequently use them.
And if not with one endeavor, thou can overcome sin and corruption, thou
may with the 2.3.5.10. as Chrysostom speaks Chrysostom. hom. 3. Poenitent.
of the cutting down of an oak by many strokes which cannnot be by one. If
they be hardly overcome with all thou can do, think they will overcome thee,
if thou neglect them. Therefore this repentance must be continual for
mortificatio^; so must it be also for regeneration: men must labor, and not
think they be holy enough; for as Bernard says, Desinit esse honus, qui
desinit velle sieri melior. Bern. Perfectum esse nolle, delinquere est. Hieron.
That man cease to be good, that does not endeavor to grow better. Yea as
Hierome says: Not to strive to be holy is to be corrupt; not to continue in
that endeavor. For going against the wind and tide in this, if there be not a
continual rowing, if any remission of the hands, or any time sitting still,
they must needs decay, and fall back. Besides, if that were not, yet here is
it much more true, then in the body; a little thing, as a surfeit, and such
like, decaieth the health, and strength of it in a moment or minute, or very
short time, more then many means, and long time, will recover the perfect
health again. But the soul that was corrupted in a moment almost, is not
recouerable in so short a time, as the other is; therefore there must be a
constant care to practice this, by which it may be recovered, and repaired,
and so fit to receive the Lord, whether coming in grace, or in glory. For
who, about to intertaine a king, does not prepare, and adorn his house, that
it may be fit to receive him, and fit for his abiding? dare any man in a
beastly and beggarly house offer to receive a king? And know, as Chrysostom
says, Nec sane sub vna die adornetur domus Christo, sed per totam vitae
nostrae aetatem; aeterno principi in referenda humani peccaetoris aula
componatur. etc. Chrysostom. hom. de militia Christ.
That one day is not enough to repair or adorn a house for Christ, but a man
had need to spend his whole life in repairing the hall of his heart for the
eternal king. But thou have sinned, let it repent thee: for repentance does
purge a sinner and repaireth holiness in him.

The impediments of repentance.
In the next place, in this doctrine of repentance, we must-speake of the
impediments which hinder men from the doing of it, and from the speedy doing
of it. And the first of these is ignorance; not that I suppose any in the
Church, is ignorant that it ought to be: but ignorance of the nature of
repentance, how it is a change, how there must be a mortification, and
regeneration, and such like, and as concerning this I say:

Ignorance the first impediment of repentance.
Ignorance of the nature, substance, and parts of repentance is a great
impediment to keep men from repentance, and from the speedy, and continual
practice of it: which is manifest by that of Nicodemus, who was amazed at this
doctrine of repentance, and regeneration, as never having heard of any such
thing before: for when Christ said unto him; Except a man be borne again, he
cannot see the kingdom of God; Nicodemus thought that Christ had spoken of a
natural birth, and said, 3. John 3.4.
How can a man be borne which is old? can he enter into his mothers womb
again and be borne? He could not be ignorant that such a thing was to be
performed, as being a great Rabbi in Israel, and therefore knew the exhortations
of the Prophets, Eschew evil and do good. But yet the nature, and as it were
the marrow and pith of this he knew not, and so could not make speed to
perform it. So was it with Peter's hearers; for when they were pricked and
touched in their hearts by the preaching of Peter, Acts 2.37.38.
They said, men and brethren what shall we do? Peter then calls them to
repentance, and said, Amend your lives, and be baptized, etc. So that we may
see by these men, what was the impediment, why they had not hitherto performed
it; neither could perform it now, that they saw their sin and their miscrie
^n by reason of their ignorance of it. So was it with ye Iayler, Acts 16.30.
who being astonished at the miraculous opening of the prison door, came
trembling, and fell down at Paul's feet, and said, what shall I do to be
saved? where we see that he was ignorant of this doctrine of repentance, and
therefore could not repent: So is it with all others; ignorance is that which
has and will keep them from repentance, and reason there is for it:

Reason 1.
1. Because men will never desire that they know not, and less endeavor and
labor for it, which usually follows their desire. Even as a Hawke that
seeks not after the prey while she is hooded, though otherwise, she have a
great desire unto it. No marvel then, that these men while they are ignorant
labor not for it, nor desire it.

Reason 2.
2. Because if they could desire, yet they could not perform: for many may
have a general blind devotion to a thing which they are not able for their
ignorance to do. As many men seeing the cunning works of some artificers, may
have a desire to do ye like, but are not able to perform any one of them,
seeing they are ignorant of the art: no marvel then, if all the while men are
ignorant of repentance, they perform it not. And hence may we learn:

Use 1.
1. Whence it is that in our times, as in all times, this duty is so little
practiced: it is manifest to be the ignorance of it; for to say nothing of the
common belief and confession of men, who when they talk of salvation, they
say they hope to be saved by their good meaning, and good works, and never
think or speak of any such matter as repentance, and regeneration, at least
as the Scripture speaks of it; yea to let pass those errors, which possess
many of the learned, and take up their thoughts, as well as the ignorant, as
justification by works, inherent holiness, and man's own righteousness; which
argue plain ignorance of this doctrine of repentance, and regeneration: I say,
to let pass these, what an infinite number of men live in the Church, whose
ears hear often of this from the mouths of their Ministers, that they must
repent, and so they know the name of it; but understand nothing of the nature
of it, none of the doctrine? but they think, and are so deluded by Satan, and
their own selfeloue, and natural reason, that having once the sight of their
sins, and their consciences convinced out of Gods word; if they do but in
some general terms confess, that they are all sinners, and desire God after
a formal manner to have mercy upon them; if they can sometime strain from
them a broken sigh, and be content to leave some of their less pleasing
sins, though they never knew what the turning of the whole man meant, what it
is to mortify one member, or to be renewed in any part, inward or outward,
neither had experience of any such things in themselves, as are the fruits of
true repentance: I say, if upon these slight and small performances they
should not be accepted of God, and man, as good repentants, they will quarrel,
as those hypocrites of whom the Prophet Esaias speaks, Esaias 58.3.
who say, Wherefore have we fasted, and thou see it not? we have punished our
selves, and thou regardest it not, etc. But he will answer them, that he
cannot away with their sick, and blind, and lame sacrifices, Malac. 1.6.7.8.
though they say they are not evil, yet he accounts them but the pollution
and despising of his name.

Use 2.
2. If knowledge of repentance be so necessary unto repentance, as without
which a man cannot repent: then if there be any desire of this duty in any
man, he must endeavor to remove this first let and impediment: for this being
in him, will not only hinder him from the speedy doing of it, as fetters may
hinder the speed of the swift, but make him he shall never be able to do it.
As no man can exercise any Art, that understands not the principles and nature
of it. Though some think a man may understand the nature of an Art, and teach
it others, yet never be able to practice it himself; as they say a man may
know Music, and be able to teach others, and yet be never able to play
himself: yet sure it is, he that does not know this, cannot act it. Which
urges as the necessity of the teaching of this point, so of the learning of
it, that men should by all means possible, and with all the care and endeavor
they can, labor for this knowledge, as they do for earthly things; specially
seeing the necessity is such, as there is no salvation without it, neither can
a man look for any salvation by any other means. Now then, as in the things
of this life, if there were no trade or way for a man to live by, and to keep
soul and body together, to get maintenance for it, but only by one, would not
every man labor for the knowledge, and endeavor to understand that mystery?
Nay now that there are many, yea almost infinite, yet see how they labor for
knowledge of one, to be able to maintain a poor miserable condition upon the
earth; how should they then much more labor for this, when it is the only
thing whereby they must either take their way toward heaven, or never come
there? Who, being in a strange country, ignorant of his way to his native
soil, where he should inherit great things, if he were once come thither,
would not be willing to learn, and diligent to know the means and the way?
Doubtless none, but he that has no desire at all neither to his country, nor
his inheritance. And so may we well judge of as many as content themselves, and
sit down in the ignorance of this doctrine, the Kings high way to the Court of
Heaven, and the country of happiness.

The second impediment is despair; Despair of a man's own strength and
ability, is the second impediment to repentance.
that is, when men are diffident, or despairing in themselves, by reason of
their own corruption, and the greatness of the thing, that they shall never
attain to it, which makes them often to defer, and to delay the time before
they will set about it, and oftentimes never to endeavor for it. And this
seems to be proved by the saying of our Savior Christ in the Gospel of S.
John: John 6.65.66.
No man can come unto me, except it be given unto him of my father. Whereupon
many of his disciples went back, and walked no more with him. Also by that
place of Matthew, where Christ speaks: Matthew. 19.23.24.25.
Verily I say unto you, that a rich man shall hardly enter into the kingdom of
God. And again, I say unto you, it is easier for a camel to go through the
eye of an needle, then for a rich man to enter into the kingdom of God.
whereupon his disciples were in a maze, and said, Who can then be saved? Noting
as it were an impossibility that any should be saved, being so hard a thing
to be effected; and so by one particular understanding all sorts of men, and by
their answer, showing, as it were, the despairing of other men, in themselves.
And may not that in the Acts prove this, where the people being pricked in
their hearts, at the preaching of Peter, said, Acts 2.38.
Men and brethren what shall we do? who, despairing in themselves, if God had
not showed them more mercy, would never have gone about this thing. These and
many such like, will easily prove this to be an impediment; and for further
proof I add these reasons:

Reason 1.
1. Because when they are any ways awakened, and come to the sight of
themselves, and their sins, they are like the servant of Elisha, who cast his
eyes only upon his enemies, 2. King. 6.
the huge army of the Assyrians ready to assault him, and so thought himself
lost, and impossible to stand in their sight. So these men beholding their
infirmities of nature, together with all their sins of custom; of ignorance,
of knowledge, of weakness and wilfulnes, and such like, do account this not
only painful to strive against them but almost impossible to overcome them,
and forsake them: and so sit down before they begin.

Reason 2.
2. Because in that condition they are not so sharp sighted to discern what
is against them, as they are blind, like the forenamed servant, who saw not the
angels that stood there pressed ready to sight for him, and on his side; so do
not they see, how nie God is unto them with his graces, and what helps and
spiritual succors he is ready to send unto them, who do go about this work,
and do truly, and constantly seek it at his hands. That he does not only
look on, judge and reward, as the Judges did in the games of Olympia, Chrysostom.
but also puts to his helping hand, sustaining their infirmities, and
enabling them to do that which he requires, and to overcome all that oppose
against them. But see what we may learn from this.

Use 1.
1. This teaches us, that it is no marvel though many be still found
impenitent, seeing they are possessed with this despair and diffidence, and
the tongue tells us, it is rooted in the heart. For persuade them to this
duty, they seem willing, but they say they cannot tell which way to turn
themselves, nay they desist to begin, because they despair ever to attain
unto it: for they tell us how marvelous hard and difficult a thing it is, how
paineful and laborious, that they despair ever to go through with it, if they
should begin: and so in the cowardlinesse and slothfulness of their own
heart, go never about it: when as notwithstanding, that is true in them which
Chrysostom says; Cogitemus quae diabolus imperarit, quam laboriosa, quam
grauia; nec difficultas fuit eius mandatis impedimentum. Chrysostom. hom. 19. ad
pop. Antioch.
Let us think what things the devil has commanded them, how laborious and
grievous they be; yet they make not difficulty any let why they should not
obey his commandments: but in these things they tell us of the difficulty,
and so by despair remain impenitent. We see how apt and laborious men are in
following their pleasures (says the Father) which is the service of the
devil, yea with what danger they will do it: as Tumblers to go along upon a
cord, whose safety consists in an exact even carriage of the body, the least
swaying to either side is no little hazard of their lives; others carrying a
beam upright upon their foreheads, or swords and such like; whom if thou
persuade to this duty or any part of Gods service, they cry out of the
difficulty of it. Persuade an adulterer to leave his adultery, and to mortify
that member, he pretends the difficulty of it; yet observe him and thou shall
see him take greater pains, for the satisfying of his lust and desire, then in
reason he need to do in mortifying of them, having the assistance of Gods
spirit; for he wastes his body, he consumes his goods, he exposes
himself to the rereproch of the world, to the law of the Magistrate, to the
curse of God, both for body and soul; and yet he fears difficulty to
mortify this. So the aspiring mind who persuades himself that it is a thing
impossible to overcome his ambition, and so never goes about it, will on hands
and knees, on foot and horse back, toil like a horse, following of Princes
courts, for one step of honor more then he has. So if thou call upon a
covetous man to subdue his covetousness, and labor to be crucified to the
world, he holds out difficulties, and says it is a labor not to be endured:
and yet takes he much more pains, rising early and going to bed late, and
eating the bread of care and sorrow, to scrape that together, which had, will
no more satisfy him, then waters of the sea will quench his thirst. No marvel
then if many men remain still impenitent and lie in their sins.

Use 2.
2. This may instruct him that would repent, to labor to remove this, and to
step over or break through this hedge, which is made against him, and to
gather his spirits unto him, and take courage to go about it, for the
difficulty of this lies more in his faintness and sloth, then in the thing.
As Chrysostom spoke of a commandment of the Law; Difficile mandatum non
suapte natura, sed audientium desidia: mel natura dulcedine^ habet. etc.
Chrysostom. hom. 8. de Poenitent.
The commandment is hard, not in it own nature, but by the sloth of the
hearer. Honey by nature is sweet, yea most lussious; but to those who are sick
it is bitter, and not to be tasted; which is not from the nature of it, but
from their infirmity. So the law is not burdensome by nature, but by our sloth
and negligence: which will be much more true of this, being a precept of the
Gospel; which is much more assisted by the spirit, and more giving grace then
the other. Besides, if it be now difficult and hard, and he unable for it, can
he think to make himself more able by despairing, or delaying in his
diffidence, when as sin will grow the stronger, and himself the weaker? Tam
bona qua^ mala cum fuerint plurimum immorata, potentiora sunt, etc. Chrysostom.
hom. 80. ad popul. Antioch.
As well good things as evil if they long continue, grow stronger: as a tree
in the ground, the longer, the more vnremooueable; as an ague, the more fits,
the more incurable; and a beast the elder, the more untameable. And if the
multitude do now discourage him, what will they do when they are grown to be
more? And if his youth be not able to overcome them, but he falls before
them, how shall he stand when he is old? But that which must best encourage him
is, that which Christ spoke to take this diffidence from his Disciples. In the
Gospel of S. Matthew, Matthew. 19.26.
With man this is impossible, but with God all things are possible. Which is as
much as if he had told them, that though it were impossible for any man to
repent and turn, yet with God it is not only possible, but also easy. And
therefore they ought not to be discouraged from seeking, nor despair of
attaining it, but account it an easy thing, and though this hedge were a stone
wall, yet by the help of God he may leap over it, or break through it. And
the rather should a man labor against this difficulty and discouragement,
because if he do not kill and crucify them, they will certainly kill him;
and is it not better to kill then be killed? If a Physician should tell his
patient that he must change his diet, and take physic and purge away his
corrupt humors of choler or melancholy, or he must die for it, though it were
very unpleasant, yea very difficult and hard, yet would he not stick to do
it: how much more ought men to do this for the soul? A certain Philosopher
when he found his goods and riches to hinder him, he could not go the way of
virtue, as he desired, threw them into the sea, with this farewell: I had rather
drown you, then you should drown me: How much more ought a Christian to part
with his sins, and give them such a farewell, though it be somewhat more
difficult? And to conclude, as Hierom counseled Heliododorus to go on in the
course of piety and following after Christ: Licet paruulus ex collo pendeat
nepos: licet sparso crine, scissis vestibus, vbera, quibus te nutriebat, matter
ostendat: licet in limine pater iaceat: perculcatum perge patrem, siceis oculis
ad vexillum crucis euola. Solum pietatis genus est, in hac re esse crudelem.
Hieron. ad Heliodoru^ epist. 1.
Though his little nephew should hang about his neck: though his mother
should, with her hair about her head, and her garments rent, show him the
teates which gave him suck: though his father should lie upon the threshold to
stop up his passage: yet he would have him trample upon his father, and with
dry eyes follow after Christ. For this is a special kind of piety, to be
cruel in this thing. So would I counsel every one, though his sins were as
dear as his father and mother and dearest friends, though it be never so
difficult to part with them, yet that he should cast them away, and trample
upon them to follow after Christ, and perform true obedience to him, for this
is a special kind of piety, to be cruel in this execution.

Presumption is the third impediment to repentance.
The third impediment is presumption of Gods mercy, whereby they are persuaded
he will accept them, whenever they come and return. And that this is such a
let, needs no further proof then of sinners themselves, who often allege
for themselves (why they should not sear to defer their repentance, and
still to follow their pleasures) the sweet promises of Gods mercy at all
times, as these: First the Lord speaks by his Prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 18.32.
That he desires not the death of a sinner. And again, by the same Prophet:
Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way and live. And Christ says in the Gospel of S.
Matthew: Matthew. 9.13.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice. And again in the same Evangelist our
Saniour speaks: Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, and I
will ease you. And S. Paul to Timothy has these words: 1. Tim. 2.4.
Who will that all men should be saved, and come to the knowledge of the truth.
Then what needs such haste to repentance? what needs all this care and speed?
they shall be received at all times: and by the abuse of these, they abuse God
and themselves, and still are kept from returning, and that by these means
also:

Reason 1.
1. Because they so remember, and their minds so run on his mercy, that he
is merciful, that they utterly forget his justice, and that he is just. They
think so much of the promises of the Gospel, that they forget the curses of
the Law, and gather poison out of the swee^e flowers of Gods promises: which
makes them never fear any danger, though they remain still without returning,
and so they add drunkenness to thirst.

Reason 2.
2, Because they loving their sins, for the pleasure, profit, or preferment,
or such things as they bring in, do willingly lay hold of any thing that may
harten them still in them, and will not see that which should draw them from
them.

Reason 3.
3. Because repentance is so hard a thing and unpleasant, and therefore men can
be willing to avoid the labor and pains of it, so long as they have any hope
to avoid the danger of their sins, and have any hope of inioying life and space
to return and repent. Now for the uses of this point they are these:

Use 1.
1. This teaches that this age is full of impenitencie, their words and works
declare it manifestly; and how should it be otherwise? for if they had no other
let, yet this, that they are full of presumption of the mercy and goodness of
God, is impedimentenough. They have not any true faith in the promises and
mercies of God: for if they had, they would not so abuse them, but would rather
return to him, and seek the pardon of that is past, and to please him in
future time. But only they have a mere presumption of it, which appears as
by their speeches, as before, so by alleging other examples of it, and telling
us Gods mercy is above all his works: which things are set down in the
Scripture for the comfort of the weak, and not to encourage the wicked;
written for the penitent, and not for the obstinate. Therefore for them to take
hold of them is presumption, when they were never intended to them; being
childrens bread, and not for dogs to devour. But another thing manifesting
their presumption, is their impatience under the rod of the Law, and the
reproves of the Word, arguing they are like those, whose palats are used to
sweet meats so long, that they can endure nothing that is sharp: like those
who (as Augustine says) August. in Psalm. 48.
having eaten sour grapes, have their teeth set on edge, that they cannot
eat, or delight in bread: so they being given to sin, cannot endure the
word, specially as it is thus against them; of whom there is a great deal
less hope, than of any other that is raging in despair.

Use 2.
2. This may admonish all men to take notice, that this is a maine let and
hinderance from this duty, and then to labor to overcome it; which one shall
best do if he will conceive of God aright, namely, that he is as just as
merciful; and that if the gracious promises show the one, then the severe and
grievous threatening; of the Law manifest the other. And why should not one eye
be upon this, as well as another upon that? they should consider that place of
Nahum, Nahum. 1.3.
That the Lord is slow to anger, but he is great in power, and will not surely
clear the wicked. Bernard says, Deus duos pedes habet, misericordiam and
iustitiam, neutrum solum apprehendere debemus. Bern. sermon. 56. inter paruos.
God has two feet, mercy and justice, we must not take hold of either of them
alone: for justice without mercy will not make men so fear, as mercy without
justice does make men continue and persevere in a corrupt life. Therefore, he
that would be saved, and truly repent, he must kiss both these feet, the one
will make him come with boldness, the other will make him hasten with fear, and
keep him from presuming. Others speak of God as having two arms, mercy and
justice, one as long as the other, unless we make him a monster, and
imperfect. And if he thus conceive of God aright, he may preserve himself
from this. Again, it is good for him to consider those promises he auowes,
whether he has any part in them or no: and let him know, that while he
remains impenitent, he has no part in them at all, and so preyes upon
another man's right. For those were made to the repentant, and not to the
impenitent, as the places do expound themselves, as it is in that of Ezechiel,
thus set down: Ezekiel. 33.11.
As I line, faith the Lord, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that the
wicked turn from his ways, and line: turn you, turn you from your
euillwaies, for why will ye die o ye house of Israel? The latter part shows,
he speaks not of al sinners, but of those who turn unto him, from their
wicked ways. Also that of Matthew, where Christ says, Matthew. 9.13.
I will have mercy, and not sacrifice: for I am not come to call the
righteous, but sinners to repentance. He she weth that whosoever are called to
him, that in him they may have salvation, are called also to repentance. And
again, our Savior Christ faith in the same Evangelist: Matthew. 11.28.
Come unto me all ye that are weary, and laden, and I will ease you. He
means not all without exception, but who find their sin irksome and
grievous unto them, and desire nothing more than to be freed from that
intolerable burden. So S. Paul to Timothy says: 1. Tim. 2.4.
That God would have none to be saved, but such as come to the knowledge of
the truth: such as believe the word, and have redemption by Christ, and so
turn to God. Likewise David in the 73. Psalm. begins the Psalm with the
admiration of Gods goodness to the godly, where he says: Psalm. 73.27.
That God is good to Israel, even to the pure in heart. And yet in the whole
Psalm following, he she weth nothing but the heavy justice of GOD to the
wicked, even when he gives them most prosperity, and wealth, concluding so of
them in the 27. verse of the same Psalm. For lo (says he) they that withdraw
themselves from thee shall perish: thou destroyest all them that go a whoring
from thee. Therefore to the ignorant, obstinate, impenitent, and secure sinners
these belong not at all. Again, admit it be as they say, that God will be so
merciful to them, and is so gracious; how ungrateful, and wicked a
consequence is this, to reason from his love to rebellion, that therefore men
may be graceless toward him, because he is so gracious to them? they never
learn this in the school of the Scripture, but the contrary. As in that of
Paul to the Romans; Romans 2.4.
Despisest thou the riches of his bountifulnes, and patience, and long
sufferance, not knowing that the bountifulnes of God, leads thee to
repentance? Teaching men to look for more justice, and not the continuance of
mercy. Nay, nature itself if it have any spark of the image of God
remaining, teaches otherwise. If a man have a father, or but a friend, that by
reason of the love he bears him, would hardly be displeased, or moved to
anger against him, would he make this use of his love, and patience, still to
provoke him with new iniutles? Nay it would move him to love him, and love
would make him loath to displease him, and fearful to offend him. Which being
so, then these men are monsters in nature, and reason, that because God will be
merciful, therefore they will sin, and displease him. But to restrain us
from this presumption, we must remember what is proved before, that God is
just, as well as merciful, and that the promises of God belong to the
repentant, and not to the obstinate; and though God be good to his, yet that he
will destroy the wicked: and let us not answer God with these unkindness,
because he is merciful, therefore we will sin against him; but rather
because he is gracious, let us turn unto him, and we shall find pardon.

Despair of Gods mercy is the fourth impediment to rerepentance.
The fourth impediment to repentance is despairing of the goodness and mercy
of God, a thing contrary to the former. There be two things, says Augustine,
August. tract. 35. in Joan.
whereby sinners are in great danger, the one in hoping too much, the other in
hoping too little, the one presumption, the other desperation, this is
contrary to that. By this was Cain damned, despairing of Gods mercies, as if
they were less then his sin. By this Judas perished, who seeing his sin,
could not lay hold of Gods mercy, but as without hope hanged himself, and
brast asunder with despair. The like may I say of Simon Magus, who began as it
were to live in a day, and died in the same, and of diverse others, who by this
despair, like the swine in the Gospel by the devil, have been carried
headlong into the sea of destruction and perdition, and were never able to come
out again, by returning and repenting.

Reason 1.
1. Because Satan, who made men in former times to look upon their sins with
a young sight, and so they seemed small, makes them now behold them with an old
spectacle, which makes every thing seem great, and so they are overtaken with
a fearful sight, and apprehension of them; during which time Satan rests
not to suggest that God indeed is merciful, but he will never extend his mercy
toward such heinous offenders, whose sins are in number, numberless, in
quality, and nature most grievous, and outrageous. And so putting them out of
hope of mercy they cannot during that time repent and return.

Reason 2.
2. Because others seeing their sins so grievous, and thinking them not
possible to be pardoned, say within themselves; Well, we are damned already:
why do we not then whatsouer pleases us best in this life? These men are
murdered by despair: As Augustine speaks. Or rather murder themselves by not
repenting. Now for the use it is thus much.

Use.
This impediment is rarer then the former, few there are whom Satan assaies
with it, because it is too fearful even to others, and would disadvantage him
more, then he can gain by it, though he use it in some, where he sees it may
advantage him, and sometime when he fears to be cast out. Yet as fewer die
of the sword, then of surfeiting by a plenty, and full diet: So fewer perish
by this, then by the other. Yet for the taking away of this snare, and the
remoouing of this impediment; every one that is troubled with it must
understand, that though their sins were never so great, and heinous, yet this
should not keep them from turning to God by unfeigned repentance, which they
may be assured shall be accepted, for these reasons, and grounds. First, from
the name of God, and his royal title, as it is expressed by God himself in
the book of Exodus: Exodus 34.6.7.
The Lord, the Lord strong, merciful and gracious, slow to anger, and abundant
in mercy, and truth, reserving mercy for thousands, forgiving iniquity, and
transgression and sin. Where the greatest part of it, is mercy, goodness,
long suffering, and readiness to forgive. And why is all this? but for the
comfort of such as have need of mercy, and not only to encourage them to
come, but to make them afraid, by such fears as these to be kept from him,
which they cannot do, without denying this unto them, and so bring much
dishonor and disgrace unto him, and sin to themselves. For as men much
dishonor great princes, in doubting of, and calling in question their title,
and regal styles, and make themselves capable of treason, so is it in this. 2.
They must think, his name is not a bare title, as some princes have, without
any part of the thing; but as his name, so is his nature, as the Prophet Micha
manifests: Micha 7.18.
Who is a God like unto thee, that takes away iniquity and passes by the
transgression of the remnant of his heritage? he retains not his wrath for
ever, for mercy pleases him. And why is this, but because, as the servants of
Benhadad persuaded him to let them put on sackcloath about their loins, 1.
King. 20.31.
and ropes about their heads, and to let them go to the King of Israel, and so
humble, and submit themselves unto him, because the Kings of Israel were
reported to be merciful Kings, and therefore said they, It may be Ahab will save
thy life: So should others encourage themselves in respect of God, and not
only because it is his nature, but because he is said to take pleasure in it,
that he is marvelous glad to have the occasion, to show his mercy; not that
he is simply glad of sin, and the misery of man, the object of his mercy;
but glad that sinners will come to him that he may manifest his mercy, and the
greater the sinner is, the more gladder of him, for it more magnifieth his
mercy. 3. To overcome this let unto repentance, they should think of the
promises of God, who is true, and cannot lie: As these and such like: First,
that of Esaias; Isal. 55.7.
Let the wicked forsake his ways, and the unrighteous his own imaginations,
and return unto the Lord, and he will have mercy upon him: and to our God,
for he is very ready to forgive. Also that of Ezekiel; Ezech. 18.21.22.23.
But if the wicked will return from all his sins, that he has committed,
and keep all my statutes, and do that which is lawful and right, he shall
surely live, and not die. All his transgressions that he has committed, they
shall not be mentioned unto him, but in his righteousness that he has done he
shall live. Have I any desire that the wicked should die, says the Lord God?
or shall he not live, if he turn from his ways? And again by the same
Prophet he speaks; Ezech. 33.11.
As I live, says the Lord God, I desire not the death of the wicked, but that
the wicked turn from his way, and live, etc. And lest these should be thought
to appertain only to those, who have committed few and small sins, let them
consider that place of Esaias, and see what manner of men the Lord promises
forgiveness unto, upon their true repentance, whose words are: Esaias 1.18.
Come now, and let us reason together, says the Lord: though your sins were
as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow, though they were as red like
scarlet, they shall be as wool. And S. John says: 1. John 1.1.9.
If we walk in the light, as he is in the light, we have fellowship one with
another, and the blood of Jesus Christ his son cleanses us from all sin. And
again: If we acknowledge our sins, he is faithful, and just to forgive us our
sins, and to cleanse us from all unrighteousness. Here is no restraint of
number or grieuousnes. And if they yet stagger, let them take his oath which he
has made to put them out of all doubt of his abundant love unto them; as it is
manifest in the Epistle to the Heb. Heb. 6.17.18.
So God willing more abundant lie to show unto the heirs of promise the
stablenes of of his counsel, bound himself by an oath; That by two immutable
things, wherein it is impossible that God should lie, we might have strong
consolation, which have the refuge to hold fast the hope, that is set before
us. And so unless God be untrue, and more; as a perjured person, which is
blasphemy to think, this let need be no impediment. But if it yet have any
more lively force in them to hinder them, let them consider what sinners he
has received: As Rahab the harlot, of which Chrysostom has this saying:
Chrysostom. hom. 5. de Poenitent. Reported by the Jews to live 40. years in
uncleanness.
That Jesus who said, Rahab the harlot shall live, was the image of the Lord
Jesus, saying, the harlots and publicans shall go^ before you into the kingdom
of God, Also Manasses and Mary, Luke 7.41.25.
whose sins were like the debt of him that ought five hundred pence, and of
Peter, and Paul, with infinite others. Consider further if God be good,
peccantibus, to those that sin, as they have experience, by his patience, and
many otherwise what will he be poenitentibus (that is) to those that repent?
yea as says Chrysostom, Ambrose.
If men be good to servants when they have offended, and do receive them into
favor again, if they humble themselves, and not only have them in the same
account, but also give them more liberty; how will God be gracious and good to
his? If our Savior Christ do thus teach men to use a motive to God to forgive
them their sins; Luke 11.^.
For even we forgive every man: how much more may it be a ground to them to
hope for his mercy, when they see how merciful men are, who have but a dram
of mercy, in comparison of that infinite mercy which is in him? Now if a man
lay together and compound as it were all these simples, he may make thereof an
excellent confection, to keep him from this evil of despairing of the mercy
of God, and make him the more able and willing to return unto God and repent.

Object.
But some will say, you say well Sir, God is merciful, but I am so unworthy
of my self, and I find so many insirmities in me, that I am not worthy of
the mercy of God, and therefore I cannot expect it.

Answ.
I answer, that this is a common objection, which rises not from humility,
but from the pride of thy heart, which makes thee to say thus, because thou
would not be beholding to God for his mercy, but would have God be
beholding to thee for thy worthiness. But if thou would have God to have
the glory, stand not upon thy infirmities: for the more unworthy thou art in
thine own sight, the more worthy thou art in the sight of God, and the more
acceptable, because Gods glory is then most magnified. As our Savior Christ's
power was magnified, not in curing one that was a few days sick, but in
curing of him that was 38. years diseased: John 5.
so the mercy of God is not magnified so much in curing of a small sinner, or
a few sins, but in curing of great sinners, does his goodness most show it
self. Do thou think yt God is like some Physicians that will do nothing
without a fee? so he will do no more for thee then thou art worthy of: nay,
it is far contrary with God, for he never cured any, who was not brought both
to see and know and acknowledge his own spiritual poverty and unworthiness,
and to think himself less then the least of Gods mercies. When thou art so
humbled, that with the Centurion thou can send thy friends, Luke 7.6.7.
thy prayers, to Christ with this message, Lord I am not worthy thou should
enter under my roof; and with Peter, Lord depart from me a sinful man; thou
shall find thy soul cured, thy sins pardoned, and Christ will come to thee
in mercy.

Care and pleasures of the world, the fifth impediment to repentance.
And now I come to the fifth impediment, which is the cares, and pleasures of
this present life, of the love of the world and the things of it, which is
either in seeking for them, or in using of them. This impediment is double,
those who have not attained them; but are in want, or necessity, think they
may lawfully provide for the body, before the soul, and defer the care of
this, till that be sufficiently provided for. Those who have them do more
enlarge their appetite and desire of them, inuenting new and fresh pleasures
daily, by which they are kept from this. Now that these things are a let, if
the common experience of every man do not sufficiently prove it, then may the
testimonies of these places of Scripture confirm it: As first that place of S.
Luke, Luke 14.17.
where many being invited to a wedding, all of them made delays and excuses,
either profit, or pleasure, cares, or delight hindering them; and therefore one
pretended, that he had bought a farm, and he must go and see it: and another,
that he had bought a yoke of oxen, and he must go and prove them: and
another said, that he had married a wife, and he could not come. So that one
thing or other hinders them from harkening to the voice of God. So we read of
certain who heard the Word, but were not brought by it to repentance. The
reason was, Matthew 13.21.
because the cares of the world grew up. as thorns with the seed, and the
deceitfulnes of riches choked the word, and it was made unfruitful. So the
rich man in the Gospel (so called because riches was his master) even s^tled
himself upon his lees, and his hope upon his wealth, and debarred himself
from this duty of repentance; Luke 12.19.
And said unto his soul, thou have enough laid up for many years, live at
ease, eat, drink, and take thy pleasure. To this may be added the example of
the Rulers, who are said John 12.43.
to believe in Christ, yet they did not confess him, lest they should be cast
out of the Synagogue. And the reason of this was, because they loved the praise
of men, more the^ the praise of God. And though in the former verse they
pretended fear to be the cause, yet it is told us here, that care and love of
the world was ye cause. This was also the reason why Demas had forsaken Paul,
2. Tim. 4.10.
namely, because he had embraced this present world. And finally that parable
of our Sa^iuio^ Christ of the prodigal son does illustrate and make manifest
this point unto us. For all the while that his portion lasted, that he had
enough to spend upon his pleasure and delight, he fled from his father, and
could never bethink himself to turn unto him: but when his patrimony was
spent, and that he was bitten with penury and want; then he could lay down
with himself all meane^, ^o^ he might with greatest humility come again^ to
his father, and fell down before him, and acknowledged his ^ult. It is
manifest then that these are maine impediments, and in reason they cannot be
otherwise.

Reason 1.
1. Because repentance requires all a man's care and diligence, the attention
of the whole heart, it is not a little that can work it out. But where the
care and pleasures of the world is, there the heart is stolen away, Mark 4.19.
and the affections divided, not to diverse but contrary things; and so as the
senses; which have many objects, can hardly attend any one seriously and as
they should, to perceive them well; no more can the affections affect truly and
effect thorowlie two things of such contrary natures.

Reason 2.
The second reason is, because the cares of the world choke the word; if they
hinder not a man from receiving it, as full hands are able to receive nothing,
no not gold, when they are full, of clay before; now affections are like hands,
says Augustine, which when they are full of the world how shall they receive
the word? or if they receive it a little, they will soon choke it. Then when
the word is Gods instrument to bring men to repentance, when either it is not
received or choked, what shall beget this in them? how must not cares needs
keep them from repentance?

Reason 3.
3. Because by these, men are made licentious, and voluptuous; and so can never
profit by the word, (no more then seed sown in the mire can grow) nor
exercise mortificatio^. Their minds being transported that they cannot remember
themselves, nor God, nor the last day. Therefore our Savior Christ exhorts
us, Luke 21.14.
that we should take heed of surfeiting, and drunkenness, the cares of this
life, lest that day come on us unawares, and take us without repentance, and our
oil in our lamps, which these things must needs effect. But let us make some
use of this.

Use.
This ought to incite us to labor to remove this impediment, and strive the
more against it, because it is one of the most dangerous ones, and that which
carries men away with the stream, some not blushing to pretend this as a let,
and to profess it; others though they cou^ it, yet if then pulse be fel^, it
leans this way altogether. It is one of the greatest, most general, and
dangerous impediments. To remove it then, first, from those who have not
riches, and such a state as they could desire, they ought to remember that
saying of Christ, who advises every man: Matthew. 6.33.
First seek the Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, and all these
things shall be ministered unto you. Which rule if they observe, the things
which they desire shall be gotten with great facility and abundance; of which,
as the promise of God may persuade a man, in that he has given godliness so
large a charter; namely, 1. Tim. 4.8.
that it has the promise both of this life, and that which is to come: so may
his performance thereof, because he has thus blessed others even in these
things; as for example, Solomon: 1. King. 3.12.13.
for when God gave him his choice to ask what he would, because he asked
neither long life, nor riches, nor the life of his enemies, but wisdom and
understanding to hear judgment, therefore the Lord answered him according to
his desire, and said, I have given thee a wise and understanding heart, so that
there has been none like thee, before thee, neitherafter thee shall arise the
like unto thee. Moreover, I have given thee that which thou have not asked,
both riches and honor, so that among the Kings, there shall be none like unto
^hee all thy days. Here we may see earthly things given unto Solomon for a
reward, because he had in his choice, preferred wisdom before wealth and al
other earthly blessings. They should remember also the uncertainty of them:
And therefore S. Paul wills Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.17.
to charge them that are rich in this world, that they trust not in uncertain
riches. And this is in holding of them, if they have got them. And Solomon
says, Prou. 23.5.
Will thou cast thine eyes upon that which is nothing? For riches takes her to
her wings, as an Eagle, and flies into the heavens. And a man should here also
consider, that when he has most need of them they shall least help him;
neither can do him any good, and therefore Solomon says again, Prou. 11.4.
That riches avail not in the day of wrath: And Job, though sometime rich, yet
he said thus of himself: Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall
I return thither; the Lord has given, and the Lord has taken, etc. And that
howsoever riches cannot help him in the time of his adversity; yet if he
labor for repentance, that will abide with him, that being true that
righteousness (as Solomon says) Prou. 11.4.
delivers from death. Then, as the same wise man speaks, Prou. 23.4.5.
Travel not (...) to be rich, but cease from thy wisdom, and labor for that
which will remain with thee. If any shall pretend unto me the maintenance of
his life, and body, in health, and competency, and provision for his wife, and
children: I deny not, but that men may lawfully, yea must of necessity have
care of their temporal estate, yea so much the greater as it is worse, and more
unsettled: For if the body perish for want of things needful, how should the
foul be endued with the life of righteousness and holiness? But this is
that I persuade that men should nor do, as commonly men do, that suffer
themselves to be possessed with the cares of this world, that is, not so hotly
to pursue them, that they forget to seek for this, but that in all wants,
miseries, and troubles, their chief care, study, desire, and endeavor, be
set upon this, and they chiefly labor for it. For being in distress they have
more need to seek God, and to exercise this. And better were it to suffer
their bodies to pine for want of food, then their souls to continue in the
state of sinfulness, and death. For as our Savior Christ says, What will it
profit a man if he win the whole world, and lose his own soul? So in the
case of wife and children: let men think it is a fearful condition, that the
proverb, (though it be profane) should be fulfilled in them: Happy is the
son whose father goes to the devil: So happy wife, and happy body, whose
soul goes to the devil. And as for these who have these outward things
already, Luke 10.41.
they may more freely seek the spiritual, and are bound more strongly so to
do, and they should know more is required of them. They may learn by
experience, that which reason could not teach them before, that is, the
vanity, uncertainty, and lothsomnes of them. For as one says, Earthly
things are like to certain herbs, which grow in the fields, which a far off
seem very beautiful; but when a man is come nie, and has gathered the leaves,
they smell rankelie, which a man will speedily cast away, correcting the error
of his eyes, by the touch of his hand. So should they do with these, and
labor to have the seeing of that, which is in truth: That they are by the word
not unfitly compared to thorns, says Chrysostom; as thorns howsoever they
are taken hold of, they prick, so earthly things are eftsoons through our
corruption causes of destruction, and of sorrow, (though not of the true
sorrow) when as spiritual things are as precious stones, as in other respects,
so in this, that as they delight wheresoever they are beholden; so these are
ever pleasant and continual comforts. Chrysostom. hom. 32. ad popul. Antioch.
They therefore should learn, to use the world, as though they used it not, to
touch it as honey, but not tumble in it. Remember if they enter too far into
it, the laylor is covetousness, as says Chrysostom; I would add
voluptuousness and the like, if they be thorowlie in, the more they assay to
go out, the more fetters they will put upon them. And so both by seeking of
them, and by inioying of them, shall they be still kept from this duty of
repentance, and so out of the state of salvation.

Offense a sixth impediment to repentance.
The sixth impediment is offense, that is, either such as they fear from wicked
men, their companions before in their sin, that is, their hatreds, injuries,
and reproaches, or such as they take from those who profess they have attained
this work of regeneration and repentance. Of the first sort we have a proof
in Nicodemus, John 3.1.
whose repentance was deferred for fear of men; which appears by his coming
to Christ by night. Also by the example of the Rulers, of whom John 12.42.43.
many believed in Christ, but because of the Ph^risies they did not confess
him, test they should be cast out of the Synagogue: Because they loved the
praise of men, more then the praise of God. Like unto Zedekia, who refused to
go forth unto the King of Babels Princes, because, as himself confessed,
Ierem. 38.19.
he was careful of the ^ewes that were f^ed unto the Caldeans, lest they should
deliver him into their hands, and they mock him. The second kind of offense
appears by these exhortations: As of Paul unto the Colossians, Coloss. 4.5.
Walk wisely toward them that are without, and redeem the time. As if he
should say, Give them no offense, as a means to keep them out still. Again
by the same Apostle unto the Thessalonians, 1. These. 4.12.
who exhorts them to behave themselves honestly toward them that are
without; and that nothing be lacking unto them. And unto the Corinthians: 1.
Cor. 10.32.
Give none offense, neither to the jews, nor to the Grecians, nor to the
Church of God. For if offenses from these, and corruptions in carriage, did not
hinder them, why should the Apostle thus exhort them to beware of such
carriage, lest they should lay a stumbling block before them? Yea and reason
tells us these must needs hinder men.

Reason 1.
1. Because men are a great deal more sensible of the injuries, and
indignities which men can do them, then they are of the judgments that God
can bring upon them, remaining in that course, wherein they then walk; and
natural men especially live rather by sense then by faith.

Reason 2.
2. Because if they see the wants and infirmities, yea sometimes the vices and
sinces that are found in them who have received grace and repentance, being but
personal, they impute them to the profession, and not able to distinguish
betwixt the person and the profession, they are made out of love with the
profession, for the personal faults, and so never endeavor for it, but are
discouraged from it.

Use.
To remove these ^drances, men ought first to labor for spiritual courage,
and to contemn all those injuries and reproaches that sinners will cast upon
them, such as they are ready to forsake, and come to God. For those reproaches
cannot hurt them, unless they be faint-hearted within. As I may say of
pleasure, says, Chysost. Homil. 2. ad popul. Antioch.
that it consists not in the dressing of the meat, but in the affection of
the eater: So say I of reproaches, that they are somewhat or nothing; not from
his opinion that reprocheth, but from his affection that suffers, and is
reproched. For example, let a man cast upon thee very strange and unheard of
infamies and reproaches: if thou deride them, if thou set light by his words,
thou have suffered no reproach. For as if thou had a body of Adamant, or
iron; if thou were smitten with innumerable darts on all sides, yet thou had,
received never a wound: for wounds come not from the hands of him that cast
those darts, but from the body of him that suffers: So here injuries and
reproaches have not their being from the madness of him that reprocheth, but from
the meekenes of him that suffers. Does any man injury thee? thou feel
not, thou grieuest not, thou have suffered no injury, thou have rather smitten
him, than he thee. For he that reprocheth, if he see his wound and stroke go
not to the heart of him that suffers, he is much more vexed then before, and
a man meekely suffering his reproaches, the stroke of those reproaches do
return upon him that sent them out, of their own accord. Again, he shall
find that God will take notice of all these, as he said he did of the
reproaches which fell upon the Church of the Smyrnians: Revel. 2.9.
I know the blasphemies of them, etc. to do to his as David promised himself
from the Lord, that he would 2. Sam. 16.12.
look upon his affliction, and to do him good for their cursing: and amongst
other things happily this good which David speaks of, that the Lord would
make him of the very sum servants, which Michol told him had despised him, 2.
Sam. 6.22.
to be had in honor. So that God will make those who now reproach and dospise
him, afterward to honor him, yea and to glorify God for them, 1. Pet. 4.2.12.
in the day of their visitation, when God shall call them. And as for scandals,
which arise from professors, he must learn to put a difference betwixt the
person and the profession, and not for the faults of him to condemn this. I
have heard it often observed, that in many handie crafts, the more skillful the
trades man is, the more vicious he proves in his carriage, as in drunkenness and
such like: yet no man condemns his Art for all that; and why then should men
condemn this art of piety, for the impieties of the professors of it? Alas
how many should have stumbled at piety when David fell into his unclean and
bloody sin? how many at Christianity, when Judas an Apostle of Christ hanged
himself, being before filthy and covetous? how many at Peter's denial and
forswearing his Master? Nay take heed whosoever thou art, and know that these
scandals may be laid before thee in Gods justice that thou might stumble at
to thy destruction; but labor to make good out of their evils, and let them
move thee to strive and pray for more grace, that thou may be able to stand,
though they fall. And think, that if a wo^ belong to them who give the
scandal, (which yet by their repentance they may avoid) it cannot be well with
thee, which take the scandal, and art by it kept from repentance.

The peaceable ends of sinners is the seventh impediment to repentance.
Now we must proceed to the seventh let and impediment, which is the ends of
other men, who having lived very wickedly, and vngratiouslie, yet have died
very peaceably, and either in truth or show, very happily; whereupon they
gather that they also may make the like end, though they live impiouslie, and
impenitentlie, all the days of their lives: hence it is that nothing is so
common in their mouths, as the good thief saved at the last hour, who at the
last hour passed from the state of a wicked man, to the condition of a godly
man, and out of the place of dead bodies, into the place of living souls; yea,
and they will long talk of the end of a wicked man, or men, which they have
seen or heard to have been quiet and peaceable, to animate themselves, to go
on still in their sins, and keep them from repentance. Yea they will not
pass over the unquiet ends and deaths of many, who have repented, and their
vncomfortablenes at their death, who exercised this duty much in their life
time, and so are kept from this repentance, yea, and they have reason why they
should not make such have to this.

Reason 1.
1. Because they think of themselves that they have lived, and do still live a
far more orderly and civil life then they have done, though not so holily as
some others. And so doubt not to make as good, or rather a better end, then
the best of them.

Reason 2.
2. Because in the hypocrifie of their hearts, they persuade themselves that
they are the children of God, and more dear unto him the^ those, whose ends
they remember: and therefore make no doubt to find as much favor, as they
suppose, they have done already.

Reason 3.
Thirdly, because by the discomfortable ends of such as have repented, Satan
works upon their corruption, and persuades them that it is abootelesse and
unprofitable thing for them to vex and disquiet themselves in crucifying their
corruptions, seeing they see but little fruit of it in the end. But let us
make some use of these men's folly.

Use.
Every man ought to strive against this, if they desire at all to be saved,
which must be by repentance; they ought to labor to remooueit: which that
they may do the more easily, they should first remember, and consider it
well, that the quiet ends of most wicked men (though not of all) comes partly
by the justice of God, and partly by the subtlety of S^n, and their own
corruption, so to blind them, that they may have, and do still imagine, that
they are as dear to God as any of his, and as sure of heaven, and everlasting
happiness, and life, though they never repented in truth, neither knew he
what it meant. And to change Augustines words a little: Sperando and desperando
pereunt homines etc.
By hoping and despair, many men perish: I say, By hoping and presuming many
perish, hoping evil in their lives, but presuming worse in their deaths. And
this God does, either lest they should be converted and be saved, as the Lord
commands in Esaias: Esaias 6.10.
to make the heart of this people fat, make their ears heavy, and shut their
eyes, lest they see with their eyes, and hear with their ears, and understand
with their hearts, and convert, and he heal them: Or that their companions,
who have contemned God, and his laws with them, might be hardened in their
course, he having a purpose to destroy both the one, and the other. If it
proceed from Satan's craft and subtlety, that men be thus holde^ in
impenitencie, then is it after this manner, he being sure of them, and by the
former delusion having held them, seeing what is for his purpose, will not
trouble them, but feed them on still with a vain hope of salvation, by which
not only they dying, are as the devil said to Saul, 1. Sam. 28.19.
To morrow thou and thy; sons shall be with me: so they and their souls with
him: but he also holds many in his power still, who outliue them, which would
be made to bethink themselves, if they should see their companions for their
former courses to be at their deaths, full of doubts and perplexities. Again,
this should be thought on, when the repentant dies not so comfortable; that
it argues not, he never had it, because now he has not the seeling of it, no
more then a man's feeling of nothing but aches, and pains, will prove that he
was never healthful; or that it is not now, because it appears not; for so
should all trees in the winter, be accounted dead, because their life appears
not; for as this comes from extremity of cold, so that may come from
extremity of heat, by a burtting ague, which may so distemper the brain,
that he may be like Peter in the mount, speak he know not what. The judgment
of a man then, is to be fetched from his life in former time, for as he liue^
and believed, so shall he end in truth, whatsoever he do in show; for the
outward death, he may die like a wicked man, for these things fall out alike to
all, as the wise man says in his book Ecclesiastes; Eccles. 9.2.
Al things come alike to al, and the same condition is to the just, and to the
wicked, to the good, and to the pure, and to the polluted, and to him that
sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices not: as is the good, so is the sinner,
he that swears, as he that fears an oath. And these men's ends if they would
consider them well, should make them rather hasten, then defer repentance,
do it when they have the use of their understanding, memory, and other parts
fit for such a holy business; lest deferring it, such a distractio^ may befall
them at their ends, specially seeing they see it has happened to such as are
his. But they take with the left hand, that God offers with the right hand,
and so turn it to their hurt. Thirdly, for the example of the thief, it is
but one, and why should men presume of it, when they have instances of many
thousands dying as senseles^y, as they lived wickedly? Would not that
malefactor be condemned, who had means, opportunity, and time enough, to get
his pardon, if he should defer upon hope, that when he was going to the
gallows he might then have his pardon, only upon this ground, because there
is a president of one, that the King did so save, and yet but one president of
all the records of the land? So in this: were he not a desperate fellow, that
would undertake to make an ass to speak, and that upon the hazard of his
life, if he did it not, and presuming to do it, because he reads of one
Ass, Baalams Ass, which did speak? August.
So here, there is one, that no man finding true faith, and repentance should
despare; and but one, that none might presume. Furthermore the act was a very
extraordinary thing, done at an extraordinary time, at the last hour upon
the cross, when Christ was entering his glory. And as Princes, at the time of
their coronation, pardon such notorious offenders, and offenses, the like
whereof they will very hardly ever remit afterward: So our Savior putting off
his abasement, and humiliation, and ready to enter his glory, and kingdom,
did this to magnify his mercy, virtue, and excellency of his merit, which he
then performed upon the cross. The occasion extraordinary; the action not
like to be ordinary. Now what folly were it, for a man to commit such a
grievous offense, upon hope before ye day of Assizes, ye coronatio^ of a Prince
may come? and more folly and madness is there in this. Finally, for this
Augustine makes certain notes, August. ser. 120. de tempor.
which will put a difference of these men from the thief. As first, he did not
wittinglie, but ignorantly defer his repentance, having not had the doctrine
of the Gospel, by which he might be brought to come to Christ, and repent: but
they have lived a long time within the sound of it, and have neglected, and
contemned it. The second difference which Augustine puts between these
impenitents, and the thief, is, that he did not desperately reserve the hope
of his redemption to the last hour; but these most ungratefully resolve so to
do, and therefore deserve reiection. 3. He had no knowledge, either of
religion, or of Christ before this time, for if he had had, it may be he would
not have ^in the last among the Apostles in ^umber, which was made the former
^n the kingdom: whereas they cannot be ignorant of these, unless their
ignorance be affected, and by negligence brought upon themselves. 4. His
belief and confession was short, but it was most unfeigned and devout; the
occasion shows it, because it was then, when the perfection of the just did
stagger, says Augustine, his Disciples for fear forsook him, and his
Apostles doubted of him; yea we may add, that though the people railed on him,
yet he prayed to him, and when his fellow thief reviled him, he justified
him, confessed his own sins, and lovingly admonished his fellow, desiring
as they had been brethren in iniquity, they might be partners in the pardon
of it, and in the work of redemption. But theirs most commonly is not for
love of God, but fear of hell, not for hatred of sin, but the punishment, and
commonly dissembled, and hypocritical. Seeing how usually then they thus
differ from the thief, why do they hope of his end? Show me that faith of the
thief in thy self, (says Augustine) and then promise to thy self the like
felicity. But when as faith, and repentance, is the free gift of God, which he
seldom bestows on those, who have contemned them in their lives, not to one
of ten thousand, why should any suffer himself by this impediment to be kept
any longer from this duty? nay by all of these, or by any other: for better
were it for a man that he never had bin borne, then not to be borne again;
better to have been any thing then a man, if he be not a renewed man.
Doubtless (says Bernard) Expedit profecto nobis, magis omnino non fuisse,
quam nostros permanere. Nam qui volu^runt sui esse, vtique sicut dij, scientes
bonum and malum, facti sunt non tantum iam sui, sed and diaboli. Bern. degrat.
and lib. arbitr.
it were more profit to us, not to have been, then to remain our own still.
For they who would be their own, that they might be as Gods, knowing good and
evil (that is, our first parents) were made not so much now their own, as the
devils. Now our own are we, or the devils, or both our own and the devils,
and not Gods, unless we be renewed by repentance; how then ought we violently
to break through all these lets, and with spiritual fortitude, like Sampson,
Judge. 16.
to carry these gates upon our shoulders, for they are the gates of hell? lest
if we be shut within them, the Philistims, and fiends of hell being upon us, we
shall be a pray unto them. 1. Sam. 4.9.
Let us then be strong and play the men, that we be not servants to this
enemy for ever. The way to free our selves is now by time to shake off his
yoke, and to deny our selves, and take up Christ's yoke, Matthew. 11.29.
so shall we find rest to our souls. And though we have often begun this, and
after have been cast back and relapsed, yet let us not despair: Athleta namque
saepe lapsus, postea victor effectus est: and miles vulner atus, and curatus,
circa finem ^on vulneratis probatior apparet. Mercatores multi ad inopiam
redacti, rursum effecti sunt diuites: and na ^fragium passi, rursum post
naufragium negotia^i re uixerunt Chrysostom. hom. 22. ad pop. Antioch.
For often a Master wrastler takes a fall, and after is made a conqueror: and
a soldier is wounded, and being cured, in the end is more honored, then they
who never were wounded. Many Merchants even brought to beggars bush, again grow
rich; and having suffered shipwreck, after that traffic again, and attain
their old estate: Even so may i^ be with us. And let no man faint in that
thought, which the Father found in some in his days; Perfectam non possum
agere poenit entiam. Chrysostom. ibid.
I can not perform perfect repentance: For as no man shall be accepted for
his perfect repentance, which none can have; so shall he not be rejected for
his imperfect, so it be sincere and upright. Si non potes sol sieri, fias vel
s^ella duntax^t. Jdem ibid.
Therefore if thou can not be the sun, at least be a star. If thou can
not come to the perfection of others, labor to be partner of this grace; and
he that under the Law, would accept a pair of Turtle doves and two young
pigeons, and in the Gospel, so accounted of the widows mite, and a cup of cold
water, and recompensed their work with the penny, who had labored but one
hour; will accept thy small labors in piety, and not suffer them to be in
vain, but will plenteouslie reward them for his own mercy, and through the
merits of Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
A TABLE CONTAIning the principal things handled in this Book.
ABstinence requisite in the Penitent. Page 64. 90 Ahabs repentance faulty.
Page 163 Agreement with a man's self is very pleasing. Page 63 Ambrose and
Augustines exposition of Luke 15. chap. 7. verse. Page 178 Angels carry the
souls of the godly into Paradise. Page 266 An art may be good, though the
Artizan be wicked. Page 338 Attrition. Page 22
B
THe Body must do service unto God. Page 63
C
CAre to shun sin discerneable three ways. Page 204. 205. 206 For Christ al
things are to be left. Page 308 The Church is full of impenitent persons. Page
33 Civil carriage without faith a sin. Page 179 Confession of sin is joined
with repentance. Page 68. 70 Confession is a part of humiliation. Page 69 No
Confession, no pardon. Page 70 Confession to be made to God. Page 70 Confession
also is either Civil, or Ecclesiastical; and of both them. Page 70. 71
Confession in the case of a perplexed conscience may be made even to a Layman.
Page 72 Popish auricular Confession taxed. Page 74. 75 A general Confession
unto God may in ease be used. Page 77 Confession must be plain and free. Page
81. 82. 83 The benefit of such Confession. Page 85 Contrition cannot merit.
Page 22. 23 Conversion of a sinner the only mira^cle of the Gospel now. Page
142 The Covenant of grace is general and perpetual. Page 191. 192
D
DEath comes well to the penitent. Page 268 Death is good, if life was good.
Page 343 344 Defending of our selves, the second ^ sign of repentance. Page
207 Two reasons hereof. Page 209. 210 Desire, the fifth sign or effect of
repentance. Page 231 How this Desire may be discerned. Page 237 Comfort
against Desperation. Page 191 192. 193 Despair of a man's own self a let to
repentance. Page 300 Two reasons proving it. Page 301 Desperation of Gods
mercy an impediment of repentance. 315. Proved by two reasons. Page 316. 317
Remedies or Preservatives against Desperation. Page 317. 318. 319 Who is
Christ's Disciple. Page 166
E
ELect men only do truly repent. 167. 168. Three reasons proving it. Page 169.
170 Election how discerned in a man. Page 17^ Elect men are of two sorts. Page
175 The Elect being uncalled must for two causes repent. Page 176. 177 All the
Elect shall be saved. Page 176 Epicures repent not truly. Page 258
F
FAith is the ground of repentance: four reasons hereof. Page 15. 16 Faith is
either saving or temporary. Page 17 Faith in nature before repentance, in time
together. Page 18. 19 Faith is no part of repentance. Page 21 Faith ought to be
got, and kept. Page 26. 27 Without Faith to use mercy is sin. Page 47 Faith is
the inward instrumental cause of repentance. Page 150 Fear before faith is
servile. Page 20 Fear is a companion of repentance, what it is. Page 50 Fear
is the fourth fruit of repentance. Page 224 Fear filial and servile differ in
three respects. Page 224 The Fear of many is slavish. Page 227. 228. 229 How
Filial fear may be discerned. Page 230 Popish Fasting reproved. Page 91. 92
Fasting commended. Page 9^
G
GOd alone can reform the heart. Page 139 God is not like some Physicians,
that will do nothing without a see. Page 323 Why God commands things, that man
cannot do. Page ^29 Gods glory and Man's good, the final ^e of repentance.
161. Two reasons proving it. Page 16^ Gods glory is to be aimed at in our
repenting. 164. And a man's own good in the second place. Page 165 What growth
will prove a man's graces to be true. Page 123 The Gospel works repentance.
Page 142 The Guilt of sin is taken away in the regenerate. Page 117 The Guilt
of sin remains after the action. Page 172
H
HOw hearers of Gods word should be qualified. Page 148. 149. 150 Humiliation is
joined with repentance. 41. Two reasons proving it. Page 43. Humiliation
hindered by certain fond conceits. 44. 45. the way to subdue them is set down.
Page 46. 47 Humiliation is twofold. Page 48 Inward Humiliation is described.
Page 49 In inward Humiliation is shame, forrow, fear. Page 49. 50 Outward
Humiliation is either verbal, or real, Page 62. Outward Humiliation requisite
for three reasons. Page 63. 64. 67 Inward Humiliatio^ is the principal. Page 65
Outward Humiliation may be omitted in some cases. Page 65 Real Humiliation
consists in mourning, abstine^ce and restitution. Page 86. 87 Five reasons
rendered thereof. Page 89. 90
I
Ignorance an impediment of repentance. Page 33. 293 Two reasos proving this to
be so. Page 295 Why men are so ignorant of themselves. Page 34 Ignorance
affected a common sin. Page 38 The Image of God is not perfited at once. Page
183 Impenitencie a common disease of this age. Page 310 Sundry sorts of
Impenitent persons. Page 153 Indignation the third sign of repentance. Page
214
K
KNowledge is the Ruler of true zeal. Page 247. 248 Knowledge of a man's self
is by the Law. Page 39 To the Knowledge of a man's self three things are
requisite. Page 29 Knowledge must be labored for. Page 298
L
THe Law is a Christians looking glass. Page 39. 40 The spiritual sense of
the Law must be regarded. Page 39 Why some loathe the pure preaching of the Law.
Page 54 The Law is a preparatiue to repentance. Page 142 Love has two notable
properties. Page 248. 249
M
Means of repentance are to be used, though God sometimes give it without
means. Page 156 157 Means wherefore of God used. Page 160 Ministers ought to
exhort and pray for the impenitent, why so. Page 131 Mortification described.
Page 104 Mortification is an essential part of repentance. Page 106 No
Mortification, no repentance. Page 107 Motives to Mortification. Page 111. 112
P
PArts (as also Helps) are of two sorts. Page 103. 104 A true Penitent is
careful to avoid all sin. 199. Two reasons proving it. Page 201 Why one
Penitent person was received at the last hour. Page 344 The Penitent is
persuaded of Gods love to him. Page 227 The Penitent discernes two things,
which he saw not before. Page 254 The Penitent will take an holy revenge of
himself. Page 260 The Penitent is fit for death. Page 266 The Penitent need
not dread the day of doom. Page 267 Popish Penances disallowed. Page 255
Person, and profession of a man must be distiguished. Page ^3^ The Physike of
the Soul continual. Page 289 Preaching where wanting, their case is
fearful. Page 143 Preaching is a great blessing. Page 144 Preaching is much
to be respected. Page 146 Preaching serves both to beget, and to preserve.
Page 194 Preaching is not like other arts. Page 195 Prayer is the isntrumental
cause of repentance from within. Page 150 Two reasons proving Prayer so to be.
Page 151. 152 Presumption of Gods mercy an impediment of repentance. Page 308
Three reasons proouing it. Page 309 Helps against Presumption. Page 312. 314
Presumption the cause of perdition. Page 341 Popish Purgatory of no use. Page
265
R
REpentance deseribed. Page 1 Repentance is a turning. Page 1. 2 Repentance is
a turning of the whole man from all sin. 3. and so proved by Scripture. 4.
And by two reasons. Page 5. 8 Five sorts of men mistaken about Repentance. Page
6. 7 The best way to begin Repentance, is to deal with the heart first. 9. But
the more easy course is to begin with the life. Page 9. 10 Repenting must be
daily. Page 12 Repentance is from a justifying faith. Page 13 Abab. Repentance
was from a temporary faith. Page 17 Repentance (as faith) is double. Page 18
Repentance how it is before faith. 18 How after. Page 21 Repentance is not in
the ignorant and unbelievers. Page 24 Repentance arisoth from the knowledge of
a man's spiritual estate. 27 Three reasons hereof. Page 31. 32 Repentants must
have shame, fear, and sorrow. 51. Three reasons thereof. Page 51. 52. 53 The
Repentant must be an Examiner, an Informer, and a Judge. Page 78 Repentance may
be without tears. Page 95 Repentance has two parts. Page 104 Repentance is
not so easily made, as is imagined. Page 108 Regeneration described. Page 113
Where repentance is, there is regeneration: proved by two reasons. Page 115
Repentants are not perfect. Page 121 The principal efficient of Repentance is
God. 125 Proved by two reasons. Page 127 The Regenerate shall not fall away.
Page 132. 133. 134 A man cannot repent when he list. Page 134. 137 The outward
isntrumental cause of Repentance is the word. 139. 140 Three reasons proouing
it. Page 141 Why many do not repent. Page 154 The end of Repentance. Page 161
Diverse kinds of Repenters. Page 167 Remission of sins and Repentance go
together. Page 169 Why Repentance is preached to the Page 17^ Repentance
absolutely necessanie to salvation. Page 180 The Regenerate must repent. 181
Two reasons hereof. Page 182 Seven signs or effects of Repentance. Page 197.
198 How Repentance may be knowno to be true. Page 213 Three reasons showing
that Repentance produces anger at sin. Page 218 Three reasons proving that
Repentance makes a man afraid to sin. Page 22^ Repentance works a seruent
affect on to God and his word. 233. Two reasons proving this. Page 233. 235
Reasons proouing that Repentance produces zeal. Page 242. 243. 244 Repentance
must be with speed, not posted off. 136. 270. Five Reasons proving it. Page
271. 272. 273 The Proroguers of Repentance taxed. Page 274 The danger of
delaying repentance set forth in five particulars. Page 281. 282 Repentance
must be constant. Page 285. 291 292 Two reasons showing it. Page 286 287 The
cares and pleasures of the world a let of Repentance. Page 324 Three Reasons
hereof. Page 327. 328 Repentance hindered by scandals. 333 Two reasons hereof.
Page 335 The peaceable ends of sinners a let to Repentance, as also the unquiet
deaths of some Repentant Professors. 338. 339. Three reasons of it. Page 339.
340 Diverse differences betwixt the repentant thief, and our Adiourners of
Repentance. Page 345 No man is respected for his perfect repentance, nor
rejected for the imperfection of it. Page 348 No restitution, no Repentance.
Page 90 Shifts against Restitution removed. Page 99. 100. 101 Restitution how
to be made without crazing credit. Page 102 Non-Restitution excludes salvation.
Page 103 Revenge the seventh sign or fruit of Repentance. Page 251. 253 How
this Revenge differs from indignation. Page 252 Reasons proving repentance to
bring forth this revenge. Page 253. 255 Revenge how it may be taken. Page 259
This life is the only time of Repentance. Page 262 Two Reasons proving it.
Page 264 The delaying of Repentance fearful. Page 269
S
SCandals and their remedies. Page 333 335. 337 Scandals may by God be set
before a man, and why. Page 338 Searching of a man's self necessary. Page 79
Search out two things. Page 79. 80 Sin separated man from God. Page 5 Shame
whence it arises. Page 49 No Shame before repentance. Page 51. 52 Sin why of
some liked. Page 219 Sinners must not be hated, except for sin. Page 213
Original sin described. Page 80 The seeds of all sins are in every man.
Page 80 Stumps of sin stick in the regenerate. Page 107 Sin why not wholly
slain in this life. Page 117 Sin willingly committed may be pardoned. Page
190 Sins iterated have been forgiven. Page 191 Of Sighs and sobbing. Page 68
Sorrow for sin makes a man defend himself against sin and Satan. Page 207
Sorrow and joy, how they will stand together. Page 287 Sorrow is joined with
repentance. Page 50. 51. 57 Sorrow for sin must not be deemd a melancholic
passion. Page 55 Sorrow should be suitable to a man's sins. Page 58. 59 Whence
difference of Sorrow arises. Page 59. 60 Soule-sicknes is continual. Page 289
T
TVrning is of four kinds. Page 3 Turning from one sin is made by some unto
another. Page 8 Turning merely outward may have a benefit. Page 11 Turning is
not constant without fear. Page 53
V
Vivification described. Page 113 Unworthy man must not despair for his
unworthiness. Page 323
W
GOds Word should be heard often. Page 196 Why me^ love the word no better.
Page 235 Why some cannot abide the word. Page 311 Good works from a corrupt
fountain are sins. Page 46 Whipping used of Papists taxed. Page 92. 93 Of
Weeping for sin. Page 95. 96 The World is an enemy to repentance. Page 325
Helps against worldly cares. Page 329. 332
Z
Zeal a fruit of repentance. Page 247 Zeal little in the world. Page 244 246
Zealous Protestants scorned. Page 245 The difference of good and bad Zeal.
Page 247 Zeal consists of Love and Sorrow. Page 248 Zeal, that is true, how
discerned. Page 251
FINIS.

