AN EXPOSITION UPON THE CXII. Psalm.

The high way to everlasting blessedness.

Written for the benefit of Gods Church, by T. S.

Psalm. 111.10. The fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom, a good
understanding have al they that do his Commandments. Eccles. 12.13. Therefore
let us fear the end of all, fear God, and keep his Commandments, for this
is the whole duty of man. LONDON, Printed by Bernard Alsop dwelling in Distaffe
Lane at the Sign of the Dolphin. 1621.

TO THE RIGHT worshipful, right virtuous, truly religious and most worthy
Mistres M. Murry, wife to the honorable Mr. Thomas Murry Secretary to the
Prince his highness, the increase of grace, and all true happiness external,
internal, eternal.
RIght Worshipful, the principal thing of which I read in holy Scriptures
which makes us both acceptable to God, and approved of the godly, is the grace
of regeneration, and to become new creatures, this alone, when all other things
fail, commends us to God, this distinguishes the good from the bad, the
precious from the vile, the godly from the wicked: this grace Right
worshipful, as being of all others most requisite, I most willingly commend to
your wise and Christian Consideration, having experience of your Christian
love. The author of this Psalm was blessed David the sweet singer of Israel,
wherein the Prophet teaches us the way to true blessedness, that is, to fear
God and delight in his Commandments, for circumcision is nothing, 1. Cor. 7.29
and uncircumcision, is nothing, but the keeping of the Commandments of God, I
may truly say of this new creature, Prou. 31.29
as Solomon speaks of the virtuous woman, many are the graces of Gods spirit,
but this excels them all.

This is it indeed which will make you thrice blessed, both of God and all
good men, for the kingdom of God is not meat and drink, but righteousness,
peace, Romans 14.17 18.
and joy in the holy ghost, and he that in these things serves God is
acceptable to him, 1. Sam. 2.30
and approved of men, they that thus honor God, he will honor, whereas those
that despise him neglecting the means of regeneration, shall be lightly
esteemed, for there is no respect of persons with God, but be he what he will
be, noble or ignoble, in every nation, he that fears God, Act 10.35.
and works righteousness, is accepted with him. First therefore seek the
kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all other things (as honor, Mat.
6.33.
wealth, and riches) shall be cast upon you, namely, in the sober use of
lawful means, this is the good and right way only to fear the Lord, and to
serve him in truth with all our hearts: 1. Sam. 12.23.24.
by this ye shall be sure to have the honor that comes from God, as Christ
says, Ioh. 12.26.
If any man serve me, him will my father honor; whereas on the contrary,
without this we can never have Gods approbation, though we may have the worlds
commendation, yea though the world, and all men in the world speak well of us,
we may be accursed: Luke 26.
Cursed are you when all men praise you; that is, if God dispraise you, and ye
want his approbation and commendation. Woe be unto you, though all men speak
well of you, and know it for your unspeakable comfort, Psalm. 4.3.
that you being godly, God sets you a part for his own self, all Gods
delight is upon the Saints on earth, Psalm. 16.4.
and upon such as excel in virtue, the Lord takes pleasure in those that
fear him, the Lord takes pleasure in his people, Psalm. 147. and 149.4.
and will beautify the meek with salvation and remember with joy the words of
God by Moses, if we hear Gods voice indeed, with care and conscience to
practice it, by living in faith, repentance, and new obedience, Exodus 19.5.
you are Gods chief treasure above all people, though all the earth be his.
Thus hoping for pardon of my boldness, I entreat your favorable acceptance
and patronage hereof, and humbly take my leave, beseeching Almighty God to
bless you and yours, with the increase of all blessings spiritual and
temporal, according to the many graces bestowed upon you. The Lord Jesus
Christ himself, and God, even our Father, which has loved us, and has given
us everlasting consolation, and good hope through grace, establish you in every
good word and work, the Lord fill you with all spiritual grace, that so you
may be presented most glorious without spot and wrinkle in the Church
triumphant, and that by our most blessed and alone Savior Jesus Christ the
righteous, to whom be glory and majesty, dominion and power, now and for ever,
Amen.

Your worships servant in all duty to be commanded T, S.

TO THE Worshipful virtuous and worthy Gentlewoman, and my approved loving
cousin, Mistress Euelyen wife to the worshipful Master Richard Euelyen
Esquire, one of his Majesty's Justices of peace, in the county of Surry the
increase of all outward blessings and spiritual comforts, be multiplied through
Jesus Christ.
IT is a thing better known then well considered of, that in the mystical
body of Christ Jesus, every member has his several office, whereon it must
attend, the weakest as well as the strongest, and in the family of the great
ruler of heaven and earth, each servant has his several talent, which he
must employ the meanest as well as the worthiest, for want of greater ability,
I have done my best endeavor to show the way to everlasting blessedness, for
the doing whereof, I had rather undergo the censures of such as are curious,
then deprive those of a benefit that are religious and spiritually minded,
perhaps I shall be tossed by some with the stormy winds of evil censures, but
for them I pass not, so I can benefit any: this part of the Psalm I am sure
is excellent for the purpose, and Jerome does call this book of the Psalms,
the treasures of learning. Seeing therefore it was promised that under the
kingdom of Christ, the meanest or least should be like unto David, therefore
try your self if by grace you are partakers of David's disposition, recorded
in this Psalm, you may be out of doubt that you shall be also partaker of his
approbation, for the Lord is no accepter of persons what he approues in one, he
will also approve another; therefore follow David in the practice of Piety, and
then you shall be partaker of his praise which he received from God, the
general complaint of the world is, that there is no end of making many books
because there is little or no fruit in those that read them; but as the grass
on the house top, which withers before it comes forth, whereof the mower
fills not his hand, Psalm. 129.6.
nor the gleaner his lap, neither they which go by say, the blessing of the
Lord be on you, we bless you in the name of the Lord: therefore read to some
purpose, that is, intend of a reader to become a doer, so shall you auert this
curse and reproach from you, so shall God and man call you blessed, and blessed
shall you feel your self in so doing, now if you shall lay this to heart in
the strength of your years, it shall be your chiefest wisdom, for it is
religion and godliness that shall embalme your name, and make it shine before
men, and glorify your soul amongst Angels. Luke 7.37.
Mary's box of ointment shall never be forgotten, for godliness has the
promise of this life, and that which is to come, and that without it there is
no internal comfort to be found in conscience in this world, nor eternal
happiness to be hoped for in the next, hoping it shall find entertainment at
your hands, and that you will find time at your leisure to peruse it desiring
your favorable acceptance of my good meaning in this behalf, I humbly take my
leave, recommending you to the Lord, and to the word of his grace, the God of
heaven so vouchsafe to water you and yours, with the dew of heaven, that with
the godly man in this Psalm your generation may be blessed, and that at the
end of this life your reward may be true blessedness, which mercy the Lord
grant you for his Sun Jesus Christ's sake, Amen.

Your most bounden and in all Christian duties to command, T. S.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Page. 21. line 8. read cheerful. p. 27. l. 7. r. q.d. p. 29. l. 1 r. dans.
p. 30. l. 18. r. in order. p. 36. l. 16. r. late. p. 81. l. 10. r. a to. p. 81.
l. 14. r. unto. p. 103. l. 23. r. hear. p. 104. l. 22. r. the Sechemites p.
125. l. 22. r. to do. p. 151. l. 7. r. of the Hebrews. p 157. l. 4. r. that.
p. 165. l. 8. r. in these. p. 187. l. 14. r. this the.

Christian Reader, I fear there are other faults besides these, I desire thee
therefore to correct these and bear with the rest, and so I bid the^ heartily
farewell.

AN EXPOSITION ON THE CXII. Psalm. verse 1.2.
VERSE 1. Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, and delights greatly in
his commandments, his seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the
righteous shall be blessed.
THere is no greater encouragement or stronger motion to stir a man to an
eager and earnest pursuit of the means, then to propose unto him an end;
wherein at length his heart may repose, as in a concurrance of al comforts and
contentments: to which there is no possibility of attainment, but by pureness
of heart, holiness of life, constancy in the course of sanctification, which
only lead unto the face and presence of God, where, and with whom alone, is
the highest perfection of bliss, a river of infinite pleasures, the well of
life, and endless rest of all created desires. For the capacity of man's soul
cannot possibly be filled with the sufficiency of any creatures, no not with a
world of creatures: for they are all nothing to the worth of a man's soul:
Christ himself having preferred it in valuation: What shall it profit a man,
though he should win the whole world, if he loose his own soul? And
therefore can never be free from motion and vexation, until it reach unto
(either in certain hope, or actual fruition) an object; infinite, as well in
excellency of nature as duration of time. Blessed then was the wisdom of the
disposer of these heavenly songs of David. First, this Psalm does teach us
these two worthy points; namely, how the blessed man lives, and that is in the
fear of the Lord. Secondly, what manner of life he leads, and greatly
delights in his Commandments.

These Psalms of David the sweet singer of Israel, are penned with such
heavenly wisdom, that they are convenient for the state of the whole Church,
and every member thereof. It is a banquet of heavenly wisdom says Ambrose;
and as Basil speaks of another part of the Scripture likening it to an
Apothecaries shop; so may this book of the Psalms fitly be compared: in which
are so many sundry sorts of medicines, that every man may have that which is
convenient for his disease; for there is no sickness of man, whereunto the
book of the Psalms furnishes not a present remedy.

First, this blessed man is described, showing what he does carefully embrace
and follow: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord, that is, that endeavors
to the utmost of his power to live in the fear of the Lord.

Secondly, what is his practice; namely, to be much and often in serious and
Christian meditation; and delights greatly in his commandments.

Thirdly, he shows the happy succes of this blessed man, his seed shall be
mighty upon earth.

Now seeing this is the maine proposition of the psalm, to prove that the godly
man, and he that fears the Lord is only blessed; therefore the Prophet does
first show who be truly blessed, and then wherein their blessedness does
consist. David often uses this phrase as in the first Psalm; Blessed is the
man that walks not in the council of the ungodly, etc. And in the 32.
Psalm; Blessed is he whose wickedness is forgiven, whose sins is covered,
etc. And as here we have it: Blessed is the man that fears the Lord. It seems
to be the words of a man in admiration or admiring with himself, as if he
should say, O the blessedness of that man that fears the Lord.

In this duty I observe three points; first, what is the true fear of God.
Secondly, what we are to fear in God. Thirdly, by what means we may attain
to this fear.

There is a twofold fear; the one is holy and good, called filial or
childish; the other is bad and naught, termed servile or slavish: the filial
or childish fear is such an one, as is in children toward their parents, who
do reverence and fear them, as being unwilling to offend them any way,
whether by words or deeds, through the tender love and affection, which they
do bear toward them: the servile fear is such an one as is in bondslaues
toward their masters, who do reverence and fear them, through the dread and
fear of punishment, which otherwise they are sure to have, if they offend and
do contrary to their duties: so that some do fear him through love, and care
to offend him; and others do fear him through dread of punishment, and power
to torment them; and it may be defined thus. What the fear of God is.
It is a reverence of Gods majesty in our hearts, whereby we are made
unwilling to offend him in any thing, and most willing to please him in all
things, through the love, which we bear toward him. This is a virtue most
necessary and requisite for all Christians whatsoever, as might at large be
showed: but let the example of Abraham suffice, Genesis 20.11.
who thinking that the fear of God was not in Gerar, utterly despayred of any
other virtue, and therefore moved his wife to say that she was his sister: in
this respect the fear of God is both by David and also by Solomon called the
beginning of wisdom; Psa. 111.10 Prou. 1.7.
that is, the root and fountain of all goodness, and therefore we must fear the
Lord, Deuteronomy. 6.13.
and stand in great awe and reverence of him. Thou shall fear (says Moses to
Israel) the Lord thy God, and serve him, and shall swear by his name. Esaias
does require the same, Esaias. 8.13.
when he says unto them; Sanctify the Lord of hoasts, and let him be your
fear, and let him be your dread. But Solomon says; Let us hear the end of
all, Eccle. 12.23
fear God and keep his commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

These reasons should be motives to us to fear the Lord.
And there are diverse reasons to move us hereunto; as first, the greatness of
his power and might above us. Secondly, his authority and jurisdiction which he
has over us. Thirdly, his goodness and mercy, which he does show unto us.
Fourthly, his majesty and glory; which does shine and glister round about us.
Fifthly, his purity and holiness, that is in his eyes, beholding us. And
lastly, the great blessings which the fear it self being had will bring unto
us, for all these things may justly work a fear in men. Mean men do fear
great men, and they dare not in any case displease the^: children fear their
parents, and such as have a ruling tuition over the^. Workmen fear their
masters by whom they live and are maintained. Simple persons fear great
states, and such as excel in glory and majesty above themselves, though
otherwise they owe no homage or subjection unto them. Loose livers and wantons
fear grave and religious persons, and such as are zealous for Gods glory and
earnest for the salvation of man's soul, as being ashamed to pour out their
evil words, or to commit their wicked facts before them and in their presence.
Lastly, every one by nature is forward to apply himself to those things, which
he does know will bring great profit and benefit unto himself, and to live in
happiness and prosperity all the days of his life.

Now to apply this to God and to our selves. First, he is of power, and he is
able to pay us home if we do displease him: this our Savior tells us when he
bids us not to fear men who can kill but the body, Mat. 10.28.
but to fear the Lord who is able to destroy both body and soul in hell.
Secondly, he has authority and jurisdiction over us, we are his, he has
made us, and he may do with us what he will, as the Potter does with his
vessel: this reason the Lord himself does give when he says, A son
honors his father, Mal. 1.6.
and a servant his master, if then I be a father, where is mine honor; and if
I be a master where is my fear, says the Lord of hosts unto you O Priests,
that despise my name. Thirdly, he is good and kind to us, his benefits which
we do enjoy from him are infinite, we have all that we have from him, even
our lives and all the rest: Psalm. 130.4.
this reason David does touch when he says unto the Lord, but mercy is with
thee, that thou marest be feared. Fourthly, he is a God of infinite majesty
and glory, and we are but poor simple creatures made of the dust and clay of
the ground; the heaven of heavens cannot contain him, neither can the Angels
themselves stand before him for his brightness, unless they cover their faces
with two of their wings: this reason does Moses glance at when he shows the
end wherefore the Lord did publish his law, Exo. 22.20.
in that glorious and maiesticall manner as he did, in thunders and
lightnings, and the like, saying; For God is come to prove you, and that his
fear may be before you, that ye sin not. Fifthly, he is holy and righteous,
his eyes are pure eyes, and cannot behold sin and iniquity; this reason is
laid down before the eyes of the Israelites, oftentimes in the old
Testaments, by the spirit of God, when he would draw them to the true fear
and service of God, from all such manners as were found among the Gentiles.
Finally, the the commodities, which the fear of the Lord being had, will bring
unto us, are exceeding great. For first, The benefits which we shall receive
should move us to fear the Lord.
it will make us holy and frameable unto Gods will, in avoiding those things
which he has condemned, and performing those things which he has commanded;
The fear of the Lord (says Solomon) is to hate evil, Prou. 8.13.
as pride and arrogance and the evil way, where he shows that in what
measure any one fears God, in the same measure he does loath and detest all
evil, for he says not, to hate evil, as murder and adultery, but pride and
arrogance which lie in the heart, and do not show themselves to the world: Yet
he that fears God will hate them. Secondly, it will make us blessed and
happy in all our ways; Blessed (says David) is every one that fears the
Lord, and walks in his ways: this reason the sweet singer of Israel, has
alleged, when he says, fear the Lord, ye his Saints, for nothing wants to
them that fear him; nothing he means which is good and wholesome for them,
Psalm. 84.11.
as he speaks else where, saying; the Lord will give grace and glory, and no
good thing will he withhold from them that walk uprightly.

First, this serves to condemn those that have not the true fear of the Lord
before their eyes. Alas their case is miserable, for they serve not the true
and living God, what show of religion soever they do make, or what brags soever
they do give forth concerning the same: for seeing the fear of God is the
very beginning of wisdom, and the foundation or groundsill of Gods worship
(as has been proved) it is impossible, that either they should have any true
wisdom in them, or else religiously should serve the Lord, when they want
this fear, the only cause and fountain thereof.

Secondly, this may serve for to stir us up to get the true fear of the Lord
unto our selves, and labor by all means possible to bring our hearts
thereunto, Ioh. 4.18.
that so we may truly say of our selves, that the Lord is our dread. But
against this it may be objected, that perfect love does cast out fear; and we
are commanded to serve God without fear. Luke 1.74.
To this I answer, that perfect love does cast out hellish and slavish or
servile fear, whereof we spoke before, that makes men to tremble before God
for fear of punishment: but on the contrary side, it causes that holy and
childish fear that makes man careful to come unto him, and to worship him as
we ought to do. From the former of these we are delivered, but not from the
latter. We have not received the spirit of bondage to fear again, Romans 8.5.
but the spirit of adoption, whereby we cry Abbah Father. So that true love is
so far off from casting out this holy fear of adoption, whereby we are
drawn to hate sin in love toward God, and not for punishments sake, that it
does bring it in, and establish it within us; yet this is to be noted by the
way, that servile fear is a good means at the first to bring us unto God, for
it prepares a place for the holy Ghost to bring him into our souls, as the
bristles brings in the thread. But when it is once entered into us, and has
taken up the possession of our souls within us, then this fear is gone, as
the bristle is when the thread is entered into the hole. Besides this we must
mark, that as the children of God are not by and by perfect; so a piece of
this fear may still remain in them, but the fear that is here required, of
us, and which is to last for ever, is that fear of reverence, whereby we
beholding our own weakness, and the excellency of God, and his
incomprehensible Maieiestie, dare not lift up our selves against him, but do
stand in awe of him with all reverence, being loath to offend him in any thing,
and most careful to please him in all things; it is such a fear as is in
loving children toward their parents, in dutiful wives toward their husbands,
and in faithful subjects toward their Princes, the fountain whereof is love,
and a due consideration of his excellency every away about us. A plain
difference between the true filial and sonne-like fear, and the servile and
slavish fear.
Here we may see a plain difference between the true filial fear of God and
the servile and slavish fear: the filial fear keeps us from final falling
away, but the servile does not; the filial is only in the godly, the servile
in the wicked; the filial is a peculiar gift of the spirit, so is not the
servile; and the filial fear is joined with love, but there is no servile
fear in love.

And as the true fear of God proceeds from love, so it must be continued in
love and end in love: therefore if the Lord love thee, then thou do love him
again; this Saint John does confirm, We love him because he loved us first:
Ioh. 4.19.
examine then what love thou bear toward God, try whether it be sound; for
certainly if thou love him, thou art beloved of him. It is thought to be a
common thing, and easy to love the Lord, This fear of God must be lovely, for
where God is not truly loved he cannot be truly feared.
and he is a wretch and unworthy to live that does not love his maker: but let
every one beware lest it be found in himself, for it is not so common a thing
to love the Lord as the world takes it to be. Be thou therefore of a good
ground, try thy love by the fruits and effects; therefore if thou love God
truly, Mat. 10.37. Psalm. 63.3. Phil. 3.4.
thou do esteem him and his favor above all things in the world besides,
counting his loving kindness better unto thee then life, and the signs of his
favor thy greatest joy, all things shall be counted but as dross and dung in
comparison of it.

Thirdly, if thou love God, thou will then delight in his presence; for the
nature of true love is such, that it earnestly desires the presence of the
party which is beloved: Psalm. 26.8.
thou will love his house, and the place where his honor dwells, thou will
have frequent recourse to those means, by which the Lord is pleased to converse
with his children, whether public, as to the hearing of the word; or private,
as reading, singing, etc. Take all occasions to speak unto him by prayer and
meditation: Phil. 1.25.
yea thou will have an ardent desire to be dissolved, that thou may be with
Christ, and to be absent from the body, 2, Cor. 5.8.
that thou might be present with the Lord.

Readiness to obey, signs of true love.
Fourthly, our love to God may be tried by our readiness in obeying of his
commands. Love can hardly deny any work which the party beloved does enjoin.
Loath we are to deny to do any thing for those whom we entirely love. He that
has my commandments and keeps them, Ioh. 14.21
he it is that loves me, says our Savior: this is the love of God, that we
keep his commandments, and his commandments are not grievous. So then, 1.
Ioh. 5.3.
where there is love, there is obedience, yea willing and careful obedience.
This may serve for the great comfort of all such, as have Gods love manifested
unto them, for as the terrors are great, which that man has in his conscience,
who is in doubt of the love of the Almighty toward him: so is the comfort as
great which that man has, who is hereof persuaded, for come tribulation, or
distress, or persecution, Romans 8 25, 11. Heb. 11.
or famine, or nakedness, or peril, or sword, or life, or death, yet the
certainty of Gods love will support him: this assurance does make bitter things
sweet, and gall to relish as honey. Comfort then thy heart thou beloved of the
Lord, let nothing dismay thee, though the wicked mock, though the world scorn
thee, though thy acquaintance hate thee, yet remember God loves and favors
thee, 1. Sam. 1.8.
and has manifested the same unto thee. Is not my love better unto thee then
ten children, said Elkanah, to Hannah? so is not the love of God unto us better
then ten worlds: let then the meditation of this harden thy face like brass
against all dangers and sad times of temptations and persecution, for God shall
give his beloved rest, they shall be delivered, for he will help them with his
right hand.

Therefore to this fear we must stir up our souls every day, and so far as
we would either worship God aright, or have his blessings powered down upon us;
whether for this life, or the life to come, we must strive and contend with our
souls and our hearts to bring them hereunto: that so we may always reverence
and dread the great name of the Lord of hosts: doubtless we shall never serve
the Lord aright, or become happy and blessed until this be brought to pass:
well we may perform some duties in outward appearance, we shall never look
to all with a good heart and conscience within. And howsoever we prosper and
flourish for a while, yet woe and destruction will overtake us at the last; but
let his fear be once planted within us, then shall we inwardly and from the
heart, have a respect unto all his commandments, and be most careful to
please him in all things, and then again shall we prosper and flourish for
ever, not only in this world, but much more in the world to come. If any then
shall come unto us, to entice us unto any wickedness whatsoever, as Potiphars
wife came unto Joseph, Genesis 39.8.
and enticed him unto uncleanness, we shall not consent unto him therein, no
more then he did unto her, who was kept therefrom by the fear of the Lord.

This should teach every one of us daily to think of and be fully persuaded
of the glorious and continual presence of Almighty God. The presence of God
ever looking upon us, should be a means to keep us from sin.
That wheresoever we are, and and whatsoever we think, speak, or do, God
understands it, knows it, and beholds it, our thoughts, our words. Psalm. 139.4.
There is not a word in my tongue, but thou O Lord know it altogether: our
deeds in public, and secret, Prou. 15.3.
the eye of the Lord is in every place, beholding both the evil and the good.
This consideration and persuasion, we ought all to labor for it being a
notable means to work true fear in our hearts: therefore let us esteem of
every place as Jacob did of Bethel, what he then said urge still upon thy
soul, The Lord is present, and I was not aware of it. Let thy shop be a
Bethel, thy chamber a Bethel, thy closet a Bethel, for God is there present. Oh
that this meditation did take place in our hearts, how many sins would it
keep us from? how conscionably should we walk? how upright would be. The
chief sountaine of all hypocrisy is either ignorance, or not considering of
this divine property of God; and surely if any thing will banish hypocrisy,
this will do it. A man cannot choose but be good (says Boethius) who still
remembers, that he stands in the presence of the Lord. Let this meditation then
be ever in our mind, that God is before us and behind us, within thee and
without thee, on thy right hand and on thy left hand, always near and never
far off; and so shall thou walk uprightly.

Holy Job, we see, took that course that the Lord would have us take for the
repressing of all inordinate lust and affections: I made says he, Job. 31.1.
a covenant with my eyes, why then should I think on a maid. A carnal man
would have thought this too much curiosity and niceness, what not to look on
the beauty and comely visage of a woman, at least, not to take some liberty for
thoughts tending that way, it is too too much preciseness, who can take any
notice of such things in us? Verse. 2.
Oh (says Job) what portion should I have of God from above, and what
inheritance from the almighty from on high. I durst not give any way unto the
flesh in any sort, for that were the directest course to deprive my self of
the comforts of the word and spirit here, and of the crown of happiness,
which is reserved for the Saints in the world to come. Albeit I should speed
little the worse with men, yet I should be sure to come short of many special
favors and blessings of the Lord: and further he adds, Is not destruction to
the wicked, and strange punishments to the workers of iniquity. Suppose I
should escape the censures of men, yet has not the Lord means that I cannot
conceive of, for the punishment of rebellious sinners, and though things may be
smothered for a time, cannot he bring secret sins to open shame: grant that it
be kept close from the eyes of the world, yet does not he behold my ways, and
tells al my steps; though the eyes of men take the view only of the outward
actions, yet he looks upon the inward disposition, and affection of the
heart. These and the like reasons he used to keep himself in order, and
fright his conscience from all manner of sin and impiety, as is more fully
described unto us in that chapter.

Fifthly, this may serve for terror to all such as live in sin; what greater
terror to a thief, then to have the judge an eye witness of his vilany. Let
all dissemblers take notice of this.
So what greater terror to the wicked then this, to have the Lord behold their
doings. Come then and learn thou dissembling hypocrite, thou that coggest and
dallyest with the Lord, God has spyed and does espy thy rottenness within,
for all thy painted outside. He knows that though thou wearest Christ's
livery on thy back thou wearest the devils favor in thy bosom. Think upon
this you lurking devils, close enemies of the Church whose sleep departs from
you till you have caused some to fall: the Lord sees your plots and cunning
devises, your close practices against his Church and people, But he that
sits in Heaven shall laugh you to scorn, Psalm. 2.
the Lord shall have you in derision. Take notice of this all you adulterers
and whoremongers, who say in your hearts; Who sees us, we are compassed about
with darkness, we need not fear. Behold the Lord himself sees thy villainy,
and looks thee in the face, in the act of doing. Let us all consider this and
be better advised, think not by denying, excusing, coloring, or cloaking
them to avoid the shame, for what if men do count you innocent, yet God will
bring in evidence to find you guilty, and therefore he himself will witness
against thee, Psalm. 50.
and set thy sins order before thee.

Sixthly, this may serve to stir us up, and encourage us to well doing. What
lazy servant will not put forth his strength when his masters eye is on him?
So, who is it, were he well persuaded that the Lord is a spectator and beholder
of his doings, would not put forth his strength to the Lords work. Were this
well considered how courageous should we be, both in the duties of our
general and special callings; Seeing the Lord is the beholder of all our
actions, and will reward the^ let this inflame us to practice piety, and cause
us to make even holy thoughs precious.
how forward would we be to every good work. Be not then slothful in Gods
service, stand not all day idle, be ever doing of good. Not the least good can
be done, but he does know it, be it done never so secretly, yet he sees it:
he sees thy prayers, he hears thy groans, he bottles up thy tears which
are shed at midnight, and will reward them. Thou needst not look for witness,
to take notice of thy actions, God himself is witness, and thy own
conscience also: thy conscience is as a thousand witnesses, and God as a
thousand consciences: how many witnesses would thou have? can thou desire
more? Let this inflame us to piety, and cause us to make eue^ holy thoghts
precious: for, as there is not the least evil in the heart which can escape
Gods knowledge; no more is there the least good motion and cogitation. Oh that
this were well weighed, then would not there be so many lazy Christians, as
now there be amongst us. Let it be considered, and let his knowledge support
thee in every good action.

And that we may the better attain to these graces let us use fervent prayer
unto almighie God, and that daily, humbly beseeching him of his infinite
goodness and mercy, to beget and work this holy fear in our hearts. I will
put my fear in their hearts, Ier. 32.39.40.
that they shall not depart from me. Here we see it is a propper gift, It is
music to God to hear Christians prayers.
and work of God himself, and we must not think to have it, unless we use
the means of Prayer, which God has ordained to obtain his blessings and
graces, as Saint James speaks: We have not, Iam. 4.2.
because we ask not. Therefore says David: Unite my heart unto thee, Psalm.
86.11.
that I may fear thy name: And God is so well pleased with our Prayers, when
they come unto him, that there is no melodious harmony so pleasant in our
ears, as a Prayer proceeding from an humble and broken heart, is in the ears
of the Lord of Hosts: let us present our petitions with our souls full of
grief, and our eyes full of tears unto men, and we shall be tedious and
troublesome unto them for the most part, as the woman of Canaan was unto the
disciples. Send her away, say they to our Savior, Math. 15.13
for she cries after us. But Christ has no greater joy then to hear and
releive such worthy believers as she was. Now since it is a thing so well
pleasing unto him, he cannot but grant and satisfy the desires of such as
faithfully and fervently call upon him.

Therefore seeing the Lord is so pleased with penitent sinners when they come
unto him, The true penitent sinner fears to displease God by committing the
least sin.
let every one of us labor for true and sound repentance, to be humbled in
the sight and knowledge of our sins with godly sorrow, which may continually
bring forth in us repentance to salvation, never to be repented of, 2. Cor.
7.11
and this will bring forth fear. Behold this godly sorrow, what fear it has
wrought in you. The penitent sinner fears to displease God, This fear of God
must be durable not only for a time, but it must be to the end of our days.
to disobey his word or to do any thing which he knows will not be well
pleasing in Gods sight, and so out of his true love unto God, is afraid lest
by committing the least sin, he should procure the anger of God against him,
and this our repentance must continue all the days of our life, according to
David's saying: The fear of the Lord which brings repentance endures for
ever. And great reason it should be so, for we are commanded to be constant,
and to persevere in godliness even to the end: but this cannot be unless the
fear of God be in us always, therefore says God, I will put my fear in
their hearts that they shall not depart from me. Ier. 32.40.
And it is the special commandment of God, that we should fear the Lord our
God for our good always, in our youth, middle-age, and old age, even unto our
death, and not post it off till old age, as a number do, spending all their
time in riot, and all manner of profaneness: it is long ere they begin, yet
at length they bethink themselves, and so are afraid to sin as they have
done; but a number of such never leave sin, till sin leaves them, whose
cases are pitiful and lamentable. It is true which is said, better late then
never, Psalm. 72.5.
so it is as true, that large tears, and late repentance is not always true.
David describing the time, Pal. 119.8.
says, They shall fear thee, as long as the Sun and Moon endures
throughout al generations: let us therefore continually use al good means to
keep us in this fear, that all of us jointly, and each one in particular may
truly say with David, O Lord I am devoted to thy fear. Seventhly, Let us not
be discouraged, though our repentance be but in a beginning, yet if it be true,
God will meet it with mercy. Romans 7.19.
here is great comfort to al weak Christians, who are much discouraged with
their weak proceedings in grace: they feel not their hearts so broken as they
desire. They desire with all their hearts to turn unto the Lord, to leave sin,
but still they fall, and that foulely. The good they would do they do not; the
evil they would not do, that do they daily: well, is it thus? yet be thou not
discouraged: for though thy repentance be but in a beginning, yet if it be
true, God will meet it with mercy. Thou say thou desire: Is thy desire
true and unfeigned? 2. Cor. 8.12
Do thou desire to walk, so as that God may be glorified? Do thou
express thy desires by using of all good means? And is not thy desire idle?
and art thou content to do any labor, and take any pains for the obtaining
of grace? do thou thirst after it as the Heart does after the rivers of
waters? If it be thus, assure thy self thy dedesire is highly pleasing unto
God and most acceptable unto him, the Lord he will not reject it, nor thee in
regard of it, he will not break the bruised reed, nor quench the smoking
flax. Mat. 12.20
Till he bring forth judgment unto victory, he does not contemn the least
measure of his own grace he has bestowed on thee, be it never so small a
quantity if true, it is his own gift, and his gifts are without repentance,
Romans 11.29
he cannot despise that which himself has given, neither take that away for
ever which he has once bestowed: thy creeping is acceptable to God, go on
with comfort constantly unto the end.

Lastly, here the Prophet says, Prou. 3.7. Let all men therefore examine their
own consciences, whether they have left their sins if they have, they may
safely conclude they are such as fear God.
Blessed is the man that fears the Lord: and Solomon he says, Fear the Lord
and depart from evil; for no man can depart from evil unless he fear God,
so none fears God truly but he does cease from sin, therefore they that boast
of their fear, and yet live in their former sins, are liars against the
truth, and deceive their own souls. Let all men therefore seriously examine
their own conscience, whether they have left their sins, and are become new
creatures in Christ Jesus, and whether they have a full purpose and resolution
of heart for time to come, to hate that which is evil: if they have, they may
conclude to their everlasting joy and comfort, that they are such as fear God;
if not, then let them know, they cannot approve unto their own souls that
they have this fear, for he that continues in the practice of sin, without
any penitency, has not the true fear of God. Psalm. 36.1.
The wicked have no fear of God before their eyes.

Let us therefore keep Gods Commandments and not only talk of them, but
practice them and do them.
First, this teaches us to walk in the path of Gods Commandments, and not to
talk of them only, or to commend them, but to practice them and do them: the
Prophet David therefore, shows plainly who they are that fears God; saying,
The mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to everlasting, Psa. 10^.17 18. Psa.
128.1. Psa. 119 63. Deuteronomy. 8.6.
upon them that fears him, to such as keep his Covenant, and remember his
Commandments to do them, and blessed is every one that fears the Lord, and
walks in his ways, and David says, I am a companion of all them that fear
thee, and keep thy Commandments. This must therefore teach every one
carefully to observe and keep Gods Commandments, according to the saying of
God by Moses: Thou shall keep the Commandment of the Lord thy God, to walk
in his ways, and to fear him. In vain therefore do they boast of their
fear, service, and worship of God, who instead of keeping Gods Comandements,
break them all, and delight themselves in nothing more, then in committing of
sin, and transgressing the Law of God, let us therefore take Salomons counsel;
Eccle. 12.13 In all Gods children in whom the true fear of God is, there must
be uprightness and sincerity of heart.
Fear God and keep his Commandments, for this is the whole duty of man.

Secondly, we must get uprightness of heart in the whole course of Gods
worship and service. He that walks in his vprightnes, fears the Lord. Job
was an upright man, and one that feared God. Cornelius was a just man, and one
that feared God, with all his house: Pro. 14.2. Job. 1. Act. 10.22. Verse 2.
and certainly in all Gods people in whom the true fear of God is, there
cannot but be uprightness of heart void of all hypocrisy, and a true
endeavor to approve their hearts unto God, to be true and sound in all
things, as knowing, that God knows and beholds all, and he who will judge
them all at the latter day. To go on constantly in grace unto the end, is a
true sign of the holy fear of God. Ier. 32.40. Pro. 24.24.
Therefore let us all get uprightness of heart, and go on constantly in the
grace and favor of God, cleaning so fast unto God, as never to fall away from
him, for those that have made some good beginnings, and yet afterward fall
away from him, do evidently declare, that they never had this true fear of
God, for God does so put his fear in the hearts of his Children, that they
shall never depart from him: they may sometimes fall through infirmities, but
as Solomon says, They rise up again, therefore they cannot finally fall away
from God, none can pluck him out of his hands: Satan cannot, Ioh. 10.29.
because he that is in us, John. 4.4.
is stronger then he that is in the world: Sin cannot, because grace will
prevail against it: The world cannot, 1. John 5.4.
because this is our victory, whereby we overcome the world, even our Faith.
And the Apostle concludes generally for all other matters, that Neither death,
nor life, nor Angels, Romans 8.38, 39.
nor Principalities, nor Powers, nor things present, nor things to come, nor
height, nor depth, nor any other creature, shall be able to separate us from
the love of God, which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. The excellency of this
grace, should be a special motive to us to fear the Lord.
And to stir us up to the performance of this duty, whereby we may get the
true fear of the Lord, let us remember the excellency of this grace, and how
it makes all those in whom it is to be most excellent. Mal. 3.16.
For, a book of remembrance is written before God, for them that fear the
Lord, and they shall be mine, says the Lord of Hosts, Pro. 31.30.
in that day when I make up my Jewels. Here we see, God has them in
everlasting remembrance, never to forget them, as being his Jewels and chiefest
treasure. The woman that excels all, is she that fears the Lord; Pro.
15.16. Psalm. 37.16.
this Solomon describes the excellency of this fear, above all other things:
Better is a little with the fear of the Lord, then great Treasure, and trouble
therewith. A little that a righteous man has is better then the riches of many
wicked men, and of all people. Psa. 147.11
The Lord takes pleasure in them that fear him.

Thirdly, we learn from hence that this blessed man that fears the Lord, No
good thing will the Lord withhold from them that fear him.
has the promise of temporal blessings, as riches, honor, preferment, length
of days, blessing upon our labors, and all that we have. Do thou then
desire riches? Would thou come to honor? Would thou live long, and see
good days? Then be careful to fear the Lord, and be thou sure thou shall
have these blessings, or at least, as good in stead of them. Pro. 22.4. Pro.
10.27. Pr. 9.10.11. Psalm. 128.
By the fear of the Lord are riches, honor, and life, the fear of the Lord
prolongeth days, and by it thy days shall be multiplied and the years of
thy life shall be increased. Blessed is every one that fears the Lord, for
thou shall eat the the labor of thine hands: happy shall thou be, and it
shall be well with thee: Lo thus shall the man be blessed that fears the
Lord. Again, would thou have God to deliver thee and save thee from
trouble? then fear the Lord. For the Angel of the Lord encampeth round about
them that fear him, Psalm. 34.7.
and delivers them. Would thou have plenty, or at least a competent
living, to enjoy Gods good blessings? then fear God, for their is no want to
them that fear him. The Lions do lurk and suffer hunger, Psalm. 9.9.10
but they that fear God shall want to manner of thing that is good. Would
thou have thy hearts desire granted thee of God, so far forth as shall be
agreeable to his will? Psalm. 37.4.
Then delight thy self in the Lord, and he shall give thee thine hearts
desire: yea, he will fulfill the desires of them that fear him, he will hear
their cry, and will help them. Would thou have all things to be well with
thee? then fear the Lord, for he takes pleasure in them that fear him. Psalm.
147 11. Eccle. 8.12.
And though a sinner does evil an hundred times, and his days be prolonged,
yet surely I know that it shall be well with them that fear God, which fear
before him. And though many troubles, and manifold mischiefs are in the world,
and though the righteous fall into manifold afflictions. Yet as Solomon says,
Eccle. 7.18.
He that fears God, shall come forth of them all, so that it will make us
blessed and happy in all our ways, so that the fear of the Lord brings with
it always a plenty of al good things, and comes laden with the blessings of
God, wheresoever it comes: for all these causes now rehearsed, should we fear
the Lord, and endeavor to please him.

The fear of the Lord gives understanding to the simple.
Fourthly, he that fears the Lord, has the promise of spiritual graces, as
knowledge, instruction, wisdom, and the like. Art thou ignorant in Gods
matters, and would feign know and understand the ways of God? then fear
the Lord. For what man is he that fears the Lord, him shall he teach in the
way that he shall choose: Psalm. 25.12. Verfe 14.
yea, the secret of the Lord is among them that fear him, and he will show
them his Covenant, the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom. A good
understanding have all they that do thereafter. Psalm 111.10
Would thou have the Lord to show pity and compassion upon thee, and to
forgive thee all thy sins? O then fear the Lord: Mal. 3.16.17
For the Lord will spare them that fear him, as a man that spares his own
son that serves him, and as a father pittieth his Children, so the Lord
pittieth them that fear him: Yea, the mercy of the Lord is from everlasting to
everlasting upon them that fear him, and his righteousness upon childrens
children: Again, Psalm. 103.13
the Lord hears the Prayers of those that fear him, and grants their
request: Yea, the Lord will give grace and glory, and no good thing will he
withhold from them that walk uprightly. Psalm. 84.11.
Thus we see no grace needful to salvation, shall be wanting to us, if we
fear the Lord,

Lastly, it has the maine promise of eternal life in the world to come: His
endless mercy is on them that fear him from generation to generation. The
maine reason to enforce us to labor for this holy fear is, that it has the
promises of eternal life in the world to come. Luke 150. Psalm. 85.9. Mal. 2.5.
Psalm. 25.12.
This is a main reason to enforce us to labor for this holy fear; and
howsoever the wicked believe it not, but account it altogether in vain to
fear God and serve him, yet let no man doubt of it who belongs to God, for as
David speaks: Surely, Gods salvation is nigh all them that fear him. And the
covenant of life and peace was with Leui, because he feared God, and the soul
of him that fears God shall dwell at ease: Deuteronomy 5.20.
yea, If we fear the Lord always, it shall be well with us, and with our
children for ever. The consideration of all which should move every one of us
to break out with the Prophet saying, Who would not fear thee, Ier. 10.7.
Revel. 15.7, Psa. 115.13.
O King of Nations, and with Gods servants. Who will not fear thee O Lord, and
glorify thy Name, for thou only art holy. Lo, These gracious promises should
move us to fear the Lord. 2. Cor. 7.1. Phil. 2.12. Esaias 8.13.
thus will the Lord bless them that fear him, both small and great. Therefore
seeing we have such promises, let us cleanse our selves from all filthiness of
the flesh and spirit, perfecting holiness in the fear of God: Work out your
salvation with fear and trembling: sanctify the Lord of Hosts himself, and
let him be your dread. Now let the fear of the Lord be upon you, take heed
and do it. And whatsoever ye do, do it in the fear of the Lord faithfully,
and with a perfect heart. Let us with good King Iehosaphat, fear the Lord, 2.
Chr. 19.79.
and set our hearts earnestly to seek him: For as the Heaven is high above the
Earth, 2. Chr 20.3 Psalm. 103.11
so great is Gods mercy toward them that fear him, as far as the East is
from the West, so far has God set our transgressions from us. Psalm. 33.8.
O let all the earth fear the Lord, let all the Inhabitants of the World stand
in awe of him: Psalm. 2.11
Serve the Lord with fear, and rejoice before him with reverence. The Lord of
his mercy give us this grace, and good Lord unite our hearts to thee, that we
may fear thy Name, For thou only, Psalm. 86.11. Psalm. 76.7.
O Lord, even thou art to be feared, and who may stand in thy sight when thou
art angry? Wherefore let us perform these things with care and conscience, and
no doubt but we shall have the true fear of the Lord within us, which will
be a comfort unto us for evermore. Our chiefest joy and delight should be in
the Commandments of God.


Now follwes the practice of this blessed man, and that is in actions of piety,
and delights greatly in his Commandments: that is, the whole Doctrine,
divinely inspired is the very joy of his heart, and delight of his soul: It is
sweeter unto him, then the Honny and the Honny-combe: It is more precious unto
him then gold; yea, then much fine gold. It is more worth unto him then the
whole World, and where the heart is once enkindled with love, there the
imagination imbraceth with dearest apprehension: the thoughts are impatient of
any other object: all the powers of the Soul, are united in a strong endeavor
for the attainement, the whole mind must needs be possessed with Meditation
and Prayer. If he delight in the Law of the LORD his GOD, he must needs
meditate therein, And this feruency of the heart cannot possibly be enclosed
within the compass of the breast, it will spread it self in speech and actions
as is plain by David's speech: Psalm. 37.30
The mouth of the righteous will speak of wisdom, and his tongue will talk
of judgment, for the Law of God is in his heart: Psa. 119.167.
and David says, My soul has kept thy testimonies, for I love them
exceedingly. And this love, delight, meditation, and exercise in the
Commandments of God, of this blessed man, is not a morning cloud, and as the
morning dew, before the Sun, but like the light of the Sun, that shines
more and more unto perfect day: it is not for a start, for fear, upon
restraint, for rereputation, for advantage, or to cover the terrors of
conscience for a while, but it is out of a free resolution, and with undaunted
constancy, as he speaks else where day and night.

So that Gods Law and Word cannot simply profit us* Gods word cannot be
profitable, except first it be comfortable unto us.
except we take joy and comfort in the same. We must first taste and prove the
sweetness thereof, we must before hand find out and feel the virtue
thereof. When wisdom enters into thy heart, Pro. 2.10.11 Psalm. 1.2.
and knowledge delights thy soul: then (and not before) shall counsel
preserve thee, and understanding shall keep thee, and deliver thee from the
evil way, and from the man that speaks froward things, etc. When we once
delight in the law of the Lord, and exercise our selves therein day and night,
then shall we flourish like the planted trees by the rivers of water, that are
fruitful in due season, whose leaves shall not fade in any drought of danger;
the^ I say, whatsoever we do and take in hand shall prosper: so that if we
delight in the Commandments, we shall find comfort in the ministry of the
word: for there is true joy and peace to be found, there is joy and salvation
the sweet promises of God, faith, grace, spiritual strength, and every good
thing offered unto us.

The church of God should be our greatest pleasure, for there we shall find
food for our souls.
Gods Church with the holy ministry thereof, is Christ's Garden of pleasures,
wherein he banqueteth with his elect, even he which is the fountain of the
garden (the true and only head of all Churches, the well of living waters, and
the Spring of Lebanon, Can. 4.12.15. and 5.
hither he comes to eat his pleasant fruit: this only true and Christian
Church being his sister, and Spouse, is as a garden enclosed, as a spring and
fountain sealed up: hither Christ comes to make merry with his friends, and
to banquet with his beloved; there he gathers his myrrh with his spices,
there he eats the hony-combe with his honey, and drinks his wine with his
milk, delighting himself with the sweet pleasant and profitable fruits that
the children of God do yield unto him. Comfort and love to Gods word procures
liking and diligent hearing, and so by Gods blessing faith and obedience. Romans
10.14
Now the reason why the word of God cannot profit us without delight, is,
because that comfort and liking, provoke and procure men to be diligent in
hearing, and diligent hearing by Gods blessing begets faith, and faith brings
us assurance of Gods love and protection, the evidence and certainety whereof
are Gods promises which are yea and Amen. Gal. 5.6. 1. Co. 13.7. Genesis 31.30 40.


Again, love supporteth our labor and sets our faith a work: It suffers
all things, it believes all things, if endures all things. Jacob loved
Rachel, served twice seven years for her sake: neither the heat of the day,
nor the frost of the night, nor the breaking of his sleep, no danger, loss or
cross could drive him out. So the Israelites toyled and traveled many miles
to the temple, hungry, weary, and thirsty, they going through the vale of Baca,
make wells therein, contented to refresh themselves with the rain that filled
their pooles, in so barren a wilderness, Psalm. 84. etc.
and thus they went from strength to strength till they appeared before the
Lord their God, in Sion. And what was the reason hereof that they still proceed
without any interruption, even this was the reason, O Lord of Hosts, how
amiable are thy Tabernacles, our soul longs and faints for thy Courts, our
hearts and flesh rejoice in the living God. Blessed are they that dwell in thy
house, and in whose hearts are thy ways. For the Lord our God is a Sun and
shield us, the author of all good things, and the deliverer from evil: he
will give grace and glory and no good thing will he withhold from them that
are sincere: therefore O Lord of hosts, The only way to profit by the word and
ministry is, to delight in the same.
blessed is the man that trusts in thee. Here we see that every action
without affection is laborious and toylesome, none ever soundly profited by the
word, and holy ministry thereof, that delighted not in the same.

First, this serves to stir up our love and liking of Gods truth, to raise
up our dead affections, and to cause our dull senses more earnestly to embrace
the same, and to set before our eyes the best examples for imitation and
practice: The word is of power and is able to convert our souls to the living
God.
and that we may be persuaded the better, for the performance of this duty, let
us consider the singular fruits and effects of Gods word, which we ought so
worthily to affect. Gods law and word is perfect of it self to convert our
souls from sin and Satan, to God and godliness, heaven and happiness, his
testimony is sure to give wisdom to the simple. The statutes of the Lord are
right, Psalm. 19.7.8 9.20.11.
and rejoice the heart, the commandments of the Lord is pure, and gives light
to the eyes, the fear of the Lord is clean, the judgments of the Lord are
true and righteous altogether, by them is thy servant made circumspect, in
keeping of them there is great reward, and therefore they are more to be
desired then gold, yea then much fine gold, sweeter also then honey, and the
honey comb. Gods word is the means for young and old to redress their wicked
ways, a counselor to advise us, a Lantern to our feet, a light to our
paths, a resoluer of our doubts, a sweetning of our affections, able to revive
us being dead, therefore says David, I will delight in thy statutes, I will not
forget thy word, Psalm. 119.16 72.97. ver. 103.
the law of thy mouth is better unto me then thousands of gold and silver: O
how love I thy law, it is my meditation continually, how sweet are thy promises
unto my mouth: yea more then honey unto my taste, thy testimonies have I taken as
an heritage for ever, no earthly thing being comparable to them, for they are
the joy of my heart, they that know thy law have great prosperity, and they
shall have no hurt. Keep them and do them (says Moses) for this is your
wisdom, Deuteronomy. 4.6.8.9.
and understanding in the sight of other people, who shall say, only this
people is wise, and what nation is so great that has ordinances and laws so
righteous: therefore take heed to thy self, and keep thy soul diligently:
let not these things depart out of thy heart all the days of thy life, but
teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Hence proceeds all blessings
from heaven and earth, upon man and beast, corn and cattle, wine, oil, or
what can be desired, 1. Tim. 4.8.
for godliness has the promise of this life, and of the life to come. If we
seek the kingdom of God and his righteousness, all other things shall be
ministered unto us: Mat. 6.33. Mat. 13.44.45.46. Luke 10.42.
this is the best part and most necessary duty that caused Marie to be
preferred before Martha, for setting all other things aside, Having such
promises let us with Marie choose the best part which shall never be taken from
us.
to come sit at Jesus feet, to hear his word: this Pearl must be purchased
with all we have, all other things are but dross and dung in respect of the
excellent knowledge of Christ Jesus our Lord, therefore we must not only hear
and read, and meditate, but increase our love, liking, and delight, to the
holy ministry of Gods word, longing and thirsting after it, Psalm. 42.1.2
with David, As the Heart pants after the water brooks, so pants my soul
after thee O God. Thus every good Christian must whet the appetite of his soul
to delight in Gods law, by conference, meditation, hearing, reading, praying,
preaching, and daily frequenting of holy assemblyes: Psalm. 122.1.
I was glad when they said unto me, let us go into the house of the Lord. So
was it prophesied of the christian church that many people should go and say,
Mich. 4.1.
Esa. 2.3. Esa. 60.7.
Come let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, to the house of the God of
Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we shall walk in his paths: who are
these that fly like a cloud, and as Doves to their windoes? Noting not only
the greatness of the number, but diligence and zeal of such as should come to
Christ and receive his doctrine: and Christ said, Mat. 11.12.
that from the time of John Baptist hitherto the kingdom of heaven suffers
violence, and the violent take it by force. Thus the zeal of Gods house should
eat us up. The least danger or weakness does put of such as are backward in
Gods service.


Secondly, this serves to confute and reprove all such as are backward and
careless in this necessary duty, being idle and vain in their excuses or
reasons, to hinder their zeal and love to the word, any fear, the least
danger, Prou. 22.13 Psa. 119.51 and 62.7.11.12. Luke 14.18.19.20.23.23.
and worldly business does put them off, There is a Lion in the way. Some have
their oxen to prove, their Farm to see, their wife to marry, all these yet
are invited to come to the Feast, though unworthy of the same: therefore God
will fill his house with any others then with such, even those that sit in the
high way and under hedges: the most basest and vilest of men shall enter before
them and be saved, Mat. 21.31.32.
even whores and harlots shall sooner be received, then those that seem
children of the kingdom: God will raise up to Abraham sons of stones rather
then these viperous serpents shall have the name of his seed. Mat. 3.9.


Others there are that think; if we should make conscience of religion, and
begin to read the word, to frequent sermons, to have prayer in our families,
and the like; this would make us to be scoffed, and mocked at: but let such
hear what the word says, that pronounces them blessed that delight in the law
of the Lord, Psalm 1.
and meditate therein day and night, and that seek him with their whole
hearts: yea albeit they should meet with some disgrace and opposition in the
world. Psalm. 119.
Math. 5.
Blessed are ye (says Christ) when men revile you, and persecute you and
speak all manner of evil against you falsely for my names sakt. Rejoice and be
glad, for great is your reward in heaven: is it not better to endure a little
mocking from men for a time, and that for well doing, then to undergo the
wrath of God for ever for ill doing. Let us consider in particular what benefit
we may reap by the ministry of the Gospel: Isai 5.3.
Hear, says the Prophet Isaiah, Iam. 1.21.
and thy soul shall live: receive the word with meekenes (says James) which is
able to save your souls: Reu. 1.3.
blessed is he that reads and hears the words of this Prophecy says the
spirit in the Revelation. And on the other side: Prou. 28.9.
he that turns away his ear from hearing the law, his prayer shall be
abomination, says Solomon: and again, the wisdom of God speaks thus,
because I have called, and ye refused; Prou 1.24.25.26.
I have stretched out my hand, and none would regard: but ye have despised all
my counsel, and would none of my correction; I will also laugh at your
destruction, and mock when your fear comes. These and the like places, if
we could thoroughly consider of, they would work more powerfully with us to
cause us to desire the word, and to retain and keep our hearts still in love
and liking of it, then all the reproaches and persecutions in the world could,
to withdraw our affections from it.

God is to be heard before any.
Therefore they that come to receive benefit by the ministry must not harken
what reasons flesh and blood can yield them against it, but what reasons God
can give them for it; for the devil will have much to say against goodness,
and our own fleshly wisdom will have have as much, and the world will be as
great a pulbacke unto us if we will give it the hearing, but if we can bend an
attentive ear unto the Lord, we shall find that he will bring better
arguments to persuade us to goodness, then all those our enemies can to
dissuade us from it: and therefore it is that men are so often and so grossly
deceived, because they hear what the one side can say to discourage and hinder
them in actions of piety and godliness, but not what the other can say to
harten and draw them onward in good ways: for if they did bring a spiritual
ear to receive the proofs that are brought from the word, they would be more
forceable to bring them to God, then al other means could be to allure them to
forsake God, Ephesians. 4.30. If we cherrish in us the gifts of Gods holy spirit, it
assures us of deliverance from the wrath to come.
and to embrace or hearken to the allurements of this present world: and
therefore Paul writing to the Ephesians, he says thus, grieve not the holy
spirit of God nor that holy delight in the commandments: and he brings a
forcible reason, whereby you are sealed unto the day of redemption. This is the
only evidence we have of freedom from condemnation, this is Gods mark and
character set on us, and seizing us for his own, this is like the blood that
was stricken upon the door posts, Exo. 12.22
which shall make the Lord to pass over us, and not suffer the destroyer to
come near us when he goes to smite the Egyptians. By this we are assured
that the day of judgment shall be to us no day of wrath, but a day of
redemption: so then thus we may take the Apostles meaning; as you desire to
retain assurance of your deliverance from the wrath to come, and that the Lord
should take notise of you for his in the day of that dreadful separation, so
see that by all meaanes you cherish in you the gifts and operation of Gods holy
spirit, grieve it not by strangling and choking of those holy motions and
operations, but let them be cherished and preserved without any the least
abatement.

Thirdly, Let us beware of que^ching the motions of the spirit, for the sin is
fearful.
this serves to condemn such as nip the bud so soon as ever it peepeth
forth, and quench every spark that at any time appears, yea, wilfully set
themselves to repel all good motions, hasting to their cursed company, to
chase away those sweet inspirements of Gods holy spirit. Oh the cursed
unthankfulness of these men, what unkind ungrateful; discourteous dealing is
here with the spirit of grace, thus shutting him out so soon as ever he begins
to enter: Revel. 3.20
would thou deal so unkindly with thy friend, who comes to thy door? why
dealest thou then so discourteously with Christ Jesus and his holy spirit,
Revel. 3.20
who stands at the door and daily knockes, but can get no entertainment,
Act. 7.15.
beware of this resisting the holy Ghost, the sin is fearful and
discomfortable, for hereby thy heart may grow more obdurat, and thy life more
brutish and abominable.

Fourthly, let every one of us beware how we suffer that blessed heat to
slack, This delight must show it self by increasing in spiritual graces.
which by Gods grace begins to be inkindled in our hearts. Suffer not that
coal, that holy motion which the Lord has cast into thy bosom to die within
thee, but blow it up, lay on more fuel, add daily more and more matter to it,
and tremble to lose the least measure of Gods gracious gift: be frequent in
spiritual exercises, as in hearing, reading, meditation, Christian conference,
prayer, and the like: Let no means be neglected, that God has ordained for
the working of establishment. And as thou layest on fuel, so see thou give
this holy Fire vent, exercise and put these holy motions into practice: much
Wood piled on a Cole, if vent be wanting, does soon smother it, and put it
out, see the^ thou exercise the graces which God has given thee.

Therefore when the Lord shall put any good motion into our hearts, Good
motions are-not to be qvenched, but cherished.
we are to nourish and cherrsh the same: to one good motion we must add a
second, and to that a third, and so fall to blowing, and give not over until
at length they break forth into a comfortable flame of godly practices. 1.
These. 5.19.
Quench not the Spirit (says Paul) nor the gifts and motions of the holy
Ghost: he used a Metaphor borrowed from fire, whose heat and light when it is
put out, is said to be quenched: Thus also he exhorts Timothy to stir up the
graces of God which be in him. 2. Tim. 1.6.
Thus it is with them that live the life of Grace, there is a daily seeking
after food, for the preserving of it, Psalm. 1.2.
a daily using of the means, as Prayer, Reading, Meditation; and thus it is
said of the blessed man: In Gods Law he does exercise himself both day and
night. Many examples might be brought for proof of this.

Job rose up early to offer sacrifice, this did Job continually: Job. 1.5.
and it was Daniels practice to pray three times a day: and David's: Evening,
Dan. 6.10. Psalm. 55.17. Psa. 119.164. Genesis 24.63
Morning, and Noone-tide, will I pray unto thee: Yea, we may hear him speaking
of seven times a day praising of the Lord: And Isaac went into the Field to
pray and meditate in the Evening. Let us examine our selves in this duty, how
we perform it in our practices.
Therefore let every Christian man and woman try and examine themselves in this
duty: For it is certainly true, and cannot deceive us, that our prayers are
proportionable to our faith: For he that prays seldom has but a weak
faith; he that prays often has a strong Faith; and he that prays not at all
has no faith: For, Romans 10.10
with the heart man believes unto righteousness, and with the mouth
confession is made unto salvation. Let this be well considered of such as
hear, and read, and pray by fits and starts, now and then, as it were upon
rainy days. Alas, thousands there are in the World, who read not, pray not,
from Sabbath to Sabbath; nay, nor then neither, have these any life of grace in
them? Sure I am, natural life must be daily fed, and shall be too, and is there
not as much need for the spiritual: be it therefore known unto thee, and
certified to thy soul, We should let no day pass without examination, nor
suffer our eyes to slumber, nor our head to take any rest tell we have made
peace with our God.
that thou deceiuest thy self, in thinking thou live the life of a
Christian, when there is no care had to a daily performance of the exercise
belonging to a Christian: therefore let no day pass over without examination,
let us call to mind what evils has been committed, what good duties omitted,
which God has required: suffer not thy eyes to slumber, nor the temples of thy
head to take any rest, till this task be performed. Would Christians keep
this course, and well consider of their carriages the day past, they would
soon find the excellent commodities of it, to the unspeakable comfort of
their souls for evermore.

Lastly, Phil. 3.13.
let this admonish every one to grow in grace, let us forget that which is
behind, and endeavor to that which is before; let us press hard toward the
mark for the prise of the high calling of God, let us not be evermore as
smoking flax, or bruised reeds, or as new set Plants, but let us abound more
and more. These. 4.1.
At a stay we cannot stand, judge what we will, not to go forward, is to go
backward, not to increase is to decrease, like as the Sun, we are evermore in
motion, and as the Sea, Genesis 19, 26. Psalm. 114.3. Eccle. 1.
ebbing or flowing, and as the Angel on Jacobs Ladder, ascending, or
descending, therefore we must not look backward with Lots Wife, but forward
with Lot himself, nor start back as Jordan did, but run forward as other
Rivers do, and travel toward Canaan, with Caleb and Joshua, so that still we
must profit in the way of godliness, there must be no growing downward, but
growing upward; Luke 2.52.
the Child Jesus grew not downward but upward in grace, wisdom, and stature,
they which will have their growth in Christ and toward his Kingdom must grow
upward: Psalm. 84.7.
Let us therefore proceed in sanctfication, and go from strength to strength,
Romans 15.14.
and labor every day to abound more and more in all wisdom, and in
goodness. If we prayed once a day in private, and that somewhat coldly at the
first; we must afterward pray twice or thrice, or oftener in a day, as occasion
is offered; and that more fervently and feelingly then we did in the
beginning, if we did hear and meditate more seldom, and with greater
weakness and distraction at our first entrance into profession, in our
proceeding we must use those exercises more frequently, We must grow in grace,
and never rest until we come to perfection.
and perform them more seriously and cheerfully: So that if you be in
Christ, never rest until you become strong in Christ; nay, if you be in
Christ, you will not rest till you come to some perfection in him. 2. Pet. 1.5.
Join therefore unto your virtue faith, and with faith knowledge, and with
knowledge temperance, and with temperance patience, and with patience
godliness, and with godliness brotherly kindness; for if these be in you,
they will make you neither unfruitful nor unprofitable. Keep then thy grace
in an honest heart, and it will increase like the Widows oil in the Cruise,
and meal in the Barrel, till thou come to be a perfect man in Christ Jesus.

The marks of an upright heart, is universal obedience.
Now we are come to the last part of this blessed man's delight, and that is
said here to be in the Commandments, and therefore that we may make sure
work in this regard, let us try our sincerity by the good effects that do
ever accompany the same: The first note therefore of a sound heart, which we
should take for our trial, is to be universal in our desires, and in our
practice, that we have respect to every Commandment of God, Psalm. 119.8.
to the first table, as well as to the second, and to the second as well as to
the first, that we be righteous toward men, as well as religious toward God,
that we look to our hearts as well to our actions, and to our actions as well
as to our hearts. Contrary to this rule is the dealing of those that will give
dispensations upon themselves for many things, so that they can make a show of
some things: what if we be not so liberal to the poor, say they, yet we are
no swearers nor blasphemers; what if we take a little liberty, these are but
trifles; we will not be adulterers nor filthy speakers, etc, this is a shrewd
sign of a heart full fraught with guile and deceit- The property of a good
conscience is to be willing and desirous in all things to walk honestly: Heb.
13.18.
if one be never so strickt in hearing Sermons, and abstaining from swearing:
yet if he will help himself with a lie now and then, for his commodity; and
if a man be never so rigorous and severe for matters of Justice against
others, yet will dispense with himself in a corner, thinking that the name of
a Professor, and reputation of the brotherhood will bear him out, this is an
argument of a false and dissembling heart, and therefore this must be taken heed
of, as being very dangerous.

Therefore that we may not deceive our selves in this one trial, the sincere
and honest heart, as our Savior calls it, is that which cherishes hatred of
all sin, without exception, and carries a constant purpose and resolution in
nothing willingly to sin against God, but to endeavor it self to the utmost
in every good way of Gods Commandments: Whatsoever it shall know to be a
sins, it will not purposely and deliberately do it for all the world: this
note the Prophet David gives, for having said: Psalm. 119.3.
Blessed are the upright in their way, he teaches us to discern them by this
note: Surely they do no iniquity. With my whole heart have I sought thee,
says David, Psalm. 119.10
suffer me not to wander from thy Commandments: Insinuating thereby, that
such as do not seek God with their whole hearts, that is, in singlenes of
heart unfeignedly, God will suffer them to wander in crooked blind ways, and
that fearfully and irrecouerably. To the like purpose is that in the same
Psalm, Let my heart be upright in thy statutes, that I may never be ashamed.
And although Saint James say, Iam. 3.3.2.
In many things we offend all: yet we must resolve our selves to leave all
sin: For if we live and lie but in one sin, that one sin is sufficient to
press us down to hell: Can. 4.7.
therefore the spouse is said to have no spot in her, for if she had but one
spot, then were she not beautiful in his eyes; let the walls of the City be
never so strong, if there be one breach, the enemy will enter in, and sack the
City, if a strong ship do but leake in one place, it will be drowned, a beast
which is caught in the snare but by one leg cannot escape, one Fly falling
into the Apothecaries box will spoil the whole ointment. 2. Sam. 15.
Let us remember Saul, and forget not our own souls, God commanded him
utterly to destroy the Amalekites, he sparing but some of them, was cast off
from God, and his Kingdom rent from him: our sins are the sins of the
Amalekites, which God commands us to destroy, we must kill them all, and
spare none, lest God forsake us, and so we lose a better Kingdom then ever Saul
found: For, Iam. 2.10. Iam. 1.17. Heb. 12.1.
Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet offend in one point, he is guilty
of all, for pure religion and undefiled, is to keep our selves unspotted of the
world. Let us therefore cast every sin away, which is as great weight, This
discouers many to be lewd and dissolute persons when the Commandments are
distasteful unto them.
and lay aside every sin with which we are beset.

First, this serves for the discovery of many, to be the sons of Beliall,
lawless, lewd, and dissolute persons, to whom nothing is more grievous then
Gods government, and nothing more distasteful then the Commandments of the
Lord: Gods Word is like hard meat lying heavy upon the stomach, that cannot
easily be digested, those precepts given, for the ordering of our ways:
Swear not at all, Mat. 5.34.
sanctify my Sabbath, they are hard sayings, who can endure them; nay, they
could wish they were rased out of the book, and there were no such iniunction:
debar them from swearing, you were as good sow up their lips; keep them
from their sports on the Sabbath day, why then take away their lives; nay, they
cannot nor will not be so straight laced, their sports they must follow, their
pleasures they must take, and no day fitter then that, thus Sampson like, they
break Gods Laws, like twind threads, and say: Depart from us, we will none of
thy ways. Let all such then know, that pretend what they will, they are but
lawless persons, children of Belial, who desire nothing more, then to be from
under Gods Commandments, and to cast his yoke from off their necks: therefore
I may truly say, that where the Sabbath is not sanctified, there is neither
sound Religion nor a Christian conversation. How God esteems the
sanctification of the Sabbath, may appear by the exact delivery of the
Commandments, for he has fenced it about like Mount Sinai, Exodus 19.12
with marks and bounds at the delivery of the Law, that no profaneness might
approach near unto you; first, by his watchword, Remember; secondly, Exo.
20.8, 9
by his bounty, six days thou shall labor, and do all that thou have to
do; thirdly, by his sovereignty, It is the Sabbath of the Lord thy God;
fourthly, by the latitude, thou, thy son thy daughter, thy man servant, thy
maid servant, the stranger that is within thy gates must sanctify it; fifthly,
by his example, The Lord rested the seventh day; lastly, by his benediction, he
blessed and sanctified it. These six marks are like the six Water-pots in
the second of John, John 2.7. Let every one of us remember to sanctify the
Lords Sabbath, and that shall be a pledge of the eternal Sabbath in the
kingdom of Heaven.
fill them up to the brim with a holy observation, then draw out and carry to
the master of the feast, even to Jesus Christ, the Lord of the new Sabbath:
therefore let us remember to sanctify the Lords Sabbath, and that shall be
unto us a pledge of the eternal Sabbath in the kingdom of Heaven, which shall
be a day without evening, and shall yield us rest without labor, and joy without
ending.

Secondly, behold a difference, There is great difference between the godly
and the wicked in their obedience.
whereby we may try our selves, between the wicked and the godly, the one
desires to draw in Gods yoke, and yield obedience to the commandments; and the
other desires nothing more then to cast it of: let us examine then how our
heart is affected, do thou find this inward coffeehouse in obeying? are
Gods laws as bonds and cords in thy esteem? and as a stomackful horse do
thou foame at the bit which is put into thy mouth; an evident sign of a
rebellious heart: but one the other side, art thou content to submit thy self
to Gods commandments? art thou desirous that thy nature would be more
conformable to Gods law? art thou content to be restrained, and if it were
possible to have the wicked inclination of thy heart abolished? surely then
thou need not to want comfort, thy state will afford it, go on therefore
constantly unto the end.

Here is great comfort for all such as find vprightnes in their hearts though
they have many imperfections.
Thirdly, here is great consolation for all such as find these notes of
uprightness in themselves, and that they have part in the commandments:
though they have many corruptions and imperfections mixed with their best
works; yet seeing they have pure hearts, they are happy and blessed, and shall
find the good effects of their blessedness, true holiness, and true
happiness are never separated. As for perfections, God looks not for it at our
hands, if sin hang on us, but we would feign cast it off, if we find
unbelief, but would most gladly get faith if we be troubled in our hearts
with hardness, but are desirous of softness, if we be humbled for that we
cannot be humbled sufficiently, nor get such a large heart as we would to
desire and exspect grace from heaven, yet let us not be discomforted for our
defects and frailties for the Lord will spare us and be gracious unto us in his
beloved son, according to that worthy prayer of good king Hezekiah; 2. Chro.
30.18.19.
The good Lord be merciful toward him that prepared his whole heart to seek
the Lord God of his fathers, though he be not cleansed according to the
purification of the sanctuary.

Fourthly, this serves for comfort to the children of God, Our good purposes
shall be rewarded.
to let them see how highly God prizeth good purposes and desires, accepting
and rewarding them when they come to him, as if they came accompanied with the
deeds themselves. David did but conceive a purpose to build God a house, 2.
Sam. 7.16
God rewards it with the building and establishing of David's house: he did but
conceive a purpose to confess his sins, Gods ear was in his heart before
David's confession could be in his tongue. Psalm. 32.5.
The poor beggars that have wanted food for themselves, Christ yet shall say
at the last day, Ye have fed me when I was hungry, only in regard of their
strong affection if they had had ability: Luke 15.20.
the prodigal child when he was but conceiving a purpose of returning, was
prevented by his fathers first coming to him, Isa. 65.24.
and as Isay says, God will answer us before we call, that is in our purposes
of prayer. O sweet comfort when we address our selves to prayer in our
private meditations, and bethink our selves of our sundry wants, we purpose
with our selves to beg such and such things, whereof yet happily we forget
some in the vocal prayer; shall any good soul now think that the memories
weakness shall any thing prejudice her in this case? no, thy purpose of
asking the thing forgotten was a most effectual asking of it, Therefore when
the Lord shall put any good motions into our mind, let us not delay but
speedily put them in practice.
and unto thee belongs the comfort of that saying, I will hear before they
calll. Therefore seeing the Lord does so highly esteem good purposes, let us
not delay, but speedily put then in practice. Before the Iron cool it is good
striking, and while the wax is pliable it is good setting on the Seal, do
thou then feel at any time that thy heart is warmed with good motions,
enlarged with good affections, lift up to heaven in spiritual meditations:
do thou feel any sparkles of the heavenly fire? take, take thou the
bellows presently, blow till the flame cherish in thee, and make much of the
smoking flax: Eccles 5.31.
and therefore what Solomon exhorts in the case of vows, is generally to be
practiced in all holy purposes and motions; be not slack to perform them,
they that know themselves, know how fickle and unconstant their hearts are: now
as we would deal with a variable and unconstant man, so let us deal with
these hearts of ours: we would take such a one at his word, and lay hold of the
opportunity, least within a short space he alter his mind: our hearts are more
unconstant then any man is or can be; let us then learn this wisdom,
presently to lay hold of every good motion, and put it in practice, do not
stand debating the matter when God puts any good thought into thy heart, or
rayseth up any good purpose or desire within thee, but presently proceed to
execution, make no long tarrying before thou do put them in action: there
have been many who have resolved to leave such a sin, Delaying of time very
dangerous.
or do such a duty, and put in practice what they have heard, but by reason
of their deferring until the next day, or such a time, those motions die, and
purposes vanish, and come to nothing for want of speedy execution. The right
way to try our selves is to know that we have forsaken our sins


And therefore let us try our selves if these good purposes have wrought in us
a forsaking of sin, and a reformation of life: if it be thus, then it is
well; for this it is, and must be with every true penitent. True it is in the
time of our impenitency, like wild and mad horses we gallop in the way of
sin, yet in the day of our repentance the spirit of God as with a bit or
bridle gives us a check, and turns us back, and sets us as fast a going
the other way, insomuch that our old companions stand wondering at the matter,
admiring that we so suddenly break off company, 1. Pet. 4.4.
and run not with them to the same excess of riot: so great is the change,
that not only our selves, but others also see it and admire it. Now then, thou
that talkest of repentance, and of thy obedience to the commandments, is this
change in thee; assure thy self, if thou have repented, it is, and all the
world may see it. Can thou with a good conscience say of thy self, as Paul
did of the Corinthians: 1. Cor. 6.10.11.
I was once a thief a drunkard, an adulterer, a reuiler, an extortioner, a
covetous person, and the like: but now I am washed, now I am sanctified, yea,
justified in the name of the Lord Jesus, and by the spirit of my God; can
thou thus say of thy self, and that in truth? why then to thy comfort be it
spoken, this is a notable evidence of the truth of thy repentance; but if it be
otherwise, thou may deceive thy self, for if no reformation follows, these
are not signs of true repentance, for this is true repentance, Augustine.
says Augustine, so to bewail sins past, as that we commit them no more,
which we have bewailed. It is to no purpose then for us to bewail our former
courses, unless there follow amendment: let not then this deceive thee, For
where the Lord gives repentance, there he gives the grace of reuocation,
whereby they become new creatures.
for thou do but mock, and not indeed repent, when thou still do that
whereof thou have repented, this is true repentance, so to repent, that thou
have sinned, as that thou do so no more: till therefore thou do cease from
sin and reform thy ways, until thou do find this change in thy self,
so that thou can truly say I was thus and thus, but now the case is altered,
thou can have no comfort in thy repentance, nor in the commandments: for
asure thy self that repentance and continuance in the old wicked courses can
never stand together.

Lastly, this may serve for the comfort of all such as do find this change in
themselves, who can say with that blind man who had his sight restored, one
thing know, that whereas I was blind, now I see; Ioh. 9.25.
whereas I was filthy and unclean, I am now washed and cleansed: Oh happy is
the condition of such a one, thrice blessed is the estate of that man: only
manifest this change unto the world, that others may also say; How is this man
cbanged from what he was? that as others have been witnesses of thy sin, so
they may be also witnesses of thy repentance.

This may serve for reproof, Loose professors reproved as being far from
keeping the commandments.
against our loose and lewd hypocrites, masked under the name of pure
professors, promising to themselves, though living and lying in their sins, and
far from keeping the co^mants, the reward of glory, no, as thou sowest thou
must reap, and as thou bruest thou must drink, if thou sow tares, never
look to reap wheat; if thou Brue with crabs, never look to drink mild
Beer. Can men gather figs of thorns, or grapes of thistles: so I comparing
our works to trees, their rewards to the fruits; say the like: think you ever
of the thorns and thistles of covetousness, pride, uncleanness, blasphemy,
swearing, profanation of the Sabaoths, ever to gather the sweet figs, or
pleasant grapes of glory and happiness? will this gall and wormwood ever make
pleasant drinke^, will these wild and sower grapes ever yield sweet wine? Oh
that we could seriously lay this to heart; that we must all appear before
the judgment seat of Christ, 2. Cor. 5.10 11.
to receive according to that which we here have done, whether good or evil:
that he that sows of the flesh shall of the flesh reap corruption, Gal. 6.8.
and he that sows of the spirit, shall of the spirit reap life everlasting;
then would we presently begin to reason with our selves; Alas how poor, how
how barren am I in good works, how fruitful in ill; it is true indeed that
according to the quality of our works we shall be judged; alas what other works
can I present the Lord withal, besides the works of death and darkness, if these
had the promise of reward, then were my case good; let us examine our hearts
herein, and think ever with our selves, thus long have I lived, but what good
have I done, either to my self or others? where are my prayers, fastings,
humiliations, meditations, well spent Sabaoths, well governed children, and
servants? where are the works of mercy to my brethren, either to their souls
in holy admonition, reprehension, exhortation, or bodies in ministering relief
to their necessities; how can I look for the penny that has stood idle in the
market place, all the day long; for the crown, that refused to run, Romans 2.7.
for a good crop in harvest, that would not sow in seed time: let us no longer
deceive our selves no glory, honor, and immortality can be found of any, but
such as seek it by continuance in well doing and in keeping the commandments,
and delighting therein.

Seeing then the greater our zeal pains, and travel has been in Gods cause,
the greater shall be weight of our glory: the twelve Apostles shall have
twelve special thrones at the day of judgment: and whereas otherwise men shall
but shine with the brightness of the firmament, Dan. 12 3.
they that turn others from their evil ways, with brightness of the
stars, Phil. 4.17.
he that sows liberally shall reap liberally: and every good work added to
the number of the former, helps to further our reckoning in the day of the
Lord. Mat. 12.
And here for our comfort let us remember that God rewards every one according
to his work, for he will reward the least good work, even a cup of cold
water, ant. 5.1.
eating not only of our honey, but of our hony-combe; yea at the last day
notice will be taken of inferior sorts of works as giving a piece of bread
or a piece of cloth. God forbid then that any should say with those in
Malachy, It is in vain to serve the Lord, therefore let us fear Gods saying,
Behold I come quickly and my reward is with me. When Mordecay had performed a
worthy service to Ahashuerosh in discovery of a dangerous treason, Est. 6.10.
he had not his reward presently, but yet his service was registered, and so
afterward when the king looked upon the records, it was royally recompensed.
Malachy teaches us that there are books of remembrance written for them thar
fear the Lord, Mal. 3.16.
and in this Chronicle all our good services, even every action of obedience is
recorded, that it may be rewarded; our labor then shall not be lost, nor so
much as our tears but they are blotted; men may forget us as Pharaoh did
Joseph, Judge. 9.17. Genesis 41, 42.
and Sechemites, Gedeon, but God will not, our reward is sure though not so
speedy as we desire: Here is great comfort to all faithful Ministers, who
spend their strength to turn sinners from their evil ways, great is their
reward in Heaven. We must live the life grace hear if we mean to shine in
glory hereafter.
God here assures us of reward in the Kingdom of Heaven. Behold what comfort
shines from hence to all you who have spent your strength in the service of
God, and conversion of sinners, great is your reward in Heaven, you shall shine
as stars in the Ftrmament, for ever and ever.

From hence we learn, that the degrees of glory hereafter, shall be
according to the degrees of grace here, so that if we would then shine in
glory, now we must shine in grace; therefore take the advantage of this thy
corruption, shake of all spiritual sloth, use it as a goade in thy side, to
make thee sweat again in Gods work, double pains shall bring thee double
pleasure; double deligence, double delight; double holiness, double honor:
Who will be a common stone in the building, when he might be a Pillar? Who
would be a Doore-keeper when he might be a Steward; therefore let us look to
the whole course of our lives: God rewards us not according to our good or
evil work, but according to our works, to the ordinary course of them: this
must teach us faithfully to walk before the Lord, in the discharge of our
several callings; let us look well to our work that we do it, and God will
look far better to reward our work. Oh then that instead of taking thought
how to get this or that good thing promised, we would once take thought how to
do this or that good thing commanded, and so doing our duty, we should be
happy for evermore.

In worldly affairs no weighty thing can be done without diligence, far
less in spiritual. Cursed be he that does the work of the Lord negligently,
how shall he look for the penny that has stood idle: Oh that there were no
such to be found in these our days, 2. Tim. 4, 2.
forgetting the rule of the Apostle: Preach in season and out of season. Hence
it comes to pass, that their Sheep belonging to their charge are like
Pharoa his Kine, so lean and evil favored, and so weak as every bush is
able to entangle, and every ditch ready to drown them, and every blast of
vain Doctrine able to blow them away. Oh that this charge were considered, and
that we remembered, that belongs to them that preach not the Gospel. Art thou
a Steward? Art thou an Ambassador? Why then do thou not distribute Gods food
unto his people? How will thou be able to look him in the face, at whose bar
one day all flesh must stand? Luke 16.21
and if the rich man were cast into Hell, who did not relieve poor Lazarus
with his bread? What shall become of those that have famished the Souls of
their people, for want of holy admonition and instruction.

First, to all be it spoken, both Minister and people, let us avoid all sin,
and endeavor our our selves to the utmost of our power to keep and delight in
the Commandments, not one but al, and that we may not deceive our selves
herein, let every man examine himself at this mark, and with a single eye,
and upright heart take a view of his affections; whether his joy be inward and
spiritual; that is, in the assurances of God favor in his word, in his
Children, in Prayer, and continual practice of Godliness, or outward and
carnal; that is, in attainement of greatness and worldly pleasures, in the
increase of our Corn, and Wine, and Oil: whether he love the peace of
Conscience, far more dearly then the favor of men, or his own life:
Whether he be more zealous for the honor and praise of GOD then his own:
Whether he be more afraid of secret sins, then open shame of offending God,
then outward afflictions: Whether he be more angry in the cause of Religion,
and concerning Gods glory, or for our own private wrongs, and so throughout
the rest of our affections.

Secondly, would thou repent thee of thy sins, turn from them, and have
them pardoned, then labor to know them, strive to find them out. Consider of
thy ways, make a stand for a while, and examine thy courses, put the question
to thy soul, what have I done, and again propound it, wherein am I failing,
take the light of Gods Law, that will show thee thy filthiness, that will
discover unto thee thy great corruptions, and many faylings: be not backward
in this duty, the more backward thou art, the greater cause thou have to fear
thy estate. Bankerouts that are not worth a groat do not dare look into their
state, because they know they be worse then naught: be then persuaded to call
thy courses to account. Consider the estate wherein thou art, thy case is
fearful, because thou art ignorant of it, but it is desperate, if thou will
not be persuaded to look into it; but on the other side, if thou will take thy
self aside, and commune with thy own heart, as David speaks, Psalm. 4.4.
surely then thou will be in a fair forwardness to sound conversion.

But hear some may ask, Obedience to all the Commandments is an infallible
sign of a true justifying faith.
how shall I know if I be such a one or not? I answer, thou may easily
prove it in keeping the Commandments, and delighting therein; by this may
thou know, and therefore try thy self, whether thou have respect to the first
Table as well as to the second, and to the second as well as to the first? do
thou perform good duties for conscience sake, do thou as well make
conscience of dissembling with the world, defrauding thy neighbor, lying, or
equiuocating for advantage, as of blaspheming Gods name, of profaning Gods
Sabbath, of neglecting holy exercises? Do thou lament and bewail thy
dullness and deadness, thy drowsinesse and heaviness in the performance of holy
duties to God, and honest duties to men? Art thou grieved and disquieted when
thou find not the efficacies and fruit of those good exercises in thy heart?
have thou learned to make conscience of sins of omission, as well of
commission? Do thou as well open thy mouth to speak to his honor, as keep
it shut from dishonouring him? Do thou as well make conscience of doing these
good duties on the Sabbath Day, hearing, reading, meditating, and the like,
which God requires, as thou do from abstaining of the works of thy ordinary
calling, which he forbids? and do thou not rest in Negatiues, abstaining
only from what is forbidden; but have thou also regard to affirmatiues, doing
what God has enjoined to be done, esteeming this latter as necessary as the
former. Surely if it be thus, thou may have comfort that thy obedience to
the Commandments is sound and good; but yet a little further: thou abstainest
from gross evils, and art severe and sore against others that fall into them,
such and such sins thou do not commit, but what is the ground of thy
abstaining? Is it the law of the Magistrate, fear of Gods wrath or shame of
the World, or is it because thou want ability or opportunity? if this be the
ground, let me tell thee, this is a false ground, and will deceive thee in the
end. But do thou leave these, H s. 3.5. Psalm. 130.4.
because they are evil and displeasing to the Lord: Do thou fear the Lord
and his goodness, and tremble to offend him because of his mercy? Why then, it
is an evident sign of a sanctified soul. Oh that we would deal truly with
our selves, that we would now at the last learn to be wise, and not gull our
souls as most do: and therefore consider with thy self, and be thou better
advised, cast of all profainenes, and follow holiness and piety, for without it
no man shall ever see God to his comfort. Seeing therefore examination is so
necessary for every one, Examination so necessary, that without it no state of
life can be rightly ordered.
let us go one step further in this trial of our selves: Have thou felt by
thine own experience, this great work of regeneration and change, wrought
upon thy soul? Has the powerful Word, by the inward and effectual working
of his Spirit, broken and bruised thy hard and stony heart? Has it pierced and
purged the very closest and unsearchable corners thereof, has it humbled it
with the sight of thy sins, has it filled it with fearful terrors,
remorse and true sorrow for thy life past, has it after quieted and refreshed
it with a sure faith in Christ Jesus, and a delight in heavenly things, has it
mortified thy inward corruptions and broke the heart of thy sweet sin, has it
planted a holy moderation in all thy affections, that whereas heretofore they
have been enraged with lust, with immoderate anger with ambition, with
insatiable desire, for the enlargement of thy possessions and greatness, and
with hatred of Gods dearest servants and their holiness, are they now inflamed
with zeal for Gods honor, truth and service, with a fervent love unto the Lord
and his Saints, with Christian courage to oppose against the sins of the
time, to defend goodness and good causes, to contemn the lying slanders and
profane scoffs of worthless men, has it begot in thy will an hunger and
thirst after the spiritual food of thy soul, the Word and Sacraments, so
that thou had rather part with any worldly good, then not enjoy the
incomparable benefit of a conscionable and constant ministry, are thy thoughts
which hertofore did wander up and down at random wickedly, idly, wantonly,
are they now bounded within a sacred compass, and spent upon holy things, and
the necessary affairs of thy honest and lawful calling? Is thy understanding
informed and acquainted with the mystery of salvation, which the world, and the
wise men thereof account nothing but madness and folly, is thy memory which has
heretofore bin stuffed with trash and toys, vanities and follies, now capable
and greedy of divine knowledge, are thy words which heretofore have bin full of
profanenes and worldlines, now directed to glorify God, and to give grace to
the hearers? Nay yet further, besides this reuocation of the faculties of thy
soul, has the power of grace sanctified all thy outward actions? Do thou
order in every particular all the businesses of thy vocation religiously,
conscionably, and by direction out of the Word of God? Do thou now hear the
Word of God, not only of course and custom, but of zeal and conscience, to
reform thy self by it, and to live after it? Do not the weekdaies duties and
worldly cares drown thy mind on the sabbath? do thou exercise daily with
fruit and feeling, prayer, that precious comfort of the faithful Christian?
Thou being converted do thou labor the conversion of others, especially of
those which are committed any way to thy charge, and for whom thou must give a
more strickt account; as if thou be a master of a family, do thou pray with
them, and instruct them in the doctrine of salvation, and ways of godliness?
do thou now not only stick at, and forbear great and gross sins, but
do thou even hate the garment spotted of the flesh, and all appearance of
evil? These. 15.22
does the tenderness of thy conscience check thee for the least sin, and make
thee fearful to offend, though it be but in a wandering cogitation after every
fall into infirmities? art thou careful to renew thy repentance, and learn
wisdom and watchfulnes to avoid the^ afterward? do thou feel thy self
profit, grow, and increase in these fruits and effects of grace, and have thou
such a gracious taste of the glory of God, and of eternal life, that thou art
even willing and desirous to meet thy Savior in the clouds, not so much to be
rid out of the miseries of this life, as to be freed from the heavy burden of
Heb. 12.1.
sin which hangs on so fast, and to enjoy his presence in the heavens for ever;
in a word, as thy soul gives life, spirit and motion to thy whole body, and
every part thereof, does the Spirit of God, even so inspire thy soul and body,
and all thy actions with the life of grace? why then thou art possessed of the
state of true blessedness: Here is great comfort for all such as can find this
uprightness in themselves, they need not fear, though the earth should be
moved, yet they shall abide and be safe in the Day of the Lord.
thou art then happy that ever thou wast borne, thy life is certainly the way
of life, and I can assure thee, and I dare boldly speak it, that thou art
already out of the reach of all the powers of Hell; Satan is chained up for
ever doing thee any deadly hurt, all the creatures are reconciled unto thee,
and at league with thee, thou have filled the angels with joy at thy
conversion, they will for ever guard thee, thou shall never more be afraid for
any ill tidings, though the earth be moved, Psalm. 46.2.
and though the mountains fall into the midst of the sea, thy heart shall
abide strong, unshaken, and comfortable: when thou fallest down upon thy bed
of sickness, thou shall find no mortal prison in thy flesh, no sting in
death, no darkness in the grave, no amazement at that great and fearful day:
for all the merits and sufferings of Christ are thine, all the comforts of Gods
children are thine, all the blessings in the book of God are thine, even all
things are thine, and thou art Christ's, and Christ is Gods: only stand fast in
thy faith, quit thy self like a man and be strong, gird thy sword upon thy
thigh, buckle fast to thee the whole armor of God, ride on because of the word
of truth, Psalm. 45.3.
and the Lord thy God be with thee; break through for a while with undaunted
courage the bitterness of the worlds malice, the keen razours of empoysoned
tongs, the tears and tediousnes of a few wretched days, for thou art nearer
the prize of the high calling, the^ when thou first beleeuedst: shine more and
more in faith, in patience, in love, in knowledge, in obedience, and all other
christian graces, until the perfect day, until thou reach the height of
heaven, and the full glory of the Saints of God.

A true mark of our repentance, if we have left our evil ways to serve the
living God.
First, here is matter of great consolation for us, for hereby we may gather
assurance unto our own hearts of the soundness of our repentance, and
conversion to the Lord, if we have indeed turned from our evil ways to serve
the living God, so that we delight in the commandments: therefore they may
take this for their comfort, who are still proposing of good questions, what
they must do, and how they must do it, by what means they may get out of this
or that sin, and attain to such or such a grace, how they may be
profitable, helpful, and comfortable to themselves and others: this was the
practice of the Publicans and Soldiers, and all sorts that were inwardly
touched in their consciences by the preaching of John Baptist, Luke 3.10.
every one of them came unto him, saying; What must we do: and of the Iayler
who when once he began to be humbled, came trembling and fell down before Paul
and Silas, saying; Act. 18.29.30.
What must I do to be saved. For howsoever Gods servants have learned for the
most part, what things in general must be done, yet still they need to be
informed in many things; therefore if we truly repent us of our sins, the
Lord will neeuer leave us till all our iniquities be quite removed from us; for
they that turn to the Lord by true repentance, the Lord will wash them from
all their sins by the blood of his Son; that whatsoever offenses we repent
of, we shall be sure to have the^ pardoned.

Secondly, God accepts of penitent persons the will for the deed as for the
fulfilling of the law in absolute perfection, If we have a willing mind to
perform our duty, the Lord will accept the will for the deed.
that Christ alone has performed, he has paid our debt, and cancelled the
bond, and taken away the handwriting that was against us; now this only
remains for us, that we have a good inclination, and a willing mind to
perform our duty and labor to the utmost of our strength so to do, seeing and
bewailing our manifold imperfections, errors, and faylings, in every one of our
services, which if we can do God will be as well pleased with us through his
beloved son, as if we had kept the whole law, without any declining from it
at al, either to the right hand or to the left. That which is spoken in the
matter of communicating unto the necessities of the Saints in the Epistle to
the Corinthians (to wit) if there be first a willing mind it is accepted
according to that a man has, Cor 2.8.12.
and not according to that he has not, holds as true in all other services,
that we are accepted with the Lord, according as we are inwardly affected,
albeit our actions be not answerable to our desires: for he that has a ready
mind to what he can, and does the same, would be as ready to do a great
deal more, if his ability did serve; and therefore the Lord will show his
gracious acceptance of that which is done by him, though it be never so little
as well as if it had been a matter of a far greater worth.

Now that the true purpose and intent of the heart, is that which God
principally regards in his servants, is plainly proved out of holy Scripture;
for we may read in Genesis what God says of Abraham, Genesis 22.7.
By my self have I sworn (says the Lord) because thou have done this thing,
and not spared thine only son, therefore I will surely bless thee: and yet
Isaac was not slain, but Abraham withdrew his hand from him and spared him:
yet because he was content to kill him, and made all things ready for the
sacrificing of him, God accounts it as good, and rewards it as well as if he
had killed him indeed.

So David had but a purpose to build the temple, 1. Chron. 17 1. 1. Kin. 8.16.
which work was afterward laid upon Solomon, and by him performed, yet the
Lord gives him a good testimony, and large reward for his readiness that way:
he was content to spare him because he had been at great pains before in
shedding the blood of many enemies of the Church, and some remained yet still
to be subdued by him, yet this he tells him for his comfort: whereas it was
in thine heart to build an house unto my name, 1. Chro. 17.10.11.12.
thou did well that thou were so minded: and besides this, he bids
Nathan to carry him this message; that the Lord would build him an house, and
would raise up seed after him, and employ his son in that honorable service
of building an house unto the name of the Lord, and that he would establish
his throne for ever: and therefore if we can believe that he is pleased with
our good actions, we may as well be persuaded that he is delighted with good
our motions, and holy desires that are stirred up in our hearts by his own
spirit.

And the reason why God takes such small things in good worth is, Psalm. 103.13
because he is both in name and nature a father; Mal. 3.17.
yea, an heavenly father, and therefore has compassion of those that fear him:
now he that is a most merciful, and wise, and loving father, (as those will
be most merciful to others, that have tasted most of Gods mercy to themselves)
when he sees that his child does as well as he can, though it be but simply
and poorly, yet he will show his liking of it, and commend him for it: and so
will God deal with us, though we cannot do things perfitly, yet if we do
them obediently, he will show his love and approbation of us, and of our
works. When a little child does cheerfully aim and shoot at the mark which
his father proposes unto him, though by reason of his weakness he shoot very
wide and short, yet it is well accepted of his father, as if he did hit the
white: and the like fatherly dealing shall we find in God, that if we be
faithful in a little he will esteem of us as if we performed a great deal
more. The perfection of a Christian here in this life.
Indeed when we have put off the image of the first Adam and have put on the
image of the second Adam, and have changed the earth for heaven: then we shall
not only obey truly, but perfectly; but here it is in truth, and so it must
be esteemed, one degree of perfection is to see our own imperfections; and
that was in Nehemiah, and in those of his time; O Lord I beseech thee, Nehe.
1.11
let thine ear now hearken to the prayer of thy servant, and to the prayer of
thy servants who desire to fear thy name: he could not say that they did so
fear his name as they should, but this they could say, that they desired to
do it better, which desire was a fruit of the grace it self. This should
encourage us still to be doing in the services and works of God. But here some
may say, we find many imperfections, and many wants and weaknesses in our
selves: be it so; yet if we aim at perfection, and have respect to every
commandment of God, and come as near to the mark as we can, the Lord will
accept us according to that we have, and not reject us for that we have not;
if we could obey perfectly, to what end were Christ his obedience, and if God
should look after none but those that can fully please him in all things, he
should be a Lord and a master without subjects and servants, If thou O Lord,
Psalm. 130.3.
says David, should mark what is done amiss who should stand.

Therefore though we cannot pray with that feeling, Our infirmities should not
hinder us, if we have respect to every commandment.
hear and read with that profit, sing Psalms with that ioyfulnesse and
cheerefulnes of heart as we should, though we cannot forgive our enemies, long
for Christ his coming, have such a tender feeling of the afflicctions of the
Saints, nor attain to such heavenly meditations night or day, as we do
desire, and as God does command, yet let us not be discouraged if we strive to
bring our wicked flesh to the performance of those duties: and though we have
much ado with it, yet if we draw it as a Bear to the stake unto Gods
worship, and to the performance of good duties in public and and private,
Romans 7.12.
and when we feel most backwardness and untowardness in our nature, yet we
consent in our very souls, that the law of God is holy, just and good, and
that our wills and affections are indeed very corrupt and rebellious; but we
would rather then all the world that things were otherwise wise with us, that
sin might be subdued, and grace planted in stead thereof, and it is our
continual grief that God should be so gracious, and kind, and liberal to us,
and we can be no more obedient and loyal, and serviceable unto him? if (I
say) we find such a heart within us, we, need not to be dismayed, but may
cheerfully go on with full persuasion and undoubted resolution that the Lord
will be merciful unto us, and take our obedience in good worth if we endeavor
still to be better, and to do better every day then other, never standing upon
that we have done, The sign of a true heart.
but pressing hard to the mark. This is an infallible note that we are true
hearted, he that feels but a little faith, a little love, a little
repentance, etc. And would with all his heart have them increased, these very
desires to obey, are evident signs that we have part in the Commandments.
But here some may object and say, God requires absolute perfection in the Law;
I answer, but not so in the Gospel, but qualifieth the rigor of the Law by the
satisfaction of a Mediator, and in our stead accepts the true endeavor for
the deed, and the good will for the work it self: the law commands works
and perfect obedience, do this and thou shall live: the Gospel commands
faith. This is the commandment that we believe in the name of Jesus Christ,
John 3.23.
and love one another as he gave commandment.

Thirdly, that we may therefore arm our selves with the complete harness of
God to vanquish Satan, Let every one therefore arm himself against Satan's
temptations.
and quench all his fiery darts: true it is in part, we were the children of
wrath by nature, but by grace we are not so; we are not now under the
corruption of nature, but under the state of grace, and therefore no reprobates
but members of Christ, It is the spirit of God that can assure us that we are
hls children.
and heirs of salvation: Satan cannot tell who be reprobates, he is only an
accuser, but no judge in this case, he is a lying spirit, but the spirit of God
which cannot lie, assures us that we are the children of God: God has given
us a Law to keep which we cannot keep, yet his law is performed of us even
to the full, though not of our persons, yet in the person of Christ Jesus; and
though we cannot fulfill the law of works, yet we can (by Gods inspiring and
assisting grace) perform the law of faith which suffiseth to salvation. Christ
is not only a judge to condemn, but also a Savior to pardon; as he has
judgment so he has mercy, but his mercy is above his judgment, for it is
above all his works: our sins are infinite, but Christ his mercy is more
infinite to them that are in him, but we are in him, and there is no
condemnation to them which are in Jesus Christ. We cannot sin so much as he
can pardon, It is no presumption to hope for mercy, but the assurance of faith.
neither do we sin with an high hand, but upon infirmities: we are only
captives, but not servants to sins; that is, we serve the law of sin
whether we will or no, but we do not willingly submit our selves, unto it
neither is it presumption in us to hope for mercy, but it is faith: for God
stands not so much upon the quantity as upon the quality of our faith, so as
we have any at all, not the perfection but the truth of it, though it be
mixed with infidelity or unbelief. we say with the father of the child, which
had a dumb spirit, I believe Lord, but help my unbelief. Mat. 9.24.
That this faith of ours is no fantasy or illusio^, or flattery of our
selves, but a certain assurance of Gods spirit, we persuade our selves by
these reasons; we hate our selves because of our sin, we purpose to sin so no
more, we call to GOD to strenghen us in this godly resolution, we delight in
the Law of God we love all that fear him, we desire the furtherance of the
Gospel, Romans 7.22.
and building up the Kingdom of grace: We desire to be dissolved, and to be
with Christ, that sin may cease in us, and this desire of faith, and the
groaning for want of any grace belonging to salvation is the grace it self,
and to such a desire a blessing is annexed. Blessed are they which hunger and
thirst after righteousness, Mat. 5.6.
for they shall be satisfied, even at the full though not in this life, yet in
the life to come.

Lastly, as we feel the disease, so we must also feel the strength of the
medicine. Romans 7.23.
Saint Paul feels a Law in his members, etc. which is the rebellion of
concupiscence, and lust in the flesh by original sin: 2. Cor. 12.19.
So also, the grace of God by Jesus Christ, shall deliver him from it: our
Savior said to him in his greatest temptations, My grace is sufficient to
strengthen thee againsh all: Mat. 14.31.
He held Saint Peter that he could not sink, and prayed for him that his
faith should not fail him: Satan and our sins are as the great army of the
Assyrians, against Eliseus, they appeared terrible, but on the other side stood
an army of Gods Angels, to fight for him: 2. Kin. 6.17.
therefore still we must look to the helps of grace; in all these conflicts
we overcome by the help of him that loved us. Romans 8.37. Phil, 4.13. Esaias
41.10.
Saint Paul says, he could do all things. God says by the Prophet, Be not
afraid, for I am with thee, step not aside, for I thy God have strengthened
thee, and have assisted thee, the right hand of my just man has taken thy
defense, and if God be with us, Romans 8.31.
who can be against us.

And that every one of us may be stirred up to the performance of these duties:
This should exhort every one to get part in the Commandments.
let us remember when God had made the heavens and the earth, he placed men and
Angels in the same as his tennants to bring him in the rent of obedience in
keeping the Commandments, therefore every one of us must bring in some thing
to the Lords Exchequer, for the which the Lord may remember him. When Abraham
went to sacrifice Isaac upon Mount Moriah, Genesis 22.2. Heb. 11.22.
when Moses forsook the pomp of Pharohs Court, to sustain afflictions with
Gods people, 1. King. 18.4.
when Obadiah hid and relieved the Lords Prophets: Job. 31.20.
When Job caused the loins of the poor to bless him, when Mary Magdalen
washed our Saviors feet, Luke 7.38.
and wiped them with the hairs of her head, every one of these had whereof the
Lord might remember him: Here we see that those who warm the loins of the
poor and are an eye to the blind, have that for which the Lord might remember
them.
Therefore let your light so shine before men, that they seeing your good
works may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. Here we see the men for
whom our heavenly Father is glorified, are such whose works shine before men,
who warm the loins of the poor, and with their knowledge are an eye to the
blind. I can hardly believe that God ever made any creature only to behold
their glorious outsides; neither Star, Pearl, Flower, or fethered Foul, but
to have influence, virtues and qualities beneficial to mankind: much less a
man to know only, or an Art only to to be known, but all to his glory and
man's service; which to effect, is all the glory of man to keep the
Commandments. Pure religion is seen not in affected words, but in the effect
of charitable works.
Who commends a Schoolmaster whose Scholars can say and understand their
Rules, but speak not and write not any good styles by them: A Captain, whose
Soldiers can skill of millitary terms and orders, unless their acts and
exploits of war be suitable. Who prayseth a Courser that feeds well, or
pranceth proudly, but is not deedy for the race, or travel, speed or length.
Little says the Scripture of the learning of the Apostles, but much of their
acts, these are the richest, and usual styles of commendation in Scripture.
Number. 14.19.20. Acts 10.2.
Moses, a man mighty in words and deeds. Cornelius, a man fearing God, and
giving much Alms. The Centurion worthy of favor, for he has built us a
Synagogue. Acts 9, 39.
Dorcas made thus many coats for the poor, etc. Such benefactors their works
shall follow them and praise them in the gates here, yea, and at the great Day
obtain that, Come ye blessed of my Father, for I was naked, and you clothed
me, I was hungry, and you fed me, for such men God is blessed of men, and such
men shall be blessed of God in their deeds: and as the more knowing without
doing, shall procure the more stripes, so the more doing with knowing, shall
have double honor, because God was double honored in them: Reu. 22.12.
Behold, I come quickly, and my reward is in my hand, to give every man
according to his deeds: Reu. 22.14.
Blessed are they that keep my Cammandements: If you know them, and do them
not, miserable are you, but these things if you know and do them, you are the
happiest men living.

Of all men I hold them most wretched and selfe-condemned, Here are all those
condemned, who intend not to be dooers of the Commandments, as well as
hearers.
that bend their studies to divinity, not tending to be dooers, as well as
Students and Preachers; not much wiser are such as will be precise Professors
of Religion, but not Practisioners. Oh that here were not too many such to be
found in these days. They may fitly be resembled to such as plow and sow all
the year, and never reap, to the Grasshopper that sings all the Summer, and
wants in the Winter, to women ever conceiving, and never coming to the birth:
and best of all, to that of Christ, comparing some hearers unto fools that
build on the sand of bare hearing and professing, Mat. 7.26, 27.
who think that all Religion consists in hearing Sermons, neglecting the
performance, but the wise are they that build on the rock of doing,
vnshakeable. Search all the Scripture, and see if any covenants or grants were
made to hearing or knowing, and not all to doing the Commandments: is not the
ancient tenor of the law; do this, and live: and the Gospel, repent believe,
and live, Mat. 12.50.
which implying sundry consequences and fruits of it. He that does my Fathers
will, he is my brother and sister, not every one that says, Lord, Mat. 7.21.
Lord, but he that does my fathers will; to him that does ill, shall be
tribulation and anguish to every soul of Jew and Grecian, Romans 2.8.9, 10.
to him that does well, shall be honor and and peace to all the Israel of God.
Unto whom shall that Euge be given at that great day, but to the dooer? and in
what form, but well done, thou good servant, that have not buried thy Talent
in a Napkin; he himself expresses the manner. Behold, I come quickly, my
reward is in my hand, to give every man according to his works: Blessed is
every one that does my Commandments, that he may ^ate of the Tree of life; and
enter tho^ow the gates into the City: In all which happiness in this life, and
that to come is confirmed upon the living acts and exercises, not upon the dead
habits of any grace whatsoever: In all labor there is abundance; but in the
conceits of the brain, and talk of the lips, nothing but emptiness and
misery.

Next to Gods glory and a man's own good, a Christian places much happiness
in winning and edifying others, 1. Cor. 12.10.
to which purpose a speechles life has more life in it then alive speech. So
Chrysostom commends a good life, above afar profession: For it is able,
says he, to confute and convert Pagans; withal he tells us, they have a
louder language then the sun and Moon, whose sound yet goes over all the
world, publishing Gods glory: therefore says Christ to his Disciples, go and
tell, not what you have heard me preach, but saw me do. How the blind receive
sight, etc. If I do not such works as none other has done before me, The
best course for us to take to win others, is to be doers of that we profess.
I desire not men to believe in me. By these courses Peter would have
Christians win their neighbors, and wives their husbands, rather the^ by
tutering of them: then would neighbors follow one another to the right
Religion and true Church, as Tradsme^ do to those markets where they see them
gather wealth fastest; yea imitate their lives, and bring forth fruits as
Jacobs sheep, if they saw their rods speckled with works, as well as with
words: thus saint Augustines famous mother, taught one of her neighbor
Gentlewomen, complaining of her churlish Nabal, and wondering how she won her
perverse husband, why says she, I observed his mind, and pleased him in all
indifferent things, forbore him in his passions, gave him all content in diet,
and attendance, and so have made him first Gods, and then mine by degrees.
These are the Arts and charms, that if they were now used by one Christian to
another, would cover multitudes of sins, and convert multitudes of sinners.
These things mind and exercise, these things if you know and do, you shall
save your selves and those you live withal, and so be every way blessed men.

The doers of the Commandments are only blessed
Thus we see, that doing the Commandments only, brings in the blessedness
without which all our knowing makes and leaves us, but dishonorable to God,
uncomfortable to our selves, scandalous to others; in no nearer keeping the
Commandments, then Balaam, Judas, and the devil himself, who the more they
know, the worse for them, the more sin, and the more punishment. If knowing
made up blessedness, England were an happy Nation, out times as happy as ever
any, but if doing be required, great is the felicity of both questionless: the
more any man knows or professes to know, and the less they do, the more they
do dishonor God.

And what are such themselves the better for their knowledge: They which know
them and do them not, they do increase their sorrow.
but as the Preacher speaks in another sense. He that increases such
knowledge, adds sorrow. What a misery is it for a man to have no inward
faithful knowledge or affection to the Gospel, nor better proof of his love
thereto, then that he carried it always about him, at his Girdle. My meaning
is not to tax Bible carrying, and Christian conference which I hold a better
grace then Boots, Spurs and Rapiers, on Sundays, or Fannes of Feathers, and
top-gallant Ensigns of vanity every day, but only to show the foppery of them
that carry Gods word and law, not in their hearts but only in their heads, or
in their memories or understandings. Let these be as wise as they may in their
own conceits, to me they are no better then Asses which carry dainty burdens,
but taste not of them, Verily a man knows no more rightly then he Practices:
it is said of Christ, he knew no sin, because he did no sin, and in that
sense, he knows no good that does no good. He that will obey, shall know my
Fathers will, and such as will not do what they know to be good, The abuse of
that we know will be the chief cause to deprive us of it.
shall soon unknow that which they know, it being just with God to punish
shipwreck of a good conscience, with the fraught of knowledge, according to
that imprecation in the Epistle to the Hebrews, that if they should abuse
their skill in music, their right hand might forget his cunning, and their
tongue cleave to the roof of their mouth, from which just Judgment it comes
to pass, that many become colder in matters of Religion, and keeping the
Commandents: For, a good understanding have all they that do thereafter, and
cursed are all such as know these things, and do the clean contrary: Cursed,
I say are they because they not only cast away themselves, but also lay a
stumbling block before others, both weak ones within, and bad ones without,
such as these know God, and yet deny him in their lives, and are reprobates to
every good work; such as buy by one Balance, and sell by another, have a
form of knowledge, which they pretend in themselves, and prescribe to others,
with all severe severity, and live themselves in secret by contrary rules.
Friends in show, but indeed Enemies to the Cross of Christ, Phil. 3.18.
unclean beasts, for all the chewing of the Cud, which makes men mislike, not
only their persons, but the very religion which they profess in the highest
streine of stricktnesse. I wonder with what face such can call themselves
Christians, or with what ears can hear themselves so called; does any man
look to be accounted a Carpenter, that calls himself so, but never squares
timber, nor erected frames; therefore to all hearers and goers to Sermons I
say, play not the fools as most do, hear not to hear, go not to Church as
many now adays do, for fashion sake or to get an opinion of zeal, or as boys
go into the water to play and paddle there only, not to wash and be clean.

Therefore let us all that lay claim to that honorable name, Let us therefore
do the works of Christians and so approve our selves.
do the works of Christians and thereby approve your selves to God and man,
as the Angel to Manoch who being asked of his name, made answer, It was
wonderful, and did wonderfully ascend in the flame, and made good his name by
his action. The art of doing is that which requires study, strength and divine
assistance: do the sins that swarm in our times, proceed from ignorance, or
incontinence rather, and wilfulnes? It were happy if men had that plea; if the
light were not so great, the times and the nations had not sin, who amongst
us is so ignorant but he knows that Idolatry, swearing, stabbing, whoring,
and excessive drinking are sins, and that for these things comes the anger of
God? Is any so simple that he knows not the ten Commandments, and the sum of
the Gospel yet how desperately do men rush on the pikes, carelessly, and
wittingly willingly, seeing the gulf, and yet leaping into it. Upon this
therefore do I wish Christians would set prices, and spend their studies, even
about the art of doing the Conmandements. But here some may ask, how shall we
attain this facility and faculty of doing? I answer, to wish it, Good desires
is the best half, especially when it breeds prayer for the dead.
and heartily to desire it is half, yea and the best half of the work, for a
man or woman, to effect goodness above cunning is a good sign, and a good
help and step to be such an one, especially when this desire breeds prayer
for power to do, knowing that without Christ we can do just nothing:
therefore let every one of us do that we should do, and blessed are we. If we
know that Baal be God, if Rome be the true Church, let us turn to it again;
if we know that swearing, dicing, swaggering, and foolish fashion following be
good things; let us all fall to do those things: but if God has given us the
truth and the light, let us walk in it, and work by it while it is to day,
lest if we play revel and riot, by it the Candlestick be removed, and the
light put out: if purity, sanctity, and sobriety, be known to us to be good
things, and pleasing to God to keep the Commandments, and delight therein, O
happy then, thrice blessed are we if we do them.

Therefore to conclude, though I confess my self unworthy to write, The
consideration of the blessedness of that man, that delights in the
commandments should move us to get our part therein.
yet I beseech you let my counsel be acceptable to the Reader; that is, let
every one of us get some part in the Commandments, for the which the Lord may
remember us, and the remembrance whereof may be a comfort to us at the hour
of death, let us provide with Joseph in the time of plenty against the day of
scarcity,. John. 92
the night comes when no man can work: God loves a living sacrifice, and a
cheerful giver: therefore let us think with Titus Vespasian we have lost they
day wherein we have not done some good. O what a blessed hour shall that be,
wherein our souls shall expire with Hezekias words: Esa. 38.3.
I beseech thee O Lord remember how I have walked before thee in truth, and
with a perfect heart and have done that which is good in thy sight. Iud. 5.21.
Then may we say with Deborah, O my soul thou have marched valiantly. Psalm.
116.7.
Yea then may we say with David; Return unto thy rest O my soul, for the Lord
has rewarded thee. Death is the worlds strict door keeper, and will see, 1.
Tim. 6.7.
that as we brought nothing into the world, so we shall carry forth nothing
again: yet can he not hinder us from that blessedness which the Oracle of
heaven has proclaimed to all those that delight in the Commandments: Blessed
are the dead which die in the Lord, they rest from their labors, and their
works follow them. Reu. 14.13.
Let us consider, that only our good works will be our companions to heaven
they shall be our honor in life, our comfort in death, and our crown at the
last resurrection: beseeching him to enable us with grace for the performance
of all thy Commandments, for thy truth, and for thy names sake, Amen.

VERSE 2. His seed shall be mighty upon earth, the generation of the righteous
shall be blessed.
Having spoken of the blessedness of that man that fears the Lord, and
delights in his Commandments. Now in this Verse the Prophet David shows
the happy success of this blessed man; His seed shall be mighty upon earth,
etc. That is, they shall not only have spiritual grace, but also right unto,
and the right use of all the benefits of this life: True obedience bring
outward prosperity.
for true obedience to Gods Commandments, though it be not perfect, brings
the blessing of God upon us for outward things, as well as for inward.

This is promised in Deuteronomie, where Moses speaks thus unto the people of
Israel: Deu. 28.2. etc.
If thou shall obey diligently the voice of the Lord thy God, and observe and
do all his Commandments, which I command thee this day, then the Lord thy God
will set thee on high above all the nations of the earth, and all those
blessings shall come to thee, etc. Belssed shall thou be in the city, and
blessed also in the field, 2. Cor. 9.7.
etc. Showing that true and faithful obedience is that which brings all
manner of blessings for body and soul, for name and estate; yea, and for seed
and posterity also: and therefore the Apostle tells Timothy, 1. Tim. 6.5.
that godliness is great gain, and that it has the promises of this life,
and of the life to come. In which regard David says, I have been young, and
now am old, yet have I not seen the righteous forsaken, ^sal. 4 ^. 25.
nor his seed begging bread: therefore David's speech is well to be observed; for
he does not say, the righteous is never forsaken, How to understand David's
words.
but I never saw it; speaking there of his own experience and observation: he
had seen (and so may we) that children of great men have broken forth into
many horrible sins, and so have been brought to a strange and miserable and
violent death, and many woeful straits and extremities before their death: but
he never saw, neither shall we see, the godly seed of godly men forsaken, of
God and men, and left as vagabonds to beg their bread, but God has ever had
(and still will have) a special care of them, and ever made all necessary
provision for them, either he himself by a more particular providence of his,
casts sufficency of these outward things upon the^, or blesses their
labors, so that they are made a means of maintenance unto them, or if they
fail that way, he moves the hearts of some other of his servants to pity
them, and to supply their wants, so that whatsoever their necessities be, they
are freede from that curse that is denounced against the seed of the wicked, to
wit, that they should wander up and down as vagrants, begging their bread, and
making a trade of that vile wretched course of life.

Nothing that is needful shall be wanting, when Gods favor is not.
Teaching us this much, that nothing that is needful shall be wanting to those
that are in the favor of the Lord, such as have his favor shall have all good
blessings flowing to them, and following of them. David does notably confirm
this in many of his Psalms, as in the three and twentieth Psalm where
professing God to be his shepherd, makes this inference thereupon: Therefore
I shall not want, Psalm. 23.1.6.
but doubtless, kindness, and mercy shall follow me all the days of my
life; Psa. 34 9.10
and again, the Lions do lack and suffer hunger, but they which seek the
Lord shall want nothing that is good: Psalm. 84.11.
also David says, the Lord God is a sun and a shield unto us, the Lord will
give grace and glory, and no good thing will he withhold from them that walk
uprightly. And is not this the blessing that is promised to such as fear the
Lord, that all good things should flow unto them from heaven and earth, that
they shall be hlessed in the house, in the field, in their basket, in their
store, in the fruit of their bodies, in the increase of their cattle and in
the abundance of all things, Let no man doubt of this truth, for God is the
Governor of heaven and earth and the di^^oser of all things.
thus we see, that where Gods favor is there is want of nothing that is
needful. And there is cause why we should rest fully resolved of this point,
that none of Gods household shall ever want necessary relief, because all will
yield that God is the Governor of heaven and earth, and the disposer of all
things in them both, and then they must grant further, that those that are
best, and do best, shall speed best, because God loves them most; and how
then can we make question whether or no, the Lord will bestow upon them a
competent measure, and a comfortable use of these earthly blessings, seeing all
is in his hand, and he wishes so well unto his own people; especially seeing
he has straightly charged us, not to care what we shall eat or drink, Mat.
6.25.
or what we shall put on, but first to seek the kingdom of God and his
righteousness, promising us faithfully, that if we do so all other things
shall be cast upon us.

And as he has promised this, so has he from time to time performed it, If
we will prosper in our outward estate, we must thrive in piety.
as we may observe throughout the book of Judges, of Samuel, and of the
Chronicles, for there it is to be seen, that when godliness prospered in the
souls of Gods people, they prospered their outward estate, and when sin (on
the other side) had made havoc in their souls, then the Madianites, and the
Philistims and other enemies, made havoc in their country, when they and
their kings thriued in piety, and did grow in the knowledge of God and zeal
of his glory, then it went well with them for outward plenty and abundance,
but when Idolatry and impiety, began once to thrive in their hearts, and in
their land, they never had long nor settled prosperity, but their enemies
hands and swords prevailed against them, for taking away of their lives, and
the ruinating of their estates.

Sinful courses can never prosper.
First, here is matter of terror for all wicked worldlings that think to
advantage and advance themselves by sinful and and naughty courses, that is
an ill way to rise, for the riches of iniquity shall not prosper, Pro. 10.2.
Iere. 22.23.24.
though they build their houses never so high, and advance their nests unto the
stars, yet the Lords hand shall pull them thence, and cast them down into
the very dust: they think their houses, their names, and their substance shall
remain for ever, and that they shall make themselves and theirs, by joining
house to house, and land to land, by oppressing the poor and needy, and by
defrauding the fatherless and widow, and such as cannot right themselves; but
alas, they little consider in the mean while, that God is the Judge of the
world, and that he will reward every man according to his works; they imagine
their estate shall be according to their wealth, and so it might be indeed,
if God were not the governor of the world, but since he is so, it shall go
with every one according to that he is, and not according to that he has: and
therefore as God would have it proclaimed to the godly, Isa. 3.10.
say ye, surely it shall go well with the just, for they shall eat the
fruit of their works: so he would have this denounced against the ungodly, Woe
be to the wicked, it shall be evil with him for the reward of his hands shall
be given him, Esa. 3.11.
they shall reap that which they have sowed. It were and absurd thing for one
that has sown nothing but cockle and fitches to exspect a good crop of wheat,
and as contrary to all reason is it for the^ that sow iniquity to think they
shall reap any thing but affliction, they may delude themselves with vain
hopes, but they shall never obtain any happiness and prosperity from the Lord
nay surely he hates both the^ and their practices, and therefore they and their
wicked seed shall be rooted out, as we may see it verified in many of the
kings of Israel, as in Jeroboam, Ahab Baasha, etc. And most notably in that
place of Jeremy, concerning Iehoiakim the son of Josiah, woe unto him, says
the Lord, that builds his house by unrighteousness, Ier. 22.13.89.
and his Chambers without equity, he uses his neighbor without wages, and
gives him not for his works, etc. Shall thou reign because thou closest thy
self in Cedar? did not thy Father eat and drink and prosper, when he
executed Judgment and Justice? etc. Where is declared in the example of
Josiah, Ios. 11.23. No certain way to prosper in, but in the practice of
godliness, for that brings all true honor and prosperity.
the godly Father on the one side, that the true knowledge of God, and the
practice of godliness and righteousness, brings all true honor and
prosperity; and on the other side in the example of Iehoiakim, the wicked son
is showed, that impiety joined with oppression; and cruelty with fraud and
deceit, and injurious dealing, man lives a base and dishonorable life, and
dies a shameful and Ignominious death, as we see it many times comes to
pass, that while he is in the World, he shall live undesired, and when he
goes out of the World, he shall die unlamented.

The best way to thrive in all the world is, to get Religion into our hearts.
Therefore let this encourage men, if they would have good things either in
right or in possession, to labor to get Religion into their hearts, and to be
as much afraid of sin as of misery, and as desirous of grace, as they are of
prosperity: which if we could do, we should find Gods eyes open to consider of
us, and his hand to relieve us continually in all our wants and necessities.
And as we should be thus careful for our selves, so we should be also for
our children, there is no good parent but would wish his children might be
provided for, and live in the World in good sort, now here is the way to
purchase them a good estate in the earth, use the means to bring them unto the
fear of God, and to have faith in God, for when the Lions that are full of
might, and rage and cruelty, do lack and suffer hunger, then they that seek
the Lord shall want nothing that is good, Psalm. 34.10
God will have a care that his sheep shall have convenient pasture, and be in
good liking, though the Lions be pined and hunger-starued, and when strong and
mighty men are in misery, want, and necessity, Heq. 13.15.
yet then Gods poor and weak servants shall have that will satisfy and
content them, for God has said, that he will never leave them nor forsake
them: therefore are they the most provident and wise Parents, that bring up
their children in the instruction and information of the Lord, for such shall
possess the earth, and the generation of the righteous shall be blessed. Psalm.
37.11.
Children are not always the better for the goods of their Parents, but they
are always the better for their goodness, for as we have it here, the
generation of the righteous shall be blessed; it is more then if it had been
said, they shall enjoy honor, credit, wealth, and whatsoever outward blessing
else can be named, for that implies thus much; that they shall have the good
gifts of God, so far as they are needful for them, and that they shall have
the right use of them to their comfort. Here is great consolation for Gods
children, they shall not want some to relieve them.


Secondly, here is a singular comfort for Gods children that are in many wants
and necessities, so long as there is any godly man or woman that will do any
thing for Christ his sake, for their own comforts sake, they shall not be
destitute of relief, for God has commanded his servants to succor them, and
has made many gracious promises to such as are merciful, and will bear the
burdens of others, and if men should fail them, the Lord himself will look
unto them, who beholds their troubles, and sees their tears, and is acquainted
with all their griefs, and he that bids others to be merciful, he will not be
unmerciful himself, and therefore it is, that men do deny us help, and
comfort many times, because God would have us draw nearer unto him, whose eyes
are ever upon us, and whose ears are always open to hear the cries of the
poor, and of those that are humbled before him.

The wicked flourish.
But here some may object and say, that the wicked and profane persons live in
all manner of plenty, when the godly sustain penury and scarcity, and in
appearance, godliness is not the best course to procure a happy and prosperous
estate: to this I answer, that howsoever the wicked of the World seem to
thrive best, and to enjoy great matters, in comparison of that which good
Christians have, yet in truth their case is nothing so good as is the case of
Gods servants, for though they be pressed and pinched with many distresses and
wants, and driven to many extremities and straights, yet they may be fuller of
joy in the midst of their aflictions, then the wicked are in the midst of
their iollity, Act. 16.25
Paul and Silas were fuller of gladness, and of true contentedness in the
Dungeon, The children of God have more joy in the midst of their afflictions,
the^ the wicked have in their greatest iollity.
when their feet were fast in the Stocks, then Herod was on his Throne, having
all flatterers about him, to extol and magnify him, the very tears of the
people of God, are sweeter and more comfortable then the greatest of carnal
men can be, for the Lord is with his in mercy and goodness, Psalm. 37.16.
where as his face is bent against the wicked and impudent, and thence it is,
that a little that the righteous has, is better then great riches of the
ungodly: better is a dinner of green herbs, seasoned with the blessing of
God, then many dainty dishes poisoned with Gods wrath and malediction. If the
saints of God should want outward things, yet they shall have Gods favor.
Psalm. 84.11.


And albeit, the Saints of God be sometimes deprived of these things, yet they
shall never be deprived of Gods favor, and that want of outward things, shall
be supplied with inward graces, they have a sure promise, that they shall have
sufficient, and God never gives less then he promises, but many times he
gives more then we expect; and if that which is wanting in dross be paid
home in good gold, we need not to complain, as if we were losers by such an
exchange, therefore says says Solomon, Prou. 2.20.21.22.
Walk thou in the way of good men, and keep the ways of the righteous, for
the just shall dwell in the Land, and the upright men shall remain in it, bue
the wicked shall be cut off from the earth, and the transgressors shall be
rooted out.

Thirdly, this shows us a difference betwixt the favor of God, and the favor
of men, true it is, the favor of Princes and of great men brings with it many
priueledges and preferments, but they cannot assure us if every good thing,
neither are they able to do all things that they would, yea many times they are
prevented by sudden death, before opportunity be offered to manifest their
love, and when they do show favor unto any, how unstable is it, and how
uncertain this Hammon found; to day he is honored, Est. 71.10. There is
great difference between the favor of God, and favor of men.
to morrow hanged, but it is otherwise with God, his favor brings with it a
supply of all things needful, and they that rely upon it shall never be
deceived nor disappoynted, but may be assured of it.

His seed shall be mighty upon earth. The favor of God is to be sought above
all things.
From hence we learn that Gods favor does make supply of all things needful,
let us seek then and labor for his favor before all things, for if this be
not wanting, no blessing shall be; this is the maine and mother blessing, so
that if we can obtain it, we shall obtain all other blessings whatsoever,
we see how far men will go, what labor and pains they will endure, and all
for the favor of a Prince, Psalm. 4.
whose breath is in his Nosthrils, and whose thoughts perish, and yet no King
can be so bountiful to his fauouries, as is the God of Heaven: excellent
things shall be done to the man whom the King does honor, but far more
excellent to him whom the Lord does favor: why then do we no more respect his
love? why do we not use the means to become gracious in his eyes? Oh let us
all seek his favor before the favor of Princes, let us seek his face
evermore.

Fourthly, this teaches us to have our conversation without covetousness, which
is as insatiable as the grave, in every estate and condition learn to depend
upon the Lords prouide^ces, Commit thy way unto the Lord, and trust in him,
Psalm. 37.5.
and he shall bring it to pass. Use no unlawful means, take not any indirect
course for the obtaining of wealth or supplying our wants, for God has engaged
his promise and his truth, to see our needs supplied.

Lastly, let it comfort the children of God in the midst of all the miseries
of this mortal life; Nothing can make us miserable, where Gods favor is not
wanting.
for what can make us miserable, seeing we enjoy the favor of God, and the
light of his countenance, which is the Fountain of all good, and the ground of
all other mercies whatsoever: what Elkanah said to Hannah, complaining for want
of children, may Gods favor speak to all that have their parts in it, in
every distress. Am not I unto thee instead of riches, wealth, glory and
greatness in the world? surely yes, it is instead of these, and better then
all these unto us; let therefore the inioyment of this serve for a supply for
all our wants, of what kind soever; let us make Gods favor to be that unto us
which we want, for he that can assure himself of this, has a sufficient
salve for every sore.

There is no certain way to advance our selves, but true religion and piety.
The generation of the righteous shall be blessed. Hence we learn that
Religion and true piety, is the ready way to the highest advancement that can
be, therefore let us set our hearts chiefly thereupon, and above all the
treasures in the World, principally to effect that: we count it good husbandry
to seek after those things that will do us most good, if silver be offered,
we will prefer it before brass; and if gold be offered, we will take it
rather then silver. Now concerning this heavenly wisdom it is said, Pro.
8.10.11
Receive mine instruction, and not silver; and knowledge rather then fine gold;
for wisdom is better then precious stones, and all treasures are not to be
compared unto her. And this should encourage us rather to use all industry for
the obtaining of this blessed estate, because it is a thing haue-able: it were
in vain for a base person to sue to be a King, a Duke, or a Lord, none almost
is so foolish as to seek for such preferments, because they know it would be
but lost labor, but there is not the meanest Servant, Slave, or Bondsman, but
may attain to this spiritual dignity, which is far beyond all the advancement
that the Kingdoms of this world can possibly yield: he that can pray, hear,
meditate, confer, and with all good care and conscionable respect, use all Gods
ordinances for the obtaining of faith and other graces, which do ever
accompany the same, shall be sure of good and happy success; for the Lord will
be found of those that seek him with a true heart, therefore let us not so
cast our eyes on earthly commodities, as that in the mean time we neglect
this pearl of price, and this inestimable Jewel, that will so exceedingly
enrich us: 2. Cor. 9.21
the Apostle tells us, that those that run in a raze for a prize, though it
be but a Garland that is set up, yet they will put off all that might clog and
hinder them in their race, but especially if they should run for a Crown of
gold, neither will they be so foolish to stoop down to take up every pin or
point that lies in the way, and yet they run but at an uncertainty, when they
have done their best, another may carry away both the honor and commodity from
them: from all which the Apostle would have us draw this conclusion, that if
such kind of persons will so bestirre themselves, and seek to acquit
themselves every way like men, then much more ought we to put our selves to it,
since we run not at an uncertainty, Only the godly are sure to obtain the
Crown.
but are sure to obtain the Crown, one shall not prevent nor deprive another,
but all shall undoubtedly get that which they do expect, and shall attain
unto not a fading and vanishing, but an abiding and everlasting dignity, they
shall be blessed: but here some may say, if we bestow our pains and endeavor
so much about spiritual things, in the mean time we shall neglect those
earthly things that are needful, and so bring our selves to poverty. I
answer, not so, for provision of our everlasting estate does never impair our
present estate: 1. Tim. 4 8.
For Godliness has the promises of this life, and of that which is to come,
and thereby shall all matters be blessed unto us.

Of all men they are the husbands, that labor most for grace.
Seeing therefore they that spend their pains in seeking of grace, shall never
lose their labor, nor miss of their mark, but always obtain that which
they do desire, and when once they have possession of it, it will abide with
them, they cannot lose it though they would, it is so durable and permanent
that it will never decay, and so united and ingrafted into the nature of the
parties, that it can by no possible means be wholly taken away; and therefore
as in other things, so in this, the continuance of it adds greatly unto the
worth of it, 1. Pet* 4.
for grace is a perpetual inheritance that far surpasses all that the world
can afford: a man must leave all his earthly inheritance and abundance he
knows not how soon, neither can his great pomp descend into the grave with
him, neither can he so make it over unto his seed, Psalm. 49.17.
but that they may be defrauded of it; but the heavenly treasure is ours
whiles we live, and when we die, and after death, yea at, and after the
resurrection for evermore: and as the perpetuity, so also the excellency of
this in it own nature should be a forcible motive unto us, and set an edge
upon our affections to pursue after it continually, for whereas other things
are dangerous and hurtful, Godliness is profitable in this life, and in the
life to come
this is always profitable and helpful, it makes us blessed in this present
life, and in the life to come; it brings with it the comfort of the spirit,
the feeling of Gods love and favor, and the comfortable use of all outward
good things, we are not likely, at least not certain to continue here many
days, and what an unspeakable comfort then is it to be assured that when we
go from men we shall go to God, and when we leave the earth, Though man
should forsake us, yet God will not leave us comfortles.
we shall inherit heaven, that we shall have peace at our death, and glory
after our death: if the pestilence enter into our houses, or take hold on our
persons, when none dare come unto us, then God will be with us, though our
bodies be infected, yet our souls can never be so infected, if we have
grace in our hearts, but that God dares to enter into our houses to visit us,
and when our souls shall be parted from our bodies, he will not think it too
much to give them a place of rest with himself in his own kingdom, and at
length unite them to our bodies again, that they may enjoy everlasting bliss
together, this generation of the righteous shall be blessed.

First, therefore seeing religion is such an incomparable treasure, True piety
is the only means to reform our crooked ways.
this should teach us to have the means in due estimation, whereby we may be
made truly religious, by which our minds that are blind may be enlightened,
our hearts of crooked may be made straight, of proud may be made humble, and
of fraudulent may be made true and faithful; and those means are the word and
sacrament, prayer and the like, which are steps whereby we must ascend unto
this honorable estate, for it is as possible for men to make stayres to climb
up into the sky, as for us without these to ascend unto heaven by any devices
of our own framing.

The word of God preached is the chiefest means to loose us from the bonds of
sin and satan.
Secondly, the word is the key that must open hell gates to set us at liberty
from the bonds of sin, of satan, and of death, and to unlock heaven gates
that we may have entrance into glory, in which respect it is, that Christ
says unto Peter, that he would give unto him, and consequently to all
ministers of the Gospel, the keys of the kingdom of heaven; that is, the
dispensation of the word and sacraments, which makes the way into heaven lie
open to all such as by faith receive the same into their hearts, so that we
should not come unto the means with a base conceit or light estimation
thereof, but with a large and ample desire and exspectation of taking benefit
thereby; if men can once espy away how they may rise in the world, either in
great wealth or promotion, they will be most industrious and laborious in that
course, they will refuse no pains in seed time, though the weather be
unseasonable and cold, and their work every way troublesome, but they will put
themselves to it with all care and industry, in hope though it be but an
uncertain hope of bettering their estate, so those that live by fayres and
markets, will not fail one of them ordinarily, neither heat nor cold, wind
nor rain, nor any the like impediments shall hinder them from pursuing the
commodity, and why then should we be negligent and play the sluggards while our
seede-time lasts, and the Lord bids us plow up the fallow ground of our
hearts, Ierem. 4.
that he may sow therein the seed of life, which will never fail to yield us a
plentiful harvest if we can wait upon him for the same? and why should we be
slack and careless when our chief market days and fair days come, and not
rather set our hearts and endeavors to seek after those things, which all that
seek shall find, and being found will make us blessed for evermore?

Therefore we ought to break through all impediments, and swallow up al
difficulties with the consideration of this, that our iourny tends not to the
getting of some small commodity, or to the purchasing of some worldly
possessions, but that we are traveling toward our own country, where we
shall receive an inualuable and eternal crown of glory: and albeit we must
pass through many rough and craggy and thorny ways, and meet with sundry
things that will be very irksome and unpleasant, The deficulty of the way
should not hinder us.
yet let us make account with all, that we shall find many sweee comforts, and
joys unspeakable and glorious, in the midst of our pilgrimages and in the end
shall have the fruition of that blessedness which will make amends for all.

Now that our desires may be futher enlarged toward heaven, and our
affections the better withdrawn from the love of this deceitful life, and
world of vanities, let us meditate on those complete joys, which no tongue
indeed is able to express, or heart of man conceive, for if their estate be
so blessed in this life, what shall their happiness be when they depart out
of this life, The happiness of the life to come
to have the fruition of those joys which are prepared for the Saints in the
kingdom of glory, where all tears shall be wiped away from their eyes, and
they being altogether freed from sin and sorrow, shall receive an immortal
crown of blessedness with the Saints and Angels in Gods own presence, where
is fullness of Joy, Psalm. 16.11.
and at whose right hand are pleasures for evermore. Therefore I may say with
the Apostle, no eye has seen, no ear has heard, neither has it entered into
the heart of man, 1. Cor. 2.9.
what unspeakable joys God has prepared for them that love him. If it be so
says an ancient Father, what can I do else, but lift up mine eyes to heaven,
mine ears to God, and my heart to Paradise, to see and understand what I can
comprehend upon earth; and therefore my soul longs after thee O God, and
sigheth till it see the brightness of thy face, O kingdom of everlasting
bliss, where thou O Lord, the hope of all Saints art, rejoicing them on every
side with thy blessed sight. If the wise men of the East came so far off, and
rejoiced to see Christ in the manger. What will it be in the sight of his elect
to see him in his glory? If John Baptist a babe sprang in his mothers womb for
joy of Christ so newly conceived, and not yet seen. What shall his real
presence do in his royal kingdom, but even ravish with joy our very hearts
and souls, when we shall continually enjoy his most glorious sight, for it
passes all other glory that the Saints have in heaven, and to receive the
beams of glory from the brightness of his Majesty. If Salomons servants were
accounted happy (of Sheha the Southern queen) for their daily living in the
Court of Solomon, and hearing of his wisdom, how happy then and thrice
blessed shall the Saints and servants of God be accounted, that live
continually in the Court of heaven, the very paradise and Palace of God
himself? O how happy and blessed is he which with the only desire and love
of eternity pineth away; such a one is neither proud with prosperity, nor
cast down with adversity, for as he has nothing in this world that he
loves, so is there no loss of any thing in this life that he fears. Sweet
is the fountain to the weary traveler, and rest to the tired servant;
comfortable is the cool evening after a hot Sunny day; yet much more sweet
will it be to the Saints of this heavenly city to have peace after war,
pleasure after pain, joy after trouble, and constant security after their so
long endured sorrows, then shall we blessed indeed as here the Prophet says.

If one Sun can lighten and fill the whole world with his brightness, Dan.
3.12. Mat. 13 43
what shall so many glorified bodies of the blessed appear, that shall be as
so many Suns, so many Lamps, and so many shining Lights in heaven? then
shall we blessed indeed, when we shall be like unto God, 1. Ioh. 3.2. 1. Cor.
13.
which by nature is blessed, and we shall be like unto God when we shall see
him as he is; for this only sight of God is our whole happiness. O what a joy
shall it be when at one view, we shall behold the most high and hidden
mystery of the inseparable Trinity, and of the love of God therein: then shall
man's mind have perpetual rest and peace, neither shall it desire any further
understanding, when he has all before his eyes, that may be understood, then
shall man's will be quiet, when he enjoys that felicity, wherein all other
good things, as in the fountain of all happiness are contained, then shall
faith have her perfect work, and hope shall enjoy that which she long
desired; but charity shall endure for ever: then shall be sung continual
praises unto the Lamb, Reu. 14.3.
and the song (although it be always song) yet it shall be ever new, the joy,
mirrh, melody, pleasure, power, wealth, riches, honor, beauty, fellowship
dainties, odors, glory, wisdom, knowledge, treasure, securities, peace,
quietness, and eternal felicity, is beyond al understanding and
comprehension of man which the faithful shall have and enjoy world without
end, with God the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost, with Angels, and
Archangels, Patriarchs and Prophets, with the Apostles and Evangelists, with
the Martyrs and Confessors, and with the Saints of God, in the palace of the
Lord in heaven, there shall be an everlasting Sabbath, which no evening shall
end, then shall the geneartion of the righteous be fully blessed.

There we shall rest, and we shall see, No content but in the kingdom of heaven.
we shall see, and we shall love; we shall love, and we shall praise. Behold,
says Augustine, That which is the end, is without end: For what other end is
there ordained for the godly, but to attain to that Kingdom which has no end.
We call Paradise our Country, and the Patriarchs our Fathers; and the Saints
our brethren and friends. Why run we not then with all speed to enjoy our
country, and salute our Parents? a great number of our friends and kinsfolks,
brethren and children, do there attend, wishing and expecting our coming,
what joy will it be both to them and us, there to meet one another? what
pleasures are there amongst the inhabitants of heaven, which now fear death no
more, and are sure to live for ever? Those whose understandings are darkened,
cannot see their happiness.
Woe to the blindness of our eyes that see not this, woe to the deafness of
our ears that hear not this in such wise as a we should do, where through we
might be so far from fearing death, that rather we should wish it, with old
Simeon, Luke 2.29.
Now let thy servant depart in peace: Psalm. 42.2.
and with David, when shall I come and appear before thee, that we may be
blessed for evermore.

Thirdly, If true faith were placed in our hearts, fear would vanish away.
if true knowledge and faith possessed our hearts as they should, fear and
doubtfulnesse would vanquish quite away, for assurance of heavenly things,
makes us willing to part with earthly, he cannot contemn this life that
knows not the other, if we would despise this world, we must think of the
glorious life that follows it, and if we can endure pain for health, much
more should we abide a few pangs for glory, how foolish are we to fear a
vanquished enemy? Christ has triumphed over death, it bleedeth (as it were)
and gaspeth under us, Death being conquered, we should desire to be
dissolved, and to be with Christ.
and yet do we tremble, it is enough that Christ dyed, neither would he have
dyed, but that we might dye with safety and pleasure: how truly may we say of
this our David, thou art worth ten thousand of us, yea, worth a world of
Angels, yet he dyed for us; who would therefore live that knows his Savior
dyed? Who can be a Christian, and would not be like him, that would not dye
after him? let us think of this, and judge whether all the world can hire us
to die.

But (alas) great is our unbelief, full faint and weak is our faith, or else
night and day, tears and cries should be our meat and drink, whilst the
wicked say unto us, Where is now your God? Psalm. 42.3.
We should wish rather to be doore-keepers in the house of God, Psalm. 84.10.
then to dwell in these ungodly tents: For one day in his Courts, is better
then a thousand: it is a token of little love to God, to be so loath to go
unto him when he calls, herein we ought to lament the weakness of our
faith, and seeing our wants to prepare for remedy against the time of need,
and to beg of God his aid, strength and comfort against the pinch: which
things undoubtedly if we ask in faith, we shall obtain and find his promise
true: God reaches out his hand to conduct us, but we draw back our own, and
run away when he calls us, if he bring us into the way of salvation, we
mourn for the World, and we look behind us with Lots Wife, and hinder our
desire of well doing, we must therefore rouse up ourselves, and not remain
still in the mire, we must be fortified in this virtue, who supporteth and
comfort us in all distress.

Lastly to conclude, let us attempt to despise corruptible things, and to
desire heavenly and eternal, when God calls at every occasion, let us
hearken unto him: if he be our Guide, we must follow him: for to arrive in his
house, let us receive his benefit, and himself too, for he gives himself
unto us in the person of his son, he causes us to see the means how to
come unto him; we must therefore request him to bestow upon us will and
desire, to come thither by Faith, Repentance, Hope, etc. And that he would
mainetaine his gifts and graces in us, to the end that here we may mourn in
this mortal life, and attend in the assurance of his mercy, for the end of
this world and our last day, which shall be the beginning of our true life,
when we are to receive an inheritance, not mortal but immortal; not earthly,
but heavenly; not like the Goord of Jonas, Jonas 4.7.
but the Caeders of Libans; Deuteronomy. 8.4.
not like the garments in Egypt, Genesis 3.7.
but in the Wilderness; not like the morning dew, but the waters of Paradise;
Ephesians. 6.16.
not Aprons of Fig-leaues, but the Helmet of salvation; Genesis 5.14.
not like Jacobs Pottage which he sold, but the birthright which he bought;
2. King. 2.11
not a Tabernacle, but a Temple; not time, but eternity; not like an abortiue
child, but like Henoch and Elias which never tasted of death, beseeching God
our heavenly Father, for his son Christ his sake, to keep us souls and
bodies to his kingdom and glory; and to lead us, order us, and dispose of us
as he will, in all things, in all places, and for ever; that at the length we
may come whether we would; that is, into his own blessed presence, and
fruition of immortality with Christ and his Saints, world without end. Amen.

FINIS.

