A COVNTERBLAST TO M. HORNS VAIN BLASTE AGAINST M. Fekenham. Wherein is set
forth: A full Reply to M. Horns Answer, and to every part thereof made, against
the Declaration of my L. Abbat of Westminster, M. Fekenham, touching, The Oath
of the Supremacy. By perusing whereof shall appear, besides the holy
Scriptures, as it were a Chronicle of the Continual Practice of Christ's
Church in all ages and Countries, from the time of Constantin the Great, until
our days: Proving the Popes and Bisshops Supremacy in Ecclesiastical causes:
and Disprouing the Princes Supremacy in the same Causes.

By Thomas Stapleton Student in Divinity.

Athanas. in Epist. ad solita. vita^ agentes. page 459. When was it heard from
the creation of the world, that the Judgment of the Church should take his
authority from the Emperor? Or when was that taken for any judgment?

Ambr. lib. 5. epist. 32. In good sooth, if we call to mind either the whole
course of Holy Scripture, or the practice of the ancient times passed, who is
it that can deny, but that in matter of faith, in matter, I say, of faith,
Bisshops are wont to judge over Christian Emperors, not Emperors over
Bisshops?

LOVANII, Apud Joannem Foulerum. An. 1567. Cum Priuil.

REgiae Maiestatis Gratia Speciali Concessum est Thomae Stapletono Anglo,
librum inscriptum, A Counterblaste to M. Horns Vain Blaste etc. per aliquem
Typographorum admissorum tuto and libere imprimendum curare, and public
distrahere, nullo prohibente.

Datum Bruxellis.27. Maij Anno. 1567. Subsig. Pratz.

TO M. ROBERT HORN, THOMAS STAPLETON WISHES Grace from God, and true
repentance of al Heresies.
IF the natural wisdom and foresight, M. Horn, described of our Savior in
the Gospel by a parable, had been in you, at what time you first set pen to
paper, to treat of the Oath of Supremacy: you would not, I suppose, so rashly
have attempted an enterprise of such importance. The Parable says. Luc. 14.
Who is it among you, that minding to build a Castle, sits not down first
and reckons with him self the charges requisite thereunto, to see if he be
able to bring it to pass, lest that having laid the foundation, and then not
able to make an end, all that see him, begin to laugh him to scorn, saying,
behold: this man began to build, but he has not been able to make an end?
The matter you have taken in hand to prove, is of such and so great
importance, as no matter more now in Controversy.

It is the Castle of your profession. The keye of your doctrine. The principal
forte of all your Religion. It is the pillar of your Authority. The fountain
of your Jurisdiction. The Ankerholde of all your proceedinges. Without the
right of this Supreme Government by you here defended, your cause is betrayed,
your doctrine dissolueth, your whole Religion goes to wrack. The want of
this Right shakes your Authority, stops your Jurisdiction, and is the
utter shipwreck of all your Procedings.

Again, it touches (you say) the prerogative of the Prince. It is the only
matter which Catholics stand in, by parliament enacted, by book Oath
required, upon great penalty refused. Other matters in co^trouersy whatsoever,
are not so pressed.

Thirdly, you have taken upon you to persuade so great a matter, first to a
right learned and reverent Father, in private co^fere^ce: and next to all the
realm of England, by publishing this your Answer, as you call it. The weightier
the matter is, and the more confidently you have taken it upon you, the more is
it looked for, and reason would, that you did it substantially, lernedly, and
truly: and before you had entered to so great a work, to have made your
reckoning, how you might bring it to perfection.

But now what have you don? Have you not so wrought, that all your fair
building being clean overthrown, me^ begin (as the Gospel says) to
laughe you to scorn, saying: Behold, this man began a great matter, but
being not able to finishe it, he is feign to break of?

You will say: These be but words of course, and a certain triumph before
the Victory. Have I not grounded this work of mine upon the foundation of holy
Scriptures? Have I not posted it up with the mighty strong pillars, of the
most learned Fathers? Have I not furnished it with a ioyly variety of Stories
deducted from all the most Christian Emperors, Kings and Princes of more then
these.xij. hundred years? Have I not fensed it with inuicible rampars of most
holy Councels both general and national? And last of al, have I not removed all
such scruples and stays of conscience, as though it were, brambles and briers
out of the way, to make the passage to so fair a Forte, pleasant, easy, and
commodious?

You have in deed M. Horn, in owtwarde show, and countenance set a gay
gloriouse and glistering face upon the matter: A face I say, of holy
Scriptures, of Fathers, of the Canon, the Civil, and the law of the Realm,
of many Emperors, Kings and Princes (for proof of a continual practice of
the like Supremacye now by Oath to the Q. Highness attributed) in the ancient
Churches of England, France, Germany, Spain, Italy, Greece, Armenia, Moscouia,
Aethyopia: Aug. de ciuit. Dei li. 21. cap. 5. Iul. Solinus ca. 48. Cornel.
Tacit. li. 8. Aegesippus lib. 4.
But all is but a Face in deed, and a naked show, without Substance of Truth
and matter.

It is like, to the Aples and grapes and other fruits of the country of Sodom
and Gomorre, which growing to a full rypenes and quantitye in sight, seem to
the eye very fair and pleasant: but when a man comes to pluck of them and to
taste, he shall find them unnatural and pestilente, and to smoder and smoke
away, and to resolve into ashes. Such is the effect of your whole book: It
bears a countenance of truth, of reason, of learning. But coming to the trial
and examination of it, I find a pestilent rank of most shameful Untruths, an
unsavory and vain kind of reasoning, and last of al, the whole to resolve
into gross Ignorance. For proof hereof, I will shortly lay forth, an
abridgement of your whole demeanor.

M. Horns Gra^mer.
And wherewith shall I better begin, the^ with the begi^ning and foundation of al
sciences, and that is, with gra^mer it self? Whereof I never heard or read in
any man, bearing the vocation that you prete^de, either more gross ignorance,
or which is more likely and much worse, more shameful and malicious corruption.
You English Conuenit: Answer Fol. 42. col. 1.

Reply Fol. 180. col. 1.

Answer Fol. 53. col. 2:

Reply Fol. 217.

Answer Fol. 79. col. 1.

Reply Fol. 322. col. 2.

Answer Fol 83 col 1.

Reply Fol. 350. col. 2.


which is, it is mete and convenient, into, it ought: which is the English of
oportet, not of, conuenit. You English Recensendam, to be examined and
confirmed, where it signifies only, to be read or rehearsed. Item where your
Author has Priuilegia irrogare, that is, To give privileges, you translate it
quyte contrary: To take away Privileges. Again in the same Author, pro
quauis causa: which is, for every cause: you translate it, for any cause, as if
it were, pro qualibet or quacu^que causa. Al which foul shifts of how much
importance they were, I refer you to the leaves of this book, here noted
unto you in the margin, together with the leaves of your own book. Many like
gay gra^maticall practices might yet be showed. An. 1566. Comp. Anglic. Mar. 18.

See more of this in this Replye, fol. 480. b.


Yea in your late Visitation at Oxforde, exercised by your Chauncelour and
son in Law (as beside al law you call him, having married your bastard, not
your lawful daughter) in all the copies of articles that your said Chauncelour
proposed to be subscribed, are these words: Regina supremus Gubernator
Ecclesiae Anglicanae: for Suprema gubernatrix: And so remains that clause to
this hour unreformed. So that, if it were nothing, but for false Latin, a
scholar might honestly refuse to subscribe to such an Article.

Now what shall I say of your logike and exact kind of reasoning? As there is
nothing in a writer more requisite, M. Horn^ Logike.
that means truly, so the more you have broken the rules thereof, the more is
your shame, and the less ought the credit of your whole Book to be. I need
not descend to the particulars, your perpetual manner of writing being such,
as your whole discourse seems nothing else but a misshapen lump of lewd and
loose arguments. For this being the matter which you have taken in hand to
prove by the examples of other Princes, and by the practice of Counsels, that
the Lay Magistrates are Supreme Governors in all Ecclesiastical causes, this
universal proposition being that which should be concluded, your premises are
allwaies mere particulars: your proufes proceed ever of some one fact or matter
Ecclesiastical, but never of all: And yet those matters that you bring, being
partly no Ecclesiastical matters at all, partly untruly fathered upon the lay
Magistrate. So that, as ever you fail in truth of matter, so you never make
good form of argument. And you can tell your self: (they be your own words)
that young Logicians know, Answer. fol. 108. a.
this is an evil consequent, that concludes upon one or diverse particulars
affirmatively an universal. This evil consequent M. Horn, is the only
conseque^t that you make in all your book, where you play the Opponents part.
Answer. fol. 4. fol. 100. fol. 105.
For the which I refer you and the Reader to the three first books of this
Reply. With the like good logique you lay forth false definitions and false
divisions of your own Invention.

M. Horns Rhetorik
As for your Rhetorike, you work your matters so handsomely and so persuasiuely,
that there is not almost any one Scripture, any story, any Council, any Father,
any Author yt you allege, which makes not directly against your purpose, and
bears withal an express and evident testimony for the Popes Supremacy, not
only otherwher, but even in the very same place and allegation that you allege
and ground your self upon. And this chances not once or twice, but in a
manner customably, as by perusing this Reply, you shall soon perceive. And
therefore I will not specially note it here unto you, as a rare or seldom
thing. Neither will I thank you for bringing to our hands so good stuff to
prove our principal purpose by, but say herein unto you, as S. Augustine said
in the like case of the Donatistes, alleging the works of Optatus, by the
which they were ever confounded, and the Catholics cause maruailously
furdered. Nec tame^ ipsis, Aug. cont. Dona. post Collation. cap. 34.
sed Deo potius hinc agimus gratias: vt enim illa omnia vel loquendo, vel
legendo pro causa nostra promerent, atque propalarent, veritas eos torsit, non
charitas inuitauit. Neither do we yet thank them for their so doing, but
rather God. For that they should bring forth and utter either by talk, or by
alleging, al those things for our matter, the Truth forced them, not any
Charity invited the^. And truly so M. Horn, that by your own Authors you are
ever confounded, the Truth of our cause forces you, as not being able to
allege any Author that makes not for us, not any good will to our cause or to
us moved you.

Again what a new Cicero, or Demosthenes are you, that lay forth to M.
Fekenham, as a good and a persuasible motive, to enduce him to take the Oath of
the Princes Primacy, the former erroneous doings of certain Reverend Fathers,
whereof they have so far repented, that for refusal of this Oath they have
suffered deprivation, and have and do suffer imprisonment, and are ready
besides, by Gods assistance, patiently to suffer, whatsoever Gods providence
has graciously provided for them? Whereunto both they and other have good
cause much the more to be encouraged, considering that after all this struggling
and wrestling against the Truth by you and your fellows M. Jewel and the rest,
the Truth is daily more and more opened, illustred, and confirmed. And your
contrary doctrine is or ought to be disgraced and brought in utter discredit,
with such as do but indifferently weigh the most wretched and miserable
handling of the holy Fathers and Councelles before by M. Jewel, as al England
knows, and now by you Master Horn, which are not much inferior to him in
that point of legerdemayne. For as in his most lying Reply against D. Harding,
so in this your Answer to M. Fekenhams treatise, there is neither Scripture,
nor Counsel, nor doctor, nor any thing else that comes through your hands,
which you do not miserably mangle, corrupt, and peruerte: and that by a
number of dishonest and shameful shifts: which particularly to specify would
be to long and tediouse.

M. Horns miserable peruerti^g of his authors.
But to say somewhat for an example, the principal part of all your shifting
stands in a certain meruelouse kind of a new and a false Arithmetike,
sometime by Addition, sometime by diminution and Detraction.

By addition.
Thus to make your matter of the Princes Supreme government in all
ecclesiastical causes more probable, 1. Answer fo. 20. b. Reply fo. 88. b.
you interlace twice these words (as one that had the cure and authority
over all) and again, in the same leaf (as one that had authority over them)
which you find not in your Authors. 2. Answer fo. 22. ^. Reply. fo. 98. b.


Thus you shuffle in this pretye syllable (All) to Socrates, and again to
Theodoretus. 3. Answer fol. 24. b. Reply. fol. 107. b.


So you springle in these words (by his supreme authority) to your
narration out of the said Theodoretus. 4. Answer fol. 26. a. Reply fol. 115
b.
And by and by to your narration out of Sozomenus, these words (and the
Bishops could not remove him.) 5. Answer Fol. 26 b Reply Fol. 116. b


So you add to Liberatus this word (depose: 6. Answer fo 30. a. Reply Fol.
128. b
) And to the Acts of the Chalcedon Counsel, these words, 7. Answer Fol.
32. b Reply. Fol. 144 a
(which otherwise must be deposed.) And to the Acts of the sixth General
Council these words (to examine and confirm. 8. Answer fol. 53. b. Reply.
fo. 216. b.


You thrust into the narration of Antoninus and Marius, 9. Answer fol. 81. a
Reply fol. 334. a
) that which they say not: and to the narration of Quintinus Heduus five full
lines, that are not in your author touching Pope John the.22. and many other
like things otherwhere. 10. Answer fol. 89. b Reply fol. 378, b


And yet I can not tell, whether your peruersity be more in your false
multiplication, By Diminution.
or in your false diminution. 1. Answer fol 19. b Reply fol. 33. a
In framing the state of the question by the statutes of the realm, you leave
out the beginning and the end of the Statute. You leave out of Marcians
oration.ij. or.iij. words, that make most against you. 2. Answer fol. 33.
a Reply fo. 147. a
You pare away from the sentence that your self reherseth out of the fourth
Roman council, 3. Answer Fol. 36. Reply Fol. 162.
the tail of it immediately following your own words: that is, Totam causam Dei
iudicio reseruantes, quite overthrowing your new supremacy.

4. Answer fo. 37. b. Reply Fol. 167. a.
In like manner from the narration of the ambassadry of Pope John, you conceal
the necessary circumstances of the same: as you do from many otber narrations,
the which being truly set in, do utterly destroy al your untrue assertions.
5. Answer Fo. 4^. a. Reply. fo. Fol. 179. b
After this sort to these words of Justinian the Emperor (these things we
have determined) you choppe in of your own (by sentence) and withal choppe
away that which immediately follows, sanctoru^ Patrum Canones sequuti.

In this manner whereas throughout your book, one of your great matters to
prove Emperors and Kings supreme heads of the Church, 6. Answer fol 74.
and fo 78. a Reply. fo. Fol. 282. a. and. 306. a.
is the inuesturing of bishops (which yet nevertheless is but an impertinent
matter) you tell us still of this inuesturing, and make a great busy nedelesse
stir about it, but yt the said Emperor or King, as for example Charlemaine,
Otho the first, and other received that privilege from the Sea of Rome, and
again that other Emperors and Kings, as for example, the emperor Henry the.5.
in Germany, and in England King Henry the first, yielded afterward, and gave
over the said inuesturing, which things appear as well by other Authors, as by
your own that your self alleges, you pass them over with great silence.
For if you had told these and such like stories of the inuesturing of Bisshops
truly and fully, then had your new supremacy been quite distroyed. 7. Answer
fo. 80 b. Reply fo. 330. a.


For the said cause, whereas you tell, us that Philip the French king swore
the Pope to certain conditions, you altogether dissemble, what those
conditions were. 8. Answer fo. 106. a. Reply. fo. 448. a.


For the same cause, you leave out of your Author Io. Anth. Delphinus in the
middle of the sentence, a line or two: Least that if you had sincerely set in
those words, they would have overthrown your fond, folishe and heretical
paradoxe, that the Authority to excommunicate appertains neither to Bishop,
nor Priest.

Well, to set a side (least we be to tediouse) all other places of like
corruption (which plentifuly abunde every where in your answer) we will only
touch, of a great number, two or three, apperteining to our own domestical
stories.

You will prove to us, that King Henry the first was supreme head of the
Church of Englanda: nd why trow you? Forsooth because the spiritual
condescended, in a Council at London, that the Kings officiers should punish
Priests for whoredom. Is not this I pray you an importante and a mighty
argument, to prove the Kings supremacye by, which rather directly proves the
cleargies supremacye, of whom the King had this authority? And yet such are
your accustomable arguments, as may sone appear to the reader. But this is not
the thing we now seek for: 9. Answer fol. 77. a Reply fo. 199, a
but to know, what kind of whoredom it was, that the Priests should be
punisshed for. Lo this, though you allege. 7. marginal authors, durst you not
ones touch. For if you had, you had withal proved your own whoredom, and
such as is much worse then was theirs.

10. Answer fol. 89. b Reply fo. 380, a
Again you labor to prove by Browghton a temporal Lawier, that by the Law of
the realm, the King was then taken for supreme head of the Church, for that
all are under the King, and the King is under God only, but you most
shamefully dissemble, that the said Browghton speaks but of the Kings
authority in temporal things: and that in the place by your self alleged, he
says, that as Emperors and Kings are the chief rulers for temporal things:
so for spiritual things the Pope, is the chief ruler, and under him,
Archbisshops, Bisshops and other.

But of al other Lies, this that we shall now show is one most Captain, and
notable. Of al stories by you most miserably and wretchedly pinched, pared, and
dismembered, the story of our first and noble Christian King Lucius, is most
shamefully contaminated, depraved, and deformed. The consent of al stories as
well Domestical as external, yea as well of Catholics as of heretics (as
far as I can yet by diligente search, possibly find) is, that the said
King Lucius was ch^istened by the help, advice, and instruction of Pope
Eleutherius. But you M. Horn bear such a spiteful and malitiouse heart to the
Pope, and to the Sea of Rome, that contrary to the narration of all other, yea
of your own dear brother Bale (the chief antiquarye of English Protestants)
you auouche, that he and his subjects were baptized, and that he reformed the
Heathnishe religion, and did other things, 11. Answer fol. 93. b Reply fol.
397,
that you rehearse out of Polidore, without any Authority, knowledge or
consent of the Pope. And yet beside all other, your own author Polidorus,
says, that he was christened, and the profane worshippinge of the false Gods
was banyshed, and other things done by the admonition, help, and advice of
the said Pope Eleutherius Ambassadors. And therefore you rehersing Polidorus
words of the said King Lucius most falsely and lewdely, do cut away
from Polidorus his sentence (by your self recyted) all that ever Polidorus
writes of Pope Eleutherius and his Legates.

I trust Master Horn, that, when any indifferente Reader has well
considered, these and such other like parts, that every where you play in
this your Answer, and withal, the cancred and maliciouse heart that you
bear to the Apostolical See of Rome, which most evidently bursteth out in the
handling of the foresaid story of Lucius, he shall find good cause to take
you as you are, false and maliciouse, and not to trust the report of such a
partial writer, yea of such an evident falsary. Answer fol. 47. a. and fol. 55.
But it is no news for a man of your coat, to be partial in Popes matters, or
to call the Pope himself the child of perdition, or to term his lawful doings,
Horrible practices, as you do.

Answer fol. 101. b. Reply. fol. 435. a. and 436. b.
But to auouche him to be a more periculous enemy to Christ, then the Turk, and
that Popery is much more idolatrous, then Turkery, I think you are the first
English protestant, that ever wrote so Turkishly. Such Turkish treachery might
better have been borne in the lauishing language of your hot spurred
Ministers in pulpit, then in the advised writing of a prelate of the Garter in
printe. With the like discretion you call blessed S. Augustine, of whom we
Englishmen first received our Christendom, in contempt and derision, Answer
fol. 58. and 59.
the Popes Apostle, maligning in him the name of the Apostle of England, and
calling him beside, together with the blessed Apostle of Germany and Martyr,
Bonifacius, blind guides and blind bussardes. But who so bold as blind
bayarde? or who can see less in other men, then such as can see nothing in
themselves? And what do you else herein, but like a furious Ajax, thinking to
deface the Pope, fall a whipping and railing at his sheep, (such sheep, I say
as Christ committed to Peter, whose successor the Pope is) as Ajax in his fury
whipped the sheep of Ulysses, thinking he had whipped Ulysses himself? But as
the fury of Ajax reached not to Ulysses person, but only increased his own
misery and madness: so your Turkish talk M. Horn, blemisheth not the Sea
Apostolic, or hurts it the valewe of one rushe, but only expresses the
Turkish sprit that lurketh within you. Therefore bluster and blow, fume and
frete, rave and rail, as lowdely as lewdely, as bestly as boldly, do what you
can, you must hear, as the Donatists heard of S. Augustine: Ipsa est Seeds,
August. in Psalm. cont. parte^ Dona. Tom. 7.
quam superbae non vincu^t inferorum portae. That See of Peter, is the Sea,
which the proud gates of hell do not overcome. The more you kick against that
Rock, the more your break your shinne.

You bluster not so boysterously against the Pope, as you lie most lewdely upon
the right Reverent, and learned Father M. Fekenham, whose person you impugn,
for lack of just matter, with most slanderous Reproaches. Answer fol. 2. a.
As where you say of him, that the Catholics had ever a fear of his
reuolting, that, Fol. 7. and fol. 104. fol. 3. b.
he seemed in a manner resolved and satisfied in this matter, that, his doings
should be a preparation of rebellion to the Queen's Majesty's person, and that,
Fol. 6. a.
he vvissheth the Pope should reign in her place, that he makes his belly his
God, that he promised to reca^te in King Edvvardes days, and last of all,
Fol. 7. b. Fol. 128. a.
that he changed in Religion.ix. times, yea.xix. times. These be such
slanderous Reproaches M. Horn, and the person whom you burden them withal,
so far from all suspicion of any such foul matter, among all such as these
many years have known him and his behavior, that if you were sued hereof upon
an Action of the case, as you well deserve no less, considering of what
vocation and true deserved reputation he is, whom thus vilainouslye you
slander, you would I fear be driven at the lest, to do that at Paul's
Cross, which about Waltham matters (you know the^ est your self) the
Regestre of Hampshiere was driven at that place to do. So should the gospel
be fulfilled, Mr th. 7.
Look with what measure you have measured to other, with the same it shall
be measured again to you. And so should Lex talionis in you well and worthily
take place. As it does by Gods providence fall out upon you, in that you tell
your Reader in great sadness, Reply fo. 5^.
that M. Fek. is a great Donatist. For by that occasion you shall find your self
and your fellows M. Horn most rightly and truly proved Donatists: and M.F. to
be as far from that lewd sect, as you are from a true Catholic.

But of al your other slanderous lies heaped most wrongefully upon M.F. this
one which to omit the rest, I will only now note, is most ridiculous. You
bluster exceedingly, and are in a vehement rage with Master Fekenham. Answer
fol. 128. col. 2. and 129 col. 1. Reply. Fol. 5.7.
You say that if his friends would but a little examine his false dealing with
the Fathers, they would no longer believe him, but suspect him as a deep
dissembler, or rather abhor him as an open slau^derer and belier of the
Ancient Fathers. And to exemplify this grievous accusation, you tell him in
that place, that he manifestly ma^gleth, alters, peruerteth, and corrupts
a saying of S. Augustine. A man would here suppose M. Horn, that you had some
great and just occasion, thus grievously to charge such a man as M. Fekenham
is, and that in printe, where all the world may read it and consider it. What
is the place then? Thus it is. M. Fekenham alleges S. Augustine saying thus.
Istis cede, and mihi cedes: yield to these, and you shall yield to me. You say
S. Augustine has no such words, but thus. Istis cede, and me non caedes.
Yield to these, and thou shall not strike or whippe me. Now put the case, it
were as you say. Does this Alteration or change deserve such a grievous
Accusation? You confess your self in the same place, and do say to M.
Fekenham: And yet this corrupting of the sentence makes it serve no whit the
more for your purpose. And is then M. Fekenham to be abhorred of his friends
for an open slaunderer and belier of the Ancient Fathers, when he so alters
them, that yet they make nothing for him? Who sees not, that in case. M.
Fekenham had altered the words of S. Augustine, yet seeing he got nothing by the
exchange, nor used them to any guile or deceyuing of his Reader, he little
deserved such a grievous Accusation. Fol. 527. and seque^t.


But now so it is, as I have in this Reply more amplye declared, that the
words by Master Fekenham alleged, are the true words of S. Augustine
according to four several prints that I have seen: two of Paris, one of Basil,
an other of Lyo^s. And the words as you would have them read Master Horn, are
in none of those printes at all in the text of S. Augustine. Only in the later
print of Paris. An. 1555. those words by you avouched stand in the margin as a
diverse reading, and the words by M. Fekenham avouched stand in the text, as
they do in all other printes beside, for the true text of S. Augustine. And who
sees not now, that all this was but a quarrel picked, without desert? And you
M. Horn to have showed your self a most ridiculous wrangler?

But Gods name be blissed. The dealing of Catholic writers is so upright, that
such small occasions must be picked, and upon such trifles your Rhetorike must
be bestowed: else against their dealing you have nothing to say.

With the like felicity your brother Jewel in his late Sermon the.15. of June
last at Paul's Cross, laid full stoutely and confidently to D. Hardings
charge, for alleging the Decades of Sabellicus: saying with great bravery, but
with exceeding folly, that Sabellicus never vvrote Decades, but only Aeneades:
Whereas yet all that ever have seen Sabellicus, do know; that he wrote of his
Rapsodia, Aeneades: and of Venice matters, Decades: which book with the very
page of the book D. Harding truly alleged. Whereby it is evident, that M.
Jewel either is extreme rechelesse and utterly careless what he preaches or
printeth, or at the least is at a full point to lie on, as he has begun,
whatsoever come of it. Of the which mind also it seems your self are M. Horn.
For (to omit other specialities, as of Fol. 127 120. and 123. Reply 451. a.
framing arguments upon M. Fekenhams discourse, which he never framed, nor the
discourse bears, of Answer fo. 96.97.105. et 207 Reply. 411. b. 416 a. 447.
a. 451. b.
your contradictions, whereby you show the vnstablemesse of your own
judgment, with such like) your Answer is so fraighted and stuffed with
falsehoods, your Untruths do so swarm and muster all a long your book, that
for the quantity of your Treatise, you are comparable to M. Jewel.

Your Untruths amounte to the number of six hundred fourscore and odd. They
be so notorious and so many, that it pitieth me in your behalf, to remember
them. But the places be evident and cry Corruption, and may by no shift be
denied.

If my curiosyty in noting them displease you, let the uttering of the^ first
displease your self, and then you will the less be displeased with me. You
know, M. Jewel has led us this dance. Be not angry M. Horn, if we follow
the round. Moderat your pen better. Report your Authors more sincerelye.
Translate your allegations more truly. Lay down the whole sentences without
concealing of such matter as overthrows your purpose: Say no more then you
find in the Stories. Slander not your betters. Deal more advisedly and
uprightly. So shall your Untruths be the fewer an other time. But so will your
cause, I assure you M. Horn, come forth stark naked, feeble, and miserable.
The beauty and force of your Cause consists and depends altogether of lies
and untruths.

If you join obstinacy to folly, as Master Jewel does, so shamefully in open
Sermon justifying him self, but not clering him self of any one of so many
hundred Untruths iustlye and rightly laid to his charge: then as I said
before, I may justly say, that you are at a point to lie, whatsoever come of
it. Like as a protestant of late days being pressed of a Catholic for extreme
lying, and not being hable to clear him self, said plainly and bluntlye:
Quamdiu potero, Vide Remundum Rufum. in Duplicatione co^t. Patronu^ Molinaei.
Fol. 76.
clades adfera^, Latebunt quamdiu poterunt. Valebunt apud vulgus ista mendacia.
Well. I will deface them (meaning the Catholics) and do some mischief to them
as long as I am able. My lies shall lie hid, as long as may be. And at the least the common people shall fall in a lyking with them.

If you be at this point, then knowing where to have you, we know also what
to make of you, and for such to esteem you. A false Prophet, and a lying
Master, such as S. Peter spoke of, bringing in wicked and damnable sects. 2
Pet. 2.
God give them grace, which are deceived by you, so well to know you, as we
that do examine your writings, have good Cause to know you.

This your Answer M. Horn (as I understand) you have presented to diverse of
the Queen's May. most Honorable Council, intending thereby not only to
discredit Master Fekenham, and to increase his trouble, but also to bring into
displeasure, all other the Queens Highness Catholic subjects: of which full
many, only for conscience sake, have refused, and do yet refuse the Oath
that you here most ignorantlye defend. For this purpose also at the very
end of your book, you refer as it were the whole matter to the most
Honorables saying.

To Conclude, by the premises it may appear to the Honorable as by a taste,
what sincerity there is in you. Thus much you say for discrediting of M.
Fekenham.

You add a grievous Accusation against all the Catholic subjects of England,
saying. And lastly your quarreling by spreading this book, was and is to
impugn and bark against the Q. May. Lavvful and due Authority, which you
and your accomplices daily labor to subvert: which matter I refer to be
further considered by the grave wisdoms of the most Honorable. And with this
poisoned and ca^cred Reproach you end your whole book: geui^g your Reader to
understand yt the very end and scope of your book was to ingraffe in ye Noble
hearts of the most Honorables a great misliking and heavy displeasure, not
only of and against M. Fek. already in trouble, but also of and against the
whole number of Catholics: who have always continewed and showed themselves
the Queen's May. most loyal and obedient subjects, and have deserved no such
Reproach at your hands M. Horn.

You have therefore M. Horn, in this Reply, a just and a full defense, partly
See the 3. Chapter of the.1. book.
against your most slanderous accusation, but chiefly and especially of the
whole Cause and Question in Controversy. As you did to M. Fekenhams Treatise,
so I to your Answer have replied through out. I have not omitted any one part
or parcel of your whole book. As I have here printed again the whole, to
increase of charges, so have I answered the whole, to edifying of the Reader.

If by this Reply you find your self satisfied, and are content to yield to the
Truth, so evidently and abundantly opened unto you, than both I and al other
Catholics will both better trust you, and give God thanks for you.

But if after the perusing of this Reply, you shall think you are not fully and
in every point confuted: I wish that the most Honorable, to whom so
co^fidently you commend your own doings, would command you, to prove it so
to the world by a full Reioyndre. A full Reioyndre I say, and perfect, to al and
every part of this Reply, as I have here replied to al and every part of your
Answer: not omitting any one example, of Council, Prince, or Country by you
alleged. And that you put in my whole Answer, not omitting any one line or
sentence, either of the text, or of the margent.

If the Truth be on your side, you have no cause to stick hereat. You will seem
to want no learning. Abylytieto bear the charges we are sure you want not.

Go thorough therefore as you have begun, with this fair building of yours,
if you think your foundation good, or the cause which you ground upon sure.
Go through I say, that it may appear you have given M. F. good cause to remove
his scruples, and to be persuaded at your hands.

Else if you now draw back, and think by silence to drown the matter, first for
your fair piece of work, so shamefully broken of, men will laugh you to
skorne, as the ghospel by the parable told you: Then al me^ may know, that
your great vauntes of your Waltha^ talk and reasoning, are but words of
course to save your poor honor, I should say, honestly. Thirdly, that M.
Fekenha^s scruples are most learned and invincible reasons. And last of al, that
the Oath which you so earnestly persuade him to take, can of noma^ be taken
without manifest Perjury. Whereof enseweth, yt you most horribly offend Gods
Divine Majesty, which do burden men's consciences with such evident perjury.
The worste that I wish you M. Horn, is, that you retracte your heinous
heresies, and prove a true Christian. And thus for this time I take my leave of
you.

Vale and Resipisce. Thomas Stapleton. (...).

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
IT had been much to be wisshed (gentle Reader) that the right reverent and
learned Father my L. Abbat of Westminster, M. Feckenham, whom M. Horns Book
most touches, might him self (as he is most able, and as I suppose, as well
willing) have answered it also. But seeing his state is such, that he presently
can not do it, I being by some of my friends requested to travail in the
matter, was at the first not very willing thereto: as for diverse other causes,
namely for that in very deed I was full purposed, having so largely provoked
such sharp adversaries, especially M. Jewel, for a season to rest, and to
stand at my own defense, if any would charge me: so chiefly for these two
causes.

First, for that many things in this book pertain to certain private doings
betwixt M. Feckenham and M. Horn, of the which I had no skill. Seco^dely, for
that a number of such private matters touching the state of the Realm
occurred, as to them without farther advise, I could not thoroughly shape any
answer. Howbeit afterward it so happened, that by such as I have good cause to
credit, there came to my knowledge such Instructions, as well for the one as
for the other, that I was the better willing to employ some study and pains in
this behalf. Not for that I think my self better able the^ other, but for
that I would not it should seem, that there lacked any good will in me, either
to satisfy the honest desire of my fre^des, or to help and relieve such, as
by such kind of books are already pitefully inueigled and deceived: or to
stay other yet standing, that this book be not at any time, for lack of good
advertisement, a stombling stock unto them.

I have therefore by such helps, as is above said, added my poor labor
thereto, and with some diligence in the rest, shaped to the whole book, a
whole and a full Reply. Wherein I rather fear, I have said to much, then to
little. But I thought good in a matter of such Importance, to be rather tedious
to make al perfitte, then short and compendious, to leave ought imperfect.
Before then that thou shall enter (good Reader) into the Reply it self, it
shall be well, to take some advertisement, with a certain vewe by a short and
summary comprehension, of the whole matter. Whereby both to the Co^trouersy in
hand thou shall come better instructed: and, what in the whole work is to be
looked for, thou shall be advertised.

M. Horns Answer, as he calls it, rests in two parts: In the first and
chiefest he plaieth the Opponent, laying forth out of the holy Scriptures
both old and new, out of Councelles both General and National, out of
Histories and Chronicles of all Countres, running his race from Constantine the
great, down to Maximilian great gra^dfather to the Emperor that now
lives, taking by the way the kings of France, of Spain, and of our own
Country of England since the Conqueste, all that ever he could find by his own
study and help of his friends, partly for proof of the like gouuernement of
Princes in Ecclesiastical causes, as the Oath attributes now to the Crown of
England partly also for disproufe of the Popes Supremacy, which the Oath also
principally intends to exclude. In the second and later part he plaieth the
defendant, taking upon him to answer and to satisfy, certain of M. Feckenhams
Arguments and scruples of conscience, whereby he is moved not to take the
Oath. How well he has played both his parts, the perusal of this Reply will
declare. The doings of each part, upon what occasion they rose, thou shall
understand in our Answer to M. Horns Preface.

For the more lightsome and clear Intelligence of the whole that is and shall
be said to and fro, I have divided the whole Process into four books:
keeping the same order and course, that Master Horns Answer did lead me
unto. To the first part of the Answer, wherein he lays forth his proufes
for defense of the Oath, I Reply in three Books. Comprising in the first
book, his Objections out of Holy Scripture: In the Second, his Objections out
of the first six hundred years. In the third, his Objections out of the later
900. years, until our own days. Each book I have divided into several
Chapters, as occasion served. In the second and third books, where we enter
the course of times, I have noted at the top of each page, in one side the
year of the Lord, on the other side, the name of the Pope, Prince, or
Council, or other Principal matter in that place debated: to thentent (Gentle
Reader) that at the first sight even by turning of a leaf thou might know,
both where thou art, and what is a doing: both the Age and time (which
exceedingly lighteneth the matter) and also the Pope, Prince or Council of that
time. In these three books, what I have particularly done, if thou list
shortly to see, at the end of the third book thou shall find a brief
Recapitulation of the whole.

To the second part of M. Horns Answer, I have replied in the fourth Book. By
perusing whereof it shall well appear, both what strong and invincible
Arguments. M. Fekenham right lernedly proposed, as most just causes of his
said Refusal: and also what seely shifts and miserable escapes M. Horn has
devised, to maintayn that obstinatly, which he ons conceived erroniously.
Especially this thou shall find in such places of the fourth book, where thou
see over the Head of the leaves in this letter, The Oath: The Oath:

Now good Reader, as thou tendrest thy own Salvation, and hopest to be a saved
soul, in the joyful and everlasting bliss of Heaven, so consider and weigh
well with thy self, the importance of this matter in hand. First Religion
without Authority, is no Religion: Aug. de vtil. crede^di cap. 9.
For no true Religion (says S. Augustine) can by any means be received
without some weighty force of authority. Then if this Religion, whereby thou
hopest to be saved, have no Authority to ground it self upon, what hope of
Salvation remaining in this Religion can thou co^ceyue? If it have any
Authority, it has the Authority of the Prince, by whose Supreme Government it
is enacted, erected and forced upon thee. Other Authority it has none. If
then that Supreme Government be not dew to the Lay Prince, but to the
Spiritual Magistrate, and to one chief Magistrate among the whole Spiritualty,
thou see thy Religion is but a bare name of Religion and no Religion in deed.

Again, if this Supreme Government be not rightly attributed to the Lay
Magistrate, in what state are they, which by book oath do swear that it ought
so to be, yea and that in their Conscience they are so persuaded? Is not
Perjury, and especially a wilful Continuance in the same, a most horrible and
damnable crime in the sight of God? And does not Gods vengeance watch over
them, which sleep in Perjury? Malac. 3. Ero testis velox.
I will be a Quick witness to Perjured persons, says God by the Prophet
Malachie.

Now if that Supreme Government may dewly and rightly appertain to our Liege
Sovereign, or be any Principal part of a Princes Royal power, as Master
Horn stoutelye, but fondely avouches, or of his dutiful service to God,
which never Prince in the Realm of England before the days of king Henry
the.8. used or claimed, which never Emperor, King, or Prince whatsoever
without the Realm of England, yet to this present hour had, Reply Fol. 22.
and Fol. 508.
or attempted to have, which the chief Masters of the Religion now Authorized
in England do mislike, reprove, and condemn, namely Martin Luther, John
Calvin, Philip Melanchthon, and the Magdeburgenses, as in place convenient I
have showed: which also in no time or Age, sense Princes were first christened,
in no land or Country, in no Council General or National, was ever witnessed
practiced, or allowed: last of al, which directly fights with Christ's
Commission, given to the Apostles, and their Successors in the Gospel, and
stands direct contrary to an Article of our Creed, if such Supreme
Gouuernement, I say, may be laweful and good, then is the Oath lawefull, and
may with good Conscience be taken.

But if these be such Absurdities, as every man of any mean consideration
sees and abhors: then may not the Oath of any man that has a Conscience be
taken, neither can this Supreme Government be possibly defended for good and
laweful. That al these Absurdites and many yet more, which to avoid prolixitie
I here omit, do hereof depend, this Reply, gentle Reader, abundantly proves.

The Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, against the which the Oath directly
tends, (as M. Horn avouches) is evidently here proved, not only in our dear
Country of England, as well before the Conquest as sythens, but also in all
other Christened Countres, not only of all the West Church, as of Italy,
Spain, France, Germany and the rest, but of the East Church also, yea
among the Aethyopians and Armenians. And that by the witnesses of such
Authors, as M. Horn him self has builded his proufes upon for the contrary.

The practice of the.8. first General Councelles, and of many National
Councelles beside, in Spain, France, and Germanye, has pronounced evidently
for the Popes and Bishops Supremacy, and nothing for the Princes in matters
Ecclesiastical. It is now thy part, Christian Reader, not to shut thy eyes,
against the Truth, so clearly shining before thy face.

Against the which Truth, because M. Horns whole Answer, is but as it were a
Vain Blaste, the Confutation of that Answer, to avoid confusion of Replies,
whereof so many and diverse have of late come forth, I have termed for
distinction sake, a Counterblaste.

And now, gentle Reader, most earnestly I beseech thee, of all other Articles,
that be this day over all Christendo^ controuersious, through the great
temerite of self willed heretics raised up, most diligently to labor and
travail in this of the Supremacy: As being such, that to say the Truth, in
effect al other depend upon.

Of Protestants some be Lutherans, some Zwinglians, some Anabaptists, some
Trinitaries, and some be of other sects. But as they all being otherwise at
mutual and mortal enemitie emonge themselves, conspire against the Primacy
of the Sea Apostolic: so a good Resolution ones had in this point, staieth
and setleth the Conscience, as with a sure and strong Anchor, from the
insurgies and tempests of the foresaid rableme^t, and of all other sects,
and schisms.

Contrary wise, they that be ones circumuented and deceived in this Article,
are carried and tossed, with the raging whaues and flouddes of every error and
heresy, without stay or settling, even in their own errors.

I report me to the Grecians, who forsaking the unity of the Roman Church,
and being first Arrians, defying the Pope, Sozo. lib. 3. cap. 8. Socrat. li. 2.
cap. 15.
as it may appear by the letters of Eusebius the great Arrian and his fellows
to Julius then Pope, fell after to be Macedonians, Nestorians, Eutychians,
Monothelites, Iconomaches, with diverse other great Heresies, each Heresy
breeding great numbers of sects, and all conspiring against the Sea
Apostolic, until at the last proceeding from heresy to heresy (diverse
Reco^ciliations with the Roman See coming between, which stayed a long time
Gods high vengeance that ensewed) they fell to Turkish Captivity, in which (o
lamentable case) they remain to this day.

I report me to the Africans, who falling from the unity of the Roman See,
Opta. li. 2.
first in the Donatistes despising the Judgment of Pope Melchiades in the
very first spring of their heresy (where then it might have been stopped, if
they had given ear to their chief Pastor) then falling to be Pelagians,
Victor de persequut. Vandal.
and soon after Arrians, by the conqueste of the Wandalles, became in time
Infidelles, as to this day they continue.

I report me last of all, to these Heresies of the North, the Bohemians
first, In parua Confessio. de coena Domini.
and now Luther, and his scholars. Which within few years, their Master
yet living and flourisshing, went so far from him, that he pronounced them
in open writing, Heretics, and Archeheretiques. And yet they now (I mean
the Sacramentaries) whom Luther so defied, bear the greatest swaye of all
other sects. What the end of these Heresies will be (except we abandonne them
in time) Hungary and Lifelande may be a lesson unto us: Staphylus in Apolo.
part. 3.
which by Luthers heresye, are both fallen away, as from the Roman
Church, so from the Roman Empire, the one into the Turks hands, the other
into the Moscouites.

But to leave forayne Countres for trial, what it is to separat our selves
from the Sea Apostolic, our own domestical affairs may serve us for a
sufficient example.

At what time king Henry the 8. first banisshed the Popes Authority out of
England, as the king and the Parliament thought, (though erroneously) that
this doing imported no schism nor heresy, so they thought likewise, in such
sort to provide, that the people should not fall into the other errors of
the new Lutheran or Sacramentary religion, which then the king and the
Parliament no less abhorred, then they did Turkery. But what was the issewe,
all the world knows, and England, the more pity, grievously feels.

For immediately books came so thick abroad, as well of the Lutheran, as of
the Zwinglian sect, and the people fell so fast to a contentation and liking
with them, that the king was feign to make diverse straight laws, and Acts of
Parliament for the repressing of heresy, Acts and Monumentes. fol. 553.
yea and to forbid the common people the reading of the Bible. And he sat in
his own person in judgment, upon Lamberte the Sacramentary. Neither the
Lutherans and Zwinglians only swarmed in the realm, but the Anabaptists
also, twelve of the said Anabaptists being burned about one time.

Now though king Henrye altered no matter of faith, saving this Primacie
only, but kept constantlye the Catholic faith otherwise, and though
suppressing the Abbeys, he would not suffer religiouse men, that had vowed
chastitye, to marie: yet after his death, and in the minoritye of his son
king Edward, all the laws that he had made towching matters of religion
(saving against the supremacy) were repelled and abolisshed. And a new
religion was through out the realm set forth.

To the which though the Religion now used be much conformable, yet is there
in many things much diuersit^e. As among other, for the marriage of Priests:
for the which they had some color in king Edwardes days by Act of
Parliament. Now they have both the Church law, and the law of the Realm
against them, and which more is, the very law of God, Psalm. 75
that says, Vouete and reddite. Make your vow, and perform it. And S.
Paul says, Habentes damnationem, quia primam fidem irritam fecerunt. 1. Tim.
5.
Incurring damnation, because they have broken their first promise.

Again, in the first year of our gracious Queen, the Act of Parliament, for
making and consecrating of Bisshoppes, made the.28. of king Henrye was
revived. And yet the Bisshoppes were ordered not according to the act, but
according to an act made in king Edward his days, and repelled by Queen
Marye and not revived the said first year. And if they will say, that that
defecte is now supplied, let them yet remember that they are but parliament
and no Church Bisshoppes, and so no Catholic Bisshoppes, as being ordered in
such manner and fasshion, as no Catholic Church ever used.

But this is most to be considered and to be lamented of all things, that
whereas no Act of Parliament can give any sufficient warrant, to discharge a
man from the Catholic faith, and whereas yt was as well in king He^ries days by
Act of Parliament, as ever before, through out all Churches of Christendom,
since, we were christened, taken for plain and open heresy, to deny the
real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament of the altar (for
maynteining of the which heresy there is no act of Parliament God be
thancked, neither of king Edwardes time, nor in the time of our graciouse
soueraygne Lady and Queen that now is) yet do these men teach and preach
and by writing defend and maynteine the said great and abominable heresy,
with many other, for the which they can show no warrante of any temporal or
spiritual law, that ever has been made in England. No country in
Christendom acknowledges the prince for supreme head beside England.
Lutherus, Contra Art. Louauienses. Tom. 2. Magdeb. in praefat. Cent. 7.
Caluinus. in Osee. 1. et Amos. 7 Jacob. Acontius Stratage^. Satanae. lib. 3.
See the leaf. 15. Andreas Modre. de Ecclesia lib. 2. c. 10.


All this have I spoken to show it is most true, that I have said, that there
will never be redress of error and heresy, or any stay, where men are once
gone from the unity of the Sea Apostolic, which is the welspring and
fountain of all unity in the Catholic faith.

And touching this question of the Supremacy, that we have in hand, if we well
consider it, we shall find, that we do not agree, either with the other
Protestants, or with our selves. For in this point, that we make the Prince
the supreme head of the Church, we neither agree with Luther him self, or his
scholars, which deny this primacie: nor with Calvin and his scholars the
Sacramentaries. Calvin says: They were blasphemers, that called King Henry
head of the Church: One of his scholars, Iacobus Acontius, in a book dedicated
to the Queens May. blames openly the civil magistrate, that makes him self
the Judge of controversies, or by the advice of other commands this doctrine
to be published, that to be suppressed.

Now some of Caluins scholars, and our own countriemen have taken forth such
a lesson, that they have avouched in their books printed and publisshed to the
world, that a woman can neither be head of the Church, nor of any Realm at all.

Again, many of the Protestants though they will not, the Pope should have
the chief government (because they like not his true doctrine) yet they
think it meet and convenient, that there be some one person ecclesiastical,
that may have this supreme government for matters of the Church.

It is also to be considered, that the words of the Oath now tendered, for
the mainteining of the Princes Supremacy, are other, then they were in King
Henry's, or King Edwardes days: with a certain addition of greatest
importance, and such as to a civil Prince, specially to the person of a woman
can in no wise be with any convenient sense applied: I mean of these words,
Supreme Governor as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or
causes, as temporal. Such large and ample words were in neither of the
foresaied Kings times put into the Oath. And yet had they been more tolerable
in their persons (for that men be capable of spiritual government, from the
which a woman is expressly by nature, and by scripture excluded) then they are
now. These words are such, I say, as can not with any colorable pretext be
excused.

Neither is it enough to say (as the Injunctions do) that the Queen's Majesty
entendeth not to take more upon her, then King Henry her father, or King
Edward her brother did, what so ever that were, more or less: but it must be
also considered, what she or her Successors may take upon her or them by the
largenes of these words (for an Iniunction can not limit an Act of
Parliament:) and whether there be any either Scripture or other good doctrine
ecclesiastical, sufficient to satisfy their consciences, that refuse
especially this Oath. Which does not only, as it did before, exclude the
Apostolical See, and all General Councelles also, as (though not in plain
words, yet in effect) in excluding the ecclesiastical Authority of al foren
persons and Prelates: but does further adioyne the foresaied new addition
less probable, and less tolerable, then was any other part of the former
Oath.

And therefore certain Protestants of some name and reputation being tendered
this Oath by commission, have refused it. Yea and how well trow you, is this
supreme Gouuernement liked of those Ministers, which withstand the Queen's
injunctions touching the order of semely Apparel, etc?

Thus ye perceive, that as we are gone from the constante and settled doctrine
of the Church, touching this primacy, so we agree not, no not among our selves,
either in other points, or in this very Article of the Supremacy. Neither shall
we ever find any cause of good and sufficient contentation, or constancye in
doctrine, until we return thither, from whence we first departed, that is, to
the Sea Apostolic. Which of al other people our Nation has ever most
reverenced and honored, and ought of al other most so to do: As from whence
both the Britains and Saxons received first the Christian faith. This return
God of his mercy grant us, when it shall be his blessed pleasure: Amen.

In Louaine, the last of September. An. 1567. Thomas Stapleton.

An Advertisement to the Learned Reader.
TOuching certain Authors alleged in this Reply, about matters of our own
Country, it is to be understood, that of certain written Copies not yet
printed which we have used, as of Henricus Huntingtonensis, and Gulielmus
Neubrigensis, or Noueoburgensis, or Neoburgensis many things are in the said
Copies, which seem not to be written of the^, but of Some others. As in the
Copy of Henricus Huntingtonensis, certain things are found, which seem not
to be written of him, but to have been gathered out of his works, and to have
been written by some other: whom we conjecture to be Simeon Dunelmensis. Also in
the Copy of our Neubrigensis many things are added both at the beginning and
at the end, which seem not to have been written by Neubrigensis him self, but by
some other. And that which is added at the beginning, was written as we
understand now of one Alphredus Beuerlacensis, who lived under king Steven:
The additions which do follow, who wrote we yet know not, except it were
Roger Houeden. This I warn thee of, gentle Reader, to thentent that if
hereafter the foresaid Copies come forth in printe (as this very year
Neubrigensis did) and that the printed Copies have more or less then we
report out of the written Copies, thou may not suspect any falsehood or forgery
in us, but understanding the case as we have said, may take our dealing to
be, as it is, true and sincere. I herefore having conferred the printed
Neubrigensis, with the written Copy, and finding some difference: as often as
that which I allege out of Neubrigensis, is in the printed Copy, so often I
have noted in the Margent, the book and Chapter of that Copy. And when that I
allege, is in the written, not printed Copy, I note in the Margent: Neubrig.
M.S. for: Manuscriptus.

Again in quoting the leaves of the Tomes of Counsels, I have always in
manner followed the former Copies printed at Collen in three Tomes: Anno. 1551.
Only toward the end of this book I have followed the last edition of this
present year, quoting the leaves according to that Edition, and then for
perspicuites sake I hau^ added in the Margent. Edit. Postr. Vale.

(...). AN ANSWER TO THE PREFACE.
THE PREFACE OF M. HORN.
It is now an whole year past, since I heard of a book secretly scattered
abroad by M. Fekenham among his friends: And in April last, I came by a Copy
thereof. When I had read the book, and perceived both the matter and the manner
of the man's doings therein: I savv his proofs so slender: and his manner of
dealing so shameless: that I stood in doubt what to do, whether to discover
the man by vvriting, or to shake him of with silence. If I had not seen a
further meaning in his setting forth and publishing the book (.1.) 1. The first
untruth sla^derou^ co^cerni^g M. Feke^hams meaning.
the^ he durst plainly utter, or then his cunning could by any means
answer unto: or then, that I with a good conscience might have neglected:
I vvoulde have past it over with silence, as a piece of work not worthy of
answer. But seeing the (.2.) 2. His chief* end was far otherwise, as shall
appear.
chief end and principal purpose intended, as may be justly gathered in
publishing the book, was, to ingrafte in the minds of the subjects, a
misliking of the Queens Majesty, as though she usurped a power and
authority in Ecclesiastical matters, vvhereto she has no right: to slander
the whole Realm, as though it were stranged and directly against the
Catholic Church, renouncing and refusing to have Communion therevvith: And
under my name to deface the mynisters of Christ's Church: I could not choose,
oneles I would vvilfully neglect my duty to her Majesty, show my self
ouermuche unkind unto my native Country, and altogether become careless of
the Church Mynisterie, but take pen in hand, and shape him a full and plain
answer, without any curiosity.

T. Stapleton.
IT is to be known (gentle Reader as I assuredly understand) that the Reverent
Father, my L. Abbat of Westmynster, M. Fekenham being prisoner in the Tower,
and supposing that the oath of the supremacy then passed in the Parliament
holden at Westmynster in the fifte year of the Queens Majesty's reign, should
forth with (as it was probable) be tendered him and others, gathered as it were
in a shedule, certain reasons and causes, why he thought he could not with safe
conscience, receive the said oath. Minding to offer the said shedule, to the
Commissioners if any came. The said shedule M. Fekenham delivered to M. Horn
at Waltha^, a manor place of the Bishop of Winchester in Hamshier, he being at
that time there the said M. Horns prisoner, by the committie of the Queen her
highness honorable Council: and that upon this occasion.

In M. Fekenhams abode at Waltham, there was daily conference in matters of
Religion, namely of the principal points of this Treatise, between him and M.
Horn, as him self confesses. In the which space, he required M. Fekenham,
sundry and diverse times, that he would by writing, open unto him the stays of
his conscience, touching the oath of the Queens highness Supremacy, being the
whole matter and cause of his trouble, with no small promises, that he should
sustain no kind of harm or injury thereby: And in fine, if there came no
further fruit or benefitte thereof unto him, the whole matter should be safly
folded up, and left in the same estate where they began. The cause why M.
Fekenha^ delivered his little Treatise to M. Horn.
Whereupon M. Fekenham, thinking verily all things by him promised, to be as
truly meant as spoken, made deliverance to M. Horn of a small Treatise,
devised by him before his coming forth of the Tower, entitled: The Answer
made by M. John Fekenham, Priest and Prisoner in the Tower, to the Queens
highness Commissioners, touching the oath of the Supremacy. With this
declaration also, made unto the said Master Horn, that upon the passing of the
said statute, he thought to have delivered the said Treatise, to the
Commissioners (if any came) as the stay of his conscience, concerning the
refusal of the foresaid oath: And forasmuch as they came not, he being as
before is said, urged and pressed by the said M. Horn to open unto him by
writing, the causes forcing him to breathe, and stay upon the taking of the
foresaid oath made deliverance of the very same Treatise devised in the Tower,
with the foresaid Title and declaration. Which Treatise being afterward
increased as well by M. Horns Answers, as by M. Fekenhams Replies thereunto
made: after his return back again to the Tower, he sent one copy to the right
honorable the L. Earl of Lecester and one other to Sir William Cicil Knight and
Secretary unto the Queens highness, (with the same title that the printed book
contains) both of them being delivered by M. Lieutenant of the Tower. This
shedule or little Treatise M. Horn calls a book* Fol. 1. page 2.
yea and that made with the help of the rest: that he might seem after two
years and more to have done a worthy and a notable act in answering six poor
leaves (for thereabout in M. Horns book amounts the quantity of M.
Fekenhams Treatise) and to have made a great conqueste upon M. Fekenham and his
fellows: worthy for this great martial prowes to be, if al other things
fail, a Prelate of the Garter. This his Treatise was he forced to deliver to
the right Honorables, Why M. F. caused the same to be delivered to some of the
Counsel.
as before for his necessary purgation concerning such false accusations and
slanders, as Master Horn had made and raised upon him, as shall hereafter
in more conueniente place be specified. Wherefore this being done as ye have
heard so plainly, so simply, and upon such cause shows that M. Fekenham had
no such meaning, as M. Horn here falsely surmiseth. As one, who had his
principal and chief regard, how to satisfy his own, and not other men's
consciences, how to save him self from slanders and untrue accusations, and
not to work with other men by persuasion. Wherefore this is an untrue and a
false surmise of M. Horn: as are the other two here also, in saying that M.
Fekenha^ meant otherwise, then he durst plainly utter, or by his cunning could
answer unto.

M. Horn. The 2. Division.
Wherein I follovv the order of M. Fekenhams book: I make the proofs
according to his request: and besides my proofs forth of the Scriptures, the
ancient Doctors, the General Councels and National: I make proof by the
continual practice of the Church (.3) The third untruth. you never prove the
like gouernemente Namely in all Ecclesiastical things and causes.
in like government as the Queens Majesty takes upon her, and that by such
Authors, for a great sort of them, as are the more to be credited in this
matter, for that they were most earnest fautors of the Romish sea, infected as
the times were, with much superstition, and did attribute unto the sea of
Rome, and so to the whole Clergy so much authority in Church matters, as
they might, and much more then they ought to have done.

Stapleton.
I will not charge M Horn, that his meaning is to ingraffe in the minds of the
subjects, a misliking of the Queens Majesty, as though she usurped a power
and authority in Ecclesiastical matters, whereto she has no right, as he
charge M. Fekenham withal: unless perchance he were of Council with the
holy brotherhode of Geneua for the Book, whereof we shall hereafter speak
that spoyleth the Queens Majesty of al her authority as well temporal as
spiritual and unless he has in open sermon at Winchester maintained,
contrary to the Queen's ecclesiastical injunctions, such as would not reform
their disordered apparel and that, after he had put his hand (as one of the
Queens commisioners) to the redress of the said disorder. And unless he
has and does mai^tein many things beside, yea and contrary to the laws and
orders of the realm late set forth concerning matters ecclesiastical, as it is
well known and to be proved he has don as well in the defending of the Minister
of Durley, near the Manor of Bisshops Waltha^ refusing the said order, as
otherwise. But this may I boldy say, and I doubt nothing to prove it, that in all his book, there is not as much as one word of scripture, one Doctor, one
council general or prouincial not the practice of any one country throwgh
owte the world counted Catholic, that makes for such kind of regiment, as
M. Horn avoucheth, nor any one manner of proof that has any weight or pythe
in the world to persuade, I will not say, M. Fekenham but any other of much
less wit, learning and experience. I say M. Horn comes not ones nighe the
principal matter and question wherein M. Fekenha^ would and of right ought to
be resolved. I say further in case we remove and sequester al other proufes on
our side, that M. Horn shall by the very same fathers, councels, and other
authorities by him felfe producted so be overthrown in the chief and capital
question (unto the which he comes not nighe as a man might say, by one
thowsande miles) that his own company may have just cause to fear least this
noble blaste so valiantly and skilfully blown owte of M. Horns trompet shall
engender in the hearts of all indifferent and discrete Readers, much cause to
mistruste, more the^ they did before the whole matter, that M. Horn has taken
in hand to justify.

Wherefore as it is mete in all matters so is it here also convenient and
necessary to have before thine eyes, good Reader, the state and principal
question controuersed between the parties standing in variance: And then
diligently to see, how the proufes are of each party applied, for the
confirming of their assertions.

The principal questions concerning Ecclesiastical regiment, which M. Horn
does not on^ touch.
There are therefore in this cause many things to be considered. First that
Christ left one to rule his whole Church in his stead from time to time
unto the end of the world. Secondly that this one was Saint Peter the
Apostle, and now are the Bisshoppes of Rome his successors. Thirdly that
albeit the Bishop of Rome had no such universal government over the whole, yet
that he is and ever was, the patriarche of England and of the whole weste
Church, and so has as much to do here as any other patriarche in his
patriarkshippe. Then that all were it, that he had nothing to intermedle with
us nor as Pope, nor as patriarche, yet can not this supremacy of a civil prince
be justified: whereof he is not capable especially a woman, but it must
remain in some spiritual man. Beside this the Catholics say, No such regiment
as M. Horn defe^deth among all the sects saving in England.
that as there was never any such preside^te heretofore in the Catholic
Church: so at this present there is no such (except in England) neither emonge
the Lutherans, the Zwinglians, the Swenckfeldians or Anabaptists, nor any
other sect that at this day raygneth or rages in the world. None of these I
say agnise their cyuil prince, as supreme governor in all causes spiritual
and temporal: Last of al I say and M. Fekenham will also say that even M. Horn
him self in this his answer retreyteth so far back from this assertion of
supreme government in all causes spiritual and temporal, M. Horn himself
denies this supremacy in all causes ^cclesiastical.
which is the state and keye of the whole question, that he plucketh from the
prince the chief and principal matters and causes ecclesiastical, as we shall
here after plainly show by his own words.

The premises then being true, and of owre side abundantly proved, and better
to be proved, as occasion shall serve, as nothing can effectually be brought
against them, so M Horn, as ye shall evidently perceive in the process,
stragleth quyte from al these points, besetting himself, all his study and
endeavor, to prove that which neither greatly hyndereth our cause, nor much
bettereth his: and for the which neither master Fekenham nor any other
Catholic will greatly contend with him: which is when all is done, that
Princes may meddle and deal with causes ecclesiastical. Which as it is in some
meaning true, so does yt nothing reach home to the point most to have been
debated upon. And so is much labor vaynely and idlelye employed, with tediouse
and infynite talk and bablinge, all from the purpose, and owte of the matter,
which ought specially to have been justified. And therefore this is but an
impudente facing and bragging to say, that he has proved the like regiment
that we deny, by the Fathers, by the Councels, and by the continual practice of
the Church.

Now it is worthy to see the iolye policy of this man, and how even and
correspondent it is to his fellow protestants. The uneven dealing of the
protestants.
M. Jewel restrayneth the Catholics to.600. years as it were by an
extraordinary and new found prescription of his own, embarringe al Later
proufes. Yet he him self in the mean time runs at large, almost one
thowsande years Later, shrynkinge hither and thither, taking tagge and ragge,
heretic and Catholic, for the fortifying of his false assertions. This wise
trade this man keeps also, and to resolve M. Fekenham, and setle his
conscience, he specially stays him self upon Platina, Nauclerus, Abbas
Vrspergensis, Sabellicus, Aeneas pius, Volaterranus, Fabian, Polichronicon,
Petrus Bertrandus, Benno the Cardinal, Dura^dus, P. Aemilius, Martinus
poenitentiarius, Polidorus Virgilius. And such like as he him self declares
otherwhere and in this place also confesses. Now all be it the Catholics
refuse no Catholic writer, nor in this matter have cause so to do, yet in a
matter of such importance, which beside the loss of al temporal relief and
beside bodily death imports also everlasting damnation to the Catholics, (if
the case stand, as M. Horn and his fellows bear us in hand) reason would
he should have fetched the substance of his proufes much higher, yea within
the.600. years whereunto they strain and bind us: The which the Catholics
have already performed against M. Jewel, not in the substance of the matter
only, but even in the justifying of the precise words, wherein M. Jewel has
framed to himself by a foolish wylynes, or wylye foolyshnes, the state of the
question I mean for the words of head of the Church, and universal Busshop.

And what if M Fekenham now Sir would revel with you with like rhetorike, and
require of you to prove by the fathers writing within the said.600. years
these express words: A challenge to M. Horn.
Supreme head, or governor in all causes spiritual and temporal, to have
been given and attributed to any civil Magistrate? Again that the temporal men
without, yea and against the consent of the whole clergy, altered the state of
religion called and used for Catholic throughout the whole corpse of
Christendom one thousand years before with such other articles, as concern
the regiment Ecclesiastical that ye, in this your book defend? Ye have not,
no nor ye can not, prove any such matter either by expres words or by any good
induction or conseque^t in the first and former Fathers. And yet somewhat were
it, if the Later Fathers might help you.

But what an impudent face, as hard as any horn or stone have ye beside your
mere folly, to make the world believe, that the authors aforesaid allowed
such kind of regiment of civil Princes, as the Catholics now deny? Which
assertion is so certainly and notoriously false, that M. Horn him self can
not, nor does not deny, but that his own authors, M Horns tale incredible,
were most earnest fautours of the Sea of Rome. And how then may it ones be
thought by any wise man that they should allow the doings of such that
forsake and abandon al manner of authority of that See, further then is the
common authority of al other Bisshops, yea and make the Bishop of that Se^ to
whom the said authors attribute so large and ample authority and prerogative
as may be, and whom they agnise as supreme judge in matters of faith, a very
Antichriste? These things be incredible, these things (as the proverb is)
hang together like germans lips: and so shall ye, good Readers, M. Horn's late
brag.
see the matter most evidently fall owte. And therefore, M. Horn, where you
have of late openly sittinge at a table in London (as I am credibly informed)
bragged, that ye have quyte confuted the Papists with their own papistical
Doctors, how true this is, I trust it shall by this answer plainly appear.

M. Horn. The 3. Division.
Their judgments and sentences shall appear in reading by the form of letter:
for leuing forth the Latin to avoid tediousnes, 4. The 4 untruth For he
wrongfully alleges both the words and meaning of his Authors.
I have put into English the Authors minds and sentences, and caused them,
for the most part, to be Printed in Latin letters, that the English reader
may know and decerne the Authors sayings from mine.

If this that I have done, work that effect in the English Reader, which he
ought to seek, and I d^ vvishe, I have vvonne that I wrought for: but
otherwise, let men say and judge what they list, I have discharged my
conscience and showed the truth. Anno Domini. 1565. Feb. 25.

Rob. Wynchester.


Stapleton.
A great untruth. For M. Horn does not faithfully, but most corruptly and
falsely allege the authors words, and uses his own in stead of theirs: and
to such as he truly reherseth, he gives an unmeet and an improbable sense of
his own making, as we shall particularly notifye, when the case requires.

THE FIRST BOOK, CONTAINING MANY PRIVATE DOINGS OF M. Fekenham, the State of
the Que^tio^, answer to M. Horns oppositions out of holy scriptures both old
and new, with a declaration, who are the right Donatists, Protestants or
Papists.
M. Fekenham.
The declaration of such scruples and stays o^ ^^^science, touching the Oath
of Supremacy, as (...) ^^kenham by writing did deliver unto the L. Bis^^op of
Winchester, with his resolutions made thereun^^.

M. Horn.
The property of him that means to declare rightly any matter done, is to set
forth the truth without malice, to observe the due circumstances of the
matter, persons, and times: and to use simple plainness without guileful
ambiguities (5.) The 5. untruth in wrongfully charging M. Feke^ham for the
Title of his treatise.
This Title is so replenished with untrue report, and ambiguous sleightes,
without the note of any necessary circumstance, that there is not almost one
true word therein: whereby you give at the first a taste to the indifferent
reader, what he must look for in the sequel.

You pretend, and would have your friends to think, that the first four
chief points set forth in your book, were devised by you, put in vvriting,
and so deliured unto me, as the matter and ground whereupon, the conference to
be had betwixt me and you should stand: And that I made thereunto none other
but such resolutions, as it has pleased you (.6.) The 6. untruth, the
resolutio^s are truly reported, as shall appear.
untruly to report. In the first part, you conueigh an untruth under a
coulorable and ambiguous meaning, in these words, as M. John Feke^ha^ by
vvriting did deliver unto the L.B. of Winchester. In the other part (.7.) The 7
untruth Slanderous.
you make an untrue report without any color at all. I do grant and will
not deny, that you deliured to me a book: which, I thank God, I have to
show, whereby to disprove you. The same vvil declare the time when, the
place where, the occasion wherefore, the persons to whom the book was
vvrite^, and what is the matter in general therein contained: Whereunto must
be added, at what time the same was delivered unto me, upon what occasion,
and to what ^nde. Al which circumstances you omit in your book published,
least you should have bevvrayed your self, and have appeared in your own
likeness.

Stapleton. The First Chapter concerning the Title of M. Fekenhams declaration.
THIS was an happy hap for M. Horn, that it happed M. Fekenha^ with the
omitting of such slender circumstances to minister to him matter of such
trifling talk, wherein otherwise M. Horn should have had nothing to have
said. For here is he very exact and precise in circumstances to be kept,
with all dew observation, in a by matter, which whether it be true or false,
does nothing either preiudicate or touch the principal question, that is,
whether the resolutio^s were made before Master Fekenham delivered up his
matter in writing, or after. For this being true, that these resolutio^s were
made to take away the scruples and stays of M. Fekenhams conscience, which
scruples rose and prycked his conscience by and through such reasons and
causes first uttered by talk and after by writing alleged: wherein, I pray
you, has M. Fekenham offended you M. Horn, so greuouslye, that therefore he
should be noted of so untrue report, that there is not almost one true word
in the title of his treatise: that he should be noted of ambiguouse sleights,
yea and of malice to in prefixinge the said title to his Treatise?

And that he should conueigh untruth under coulorable and ambiguouse meaning,
as not observing the circumstance of time, place, and person. What
inconvenience is it, I pray you, though M. Fekenham wrote in the Tower, that
which he delivered to M. Horn at Waltham? What inconvenience follows, I
pray you, if he minded first to deliver the same to his examiners in the
Tower, or else where, as occasion should serve? Is this sufficient to disprove
him, to condemn him, to slander him of surmised untruth? It is rather to be
thought of such as are not malitiouse, to be plain dealing: not to dissemble
with you, but even as he had penned the writing before, so without any
alteration to deliver it. Who nevertheless, afterward, having occasion to
exhibit and present the same writing to others, did simply without guile or
deceit, signify it to be delivered unto you at Waltham. And was it not so?
Deny it, if you can. Every Child, by this may see, how fond and foolish
this your cauil is. But what is all this to the matter and thing now in hand?
It is, as your self confess, but a circumstance. How well M. ^orne k^peth
his own rule of circumstances.
But M. Horn now himself keeps so little his own rules and precepts of
circumstance, that beside the miserable and wretched perverting and deprauing
of his own authors he does so often and so maliciously omit and concele the
due circumstances of things by him reported (necessary for the full
illustration and opening of the whole and entiere matter) that concerning this
fault which he unjustly and triflingly obiecteth to M. Fekenham, In what point
the title of M. Fek. Treatise may be counted faulty.
he may most justly have the prick and price, as they say.

But now that I remember, and advise my self a little better, I suppose I can
not altogether excuse M. Fekenham for this title, but must race out thereof
four words, and in steed of Lord Busshop of Winchester, set in M. Robert
Horn: M. Fekenham dissembling and winking at the common error, whereby in the
estimation of many, ye are both called and taken for the Bishop of
Winchester: whereas in deed ye are but an usurper, and an intruder, as called
thereto by no lawful and ordinary vocation, nor canonical consecration, of
his great modesty and civility, willing the less to exasperate you and
others, thowghe he well knew ye were no right bishop, yet after the usual
sort calls and terms you Lord Bishop of Winchester. But I must be so
bold by your leave, as plainelye and bluntelye to go to work with you (as I
have done before with M. Grindall and M. Jewel yowr pewefellowes) and to remove
from you this glorious glittering Pecoks tail, and to call a fig a fig,
and a horn a horn: and to say (and that most truly) that ye are no Lord
Bishop of Winchester, nor else where, but only M. Robert Horn. For albeit
the Prince may make a Lord at her gracious pleasure whom she likes, yet can
she not make you Lord Bisshoppe of Winchester, considering ye are not Lord
but in respect of some Baronage and temporalties belonging and annexed to the Sea of Winchester. But you usurping the Sea, as you are no Bishop, so for the
consideration aforesaid, ye are no Lord, nor Prelate of the Garter. For ye
can be no Prelate of the Garter, M. Horn no Bis^h nor P^elate of the Garter.
being no Prelate at al: that being a prerogative appropriate to the Prelate
and Bishop of Winchester. Now that you are no true Bisshoppe, it is evident
by that your vocation is direct contrary to the Canons and Constitutions of
the Catholic Church, and to the universal custom and manner heretofore used
and practiced not only in England, but in all other Catholic Countries and
Churches delivered to us from hand to hand, from age to age, even from the
first graffing and planting of the faith, especially in England. For the
which I refer me, to all autentique and aunciente records, as well of
England as of other Nations, concerning the ordinary succession of Bishops,
namelye in the foresayed See of Winchester. For there was not, no not one in
that See, that did not acknoweledge the Supremacye of the Sea of Rome, and that
was not confirmed by the same, until the late time of Master Poynet: who
otherwise also was but an usurper, the true Bishop then living, and by no
lawful and Ecclesiastical order removed or deprived. Ye are therefore the
first Bisshoppe of this sewte and race, and so consequentlye, M. Horn the
first B. of his race in the Sea of Winchester.

In the Fortress of our first faith annexed to Ven. Bid. par. 2 cap. 1.3. and
8.

The Protestants vvo^derfully trobled about the question of the continual
succession of Bisshops.


no Bishop at all: as not able to show, to whom ye did ordinarily
succeed, or any good and accustomable either vocation, or consecration. Which
point being necessarily required in a Bishop, and in your Apostles Luther
and Calvin, and other lacking, (as I have otherwhere sufficientlye proved,
though you by deep silence think it more wisdom utterly to dissemble, then
ones to answer) they being therewith pressed, were so meshed and bewrapped
therein, that they could not in this world wit what to say thereto,
answering this and that, they wist nere what, nor at what point to hold them.
Yea Beza was feign in the last assembly at Poisy, with silence to confess the
invincible truth.

But let it so be that your vocation was good and sound, yet have you disabled
your self to occupy that room, and either ought not to be admitted, or
forthwith ought ye to be removed, for that ye are yoked (or as ye pretend)
married: and as well for the maintenance thereof as of many other abominable
errors (in case you stand obstinately in them) no doubt an Heretic. That ye
live in pretensed Matrimony with your Madge all the world knows, coloring
your fleshly pleasures under the name of an honorable Sacrament, by this your
incest wretchedly profaned and vilained Ye keep now your said Madge, in the
face of all the world without shame, which in King Henry's days ye kept in
hucker mucker and lusky lanes as many other did of your sort: especially M.
Cranmer that occupied the Sea of Ca^terburie: who carried about with him his
pretty conie in a chest full of holes, that his nobs might take the air.

Lechery turned into the name of wedlock
You will perchance stand in defense of your pretensed marriage, and also of your
other heresies, and say they are no heresies at all, and turn lechery into
wedlock, as some of your sort have of late days turned, upon good fridaie, a
Pigge into a Pike, putting the said pigge in the water and saying: go in
pigge, and come out pike. But then I refer you to the old Canons of the
Fathers, to the writings especially of S. Augustine, of Epiphanius, of
Philaster and other, that among other heresies, recite some of those that you
openly and your fellows maintain. If ye will reject the poor Catholics, M.
Horn and his fellows accounted heretics by the Apology of England. Apologia
Lati. in. 8. page 33.
S. Augustine and Epiphanius also, yet I trust you will not be against your
own famous Apology, which says that Epiphanius nombreth fourscore Heresies
(of the which it is one, for a man after the order of Priesthode to marie) and
S. Augustine a greater number and so concludes you and the residue to be
heretics. If ye will deny ye maintain any of those heresies, your preachings,
your teachings and writings bear full and open testimony against you. What
then have you to justify your cause? You will happily forsake and abandon S.
Augustines authority withal the old Canons and Councels, and fly under the
defense of your brickle bulwark of Acts of Parliament.

O poor and sely help: o miserable shift that our faith should hang upon an
act of Parliamente, contrary as well to all acts of Parliament ever holden in
England before, as to the Canons and Fathers of the Catholic Church. A
strange and a wonderful matter to hear in a Christian commonwealth, that
matters of faith are Parliament cases. That civil and profane matters, be
converted into holy and Ecclesiastical matters. Yea and that worse is, that
Lay men that are of the fold only, not shepherds at all, Religion ^^ered in
^ngland ^gai^st the (...) of the whole Cl^rgie.
and therefore bound to learn of their Catholic Bisshoppes and Pastors,
may alter the whole Catholic Religion, maugre the heads of all the Bishops
and the whole Convocation. This is to trouble all things: this is, as it were,
to confound together heaven and earth.

But yet let us see the providence of God: These men, M. Horn can not defend
and maintain his heresies nor himself to be a Bishop by any law of the
Realm.

See the Apology of Staphilus Fol 81.


that relinquishing the Church, would hang only upon a Parliament, are quite
forsaken, yea even there where they looked for their best help. For I pray
you, what warrant is there by act of Parliament to deny the Real presence of
Christ's body in the holy Eucharistia? Is it not for any Parliament as well
heresy now, as it was in Queen Mary's, King Henry's, or any other Kings
days? What can be showed to the contrary? Does not Luther your first Apostle
and his scholars, defy you therefore, as detestable Heretics? Now
concerning Transubstantiation and adoration, is it not well known, think you,
that in King Edwardes days, there was a preaty legerdemaine played, and a
leaf putt in at the printing, which was never proposed in the Parliamente?
What Parliamente have your Preachers to deny free will, and the necessity of
baptizing children? Again I pray you, is there any Act to confirm your
unlawful marriage? Does not in this point the Canonical Law stand in force,
as well now, as in King Henry's days? And so does it not follow, that ye
are no true Bishop? Beside, is it not notoriouse, that ye and your
Colleages, were not ordained no not according to the prescripte, I will not say
of the Church, but even of the very statutes? How then can ye challenge to
your self the name of the Lord Bisshoppe of Winchester? Whereof both the
Municipall and Ecclesiastical Law does woorthelye spoil you? Wherefore as I
said, let us dashe out these words, and then no reasonable man shall have any
great cause to quarrel against the Title of M. Fekenhams Treatise.

The.2. Division. M. Horn.
The book by you delivered unto me, touching the Oath, was written in the
Tovver of London (as you your self confessed, and the true title thereof, does
plainly testify) in the time of the Parliament holden Anno quinto of the Q.
Majesty Ianua. 12. at which time you little thought to have soiourned with me
the winter follovving, and much less meant, to deliver me the scruples and
stays of your conscience in writing, to be resolved at my hands. And although
you would have it seem, by that you have published abroad, that the cause why
you wrote, was to be resolved my hand: yet the truth is (as you your self
reported) that you and your Tovver fellows, hearing that the Statute moved
for the assurance of the Queens royal power, would pass and be
establissed, did conceive that immediately after the same Session,
Commissioners should be sent unto you, to exact the Oath. Whereupon you to
be in some readiness, to withstand and refuse the duty of a good subject,
(.8.) The.8. untruth, sla^derouse.
not without help of the rest (as may be gathered) devised the matter
contained in the book, committed the same to writing, and purposed to have
delivered it for your answer touching the Oath of the Supremacy to the
Commisioners, if they had come This may appear by the Title of that book that
you first delivered to me, which is word for word as follovveth.

The answer made by M. John Fekenham Priest, and prisoner in the Tower, to the
Queen's highness Commissioners, touching the Oath of the Supremacy.

In this Title there is no mention of scruples and stays delivered to the
Bisshoppe of Winchester, but of aunsvveare to the Queens Commissioners. I am
not once named in the ^itle, ne yet in the look deliu^^^^ to me: neither is
there one word as spoken to me: although in the (...) abroad, you turn all as
spoken to me. ^n your book published a^e (...) kinds of speeches: (...) in
d^^de the vv^orste kinds of speeches In all that book^ of M Feck.
To the L. Bishop of VVinchest^. When you^ L. shall be able etc. I shall join
this issue with your L. etc. But it is far otherwise in your book
delivered to me, namely. To the Queens highness commisioners. When ye the
Queens highness commisioners shall be hable etc. I shall join this issue with
you, that when any one of you, the Queens hignes commisioners, etc. From
October, at what time you were sent to me, unto the end of January, there was
daily conference betwixt us in matters of Religion, but chiefly touching the
four points, which you term scruples and stays of conscience, and that by
word of mouth, and not by any writing. In all which points, ye were (.9.) The
9. untruth. M. Fekenha^ was never so ansvvered.
so ansvvered, that ye had nothing to object, but seemed resolved, and in a
manner fully satisfied. Whereupon, I made afterward relation (of (.10.) the 10.
untruth. Incredible.
good meaning toward you) to certain honorable persons of the good hope I had
conceived of your conformity. At which time, a certain friend of yours
standing by, and hearing what I had declared then to the honorable in your
co^medacion, did shortly after (.11.) The.11. untruth. There was no such
report made.
report the same unto you, which as it seemed, you did so much mislike
(doubting that your confederates should understand of your revolt (.12.)
The.12. untruth. sla^derous
which they ever feared, having experience of your shrinking from them at
(.13.) The.13. untruth. notoriously sla^derous.
Westminster in the conference there, the first year of the Q. Majesty) that
after that time I found you alvvaies much more repugnant, and contrary to that
wherein ye before times seemed in manner thoroughly resolved: And also to go from
that you before agreed unto. By reason whereof, when in debating betwixt us,
you vsinge many shifts, amongst other, did continually quarrel in
Sophistication of words, I did will you, to the end we might certainlye
go forwards in the points material, that you vvoulde write your Positions
or Assertions, in form of Propositions: which I could not cause you to do
in any wise, but ye vvoulde still stand vncertainelye in granting and
deniyng at your pleasure: yea, although I for the better agreemente to be had,
did dravve such in form of Assertion, and gave them in vvrittng unto you, as
I gathered of your own mouth to be your opinion: yet vvoulde ye in no wise
stand too, and rest in any one certainelye, but used still your accustomed
wrangling and wa^dring at large. Which your behavior so much misliked me,
that I could not but earnestly charge you with inconstancy, in that ye
would sometimes deny, that ye before had granted: and also grant, that
ye before denied. Then being so much pressed herevvith, and perceiving that
your frovvarde quarelling with the plain words of the Statute, could no
longer cover your evil meaning, at the length you did require, that I vvoulde
put in vvri^ing the words of the Oath, with the sense or interpretation
added thereunto, as you considering thereuppon, might devise the form of your
Propositions, whereupon we might afterward debate. By this it may appear,
both how untrue it is, that you hitherto had delivered unto m^e any such
scruples of yours in writing, as you pretend in the Title (for then I needed
not to have sought any Propositions of your Assertions) and also how untrue
that is, that the interpretation of the Oath which I wrote at your request,
before I ever saw any writing of yours, was to answer your scruples and
stays delivered to me in writing.

The Second Chapter: declaring by the way, the order of the late disputations
at Westmynster.
HERE is no matter effectual, but that may seem already by our former answer
sufficiently discharged: saving that it serves to accumulate and increase the
heap of M. Horns untruths, as that this shedule should be made not without the
help of the rest. How prove you that M Horn? As it may be gathered, ye say.
yea, but why have you so sone forgotten your late lesson? Where be your
circumstances that enforced you so to gather? why were they not according to
your own rule specified? Again ye say, M. Fekenham was so answered at your
hands, that he had nothing to obiecte but seemed to be resolved, and in a manner
satisfied Sir, we call upon you yet ons again to remember your former rule,
with the which ye so straightly and vaynly charged M. Fekenham. But yet here ye
seame to be somewhat better advised, mollifying the matter with these words in
a manner satisfied: other wise yt had passed al good manner and honesty to, so
untruly to make that report the contrary being so well known, that he never
yielded unto you in any one point of religion, neither in court nor yet in
manor, nor else where.

Then have we an heap of other untruths packed up together: As that M. Horn
should have a good meaning toward M. Fekenham, making of him within six lines
after an untrue and a slanderouse report as to reuolte from the relligion by
him received and professed at baptism, to reuolte from the faith of Christ's
Catholic Church* to reuolte from all the most blessed Sacraments, and from the
unity of the said Church, and thereby to become as stark a schismatike and
an heretic as M. Horn him self is: Was this M Horn, your good and friendly
meaning toward M. Fekenham? He tha^keth you for nawght he will none of it: he
has espied you: ye proferre him to much wrong Of like sort is your other
saying of M. Fekenhams friend that should stand by, when you made relation of
the hope ye had of M. Fekenhams conformity, and that M. Fekenha^ upon your
report to him by his, friend should be more repugnant then he was before. This
seems to be made of your own head, to furnishe your own forged tale withal:
Which if it had been true, why did you not according to your own rule set
forth the truth thereof, observing the dew circumstances of the matter,
person, time, and place? But this incomparably passes and far excedeth al
your other forsayde untruths, that ye say M. Fekenham should so shrink from
his co^federats (as you term them more maliciously the^ truly) in the
conference made at Westminster, that they should ever since conceive a fear of
his constancy in religion.

I beseach you good Sir, in what one point of religion, did he shrink from his
company in that conference at Westminster? Was the matter wherein he dissented
from them any other than this? That, whereas both they and he also had agreed
upon a book towching the questions then in controversy between you and the^,
the right honorable Lord keaper of the great seal, commanded them in the
Queen her highness name to begin and to read their book first, which they
refused to do, and yet he for his part thought it not good to disobey the
Queen's highness commandment therein and thervppon offered himself to begin
the disputation, and the Lord keeper would not permit him so to do, what an
offense I beseache you has M. Fekenham committed herein, so great as worthy a
dashe with your pen? What shrynkinge in religion call you this, when in the
defense thereof he did so openly proferre him self to put forth the first
argument?

The book that was set forth of the said conference for the disgracing and
depressing of the Catholics, does yet give some commendation to M. Fekenham
for the cause above said and nothing towcheth him with any suspicion of
inconstancy, or mambring in religion, as ye most unjustly do: This is your own
fine and singular invention.

And now here ons again we must pluck you by the horns, and call you home to
your own rule, and demand of you: Sir how know you that his Tower fellows
have conceived such a fear of him? What proof are ye now able to make
thereof? Ye have spoken the words: ye have written them: ye have set them forth
in printe to the vewe and sight of the world. And that I trow of a very good
meaning toward M. Fekenha^. Yea forsothe. Who sees it not, and withal what
an honorable prelate you are thus to stuff and farse your book, with an heap
of such ouersights and open untruths?

I might now pass forth to the residewe of M. Horns book saving that the
me^tio^ of the conference at Westmynster and the book thereof made, occasioneth
me a little to speak thereof, for that I perceive many are slaundered thereby,
surmifyng the Catholics gave over, for that they were not able to defend and
mainteyne their side: But these me^ shall understand that the very cause was,
that they might not be suffered to reply to their adversaries, but were
commanded strait to a new question the first undetermined, and nothing by
them answered by reason their replication was cut of.

I speak nothing of the uneven dealing and handling of the matter, Concerning
the conference at VVestmynster in the first year of the Queen's Majesty's Reign.
as that the Catholics being in possession of the truth from time to time in
the Church continued and observed were yet notwithstanding disuantaged and put
to the prouf with much more injury, then if a man that had an hundred years and
more quietly enjoyed his Lands, should suddenly be disturbed and dispossessed
thereof, unless he could prove his possession, to hi^ that had no right or
interest to claim the same. Which I say not, for that the catholics had not,
or did not show sufficient evidence, but for the manner of the ordering and
dealing therein, the Catholics being very much straited for shortness of time:
beside that it was a fruytlesse and a superfluose enterprise: For in so many
great and weighty matters, as now stand in controversy and debate, to what
end and purpose was yt to debate upon these 3. matters only, whether the
service may be in the mother tongue: whether any one realm may alter and change
the rites and ceremonies in the Church and make new: The questions disorderly
put out.
whether the mass be a sacrifice propitiatory seeing that the first, and the
second question, be no questions of faith, and the.3. depends upon the
questions of transsubstantiation, and the real presence, which ought first to
have been discussed and then this, as accessory thereunto?

Again, what presidente or example can be showed of such kind of disputation
to be made before the Lay men as Judges? At Mo^ster by reason of Disputations,
in one year the Lutherans thrust out the Catholics, the Anabaptists the
Luthera^s Sleiden lib. 10.

The clergies suit to the parliament


Suerly how daungerouse this matter is, beside many fold records of
Antiquity, the miserable examples of our time do sufficiently testify:
especially at Monster in Germany. Where by these means the Lutherans thrust
out the Catholics, and where even by the very same trade, ere the year went
abowte, the Lutherans them selves were thrust owte by the Anabaptists. And
then within a while after followed the pytiful tragedy played there by the said
Anabaptists the worthy fruit of such disputatio^s. Now albeit these
disputatio^s were nothing neadful at al, and much less for that in the
parliament time, when this conference was had, the whole clergy (whose judgment
should have been in this case of chieffest importance) uniformly agreed, as well
upon the real presence as tra^substantiatio^ and the sacrifice also, with the
supremacy of the Pope, and made their humble petitio^n (as became their
vocation) that the au^cie^t relligion might not be altered in the parliament,
although they could never obtain that their petition might there be read, yet
if they would needs have gonne forward with their disputations, The Catholics
not suffered to reply.
reason had been, that they should have begone with the chief and principal
points, and not with the dependant and accessory members, or matters nothing
touching faith: and withal to have suffered the Catholics, to have replied to
their adversaries, which they could not be suffered to do, least their
adversaries weakness should (as it would have done in deed, and now daily does,
God be praised) evidently and openly have b^ne disciphered and disclosed.
Wherein whether the Catholics were indifferently dealt withal, The Catholics
required in Aphrica the Popes legate to be present in disputations with the
Aria^s. Vict. lib. 2. de perseq-Vandal.
I report me to all indifferent men. Surely among all other things concerning
the supremacy of the prince in causes Ecclesiastical, the denial whereof is more
extremely punished by the law, then any other matter of religion now in
controversy, there would have been much more mature deliberatio^, especially
considering that above.x. hundred years past, in disputations of matters of
faith, whereto the Catholics were provoked in Aphrica, the said Catholics
required, that at the said disputations should be present the Legates of the Sea of Rome, as the chief and principal See of Christe^dom. But let us now
return to M. Horn.

M. Horn. The.3. Division. page 3. a.
After this in February follovving, certain persons of worship resorted to my
hou^e* partly to see me, and partly to hear somevvhat betwixt me and you. And
after that we had reasoned in certain points touching Religion, wherein ye
seemed openly to have little matter to stand in, but rather did yield to the
most in substance that I had said: never the less being after vvithdravven
in some of their companies, although ye did seem openly to consent and agree
with me in that I had said: Yet (said you) the matter it self is grounded
here (pointing to your breast) that shall never go out. Which being told
me, I did vehemently then challenge you for your double dealing, and colorable
behavior: saying, that I thought you did not that you did, of any conscience
at al: and therefore compted it but lost labor further to travail with such
a one as had neither conscience nor constancy. But you, to show that ye did al
of conscience, shevved me both what ye had suffered for the same in diverse
manners, and also how the same was grounded in you long before. For proof
whereof, ye offered to shevve me a book of yours, that ye had devised in the
Tovver, and the same shortly after did deliver unto me, not as your scruples
and doubts to be resolved at my hand, wherein ye seemed in our conference
before had (.14.) The.14. Untruth. That M. Fekenha^ should give up his
Treatise in vvriting after he was resolved by M. Horn.
resolved: but only to declare, that the matter had been long before settled in
you, and this was the only and mere occasion of the delivery of the said book
unto me, entitled as is before declared, and not otherwise.

But as you have cast a mist before the eyes of the readers, under the speech
of a delivery in vvriting, without noting of any circumstance that might make
the matter clear, wherein you shevve your self to have no good meaning: even
so have you set forth resolutions of your own devise under my name, because
you are ashamed to utter mine, whereunto you yielded, and were not able to
answer.

Stapleton.
How unlike a tale this is, that M. Fekenha^ should either be resolved by M.
Horn, or being resolved, should the^ give up his matter in writing for none
other cause the^ M. Horn reports, I durst make any indifferent man judge, yea
a number of M. Horns own sect: there is no appearance, there is no color in
this matter. And therefore I will be so bold, as to add this to his other
untruths: where unto I might set an other more notable straight ways ensuing,
In the answer to the resolutio^s, the 440, leaf.
that M. Fekenham should set forth resolutions of his own devise under M.
Horns name, saving that I leave it to a place more appropriate, where the
matter shall be more conveniently and more fully discussed.

The 4. Division. Page 3. b. M. Fekenham.
For as much as one chief purpose and intent of this Oath is, for a more
saulfgard to be had of the Queen's royal person, and of her highness most quiet
and prosperous reign: I do here presently therefore offer my self to receive
corporal Oath upon the Evangelists, that I do verily think and am so
persuaded in my conscience, that the Queens highness is thonly suprem governor
of this realm, and of al other her highness Dominions and Countries according
as thexpresse words are in the beginning of the said Oath. And further I shall
presently swear, that her highness has under God, the sovereignty and rule
over al manner of persons borne within these her highness realms of what estate
(either Ecclesiastical or Temporal) so ever they be.

M. Horn.
How so ever by words you vvoulde seem to tender her Majesty's saulfty,
quietness, and prosperous reign, your (.15.) The 15. vntruethe vilainou^ and
slau^derous. M Fekenha^ by all his deeds has always shevved himself a most
obedient subject.
deeds declare your meaning to be clean contrary. What saulfty mean you to
her person, when you bereue the same of a principal part of the royal power?
what quietness seek you to her person, when one chief purpose and intent
of your book published, is to stay and bring her subjects to an heretical
misliking of her royal power, which is a preparation to rebellion against her
person? How much prosperity you vvish to her Majesty's reign appears, when
that with (.16.) The 16. untruth Devilish and spritish.
diepe sighs and groans you look daily for a change thereof, and (.17.) The
17.18. and 19 vntruth^ blasphemous horrible and vilainous For neither is the
pope any heretic, neither do Catholics make him their God: Neither wish t^ei
hi^ to reign in the Queen's place, that is, to have temporal jurisdiction as
the Queen's Man. has.
tharche Heretic of Rome, your (.18.) God in earth, to (.19.) reign in her
place.

The third Chapter declaring the rebellion of Protestants against their princes
in diverse Countres abroad, and the seditious writi^gs of English Protestants
at Geneua and otherwhere.
THere have been many Kings in this realm before our time, that have reigned
vertuouslye, quietly, prosperouslye, most honorably, and most victoriouslye,
which never dreamed of this kind of supremacy: and yet men of such knowledge
that they could sone espy, wherein their authority was impaired, and of such
cowrage and stowtenes that they would not suffer at the Popes hands, or at any
other, any thing done derogatory to their Royal power. And albeit the Catholics
wish to the Queen's majesty, as quiet, as prosperouse, as long, and as
honorable an empire to the honor of God, as ever had prince in the world, and
are as well affected to her highness, as ever were good subjects to their noble
princes aforesaid: yet ca^ they not find in their hearts to take the Oath: not
for any such synister affection as M. Horn most maliciously ascribes unto
them, but only for conscience sake, grounded upon the Canons and laws of the
holy Church, and the continual practice of al Christen and Catholic realms,
finally upon holy Scripture, Act. 5.
namely that saying of S. Peter. Oportet obedire Deo, magis quam hominibus. God
must be obeyed more then me^: So far from al rebellion against her highness
person, and from such sighthes and groans, as Master Horn most wickedly
surmiseth (wherein he shows by the way his own and other his accomplices
affection toward the princes not affected in religion as they be) that they
daily most heartily pray for her highness preservation: So far of I say, that
as they have already for God and his Catholic faith, suffered them self to be
spoiled of all worldly estate, content also if God shall so appointe, to be
spoiled also of their life, so is there none of them, whereof diverse have
faithfully and fruitfullie served their Prince and Country, that is not
willinge for the preservation of the Prince and his country, to imploye, if
the case so require, wit, body, and life also. And for my part, I pray God
heartily the trial would ones come.

But this is an old practice, first of the Painimes, and Jews, then of the
heretics, Act. 24. Vict de per seq. Vand. An old practice of Infidels,
Jews, and heret^ks. Sedition the pecuiiar fruit^ of heresy.
falsely to object to the Christians and Catholics, privy conspiracies and
sedition, the more to exasperate the Princes against them. And when truth
fails, then with the Princes authority and laws to fear them. Surely, this
man blows his horn a wrong, with charging the Catholics with sedition,
which is the very badge and peculiar fruit of all their Evangelical brood.

I let pass the Donatists, and their horrible tragedies: I let pass the
Boheames with their blind Captain both in Body and soul, Zischa (a meet
Captain for such a caitife company) with their detestable vprores, sedition,
and mighty army against their Prince and Country: I let pass how cruelly
they handeled the Catholics, Vide vvald doct. fidei. tom 2.

Doctrinali, and Documento. 1


casting.12. of their chief Doctors and Preachers, into a kill of hot
burning lyme: and how pitifully they murdered a noble Catholic Knight: first
burning his feet, then his legs, then his knees, then his thyes, to force
him to consent to their wicked doctrine, which when he courageously and
valiauntlye refused, they consumed with fire the residue of his body. Aene.
Pius in Praefaet. De orig. Bohemiae. Nauclerus generat. 49. page 48^.
I let pass the traitorous poysoninge of that noble young Prince Ladislaus the
King of Boheme and Hungary, at the time of his marriage in Praga, by the means
of Georgius Pogebratius a great Hussyte, for that the said Ladislaus at his
first entry into his Town of Praga, gave but heavy looks to the Hussian
Ministers, but lighting of his Horse embraced most lovingly the Catholic
Priests, saying: Hos Dei Ministros agnosco. These I acknowledge for the
Mininisters of God. And to come nearer to our own home, Polidore. lib. 22.
Hist. Ang.
I let pass the great conspiracies of Sir Roger Acton and Sir John Oldecastle
with their accomplices against King Henry the fifth.

I refer me only (to be short) to the tragical enormities yet fresh in
remembrance, of Luthers Scholars in Germany, in Dennemarke, in Swethelande,
and in our Country in the time of Queen Marie: of the Caluinistes in France,
in Scotland, and presently in these low Countries, of Brabant, Hollande,
Flanders, and Lukelande: Last of all, of the Anabaptists in the City of
Mounster in Westphalia. For these three noble Sects issued of that poisoned
root of Luther and his strompette Cate, have each of them according to their
hability, given forth such euidente arguments of their obedience (forsothe)
to their Soueraines, that all the forenamed Countries, do well not only
remember the same, but feel yet presently the smarte thereof.

In Germany the Lutherans both the commons under Thomas Muntzer their
Captain against their Nobles, and the Nobles them selves against their
Emperor, notoriously rebelled, and that under pretense of Religion. Sleidan.
lib 4. in sine.

Ide^. li. 17. and. 19.


The murder in one summer of fifty thousand men of the communaltie at the
least (as Sleidan reports) and the famous captivity of the Duke of Saxony
and the Lantgraue of Hesse under Charles the fifth (the late most renouned
Emperor) who both stood in field against him, will never suffer those
bloody practices to be forgotten. The insurrection of the people in Dennemarke
against their Nobles, and of the Nobles in Swethelande against their Prince
(as witnesses that learned Counselor of the late most Catholic Emperor
Ferdinandus, In Apolog. heart. 3.
Fridericus Staphylus) are known to all the world with the success thereof.
The open rebellion of Sir Thomas Wiat in the reign of Queen Marie (covering
his heresy with a Spanish cloak) Charing Cross and Tower hill will never
forgette.

In France the Zwinglians not only by traitorous force bereauing the Prince of
Piemont of his: Town of Geneua, and fixing there ever since the wicked
Tabernacle of their loytering heresies, but also even under the King that now
lives (as with my eyes I have my self there beholded) first by unlawful
assemblies against open Proclamations, and after by open rebellion without
measure of bloudshedde, by taking up of the Kings rentes in Gasconie and the
Province, by possessing by violence his principal towns, Rhone, Orleans,
Lions, and such other, by murdering most traiterouslie his General Captain
the noble Duke of Guise, have showed their godly obedience to their Sovereign
Princes.

For the better and more large deciphering of all these tragical feats
wrought by the Caluinistes in the Realm of France, I refer you, Master
Horn, to an Oration made of this matter expresselye, and pronounced here in
Louaine, and translated eloquently and printed in our English tongue. What
loyal subjects the Caluinistes in Scotland, have showed them selves toward
their Queen and Sovereign, Knokes and his band, the flight of the Nobles, and
the murdering also of her most dear Secretary, eue^ within her graces hearing,
with other bloody practices, yet hot and fresh, bears open witness before all the world. It is evident, that beside and against the Princes authority, your
Religion (M. Horn) has taken place there.

Of the late rebellion in Flanders.
To come to the outrageous enormities of the low Countries here, what tongue can
express, what pen can deciphre sufficiently the extremity thereof? These men
living under a most Catholic, most clement, and most mighty Prince, (the
loyalty of their profession is such) they neither reverence his Religion, nor
consider his clemency, nor fear his power: but contrary to his open edictes
and proclamations, abusing his rare clemency in remitting unto them the rigor
of the Inquisition, proceed daily to ouerturne the Relligion by him defended,
to provoke his just indignation, and to contemn his Princely power. For, a
grant being made of the mollification thereof for a season, until the Kings
pleasure were farther known: at the humble suite of certain Gentlemen, put up
to the Lady Regent the.5. of April, in the year.1566. which grant also was
expressly made, In Resp. Ducissae. 6. Aprilis.
upon condition that nothing should be innouated in matters of Religion in the
mean while, these men yet, having an inche granted them, took an elle, and
the rod being cast aside, fell straight to more unthriftiness then before.
For sone after flocked down into these low Countries, a number of rennegate
preachers, some out of Geneua and France, some out of Germany, some
Sacramentaries, some Luthera^s, and some Anabaptists. Who lacking not their
vpholders and stays fell to open preaching, first in Flaunders and then next in
Antwerp, the.24. of June of the said year.1566. After at Tournay, and
Valencenes, in Holland and Brabant, in all Towns well nere, except only this
noble University of Louaine: which (God only be praised therefore) has
continued in all these garboiles, troubles, and disorders, not only free from
all spoils of their Churches and Chappelles, yea and of all Monasteries round
about, as few towns beside have done, namely Bruxels, Bruges, Lyle, Mounts in
Henaut, Arras, Douay, and no town else of importance (as far as I can
remember) but also has remained free from all schismatical sermons in or about
the town. Which of no great town in all Brabant and Flanders beside can be
said. God only be praised therefore, for whose only glory I write it. For as
this town and university, was above al other towns in all this. Land most
spyted and threatened of these rebellious Protestants (by reason of the
Doctors and Inquisitours here, whose rigor they pretended as a cause of their
malice) so was it by Gods singular mercy, from their special malice, most
singularly preserved. To him only be the glory and honor thereof. Else man's
policy was no less, and the power of resistance was greater in other towns
then in this. But God, I trust, has showed his singular mercy upon this
place, to stop the gaping Ravens mouths, Pulchrum est coruos deludere
hiantes.
the heretical brood as well of this land as otherwhere, which thirsted
after the blood of the learned Doctors, and Catholic Students of this place.

To return to our matter, the sermons beginning at Antwerpe, (without the
town walls) at the first few, at the second, and third preachings and so
forth, great numbers assembled. The more half always as gasers on, and
harkeners for news, then zealous Gospellers as they call them selves. The
number then both of the audience and preachers increasing, a proclamation came
from the court, and was published in Antwerp the.vj. of Iulie, that none of
town should repair to such foreign preachings upon a pain. This was so
well obeyed, that to the Kings own Proclamation, printed and fastened upon
the South door of S. Mary's Church in Antwerpe, it was in the very paper of
the Proclamation vnderwriten by a brother of your Gospel M. Horn, Syrs: To
morrow ye shall have a Sermon at such a place and time. As who would say: a
fig for this Edicte, and as the traiterouse brethern in Antwerp have not
sticked openly to say: An vnmanerlie talk meet for so clenly a Gospel.
Schij^e op die Conning, We will have the word, what so ever our King say
or command to the contrary. How think you M. Horn? Do these men
acknowledge their Prince Supreme Governor in all Spiritual causes? But let
us go on. To let pass the continuance of their preachings without the walls,
which dured about six or seven wekes, the Prince of Orange governor of the
town, laboring in the mean season a great while but in vain, to cause them
to surcease from their assemblies, until the Kings pleasure with the accord
of the General States were known, Recueil de ^hoses aduenues en Anuers. An.
1566.
they not admitting any such delaie or expectation (as them selves in a
french Pamphlet by them published in printe, without the name of the Author or
place of the printing, do confess, foreseeing (as they said) that no good
would come thereof, and therefore obeying the Magistrate as much as them listed)
found the means to bring their assemblies into the town it self, so far
without the Kings or the Regents authority, as if they had had no King at al
out of the land, nor Regent in the land. But the means which they found to
bring this feate to pass, was singular and notable.

Whereas the.19. of August the Prince of Orange departed from Antwerp to Bruxels
to the court, that being then in the Octaues of the Assu^ptio^ of our Lady, a
special solemnity in the chief Church of Antwerp town, By what means the
new prechi^g^ entered first the town of Antwerp.
the brethren both for the Governors absence emboldened, and in despite of that
sole^nity more enkendeled, the.xx. of August being Tuesday toward eueni^g, at
the Antemne time between v. and.vj. of the clock, began first by certain boys
to play their Pagea^t, mocking and striking by way of derision, the Image of
our Lady the^ especially visited and honored for the honorable memorial of her
glorious Assu^ptio^. At this light behavior of the boys some stir being
made, as well by the Catholics then in the Church, as by the faction of the
Caluinists there also the^ assembled, the Catholics fearing a greater
inconvenience, began to depart the Church, and the brethren at the rumor
thereof increased very much. Herevpo^ incontine^tly the Margraue of the town,
the chief Officer in the Governors absence, being sone advertised by the
Catholics of some tumult like to arise, drew in all have to the Church. But the
brethren by this time were become Lords of the Church, and had shut the doors
against the Margraue. Notwithstanding at length the Margraue going from door
to door gat in, and approaching to the assembly of the Caluinists, willed and
commanded the^ in the Kings name whose Officer he was, to depart the Church,
and not to interrupt Gods service as they had begun. They answered, they came
also to do God service, and to sing a few Psalms in his honor, that being a
place most convenient therefore. Many words passing between the Margraue and
them, their number being great and increasing still, the Margraue departed the
Church, nothing prevailing neither by fair words nor by foul. The Magistrate
being thus rejected (as unable in deed to withstand the faction of the
Rebels, as it appeared well even that night) the holy brotherhode went to
their druggery. First they song Psalms, pretending that only to be the cause
of their meeting there at that time. At their Psalmodie rushed in great numbers
of people, some to see and be gone again, some to remain and accompany them.
I was my self present at the beginning of this Tragedy (coming by chance to
the town that afternone) and I saw after the Margraue was gone out of the
Church, and their Psalmodie begone, not past (I verily suppose) threescore
persons assembled. Mary there rushed in continually great numbers of such as
tarried still with them. All this was before six of the clock. From that time
foreward, their melody sone ended, they proceeded to sacrilege, to breaking of
Images, to throwing down of Aulters, of Organes, and of all kind of
Tabernacles, as well in that Church, as in all other Churches, Monasteries and
Chappelles of Antwerpe, to stealing of Chalices, to spoiling of Copes, to
breaking up of seats, to robbing of the Church Wardens boxes as well for
the Church as for the poor. And herein, I will report that which I saw
with mine eyes. In Saint James Church, the spoil there being not so
outragiouse, as in other Churches, all the settles, benches and seats, made
about the Church pillars and Aulters for folk to sit and kneel in, were
in manner left whole, one only excepted, placed at the west end of the
Church, in the which were diverse little scobbes and boxes of gatherings for
the poor. These scobbes lo, only, were broken up, and the contents visited:
for to them was their chief devotion: All the rest remained whole, and
unspoiled.

To be short, all that night (which to him that had been present thereat, as I
then was, might well seem Nox Siciliana) the Zealous brotherhood so followed the
chase, that they left not one Church in Antwerpe great or small, where they
hunted not up good game, and carried away flesh good store. Chalices, patens
and cruets of gold and of silver, copes and vestiments of silk and of velvet,
fine linen and course, none came amiss: They took al in good part, and
took no more then they found. What shall I speak of the very libraries
spoiled and burned, namely of the gray friars, and of the Abbye of S. Michael?
To describe particularly the horrible and outrageous sacrileges of that night,
an eternal docume^t of the ghospellike zele, of this sacred brotherhood, would
require a full treatise of it self. Only this much I have shorthly touched,
that you may see and palpably feel M. Horn, if any common sense remain in
you, what obedient subjects your brethern are, which with in.24. miles of their
Princes Court, which contrary to the express admonition of the Magistrate then
present, contrary to all law, reason, right, or conscience, under pretense
forsothe of your ghospels zele (the zele truly of Christ's gospel, was never
such) feared not in great numbers to commit such open robbery, theft,
felony, sacrilege, and treason. But let us proceed.

This Noble Strategeme was a way to bring their preachinges within the town
walls: for now they had I trow, well deserved of the town, and were right
worthy of all favor and liberty. Therefore the Thursdaye after, they preached
openly in our lady Church, and the Saturday in in the Burge Church, and
required to have places in all the Churches to preach. But at the first two,
and then four, and at last all the Catholics Churches being forebidden the^,
they obtained yet certain places in the new town to build them new Churches:
which they did with great speed. The Caluinists builded four, and the
Lutherans two. This much ground they got, by one nights work.

But was it possible, that such a beastly beginning, should have either long
continuance, or any good ending? We shall see by the issue. In this month of
August not in Antwerp only, but in Gant, Ypres, Valencene and diverse other
towns in Fla^dres, Hartoghe^buske, Lyre, and other in Brabant, in diverse towns
also of Holla^d, in some in Zela^d, and throughout well nere al these low
cou^tres, Churches were robbed and spoiled, though in few so outragiously or so
universally as in the town of Antwerp. The storm of this sudden spoils being
somewhat assuaged and stopped by policy and spedy resista^ce, yet the new
preachi^gs took place about al towns: only Louain as I have said excepted. this
being the only maide^ town of any importance in all Braba^t and Flandres, for
being free both within and many a mile about, no less from al schismatical
preachings, then from all sacrilegious spoils. God only, as I have said, be
praised therefore. But to proceed, soon after these sacrileges, they fell to
open rebellion. For when al went not foreward as it liked the Ministres, by
their persuasions, towns began to rebelle, and to shut their gates against the
Kings souldiars, which to have justice don upon Church robbers, and to stay
farther enormities the Prince commanded to be admitted. Such were Tournay,
Valencens, Hartoghenbaske, and Hassels in Lukela^d. But Tournay being soon
recovered, and the protesta^tical rebels subdewed Vale^cens held out eue^ to
the battery of the walls: before which time all Catholics being driven out of
the town that openly would show the^ selves for such, al monasteries being
overthrown, the churches being turned into barns or storehouses for their
corn, the brethern of Antwerp envying at the ioly liberty and audacity of the
Vale^ceners, attempted diverse times to obtayn the like in their town also.
Witnesses hereof, the tumult made about the gray friars Church the 19. of
September, the Prince of Ore^ge being present ska^t able to stay it. The spoil
renewed in S. Mary's Church in the month of Noue^bre, whereof six the next day
were hanged by the Conte Hochstrat the^ the Prince of Orange his deputy. The
burning of a great part of the gray friars Church and cloister in the first
So^day of Le^t. And last of all the open, manifest, and notorious rebellion made
by the caluinists in Antwerp, the 13. of March last when they possessed the
artillery of the town, planted their ordinance in the great Maire, a street so
called, stood there in arms against their Prince, required openly the kayes
of the gates, and of the town house, the banishment of al religious persons and
priests, and brefly as the cry the^ went about the streets, des Coopma^s goet,
en Pape^ bloet: the goods of the Marcha^ts and the blood of the Priests. These
I say are manifest, clear and evident witnesses that the Caluinistes of Antwerp
attempted no less rebellion, the^ the town of Vale^cens practiced in deed. But
of this Notorious attempt and of the whole manner, end and beginning thereof
toward the end of this book I shall more largely speak, to the which place I
remitte the Reader.

Now what a great and sodayn overthrow God has given to al these traiterous
atte^pts of ghospelli^g protestants, and how they have wrought therein their
own destruction (for had they not attempted the dominion it self, their
heresies (we fear) would longer have been winked at, and perhaps not repressed
at al) how first the caluinists in Antwerp were by main force of the
Catholics, (the Luthera^s joining in that feate with the^, constrained to lay
down their weapons, and to cry, Viue^e Roy, God save the king, how sone after
upon palmesonday the town of Valencenes was taken by the kings Captains, how
straight after Easter the preachers were driven to depart Antwerpe, and al
other towns and Cities of these low Countries, how their new Churches are
made a pray to the kings souldyars, briefly how al is restored to the old
face and cou^tena^ce as nighe as in so short a time may be, how wonderfully,
mercifullye, and miraculously God has wrought herein, neither my rude pen is
able worthily to express it, nether my small experience can sufficiently report
it. I leave it therefore to a better time and occasion, of some other more
exactly and worthily to be chronicled.

This is lo M. Horn, the obedience of the Caluinistes in these low cou^tres
here, as we hear daily with our ears and see with our eyes. And truly
experience has to well showed, that Protestants obey, until they have power to
resist. When their faction is the stronger side, as they resist both Prelates
and Popes, so they lay at both Kings and Keysars. And to this the law of
their Gospel enforces them, as their own Ministers persuade them. So by the
persuasio^ of Theodore Beza (Caluins holy successor now at Geneua) the
villayne Poltrot slew the Duke of Guise, his Princes Capitain General. By the
Authority of Hermannus a known rennagate now in England, and a famous
preacher here, as before in Italy for open baudery no less infamous, the town
of Hassels in Lukelande rebelled. By the encouragement and setting on of the
Ministres (who for the time were the chief Magistrates there) the town of
Tournay for a season also rebelled, and sent out aid to the rebels of
Vale^cens, who sped according to their deserts, being to the number of ij. M.
or there about intercepted by the kings souldyars and slain within the twelve
days at Christmas last. And it is well known, namely by the first execution
made after the taking of Valencenes, about witsontyde last that the Ministers
themselves were the chief Authors of the long and obstynat rebellion of that
town. Such supreme gouuerment of the Prince over causes Ecclesiastical your
dear brethern here (M. Horn) the Caluinistes do acknowledge and practice.
Which that it renew not to a farther rebellion, we for the peace of Gods
Church, and for our own safty do pray, and you for saving your poor
honesty, had need to pray. Except your heart also be with them (M. Horn)
though your pen condemn them.

Now for the purgation of the Catholics, The Catholics no seditious subjects.
against whom this man so falsely and maliciously blows his horn, yt may
seame a good and a conueniente proof, of their quietness and obedience, that all this.8. years and more there has not ben in the realm, no not one that I can
hear of, that has been convicted, of any disloyalty, for word or dead,
concerning the Princes civil regiment: which they all wish were as large and
ample, and as honorable as ever was our noble countreymans the great
Constantines. And albeit I know quod non sit tutum scribere contra eos, qui
possunt praescribere, Why the catholics should be borne vvithal.
Yet for matters of conscience and relligion (wherein only we stand) we poor
Catholics most humblye upon our knees desire her highness, that we may with
most lowlye submission crave and require, to be borne withal, if we can not
upon the sodayn, and without sure and substantial grounds abandon that
faith, that we were baptized in, and (as we are assured) al our auncetours, and
al her Majesty's own most noble progenitors, yea her own most noble father
King Henry the eight, yea that faith, which he in a clerkly book has most
pythely defended, and thereby achieved to him and his, and transported as by
hereditary succession, The Queens title Defender of the faith.
the worthy title and style yet remaining in her highness, of the defendour of
the faith. Other disobedience then in these matters, (if there be any thing in
us worthy that name) wherein as I have said our first and principal obedience
must wayt upon God, and his Catholic Church, I trust her highness has not, nor
shall not find in any true Catholic.

Let us now turn on the other side, and consider the fruits of M. Horn his
euangelical brethren and their obedience, The obedience of the Eua^gelicall
brethren in causes Ecclesiastical.
that by words would seame to recognize the Queen's Majesty as supreme
governor in all causes ecclestical. Who are those then, I pray you M. Horn,
that repine at the Queen's majesty's iniunctio^s and ordinances, for the decente
and comely apparel mete for such as occupy the room of the clergy? Whence
came those.16. Ministres to Paris, and what Ministres were they, but
roundecappe Ministres of England, fleying the realm for disobedience? Who
wrote and printed a book at Rhone against the Queens Majesty's express
co^maundment of priestly apparel? Was it not Minister Barthelet, that published
before the infamous libel against the universal Church of God, both that
now is and ever has been? As fond now and peuish against his own
congregation, as he was wicked before and blasphemous against the whole Church
of God? Who are they that have preached with a chain of gold abowte their
necks in stead of a typpet? Who are those that preach even in her highness
presence, that the Crucifixe her grace has in her chappelle is the Idol
with the red face? Who are those I pray you, that write: Sint sane and ipsi
magistratus membra and parts, Magdeb. pref. ce^t. 7
and ciues Ecclesiae Dei^imo vt ex toto cord sint, omnes precari decet.
Flagrent quoque ipsi zelo pietatis: sed non sint Capita Ecclesiae, quia ipsis
non competit iste primatus. Let the magistrates also be members and parts, and
cytizens of the Church of God, The Lutheraa^ in Germany deny this supremacy.
yea and that they may be so, it behooves us al with all our heart to pray, let
them be feruente in the godly zeal of religion, but they may not be heads of
the Church in no case: for this Supremacy does not appertain to them.

These are no Papists, I trow Master Horn, but your own dear brethern of
Magdeburge, in their new story ecclesiastical: by the which they would have
all the world directed, yea in that story, whereof one parcel Illiricus and his
fellows have dedicated to the Queen's Majesty: Cent. ^.
that bear the world hand, they are the true and zelouse scholars of Luther.

In case ye think their testimony not to have weight enowgh, then herke^ to
your and their Apostle Luther, who writes, that it is not the office of Kings
and princes to confirm, Co^tra artic. Lou. Tom. 2.
no not the true doctrine, but to be subject and serve the same. Perhaps ye
will refuse and reiecte both the Magdeburgenses and Luther to, as your mortal
enemies, (you being a sacramentarye) and such as take you and your fellows for
stark heretics. A hard and a strange case, that now Luther ca^ take no place
among a number of the eua^gelical brethern. Andreas Modreuius de Ecclesia lib.
2. c. 10.
What say you then to Andreas Modreuiu^? Surely one of the best learned of al
your sect. How like you then him that says, there ought to be some one to be
taken for the chief and Supreme head in the whole Church in all causes
ecclesiastical. Well, I suppose you will challenge him to as a Lutherane. If it
must neades be so, I trust M. Calvin your greatest Apostle shall bear some
sway with you. I know ye are not ignorante that he calls those blasphemers,
The Zvvinglians deny this supremacy.

Calvin c. 7. Amos.


that did call king Henry the eight Supreme head of the Church of England:
and handles the king hi^ self with such vilany, and with so spiteful
words, as he never handled the Pope more spitefully, and al for this title of
Supremacy, which is the key of this your noble book. Can ye now blame the
Catholics M. Horn, if they deny this supremacy, which the heads of your own
religion, as well Lutherans, as Zwinglia^s do deny and refuse?

A nevve sect in Engl^nd contrary to all the world beside, as well papists
as protestants. They may be called (...): Laicocephali: as ye would say.
Layheads, or Laiehead makers.
O what a strange kind of religion is this in England, that not only the
Catholics, but the very patriarchs of the new euangelical brotherhod do
reiecte and condemn? Perchance ye will say. Well, for all this there is no
English man of this opinion. Mary that were wonderful, that if as we be
sequestered and as it were shut up from other countres by the great Ocean sea
that does enuyro^ us, so we should be shut up from the doctrine as well of the
Catholics, as also the Protestants of other co^treis: and that with us the
Lutherans and Zwinglia^s should find no friends to accompany them, in this as
well, as in other points. But content your self M. Horn, and think you if ye
do not already, that either your self, or many other of your brethern like the
queen's supremacy never a deal in heart, what so ever ye pretend and dissemble
in words. Think ye that Calvin is so slenderly frended in England, his books
being in such high price and estimation there? No, no, it is not so to be
thought. The contrary is to well known: especially the thing being not only
openly preached, by one of your most fervent brethren there in England, even
since the Queens majesty's reign: but also before openly and sharply written
against, by your brethren of Geneua. Especially one Anthony Gilbie. Whose
words I will as well for my discharge in this matter, somewhat at large recite,
as also to show his judgment, of the whole Religion as well under King Henry,
as King Edward, and so consequently of the said Religion under our gracious
Queen Elizabeth, now used and revived: that all the world may see that to be
true, that I said of the Supremacy, as also that the fervent brethren, be not
yet come to any fix or stable Religion, and that they take this to be but
simple as yet, and imperfect.

In the time (says he) of King Henry the eight, Antonie Gilbie in his
admonition to England and Scotland to call them to repe^ta^ce. Impri^ted at
Geneua by John Cri^pine. 1558. p, 69
when by Tindall, Frith, Bilney, and other his faithful servants, God called
England to dress his vineyarde, many promised full fair, whom I could name,
but what fruit followed? Nothing but bitter grapes, yea briars and brambles,
the wormwood of avarice, the gall of cruelty, the poison of filthy
fornication flowing from head to foot, the contempt of God, and open defense of
the cake Idol, by open proclamation to be read in the Churches in steed of
Gods Scriptures. Thus was there no reformation, but a deformation, in the time
of the Sea how religiosly the Protestants speak of their Princes,
Tyrant and lecherouse monster. The bore I grant was busy, wrooting and
digging in the earth, and all his pigges that followed him, but they sought
only for the pleasant fruits, that they winded with their long snoutes: and
for their own bellies sake, they wrooted up many weeds: but they turned the
ground so, mingling good and badde together, sweet and sower, medecin and
poison, they made, I say, such confusion of Religion and Laws, that no good
thing could grow, but by great miracle, under such Gardeners. And no
marvel, if it be rightlye considered. For this Bore raged against God,
against the Devil, against Christ, and against Antichriste, as the some that
he cast out against Luther, the racing out of the name of the Pope. And yet
allowing his laws, and his murder of many Christian souldiars, and of many
Papists, do declare and evidently testify unto us, especially the burning of
Barnes, Jerome, and Garrette their faithful preachers of the truth, and
hanging the same day for maintenance of the Pope, Poel, Abel, and
Fetherstone, does clearelie painte his beastlines, that he cared for no
Religion. This monsterous bore for all this, must needs be called the Head of
the Church in pain of treason, displacing Christ our only head, who ought
alone to have this title. Wherefore in this point, O England, ye were no
better then the Romish Antichriste, who by the same title makes him self a
God, and sits in men's consciences, banisheth the word of God, as did your
King Henry, whom ye so magnify. For in his best time nothing was heard but
the Kings Book, the Kings Procedings, the Kings Homilies, in the Churches,
where Gods word only should have been preached. So made you your King a God,
believing nothing but that he allowed. I will not for shame name how he turned
to his wont: I will not write your other wickedness of those times, your
murders without measure, adulteries and incestes of your King, and his Lords,
and Commones. etc.

Lo Master Horn, how well your Protestante fellow of the best race, even
from Geneua, lyketh this Supremacy by plain words, saiynge: that this title
which you so stoutlye in all this your book auouche, displaceth Christ, who
owghte and that only to enjoy it. And whereas ye most untruly say here,
that we make the Pope our God in earth: Master Gilbie says, that you make
your Prince a God, in attributing to her this wrong title, wherein Christ will
have no co^partener: Surely, we make no God of the Pope, and sometimes
perhaps, no good man neither. And yet we reverence him for his office and
authority, that Christ so amply and honorably gave him for preservation of
unity and quietness in his Church. Your wisdom with like truth also appears
in that you call the Pope the Archeretike of Rome, naming no man. And so your
words so liberally and wantonly cast out, do as well comprehend S. Peter, S.
Clement, and other holy Martyrs, and Bishops there, as any other. I promise
you a well blown blast and hansomly handeled. With like finenesse you call him
Archeretike, that is the supreme Judge over all Heretics and heresies too, and
that has already judged you and your Patriarchs for Archeritikes. I wisse as
well might the fellon at the bar in Westmynster hall to save his life, if it
might be, call the Judge the strongest thief of all: and doubtless (had he a
Prince on his side) his plea were as good as youres is: Now where ye say, we
would have the Pope to reign here in the Queen's place, proceeds from your lik
truth and wisdom. For albeit the Popes authority was ever chief for matters
eccleastical, yet was there never any so much a noddie, to say and believe the
Pope reigned here: The Pope and the King being ever two distinct persons, far
different the one from the other, in several functions and administrations: and
yet well concurrant and coincident together without any^ imminution of the one
or the others authority.

Well, ye will perhap say, that albeit M. Gilbie misliketh this title in the
Prince, yet he likes well the religion, especially such as now is, and such as
was in King Edwards days which is all one. Harken then I pray you, what his
censure and judgment is thereof. I will name (says he) no particular things
because I reverence those days (meaning of King Edward) saving only the
killing of both the Kings uncles and the prisonment of Hoper for Popes
garments. Ibidem. Fol. 70. Gilbies judgment concerning the religion that
now is.
God grant you al repentant hearts. For no order or state did any part of
his duty in those days: but to speak of the best, whereof you use to boast,
your Religion was but an English Mattins patched forth of the Popes Portesse:
many things were in your great book superstitious and foolish. All were driven
to a prescript service like the Papists, that they should think their duties
discharged, if the number were said, of Psalms and Chapters. Finallye, their
could no discipline be brought into the Church, nor correction of manners.

I trust now, M. Horn, that you will somewhat the more bear with the
Catholics, if they can not well bear the service and title which your
companions so ill likes. Yet because ye are so hard master to M. Fekenham
and his fellows, to have their doing a preparation to rebellion against the
Queen's person, for defe^ding Ecclesiastical authority, which nothing touches
her person or croun (as without the which it has most honorably continued and
flourished many hundred years, and shall by Gods grace continue full well and
full long again, when it shall please God) let this title and jurisdiction
Ecclesiastical go, which al good Princes have ever forgon as nothing to them
apertaining. Let us come to the very temporal authority, and let us
consider who make any preparation of rebellion, the Catholics or the
Protestants.

Who are they, I pray you, that have set forth devises of their own for the
succession of the crown without the Princes knowledge? Surely no Catholics,
but the very Protestants them selves. Who blewe the first blast of the trompet
I pray you? Who are those that have set forth in open printed books in the
English tongue, that neither Queen Marie, nor this our gracious Queen were
lawful inheritours of the Croune? And finally that it is against the Law of
God and nature, that any woman should inherit any principality or
Kingdom? No Catholic I warrante you, but your holy brethren, so feruente in
the word of the Lord. Yea among other M. John Knoxe the new Apostle of
Scotland: John Knokes in his appellation and his exortatio^ to the nobility
of Scotland Fol. 77. Impri^ted at Geneua An 1558. In his appellation to the
Nobility the.36. leaf.
It is not birth only (says he) or propinquitie of blood that makes a King
lawfully to reign above the people professing Jesus Christ, and his eternal
verity, but in his election must the ordinance which God has established in
the election of inferior Judges, be observed. Lo this Apostle excludes al
succession as well of men, as women: and will have the Kingdom to go by
election, that in case there be found any Prince that fansieth not this new
Apostle, that then he may be lawfullye deposed, and a new brother in his room
placed. And therefore I fear not (says he) to affirm, that it had been the
duty of the Nobility, Judges, Rulers, and people of England, not only to
have resisted, and against standed Marie that Iesabell, whom they call their
Queen, but also to have punnished her to death, with all the sort of her
Idolatrous Priests, together with all such as should have assisted her.

Ye shall now hear the verdit of an other good man: Christopher Goodma^ how
Superiors ought to be obeyed and imprinted at Geneua by John Crispin. 15^8. c.
5. fol. 54.
a zealous brother of Caluins schole. I know (says he) ye will say, the
Croune is not entailed to the heirs Males only, but appertains as well to
the daughters. And therefore by the laws of the Realm ye could not
otherwise do. But if it be true, yet miserable is the answer of such, as
had so long time professed the Gospel, and the lively word of God: If it
had been made of Paganes and Heathens which knew not God by his word, it
might better have been borne withal: but among them that bare the name of
Gods people, with whom his laws should have chief authority, this answer
is not tolerable. And afterward. If she had been no bastard, but the Kings
daughter as laufullie begotten as was her Sister that godly Lady and meek
lamb, void of all Spanisshe pride and strange blood, yet in the sickness and
at the death of our lawful Prince of Godly memory King Edward the sixte,
that should not have been your first counsel or question: who should be
your Queen, but first and principallye, who had been most metest among your
brethren, to have had the gouernemente over you, and the whole gouernemente
of the Realm to rule them carefullye in the fear of God.

After this he shows his mind more expresselye. A woman (says he) to
reign, Cap 8. fol. 96.
Gods law forbids, and nature abhors, whose reign was never counted
lawefull, by the word of God, but an express sign of Gods wrath: and a
notable plague for the sins of the people: As was the reign of Iesabell, and
ungodly Athalia: especial instruments of Satan, and whippes to his people
of Israel. I do here omit a Sermon made by one of your Prelates, M. Sands
that both Queen Marie and our graciouse Queen Elizabeth were bastardes. And
they say that your self (Master Horn) did the same at Durham. How like ye
this, Master Horn? Is this a preparation of rebellion against the Queens
person, or no? Ye will perchance to extenuate the matter, say it is the
private doing of one or two, disanulled by the rest. Nay Sir, ye shall not
so escape: I say this was the commen consent and judgment of all your holy
brethren of Geneua, as well English as other, yea of Master Calvin him self,
as it may be gathered by Master Whitingham his Preface, to the said book of
Master Goodman. M. Vvhitingam in the Preface.
Master Christopher Goodman (says he) conferred his Articles and chief
Propositions with the best learned in these parties, who approved them, he
consented to enlarge the said Sermon, and so to print it as a token of his
duty and good affection toward the Church of God. And the^ if it were thought
good to the judgment of the godly, to translate the same into other
la^guages, that the profit thereof might be more universal.

Lo good M. Horn, a sermon made at Geneua to all the English brethren, not only
to deprive the Queen of her title of the Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical,
but even in temporal too, and from al government: the matter being communicated
beside to the best learned there. And then M. Calvin and M. Beza too, I trow,
gave their verdict to this noble and clerkly work. And so it seems to
importe the consent of all the gehennical (I should have said) the Geneuical
Church. And who are those now that rule all the roast in England but this good
brotherhod? Men no doubt well worthy, for whose sakes the Catholics should be
thus hardly ha^deled and to whom the Q. Majesty is (who doubts) depelye
bound, and they worthy to be so well cherished at her hands, as they are.
These good brethren by their new broched Divinity have found a pretty devise,
at their pleasure not only to depose the Queens Majesty and the Queen of
Scotland: but also the greatest part of all other Princes, such I mean as be
women, or have holden their government by their descent from women. As did in
our Country since the conquest Henry the second, the son of Maude
th'Empresse, daughter to King Henry the first. As did Phillipp, Charles the
late Emperors Father, hold Burgundy, and Charles him self the Kingdom of
Spain. I here omit now Petronilla the Prince of the Arragones, Maude of
Mantua, both Jones of Naples, Margaret of Norwey, and other women Princes else
where, as in Navarre, and in Loraine. But what speak I of women only, when
Knoxe, as I have showed, will have all Realms to go by election, and not by
succession? So that now whereas the Catholics, yea the starkest Papist of all
(as these men term them) can be well content, yea with all their hearts to
affirm, that the Queen's Majesty may enjoy not only this Realm, but even
the whole Empire, and wish no less (if it pleased God) to her highness, and
find no fault, but only with that title, that is not competent for her
highness, and without the which she may reign as nobly, as amply, as
honorably, as ever did Prince in England, or else where, which never affected
any such title: these men, who pretend to the world, to profess a wonderful
sincere observation toward God and their Prince, do not only spoil her of that
title, but of al her right and interest to England, France, Ireland, or else
where: making her incapable of al manner civil regiment. Which I trust the
Queen's Majesty ones well considering, will graciously bear with the Catholics
that do not envy her the one or the other title: but only desire that their
consciences may not be streyned for the one of them. Which they upon great
grounds, and as they verily think, without any impairinge of her worldly
estate can not by oath assuredlye avouche: which thing they trust they may
do, without any just suspicion of sedition or rebellion. Wherewith M. Horn
most unjustly charge them: the said note and blame most justly (for the
causes by me rehearsed) redounding upon his own good brethern.

Which thing as he can not truly lay to any Catholic: so of al men least to
master Feke^ham. Whereof I trust, A most true defense for M Feke^ham.
certain right honorables, as the Lord Earl of Lecester, the Lord Earl of
Bedforde, yea the Queen's Majesty her self will defend and purge him against
M. Horns most false accusation. Of whose doings in Queen Mary's days, the said
right honorables with the right honorable my Lord Earl of Warwyke can, and will
(I trust) also report being then prisoners, and he by the Queen's appointmente
sent unto them. M. Secretary Cycil also ca^ testify of his doings towching
Sir John Cheke knight, whose life, lands, and goods by his trauail and humble
suyte were saved. His hope is, that the Queen's highness his soueraygne good Lady
will thus much report of him, how in the beginning of her highness troble, her
highness then being imprisoned in the court at Westmynster, and before her
committy to the tower, his good hap was to preach a sermon before Queen
Mary, and her honorable counsel in the Court, where he moved her Highness and
them also to mercy, and to have consideration of the Queen's highness that now
is, then in trouble and newly entered in prison. What displeasure he sustained
therefore, I do here omit to express. But this I certaynlye know, that he
has reported, and has most humb^y thanked almighty God and her highness: that
her highness had the same in remembrance, at the first and first and last
talk, that ever he had with her, in her palace at Westmyster not long before
her highness Coronation: I trust these are sufficient personnages for M.
Fekenhams purgation and discharge against your false accusation. Well I beseache
almighty God, that Master Fekenham may now at the length after seven years
imprisonmente, be made partaker of such deeds and doings, as he then showed
unto other men: And now let us proceed on, to the residewe of your book.

The.5. Division. M. Horn.
If I knevv you not right well, I should maruail, that you shame not to
affirm, saying: I do here presently therefore offer my self to receive a
corporal Oath: and further I shall presently swear etc. Seeing that you never
made to me any motion of such an offer, neither did I at anytime require you to
take any Oath.

You think and are so persuaded in conscience (if a man may trust you) that
the Queen's highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, and of al her
dominions and countries, and has under God, the sovereignty and rule over al
manner of persons, borne within her dominions of what estate either
Ecclesiastical or Temporal so ever they be. Whereunto I add this consequent
which does necessarily follovv, Ergo: Your holy father the Pope is not (as you
think in your conscience) the supreme governor over her highness dominions, nor
has the sovereignty or rule under God over any persons borne within the
same.

The Queen's majesty must needs herein take you but for a dissembling flatterer,
in that you vvil seem sometime in general speech, to attribute unto her the
only Supremacy under God, over her dominions and subjects which you mean
not, for within a while after in plain words you deny the same. And your
holy Father vvil give you his curse, for that being his sworn Advocate, at
the first entry into the plea, you give from him the whole title of his unjust
claim, to wit, the supreme governance over the Queen's highness dominions and
people. You must now therefore make some shifte, and call to remembrance one
slight or other by some distinction, whereby to avoid your holy Fathers
curse, that you may continue under his blessing. You will expound your
meaning by restreyning the supreme government of the Queens majesty only in
causes Temporal, and not in causes or things Ecclesiastical. But th^s
distinction comes to late, and vvil do you no ease, for that in both these
kinds of causes you have already granted unto her the only supreme
government: and that as you verily think, persuaded in conscience: vvheruppon
you offer to receive a corporal Oath upon the Evangelists. And this your
grant passed from you by these words: Over al manner persons borne within
her dominions of what estate either Ecclesiastical or Temporal so ever they
be: In this that you grant unto her highness thouly supreme rule over the Lay
and Ecclesiastical persons: you have also concluded therevvith in all causes
both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, which is plainly and firmly proved by this
argument follovving.

A supreme governor or ruler is one, who has to ouersee, guide, care,
provide, order and direct the things under his government and rule, to that
end, and in (.20.) The 20. untruth For not in actions belongi^g properly to
the things governed, but belonging properly to the governor and to his end
those actions which are appointed and do properly belong to the subject or
thing governed. So that in every government and rule there are three things
necessarely co^curra^t: the Governor, the Subject, or mattier governed, and the
object or mattier vvherabout and wherein the government is occupied and does
consiste. But the Queen's highness, by your own confession, is the only supreme
governor over al manner persons Ecclesiastical borne within her dominions:
Ergo: Her highness thonely supreme governor over such persons has to ouersee,
guide, care, provide, order, and direct them to that end and in those actions
which are appointed and do (21.) The 21. untruth proved to be so by M. Horn
him self* as it shall straight appear.
properly belong to Ecclesiastical persons. And so by good consequent you
have renounced al foreine government. For this exclusive, Only, does shut out
all other from supreme government over Ecclesiastical persons: and also ye
do (.22) The 22. untruth M. Feke^ham affirmed no such thing
affirm the Queen's majesty to be supreme governor in those actions which are
appointed, and that do properly belong to Ecclesiastical persons, which are
no other but things or causes Ecclesiastical.

The 4. Chapter: how princes be supreme governors over al ecclesiastical
persons (their subjects) and yet not in all Ecclesiastical matters.
HEre is first a worshipful reason, and cause to marueyle at M. Fekenham, that
he should by writing presently offer him self to receive an oath, because, he
never made mention of any such Oath before, neither any such was at any
time of him required. Surely, this is as great a cause to wonder at, as to
see a gose go barefote. But now will he play the worthy Logician and M.
Fekenham, will he nil he, shall be driven by fine force of a Logical definition to
grant the Queen to be supreme head in all causes ecclesiastical, for that he
grants her to be supreme head of al persons both ecclesiastical and
temporal. Because (says he) the supreme governor or ruler is he, that
orders and directs al actions belonging and appointed to the subjects: and
thereby infers, that the Queen's Majesty is supreme and only governor even
in those actions that belong to ecclesiastical persons, which are causes
ecclesiastical. But as good skill as this man has in Logike, (which is
correspondent to his divinity) he has browght us forth a faulty and a
viciouse definition. The definition of a Supreme Governor.
For a Supreme governor is he, that has the chief gouermente of the thing
governed, not in those Actions that may any way properly belong to the Subject
or thing governed (as M. Horn says) but in those Actions that belong to the
end, whereunto the governor tends. Which may well be, althowgh he have not
the chief government in all the actions of the thing governed: but in such
actions as properly appertain to him as a subject to that governor. For in
one man many rulers may and do daily concur, which in some sense may every
one be called his Supreme governors. As if he be a servant, the master: and
if he be a son in that respect the Father: and if his father and master dwell
in a city, the Mayor also, is his Fathers and masters, and so his chief
governor to, for things concerning the civil government of the city. And of al
these the prince chief and supreme governor, as they be subjects. Otherwise
the prince does not intermedle with the fathers office, in duetifulnes dew
unto him by his son, nor with the master, for that government, he has upon
his seruante: How the prince is the Supreme head and governor of al persons.
no more then with the schole-mayster for the government of his scholars, and
their actions, or the master of the ship for the actions and doings of the
mariners, otherwise then any of these offend the positive Laws of the realm:
and so has the prince to do with him as his subject, or when he shall have
need to use them for the commen wealth, wherein as subjects and members of the
said common wealth they must to hi^ obey. Much like it is with the Spiritual
me^, which be also members of the said common wealth, and therefore in that
respect subject to the prince and his laws: and so is it true, that the prince
is supreme governor, of al persons as well spiritual as temporal: but that
therefore he should also be Supreme governor in all their actions, will no more
follow the^ of the actions of them before rehearsed:

Yea much less. For the better understanding whereof it is to be known, that
before the coming of Christ, Kings were there many, but Christian Kings none.
Many common welthes were there, but no Christian co^me^ wealth, The End of the
temporal government.
nor yet godly commonwealth properly to speak, saui^g among the Jews, but
civil and politik. The end and final respect of the which civil comme^welth was
and is, under the regiment of some one, or more persons to whom the multitude
co^mitteh the^self to be ordered and ruled by, to preserve themselves from al
inward and outward injuries, oppressions and enemies: and further to provide
not only for their saftie and quietness, but for their wealth and abundance, and
prosperouse maintenance also. To this end tends and reaches, and no further
the civil government: and to the preservation, tuition and furtherance of this
end, chiefly serves the Prince, as the principal and most honorable person of
the whole state, which thing is common as well to the heathenish, as to the
Christian government. But over and beside, yea and above this, is there an
other government instituted and ordained by Christ, in a spiritual and a
mystical body, of such as he graciously calls to be of his kingdom, which is
the kingdom of the faithful, The end of the spiritual government.
and so consequently of heaven, whereunto Christian faith does conduct us. In
the which spiritual body, commonly called Christ's Catholic Church, there
are other heads and rulers then civil Princes: as Vicars, Persons, Bishops,
Archebishops, Patriarchs, and over them all the Pope. Whose government
chieflye serves for the furtherance and increase of this spiritual Kingdom,
as the civil Princes do for the temporal. Now as the soul of man incomparably
passes the body: so does this kingdom the other, and the rulers of these, the
rulers of the other: And as the body is subject to the soul, so is the civil
kingdom to the spiritual. To the which kingdom as well Princes as other are
engraffed by baptism, and become subjects to the same by spiritual generation,
as we become subjects to our Princes, by course and order of nativity which
is a terrestrial generation. Further now, as every man is naturallye bound, to
defend, maintain, increase, adorn, and amplify, his natural country: so is
every man bound, and much more to employ himself to his possibility, toward
the tuition, and defense, furtherance and amplificatio^ of this spiritual
kingdom, and most of al Princes them selves, Why Princes are most bound to
aid the ^pirituall power.
as such which have received of God more large help and faculty toward the
same, by reason of their great authority and temporal sword, to join the
same, as the case requires with the spiritual sword. And so al good Princes do
and have don, aiding and assisting the Church decrees, made for the repression
of vice and errors, and for the maintenance of virtue and true religion, not as
supreme Governors them selves in all causes spiritual and temporal: but as
faithful Advocates in aiding and assisting the spiritual power: that it may
the sooner and more effectually take place. For this supreme government can he
not have, unless he were him self a spiritual man, no more then can a man be
a master of a ship that never was mariner: a Mayor that never was Citizen.
His principal gouernemente reasteth in civil matters, and in that respect,
as I have said, he is supreme Governor of all persons in his Realm, but not
of al their actions, but in such sense as I have specified, and least of all
of the actions of Spiritual men, especially of those that are most appropriate
to them, which can not be, unless he were him self a Spiritual man. Wherefore
we have here two Untruths: the one in an untrue definition, the other in saying
that the Prince is the supreme governor in all causes spiritual, yea eue^ in
those that be most peculiarly belonging to spiritual men, beside a plain
co^tradiction of M. Horn directly overthrowing his own assertion here. Fol.
96.97
The Bisshoply rule and government of Gods Church (says M. Horn) consists
in these three points: to feed the Church with Gods word* to minister Christ's
Sacraments, and to bind and lose. To govern the Church* says he, after this
sort, belongs to the only office of Bishops and Church ministers, and not to
Kings, Queen's, and Princes. The like he has after ward. Now then these being
by his own confession the actions that properly belong to ecclesiastical
persons, and the princes by his said confession having nothing to do therewith:
how is it the^ true that the prince is the only supreme head and governor in
causes ecclesiastical, ye in those that do properly belong to persons
ecclesiastical? Or by what color may it be defended, that this saying is not
plain contradictory and repugnante, M. Horn contrary to himself.
to this Later saying which we have alleged, and whereof we shall speak more
largelye when we come to the said place? Thus ye see, M. Horn walks like a
barefoted man upon thorns, not knowing where to tread.

The.6. Division. Page 5. a. M. Fekenham.
And of my part I shall swear to observe and perform my obedience and
subjection with no less loyalty and faithfulness unto her highness, the^ I did
before unto Queen Mary, her highness Sister of famous memory, unto whom I was a
sworn Chaplain and most bounden.

M. Horn.
Like an (.23.) The 23 untruth sla^derous For M. Fekenha^ so did, not as an
unfaithful subject: but as a repenta^t Catholic.
unfaithful subject contrary to your Oath made to King Henry, and continued all the reign of King Edward, you helped to spoil Queen Mary of famous memory of
a (24.) The 24. untruth. This is no part at al of the Princes royal power
principal part of her royal power, right and dignity which she at the
beginning of her reign had, enjoyed, and put in ure The same obedience and
subjection, with the like loyalty and faithfulness, ye vvil swear to observe
and perform to Queen Elizabeth: but she tha^keth you for naught, she vvil
none of it, she has espied you, and thinks, ye profer her to much wrong.

Stapleton.
M. Horn would have a man ons bemired, to wallow there still. Neither is it sin
to break an unlawful oath, but rather to co^tinew in the same, as wicked King
Herod did: Now if M. Horn can ones by any means prove this gouernemente to be
a principal part, or any part at all of the Queens royal power, I dare
undertake that not only M. Fekenham, but many mo, that now refuse, shall most
gladly take the said Oath. He were surely no good subject, that would wissh her
highness any wrong: neither can the maintenance of the Catholic faith whereof
she bears the title of a Defendor, be counted any injury to her highness.
Nether is it to be thought but if there had been any wrong or injury herein done
to the Croune, some Christian Prince or other in the world would have ere this,
ones in this thousand years and more, espied it, and reformed it too.

M. Fekenham. The.7. Division. Page 5 a.
And touching the rest of the Oath, whereunto I am required presently to
swear, viz. That I do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that
the Queens highness is the only supreme Governor of this Realm, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal: I shall then of
my part be in like readiness, to receive the same, when your L. shall be able to
make declaration unto me, how and by what means, I may swear thereunto,
without commiting of a very plain and manifest perjury: which of my part to
be committed, it is damnable sin, and against the express word of God
written, Leuit. Cap. 9. Non periurabis in nomine meo, nec pollues nomen Dei tui.
And of your part to provoke me or require the same, it is no less damnable
offense. S. Augustine in witness thereof says: Ille qui hominem prouocat ad
iuratione^, etc. He who does provoke an other man to swear, and knows that he
shall forswere him self, he is worse then a murderer: because the murderer
sleeth but the body, and he sleeth the soul, and that not one soul, but two,
as the soul of him whom he provoke to perjury, and his own soul also by
ministering the occasion thereof. And the points of this Oath whereunto I can not
presently swear without most plain and manifest perjury, are these four
following.

M. Horn.
Mutato nomine, de te fabula narratur.
As in that which goes before, you covertly uttered many untruths,
although sometime ye stoumble on the truth against your will: so in the
rest you fall to plain and manifest untruths: least men should not perceive what
you are. You were never required by me to svvere, and therefore this is an
impudent kind of dealing, to say: whereunto I am presently required to swear,
etc. I had none authority nor commission to require the Oath of you, neither
might I tender it unto you without peril to mie self: you being committed unto
me by the most honorable Counsel, without whose order I could attempt no such
mattier. You have already shevved in plain matter, although not in plainness
of speech, and that as you think, and are persuaded in conscience, that her
highness is the supreme governor, so well in causes Ecclesiastical as temporal.
For having supremacy over the Ecclesiastical person, the same being not
otherwise person Ecclesiastical, but in respect of Ecclesiastical functions,
things and causes annexed and proprelie belonging to Ecclesiastical persons:
she has the Supremacy over the person in Ecclesiastical functions, things
and causes, these being the only matter or object wherabout or wherein the rule
over an Ecclesiastical person is occupied and does consiste.

This seems to be your glory amongst your friends, that you make me an
offer, to receive this part of the Oath, when I shall be able to declare by
what means you may svvere without committing plain and manifest perjury: If
your ability be no better then here apeareth, it is none al all.
Mine ability herein shall appear in mine answer to your four points: God
make you as ready to perform for duties sake, as ye will seem ready to offer,
wherbie to purchase to your self a glorious estimation. But wherefore did you
not make this offer unto me, either by word or writing all the time of your
abode with me? You pla^e now after your return into (.25.) The.25. untruth.
The Tovver is not M. Fekenha^s hold: For it holds him, not he it.
your hold, as you did after the Parliament before you came out of the Tovver
to me. When you savve the end of the Parliament, and understood right well
that the Oath was not like to be tendered unto you, than sent you copies of the
book devised for the aunsvvere touching the Oath, abroad to your friends, to
declare your constancy and readiness, to refuse the Oath, wherebie they might
be the rather enduced, to continue their good opinion conceived of you, and
also pay your charges weekelie in the Tovver sent unto you (.26.) The.26.
untruth. The Queen's highness words in the Tovver, can testify the contrary.
every Saturdaie by your servant, who wrote and delivered the copies abroad,
as you told me your self. Now you are returned again into the Tower, and
perceiving that your friends (as you gave the^ just cause) have some (.27.) 27.
A heap of slanderous and railing vntrute.
mistrust of your reuolte and wavering inconstancy, whereby your estimation
and fame, with their service to your God the belly is decayed, you have
devised to set abroad the self same book again that you did before, and to
the self same end, altering or changing nothing at all, saving that you have
given it a nevve name and Title, and seem as in this place, as though ye
spoke to me by these words: when your L. etc. When as in very deed, there
was never any such word spoken or written to me: and in the book you
delivered to me, your speech is directed to the Commissioners, and not to me
in these words, When ye the Queen's highness commisioners shall be able, etc.

The fifth Chapter of other private doings between M. Fekenham and M. Horn.
YEt ones again M. Horn takes in hand M. Fekenha^s grant which may well be
granted, and by his great cunning and skilfulnes, will thereof infer as
before, that, that may not be granted. But now he spitteth in his hand and
takes faster hold, as he thinks, and seeing the lightness of his former
reason, would now give greater weight to it with a new fetch, but yet as light
and as weak as the other, and employing manifest contradiction as before, and
to be answered as before. For albeit a man is not called an Ecclesiastical
person, but in respect of some Church cause and function, which we freely
grant to M. Horn, yet is he never a whit the nearer of his purpose, How a
spiritual man is underneath the Prince and how he is not,
unless he ca^ prove that there were also no other respect, why he should be
under the Prince, but for causes Ecclesiastical. For as we have said, he is a
subject also as other lay men are, and a member beside of the civil commonwealth, in consideration whereof the Prince has to do with him, and not
properly as he is a Spiritual man, though both respects be co^currant in
one person and he be named of the worthyer. As if M. Robert Horn were a lay
man and a Painter the Queen properlye has not to do with him as a Painter
(unless it were for some law or order concerning Painters) but as Robert
Horn her highness subject, and borne under her obeisance. So should the Queen
have also to do with you, yea in case ye were the true Bishop of Winchester,
but not proprely as Bishop, or for your Bishoply function, for the which ye
are immediatlye under your Archbishop and the Pope, but considering you as a
subject otherwise, or as Bishop either touching your temporalties and no
farther. For the which the true Bishops also do to their Prince their Homage.
But what should I further reason with this man, which (as I have said) has
removed the Prince from all superiority concerning the mere Bishoply or
Priestly function, and so with a notable contradiction has full worshipfully
concluded against him self, eased M. Fekenham also for taking any oath, that
the Queen is supreme head in all causes temporal and spiritual?

Here remains now for the residew nothing greatly to be answered, but only
to show how M. Horn does accumulate a huge heap of untruths, as in noti^g in M.
Feke^ha^ an impudent kind of dealing: for writing: whereunto I am presently
required to swear: which may be truly verefied, seeing as M. Horn him self
confesses yt was so written in that copy that should have been delivered to the
commissioners at such time as they should have presently tendered M. Fekenham
the oath: and in the same form and fasshion delivered to M. Horn: An heap^ of
untruths vvherevvith M. Fekenham is falsely charged.
and nothing altered in the later copy but that this word commissioners is
turned into the Lord bishop of Winchester: neither does M. Fekenham say
whereunto I am required presently to swear of your L. as he says afterward:
when your L. shall be able etc. And therefore there is no manner of impudency or
untruth in the matter at all: how so ever yt be, this matter is nothing
apperteyning to the state of the principal question, and of small importance,
nothing deserving to be noted as an impudent deali^g, but rather this kind of
speech agrees with M. Horns dealing here folowi^g, who speaks of M.
Fekenha^, without any regard so loosely and lewdely as to say, he makes his
belly his God, that his friends mistrusted his reuolting and wavering
inco^sta^cy, that he sent forth copies of the book (as M. Horn terms the
shedule) when he saw the oath should not be tendered him, and such like. Where
are now in this your false tale, the dew circu^sta^ces that ye nedelessely
required of M. Fekenha^ most necessary here to have been observed of you?
Suerly the rest is as true, as that ye write of his seruante, and of his
charges wekely defrayde by his friends, and brought in by his serua^te which is
(as far as I can understand) stark false. Why do ye not I pray you, in
these and your other blind, fond, folishe, and false ghesses and surmises
make your tale more appara^te and cowlorable, clothing it with some convenient
and dew circumstances, that ye do so much harp upon against M. Fekenham?

Ye be now again blindly and lewdly harping upon his revolte, to slander and
deface him. Ye say he sent out his copies when he understood right well, that
the oath was not like to be tendered him. How prove ye it good Sir? He and
other Catholics made their certain account that after the end of the
parliament, the oath should have been offered the^: what was the cause it was not
exacted, I certainly know not: were it for the great plague that immediately
reigned and raged at London (I pray God it were no plague to punish the
strange procedings in that parliament against his holy Church, and to put us
in remembrance of a greater plague immine^te and hanging over us, in this or
in an other world unless we repent) or were it, by special order, goodness, and
mercy of the Queen's Majesty, I can not tell. But this well I wot, After Gods
plague M. Horn began his plage.
no gramercy to you sir, who so sore thirsted and lo^ged for the catholics
blood. And therefore as soon as Gods plague ceased, thought to have your self
plaged the Catholics, exacti^g the Oath of M. Doctor Bonner, Bishop of
London. But lo here now began your, and your fellows the protestant bisshops
wonderful plague and scourge, that throwgh your own seking and calling this man
to the oath, the matter so meruelously fell out, that ye and your fellows, as ye
were no church bisshops whose authority ye had forsaken and defied: so you were
also no parliament bisshops. Upon the which (a pitiful case) your state, your
honor, your worship, and bisshoply authority, yea faith and al now restethe
and depends. A meruelouse providence of God, that while ye could not be
content to spoil the true bisshops of their wordly estate and honor, but must
needs have their poor life and al, you your self were found to be no
bisshops, no not by the very statutes of the realm. But let these things
now pass, and harken we to Master Horns blaste.

The 8. Division. Page 6. b. M. Fekenham.
First is, that I must by a book Oath utterly testify, that the Queens
highness is the only supreme governor of this realm, and that as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal. But to testify
any thing upon a book Oath, no man may possiblye therein avoid perjury,
except he do first know the thing which he does testify, and whereof he
bears witness and gives testimonye. And touching this knowledge, that the
Queens majesty, is the only supreme governor as well in Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical causes as in Temporal, besides that I have no such knowledge, I
know no way nor mean whereby I should have any knowledge thereof. And
therefore of my part to testify the same upon a book Oath, being without
(as I am in deed) al knowledge, I cannot without committinge of plain and
manifest perjury. And herein I shall join this issue with your L. that when
your L. shall be able, either by such order of government, as our Savior Christ
left behind him in his Gospel and new testament, either by the writing of such
learned Doctors both Old and new, which have from age to age witnessed the
order of Ecclesiastical gouernmente in Christ's Church, either by the general
Councels, wherein the right order of Ecclesiastical government in Christ's
Church, has been most faithfully declared and showed from time to time: or
else by the continual practice of the like Ecclesiastical government, in some
one Church or part of all Christendom. When your Lordshippe shall be able by
any of these four means, to make proof unto me, that any Emperor, or
Empress, King, or Queen, may claym or take upon the^ any such government, in
spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, I shall herein yield, and with most humble
thanks reken my self well satisfied, and shall take upon me the knowledge
thereof, and be ready to testify the same upon a book Oath.

M. Horn.
The reason or argument that moves you, not to testify upon a book Oath the
Q. Supremacy in causes ecclesiastical, is this: No man may testify by Oath
that thing whereof he is ignorant and knovveth nothing, without committi^g
perjury. But you neither know that the Q. highness is the only supreme
governor as well in causes Ecclesiastical* as Temporal: neither yet know you
any way or mean whereby to have any knowledge thereof. Therefore to
testify the same upon a book Oath, you can not without committing of plain
and manifest perjury.

For answer to the Minor or second Proposition of this argument: Although I
might plainly deny, that you are without all knowledge, and utterly ignorant
both of the matter and the way or mean, how to come by knowledge thereof,
and so put you to your prouf, wherein I know, you must needs fail: yet vvil
I not so answer by plain negative, Thom. Aquin. quaest. 1. de malo.
but by distinction or division of ignorance. And so for your better excuse,
declare in what sort you are ignorant and without al knowledge. There are
three kinds of ignora^tes, the one of simplicity, the other of vvilfulnes, and
the third of malice. Of the first sort you cannot be, for you have had long
time, good opportunity, much occasion, and many ways whereby to come to the
knowledge hereof. Yea, you have knovve^ and professed openly by deed and word
the knowledge hereof many years together. For you did (28.) The 28. untruth
For no man can know that which is not true.
know, acknovvledge, and confess, this supreme authority in causes
Ecclesiastical to be in King Henry the eight and his heirs, vvha^ your Abbay
of Euesha^, by common consent of you and the other Mo^ks there under your
covent seal was of your own good vvilles without compulsion surrendered into
his hands, and you, by his authority, reformed, forsook your A rablement of
vntruth^
folishe vow, and many (.29.) The 29. vntruth^ Slanderous and reprochful.
horrible errors, and superstitions of Monkery, and became a secular Priest,
and Chaplain to D. Bell, and afterward to D. Bonner, and so duringe the life
of King Henry the eight, did agnise, profess and teach openly in your sermons
the kings Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. This knowledge remained
steadfastly in you all the time of king Edward also. For although you were in
the Tovver in his time, that was not for any doubt you made of his Supremacy,
for that you still agnised: but for other points of religion (.30.) The.30.
untruth, This was not the cause of his enprisonment, as shall appear.
touchi^g the ministratio^ of the Sacraments, whereunto you also agreed at the
last, and promised to profess and preach the same in open auditory whersoeuer
you should be appointed (.31.) The.31. untruth sla^derous he was not delivered
upon any promise of recantatio^, but to be disputed vvithal,
VVherupo^ a right worshipful gentleman procured your deliverance forth of the
Tovver, and so were you at liberty, never me^cioning any dout in this matter:
but agnising the Princes supremacy in causes ecclesiastical. Wherefore I may
safly say, that the ignorance and vva^t of knowledge which you pretend in
your Minor Proposition, is not of Si^plicity, and therefore must needs be of
vvilfulnes, or malice, or mixed of both. The way and mean vvherby to have this
ignorance removed, you assign with this issue, that when I prove unto you,
by any of the four means, that any Emperor, or empress, King or Queen may
take upon the^ any such government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes, the^
you vvil yield, take upon you the knowledge thereof, and be ready to testify
the same by book Oath. Truly, I have often and many times proved this same
that you require, and by the self same means in such sort unto you, that you
had (.32.) nothing to say to the contrary. And yet nevertheless you continue
still in your vvilfull and malicious ignorance, The 32. untruth mere
slau^derous, as may well appear by this your book. Sapien. 1.
which causes me to fear that this sentence of the holy ghost will be
verified in you: In maleuolam animam non introibit sapientia. Yet I vvil ones
again prove after your desire, even as it were by putting you in remembrance
of those things which by occasions in conference, I often and many times
reported unto you, whereof I know you are not simply ignorant.

The 6. Chapter, defending M. Fekenham and others of wilful and malicious
ignorance for not taking the Oath.
NOw are M. Fekenham and M. Horn come to cople and join together in the
principal matter. M. Fekenham first says, he neither knows this ki^d of
supremacy that M. Horn auowcheth, nor yet any way how to achiue or obtain to
any such knowledge. M. Horn says he might well put M. Fekenham to his prouf
that he is not ignorant. But by the way, I trow of some meritoriouse
supererogation, or as one fearing no ieberdy, he aduentureth the prouf himself
that M. Fekenham is not ignorant of this supremacy, and further to bind M.
Fekenham the deaper to him for his exceeding kindness, The gentle and loui^g
ha^te of M. Horn.
will show for M. Fekenhams better excuse (o gentle and loving heart) that M.
Fekenham is not ignorant of simplicity, but of wilfulnes and plain malice.

As touching this threfolde ignorance, by M. Horn alleged out of the books
of S. Thomas, Tho. aqui. de malo quast. 3.
as I will not stycke with him for that distinction, so unless he can prove by
S. Thomas or otherwise that the ignorance of this surmised supremacy, includes
wilfulnes or malice in M. Fekenham or any such like parson, the distinction may
be true, but the cause never a deal furthered. Suerly if there were any
ignorance in this point, it were such as S. Thomas and other call inuincicle
ignorance, by no study or diligence able to be put away, and therefore
pardonable. But now the very author brought forth by M. Horn so fully and
effectually discharges M. Fekenham of al three, and charge M. Horn with the
worste of them three, that is wilfulnes and malice, as he shall win small
worship, by alleging of S. Thomas. In Opusc. contra errores Graecorum.

Oste^ditur etia^, quod subesse Romano Po^tifici sit de necessitate salutis.


For S. Thomas says plainly, that we are obliged and bound upon pain of
everlasting damnation, to believe that the Pope is the only supreme head of the
whole Church. And least M. Horn may reiecte his authority (which he can not
well do using yt himself) as a late Latin writer, and to much affectioned to
the Pope, S. Thomas proves his assertion by Cyrill and Maximus two notable and
ancient writers among the Grecians. Wherefore it follows, that neither M.
Fekenham nor M. Horn, nor any other Christian man can know the contrary: being
such an evident and a daungerouse falshod, as imports eternal damnation.

Nay, says M. Horn, how can M. Fekenha^ pretend ignorance herein, when as well
in King Henry, as King Edward his days, he set forth in his open sermons this
supremacy? And so do you now, good M. Horn, and yet none more ignorant, and
farther from knowledge than you. For notwithstanding al your great brags and
this your clerkly book, ye know not nor ever shall know, but that the Pope
is the supreme head of the Church. Well ye may (as ye do) most falsely, and to
your poor wretched soul, as well in this as in other points, most
daungerouslye, No man ca^ know an untruth.
believe the contrary, but know it you can not unless it were true. For
knowledge is only of true things, and as the philosopher says: scire est per
causas cognoscere: And ye do no more know it, then the other matter that ye
here also affirm of M. Fekenha^, that he promised to profess and preach in
open auditory in King Edwards days, certain points, touching the ministration
of the Sacraments, contrary to his former opinion: And upon such promise was
discharged out of the tower: which yet ye know not to be true, for it is stark
false. And I pray you how fortuned it, that his promise so made to recante was
never required of him, being the only thing that was sowght for at his hands?

The cause of his imprisonment then, as I understand by such as well knows
the whole matter, was not abowte the ministration of the Sacraments, but
towching the matter of Justification, by only faith and the fast of Lent: like
as it does appear in the Archbishop of Caunterburies records, The cause of
M. Fekenhams imprisonment in K. Edvvardes days.
he being therefore in a solemn sessio^ holde^ at La^beth hal conuented before
M. Cranmer, then Archebisshop of Caunterbury, and other commissioners appointed
for that matter. By the examination of the which records, you shall be
convinced of your untruth and error therein as in all the rest, I dowbt not by
Gods help.

And touching the right worshipful gentleman ye mean of, that is Sir Philip
Hobbey, which did as ye say, upon M. Fekenhams promise and submission procure
his deliuerau^ce out of the tower: As it is very true he did so: So it is false
and untrue, that he did the same upon any promise of recantation or of
preaching in open auditory, before made of his part. But the very intent of
the borowing of M. Fekenha^ for a time out of the tower, like as he said him
self, was, that he should dispute, reason, and have co^fere^ce, with certain
learned men touching matters of religion then in controversy: And according
thereunto, the first day of disputation, was betwixt the^ and him, at the right
honorable my Lord earl of Bedfords house then lodged over the gate at the
Sauoy. Disputatio^^ had with M. Fekenha^.
The second day was at the house of Sir William Cicill Knight, Secretary to
the Queen's highness, at Westminster in the canon rewe. The third day was at the
white Friars, in the house of Sir John Cheke Knight. In all the which
conferences and disputations with many learned men, he was, the truth to
confess, much made of, and most gently used. And this disputation so begun
at London, did finishe in Worcester shiere, where, he was borne and had also a
Benefice, by the mean whereof, and by the special appointment of Sir Phillipp
Hobbie, he came before M. Hooper, then taken as Bishop of Worcester: where he
charginge M. Fekenham in the Kings highness name to answer him, he kept four
several and solemn disputations with him, beginning in his visitatio^ at
Parshor, and so finished the same in the Cathedral Church at Worcester. Where
amongs many other, he found M. Jewel, who was one of his apponents. The said
M. Hoper was so answered by M. Fekenham, that there was good cause why he
should be satisfied, and M. Feke^ham dismissed from his trouble. As he had
cause also to be satisfied by the answers of M. Henry Iolife Deane of
Bristow, Vide disputa: venerabiliu^ sacerdotu^, and Antuerp. impress. 1564.
and M. Robert Johnson: as may appear by their answers now extant in print.
But the final end of all the foresaid disputations with M. Fekenha^, was that
by the foresaid Sir Phillipp Hobbey he was sent back again to the Tower, and
there remained prisoner until the first year of Queen Marie. And here now
may you perceive and see, M. Horn, how ye are overtaken, and with how many
good witnesses in your untruth, concerning M. Fekenhams dimissing out of the
Tower.

A rablement of your untruths here I will not, nor time will serve to discuss:
as that Monasteries were surrendered with the Monks goodwil, which for the
most part might sing volens nolo: that their vows were foolish, and that
they had many horrible errors. Marie one thing you say, that M. Fekenham, I
think, will not deny, that he set forth this Supremacy, in his open sermons,
in King Henry's days: which was not upon knowledge (as you without all good
knowledge do gather) for knoweledge can not match with untruth: but upon very
ignorance, and lack of true knowledge and due consideration of the matter,
being not so well known to the best learned of the Realm then, as it is now,
to every man being but of mean learning. For this good, lo at the least, heresy
works in the church, that it makes the truth to be more certainly known,
and more firmly and steadfastly afterward kept. So (as S. Austine says) the
matter of the B. Trinity was never well discussed, August. in Psalm. 54. super
versum: Diuisi sunt praeira. etc.
until Arria^s barked against it: The Sacrament of penance was never thoroughly
handled, until the Nouatia^s began to withstand it. Neither the cause of
Baptism was well discussed until the rebaptising Donatists arose and troubled
the Church. And eue^ so this matter of the Popes Supremacy, and of the Princes,
was at the first eue^ to very learned me^ a strange matter, but is now to
meanly learned, a well known and beaten matter. Sir Thomas More, whose
incomparable virtue and learning, all the Christian world has in high
estimation, and whose wit Erasmus judged to have been such as England nor had,
neither shall have, the like: and who for this quarrel which we now have in hand
suffered death, for the preservation of the unity of Christ's Church, which was
never, nor shall be preserved, but under this one head: as good a man, and as
great a clerk, and as blessed a Martyr as he was, See Sir Thomas More in a
letter written to Sir Thomas Cromwell fol. 1426. and 1427. Sir Tho. Mores first
opinion of the Popes primacy:
albeit he ever well thought of this Primacy, and that it was at the least wise
instituted by the corpse of Christendom for great vrge^t causes for avoiding of
schisms: yet that this primacy was immediately institute of God (which thing al
Catholics now, specially such as have travailed in these late co^trouerses do
believe) he did not mani years believe, until (as he writes himself) he read in
the matter those things that the Ki^gs highness had written in his most famous
book against the heresies of Martin Luther: among other things he writes
thus. Surely after that I had read his graces book therein, and so many other
things as I have seen in that point by the continuance of this seven years sins
and more, I have found in effect the substance of all the holy Doctors, The
Popes primacy instituted by God.
froe S. Ignatius Disciple of S. John unto our own days both Latins and
Greeks, so co^sona^t and agrei^g in that point, and the thing by such general
Gouncels so confirmed also, that in good faith I never neither read nor heard
any thing of such effect on the other side, that ever could lead me to
think that my conscience were well discharged, but rather in right great
peril, if I should follow the other side, and deny the primacie to be provided
by God.

It is the less meruail therefore, if at the first, for lack of mature and
deep consideration, many good and well learned men otherwise, being not resolved
whether this Primacie were immediately instituted by God, and so thi^king the
less danger to rele^t to the Kings title, especially so terrible a law enacted
against the deniers of the same, were and among them also Master Fekenham,
carried away with the violence of this common storm and tempest. And at the
first many of the co^uocation granted to agnise the Kings supremacy, but
quatenus de iure diuino, that is, as far as they might by Gods law. Which is
now known clearly to stand against it. Though the Primacie were no^ ordained
of God, yet could it not be rejected by any one Realm.
And although the Popes Primacie were not grounded directly upon Gods word,
but ordained of the Church, yet could it not be abrogated, by the private
consent of any one or few Realms: no more then the City of London can
iustlye abrogate an act of Parliament. But whereas ye insult upon M. Fekenham,
for that he was ones entangled and wrapped in this common error, and would
thereof enforce upon him a knowledge of the said error, and would have him
persevere in the same: and ones again to fall quite over the ears into the
dirtie dong of filthy schism and heresy, ye work with him both unskillfully
and ungodly. And if good counsel might find any place in your hard stony
heart, I would pray to God to mollify it, and that ye would with M. Fekenham
heartily repent, and for this your great offense, schism, and heresy, as I
doubt not he does and has done, follow S. Peter, who after he had denied
Christ: Luc. 22.
Exiuit and fleuit amare, Went out and wept full bitterly. For surely whereas
ye imagine that ye have in your conference proved the matter to M. Fekenha^, so
that he had nothing to say to the contrary, it is nothing but a loud lewd
lie upon him: and that easelye appears, seeinge that after all this your
long travail, wherein ye have to the most uttered all your skill, ye are so
far from full answering his scruples and stays, M. Feke^ha^ more confirmed
then he was before, even by M. Horns book.
that they seem plainlye to be unanswerable, and you your self quite
ouerborne and overthrown, and that by your own arguments and inductions, as
we shall hereafter evidently declare. So that now M. Fekenham may seem to have
good cause much more then before, to rest in the said stays and scruples. I
may not here let pass M. Horn that you call this saying: In maleuolam animam
non introibit sapientia, Sap. 1.
a sentence of the holy Ghost. That it is no less, we gladly confess it. But
how dare you so pronounce of that saying, being written in the book of
wisdom? That book, you wot well, your brethern of Geneua account for no
Canonical Scripture at al, such as only are the sentences of the holy
Ghost (to speak absolutely and proprely) but in the notes before that book,
and certain other which they call Apocrypha, do call them only, In the
Geneuia^ Bible^ printed at Geneua An. 1562,
books proceedinge of godly men, not otherwise of force, but as they agree
with the Canonical Scriptures, or rather are grounded thereon. In which sense
not only those books, but the writings also of the Fathers, yea and of al
other men, may be by your sentence, the sentence of the holy Ghost. And
Brentius likewise in his Prolegomenis, Vide Hosium co^tr. Brent. li. 3
agrees with the Geneuian notes against M. Horn. Thus these fellows jar
always among them selves, and in all their doctrines, fall into such points of
discord, that in place of uniform tuninge, they ruffle us up a black
Sanctus, as the Proverb is: Quo teneam vultus mutantem Prothea nodo?

The.9. Division. Page 8. a. M. Horn.
You require a proof hereof, that an Emperor or Empress, King or Queen,
may claim or take upon them any such government (meaning as the Queens
Majesty our Sovereign does now challenge and take upon her) in Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical causes. (.33.) The.33. untruth. employing a co^tradictio^ to
your former answer made to M. Fek. as shall appear.
For answer I say, they ought to take upon them such government, therefore
they may laufullie do it. The former part is found true by the whole
discourse of the holy Scriptures both of the old and new Testament: by the
testimony of the Doctors in Christ's Church: by the General Councels: and by
the practice of Christ's Catholic Church throughout al Christendom.

The.7. Chapter opening a plain Contradiction of M. Horns.
Master Fekenham, as well at his abode with you, as sins his return to the
Tower, at such time as he enjoyed the free liberty thereof, has as I certai^ly
understand, declared to some of his friends, that in your conference with him
for a resolute answer to all the said scruples expressed in all the four
points, ye did much lament, that the right meaning of the Oath, The first
answer of M. Horn to M. Fekenham.
had not been in ceason opened and declared unto him. When the only lack of the
right understanding thereof, has been the cause of such stays. Whereas the
Queen's Ma. meaning in that Oath is far otherwise, then the express words are,
as they lie verbatim: like as it does well appear by her highness
interpretation made thereof in her injunctions. Of the which matter we shall be
occasioned to entreat more at large herafter. But now after two years
breathing ye frame an other answer quite iarring from the first, affirming
that the Queen must take upon her such kind of regiment, M. Horns second
answer contrary to the first.
without any mollifiyng or restraint. And this ye will, as ye say, avouch by
Scriptures, Fathers, Councils, and the continual practice of the Church. Both
your said answers being so contrary one to the other, what certain and sure
knowledge may M. Fekenham, by right reason take and gather thereof to his
co^tentation and satisfaction of his mind in these matters, when by such
diversity of answers, what other thing else may he justly think, then thus
with him self? That if you after so many and so fair promises, failed to
open the very truth unto him, in your first aunsweare: what better assurance
should he conceive, of your truth in this your second answer? For if by
dissimulation the truth of the matter was covertly hid from him in the first
answer, what better truth may he boldly look for in this your second answer:
they being not both one, but variable and diverse? S. Gregory Nazianzene says:
Veru^ quod est, vnu^ est: Truth is simple and uniform.
mendatiu^ aute^ est multiplex..The thing, says he, which is true, is always
one, and like unto it self, whereas the lie, the cloked and cou^terfait thing is
in it self variable and diverse. By the which rule here given, by so learned
and grave a Father: I am here in the begi^ning put to knowledge by the variety
of your answers, that they cannot be both true. But if the one be true, the
other must be false: and thereof such a distrust justly gathered, that I may
conclude none of them both to be true, but both of them to be deceiuable and
false. For the proof and trial of this my conclusion, I refer me to your
scriptures, Fathers, Councels, practice of the Church, that ye would seem to
rest upon: whereby nevertheless you your self shall take a shameful foil and
fall. Wherefore go on a Gods name and bring forth your evidences.

The.10. Division. Page ^. a.
The holy Scriptures describing the conditions, and propreties in a King,
amongst other does command, that he have by him the book of the law, (.34.)
The.34. and
(.35.).35. vntruth^ in false tra^slati^g, and leaving out a part of the
sentence material.
and do diligently occupy him self in reading thereof, to the end he may
thereby learn to fear the Lord his God (that is, to have the fear of God
planted within him self in his own heart) to keep all the words, and to
accomplish in deed all the ordinances, or (as the old translation has it) all the ceremonies by Cod commanded (that is) to govern in such sort (.36.)
The.36. untruth. The gloss. ordinar. has no such thing.
That he cause by his princely authority, his subjects also to become
Israelites. To wit, men that see, know, and understand the will of God.
Redressing the peruersues of such as swerue from Gods ordinances or ceremonies.
Whereupon it is, that God does command the Magistrate, that he make (37)
The.37. Untruth. The place of the Deuteronomy flatly belyed.
dilligent examination of the doctrine taught by any, and that he do sharply
punish both the teachers of false and superstitious religion, with the
folovvers, and also remove quite out of the way all manner of evil.

The.9. Chapter, concerning the Kings duty expressed in the Deuteronomie.
GO on I say in Gods name, M. Horn, and prosequute your plea stoutly: God
send you good speed. And so he does, even such as ye, and the honesty of
your cause deserve. And at the very first entry of your plea causes you, and
your clerkly and honest dealing, forth with to your high commendation so to
appear, that even the first authority that ye handle of all the holy
Scripture plainlye discovers you, and causes you to be espied: and opens
as well your fidelity, as the weakness of your whole cause: the which even with
your own first blast is quite ouerblowen. Your infidelity appears in the
curtalling of your text, and leaving out the words, that immediately go
before, those that ye allege: beside your unskillfulness (if it be not done
rather of peruersitie and malice) concurrant with your infidelity. M. Horns
unskillfulness
Your unskillfulness which is the least matter, stands in that ye say the
King is commanded to have by him the book of the Law. Your text says not
so Sir, but Describet sibi Deuteronomium legis huius in volumine. Deuteronomy. 17.
He shall write out this second Law in a book: In the great Bible dedicated
to King Edward the 6 printed 1549.
As Edmund Beck, a man of your sect, truly has translated. Well, let the King
read in Gods name, not only that book, but all the whole Bible beside: It is
a worthy and a commendable study for him. But let him beware, that this sweet
honey be not turned into poison to him, and least under this pleasant bait of
Gods word, he be suddenly choked with the topicall and pestiferouse
translation: wherewith ye have rather perverted, then translated the Bible
printed at Geneua, and in other places: and with your false daungerouse
damnable gloses, where with you have corrupted and watered the same, and made
it as it were of pleasante wine most sour vinegar. The only remedy and help
to eschew and avoid this danger is, to take this book and other holy
writings faithfully translated at the priests hands, as they from time to time
have received them, and after such order as your own text appoints, saying:
When he is set upon the seat of his kingdom, he shall write him out this
second Law in a book, taking a copy of the Priests, of the Leuiticall tribe.
Which later words ye have, because they make directly against you, quite
leafte out. And then immediately follows how he shall busely read the said
book and so forth. If this order had of Late years ben kept, and that Princes
and other had taken the Bible as it is, and ever has been, of the priests of
the Catholic Church (orderly and lawfully succeding one the other, as the
Leuits did) read, tawght, and expounded, as well in Greek and Hebrewe, as in
Latin, these errors and heresies should never have taken so deape a root, as
they have now cawght.

Neither is this place only meant, that the King should take the bare lettre,
but rather the exposition withal of the said Priests. For what were the King
the better or any man else, for the bare lettre, if he had not also as ordinary
a way for his direction, in the understanding, as he had provided him, for to
receive a true and an incorrupted copy? Both, the boks of scripture and
thexposition must be taken at the priests hands.
Where of we may see the practice in all ages in the Catholic Church: whereof
this place is the very shadow and figure. For as the Protestants them selves
are forced by plain words to confess, that they know not the true word or
book of God, but by the Church: which from time to time delivered these
books: even so by all reason and learning, they should also confess, that the
Church can no more be deceived in delivering the sense of the said word, then
in delivering the word it self. Which seeing they will not confess (for then
were we forthwith at a point and end with all their errors and heresies) they
must needs continue in the same. And so while every man in the exposition of
scriptures follows his own head be it never so worldly wise or circumspect,
yet his own propre and peculiar, separated from the common advise and judgment
of the whole Church: errors and heresies have and do daily grow, and will
never cease more and more to increase and multiply, unless we take forth the
lesson I have showed you, into this huge and infinite number, where with the
world is now most miserably overwhelmed. Whereof the best remedy were, the
exact observation of this place, that ye have so wilily and slightly slipte
over.

But most of al an other sentence in the very said chapter, and even the next
to this ye allege, that the King as soon as he is chosen, An other sentence in
the said chapter by M. Horn alleged that over throvveth all his boast
shall bestow his study upon the reading of the Deuteronomy. Where Moses
says, that in doubtful causes the people should have their recourse to the
said priests, and to the judge for the time being, meaning the high priest,
of whom they should learn the truth: and are commanded to do
accordinglye, even under pain of death. Which place well weighed and
considered, serves to declare that I have said, that the King and others
should receive not only the letter which (as S. Paul says) does kill, but the
true and sincere meaning withal: wherein stands the life of the letter, as
the life of man with in his body, yea the eternal life (whereof by following
lewd lying expositions of holy write, we are spoiled) at the priests hands.
All which things serve directly for the primacy of them and not of Princes.
Now therefore go on M. Horn, and being at your first encountringe
ouerblowen and discomfyted even with your own blaste, think well whether it
is lykely that ye shall hereafter bring against your adversary any thing,
whereby he should, as ye have falsely slau^dered him, in a manner yield, and be
resolved on your side.

For as for the next place, it enforces no supremacy. We freely grant you,
Deuteronomy. 13.
that princes may sharply punish teachers of false and superstitiouse religion
and idolatry (being thereof by the Priests instructed) which is the matter of
your text. But then take head to your self, Master Horn. For I say to you,
that ye, and your fellows teach false and superstitiouse religion, Heresy is
Idolatry. Vinc. Lyr. aduersus prophan. nouit. Hieron. Zach. c. 13 Esai c. 2.
and 8.

Augu. de vera religion. c. 38.


many and detestable heresies, and so withal plain Idolatry. For heresy is
called a very Idol, as well by scripture, as in the exposition of the holy and
learned fathers. And the^ are ye no simple Idolatour, but one that mainteyneth
a number of heresies: with no less offense toward God, than was the offense
of the Jews that your place speaks of, when they set up afterward,
their idols. And so have ye given sentence against your self and have told
the Magistrate his office. Neither thinck you that ye may illude your
punishment, by the cowlour of the late statutes of the realm, which though in
many things, serve for your wordelye indemnitye: yet that ye may keep your
Madge and bisshoprike withal, and may not be punished for the obstinate
defense of such filthy marriage, and especially for the denyinge of the real
presence in the blessed Sacrament of the altar, and for many other things
that your sort daily write and preach, I trow it will be hard for you to bring
forth any act of parliamente, or any other convenient and sufficient plea. And
as I grant this authority to punish, to the civil prince: so (that this
infers a superiority in all causes as well ecclesiastical as temporal) I flatly
deny: and most of all that ye have proved your assertion, that princes ought to
take upon them such pretensed regiment, whereof the very place by you induced,
shows as I have said, the plain contrary. Now that you bring out of Glosa
ordinaria, that the Prince is commanded by his Princely authority, to cause
his subjects to become Israelites, it may perhaps be in some ordinary Gloss of
Geneua his Notes, Bales, or some such like, but as for the old ordinary Latin
Gloss, I am right sure (M. Horn) it has no such thing. This therefore may
well stand for an other untruth. As also that which immediately you allege out
of Deuteron. 13. For in all that chapter or any other of that book, there is no
such word to be found as you talk of. And thus with a full mess of Notorious
untruths, you have furnished the first service brought yet to the table,
co^cerni^g the pri^cipal matter. How be it perhaps though this be very course,
yet you have fine dishes and dayntycates coming after. Let us then proceed.

The.11. Division. Page 8. b. M. Horn.
The best and most Godly Princes that ever governed Gods people, did perceive
and rightly understand this to be Gods vvil, that they ought to have an
especial Regard and chief rule: Care and Suprem government are ij. diverse
things.
regard and care for the ordering and setting forth of Gods true Religion,
and therefore used great diligence with fervent zeal to perform and
accomplish the same. Moses was the supreme governor over Gods people (and
was (.38.) The 38. untruth. For Moses was the chief priest, as shall be
proved.
not chief Priest or Bishop, for that was Aaron) whose authority, zeal,
and care in appointing and ordering Religion amongst Gods people, prescribing
to all the people, yea to Aaron and the Leuits, what, and after what sort,
they should execute their functions, correcting and chastening the
transgressors, is manifestly set forth in his book called the Pentateuche.

The 9. Chapter: concerning the example of Moses.
Master Horn willing to seame orderly to proceed, first brings in, Moses
what scripture commands Princes to do, and then what they did. But as his
scripture towching the commandment by him alleged nothing reaches home to
his pretensed purpose, but rather infringeth and plainly marreth the same as I
have said, and fully stands on our side: So I dowbte nothing yt will fare
with his examples, as of Moses, Iosue, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias,
Josias, and that they al come to short, and are to weak to justify his
assertion. But here am I shrewdly encombred, and in a great doubt what to do.
For I could make a short but a true answer, that these examples are fully
answered already, by M. Doctor Harding, and M. Dorman: All M. Horns examples
out of the old testament ansvvered already by M. Doct. Harding and M. Dorman.
and refer thee thither to thine and mine ease (gentle reader) and to the
sparing, not only of pen, ynk, and paper, but of the time also, which of al
things is most preciouse. But then I fear me, would step forth, if not M.
Horn (a good simple plain man in his dealings) yet some other iolye, fine,
fresh, pregnant, wytty fellow, yea and bring me to the straits which way so
ever I did tread. If I should as I said, send the reader to them, then should I
hear, a fool, a dolte, an ass that can say nothing of his own. Then should
the cause be slaundered also, as so poor and weak, that it could bear no
large and ample treatise, yea with all, that their answers were such, as I was
asshamed of them, and therefore wilylye and wiselye forbeared them, with many
such other triumphant trieflinge toys. Again if I should repete or
inculcate their answers, then would Master Nowell or some other rushe in
upon me with his ruflynge rhetorike that he uses against Master Dorman and
Master Doctor Hardinge with a precise account and calculation what either
Master Dorman or Master Doctor Hardinge borrowed of Hosius: or either of them
two of the other. And what I have now borrowed of them both, or of either of
them. And I should be likewise insulted upon, and our cause, as feeble and
very weak, Psalm. 98 Hieron in Iouinianu^ lib. 1.

Greg Nazian. in oration. de Moyse and Aaron. and in orat. habita in praesentia
fratris Basilij, etc. Philo Iudeus de vita Moysi lib. 3.

Exodus 24 Ibidem. Exodus 29. and 35.


slaundered also. But on the one side least any of the good brethren should
surmise upon my silence any such distruste, I will compendiously as the
matter shall require abridge their answers: and that Master Horn shall
think that our stuff is not al spente, I shall on the other side for a
surplussage, adioyne some other things to owre opponent accommodate. So that I
trust either answer shall be sufficient to atchieue our purpose against
Master Horn. Then for Moses I say with Master Doctor Hardinge, and Saint
Augustyne, that he was a priest as well as a Prince, I say the same with
Master Dorman, with Philo Iudeus, with Saint Hierom, and with Saint Hieroms
Master Gregory Nazianzene. And so consequently Master Horn, that Moses
example serves not your turn (unless ye will king Henry the eight, and his
son king Edward, yea and our gracious Queen to be a priest to) but rather
quite ouerturneth your assertion. And think you Master Horn, that the Queen's
authority does iumpe agree, with the authority of Moses in causes
ecclesiastical? Then may she preach to the people as Moses did. The^ may she
offer sacrifices as Moses did. Then may she consecrate Priests, as Moses did
consecrate Aaron and others. Deuteronomy. 34.
Then may it be said of the imposition of her hands as was said of Moses.
Joshua the son of Nun was full of the sprite of wisdom: for Moses had put his
hand upon him. It must needs therefore follow, that Moses was a priest, and
that a high priest, which ye here full peuishly deny. I say now further with M.
Dorman, that put the case, Moses were no priest, yet this example frames not
so smothely and closely to your purpose as ye wene. For Moses was a prophet,
and that such a prophet, as the like was not again.

Give me now Master Horn Princes Prophets, give me Princes, and Law makers
by special order and appointmente ordained of God, to whose words God
certainly would have given as great authority, as he would and commanded to
be given to Moses: and then perchance I will say, that ye say somewhat well
to the purpose.

Again Moses was such a special Prophet, and so singularlye chosen of God
to be heard and obeyed in all things, that he is in the holy scripture
euidentlye compared to Christ him self: compared, I say, even in the office of
teaching and instructing. Moses in the Deuteronom foretelling the Jews of a
Messiah to come, says: Deuteronomy. 18.
The Lord thy God will raise thee up a Prophet from among thy own nation and of
thy brethern such a one as my self, him thou shall hear.

And this so spoken of Moses in the old Law, is in the new testament
avouched and repeted, first by S. Peter the chief Apostle, and next by S.
Stephen the first Martyr, Act. 3. et 7.
and applied to Christ. If the^ Christ must so be heard and obeyed of us, as
was Moses of the Jews, no doubt as Christ is a King, a Prophet, a Priest and
a Bishop to us, so was Moses to the^ a Prince, a Prophet, a Priest and a
Bishop. As Christ is of us to be heard and obeyed as well in all matters
Ecclesiastical as Temporal (for no temporal Law can have force against the
Law of Christ among Christen men) so was Moses to be heard and obeyed of the
Jews in matters and causes as well temporal as spiritual. For why? The
Scripture is plain. Act. 7.
Tanquam me ipsum audietis. You shall hear that Prophet even as my self. Show
us M. Horn any Prince in the new testament so conditioned and endewed, and
then make your argument on Gods name. Verily any Prince that now is (namely in
Ecclesiastical government) compared with Moses is as the poet says, Impar
congressus Achilli, Troilus. And the lawier says, Me^ must judge by Law and
not by examples
Legibus, non exemplis iudicatur. We must judge according to the precise rule
of the Law, and not by examples: Extraordinary doings enforce no ordinary
prescriptio^ or rule. The ordinary rule of Priests judgments without whies and
whates, and such other triflinge importune instances, as ye are wont to make
against it, by the law of Moses and by your own chapter before alleged in
dowbtful cases, must absolutelye upon pain of death be obeyed. By this rule
of the Law you must measure all the examples following, of Kings and Princes
under this Law. You must square your examples, to the rule and not the rule to
the examples, unless ye will make of the Law of God Lesbiam regulam, and both
unskillfully and unorderly work therewith. And this one answer might well serve
for all the Kings doings now followi^g: Saving I will particularly disce^de to
every one, and for every one say somewhat.

Here I wish to encounter with M. Nowel for his shifts that he makes to
maintain the matter by Moses and the residue, but because it is M. Dormans
special and peculiar matter, I will leave it unto him, and be also in the
residue, as brief as I may.

M. Horn. The.12. Division. Page 8. b.
After the death of Moses, the people as yet not entered and settled in the
promised land, the charge of chief government over Gods people both in causes
temporal and (.39.) The.39. untruth. Iosue had not the Supreme government in
causes Ecclesiastical, but Eleazarus had it
Ecclesiastical, was committed to Iosue, and not to Eleasar, for to him
belonged (.40.) The.40. untruth. For beside: In all things to be don of Iosue,
Eleazar should instruct him.

Iosue. 3.4 5 6.8.23.24.


only the ministration of the things belonging to the Priestlie office. And
to Iosue the Prince belonged the oversight both over the priests and people, to
govern, guide, order, appoint and direct each estate, in all things that
appertained to each of their callings. Of the one ye seem to have no doubt at
all: the other is as plain. For at the appointment of Iosue, the Priests
removed the Arc of covenant and placed the same. He did interpret unto the
people the spiritual meaning of the twelve stones, which they had taken by
Gods commandment forth of Jordan, to be as Sacraments or signs. He
circumcised the children of Israel at the second time of the great and
solemn Circumcision. He calls the Priests, commands some of them to
take up the Lord's Ark: other seven of them to blovv seven trompets before
the Arc, and appoints to them the order of proceeding. He builded an Altar
unto the Lord God of Israel, according to the Law of God: be sacrifices
thereon, burnt sacrifices and burnte offerings: He wrote there upon the stones,
the Deuteronomie of Moses: He read all the blessings and cursings as they are
set forth in the book of the Law: And he read al what so ever Moses had
commanded before all the congregation of ^srael, etc. Last of al Iosue, to
show that causes of Religion did specially belong to his charge and care,
makes a long and a vehement Oration unto the Israelits, wherein he exhorts
them to cleave unto the Lord with a sure faith, a constant hope and a perfect
love, obeiyng and serving him with such service as he has appointed in his
Law. And does zelouslie and with great threats diswade them from al kind of
Idolatry and false Religion.

The.10. Chapter concerning the example of Iosue.
Stapleton.
Iosue no Supreme Governor in all Ecclesiastical causes. Number 27
THE Apology allegeth as well the example of Moses, as of Iosue his doings with
the residue by M. Horn here alleged. M. D. Harding shows that allegatio^ to
import no chief rule in spiritual matters, as in deed it does not. Which chief
rule, did rest in the Priest Eleazarus, at whose voice and word Iosue was
commanded, M. Nowel put to his shifts by M. Dorman.
to go forth, and come in, a place deaply dissembled by the Author of the
Apology. For the avoiding whereof M. Nowell is put to many shifts: first to
gloss, that this place concerning Eleazarus, may be restrained for going and
coming to and froe the wars, which as it is true, so immediatlye before, it
is generallye written, Number. 27.
Pro hoc si quid agendum erit, Eleazar sacerdos consulet Dominum For him
(meaning Iosue) Eleazar shall ask counsel of God when any thing is to be done.
In which words we see evidently, that Iosue what so ever he did, touching the
governing of the people in Ecclesiastical matters, he did nothing of him self,
but was in all such matters instructed of Eleazarus the high Priest: whose part
therefore it was always to ask counsel of God, when Iosue had any thing to do.
And though this place should be restrained to warfare only, yet the authority
given before by express words of the law, to the high Priest, whose
judgment is commanded in great doubts to be sought and also followed, does
never the less take place. Iosue. 3 4.5.6.8.23.24
And thervpo^ follows that all the testimonies of holy Scripture, brought forth
by M. Nowel, and before him by M. Horn, can not, as they do not in deed,
induce supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical. But the execution of the high
Priests or laws co^ma^deme^t, which in deed we grant to appertain to the
Prince. And here I will not quarrel with M. Nowel, either for quoting.33.34.
for.23.24. and not reformed, as he does with M. Dorman for as small a matter, as
for the misquoting of S. Cyprian: or for treading M. Horns steps, and
borowing his allegations, which not withstanding is a great observation with
him as a worthy matter (ye may be assured) against M. Dorman and M. D. Harding.
This is but a childish and boyish rhetorike, not so convenient, I wisse, for M.
Nowel the scholemaister, as for the boys his scholars, whose propretye is to
accuse their fellows of borowing, and to borow them selves like truants. But
for the doing of Iosue, I will further note, that then the Priests took up the
Arc of covenant, and went before the people. Iosue. 13.
But I pray you M. Horn, how was this observed of late years, when the lay
men durst adventure to take the guiding of the Arc, and go before the
Priests, and not suffer the Priests to go before the^? And durst alter the
state of Christian religion, against the will and mind of the Bishops and the
whole Clergy then at their co^uocation assembled? Well, let this pass for this
present. I say no further for Iosue his doings, saving that otherwise also they
are not to be drawn into an ordinary rule, Number. 17.
for that the Spirit of God was certainelye in him: and for that he had part
of Moses glory, and the people commanded to hear him. And those things that
he did (whereof M. Nowell and Master Horn would infer a Sovereignty in
causes Spiritual) he did them by the express commandment of God. And from
such Princes to all Princes indifferently to gather the like praeeminence in all points, were no sure and sound gathering and collection.

Else if you will have your examples to prove and confirm, then as Iosue
circumcided, so let the Prince baptize, and as Iosue sacrificed upon an Altar,
so let the Prince in Cope and Surplesse celebrate your holy Communion. Which
two things as peculiar offices of Bisshops and Priests, M. Nowel excludes
flatly al Princes from, Fol 23. and 24.
yea and says, they ought to be untouched of Prince or other person. Thus
again either ye iumble and jar one from an other, or else your Argument
falls down right. Choose which of both ye will. 2 Samuel 5.


M. Horn. The.13. Division. Page 9. a.
David whom God appointed to be the pastor (that is, the King over Israel) to
feed his people, did understand that to this pastoral office of a King, did
belong of duty, not only a charge to provide that the people might be
governed with justice, and live in civil honesty, peace, and tranquillity,
public and private: but also to have a special regard and care to see them
fed with true doctrine, and to be fostered up in the Religion appointed by
God him self in his law. And therefore immediately after he was with some
quietness settled in his royal seat, the first thing that he began to refourme
and restore to the right order, as a thing that appertained especially to his
princely charge and care, was Gods religion and service, which had been
decayed and neglected long before in the time of King Saul. For the better
perfourmance whereof, as the Supreme governor over all the estates both of the
laity and of the Clergy (.41.) The.41. untruth. David was not Supreme
governor in all manner causes, but suffered the Levites in Church matters to
live under the rule of their high Priest. 1. Par. 13.15.16. David in all these
matters, determimined no doctrine, nor altered any religion against the
Priests vvilles of his own Supreme authority.
in all manner of causes: after consultation had with his chief Counsailers,
he calls the Priests and Levites, and commands, appoints, and directs
them in all manner of things and causes, appertaining to their ecclesiastical
functions and offices. He prepares a semelie place for the Arc in his own
City. He goes with great solemnity to fetch the Ark of the Lord. He
commands Sad^c and Abiathar the Priests, and the chief among the Levites, to
sanctify them selves with their brethren, and than to carry the Arc upon
their shoulders unto the place appointed He comptrolleth the^ that the Arc was
not carried before on their shoulders according to the law: and therefore lays
to their charge the breach that was made by the death of Vsa. He co^ma^deth
also the chief of the Leuits, to apoint among their brethren, Musicia^s to play
on diverse kinds of inst^ume^ts, and to make melody with ioyfulnes. He
sacrifices burnt and peace offerings. He blessed the people in the name of the
Lord. He appoints certain of the Levites, to minister continually before the
Ark of the Lord, to rehearse his great benefits, to the honor and praise of
the Lord god of Israel. And for that present time he made a psalm of gods
praise, and appointed Asaph and his brethren to praise god therewith. He
ordained the priests, Levites, singers, and porters, and in some he appointed
and ordered all the officers and offices, required to be in the house of the
Lord, for the setting forth of his service and religion.

The.11. Chapter concerning the example of David.
BOTH M. Dorman and M. Doctor Harding affirm that the proceedings of King
David are nothing prejudicial to the Ecclesiastical authority: David.
in redressing of disorders before committed, or doing such things as are here
rehearsed. No more, then the reformation of Religion made by Queen Marie, as M.
D. Harding notes, which ye wot well, imployeth in her no such supremacy.
Beside that, it is to be considered, as M. D. Harding touches, that he passed
other Princes herein, because he had the gift of prophecy. So that neither
those things that the Apology shows of David, or those that ye and M.
Nowell add thereunto, for the fortification of the said superiority, can by
any means induce it. The scripture in the said place by you and M. Nowel
alleged, says that David did work iuxta omnia quae scripta sunt in lege
Domini: 1 Par. 16.
according to all things written in the law of God. Whereunto I add a notable
saying of the scripture, in the said book by you alleged, concerning David's
doings by you brought forth touching the Priests and Levites: vt ingrediantur
domum Dei iuxtaritum suum sub manu Aaron Patris eorum, sicut praeceperat
Dominus deus Israel. King David's appointmente was, 1. Par. 24.
that the Levites and Priests should enter in to the house of God, there to
serve under the government. Of whom, I pray you? Not of King David, but under
the Spiritual government of their spiritual father Aaron and his successors.
The governor of them then, was Eleazarus. Where we have to note: first, that
David appointed here to the Levites nothing of him self: but sicut praeceperat
Dominus Deus Israel: as the Lord God of Israel had before appointed. Secondlye,
that King David did make appointment unto them, of no strange or new order to
be taken in Religion, but that they should serve God in the Temple, iuxta ritu^
suu^: after their own usage, custom and manner, before time used. Thirdly and
last, King David's appointment was, that they should serve in the house of God
sub manu Aaron patris eorum, as under the spiritual gouernmente of their
Father Aaron, and his successors the high Priests. The which words of the
scripture do so well and clearly expres, that King David did not take upon him
any spiritual government in the house of God (namely such as you attribute to
the Queen's Ma. to alter Religion* etc.) that I can not but very much muse and
marvel, why ye should allege King David, for any example or proof in this
matter. But most of al, that ye dare allege the death of Oza. Which is so
directly against our lay men, that have not only put their hands, to sustain
and stay the fall of the Arc (as Oza did, for which attempt notwithstanding he
was punished with present death) but have also of their own private
authority altered and changed the great and weighty points of Christ's
Catholic Religion: and in a manner have quite transformed and overthrown the
same, and so have as a man may say, broken the very Arc it self al to fitters.
Let them not dout, but that (except they heartily repent) they shall be plagued
worse then Oza was, if not in this world, yet more horribly in the world to
come. As for that you allege of David, that he made Psalms, ordained Priests,
Levites, fingers, and porters etc. think you, he did all this and the rest of
his own authority, because he was King of the people? So you would your Reader
to believe. But the holy Ghost tells us plainly that David did all this, 2.
Par. 29.
because God had so commanded by the hands of his Prophets. And thus you see,
that by the declaration of the Prophets, Gods Ministers then, as Priests are
now, the King did all those Ecclesiastical matters, and not by his Princely
authority. Again the like you might have alleged of Carolus Magnus: Naueler.
Generat. 29. page 51 and. 52. Krantz. lib. 2. c 9.
that he corrected most diligently the order of reading and singing in the
Church, that he brought first into France Cantu^ Gregorianu^, the order of
singing left by S. Gregory at Rome, and appointed singers therefore, and when
they did not well placed other in their romes, and many other such like matters
of the Church, wherein that godly Emperor much busied himself, Iuo Carnot. lib.
5. Nec vlterius liceat retractari per appellationis negotium, quod episcoporum
iudicio reciditur.
and yet exercised no supreme government over the clergy, but was of al other
Princes, most far from it: as it may easily appear to him that will read in
the Decrees, Did. 19. In memoriam* where he protests obedience to the Sea of
Rome, yea though an importable charge should be laid upon him by that holy
See. Also in the Decrees. xj. q. j. which Iuo also alleges, where he renueth
out of the Code of Theodosius a law binding al his subjects, of al nations,
Provinces, and Countries of what so ever quality or condition they were, and
in all manner causes, if the defendante require an Ecclesiastical judgment, it
be not lawful from the Bisshops sentence to appeal any higher. And surely no
Prince more recognized their duetifull obedience to the Spiritual Magistrate,
in spiritual causes, then such as were most ready and careful to aid,
further, and to their power direct all Spiritual matters. All this therefore
proves well, that Godly Princes do further and set forth Gods Religion, by
means semely to their vocation. But here is no manner inckling, that Princes
do or did ever bear the supreme government in all Ecclesiastical matters, to
decide and determine, to alter and change, to set up and pluck down what
Religion liked them, by their Princelye authority, and mere Sovereignty.

M. Horn. The.14. Division. Page 9. a.
Solomon (.42.) The.42. untruth. For Solomon of his own authority (as your
argument runs) deposed not Abiathar: but executed only the sentence,
pronounced before by Samuel Gods minister.
deposed Abiathar the high Priest, and placed Sadoc in his room And he
builded the Temple, placed the Arc in the place appointed for the same.
Hallowed or dedicated the Temple, offered sacrifices, blessed the people,
directed the Priests, Levites, and other Church officers in their functions,
according to the order before taken by his Father David. And neither the
Priests nor Levites, swerued in any thing (.43.) The.43. untruth. Those
words are not in the scripture alleged.
pertaining to their office) from that, that the King commanded them.

The.12. Chapter concerning the example of King Solomon.
THE weight of this objection rests in the deposition of Abiathar the high
Priest. Which thing M. Dorman and M. D. Harding say imployeth no more
superiority, then if a man should say Q. Marie deposed M. Cranmer, and yet
was not she the chief, but an accessorie instrumente for the furtherance of
thexecution. But Lord how M. Nowel here besturreth him self? He fumeth and
freateth with M. Dorman, who shall cool him well inowghe I dowbt not. In the
mean while, I will ask M. Horn and M. Nowel to, one question. M. Horn says
a little before, that Iosue sacrificed burnte sacrifices and burnte offeringes,
that King David sacrificed burnte and peace offerings, that Solomon offered
sacrifices. Were trow ye Iosue, David, and Solomon priests? If so, the^ how
bring you their examples to prove any thing for kings and Queen's that are no
priests? If not, then this phrase is verefied, in that they caused the priests
(to whom the matter perteyned) to offer sacrifices. And so whereas M. Horn
says of Iosue, that he sacrificed burnte sacrifices which is agreeable to the
Latin: Obtuli^ holocausta, Novvel fol. 166. col. 1.
M. Nowel says he commanded sacrifice to be offered. And why then I pray
you M. Nowel, may not this phrase also be taken after the said sort, that
Solomon deposed Abiathar, in procuring him by some ordinary way to be deposed
for his treason? As M. Cra^mer might have been, though he were both deposed and
burnt for his heresy. But now M. Horn, M. Horn overthrown concerning the
deposition of Abiathar by the very next line of his own text guilefully by
hi^ omitted

3. Reg. c. 2


that Salomo^ was but a minister and an executour herein, the very words
immediately following (the which because they serve plain against your purpose,
you craftily dissembled) do testify. Which are these. And so Solomon put away
Abiathar, from being priest unto the Lord, to fulfill the words of the Lord
which he spoke over the house of Hely in Silo. And thus was Salomo^ but the
minister and executour of Gods sentence published before by Samuel the Leuite.
Beside that the deposing of Abiathar does not imploye that Salomo^ was the
chief ruler in all causes Ecclesiastical, which is the butte that ye must
shote at, and the^ must ye provide an other bow, for this will not shote home.
Where you say farther that neither the Priests nor Levites swerued in any thing
(perteyning to their office) from that the King commanded them, you have
swerued very lewdly from the text of holy Scripture, and have added to it those
words ( perteyning to their office) more then is expressed in the Scriptures,
and have printed them in a distinct letter, as the express words of the
Scripture. With such homly shifts an evil cause must be furdered.

M. Horn. The 15. Division. Page 10. a.
Iosaphat has no small commendation in the Scriptures, for that he so
studiously used his (.44.) The 44. untruth. The Scripture termet^ not any such
Princely Autho^ity.

2 Par. 17. Gloss. o^d.


princely authority in the reformation of Religion, and matters apperteyning,
thereunto. He removed at the first beginni^g of his reign al manner of false
Religion, and what so ever might because of offense to the faithful. He sent
forth through his kingdom visitours, both of his Princes, and also of the
Priests and Leuits, with the book of the Law of the Lord, to the end they
should instruct, and teach the people, and refourme all manner abuses in
ecclesiastical causes according to that book. After a while he made a
progress in his own person throughout al his country, and Not by his own
laws enacting a religion, which preachers should swear unto.

2. Par. 19.


by his preachers reduced and brought again his people from superstition, and
false religion unto the Lord the God of their fathers. He appointed in every
town throughout his kingdom, as it were Justices of the peace, such as feared
the Lord, and abhorred false religion, to decide controversies in civil causes:
and in like sort he appointed and ordained the high Priests with other
Priests, Leuits, and of the chief rulers among the Israelits, to be at
Jerusalem to decide, and Yea the Priests judged, not the King.
judge controversies of great weight, that should a^ise about matters of
religion and the Law. He did command and prescribe (45.) The 45. untruth.
Thereappereth not in Scripture any such prescriptio^ made vno the chief
Priests 2. Par. 20.
unto the chief Priests and Leuits, what form and order they should observe
in the ecclesiastical causes and controversies of religion, that were not so
difficult and weighty. And when any toke^ of Gods displeasure appeared,
either by vvarres or other calamity, he gave order to his subjects for common
prayer, and enjoined to the^ public fast, with earnest preaching of
repentance, and seeking after the vvil of the Lord to obey and follow the
same.

The 13. Chapter concerning the example of King Iosaphat.
YOU allege for the supreme government of King Iosaphat in spiritual matters
(as the Apology does) the 2. of Paralip. the 17. Chapter. And as M.D. Harding
and M. Dorman have written, so say I, that ye are they, which frequent private
hills, aulters, and dark groves, that the Scripture speaks of. Wherein you
have set up your Idols, that is, your abominable heresies. We also
confess, that there is nothing written in holy Scripture of Iosaphat touching
his Care and diligence about the directing of ecclesiastical matters, but that
godly Christian Princes may at this day do the same, doing it in such sort as
Iosaphat did. That is: to refourm religion by the Priests, not to enacte a new
religion which the priests of force shall swear unto. Ite^ to suffer the
Priests to judge in controversies of religion, not to make the decisio^ of such
things, a parliament matter. Ite^ not to prescribe a new form and order in
ecclesiastical causes, but to see that according to the laws of the Church
before made, the religion be set forth, as Iosaphat procured the observation of
the old religion appointed in the law of Moses. Briefly that he do all this
as an Aduocat, defendour, and Son of the Church, with the Authority and advise
of the Clergy (so Iosaphat furdered religion not otherwise:) not as a Supreme
absolute Governor, contrary to the uniform consent of the whole Clergy in
full co^uocation, yea and of all the Bisshops at once. Thus the example of
Iosaphat fitteth well Christian Princes. But it is a world to see, how
wretchedly and shamfully Master Horn has handled in this place the Holy
Scriptures. First, promysing very sadly in his preface, to cause his Authors
sentences for the part to be printed in Latin letters, here coursing over
three several chapters of the 2. of Paralip. he sets not down any one
part or word of the whole text in any Latin or distinct lettre, but handles
the Scriptures, as pleases him, false translating, ma^gling them, and belying
them beyond al shame. He tells us of the Kings visitours, of a progress
made in his own person, throughout all his country and of Justices of the
peace: whereas the texts alleged have no such words at al. Verily such a tale
he tells us, that his ridiculous dealing herein (were it not in Gods cause,
where the indignity of his demeanor is to be detested) were worthily to be
laughed at. But from fond cou^terfeyti^g, he proceeds to flat lying. For
where he says that Iosaphat commanded and prescribed unto the chief
Priests, what form and order they should observe in the Ecclesiastical
causes and controversies of religion etc. This is a lewd and a horrible lie,
flatly belying Gods holy word, the^ which, in one that goes for a bishop,
what can be don more abominable? No No, M. Horn, it was for great causes,
that thus wickedly you concealed the text of holy Scriptures, which you knew,
being faithfully set down in your book, had utterly confounded you, and your
whole matter now in hand.

For thus lo, says and reports the holy Scripture of King Iosaphat,
touching his dealing with persons rather then with matters ecclesiastical. In
Jerusalem also Iosaphat appointed Levites and Priests, 2. Par. 19 8.
and the chief of the families of Israel, that they should judge the judgment
and cause of God to the inhabitants thereof. How Iosaphat appointed the Levites
and priests to these Ecclesiastical functio^s, it shall appear in the next
Chapter by the example of Ezechias. Let us now forth with the Scripture. And
Iosaphat commanded them saying: Thus you shall do in the fear of the Lord
faithfully and with a perfect heart. But how? Did Iosaphat here prescribe to
the Priests any form or order which they should observe in controversies of
Religion, as M. Horn says he did, to make folcke wene that Religion proceeded
then by way of Commission from the Prince only? Nothing less. For thus it
follows immediately in the text. Every Here is no form or order prescribed,
to observe in controversies of Religion: but here is a general commandment
of the King to the Priests and Leuits, that they should do now their duty and
vocation faithfully and perfectly, as they had don before in the days of Asa
and Abias his Father and grandfather: like as many good and godly Princes among
the Christians also have charged their bisshops, and clergy to see diligently
unto their flocks and charges. And therefore Iosaphat charging here in this
wise the Priests and Levites, does it not with threats of his high
displeasure, or by force of any his own Injunctions, but only says: So then
doing, you shall not sin or offend. The which very manner of speech,
Christian Emperors and Kings have eftesones used in the like case, as we
shall hereafter in the third book by examples declare. But to make a short
end of this matter even out of this very Chapter, if you had M. Horn, laid
forth, but the very next sentence and saying of King Iosaphat, immediately
folowinge, you should have seen there, so plain a separation and distinction
of the spiritual and secular power (which in this place you labor to
confound) as a man can not wish any plainer or more effectual. In his quae ad
Deum per^inent, praesidebit.
For thus says king Iosaphat. Amarias the priest and your bishop shall have the
government of such things, as appertain to God. And Zabadias shall be over such
works as appertain to the Kings office. Lo the Kings office, and divine
matters are of distinct functio^s. Exodus 4. and 18.
Over Gods matters is the priest, not as the Kings commissioner, but as the
priests always were after the example of Moses: But over the Kings works is
the Kings Officier. And mark well M. Horn this point. Zabadias is set over
such works as belong to the Kings office. But such works, are no manner things
pertaining to the Service of God. For over them Amarias the priest is
president. Ergo the Kings office consists not about things pertaining to
God, but is a distinct function concerning the common weal. Ergo if the King
intermedle in Gods matters, M Horn confounded by his own book and Chapter.
especially if he take upon him the supreme government thereof, even over the
priests themselves to whom that charge is committed, he passes the bonds of
his office, he breaks the order appointed by God, and is become an open enemy
to Gods holy ordinance. This place therefore, you depely dissembled and omitted
M. Horn, lest you should have discovered your own nakedness, and have brought
to light the utter confusion of you and your wretched doctrine. Except for a
shift, you will press us with the most wretched and traiterous translation of
this place in your common english bibles, printed in the year 1562. Which for
praesidebit, shall govern, do turn, is among you. For your new Geneuian
bibles, which you take (I doubt not) for the more corrected, do translate
with us: shall be chief over you.

M. Horn. The 16. Division. Page 10. b.
Ezechias the king of Judah, has this testimony of the holy Ghost, 4. Reg. 18.
that the like governor had not been, neither should be after him amongst
the kings of ^uda. For he cleaued unto the Lord, and svverued not from the
precepts which the Lord gave by Moses. And to express, that the office,
^ule, and government of a godly king consists, and is occupied according to
Gods ordinance and precept, first of al in matters of Religion, and causes
Ecclesiastical, the holy Ghost does commend this king for his diligent care in
refourmi^g religion. He took quite away (says the holy ghost) al manner of
Idolatry, superstition, and false religion, yea, even in the first year of his
reign, and the first month he opened the doors of Gods house: 2. Par. 29.
He calls as it were to a Synod the Priests, and Leuits, he makes unto
them a long and pithy oration, declaring the horrible disorders and abuses that
has been in religion, the causes, and what evils followed to the whole
realm thereupo^: He declares his full determination to restore and refourme
religion according to Gods vvil. He commands them therefore, that they laying
aside al errors, ignorance, and negligence, do the parts of faithful
ministers.

The Priests and Leuits assembled together, did sanctify themselves, and did
purge the house of the Lord from al uncleanness of false religion, at the
commandment of the King (.46.) The 46. untruth. Those words (concerning
things of the Lord) are no words of the text, but fa^sly added to holy
Scripture.
concerning things of the Lord. That don, they came unto the King, and made to
him an account and report what they had don, The King assembleth the chief
rulers of the City, goes to the Temple, be commands the Priests and Leuits,
to make oblation and sacrifice for whole Israel. He appoin^eth the Leuits
after their order in the house of the Lord, ^o their musical instruments, and
of the Priests to play on Shalmes, according as David had disposed the order
(47.) The 47, vn^ruth. Holy Scripture falsified, and may ^ed. as it shall
appear. 2. Par. 30.
by the counsel of the Prophets. He and the Prince commands the Levites to
praise the Lord with that Psalm that David made for the like purpose. He
appointed a very solemn keaping and ministering of the Passover, whereunto
be exhorts all the Israelites, and to turn from their Idolatrye and false
religion unto the Lord God of Israel. He made solemn prayer for the people.
The king with comfortable words encouraged the Levites that were zealous,
and had right judgment of the Lord, to off^e sacrifices of thanks giving,
and to praise the Lord the God of their Fathers, and assigned the Priests and
Levites to minister, and give thanks, according to their offices in their
courses and tournes. And for the better continuance of Gods true Religion, he
caused a sufficient and liberal provision to be made from the people, for the
Priests and Leuits, that they might wholy, cheerfully, and constantly, serve
the Lord in their vocation. These doings of the King Ezechias touching
matters of Religion, and the reformation thereof, says the holy ghost, was
his acceptable service of the Lord, dutiful both to God and his people.

The 14. Chapter concerning the doings of Ezechias.
HEre is nothing brought in by you, or before by the Apology (as M. Dorman, and
M. Doctor Harding do well answer) that forces the surmised souerainty in
King Ezechias, but that his power and authority, was ready and serviceable (as
it ought to be in all Princes) for the execution of things spiritual before
determined, and not by him as supreme head newly establisshed: So in the place
by you cited it is written that he did, 4. Reg. 18.
that which was good before the Lord according to all things that David his
Father had done. So that as David did al such matters, because the Prophets of
God had so declared they should be done, so is Ezechias following his Father
David understood to have done, not enacti^g any religion of his own, but
setti^g forth that, which Gods Ministers had published. Likewise in your other
place, 2. Par. 29
according to the Kings and Gods commandment. So other where, 2. Par. 31.
he did that which was good and right before his Lord God, and he sowght God,
with all his heart, after the Law and commandment, in all the works of the
house of God. And as your self show, 2. Par. 29.
he appointed the Leuits according as David had disposed the order: And you
add by the council of the Prophets, as though David had first done it by the advice or counsel only of the Prophets, and by his own authority. But the
Scripture says: Ezechias did thus according as David had disposed, because it
was the commandment of God by the hand of his Prophets. So that in all that
Ezechias or before Iosaphat did, they did but as David had don before: That is,
they executed Gods commandment declared by the Prophets. This is far from
enactinge a new Religion by force of Supreme Authority, contrary to the
commandment of God declared by the Bisshops and Priests, the only Ministers
of God now in spiritual matters, as Prophets were then in the like.

M. Horn. The.17. Division page 11 a.
Josias had the like care for religion, and used in the same sort his princely
authority, in reforming al abuses (48) The.48. untruth. Boldly avouched, but no
way proved.
in all manner causes Ecclesiastical These Godly Kings claimed and took upon them
the supreme government over the Ecclesiastical persons of all degrees, and did
rule, govern, and direct them in all their functions, and (.49.) The 49.
untruth. as before, but somvvhat more impudent.
in all manner causes belonging to Religion, and received thu witness of their
doings, to wit, that they did acceptable service, and nothing but that which
was right in Gods sight. Therefore it follovveth well by good consequent, that
Kings or Queens may claim and take upon them such government in things or
causes Ecclesiastical. For that is right, says the holy Ghost; they should
than do vvrong if they did it not.

The.15. Chapter of the doings of Josias, with a conclusion of all the former
examples.
Stapleton.
KING Josias travailed full godly in suppressing Idolatry by his Kingly
authority. Josias
What then? So do good Catholic Princes also, to pluck down the Idols that
ye and your brethren have of late set up: and yet none of them, take them
selves for supreme heads in all causes Spiritual. And ye have hitherto brought
nothing effectual to prove that the Kings of Israel did so: wherefore your
conclusion, that they did rule, govern, and direct the Ecclesiastical persons
in all their functions, and in all manner causes of religion, is an open and a
notorious lie: and the contrary is by us avouched and sufficiently proved by
the authority of the old Testament, whereupon ye have hitherto rested and
settled your self.

It is here declared, that M. Horn comes nothing nigh the principal question.
But now that ye in all your examples draw nothing nigh the mark, but run at
ra^don, and shoot al at rouers, is most evident to him that has before his
eye, the very state of the question: which must be especially ever regarded
of such as mind not to loosly and altogether unfruitfully imploye their
labor, and loose both their own and their Readers labor. I pray you then
good M. Horn bring



What evidence have ye brought forth to show that in in verbo sacerdotij, that
they should make none Ecclesiastical law without his consent, as King Henry did
of the Clergy of England? And so to make the Civil Magistrate the Supreme
judge for the final determination of causes Ecclesiastical?

What can ye bring forth out of the old Testamente to General Councils
abandoned out of England by act of Parliament.
I say this partlye for a certain clause of the Act of Parliament, that for
the determination of any thing to be adjudged to be heresy, reasteth only in
the authority of the Canonical Scriptures, and in the first four General
Councels, and other Councels general, wherein any thing is declared heresy by
express words of scripture. By which rule it will be hard to convince many
froward obstinate heretics to be heretics: yea of such as even by the said
four first, and many other Councels general are condemned for heretics.
Partly, and most of al, I say it, for an other clause in the act of
Parliament, enacting that no foreign Prince Spiritual or temporal shall have
any authority or Superiority in this realm, in any Spiritual cause. And
then I pray you, if any General Council be made to reform our misbelief, if
we will not receive it, who shall force us? And so ye see we be at liberty, to
receive or not receive any general Council. And yet might the Pope reform us
well enough for any thing before rehearsed (for the Popes authority
ecclesiastical is no more foreign to this realm, then the Catholic faith is
foreign) saving that he is by express words of the statute otherwise
excluded.

Note.
which ye confess to be the peculiar function of the Clergy, exempted Genesis
47.
Verelye Joseph would not suffer the very heathen Priests (which only had the
bare names of Priests) to pay either tithes or fines to Pharao their Prince.
Yea rather he found them in time of famine upon the common store.



O M. Horn, your manifold untruths are disciphired and unbuckled, ye are
espied, ye are espied, I say, well enough, that ye come not by a thousand
yardes and more nigh the mark. Your bow is to weak, your arms to feable, to
shoot with any your commendation at this mark: yea if ye were as good an
archer, as were that famous Robin Hood, or Little John. Well shift your bow, or
at the least wise your string. Let the old Testament go, and proceed to your
other proufes, wherein we will now see if ye can shoot any streighter. For
hitherto ye have shotten al awrye, and as a man may say, like a blind man.
See now to your self from henseforth that ye open your eyes, and that ye have
a good eye and a good aim to the mark we have set before you. If not, be ye
assured we will make no courtesy eftsoon to put you in remembrance. For
hitherto ye have nothing proved that Princes ought, which ye promised to prove,
or that they may take upon them such government, as I have laid before you,
and such as ye must in every part justify, if either ye will M. Fekenham shall
take the Oath, or that ye entende to prove your self a true man of your word.

M. Horn. The.18. Division. page 11. b.
You suppose, that ye have escaped the force of all these and such like godly
Kings (which do marueilously shake your hold) and that they may not be
alleged against you, neither any testimony out of the old testament, for
that ye have restrained the proof for your contentation, to such order of
government as Christ has assigned in the Ghospel, to be in the time of the
new testament, wherein you have sought a subtle shifte. For whiles ye seek to
cloak your error under the shadovve of Christ's Ghospel* you bewray your
secret heresies, turning your self naked to be seen of al men, and your cause
notvvithstanding, lest in the state it was before, nothing helped by this your
poor shift of restraint. So that where your friends took you before but
only for a Papist: now have you shevved your self to them plainly herein to
be a (.50.) The.50. untruth. Most slanderous. M. Horn him self and his
fellows are in many poi^ts Donatistes, as shall appear.
Donatist also. When the Donatists troubled the peace of Christ's Catholic
Church, and divided them selves from the unity thereof, as nor^ you do: The
godly Fathers travailed to confute their heresies by the Scriptures, both of
the old and nevve testament: and also craved aid and assistaunce of the
Magistrates and Rulers to refourme them, to reduce them to the unity of the
Church, and to repress their heresies, with their authority and godly
laws made for that purpose, to whom it belonged of duty, and whose
especial service to Christ is, to see, care, and provide, that their subjects
be governed, defended, and maintained in the true and sincere religion of
Christ, without al errors, superstitions and heresies, as S. Augustine
proves at large in his Epistle against Vincentius a Rogatist, in his Epistle
to Bonifacius, and in his book against Petilian, and Gaudentius letters.
Against this Catholic Doctrine, your ancestors the Donatistes, arise up and
defend them selves with this color or pretense, that they be of the
Catholic faith, and that their church is the Catholic church: (Which shift
for their defense against Gods truth, the Popish sectaries do use in this our
time, being (.51.) The 51. untruth. Answer the Fortress M. Horn, annexed to
S. Bid, if you dare to defend this most sensible and most gross lie.

August. Epist. 43. and 50. Lib. 2. cont. lit. Pet. ca. 92 Lib 2. con. Ep. 2.
Gaud. ca. 2^.


no more of the one, or of the other, then were the Donatists and such like,
of whom they learned to cover their horrible heresies under the same fair
cloak) that the secular Princes have not to meddle in matters of religion or
causes Ecclesiastiall. That God committed not the teaching of his people to
Kings, but to Prophets Christ sent not soldiers but fishers, to bring in and
further his religion, that there is no example of such order, found in the
Gospel or new Testament, vvherby it may appear, that to secular Princes it
belongs to have care in matters of religion. And that (as it seems by that S
Augustine by prevention obiecteth against them) they subtly refused all
proufes or examples avouched out of the Old testamente (as ye craftily do
also, in binding me only to the New testament) which S. Augustine calls:
an odious and wicked guile of the Donatists. Let your friends now, whom ye
will seem to please so much, when you beguile them most of all, weigh with
aduisement, what was the erroneous opinion touching the authority of Princes
in causes Ecclesiastical of the Donatists (as it is here rightly gathered
forth of S. Augustine) and let them consider vvisely these foul shifts they
make for their defense: And then compare your opinion and guilefull defenses
thereof to theirs and they must needs clappe you on the back, and say to you
Patrisas, (if there be any upright right judgment in them) deming you so like
your graundsier Donatus, as though he had spitte you out of his own mouth.

The.16. Chapter declaring in how many points Protestants are Donatists: and
by the way of M. Foxes Martyrs.
Stapleton.
HITHERTO, good Reader, M. Horn although untruly, yet has he somewhat
orderlike proceeded. But in that which follows until we come to the.20.
leaf, beside most impudent and shameless lies, M. Horns disorderly Treatise.
wherewith he would deface M. Fekenham, he prosequuteth his matter so confusely
and unorderly, leaping in and out, I can not tell how, nor whither: that I
verily think that his wits were not his own, being perchance encombred with
some his domestical affairs at home, that he could not gather them together,
or that he the less passed, what an hodge potche he made of his doings,
thinking which is like, that his fellows Protestants would take all things
in good gree, knowing that poor M. Fekenham was shut up close enough, from al
answering. And thinking that no Catholic else would take upon him to answer
to his lewd book. I had thought M. Horn, that from the old Testament, ye
would have gone to the new Testament: and would have labored to have
established your matters thereby. Belike the world goes very hard with you in
that behalf, that ye do not so: saving that here and there ye iumble in a
testimony or two, I can not tell how, but how vnhandsomly and from the
purpose, yea against your own self, that I wot well, and ye shall anon hear
of it also.

In the mean while it is worth the labor well to consider the excellent
pregnant wit and great skill of this man, who has in the former Treatise of
M. Fekenham espied out (which surely the wisest, and best learned of all the
world I trow, beside M. Horn, would never have espied, such a special grace
the man has given him of his master the Devil of mere malice, joined with
like folly) that M. Fekenham is an Heretic, and a Donatist. But yet M.
Fekenham is somewhat beholding to him, that he says M. Fekenham has bewrayed
his secret heresies. Wherein he says for the one part most truly. For if
there be any heresy at all in this matter surmised upon him, as certainly
there is none, it is so secret and privy, that Argus himself, with all his
eyes shall never espy it: no nor M. Horn him self, let him pry never so
narrowly: whereas on the other side, M. Horn and his fellows, and his Masters
Luthers and Caluins heresies, are no secret nor simple heresies, but so
manifold and so open, that they have no way or shift to save their good name
and honesty, blotted and blemished for ever (without repentance) for the
obstinate maintenance of the same. Where of many were, many hundred years
since, condemned, partly by the holy Fathers, partly by General Councels. You
say M. Fekenham has secret heresies, and that Donatus is his great grandsi^,
and the Donatists the Catholics auncetours: but how truly, you shall understand
anon. In the mean while good Sir, may it please you favorably to hear you
and your masters honorable pedegre; and of their worthy fears and prowes. You
have heard of them before perhaps, M. Horns and his fellows au^cetors.
and that by me. But such things as may edify the Catholic, and can never
be answered by the Heretic, Decies repetita placebunt.

How say you then to the great heretik Aerius the Arrian, August. et Epiphae.
de haeres.
that said there was no difference between priest and Bishop, between him that
fasted and that did not fast, and that the sacrifice for the dead was
fruitless? How say you to Iouinian, that denied virginity to have any
excellencye above matrimony, or any special reward at Gods hands? Hier. con.
Iouinian. Ambro. li. 10. epi. 18 Ambros. sermon. 91. Euth. in Panopl. tit. 33.
To the Arrians that denied the miracles done at the saints to^bes to be true
miracles, and that the martyrs ca^ not cast out the devils and relieve the^
that be possessed? To the Bogomyles that said the devils sat at the saints
to^bes and did wonders there, to illude and deceive the people, to cause the
people to worship them? To Berengarius condemned in diverse councels, first for
denying of the real presence in the sacrament of the altar, and then for
denying the transubstantiation? To the Paulicians, Euth. Zigab. in Panop. tit.
21 Hiero. co^t. Vig. Jonas episcopus Aurelian. co^t. Claudium.

Euth. in Panop. tit. 22.

August li. 1. cont. 2. epis. Pela. ad Bonif. cap. 13.

Cyril li 6. co^t. Iulia.


that said these words of Christ, Take, eat, this is my body, are not to be
understood of his body, or the bread and wine used at the celebration of
our Lords maundy, but of the holy scriptures, which the Priests should take at
Christ's hand, and deliver and distribute to the people? To Claudius and
Vigilantius, that denied the invocation of Saints, and inueyed against the
blessed relics, and the use of Lights and other ceremonies in the Church? To
the Massalians and other heretics, saying that concupiscence as a sin
remains in us after holy baptism? And because ye shall not say I suppress,
conceile, or obscure, the chief and most notable persons of your auncetry: how
say you to the Emperors Philippicus, Leo, Constantinus, condemned with their
adhere^tes by the.7. general counsel at Nice, that vilayned by defacing,
breaking and burni^g, the Images of all the holy hallowes of Christ, and
Christ's to? To whom for your more honor and glory I adioyne the Emperor
Iulianus the Apostata. Who as ye do in your books and pulpits, Cyril lib. 6
contra Iulianu^. Aug. lib. 2 co^tr. 2. epi. Pelag. c. 4. Calvin in his
Institutions, cap. 18. in fine: Arge^torati Impress. An. 1545
cried out upon the Christians. O ye wretched men, that worship the wood of the
cross, setting up the figure of it upon your forehed and doors: you therefore
that are of the wiseste sort are worthy to be hated, and the residewe to be
pityed, that treading after your steps come to such a kind of Wretchedness.
To the Pelagians, affirming that children not baptized shall be saved? And yet
are your masters in this point worse then the Pelagians, as well for that some
of them have said, that some Infants thowgh unbaptized shall be damned, and some
other though unbaptized shall be saved: And some of them especially Calvin and
other Sacramentaries say, that they shall come without Baptism to the Kingdom
of heaven: which the Pelagians durst not say, but that they should have the
life everlasting, putting a difference, but peuishly, betwixt those two. And
if ye think the race of your worthy generation is not fetched high inoughe,
Epiph. and Philast. de haeres.
we will mount higher, and as high as may be, even to Simon Magus him self.
Of whom Marcion and Manicheus, Clemens li. 3. recog. Iraeneus. li 1. ca. 20.
and after long and honorable succession your Patriarchs Luter and Calvin have
learned their goodly doctrine against free will. Yea to touch the very
foundation and well spring of this your new gospel, which altogether is grounded
upon justification without good works, in that also ye draw very nigh to the
said Simon Magus. In the discourse annexed to Staphilus. fol. 161. and sequent.


I forbear at this time to speak of the residewe of your noble progenitors,
having in other places (as I noted before) spoken largely of the same. This
shall suffice, at this present, to make open to all the world, that they are no
petit or secret heresies that ye and your fellows maintain. Come forth
once, and clear your self of this only objection, if you can, being so
often pressed therewith. If you maintain old condemned heresies, what are you
less then heretics your selves? If you maintain them not, or if they be not
old heresies which you maintain, clear your self if you be able. I assure you
M. Horn, you and al your fellows will never be able to avoid this one only
objection. And therefore you and al your fellows must needs remain stark
heretics, and for such to be abhorred and aba^donned (except you repent) of al
good Christians. Protestants be Donatists
Now as I have proved you and your companions open and notable heretics, so
shall I strait way purge M. Fekenham to be no Donatist, or any heretik
otherwise, for any thing yet by you laid to his charge. But now Master Horn
beware your self, least this unjust accusation against Master Fekenham and
the Catholics whom ye compare to the Donatistes causeless, 1. The dissentio^
of the Donatists.

August. de haeres. and in Psalm. 36 and lib. 4. contra Cresc. c. 6.


most justly and truly redounde upon your and your fellows heads. Beware I
say. For I suppose I will lay more pregnante matter in this behalf to your
and their charge, then ye have or possible can do to Master Fekenham or any
other Catholic, whereof I dare make any indifferent Reader judge. If I should
dilate and amplify this matter at large, yt would rise to a pretty volume: but
I will purposely abridge yt, and give the Reader as it were but a taste. 2.
Aug. lib. 2 contra Julian. and lib 3. contra Cresco. c. 66. and lib. 2. contra
aduers. Leg. c 12.


They were al called first Donatistes: but as the first fell from the Church
Catholic: so fell they also afterward from their own Church and master,
into an horrible division, of the Maximianistes, Circumcellions, Rogatistes,
Circenses and others. A lyuelye pattern of the sects spro^g from your Apostle
Luther, as in their pedigree in the Apology of Staphylus every man may see.

The Donatistes would sometime crake and brag of their multitude, and bring it
as an argument that the truth was on their side, as does your Apology. Which
being restrained by the Emperors Laws, and daily diminishing, then they
cried, the truth rests with the few elected and chosen parsons: then cried
they: O little flock fear not, as ye did, when ye were as yet but in corners,
rotten barnes, and Luskye lanes.

3. Aug. epis. 204. and co^t. Cresc.
The Donatistes when they could not justify their own doctrine, nor disprove
the Catholics doctrine, leaving the doctrine, fell to railing, against the
vitiouse life of the Catholics. In this point, who be Donatists, I refer me
to Luthers and Caluins books, especially to M. Jewel, and to your own Apology.

4. Aug. lib. 1. euang. quaest. 4. cap. 38. The Donatists refuse the known
Church.
The Donatistes refused the open known Catholic Church, and said the Church
remained only in those that were of their side in certain corners of Afrike.
And sing not ye the like song, preferring your Geneua and Wittenberge, before
the whole Catholic Church beside?

The Donatistes corrupted the Fathers books wonderfully, and were so impudent
in alleging them, that in their public conference at Carthage, they pressed
much upon Optatus words, and laid him forth as an author making for them, 5.
Vide Aug. in breuiculo Collat. diei 3. and in lib. post Coll. ca. 31. See M.
Davves in his 13. book.
who yet wrote expressly against them, and in all his writings condemned them.
Is not this I pray you the usual practice of your Apostles Luther and Calvin,
of M. Jewel, and your own to, in this book? as I trust we have and shall make
it most evident. And here let M. Dawes bear you company to, in the crafty and
false handling of his own dear brothers Sleydans story, where he leaves out
Alexander Farnesius oration to the Emperor, wherein he shows the Protestants
dissensions.

The Donatists to get some credit to their doctrine pretended many false
visions and miracles, and they thowght that God spoke to Donatus from heaven:
And does not M. Fox in his donghil of stinckinge martyrs pretely follow them
therein trow you? 6. August. in Ioannem Tractat. 13 An. 1558.
Has not the like practice been attempted of late in Hu^gary, to authorize
the new gospel by prete^ding to restore life to an holy brother feyning him
self to be dead, and by the great providence of God, found to be dead in deed?
in l. theut. ad Senatu^ Germa. In lib. de miss. Angul.
Did not your Apostle Luther boast himself of his visions and revelations?
Which how celestial they were does sone appear, for that hi^ self writes,
that the devil appeared unto him in the night, and disputed with him against
private mass: by whose mighty and weightye reasons Luther being overthrown
yielded, and incontinently wrote against private mass as ye call it. 7. They
prefer a national council before the general. Aug. lib. 2 de baptis. cap. 9.

8. August. de agone Christi c. 29.

The Author of the harborovve. 9.




Did not the Donatists prefer, and more exsteme one national erroniouse
council in Aphrica, then the great and general counsel at Nice? keep not ye
also this trade preferring your forged Convocation libell before the General
Council of Trident?

The Donatists said that all the world was in an apostasy at the coming of
their apostle Donatus: And is not Luther the same man to you, that Donatus was
to them? does not one of your greatest clerks there with you now write, that
Wyclyff begatte Husse, Husse begotte Luther: and the^ adds a shameful
blasphemous note, this is the second Natiuitye of Christ?

The Donatists being charged and pressed by the Catholics to show the
beginning and continuance of their doctrine, and the ordinary succession of
their Bisshops, were so encombred, that they could never make any conueniente
answer. And are not ye I pray you, with your fellows protestant bishops, fast,
in the same mire? If not, answer then to my third demand in the Fortress
annexed to S. Bid.

Opt. lib. 2. Part. 2 cap. 1. fol. 94.

Aug. lib. 2 cont. Petil. ca. 92. Optatus lib. 2. In his Reply against M. D.
Harding.


The Donatists fynding fault with Constantine, Theodosius, and other Catholic
princes, ran for succor to Iulianus the renegate and highly commended him.
And does not M. Jewel, I pray you, take for his president against the Popes
primacy Constantius the Arrian, against Images Philippicus, Leo, Co^stantinus
and such like detestable heretics by general councels condemned? Do not your
self play the like part in the Emperor Emanuel, as ye call him, and in other
as we shall hereafter declare?

Now who are, I pray you, Donatists, for the defacing and overthrowing of
Aulters, for vilaining the holy Chrisme, and the holy Sacrament of the altar?
Which they cast unto dogs: which straitwaies by the ordinance of God, Optatus.
lib. 2.6. and 7.

The Donatistes cruelty to the Catholics Optatus. Lib. 6. Aug. contra Dona.
post Collat. c. 31.


fell upon them, and being therein Gods ministers, made them feel the smart of
their impiety. It were a tragical narration, to open the great and incredible
cruelty that the Donatists used toward the Catholics, and especially their
horrible rauishment of religious Nonnes. And yet were they nothing so
outrageous, as your Hugonots have been of late in France, and the beggarly
Guets here in Flandres, namely about Tournaye.

The Donatists said of the Catholics: Illi portant multoru^ Imperatorum sacra.
Nos sola portamus euangelia. They bring us many of the Emperors letters, we
bring the only ghospels. And is not this the voice of all Protestants
whatsoever? Only Scripture, only the gospel, only the word of God? And for the
first part, what is more common in the mouths of the Germayn Lutherans, of
the French Caluinistes, and now of the flemmish Guets, then this complaint,
that we press them with the Emperors Diets, with the Kings proclamations, and
with the Princes placarts? To the which they obey as much as the Donatists,
when they have power to resist.

Well, we will now leave of al other conference and co^parisons, and tarry a
little in one more. The Donatistes counted Martyrs. August. epist. 68.
The Donatists though they were most wicked Murderers of others and of them
selves also, killing them selves most wretchedly without any other outward
violence don to them: yet were they taken of their confederats for Martyrs. Of
whom thus writes S. Augustine. Viuebant vt Latrones, moriebantur vt
Circumcelliones, honorabantur vt Martyrs. M. Foxes stinking Martyrs: Eusebius.
li. 5 cap. 18. Niceph. li. 6. c. 32 Aug. con. epist. Mani. ca. 8. Sir John
Oldcastel Sir Roger Acton.

Anno. 2. Henrici. 5 cap. 5. Polidor. Harding. Fabian. Haul. Cooper. Eleanour
Cobham.


They lived like robbers by the high way, they died like Circumcellions
(meaning they slew them selves) they were honored as Martyrs. And now where
learned M. Fox the trade to make his holy canonisation, in his deuelish dirty
donghil of his foul heretical and traiterous Martyrs, but of those and such
like scholemaisters? As of the Montanists, that worshipped one Alexander for a
worshipful martyr, thowgh he suffered for no matter of religion, but for
myscheuous murder. And of the Maniches, that kept the day wherein their
master Manes was put to death, more solemply, then Easter day.

Have ye not the^ in M. Fox, Sir John Oldcastle, and Sir Roger Acton canonised
for holy martyrs, though they died for high treason? yea their names al to be
painted, dasshed, and flourished in the calendar with read letters, I think
because we should keep their day a double feast? Whose and their
confederates condemnation for conspiringe against the King, the nobilitye,
and their countreye, appears as well by act of parliament then made, as by the
full testimony of all our English Cronicles. Is not dame Elleanour Cobha^ a
stowte confessor in this mad martyrloge? whose banishment was not for
religion, Sir Roger Only. Magaret lordeman. The vvitch of Aey.
but for conspiringe King Henry the sixts death by wytchrafte and sorcery, by
the help and assistance of M. Roger Bolinbroke, and Margaret Iordeman, commonly
called the Witch of Aey? The which two were openly executed for the same. But
now is it worth the hearing to know, how handsomely M. Fox has conceived his
matters: wherein he plaieth in deed the wily Fox and springleth with his false
wily tail, his fylthy stale not into the dogs, but into his readers eyes. And
as the Fox, as some hu^ters say, when he is sore driven, will craftily mount
from the earth and keep himself a while upon the eather of a hedge, only to
cause the howndes that draw after him to leese the sent of the tracte: even
so for all the world has our Fox played with his reader. But I trust I shall
trace him, and smell him out well inoughe.

First then, though M. Foxes authority be very large and ample in this his
canonisation, and such as never any Pope durst take upon him, yea and though
he has authority to make martyrs, See Harding, Fabia^, Hall Cooper, grafton,
the addition of Polichronicon.
yet I dowbte whether he has authority to make Knights to: for this Sir Roger
Onley is neither a Sir, but of M. Foxes making, nor Onley neither: But M. Roger
Bolinbroke only: put to death for the treason before specified, as not only
his own authors Fabian and Harding, whom he does allege for the story of
Dame Elleanour, but al other also do testify. Truth it is that Harding
writing in English meeter and speaking of this M. Bolinbroke ends one of his
staves with this word Only, which is there to signify no name, but to better
and sweat the meeter, and is as much to say, as chiefly and principally,
meaning that Master Roger was the principal worker in this nigromancy. The
meeters of Harding are these. He waxed then strange each day unto the King,
For cause she was foreiudged for sorcery, Harding. in Hen. 6 c. 232.

For enchantments that she was in working
Against the Church and the King cursedly,
By help of one M. Roger, only.
Which last word, some ignorant or Protestant Printer has made Oonly. And
then has M. Fox added a Sir, and a Martyr too, and adorned him with no common
ink, to set forth and beutify his Martyr withal. And so of M. Roger
Bolinbroke, sorcerer and traitor, by a cunning Metamorphosis he has made, Sir
Roger Only Knight and Martyr.

Well, will ye yet see further the crafty dubling of a Fox, walking on the
eather of the hedge? Consider then that, for Margaret Iordaman that notable
witch (least if he had named her and M. Bolinbroke by their own names, he had
marred all the roast) he places an other woman, that by his own rule died
forty years after. See M. Foxes Martyr, the 371. leaf. Alanus Copus. dialog.
6. cap. 16. Hune Debnam. King. Marsh.
And yet can he not hit upon her name neither, but is feign to call her, in
steed of Ione Bowghton, the mother of the Lady Young, who in deed is one of his
stinking heretical and foolish Martyrs. For she craked full stoutly that there
was no fire, that could consume or hurt her. I could here name a rablemente of
like holy Martyrs, as Richard Hune, that hong him self: King, Debnam, and
Marsh, hanged for sacrilege. Beside a number of such notoriouse and detestable
heretics, that M. Fox him self will not I trow, as great an heretic as he
is, deny them to be heretics. As Peter a Germain being an Anabaptist: as
Anthony Person an Heretic of the sect of the Paulicians, of whom we have
spoken. D. VVesalian.
As D. Wesalian, that denied the holy Ghost to proceed from the Father and the
son. And to conclude this matter, of the notable heretic Cowbridge, burnte
at Oxford. Who expounded these words of Christ, Take eat this is my body
that shall be betrayed for you. Covvbridge.
thus: Take, eat, this is my body, in the which the people shall be deceived. Who
also affirmed that the name of Christ was a foul name, and therefore raced it
out of his books, whersoeuer he found it. And would read for Jesus Christ:
Jesus, Jesus, saying that Christ was the deceiuer of the world, and that al were
damned in hell, that believed in the name of Christ. We will now with this blessed
Martyr of M. Foxes canonisation end this talk with the whole conference,
leaving it to the indifferent Reader to consider whether the Catholics, or
the Protestants, draw nearer to the Donatists.

Let us then proceed forth, and consider upon what good motives, ye charge M.
Fekenham to be a Donatiste, which are, to say the truth, none other but falshod
and folly. But, as ye surmise, the one is, because he craftelye and by a
subtle shift refuses the proufes of the old Testamente, as the Donatists
did. The other, because he with the said Donatists should auouche, that
secular Princes have not to meddle in matters of Religion, or causes
Ecclesiastical: nor to punish any man for such causes. Surely for your
first motive so fine and subtle a blaste of an horn, a man shall not lightlye
find again among all the horners in England I suppose. But yet by your leave
Sir, your horn has a foul flawe. When M Fekenham offers to yield, if ye can
prove this regiment either by the order that Christ left behind him in the new
Testament, either by the Doctors, either by Councels, or else by the continual
practice of any one Church, think you M. Horn that this is not a large and an
ample offer? I will not say, that this is subtyle shift, but rather a very
blind, bytle blonte shifte of yours, to charge him with any refusal of the
old Testament, either openly or covertly. There is not so much as any
conjecture apparente, to gather this upon, yea the old Testamente is not by
this offerre, as ye blindlye and blontly gheasse, excluded, but verily
included. For if the new Testament, which reherseth many things out of the
old, have any thing out of the old Testamente, that make for this regimente:
if any Doctor, old or new, if any Council have any thing out of the old
Testament that serve for this regimente, then is Master Fekenham concluded,
yea by his own grant. For so the Doctor or Council has yt, he is satisfied
according to his demand. Whereby it follows, that he does not refuse, but
rather allow and affirm the proufes of the old Testamente. And surely wise
men use not greatly to show that, that makes against them, but most for them.
Wherefore it is incredible, that Master Fekenham should ons imagyn any such
syftynge or shyftynge as ye dream of, having won his purpose against you
even by the very old Testamente as we have declared. And therefore it is
spoken but in your dream, when ye say, ye have thereby with meruelouse force
shaken M. Fekenhams hold: which suerlye is so forcible, as will not beat down
a very paper wall. And marvel were it, if ye should so batter his hold, when
that these your great cannons come not nigh his hold by one thowsande miles.

Again this accusation is incredible. For M. Fekenham him self is so far of
from this suspicion, that he himself, brings in against you many and good
testimonies of the old Law. (as fol. 109. and 123.) by the force whereof only
he may be thought to have shaken and overthrown to, your rotten weak hold
underpropped with your great Sampsons posts as mighty as bulrushes. But I
perceive by your good Logike, your Law, and like Divinity, silence makes a
denial, and because M. Fekenham makes no mention in this place of the matter
to be proved by the old Testament, therefore he subtillie refuses the proufes
thereof. But ye should rather me thinks induce the contrary, and that he
consents to you for the old Testament: Quia qui tacet, consentire videtur:
(as the old saying is) For he that holds his peace, seems to consent: and
so ye might have better forced upon him that all was yours, presupposing that
ye had proved the matter by the old Testament.

But you will needs drive your reason an other way. Let us see then, what we
Catholics can say to you for your Apology by the like drifte. You and your
Colleages, seeing your selves charged with many heresies, to wipe away that
blotte if it be possible, and for your better purgation, take upon you, to show
your whole, full, and entier belief. And thereupon you recite the Articles of
the common Creed. But now good Sir, I ask you a question: What if by chance
you had omitted any one of them, would ye gladly be measured by this rule, ye
measure M. Fekenham by? Would ye be content, that the Catholics should lay to
your charge, that ye subtly refuse that article, that you have forslowen to
rehearse? If ye would not, the^ must I say to you with Christ: Quod tibi non
vis fieri, alteri non facias. Do you not to an other, that ye would not have
don to your self. If you say, that ye are content to stand to the very same
law, as if ye be a reasonable and a constant man you must needs say: Lo then
good Sir, you have concluded your self and all your companions plain
heretics, for the refusal of the Article, The Apology of England in reciting
the common Creed leaves out these words Conceived of the holy Ghost. Tom 1.
Council. pa. 752. M. Horn and his fellovve^ by M. Horn his rule are
Apollinarians, and Eutichians.
Conceived of the holy Ghost, which ye omit in the rehearsal of your
Creed, which Article I am assured, ye find not there. Then further, seeing that
the Archeheretique Eutiches, and before him Appollinarius in the recitinge of
the common Creed ran in a manner the same race, you following them at the
heels, as fast as may be, pretermitting also these words: Incarnatus est de
Spiritu sancto: here might we even by your own rule and exaumple, cry out
upon you all as Apollinarians and Eutichians, and that with more colorable
matter, then you have, either to make Master Fekenham a Donatiste, or that
your Apology has to make the worthy and learned Cardinal Hosius a
Zuenckfeldian. Wherein your Rethorique is all together as good, as is this
yours here against Master Fekenham. Neither do we greatly pass, how the
Donatistes in this point demeaned them selves, and whether they openly or
privily shonned proufes brought and deduced out of the old Testament. In deed
the Manichees denied the authority of the books of the old Law and Testament:
which I read not of the Donatists. Lib. 2. contr. Petil ca. 92.
Yea in the very same book and chapter by you alleged, Petilian him self,
takes his proof against the Catholics out of the old Testament, which you
know could serve him in little stead, if he him self did reject such kind of
evidences. This now shall suffice for this branche, to purge M. Fekenham that
he is no Donatist, or Heretic otherwise.

Concerning the other, beside your falsehood, your great folly does also show
it sesfe too, as well as in the other, to imagine him to be a Donatist, and to
think or say as you say they did, that civil magistrates have not to do with
religion, nor may not punish the tra^sgressours of the same. M. Fekenha^ says
no such thing, and I suppose he thinks no such thing: and further I dare be as
bold to say, that there is not so much as a light conjecture to be grounded
thereof by any of M. Fekenha^s words, unless M. Horn become suddenly so subtle,
that he thinks no difference to say: the Prince should not punish an honest
true man, instead of a thief, and to say he should not punish a thief. Or to
say, there is no difference betwixt althings and nothing. For though M.
Fekenha^ and al other Catholics do deny the civil Princes supreme government
in all causes ecclesiastical, yet does not M. Fekenha^ or any Catholic deny
but that civil Princes may deal in some matters ecclesiastical as advocates
and defendours of the church, namely in punishing of heretics by sharp laws,
unto the which laws, heretics are by the Church first given up and delivered
by open excommunication and condemnation.

As for S. Augustines testimonies they nothing touch M. Fekenham, and therefore
we will say nothing to them, but keep our accustomable tale with you, and
beside all other score up as an untruth that ye say here also, that the Papists
are no part of the Catholic Church, no more then the Donatistes.

M. Horn. The.19. Division. page 12. b.
But for that S. Augustines judgment and mine in this controversy is all one,
as your opinion herein differs nothing at al from the Donatists: I vvil use
no other confirmation of my proufes alleged out of the old testament, for the
reproufe of your guilful restraint, then Christ's Catholic Church, uttered by
that Catholic Doctor S. Augustine, against all the sects of Donatistes,
whether they be Gaudentians, Petilians, Rogatists, you should have said
Protestants. who in so many points (as has been shevved) resemble the
Donatists.
Papists, or any other petit sects spro^g out of his loins what name so ever
they have.

S. Austine against Gaude^tius, his second Epistle affirms, saying: I have (
says he) already hertofore made it manifest, Lib. 2. cap. 26.
that it apertained to the kings charge, that the Ninevites should pacifye
Gods wrath, which the Prophet had denou^ced unto the^. The kings which are of
Christ's Church, do judge most rightly, that it appertains unto their cure
that you (Donatists) rebel not without punishment against the same, etc. God
does inspire into ki^gs that they should procure the commandment of the
Lord, to be performed or kept in their kingdom. For they to whom it is said:
and now ye kings understand, be ye learned ye Judges of the earth, serve the
Lord in fear: do perceive that their autoriti ought so to serve the lord, that
such as will not obei his will should be punished of that authority, etc. Yea
says the same S. Aug. Let the kings of the earth serve Christ, eue^ in making
laws for Christ. meaning for the furtherance of Christ's religion. Epist. 48.
How then does kings ( says S. Aug. to Bonifacius, Epist. 50.
against the Donatists) serve the Lord with reverence, but in forbidding and
punishing with a religious severity, such things as are don against the Lords
commau^dements? For a king serves one way in that he is a man, an other way,
in respect that he is a king. Because in respect that he is but a man, he
serves the Lord in living faithfully: but in that he is also a king, he
serves in making laws of convenient force to co^mau^d just things, and to
forbid the contrary, etc. In this therefore kings serve the Lord, when they do
those things to serve him, which they could not do were they not kings. etc.
But after that this began to be fulfilled which is written: and all the kings of
the earth shall worship him, all the nations shall serve him, what man being in
his right wits, may say to Kings: Care not you in your Kingdoms, who
defe^deth or oppugneth the Church of your Lord? Let it not appertain, or be
any part of your care, who is religious in your kingdom, or a wicked deprauer
of Religion.

This was the judgment of S. Aug. or rather of Christ's Catholic Church,
uttered by him against the Donatists, touching the service, authority, power,
and care, that Kings have or ought to have in causes spiritual or
ecclesiastical, the which is also the judgment of Christ's catholic church,
now in these dais and defended, by the true ministers of the same Catholic
Church, against al Popish Donatists: with the force of Gods holy word,
both of the old and new Testament, even as S. Augustine did before. Who to
prove and confirm this his assertion to be true against the Donatists, did
avouch many more examples, then I have cited out of the old Testament: as of the
King of Niniue, Epist. 48.
of Darius, Nabuchodonozor, and others: affirming that the histories and other
testimonies, cited out of the old Testament, are partly figures, and partly
prophecies, of the power, duty, and service that Kings should owe and
perform in like sort, to the furtherance of Christ's Religion in the time of
the new Testament. The Donatists in the defense of their heresy, restrained
S. Augustine, to the example and testimony, of such like order of Princes
Service in matters of Religion, to be found in the Scriptures of the nevve
Testament: meaning that it could not be found in any order that Christ left
behind him, as you also fantasied when you vvrote the same in your book
following, yea, going even cheke by cheke with the^. But S. Austine makes
answer to you al for him and me both: Who, rehearsing the acts of the godly
Kings of the old Testament, Epist. 41
takes this for a thing not to be denied, to wit, That the ancient acts of
the godly kings mentioned in the Prophetical books, were figures of the like
facts to be don by the godly Princes in the time of the new Testament.

And although there was not in the time of the Apostles, nor long time after,
Epist. 50.
any Kings or Princes, that put the same ordinance of Christ in practice, al
being infidels for the most part: Yet the service of kings was figured ( as S.
Augustine says) in Nabuchodonozor and others, to be put in practice, Epist. 41.
when this of.71. Psalm should be fulfilled: and all the kings of the earth shall
worship Christ, and all nations shall serve him, etc. As yet in the Apostles
time, this prophecy (says he) was not fulfilled: and now ye Kings understand,
be learned ye that judge the earth, and serve the Lord in fear with
reverence. Lib. 2. cont. lit. Petil. c. 92 Dan. 3.
When the Christian Emperors and Princes ( says this Catholic Father) shall
hear that Nabuchodonozor, after he had seen the marueilouse power of almighty
God, in saving the three young men, from the violence of the fire, walking
therein without hurt, was so astonished at the miracle, that he him self being
before this but a cruel Idolatour, began forthwith upon this wondrous
sight, to understand and serve the Lord with reverent fear: Do not they
understand, that th^^e things, are therefore written and recited in the
Christian assemblies, that these should be examples to themselves of faith in
God, to the furtherance of Religion? These Christian rulers, therefore minding
according to the admonition of the Psalm, to understand, to be learned, and to
serve the Lord with reverent fear, do very attentively give ear, and mark
what Nabuchodonozor after said: for he, says the Prophet, made a decree or
statute, for all the people that were under his obeissa^ce: that who so ever
should after the publicatio^ thereof, speak any blasphemy against the almighty,
they should suffer death, and their goods be co^fiscate. Now if the Christian
Emperors, and Kings, do know, that Nabuchodonozor made this decree against the
blasphemers of God, surely they cast in their mi^des, what they are bound to
decree in their ki^gdoms, to wit, that the self same God, and his Sacraments,
be not lightly set by and contemned. Thus far S. Augustine: By whose
judgment, Note, that now S. Augustins Judgment is also the judgment of the
Catholic Church.
being also the judgment of the catholic Church, it is manifest, that the
order, rule, and government, in Ecclesiastical causes, practiced by the Kings
of the old Testament, being figures and prophecies, of the like government,
and service, to be in the Kings under the new Testament, is the order of
government, that Christ left behind him in the Ghospel and new Testament: and
so directly confuteth your (.52.) The 52. untruth M. Feke^ha^ holds no such
opinion.
erroneous opinion.

Stapleton.
Lo, now have we more testimonies of S. Augustine to prove that, for the which
he has alleged many things out of S. Augustine already and the which no man
denies. For what else proves all this out of S. Augustine, both now and before
alleged, but that Christen Princes ought to make laws and co^stitutions (even
as M. Horn him self expounds it fol. 12. b.) for the furtherance of Christ's
Religion? This thing no Catholic denies. And for my part M. Horn, that you
may not think I have now ben first so advised upon sight of your book, I
have forced that argument with many Examples of Godly Emperors and Princes in
my dedicatory Epistle to the Queen's Majesty, before the translated history of
venerable Bede. Briefly al S. Augustins words force nothing else but that
Christian Princes may make laws to punish heretics (for that in deed was the
very occasion why S. Augustine wrote all this) and ought to fortify the decrees
of the Priests with the execution of the secular power, when obstinat
heretics will not otherwise obey. Thus it serves our turn very well. But now
that Master Horn may not utterly leese all his labor herein, let us see,
how these matters do truly and trimly serve against his dear brethern, and
M. Foxes holy Martyrs to. We say with S. Augustine, that Princes may punish
wicked deprauers of religion. Li. 2. co^t. Petilianu^ cap. 92. and Epist. 48.50.
And we further say, that ye are those. We say with saint Augustine, that
Christian Princes may make a decree yea of death: as did Nabuchodonosor against
the blasphemers of God, and carefully provide, that God and his sacraments be
not lightly co^te^ned. We say ye are as great blasphemers, as ever Christ's
Church had: we say ye be they, that have conte^ned Christ's Sacraments, making
of seven two, and using those two after such sort, Princes and church laws
made against the protesta^s
that the old proverb may (the more pitye) in a manner take place, as good
never a whit, as never the better. We say further that not only the general
Council of Trente, but that the whole Church has condemned your opinions, by
general and national Councelles many hundred years since. And that Christian
Emperors, Christian Princes, as well in other countries, as in England,
especially the noble and worthy King Henrye the fyfte, have made many sharp
laws, yea of death against heresies. We do not, nor never did disalowe these
their doings, as repugnante either to the old or new Testamente. Why then call
you for this respect the Catholykes, Popish Donatistes? But will ye know
Master Horn, who be in this point in very deed the Doltishe Deuelishe
Donatists? Hearken on well, and ye shall hear. Who be the true Donatists for
sayi^g princes may not punish transgressors in causes of religion. Episto.
50. Bonifacio Comiti. Fontanus li. 1. in histor. no. temp.

Vide epist. Aug. 48. in edit. Basil. and annotatione^ marginale^ ibidem. Sir
Thomas Hitton priest M. Foxes martyr. A great Lie of M. Fox.




The Donatistes as S. Augustyne reports, said: It was free, to believe, or
not to believe, and that faith should not be forced. Was not this I pray you
the common song of the Luterans in Germany, and England at their beginning?
Was not this your Apostles Luthers opinion, that no man should be compelled to
the faith? And as there are many dissensions, divisions, schisms betwixt you
the Sacramentaries, and the Lutherans: so are you divided also in this point.
For your M. Calvin writes, that a man may laufully and by Gods law be put to
death for heresy, as he practiced himself also, burning Seruetus the Arrian at
Geneua. But al Luthers scholars in Germany are not so forward. Yea some of
your holy martyrs auouche, that the King ca^ make no law to punish any manner of
crime by death, and that al such laws are contrary to the Gospel. This was the
opinion of Sir Thomas Hytton priest, and yet is he a blessed martyr in M. Fox
his holy Kale^der, and we must keep his feast the x. of March by M. Fox. Yet
in a book of prayers set forth by the brotherhod anon upon his death, he is
appointed to the.23. of February, and so either M. Fox or they miss the
mark. Except the one day be of his Martyrdom, and the other of his
Translation. And whereas M. Fox says, that there remains nothing of the
said Sir Thomas in writing but only his name, (which is a lie, and more to
by a syllable) and that I hear say he is busye to set forth a fresh in
printe yet ons again, his huge monstrous martyrloge, I will do so much for
him, as minister him plenty of good stuff I warrante you, to set forth and
adorn at his next edition, this worthy cha^pio^ withal. I do therefore remit M.
Fox, to Sir Thomas Mores books. S. Thomas More in his preface to Tyndal the
344. leaf. etc.
There lo is matter enough for M. Fox, and to much to: for eue^ by your own
confession he is no secret but an open damnable heretik, and a Donatist: and so
I trow no martyr, but yet good inowgh, and as good as the residew of this
worthy Kale^der. But now has M. Fox a far greater business in hand, for he
must scrape out S. John Oldcastel knight, S. John Oldcastle knight of the same
opinion with S. Thomas Hytton priest.
being not only a traitor, but a detestable Donatiste also. Now all the
weight rests to prove this substancially to you and to M. Fox, and to stop
al your froward quarrelings and accustomable elusions against our proufes.
Well, I will bring you (as I think) a substancial and and an inevitable proof,
that is M. Fox him self, and no worse man. For lo thus he writethe of this
worthy champion, and that even in his own huge martyrologe, who doubts but
to the great exalting and amplification of his noble work, and of his noble
holy Martyr? The tenth article, says M. Fox, Fox in his English martyrol.
the 139. leaf. Col. 2. M. Feke^ha^ purged by M. Horn himself of that he
lays to him.
that manslawghter either by war, or by any pretended law of Justice, for any
temporal cause, or spiritual revelation, is expressly contrary to the new
Testament, which is the law of graceful of mercy. This worthy article, with
a.11. other of like sewte and sort, in a book of reformation (beilke very
like to Captayn Keets tree of reformation in Norfolk) was exhibited in open
parliament, if we believe M. Fox.

Now you see M. Horn, where and upon whom ye may truly utter and bestow all this nedelesse treatise of yours against M. Fekenha^. And therefore we may now
proceed to the remna^te of your book, saui^g that this in no wise must be
ouerhipped, that eue^ by your own words here ye purge M. Fekenha^, from this
crime, ye laid unto him even now, for refusing proufes taken out of the old
testamente. For if, Romans 1.
as ye say, the order and government that Christ left behind in the Gospel
and new testament, is the order, rule, and government in Ecclesiastical causes
practiced by the Kings of the old Testament, then will it follow, that M.
Fekenham yelding to the government of the new, does not exclude, but rather
comprehend the government of the old Testament also, both being especially,
as ye say, alone.

M. Horn. The 20. Division. Page 14. a.
Now I vvil conclude on this sort, that which I affirmed: namely that Kings,
and Princes, ought to take upon the^ government in Ecclesiastical causes.

What government, orde, and dutifulnes, so ever belonging to any, God has
figured and promised before hand by his Prophets, in the holy Scriptures of
the old Testament, to be performed by Christ, and those of his kingdom: that
is the government, order, and dutifulnes, set forth, and required in the
Gospel, or new testament. But that faithful Emperors, Kings, and Rulers,
ought of duty, as belonging to their office, to claim and take upon them Not
such Supreme government as the Oath prescribes.
the government, authority, power, care, and service, of God their Lord, in
matters of Religion, or Not in all causes ecclesiastical.
causes Ecclesiastical, was an order and dutifulnes for them: prefigured and
fore promised of God by his Prophets, in the Scriptures of the old Testament,
as (.53.) The 53. untruth. S. Augustine has witnessed no such large and
Supreme government, as you attribute now to princes.
S. Augustine has sufficiently witnessed: Ergo. Christian Emperors, Kings,
and Rulers, owe of duty, as belonging to their office, to claim, and take
upon them, the government, authority, power, care, and service of their Lord,
You conclude not in all things and causes, and therefore you conclude nothing
against us.
in matters of Religion: or Spiritual, or Ecclesiastical causes, is the
government, order, and dutifulnes, set forth, and required, in the Gospel or
new Testament.

This that has been already said, might satisfy any man that erreth of simple
ignorance. But for that your vvilfulnes is such, that you (.54.) The 54.
untruth. Slaunderours.
delight only in wrangling against the truth, appear it to you never so
plain, and that no weight of good proufes, can press you, you are so
slippery, I vvil load you with heaps, eue^ of such proufes, as ye vvil seem
desirous to have. The holy Ghost describi^g by the Prophet Esaias, what shall be
the state of Christ's Church in the time of the new testament, 2. Cor. 6.
yea now in these our day, (for this our time is the time that the Prophet
speaks of, as S. Paul witnesses to the Corinthia^s) adds many comfortable
promises, and amongst other makes this to Christ's Catholic Church, to
vvitte, Kings shall be Nourishing Fathers, Esa. 49.
and Queen's shall be thy nources. Nourishing Fathers says the gloss enterlined,
Lyra in Esa. c. 49.
In lacte verbi. In the milk of the word, meaning Gods word. Lyra adds:
This prophecy is manifestly fulfilled in many Kings and Queen's, who receiving
the Catholic Faith, did feed the poor faithful ones, etc. And this reverence
to be done by Kings (says Lyra) was fulfilled in the time of Constantine and
other Christian Kings. Certainly, Consta^tin the Emperor, shevved himself to
understand his own duty of nourishing Christ's Church appointed by God in his
Prophecy: All this of Constantine is granted and makes nothing for you.

Euse. li..3. de vita Constant. Lib. 2.


for he like a good, tender, and faithful Nource father, did keep, defend,
maintein, uphold, and feed the poor faithful ones of Christ: he bare the^
being as it were almost vveried and forhayed with the great persecutions of
Gods enemies, and maruelously shaken with the controversies and contentions
amongst themselves, even as a nource Father in his own bosom: he procured
that they should be fed with the svveete milk of Gods word. Yea, he him
self with his public proclamations, did exhort and allure his subjects to
the Christian Faith. As Eusebius does report in many places, vvriting the life
of Constantine, He caused the Idolatrous religion to be suppressed, and utterly
banished, and the true knowledge and Religion of Christ, to be brought in and
planted among his people. He made many wholesome laws, and Godly co^stitutions,
wherewith he restrained the people with threats, forbiddinge them the
Sacrificing to Idols: to seek after the Deuelish and superstitious soth
saiyngs: to set up (55.) The 55. untruth. They were Idols, not Images, that
Constantin forbadde his subjects to set up. Lib 4. de vit. Co^st. Lib. 1.
Images: that they should not make any privy Sacrifices: and to be brief, he
reformed al manner of abuses, about Gods service, and provided that the Church
should be fed with Gods word. Yea, his diligent care in furthering and
setting forth the true knowledge of Christ, vvherevvith he fed the people,
was so vvatcheful, that Eusebius does affirm him to be appointed of God, as
it were the common or Universal Bishop: And so Constantine took himself to
be: Lib. 4.
and therefore said to the Bisshoppes assembled together with him at a feast,
that God had appointed him to be a Bishop. But of this most honorable Bishop
and nourshing father, more shall be said hereafter, as of other also such like.

The.17. Chapter opening the weakness of M. Horns Conclusion, and of other
his proufes out of holy Scripture.
Stapleton.
NOw ye may conclude, that there is some regiment that Princes may take upon
the^ in causes ecclesiastical: but if ye mean of such regiment as ye pretend,
you make your recknyng without your host as a man may say: and conclude before
ye have brought forth any prouf, that they ought or may take upon them such
government. For though I grant you al your examples ye have alleged, and that
the doings of the old Testament were figures of the new, and the saying of
Esaye, that Kings should be Nowrishinge Fathers to the Church: and al things
else that ye here allege, yet al will not reach home, no not Constantines the
great his example. Who being an Ethnike became a Christian, and to the
uttermost of his power, set forth Christ's religion in all the Empire. what
then? your conclusion of supreme regiment, will not necessarily follow thereof.
And when Eusebius calls him, as it were, a common or universal bishop, I
suppose ye mean not, that he was a bishop in deed. For your self confess,
that princes and Bisshops offices are far distincted and disseuered, M. Horn
does curtal Eusebius sentence.
and that the one ought not to break in to the office of the other. And if ye
did so mean, Eusebius himself would sone confound you, if ye rehearse
Constantines whole sentence, that he spoke to the Bisshopes. For thus he says
to the bisshops. Vos quidem eorum quae intus sunt in Ecclesia agenda, ego vero
eorum quae extra sunt Episcopus a Deo sum constitutus. Euse. lib. 4 de vitae
Constant.
You are bisshops says he, of those things that are to be don within the
Church: I am bishop of outward things. Which answer of his may satisfy
any reasonable man, for all that ye bring in here of Constantine, or all that ye
shall afterward bring in: which declares him no supreme judge or chief
determinour of causes Ecclesiastical, but rather the contrary: and that he was
the ouerseer in civil matters. And the most that may be enferred thereof, is
that he had the procuration and execution of Church matters: which I am assured
al Catholics will grant.

But now whereas ye charge M. Fekenham partly with subtle, partly with foul
shifts: this is in you surely, no subtyle but a blonte and a foul shameless
shifte, to shifte the Idols into the Image of Christ and his saints: and
whereas Constantine put down the paynims Idols, to make the simple believe,
that the reformation which he made, was such as your reformation or rather
deformation is. For to leave other things, to say that Constantine forbadde to
set up Images, Eusebius lib. 3. de vita Constant.
is an open and a shameless lie: for he set up the Cross of Christ, that is
so owtragiously and blasphemously vylayned by you every where, in the stead of
the idolles, he decked and adorned the Churches every where with holy Images,
Nice. con. act. 2. Pa. 429. Col. 2.
the remembrance of Christ's incarnation, and for the worship of his saints,
thereby to set forth the truth, and the worship of God, and to convert al
nations from Idolatry and deuelishe deceit.

M. Horn. The Division 21. Page 15.
Our savior Christ meante not to forbid or destroy, touching the rule,
service, and chardge of Princes in Church causes, that which was figured in
the law, or prophesied by the Prophets. Mat. ^.
For he came to fulfill or accomplish the law and the Prophets, by removing
the shadovve and figure, and establishing the body and substance to be seen,
and to appear clearly without any mist or dark cover: yea, as the power and
authority of Princes was appointed in the Law and Prophets, as it is proved,
to stretch it self, not only to civil causes, but also to the oversight,
maintenance, setting forth, and furtherance of Religion and matters
Ecclesiastical: Mat. 21.
Even so Christ our Savior (.56) The.56. untruth. This place of S. Matthew.
makes nothing for the Princes supreme government in Ecclesiastical things.
Matthew. 22
confirmed this their authority, commanding all men to attribute and give
unto Caesar that which belongs unto him admonishing notvvithstanding al
Princes and people, that Caesar's authority is not infinite, or without limits
(for such authority belongs only to the King of al Kings*) but bounded and
circumscribed within the bounds assigned in Gods word, and so will I my
word; to be understood, when so ever I speak of the power of Princes.

Stapleton.
M. Horn goes yet nedelessely foreward to prove that Christ did not destroy
the rule of Princes in Church causes, figured in the old Law, and now at
length catches he one testimony out of the new Testament to prove his saying:
which is, Give unto Caesar, that belongs unto him. Which place nothing at al
serves his turn, but rather destroys, I will not say any figure of the old
Testament, but M. Horns foolish figurative Divinity. For it is so far of
(that of this place M. Horn may make any ground, for the Ecclesiastical
authority of Princes) that it does not as much as infer, that we ought to
pay so much as tribute to our Princes, but only that we may pay it. For the
question was framed of the captious Jews, not whether they ought, but whether
they might lawfully pay any tribute to Caesar. Which was then an external
and an infidel Prince. For if M. Horn will say those words importe a
precise necessity, he shall have much a do to excuse the Italians,
Frenchmen, Spaniardes, and our Nation, which many hundred years have paid no
tribute to Caesar. But I pray you M. Horn, why have you defalked and curtailed
Christ's answer? Why have you not set forth his whole and entier sentence:
The place of Mat. 22. makes rather quite against M. Horn. Fol. 20.
Give to Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and to God that belongs to God?
which later clause I am assured, does much more take away a supreme regiment in all causes Ecclesiastical, then necessarily by force of any words bind us to
pay, yea any tribute to our Prince. And will ye see how it happens, that
Hosius a great learned and a godly Bishop of Spain, as M. Horn him self
calls him, even by this very place proves against the Emperor Constantius,
and tells it him to his face, that he had nothing to do with matters
Ecclesiastical? Whose words we shall have an occasion hereafter to rehearse.
Yea S. Ambrose also uses the same authority to repress the like usurped
authority of Valentinian the younger. Amb li. 5. Ep. 32.
This ill hap has M. Horn even with his first authority of the new
Testament, extraordinary, and impertinentlie I can not tell how chopped in,
to cause the leaves of his book, and his lies, to make the more mouster and
show. But now, whereas this place serves nothing for any authority
Ecclesiastical in the Prince, and least of all for his preeminent and
peerlesse authority in all causes Ecclesiastical, as M. Horn fansieth, Yet
least any man (being borne down with the great weight of so mighty a proof)
should think the Princes power infinite, M. Horn to amend this
inconvenience, of his great gentleness, thought good to prevent this mischief,
and to admonish the Reader thereof: and that his meaning is not by this place to
geaue him an infinite authority, or without limits, but such only as is
bounded and circumscribed within the bounds of Gods word: and least ye should
mistake him, he would himself so to be understood. Which is for all this
solemnity, but a foolish and a frivolous admonition, without any cause or
ground: and grounded only upon M. Horns fantistical imagination, and not upon
Christ, as he surmiseth. Who wills that to be geauen to Caesar that is
Caesar's, and to God that is Gods: but determines and expresses nothing, that
is to be given to Caesar, but only paiement of money. And yet if we consider,
as I have said, what was the question demanded, it does not determine that
neither: though the thing it self be most true. How be it this admonition
serves Master Horn and his brethren for many and necessary purposes, to
rule and master their Princes by, at their pleasure: that as often as their
doings like them not, they may freely disobey, and say it is not* Gods word,
whereof the interpretation they refer to them selves. And so far it serves
some of them, and the most zealouse of them, that now their Prince, though
Supreme governor and judge in all causes Ecclesiastical, may not by Gods word,
appointe them as much as a Surplesse or Cope to be worn in the Church, or
Priestlike and decent apparel to be worn of the^ otherwise. Yea some of them,
of whom we have already spoken, have found a way, and that by Gods word, to
depose the Queen's Majesty from al manner of jurisdiction as well temporal as
spiritual: and that by Gods holy word. Whereof these men make a very
Welshemans hose, to say the truth, and among other, M. Horn him self, for
all his solemn admonition. For we plainly say, that this kind of supremacy,
is directly against Gods holy word.

M. Horn. The.22. Division. page 15. b.
And this to be Christ's order and meaning, that the Kings of the Nations
should be the supreme governors over their people, not only us temporal, but
also in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes (.57.) The.57. untruth. The
apostles never declared any such matter. 1. Pet. 2. Romans 13.
the blessed Apostles Peter and Paul, do plainly declare. The supremacy of
Princes they set forth, when they command every soul (that is, every man,
whether he be, as Chrysostom says, an Apostle, Evangelist, Prophet,
Priest, Monk, or of what so ever calling he be) to be subject and obey the
higher powers, as Kings, and their Lieutenants, or governors under them. And
they declare that this supreme government is occupied and exercised in, or
about the praising, furthering, and aduauncing of virtue or virtuous actions,
and contrary wise in correcting, staiyng, and repressing al manner of vice or
vicious actions, Epist. 125.
which are the propre object or matter hereof. Thus does Basilius take the
meaning of the Apostles, saying: This seems to me to be the office of a
Prince, to aid virtue, and to impugn vice. Neither S. Paul, neither the best
learned among the aunciente Fathers, did restreine this power of Princes,
only to virtues and vices, bidden or forbidden, in the second table of Gods
commandments, wherein are contained the duties one man owes to an other:
But also did plainly declare them selves to mean, that the authority of
Princes ought to stretche it self to the maintenance, praise and furtheraunce
of the virtues of the first table, and the suppression of the contrary,
wherein only consists the true Religion, and spiritual Service, that is
due from man to God. S Paul in his Epistle to Timothe, 1. Tim. 2.
teaches the Ephesians, that Kings and Rulers are constituted of God, for
these two purposes: that their people may live a peaceable life, thourough
their gouernmente and ministry both in godliness, which is (as S. (.58.)
The.58. untruth. S. Aug. miss understood.

Lib 14. De Trin. cap 1

Lib. 5. de Ciuit dei cap. 14.


Augustine interpreth it) the true and chief or propre vvorshippe of God: and
also in honesty or semelinesse: in which two words (Godliness and
Honesty) he contained what so ever is commanded either in the first or
second Table. S. Augustine also shows this to be his mind, when describing
the true virtues, which shall cause princes to be blessed, now in Hope, and
afterward in deed, adds this as one especial condition, required by reason
of their chardge and calling. If that (says he) they make their power which
they have a servant unto Gods Majesty, to enlarge most wide his worship,
Service, or Religion. To this purpose also, serve all those testimonies,
which I have cited before out of S. Aug. against the Donatists: who in his
book. Grad. 6. Romans 13. Lib 2. cap. 83.
De. 12. abusi^e number gradibus, teaches that a Prince or Ruler must labor to
be had in awe of his subjects, for the severity against the traunsgressours
of Gods Law. Not meaning only the transgressors of the second table in
temporal matters: But also against the offenders of the first table in (.59.)
The.59. untruth. S. Aug. means not to teach such government of Princes in
Ecclesiastical matters, as you teach, but only to punish heretics by laws,
and by the same to maintein the Catholic faith decreed of the Clergy, not by
the Civil Magistrate Lib. 2. co^t 2 Epist. Gaud c. 11
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes or matters. Which his meaning he
declares plainly in another place, where he avouches the saying of S.
Paul: The Prince bears not the sword in vain, to prove therevvith against
Petilian the Donatist, that the power or authority of Princes, which the
Apostle speaks of in that sentence, is given unto them to make sharp Laws,
to further true Religion, and to suppress Heresies and Schisms: and therefore
in the same place, he calls the Catholic Church, that has such Princes
to govern to this effect: A Church made strong, whole, or fastened together
with Catholic princes: meaning that the Church is vveake, rent, and parted in
sonder, where Catholic Governors are not, to maintain the unity thereof
in Church matters, by their authority and power.

Gaudentius the Donatist, found him self agreeued that Emperors should
entremeddle, and use their power in matters of religion: affirming, that this
was to restreine men of that freedom that God had set men on. That this was
a great injury to God, if he meaning his religion) should be defended by men.
And that this was nothing else, but to esteem God to be one, that is not able
to revenge the injuries done against him self. S. Augustine does answer and
refute his objections, with the authority of S. Paul's saying to the Romans:
Let every soul be subject to the higher powers, etc. For he is Gods minister,
to take vengeance on him that does evil: interpreting the mind of the Apostle
to be, that the authority and power of Princes, has to deal in
Ecclesiastical causes, so (60) The 60. untruth. S. Augustine never wrote so.
well as in Temporal. And therefore says to Gaudentius, and to you al: Blotte
out these saiyngs (of S. Paul. 13. Rom.) if you can, or if you can not, then
set naught by them, as ye do. Retain a most wicked meaning of al these
saiyngs (of the Apostle) least you loose your freedom in judging: or else
truly for that as men, ye are ashamed to do before men, cry out if you dare:
Let murderers be punished, let adulterers be punished, let all other faults,
Where is there in all this M. Horn, that the Princes has to deal in
Ecclesiastical causes, so well as in te^porall?
be they never so heinous or full of mischief be punished (by the Magistrate) we
will that only wicked faults against religion be exe^pt from punishment by the
laws of kings or rulers. etc. Harken to the Apostles, and thou shall have a
great advantage that the kingly power cannot hurt thee, do well, and so shall
thou have praise of the same power, etc. That thing that ye do, is not only
not good, but it is a great evil, to wit, to cut in sunder the unity and
peace of Christ, to rebelle against the promises of the Gospel, and to bear
the Christian arms or badges, as in a civil war, against the true and high
King of the Christians.

The.18. chapter declaring how Princes have to govern in cases of the first
Tables answering to certain places out of the Canonical Epistles of the
Apostles.
Stapleton.
HERE is nothing M. Horn, that imports your surmised Supremacye. The
effect of your process is, Princes have authority to maintain, praise and
further the virtues of the first table, and to suppress the contrary, wherein
only consists the true Religion and spiritual Service that is due from man
to God. And that he has authority herein, not only in the virtues or vices
bidden, or forbidden in the second table of Gods commandments, wherein are
contained the duties one man owes to an other. This is granted M. Horn, both
of the Hosius. lib. 2. and Soto cont. Brentiu^. Melanch. in lo. com. Cap. de
magistr. Ciuilib.
Catholics, and of the soberer sort of Protestants (for Carolostadius, Pelargus,
Struthius, with the whole rabble of the Anabaptists deny it) that Princes have
authority both to further the observation, and to punish the breach of Gods
commandments as well in the first table as in the second, that is, as well in
such actions as concern our duty to God him self, as in the duty of one man
to an other. But all this is (as not only the Catholic writers, but
Mela^chthon him self and Calvin, do expound) quod ad externam disciplinam
attinet, Melanch. vt supra.
as much as apperteineth to external discipline: and the Magistrate is the
keeper and defender of both tables (says Melanchthon) but again he adds:
quod ad externos mores attinet, as much as belongs to external manners,
behavior, and demeanor. For in the first table are contained many offenses
and breaches, of the which the Prince can not judge, and much less are by him
punishable. As are all such crimes, which proprely belong to the Court of
Conscience. To wit, misbelief in God, mistrust in his mercy, contempt of his
commandments, presumption of our selves, incredulity, and such like: which
al are offenses against the first table, that is, against the love we owe to
God. Co^trarywise, true belief, confidence in God, the fear of God, and such
like, are the virtues of the first table. And of these Melanchthon truly
says: Haec sunt vera opera primae tabulae, In Apolologia Co^fess. Art. 18.
These are the true works of the first table. The punishing, correcting, or
judging of these appertain nothing to the authority of the Prince, or to any
his laws: but only are judged, corrected and punished by the spiritual sword
of excommunication, of binding of sins, and embarring the use of the holy
Sacraments, by the order and authority of the Priest only and spiritual
Magistrate. Which thing is evident not only by the confession, doctrine, and
continual practice of the Catholic Church, but also by the very writings
of such as have departed out of the Church, and will seem most to extolle the
authority of Princes, yea of your self M. Horn, as we shall see hereafter.

Again whereas, the chief virtue of the first table is to believe in God, to
know him, and to have the true faith of him and in him, in external
regimente (as to punish open blasphemy, to make laws against heretics, to
honor and maintain the true service of God) Princes especially Christians,
ought to further, aid, and maintain the same: But to judge of it, and to
determine, which is the true faith in God, how and after what manner he ought
to be served, what doctrine ought to be published in that behalf, the Prince
has no authority or power at all. Therefore Melanchtho^, In locis com. vbi
supra.
who in his Common places, will have Princes to look unto the true doctrine, to
correct the Churches (when Bishops fail of their duty) yea and to consider
the doctrine it self: yet afterward he so writes of this matter, that either
he recanteth as better advised, or else writes plain contrary to him self.
For thus he says of the Civil Magistrates: In examine ordina^dorum.
Non condant dogmata in Ecclesia, nec instituant cultus: vt fecit
Nabuchodonozor. Et recens in scripto, cui titulus est Interim, potestas
politica extra metas egressa est. Suidas in ^eontio.
Sicut Imperatori Consta^tio dixit Episcopus Leo^tius.(...). No^ sunt
co^funde^dae functiones etc. Let the^ make no doctrines in the Church: neither
appoint any worshipping of God, as did Nabuchodonosor. And even of late in that
writing which is entitled, the Interim, the Civil power has passed her
bounds and limits. As ones Bishop Leontius said to Constantius the Emperor:
Thou being set to govern in one matter, take upon thee an other matter. The
functions (of both magistrates) are not to be confounded.

In these words you see M. Horn, Melanchthon takes away all authority from
Princes in judging or determining of doctrine: and will not have the functions
of both Magistrates Spiritual and temporal to be confounded. Novvel fol. 33.
Yea M. Nowel himself with a great stomach bids us show, where they deny,
that godly and learned Priests might according to Gods word judge of the
sincerity of doctrine. As though when the Prince and his successors are made
supreme governors without any limitation, it fall not often out, that the
bishop, be he never so learned or godly, shall not ones be admitted to judge of
true doctrine, except the doctrine please the Prince: As though there had not
ben a statute made, declaring and enacting the Queen's Ma. yea and her highness
successors (without exception or limitation of godly and ungodly, and yet I
trow no bisshops) to be the Supreme Governor in all things and causes as
well spiritual as temporal. As though you M. Horn, had not written, that in
both the tables, the Prince has authority, to erect and correct, to farther,
and restrain, to allow and punish the virtues and vices thereto appertayning.
As though the governor in all causes, is not also a judge in all causes. Or as
though it were not commonly so taken and understood of a thousand in England
which have taken that Oath to their great damnation, but if they repent. You
therefore M. Horn, which talk so confusely and generally of the Princes
Authority in both tables, do yet say nothing nor prove nothing this general
and absolute Authority in all things and causes, as lustely without exception
the Oath expresses. And therefore you bring in deed nothing to prove your
principal purpose, to the which al your proufes should be directed.

Again where you allege S. Augustine, that the word Godlynes mentioned in S.
Paul to Timothe should mean, the true, chief, or proper worship of God (as
though Princes having charg thereof, should also have authority to appoint such
worship, when yet S. Paul speaks there of no such or of any authority at al
in Princes, but only that by their peasible government we might with the more
quiet atte^d to Gods service) you do herein untruly report S. Augustine, or at
the least missetake him. August. lib. 14. cap. 1. De Trinit. 1. Tim. 2.
For the word (godliness) which S. Augustine will have so to mean, is that
which the Greeks call (...), Gods service or religion, as himself there
expresses: but the word of the Apostle to Timothee, is (...), godlynes. So
aptly and truly you allege your doctors. But will you know M. Horn, why
The Apostles both S. Peter and S. Paul so earnestly taught at that time
obedience to Princes? This was the cause. In the beginni^g of the church some
Christians were of this opinion: that, for that they were Christian me^, 1. Pet.
2. Romans 13.
they were exe^pted from the laws of the Infidel Princes: and were not bound
to pay the^ any tribut, or otherwise to obey the^. To repress and reform this
wrong judgment of theirs, the Apostles Peter and Paul by you named, diligently
employed the^ selves. Whose sayings can not imply your pretensed government:
unless you will say, that Nero the wicked and heathennish Emperor was in his
time the supreme head of all the church of Christ, throughout the empire, as well
in causes spiritual as temporal. And yet in temporal and civil matters I grant
you, we ought to be subject, not only to Christians, but eue^ to infidels also,
being our princes: without any exception, of Apostle, euangeliste, prophet,
Priestehod is above a kingdom
priest or monk, as ye allege out of S. Chrysosto^. As contrary wise the
Christian prince him self, is for ecclesiastical and spiritual causes, subject
to his spiritual ruler. Which Chrysostom himself, of al me^ does best declare.
Alij sunt termini etc. The bounds of a kingdom, and of priesthood (says
Chrysosto^) are not al one: This kingdom passes the other: This king is not
known, by visible things, neither has his estimation, either for precious
stones he glistereth withal, or for his gay golden, glistering apparel. The
other king has the ordering of those worldly things: the authority of
priesthod comes from heaven: what so ever thou shall bind upon earth,
Chrysostom. homil. 4. de eo quod scripsit Esa.
shall be bound in heaven. To the king those things that are here in the world
are committed, but to me celestial things are committed: when I say to me, I
understand to a priest. And anon after he says: Regi corpora etc. The bodies
are committed to the King, the sowles to the Priest: the King pardons the
faults of the body, the priest pardons the faults of the soul. The King
forcethe, the priest exhorts: the one by necessity, the other by giving
counsel: the one has visible armor, the other spiritual. He warreth against
the barbarous, I war against the Devil. This principality is the greater. And
therefore the King does put his head under the priests hands, and every where
in the old scripture priests did anoint the Kings. Among al other books of the
said Chrysostom, his book de Sacerdotio is freighted, with a number of like and
more notable sentences for the priests superiority above the Prince. Now the^
M. Horn, I frame you such an argument. The Priest is the Princes superior in
some causes ecclesiastical, Evidently proved by S. Chrysostom the Prince not to
be the Superior in causes ecclesiastical.
Ergo the Prince is not the Priests superior in all causes ecclesiastical. The
Antecede^t is clerly proved out of the words of Chrysostom. before alleged. Thus.
The Priest is superior to the prince in remission of syns by Chrysosto^: but
remission of sins is a cause ecclesiastical or spiritual. Ergo the Priest is
the Princes superior in some cause ecclesiastical or spiritual. Which being
most true, what thing ca^ you co^clud of al ye have or shall say to win your
purpose, or that ye here presently say? that the Prince has the care as well of
the first, as of the second table of the commandments: and that S. Paul
willethe us to pray for the Princes, 1. Tim. 2.
that we may live a peaceable life in godliness and honesty. In the which place
he speaks of the heathennishe princes, as appears by that which follows, to
pray for them that they may be converted to the faith: Or of al ye bring in out
of S. Augustine either against the Donatists (whereof we have already said
enough) or that Princes must make their power a serua^te to Gods Majesty to
enlarge his worship, service and religion. Now as all this frames full
yllfauoredly to conclude your principle: ^. Augustine ret^rned upon M. Horn and
his fellows. Lib. 2. co^t. 2. epistol. Gaudentij cap. 11.
so I say that if S. Augustine were alive, he might truly and would say unto
you, as he said unto Gaudentius: and as your self allege against your self
and your brethren. That thing that ye do, is not only not good, but it is a
great evil: to wit, to cut in sonder the unity and peace of Christ, to
rebel against the promises of the gospel: or to bear the Christian arms or
badges as in a civil war, against the true, and the high King of the
Christians: he would say, if he were alive unto you, that as the Donatistes,
did not deny Christ the head, but Christ the body, that is his Catholic
Church, so do you. He would say, that as the Donatistes sect was condemned
by Constantin, Honorius, and other Emperors, the high Kings of the Christians:
so are your heresies condemned not only by the Catholic Church, but also by the
worthy and most renowned King Henry the fifte: and other Kings, as well in
England as else where: also by the high Kings of the Christians, that is
themperours as well of our time, as many hundred years since. And therefore ye
are they, that cut in sonder the unity and peace of Christ's Church, and
rebel against the promises of the Gospel.

M. Horn. The 22. Division. Page 17. a.
Chrysostom shows this reason, why S. Paul does attribute this title of a
minister vvorthely unto the Kings, or civil Magistrates: because that through
fraying of the wicked men, and commending the good, he prepares the minds of
many to be made more appliable to the doctrine of the word.

Eusebius alluding to the sentence of S. Paul, where he calls the civil
Magistrate, Gods minister, and understanding that Ministry of the ciui^
Magistrate to be about Religion, and Ecclesiastical causes, so (.61.) The 61.
untruth. Eusebius never understood any such Ministry of the Civil Magistrate.

Lib. 1. De vit. Constable. Lib. 2. De vit. Constable.


well as Temporal, does call Constantine the Emperor: The great light, and
most shril preacher, or setter forth of true godliness: The one and only God (
says he) has appointed Constantine to be his minister, and the teacher of
Godliness to al countries. And this same Co^stantin, like a faithful and good
minister: did thoroughly set forth this: and he did confess him self
manifestly to be the servant and minister of the high King. He preached with
his imperial decrees or proclamations his God, even to the bounds of the whole
world. Yea Constantine himself affirms, as Eusebius reports: That by his
ministry he did put away and overthrow all the euilles that pressed the
world, meani^g al superstition, Idolatry, and false Religion. In so much (
says this Godly Emperor) that there withal I both called again manki^de,
taught by my ministry, to the Religion of the most holy Law ( meaning the
word of God) and also caused, that the most blessed faith should increase and
grow under a better governor ( meaning than had been before) for ( says he)
I would not be unthankful to neglect namely the best ministry, which is the
thanks I owe ( unto God) of duty.

This most Christian Emperor did rightly consider, as he had been truly
taught of the most Christian Bisshops of that time, that as the Princes have in
charge the ministry and government in (.62.) The 62. untruth. Impudent and
shame less. Concluded, but no vvhyt proved.
all manner causes either Temporal or Spiritual: even so, the chiefest or best
part of their Service or Ministry to consist in the well ordering of Church
matters, and their dilligent rule and care therein, to be the most thankful,
acceptable, and duetifull Service that they can do or owe unto God.

The.19. Chapter. Answering to the sayings of Eusebius and Nicephorus touching
Constantin and Emanuel Emperors.
Stapleton.
I See you not M. Horn come as yet nere the matter. I see not yet, that
Constantin changed Religion, plucked down aultars, deposed bisshops, etc. But
that he was diligent in defending the old and former faith of the Christians.
If S. Paul call the civil magistrate a minister, because through fear he
co^straineth the wicked to embrace the godly doctrine, as by your saying S.
Chrysostom co^strueth it, we are well content therewith. And withal, that the
best ministry and service of the great Constantin rested in the settinge forth
of Christ's true religion: and that he preached the same with his Imperial
decrees and proclamations, as ye out of Eusebius recyte. Neither this that ye
here allege out of place, nor all the residewe which ye rehearse of this
Constantin (with whose doings ye furnishe hereafter six full leaves) can importe
this superiority, as we shall there more at large specify. In the mean season,
I say it is a stark and most impudent lie, that ye say without any prouf,
Co^stantin was taught of the bisshops, that Princes have the government in all
manner causes, either temporal or spiritual. You conclude after your manner,
facingly and desperatlye without any proof or half proof in the world.

M. Horn. The Division.24. Page 17. b,
For this (.63.) The 63. untruth, a^ shall appear
cause also Nicephorus in his Preface before his Ecclesiastical history, does
compare (.64.) The 64. untruth: in putti^g Emanuel for Andronicus.
Emanuel Paleologus the Emperor, to Constantin, for that he did so nearly
imitate his duetifulnes in ruling, procuring, and reforming religion to the
pureness thereof: Which among al virtues, belonging to an Emperor, is most
seemly for the imperial dignity, and does express it most truly, as
Nicephorus says: who makes protestation, that he says nothing in the
commendatio^ of this Emperor, for favor or to flatter, but as it was true in
deed in him. And so reherseth his (.65) The 65. untruth. For this Emperor was
a stark heretic.
noble virtues exercised in discharge of his imperial duty toward God in
Church matters, saying to the Emperor, who has glorified God more, and showed
more fervent zele toward hi^ in pure religion, without feyning, tha^ thou have
don? who has with such fervent zeal fought after the most sincere faith much
endaungered, or cle^sed again the holy Table? when thou saw our true
religion brought into peril with new devises brought in by co^terfaict and
naughty doctrines, thou did defend it most painfully and wisely. The (66.)
Princes supremacy in repayringe Religion decayed.

The 66. untruth fond and foolish as shall appear.


Thou did show thy self, to be the mighty supreme, and very holy anchour
and stay in so horrible wavering and error, in matters beginning to fainte,
and to perish as it were with shipwrak. Thou art the guide of the profession of
our faith. Thou have restored the Catholic and Universal Church, being
troubled with new matters or opinions, to the old state. Thou have banished
from the Church al unlawful and impure doctrine. Thou have cle^sed again with
the word of truth, the temple from choppers and chaungers of the divine
doctrine, and from heretical deprauers thereof. Thou have been set on fire with
a godly zeal for the divine Table. Thou have established the doctrine: thou
have made Co^stitutions for the same. Thou have entre^ched the true religion
with mighty defenses. That which was pulled down, thou have made up
again, and haste made the same whole and sound again, with a convenient
knitting together of all the parts and members ( to be short, thou haste,
says Nicephorus to the Emperor) established true Religion and godliness with
spiritual buttresses, namely the doctrine and rules of the ancient Father^.

Stapleton.
Where ye say, for this cause also etc. This is no cause at all: but it is
untrue, as of the other Emperor Co^stantinus: and much more untrue, as ye
shall good reader straight way understand. But first we will dissipate and
discuss the myste that M. Horn has cast before thine eyes: and wherein him
self walks either ignorantly, or maliciously, or both. Ye shall then
understand, that among many other errors and heresies wherewith the Grecians
were infected and poisoned, they held, contrary to the Catholic faith, that
the holy ghost did not proceed, from the father and the son, The Grecians at
the Counsel of Lions, acknowledged the Popes Primacy Blo^d. dec. 2. lib. 8.
Joan. Bap. Egn. Romans Prin. li 2. Nice. Gregor. li. 4. and 5.

Pachimerus lib. 5. Five notable lies concerning Images in the book of
homilies.


but from the father only. In which heresy they dwelt many an hundred year.
At the length abowte 300. years paste the Emperor of Greece called Michael
Paleologus came to the general Council kept at Lions. Where the Grecians
with the Latin Church accorded, as well in that point, as for the Popes
supremacy, both in other matters, and concerning the deuoluing of matters from
Greece to Rome by way of appeal. This Michael being dead the Grecians revolted
to their old heresy against the holy ghost: and for the maliciouse spyte they
had, against the Catholic faith, their Bisshops would not suffer him to be
buried.

The author of the homely against Idolatry, as it is entitled, calls this
Emperor wrongfully Theodorum Lascarim, and says most ignorantly and falsely,
that he was deprived of his Empire, because in the Council of Lions he
relented, and set up images in Greece. Whereas he was not put from his Empire,
but from his royal burial, as I have said, neither any word was moved in the
said council of Images, nor any Images of new by him were set up, which had
customably continued in the Greek Church many hundred years before: and so
reverently afterward continued will needs have the Grecians, about a.700.
years together with a most notorious lie, to have been Iconomaches, that is,
Image breakers. Much other foolish blasphemouse babbling is contained in that
Homily. Yea many other shameless lies are there, to disgrace, deface, and
destroy, the Image of Christ and his Saints: especially one. Whereas he says,
that the Emperor Valens and Theodosius made a Proclamation, that no man
should painte or kerue the Cross of Christ. And thereupon gaily and iolilye
triumphs upon the Catholics. Li. 1. Cod. Iustiniani tit 8. alias 11.

M Jewel also has two of the same five.

In his Reply to the Article of Images. Nicephor. Greg. li. 6.

Three notable untruth of M. Horn, in this one story.

Volaterran. li. 23 Sabell. and Blondus. Lib. 8. dec. 2.


Whereas the Proclamation neither is, nor was, to restreine all use of the
Cross, but that it should not be painted or kerued upon the ground. Which
these good Emperors, not Valens (for he was the valiant Captain and
defendour of the Arrians) but Valentinianus and Theodosius, did of a great
godly reverence they had to the Cross enact. And yet, as gross, as foul, and
as loud liyng a fetch as this is, M. Jewel walks eue^ in the very same
steps, putting Valens, for Valentinian: and alleging this Edict, as general
against al Images of the Cross. And yet these Homilies (the holy learned
Homilies of the old Fathers, namely of Venerable Bede, our learned Country
man, whose Homilies were read in our Country, in the Church Service,
above.800. years past, as also in France and other where, rejected) are read
in M. Horns and other his brethrens Diocese: and are with M. Horn very good
stuff: as good perdie, as M. Horns own book: and as clerkly, and faithfully
handeled, as ye shall see plainly by the very self matter we have in hand.
Andronicus the elder, son to this Michaell, whom M. Horn calls ignorantly
Emanuel. (for this Emanuel was not the son of this Andronicus but of
Caloioa^nes, son to Andronicus the yo^ger, to who^ our Andronicus was
gra^father) after his fathers death su^moned a counsel of the Grecia^s, wherein
he and they annulled and revoked that his Father had don at the Counsel at
Lio^s, namely concerning the proceeding of the holy Ghost. And for the which
Nicephorus M. Horns Author, being also carried away with the common error, as
with an huge raging tempest, does so highly aua^ce this Andronicus. And so
withal ye see upon how good a man, and upon how good a cause M. Horn builds
his new supremacy to pluck down the Popes old supremacy. For the infringing
whereof the wicked working of wretched heretics is with him, here and else where,
as we shall in place convenient show, a goodlye and godly presidente, as it is
also with M. Jewel for to maintain the very same quarrel, as I have at large
in my Return against his fourth Article declared.

But now M. Horn, what if these heretical doings do nothing relieve your
cause, nor necessarilye induce the chief Superiority in all causes, and
percha^ce in no cause Ecclesiastical, concerning the final discussing and
determination of the same? Verily without any percha^ce, it is most plainly and
certainly true it does not. For even in this schismatical Counsel, and
heretical Synagog, the Bishops played the chief part, O what a crafty Coper
and smothe ioyner is M. Horn?
and they gave the final though a wrong and a wicked judgment. Who also showed
their superiority, though ungodly upon this man's Father, in that they would not
suffer him to be interred Pri^celike: the^ selves much more worthy to have been
cast after their decease, to the dogs and raue^s, upon a dirty donghil. What
honor have ye got, for all your crafty cooping or cunning and smoth joining,
for all your co^bining, and as I may say incorporating a number of Nicephorus
sentences together, of the which yet some are one, Vide Praefationem. Nicephor
in histo. suam ecclesiastica^.
some are two leaves a sunder, and the first placed after the second and the
second before the first, and yet not whole sentences neither, but pieces and
patches of sentences, here and there culled out, and by you very smoothlye
joined in one continual narration, in such sort that a man would think that
the whole lay orderly in Nicephorus, and were not so artificially by you or
your delegates patched up, what honor, have you, I say, wo^ne by this, or by
the whole thing it self? Little or nothing, furthering your cause, and yet
otherwise plain schismatical and heretical. For the which your hansome holy
dealing, the author of the foresaid Homily, and you, yea and M. Jewel too, are
worthy exceeding thanks. But M. Horn will not so leese his long allegatio^ out
of Nicephorus. He has placed a Note in his Margin, sufficient (I trow) to
conclude his principal purpose. And that is this. The Princes Supremacy in
repairing religion decayed. This is in deed a ioly marginal note. But where
finds M. Horn the same in his text? Forsooth of this, that Nicephorus calls
The Emperor, the mighty supreme, and very holy Anchor, and stay in so horrible
wavering, etc. Of the word Supreme ancher, he concludes a Supremacy. But o
more the^ childish folly! could that crafty Cooper of this allegatio^, inform
you no better M. Horn? Was he no better seen in Gra^mer, or in the profession
of a scholemaister, then thus fowly and fondly to miss the true interpretation
of the latin word? For what other is suprema anchora in good english, the^ the
last ancher, the last refuge, the extreme hold and stay to rest upon? As
suprema verba, do signifye the last words of a man in his last will: as
Summa dies, the last day, Supremum indicium, the last judgment, with a number
of the like phrases, so Suprema Anchora, is the last Anchour, signifiyng the
last hold and stay, as in the peril of tempest, the last refuge is to cast
Ancher. In such a sense, Nicephorus called his Emperor the last, the mighty,
and the holy Anchour or stay in so horrible wavering and error: signifiyng
that now by him they were stayed from the storm of schism, as from a storm in
the sea, by casting the Ancher, the ship is stayed. But by the Metaphore of
an Anchour, to conclude a Supremacy: is as wise, as by the Metaphore of a Cow
to conclude a sadle. For as well does a saddle fit a Cow, as the quality of
an Anchor resemble a Supremacy. But by such beggarly shifts a barren cause
must be vpholded. First al is said by the way of Amplification to extolle the
Emperor (as in the same sentence he calls him the sixth Element, Firmamentum
sextum and sempiteruum.
reaching above Aristotle's fifth body, over the four elements with such like).
Then all is but a Metaphore, which were it true, proves not nor concludes,
but expresses and lighteneth a truth. Thirdly the Metaphore is ill translated,
and last of all, worse applied.

Now whereas in the beginning of your matter, the substance of your proufes
hereafter standing in stories, ye have demeaned your self, so clerkly and
skilfully here, the Reader may hereof have a taste: and by the way of prevention
and anticipation, have also a certain prejudicial understanding, what he shall
look for at your hands in the residue. Wherefore God be thanked, that at the
beginning has so deciphired you, whereby we may so much the more, yea the
bolder without any fear of all your antiquity hereafter to be showed,
cherefully proceed on.

M. Horn. The.25. Division. page 18. a.
These and such like Christian Emperors, are not thus much commended of the
Ecclesiastical vvriters, 1. Tim. 2.
for their notable doings in the maintenance and furtheraunce of Religion, as
for doings not necessarily appertaining to their office or calling: but for
that they were exaumples, spectacles, and glasses for others, wherein to
behold what they are bound unto by the word of God, and what their
subjects may look for at their hands, as matter of charge and duty, both to
God and his people. Which S. Paul does plainly express, where he exhorts
the Christians to make earnest and continual prayer for Kings, and for such as
are in authority, to this end and purpose, that by their rule, ministry,
and service, not only peace and tranquillity, but also godliness and religion,
should be (.67.) The.67. untruth. No such words in S. Paul
furthered and continued among men: attributing the furtherance and continuance
of religion, and godliness, to the Magistrates, as an especial fruit and effect
of their duty and service to God and his people. Chrysostom expounding this
place of the Apostle, does interpret his meaning to be understood, of the
outvvard peace and tranquillity furthered, maintained, and defended by the
Magistrates, but chieflye of the inward peace of the mind and conscience,
which can not be atteined without pure religion, as contrary wise, godliness
can not be had without peace and tranquillity of mind and conscience. This
vvouldd be noted, how ye rack S. Paul. He names not Religion at all. He
does not attribute religion to the rule and government of the civil
Magistrate, but peace and tranquillity only in godliness.
This would be noted with good aduisement, that S. Paul him self shows
plainly prosperity, amongst Gods people, and true religion, to be the
benefits and fruits in general, that by Gods ordinance springs from the rule
and government of Kings and Magistrates, unto the weal of the people. The
which two, although diverse in them selves, yet are so combined and knitte
together, and as it were incorporated in this one office of the Magistrate,
that the nourishing of the one, is the feeding of the other, the decay of the
one, destroys or (at the least) deadlye vveakeneth them both. So that one can
not be in perfect and good estate without the other. The which knot and
fastening together of religion, and prosperity in common weals, the most
Christian and godly Emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus, did vvisely (.68.)
The.68. untruth. They saw no such confounding of the two functio^s spiritual
and temporal as you imagine.

Ciril. Ep. 17. to.4.


see, as it appears by this that they vvrote unto Cyrill, saiying: The
suertie of our common weal, depends upon Gods Religion, and there is great
kindred and society betwixt these tweine, for they cleave together, and the
one grows with the increase of the other, in such sort, that true Religion
helped with the endeavor of Justice, and the common weal helped of them both,
florisheth. Seeing therefore, that we are constituted of God to be the kings,
and are the knitting together or iointure of Godliness and prosperity in the
subjects, we keep the society of these tweine, never to be sundred: and so
far forth as by our foresight, we procure peace unto our subjects, we
minister unto the augmenting of the common weal: but as we might say, being
servant to our subjects in all things, that they may live godly, and be of a
religious conversation as it becomes godly ones, we garnish the common weal
with honor, having care as it is convenient for them both (for it can not be,
that diligently providing for the one, we should not care, in like sort also
for the other) But we travail earnestly in this thing above the reast, that
the Ecclesiastical state may remain sure, both in such sort, as is seemly
for Gods honor, and fit for our times, that it may continue in tranquillity
by common consent without variaunce, that it may be quiet through agreemente
in Ecclesiastical matters, that the godly Religion may be preserved
unreprovable, and that the life of such as are chosen into the Clergy, and the
great Priesthood may be clear from all fault.

Stapleton.
And shall we now M. Horn, your antecedent matter being so naught, greatly
fear, the consequent and conclusion ye will hereof infer? Nay pardie. For lo
strait way, even in the first line, ye bewray either your great ignorance,
or your like malice. Not for calling this Emperor as ye did before Emanuell
(let that go as a venial sin) but for calling him Christian Emperor, and
willing him to be an example, a spectacle, a glass for others, as one that (as
ye said before) reformed Relligion to the pureness thereof: which saying in
such a personage as ye counterfaite, can not be but a deadly and a mortal
sin. Surely M. Fox of al men is depely beholding unto you: for if this be
pure religion, the^ may he be the bolder, after your solemn sentence once
geauen, bearing the state of one of the chief Prelates in the realm: and of a
Prelate of the garter withal: to keep still his holy day, that he has
dedicated to the memory of his blessed Martyr, M. D. Wesalian, of whom we
spoke before. And yet I wene it will prove no great festiual day, for that he
was an heretic otherwise also. Well I leave this at your leisure, better to be
debated upon between you and M. Fox. In the mean while to return to the
matter of your dealing, whereof I spoke: if ye knew not the state and truth of
your Emperors doings, ye are a very poor sely Clerk, far from the
knowledge of the late reverend fathers, Bishop White, and Bishop Gardener: and
how mete to occupy such a room, The great ignorance or malice of M. Horn.
I leave it to others their discrete and upright judgments. And now Sir, if
this be pure religion, as ye say, then have ye one heresy more, then any of
your fellows, as far as I know, has: unless perhaps M. Fox will not
suffer you to walk all post alone. M Horns rhetorik upon himself returned.
And then that I may a little roll in your railing rhetorike, wherein ye
unjustly rore out against M. Fekenham, may I not for much better cause and
ground, say to you, then ye did to him, to make him a Donatist: M. Horn let
your friends now weigh with aduiseme^t, what was the erroneous opinion of the
Grecians against the holy Ghost: and let them compare your opinion and guilful
defenses thereof to theirs. And they must needs clap you on the back, and say to
you Patrisas (if there be any upright judgment in the^) Deming you so like your
great graunsiers the Grecians, as though they had spitte you out of their mouth.

Now for your conclusion, that you bring in upon this Emperors and
Constantines example, it is nedelesse and far from the matter. Whereby by the
place of S. Paul, before rehearsed, 1 Timothy 2. Chrysostom. ibidem. Cyrill. li. 1.
Epist. 17. Tom. 4.
and now eftsone by you resumed, by Chrysostom in his expositions of the
said place, and by Cyrillus you would have us seriously admonished, that
prosperity of the commonwealth and true religion, springs from the good
regiment of Magistrates, which we deny not, and that the decay of religion
destroys or deadlye weakeneth the other: which is also true, as the utter
ruin of the Empire of Greece proceeding from the manifold heresies, especially
that, whereof we have discoursed, does to well and to plainly testify. And
therefore I would wish you and M. Fox, A good aduertisment for M. Horn to
consider the cause of the destruction of Constantinople. Josephus de bello Iud.
and Hegesippus.

In the year of our Lord 1453.


with others, but you two above all others, with good aduisemente to note, that
as the wicked Jews that crucified Christ about the holy time of Easter, were
at the very same time, or thereabout, besieged of the Romans, and shortly after
brought to such desolation, and to such miserable wretched state, as in a
manner is incredible, saving that beside the foreseing and foresaiyng thereof by
Christ, there is extant at this day a true and faithful report: Even so,
your dearlings the Grecians, whose error, but not alone, but accompanied with
some other, that you at this day stoutly defend, yet especially rested in this
heresy against the holy Ghost, that ye term with an unclean and an impure
mouth, pure religion, were in their chief city of Co^sta^tinople, in the time
of Co^stantinus son to John, nephew to Andronicus your Emanuels father, even
about Whitsontide (at which time the Catholic Church in true and sincere
faith concerning the holy Ghost, keeps a solemn festival day of the holy
Ghost) suddenly by the wicked Turks besieged, and shortly after the city and
the whole Greek empire came into the Turks hands and possession. Wherein God
seameth as before to the Jews, so afterward to the Grecians, as yt were with
pointing and notyfying yt with his finger to show and to notify to all the
world, the cause of the final destruction, as well of the one, as of the
other people. But what speak I of Greece? Heresies the destructions of common
weals.
we need not run to so fare years or contries. The case touches us much
nearer: The realm of Boheame, and of late years of France and Scotland, the
noble country of Germany, with some other that I neade not name, be to to
lively and pregnant examples, of this your true, but neadlesse and impertinente
admonition. For the which notwithstanding seeinge ye deal so freelye and
liberallye, I thowght good also to return you an other: I suppose not
neadlesse or impertinente for you, and such other as do praise and commend so
highly this Andronicus doings.

And now might I here break of from this and go further forth, saving that I
can not suffer you, to bleare the readers eyes, as thowgh the Emperors
Theodosius, The popes supremacy proved by the Emperor Valentinian alleged by M.
Horn. Tom. 1 council fo. 731 col. 1.
and Valentinianus sayings or doings should serve any thing for your
pretensed primacy: We (says Valentinian to the Emperor Theodosius) owght to
defend the faith which we received of our auncetours with all competente
devotion: and in this our time preserve unblemished the worthy reverence dew
to the blessed Apostle Peter. So, that the most blessed bishop of the cyty of
Rome, to whom antiquity, has given the principality of priesthod above all
other, may (O most blessed father and honorable Emperor) have place and
liberty, to give judgment in such matters as concerns faith and priests. And
for this cause the bishop of Constantinople, has according to the solemn
order of counsels, by his lybel appealed unto hi^. And this is written M. Horn
to Theodosius him self, by a common letter of Valentinian, and the Empresses
Placidia and Eudoxia. Dict. fol. 731. co. 2.
Which Placidia writes also a particular letter to her said son Theodosius,
and altogether in the same sense. Harken good M. Horn, and give good
advertisement: I walk not, and wander as ye do, here alleging this Emperor,
in an obscure generality, whereof can not be enforced any certain
particularity of the principal Question: I go to work with you plainly,
trewlye and particularlye: I show you by your own Emperor and by plain words,
the Popes supremacy and the practice withal of appeals from Constantinople to
Rome: that it is the less to be marueled at, if Michael in the forsayde
counsel at Lions co^desce^ded to the same. And your Andronicus with his
Grecians the less to be borne withal for breaking and reuoking the said
Emperors good and lawful doings. Neither is it to be thought, that Theodosius
thowght otherwise of this primacy. But because ye hereafter wring and wrest him
to serve your turn, I will set him over to that as a more commodiouse place to
debate his doings therein.

M. Horn. The.26. Division. Page 19. a.
Hitherto I have proved plainly by the holy Scriptures, and by some such
Doctors, as from age to age, have witnessed, the order of ecclesiastical
government in the Church of Christ: yea by the confession, testimony, and
example of some of the most godly Emperors themselves, that such (.69.) The
69. untruth. Such like government you have not, nor ever shall be able to prove.
like government in Church causes, as the Queens majesty takes upon her, does
of duty belong unto the civil Magistrates and Rulers, and therefore they may
yea, they ought to claim and take upon them the same. Now remains that I
prove this same by the continual practice of the like government in some one
part of Christendom, and by the general counsayles, wherein (as ye affirm)
the right order of Ecclesiastical government in Christ his Church, has been
most faithfully declared and shevved from time to time.

Stapleton.
Hitherto you have not brought any one thing to the substantial prouf of your
purpose worth a good straw: neither scripture, nor Doctor, nor Emperor.
Among your four emperors by you named ye have iugled in one that was a stark
heretik, but as subtily, as ye thought ye had handled the matter, ye have not
so craftily conveyed your galls, but that ye are espied. Yet for one thing are
ye here to be commended, that now ye would seame to frame as a certain fixed
state of the matter to be debated upon, and to the which ye would seem to
direct your proufs, that ye will bring. And therein you deal with us better,
the^ hitherto ye have done seaming to seek by dark generalities, as it were
corners, to luske and lurk in. Neither yet here walk ye so plainly and truly
as ye would seem: but in great darkness with a sco^se of dymme light, that the
readers should not have the clear view and sight of the right way ye should
walk in, whom with this your dark sconse ye lead far awrie. For thus you
frame us the state of the Question.

M. Horn. The 27. Division. Page 19. b.
The government that the Queens majesty takes most justly upon her in
Ecclesiastical causes, is the guiding, caring, providing, ordering, directing,
and ayding, the Ecclesiastical state within her dominions, to the
furtheraunce, maintenance, and setting forth of true religion, unity, and
quietness of Christ's Church, ouerseyng, visiti^g, refourming, restrayning,
amending, and correcting, al manner persons, with al manner errors,
superstitions, Heresies, Schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities,
in or about Christ's Religion whatsoever. This same authority, rule, and
government, was practiced in the Catholic Church, by the most Christian Kings
and Emperors, approved, confirmed, and commended by the best counsels, both
general and national.

The.20. Chapter: Declaring the state of the Question between M. Horn and
Fekenha^, touching the Oath.
Stapleton.
HEre is a state framed of you (M. Horn) but far square from the Question in
hand. For the Question is not now between M. Feke^ham and you, whether the
Prince may visit, refourme, and correct all manner of persons, for all manner of
heresies and schisms, and offenses in Christian Religion, which perchance in
some sense might somewhat be borne withal, if ye mean by this visitation and
reformation the outward execution of the Church laws and decrees, confirmed
by the civil magistrate, roborated with his edictes, and executed with his
sword. For in such sort many Emperors and Princes, have fortified, and
strenghthened the decrees of bisshops made in Councels both general and
national, as we shall in the process see. ^he state of the Question
And this in Christian Princes is not denied, but commended. But the Question
is here now, whether the Prince or lay Magistrate, may of him self, and of his
own princely Authority, without any higher Ecclesiastical power in the
Church, within or without the Realm visit, refourme and correct, and have al
manner of government and Authority in all things and causes ecclesiastical, or
no. As whether the Prince may by his own supreme Authority, depose and set up
bisshops and Priests, make Injunctions of doctrine, prescribe order of Gods
service, enact matters of religion, approve and disprove Articles of the faith,
take order for administration of Sacraments, command or put to silence
preachers, determine doctrine, excommunicat and absolve with such like, which
all are causes ecclesiastical, and al apperteyning not to the inferior
ministerye, (which you grant to Priests and bisshops only) but to the
supreme jurisdiction and government, which you do annexe to the Prince only.
This I say, is the state of the Question, now present. For the present Question
between you and M. Fekenham is grounded upon the Oath comprised in the
Statute: which Statute emplieth and concludes al these particulars.

For concealing whereof, you have M. Horn in the framing of your ground
according to the Statute, M Horn^ dissembling falshod.
omitted clean the ij. clauses of the Statute, following. The one at the
beginning, where the Statute says. That no foreign person shall have any manner
of Authority in any spiritual cause within the Realm. By which words is
flatly excluded all the Authority of the whole body of the Catholic Church
without the Realm: As in a place more convenient, toward the end of the last
book, it shall by Gods grace be evidently proved. The other clause you omit at
the end of the said Satute, which is this. That all manner Superiorities, that
have or may lawfully be exercised, for the visitatio^ of persons
Ecclesiastical, and correcting al manner of errors, heresies, and offenses,
shall be for ever united to the Crown of the Realm of England. Wherein is
employed, that if (which God forbid) a Turk, or any heretic whatsoever
should come to the Crown of England, by virtue of this Statute and of the
Oath, al manner superioritye in visiting and correcting Ecclesiastical persons
in all manner matters, should be united to him. Yea and every subject should
swear, that in his conscience he believes so. This kind of regiment therefore
so large and ample I am right well assured, ye have not proved, nor ever shall be
able to prove in the ancient Church, while ye live. When I say, this kind of
regiment, I walk not in confuse, and general words as ye do, but I restrain
my self to the foresaid particulars now rehearsed, and to that platte form,
that I have already drawn to your hand, and unto the which Master Fekenham
must pray you to refer and apply your evidences. Otherwise, as he has, so
may he or any man else, the chief points of all being as yet on your side
unproven, still refuse the Oath. For the which doings neither you, nor any man
else, can justly be grieved with him.

A reasonable defense of the Catholics for refusing the Oath
As neither with us M. Horn ought you or any man else be grieved for declaring
the Truth in this point, as if we were disco^te^ted subjects, or repyning
against the obedience we owe to our Gracious Prince and our Country. For beside
that we ought absolutely more obey God then man, and prefer the Truth (which
our Savior himself protested to be, encouraging all the faithful to profess
the Truth, and giving them to wit, that in defending that, they defended Christ
himself) before al other worldly respects whatsoever, beside all this I say,
whosoever will but indifferently consider the matter, shall see, that M. Horn
himself, in specifying here at large the Queen's May. government, by the
Statute intended, does no less in effect abridge the same, by dissembling
silence, then the Catholics do by open and plain contradiction. For whereas
the Statute and the Oath (to the which all must swear) expresses A supreme
government in all things and causes, without exception, Master Horn taking
upon him to specify the particulars of this general decree, and amplyfying
that little which he gives to the Queen's Majesty, with copy of words, full
statutelyke, he leaves yet out, and by that leaving out, takes from the
meaning of the Statute the principal cause ecclesiastical, and most necessary,
mete, and convenient for a Supreme Governor Ecclesiastical. What is that, you
ask. Forsooth: Judgment, determining and approving of doctrine, which is true
and good, and which is otherwise. For what is more necessary in the Church,
then that the Supreme governor thereof, should have power in all doubts and
controversies to decide the Truth, and to make end of questioning? This in
the Statute by Master Horns silence is not comprised. And yet who doubts,
that of al things and causes Ecclesiastical, this is absolutelye the chiefest?
Yea and who sees not, that by the virtue of this Statute, the Queen's Majesty
has judged, determined, and enacted a new Religion contrary to the judgment
of all the Bisshops and clergy (in the Convocation represented) of her highness
dominions? Yea and that by virtue of the same Authority, in the last paliament
the book of Articles presented and put up there by the consent of the whole
convocation of the new pretended clergy of the Realm, and (one or ij. only
excepted) of all the pretended Bisshops also, was yet rejected and not suffered
to pass?

Again, preachinge the word, administration of the Sacraments, binding and
loosing, are they not things and causes mere Spiritual and Ecclesiastical?
And how then are they here by you omitted, Master Horn? Or how make you the
Supreme government in all causes to rest in the Queen's Majesty, if these causes
have no place there?

Which is now better (I appeal to al good consciences) plainly to maintain
the Truth, then dissemblinglye to uphold a falsehood? Plainly to refuse the
Oath so generallye conceived, then generally to swear to it, being not
generallye meaned? But now let us see how M. Horn will direct his proufes to
the scope appointed.

THE SECOND BOOK, DISPROVING THE PRETENSED Practice of Ecclesiastical
government in Emperors and Princes of the first.600. years after Christ.
Constantine the great.

M. Horn. The.28. Division. page 19. b.
Constantinus (of whose careful government in Church causes, I have spoken
somevvhat before) took upon him, and did exercise the (70.) The.70. untruth.
Constantine in repressing Idolatry. etc. exercised no Supreme government in
Ecclesiastical matters.

Euse. li. 2 and. 3. De vita Constant.


supreme rule and government in repressing al manner Idolatry and false
Relligion, in refourming and promoting the true religion, and in restreining
and correcting al manner errors, schisms, heresies, and other enormities, in
or about religion, and was moved hereunto of duty, even by Gods word, as he
him self reports in a vehement prayer, that he makes unto God, saying: I
have taken upon me and have brought to pass helthful things (meaning
reformation of Religion.) being persuaded (thereunto) by thy word. And
publishing to all Churches, after the Council at Nice, what was there done:
he professes that in his judgment, the chiefest end and purpose of his
Imperial government, ought to be the preservation of true religion, and godly
quietness in all Churches. I have judged (says this godly Emperor) this ought
before all other things to be the end or purpose, (whereunto I should
address my power and authority in government) that the unity of faith, pure
love, and agreement of religion toward the almighty God, might be kept, and
maintained amongst al Congregations of the Catholic Church.

The first Chapter. Of Constantine the Great, and of his diverse dealing in
matters Ecclesiastical.
Stapleton.
NOW M. Horn begins to walk, though not more truly, yet more orderly then
before. Now will he bring invincible proufs, taken from the Councels General and
National, from the Emperoures, from Kings, and finallye from the continual
practice of Christendom. In deed he begins here with Constantinus the
Emperor, and runs on from Emperor to Emperor, A brief rehearsal of M.
Horns discourse in his prouf^s against. M. Feck.
with a continual race, even to the late Maximilian, Graundfather and next
predecessor to Charles the fifth. Then have we about a ten Kings of Spain, and
about twelve of France, and as many of England also: and that sins the
Conqueste: with diverse other Kings and Princes: yea he has in his side, as he
says, Moscouia, Graecia, Armenia, and Aethiopia. As for Councels, what
General, what Provincial, he has made a great mouster of them, and has
them all ready to serve him as he braggeth, at the least one half hundred.
Beside all these, he is armed and fenced even with the Popes Canon laws, and
with a number of Popes them selves. For the residue of his Authors, they are in
great plenty. But I can not tell for what policy, whereas they drive the
Catholics to six hundred years, and pin up their proufes within those
bounds, this man by some special prerogative, by like; and for some deep
consideration unknown to me, and perchance to him self too, builds most
upon those that were after the six hundred years, yea a great number of them
by one six hundred years later. And with these proufes he comes now
continually forth on, whole 70. leaves. But now alas how shall poor M.
Fekenham abide the brunt of such a strong and a mighty force? It seems he must
needs be borne quite over. And surely so he should be, M. Horn comes nothing
nigh the mark.
if they could ones hitte him. But thanked be God there is one hundred miles
between him and their strokes: And as far does M. Horn straggle from the very
matter he takes in hand to prove. Wherefore, good Reader, I pray the have good
eye and regard to the thing that ought to be proved by M. Horn and then shall
thou plainly see that M. Fekenha^ is out of al danger of this terrible army,
as that comes nothing nigh to him by many a fair mile. The discussing of
Constantines doings.
Let us now in Gods name begin with Constantine who comes first to hand,
whose doings, good Reader, by M. Horn here alleged, for thy more ease, and
for the better understanding of M. Horns whole drift, I will orderly digest,
and shortly dispose by certain Articles.

The first then is (for a^swere to this present point) that Co^sta^tine

M. Horn. The.29. Division. fol. 20. a.
He did not only abolish al superstitions and false religions, which had been
amongst the Gentiles, but also he repressed (.71.) The.71. untruth. Constantine
repressed not heresies by his Supreme authority, but by a Superior authoriti
of Bisshops, co^demning before such heresies. Eus. li. 3. De vita Constant. Li.
1. c. 19. Lib. 4. De vit Co^st.
by his authority, laws, and decrees, al such heresies as sprung up amongst
the Christians, sharply reproving and correcting, the authors or mainteinours
of heretical doctrines, as the No^atia^s, Valentinians, Paulianes, and
Cataphrigians, as Eusebius says of him. And Theodoretus does recite a part of
an Epistle, that Constantine vvrote unto the Nicomedians, vvherin the Emperor
has this saying: If we have chaste bishops of right opinion, of courteous
behavior, we rejoice. But if any be enflamed rashly and unadvisedly, to
continue the memory and commendation of those pestilent Heresies, his fool
hardy presumption, shall forthwith be corrected and kept under by my correction,
which am Gods minister. Constantinus also gave Iniunctio^s to the chief
minister of the churches, that they should make special supplication to God for
him. He enioyneth al his subjects, that they should keep holy certain days
dedicated to Christ, and the Saturday. He gave a law unto the rulers of the
Nations, that they should celebrate the So^day in like sort after the
appointment of the Emperor. And so the days dedicated to the memory of
Martyrs and other festiual times, etc. And al such things ( says Eusebius)
were done according to the ordinance of the Emperor.

He commanded Eusebius the Bishop, to dravv certain Instructions and lessons,
as it were Homilies, forth of the holy Scriptures, that they might be read in
the Churches. Which was done incontinente, according to the Emperors
commandment.

Stapleton.
Constantine, says M. Horn, by his laws repressed the Nouatians,
Valentinians, and other heretics. And so would he repress you and your
heresies too, if he were now living (as no Bishops) continuing the memory and
commendation of pestilent heresies, that I may truly use your own phrase:
neither for all that should he be any supreme head of the Church. If
Constantine, of his own authority had first of all men, the matter of those
heretics standing in controversy, determined the same, and pronounced them
as a Judge, to be heretics, then had ye said somewhat to the purpose. But now
he found them by the Bishops and the Church declared (before he was borne) for
heretics: So therefore he took them, and so therefore he made sharp laws
against them. M. Horns proufs returned against him.
So that this place proves only Constantine to have put in execution the
decree of the Bishops: and so it serves very well against you for the
Supremacy of the Bishops in such matters.

As does the next also for the holy days ye allege dedicated to Christ, as
Sunday and other: For these holy days the Emperor did not first ordeine, but
they were ordained to his hand of the Church, before he was Christened. Namely
the So^day, as it may appear by the Counsel of Nice it self. Can. vlt.
And he like a good Prince was careful by his Emperial authority, to confirm
the same, that the people drawn from worldly business, to the desire of
heavenly things, might fruitfully observe the^. So that not only the So^day,
for the honor of Christ's Resurrection, but also many other days were
dedicated to the memory of the Martyrs of whom ye speak, before Constantines
time, as appears well by S. Cyprian, Tertullian, and Origin. And think ye,
Eusebius. li. 4 ca. 15. Cyp. li. 3. ep. 6. and li. 4. ep. 5. Tert. de coron milit.

Orig. in illud Mat. vox in Ramae.

Praying for the dead and to Saints was in Constantines time.

Euse. li. 4. De vitae Constant. cap. 71. Eusebius. lib. eodem. cap. 60.


if Constanstantine were now alive, that he would well bear to see the
au^cie^t Martyrs festiual days abolished? or that his ears would not glow for
shame to hear, that it were a superstitious thing, to pray for all Christen
souls, his own soul being prayed for as soon as he was dead, by the good and
devout people? which (as Eusebius writes) did therein to him an acceptable
service: Also to hear, that it were plain Idolatry, to pray to any Saint in
heaven, him self building a noble and a sumptuous Church in the honor of the
Apostles, thinking thereby to do a thing that should be profitable and wholesome
for his soul: Vt precibus, quae eo loci ad honore^ Apostoloru^ futurae essent,
dignus haberetur. That he might be made (says Eusebius) a worthy partaker of
such prayers as should be there made for the honor of the said Apostles?

But Sir, I pray you, let me demand of you a question. If Constantine were so
godly a Prince as ye make him to be, how chanced it, he commanded to keep holy
the satterday? When and where I pray ye, throughout all Christe^dom can you
show by all that ever you have read, that it was kept an ordinary holiday? I am
sure it was never so kept. And great marvel it is to me, that the satturday,
being even in the very Apostles time, and by them translated into the So^day,
in the honor of Christ's glorious resurrection, and least we should seem to be
Jewish, and Constantine him self, being so earnest against them that kept the
Easter day after the old fasshion of the Jews, should so suddenly become him
self so Jewish. This might have been a fit co^stitution to be made of some of
the Jews, that to precisely and superstitiouslie also kept that day: as the
Jew did in England, at Tewkisbury. Who falling upon the Satturday (as Fabian
writes) into a privy, Of the Jew of Tevvkesburie

See Fabia^ the.43. year of Henry the third.


would not for reverence of his saboth day, be plucked out. Whereof hearing the
Earl of Gloucester, and thinking to do as much reverence to the So^day, kept
him there till the mo^day at which ceason he was found dead. It had been, I say,
a fit ordinance to have been made of some Jew, very unfit for so good and
virtuous a Prince as was Constantine. Yet notwithstanding I am the better
content to pass this over, and find no great fault with you, but with
Musculus, whose translation beside his notable false corruption, is but very
seco^dary. But forasmuch as the common copies of the Greek, seem not very
sincere in this place, Eusebius. De vita Co^st. lib. 4. c. 18 (...). etc
I will not very much charge you neither. And yet I can not altogether discharge
him, or you, if ye think so ignora^tly and grossly as ye have written, that
Co^tantine commanded the Satturday to be holde^ as an holiday. And because I
am entered into this matter, I shall show thee mine advise, good Reader, and
that I suppose, for (...) should be readen (...), adding one Iota, and so may
there be made a good sense thus: Wherefore he admonished all that were under the
Romain Empire, that they should upon such days as were dedicated to our
Savior, rest and keep them holy, as the Saturday was wont to be kept holy. In
remembrance as it seems me, of those things that our savior did upon those
dais. Well let us go now to the next, and that is, that Constantine commanded
Homelies to be drawn out. So did Charles the maine too, and yet no man took
him, for supreme head therein. And would God that your homly homelies, had none
other nor worse doctrine, than those that the said Charles procured to be
made: Or the Homelies of our country man the venerable Bede made a little before
Charles his time, and yet exta^t, and in the Catholic church authorized. I pray
God your Homelies may be made ones conformable to the doctrine of their
Homelies.

The.30. Division. Fol. 21. b.
When the Emperor heard of the great schism moved betwixt Arius and
Alexander the Bishop of Alexandria, vvhervvith the Church was pitiouslie
tormented, and as it were re^t in sonder, he (.72.) The.72. untruth, Joined
vith follye Suprem government in all causes follows very courselye of sendi^g
letters to appease contention.

Socrat. li. 1 cap. 7. Sozom. li. 1. c. 16. Eus. li. 3. de vita Constant.


took upon him, as one that had the care and authority over al, to send Hosius
a great learned and godly Bishop of Spain, to take order, and to appeace the
co^te^tion, vvriting to Alexander and to Arius a grave and also a sharp letter,
charging Alexander with vanity, Arius with vva^t of circu^spection, shevving
them both, that it was unseemly for the one to move such a question, and for
the other to answer therein, and indiscreetly done of them both. And therefore
commanded them to cease of from such contentious disputatio^s, to agree
betwixt them selves, and to lay aside from thenceforth such vain and trifling
questions. He pacified also the schism at Antioch begun about the chosing of
their Bishop, to whom for that purpose he sent honorable Ambassadors with his
letters to a great number of Bishops that tha^ were at Antioch about that
business, and to the people, exhorting the^ to quietness, and teaching the^
(says Eusebius) to study after godliness, in a dece^t manner, declaring unto the
bishops, as (73) The 73. untruth. This fact shows no authority over the
Bisshops in matters Ecclesiastical.
one that had authority over them, even in such matters, what things apperteined
and were semely for the^ to do in such cases, and notes unto them a
direction, which they should follow. And after he had (says Eusebius) given
such things in commandment unto the Bishops or chief ministers of the
Churches, he exhorted them that they would do al things to the praise and
furtherance of Gods word.

Stapleton
Here are two things: The one that Constantine sends his letters to Arius and
the B. of Alexandria, to pacify and appease the contention begun with Arius.
The other that he labored to pacify an other schism at Antioch, about the
chosing of the B. of Antioch. Neither of these draw any thing nigh to the new
primacy ye would establish. And such letters might any other good zealous man
have sent to the^, being no Emperor. And as for elections in those days, not
only the Emperor, but the people also had some interest therein. Wherefore here
is no color of your supremacy. And therefore to help foreward the matter,
and to vndershore and underprop your ruinouse building withal, ye interlace
of your own authority these words ( as one that had the care and authority
over all) which your author Socrates has not, and likewise ( as one that had
authority over them) which Eusebius has not.

And here by the way, I would ask of you, for each matter a question. If
these of Alexander and Arius, were vain and triefling questions, as ye
allege, why do ye call Arius his error, an horrible heresy? And why say ye
their dissension was about a necessary article of the Faith? Page 22. col. 2.
I move it for this, that hereby we may understand, as well the great necessity
of General Councels, as the Supreme government of causes Ecclesiastical, to
have remained in the Bishops there assembled. Why Constantine calls those
matters triefling questions which afterward he took for heresy.
For Constantine that took not at the beginning, these questions to be of so
great importance, after the determination of the Council, took Arius to be a
very obstinate heretic: and his heresy to be an horrible heresy, as ye call
it. Concerning the second, as we grant the Prince had to do with election,
and yet not proprely with election, but with the allowinge and approbation of
Spiritual men's election: so I demand of you, what interest the people has in
either election or approbation now in England? A New strange manner of
election now in England.
Again I demand, whether in the ancient Church the Prince might (as he may
in England) not only nominate a person to be elected of the Deane and Chapter,
but if they do not elect within certain days, miserablye to wrappe them in a
praemunire? I make most sure account ye shall never be able, to show this. See
then that even in your election, which is beside and out of our chief matter,
ye are quyte out from the like regiment ye pretend to prove.

M. Horn. The.31. Division. Page 21. b.
This supreme (.74.) The 74. untruth. No such supreme authority is either by S.
Augustine or Eusebius expressed as shall appear.

Aug. epist. 50. et 48 Eusebius. lib. 10 cap. 5.


authority of the Emperor in Church causes is most lively expressed by S.
Augustine and Eusebius, where they make mention of the horrible Scisme,
stirred by the Donatists, against Cecilianus Bisshoppe of Carthage: whose
election and ordering to be Bishop of Carthage, Donatus and others of his
companions misliked, and therefore made a Schism in that Church. The question
in controversy was, whether Cecilianus being ordered Bishop, having the
imposition of hands by Felix, were lavvfully consecrated and ordered or not
this controversy made a lamentable trouble amongst the Churches in Aphrike.
At the length, the Donatists accused Cecilian unto the Emperor: desired the
Emperor to appointe some Delegates to judge of this co^trouersy. And for that
all the Churchs in Aphrike were ba^ded, either to the one partly, or the other,
and for that France was free from this contention, they require judges to be
appointed by his authority from amongst the French Bisshoppes. The Emperor
much grieved, that the Church was thus torn in sundre with this schism,
does appoint Melciades Bishop of Rome, and Marcus to be his (.75.) The 75.
untruth. Eusebius has no such words of delegates or co^missaries, but
alleges for his so doing: (...), the most holy law that is, the law of the
Church, which had ordained bishops to be judges in Church matters.
delegates and commissaries in this controversy with certain other Bisshoppes
of France, Melciades colleages or fellow Bisshops, whom the Emperor had
commanded to be there with the^ for that purpose. These commissioners with
certain other Bisshoppes according to the Emperors commandment met at
Rome, and after due examination had, do condemn the Donatists, and pronounce
Cecilianus cause to be good. From this sentence of the bishop of Rome, and
other bisshoppes his colleages being the Emperors delegates, the Donatists
appeal unto the Emperor, not only accusing Cecilianus, but also Melciades
the bishop of Rome, and other Co^missaries. Wherefore the Emperor causes a
Synod to be had at Arelatum, committing the cause to the bishop thereof and
other bisshoppes assembled there by his commandment, to be herd and
discussed. VVhereu^to he calls Crestus the bishop of Syracuse a City in
Sicilie by his letters. Wherein he declares in (.76.) The 76. Untruth.
Constantin in those letters has no such thing either in plain terms or
obscure. Only he expresses a desire to have the contention ended.
plain terms, that it belongs to his imperial cure, to see these
controversies in Church causes to be determined and ended. Augu. epistol. 166.
Donatus and his companions, being condemned also by these bishops, in the
Synod at Arelatum, and Cecilianus cleared, do again appeal unto the Emperor
from their sentence, beseching him to take the hearing and discussing of the
controversy. Who calls both the parties together before himself at Millayn,
and after he had herd the whole matter, and what was to be said on both
sides, This he did. But this he repented after.

Augu epistol. 162. Epist. 166.


he gave final sentence with Cecilianus, condemning the Donatists. Who after
al these things thus done, as S. Augustine says, made a very sharp Law
against the Donatistes, the which also his Sons after him commanded to be
observed.

The.2. Chapter of Constantines dealing in the appeals and suytes of the
Donatistes.
Stapleton.
OF all that M. Horn brings of Constantines doings, or of any others this
place seems most comfortable, (not to that wherein we ioyn issue with him:
which are a number of points, as I have declared: in the proof whereof in
case M. Horn be defectyue in any one, M. Fekenham is at liberty from receiuinge
the pretensed oath: Of Constantines judgment in the cause of Cecilian.
) but to that one point only, that not the Bishop or Pope himself, but the
civil magistrate is, supreme judge in causes ecclesiastical. And yet if M. Horn
could effectually prove this, he should quyte him self like a clerk. In deed
your master M Calvin, M. Jewel, and others runs to this example as to a
strong hold, which I trow nevertheless will prove anon as strong as a rotten
read. Artic. 4. fol. 105. and sequent.
As also to any indifferent Reader it may sufficiently appear, that has or
will read our Return upon M. Jewels lying Reply, where this whole matter is
answered at full. Yet let us ones again lay forth the matter.

Constantine, say you, in a matter ecclesiastical deuolued to him by an appele
appointed as his Delegate the Pope him self, yea after the Popes sentence he
appointed, upon a new appeal certain other Bisshhops. The appellants being
also agreued with this sentence, craved aid at Constantitins own hands, who
gave the final sentence against them. Suerly these were froward quarreling men,
what so ever they were. But what manner of men were they M. Horn? Forsothe as
ye truly say, the Donatists, the most perverse and obstinate heretics that
ever the Church suffered. Is this then, think you, a sure ground to build
your supremacy upon? Suerly as sure, and as sownd, as was your Emperor
Emanuel, as ye call him. Beside this, M. Horn builds his supremacy upon the
doings of Donatists
where is the long tediouse song, ye song of late against M. Feke^ham to
prove him a Donastiste? Ye see here the Donatists them selves against the
authority of temporal princes in Church matters, which before ye denied: and
so may M. Fekenha^ clear himself, that he is no Donatiste. Ye had done well, M.
F. purged by M. Horn him self to be no Donatist.
if ye had eased your reader and your self most of all, with an ha^dsome word
or two interlaced, for the avoiding of this contradiction. Well belyke it was by
some voluntary obliuio^ forslone. I will therefore take the pains to supply
this defect of yours. I say therefore that both is true. For when it served
their purpose, and as long as they had any hope of any relefe for their wicked
heresies, they ran to the Emperors, yea to Julian the Apostata, setting him
forth with no small co^mendations, for aid and help. And so did they now. The
marvelous in consta^cy of the Donatists
But afterward when both this Constantin and other Emperors made sharp laws
against the^, the^ the world was changed, then sang they a new song: that it
was not sit or seamely for the princes to busy themselves in Church matters.
Yea so impudent and inconstant they were, that thowg^e themselves first browght
the matter against Cecilian to the Emperors audience, yet did they blame
innocent Cecilian for their own fact, as a breaker of the Ecclesiastical
order. And are not your masters and companions I beseache you the true
scholars of the Donatists in this behalf, as I have before showed? And who
are they, tell me by your truth, that after sentence given against them by the
Pope, by prouincial and general councels, yea by the Emperors them selves, do
persiste and endure in their wicked heresies, and that more wilfully then ever
did the obstinat Donatists? Are they not of your own whole and holy generation?
Well seeing we have now delivered you from contradiction, we may proceed to the
matter it self.

Ye say Constantine gave sentence even after the Pope. Yea but we say again
(supposing this example true) that one swallowe bri^geth not the spring time
with him. The president of one Emperor (for ye prove not the like in all your
book of any other) ca^ not enforce a general rule, nor make a continual
practice of the Church: which is your special scope ever by you to be
regarded. And ye should have regarded here (if ye have any regard at al) the
circumstances of the matter. The circumstances of Constantines judgment in
^ecilia^s cause weighed
The Donatists were waxen very thycke and great in Aphrik, yea to the number
almost of.300. bisshops. Their bands, their faction were so great, their
cruelty upon the Catholics was so enormouse, their obstinat desperatio^ was
such, fearing no man, nor no punishment, yea most wickedly murtheri^g their own
selves in great multitudes, that the godly and wise prince Constantin, to
mollify their fury, and by gentleness and yelding to them to win them, fared
with the^, as many good princes fare and bear with the people being in their
rage, granting them many things, otherwise not to be granted, for the
shonning of a greater myscheif: And even so did this good prince condescende to
the Donatists, partly co^mitti^g this cause after the Popes Sentence to other
bisshops, partly taking it into his own hands: (both which was more then he
ought to have don, as we shall anon see.) For all this he did not as one that
took him self (as ye dream, and as (the more pity) appeals go in our country
at the Arches and other where) for the lawful and ordinary judge in causes
Ecclesiastical. Which thing wisely and godly considering Melchiades the Pope
with other bisshops, to recover the Donatists, and to take away al manner of
quarelings from the^, and to restore the Church to her former unity, so
miserably and pitifully by them rented and torn a sonder, did patiently bear
with Constantyne: As a wise man would do with the Mariners, Why sometime both
civil laws and Ecclesiastical are vvinked and dessembled at.


if in a great huge tempeste, they go somewhat out of their common course, to
save their ship, themselves, and all the other. And as in the polytyke body: so
in the spiritual body: the magistrates relent and wink at many things in such
hurlye burlye: and the laws and canons, which otherwise should take their
force, be for such a time, nothing or sleightlye exacted.

Nice Co^c. Can. ^.


For example, the canons of Nice forbid, that at one time two bisshoppes
should be with like authority in one see. Now to go no further then our own
Melchiades, and your Donatists: After the said Melchiades had condemned the
Donatists, he offered the^, if they would repent and incorporate the^ selves
again to the unity of the Catholic Chuch from the which, by a shameful schism
they had dismembered them selves, not only his letters that they call
communicatorye, by the which they should be counted through out the world
Catholics: but also, whereas by reason of this horrible division, Aug. epist.
50. et 162
in many places, were in one see two bisshops, the one a Catholic, the other a
Donatiste, that he should be confirmed, that was first ordained: and that the
other should be provided of an other bisshoprike. And here by the way you see
Melchiades and not Constantines supremacy.

A notable story concerning the Aphrican bisshops.

August. de gestis cu^ Emerito.


Yea, which is more notable the case standing in Aphrik, that as I said in many
places two bisshops sat in one see together, of three hundred Catholic
Bisshoppes assembled in a Council in the said Aphrike, they were all, saving
two, (and yet those two relented afterward too) content to give over their
bisshopricks, to the said Donatists, if they would return to the Church. And
yet the Nicene canons were to the contrary. Now I pray you M. Horn, if ye
had been then as Melchiades was, what would your wisdom have done? would you
have stepped forth and have said to Constantine, that he usurped an other man's
office? that he had nothing to do in those matters? and that the matter being
ons heard by him, it could not be deuolued into any other cowrte? and so not
only have exasperated the indurate and obstinat Donatists, but also the good
and godly prince, lately converted to the faith, and by this admonition thowgh
true, yet out of ceason hasard all?

Nay, Nay, ye will say, for all this Melchiades was but a mere delegate to
Constantin, who lawfully and orderlye proceeded in this case as owre prince does
now in like: and that this is but my pretty shifte, and ye will put me to my
proufes. But I had thowght you your self would have proved hi^ a mere
delegate, (seeing you speak it so pere^ptorely) and that nothing was don here
extraordinarily. But I see well you will allwaies object as your brethern do not
caring what has been answered to the objection already, like as simple
logicioners in schools, when their argument is prevented, have no shifte to
inuente an other, or to reply upon the former solution, but do sadly repete
the same. To you therefore M. Horn, as before to M. Jewel, I answer. The
places by your self alleged and quoted do confound you, and that in two
places, brought out of S. Augustine. For first in one of the epistles that ye
allege, It is proved by two places alleged by M. Horn that Constantine was
no lavvful Judge in Cecilians cause.

Augu. epistol. 48. Augu. epistol. 162.


S. Augustyne does reprove and rebuke the Donatists, for that they brought the
matter to the Emperors consistory: and says they should have first of all
brought the matter to the bisshops beyond the seas (he means specially the
Pope) and says further that Constantin himself, did more orderlye, when he
refused to hear the matter. Then in an other epistle also by you cited, he
says, that the principalitye of the Apostolic Chair has evermore been
enforce in the Roman Church. And now further concerning this appellation, he
says that there was no neade why that the matter should have been heard again,
after judgment given by Melchiades. But yet Constantine procured the matter
to be heard again at Arles, relenting (says S. Augustine) to the Donatists
obstinacy, and labori^g by all means to restrain their great outrageous
im^udency. Now concerning Constantin, that he eue^ for the co^sideratio^s
aforesaid, heard their cause himself: S. Augustine says, of him, that he minded
to ask pardon thereof of the holy bishops. Whereby most evidently appears,
that all this his doing was extraordinary, and not to be drawn into an usual
example: or to be prejudicial to the Ecclesiastical power, and much like to
the sufferance of Queen Mary, who for a time suffered her self to be written and
called the supreme head, thowgh she misliked the title, and at the day of her
Coronation openly reproved the preacher for calling her so. And our graciouse
Queen now uses not that title by those precise words. And I would feign know
of you M. Horn, if ye be so cunning, why the name only is shifted, the thing
remaining one and the very self same as before. Thanks now be given unto God,
that has so mercifullye wrowght with us, that he has caused you, in the
chiefest matter that seems of your side in all your book, by your own
author, your own places voluntarily by you, and for you laid forth, to
destroy your own doctrine, and utterly to overthrow your self. Perchance
you are now angry with your self, for this mishappe and oversight, and will
not styck shortly (as some of you begin already pretely) to reiecte even S.
Augustine himself, as a suspect man, and partial in Church and bisshoply
matters, him self being a bishop also. This rhetoryke I fear me will one day
burste out against him, and other as good and as ancient as he: as it buddeth
hansomly already. And if it chance so to do, we will provide for our selves:
and in this point, furnishe our selves, with such a witness as I think for
shame you dare not deny, and yet for very shame his testimony against you, ye
may not abide. That is Constantine him self: who said to the Donatistes, and
so withal to you their scholars in this point for this their appellation.
Opta. li. 1. M Horns primacy condemned by Co^sta^tine him self.
O rabida furoris audatia: sicut in causis gentilium solet, appellationem
interposuerunt. O furiouse and mad boldness they appeal unto me, as they were
panyms and and heathens. How like you this M. Horn? Where is now your like
regiment, when Constantine himself, for this your desperate raging appeals,
makes you not much better than a Pagan and an Heathen? Who shall clappe you on
the back now, and say Patrisas? Who is he now that is so like the Donatists,
as though he had spit him out of his mouth? How like M. Horn is to the
Donatists.

M. Horn in the.12. folio.


What would he have said, and how would he have cried out if he lived now, or
rather how would he have pitied Britanie his own native Country (as our
Chronicles report) for this kind of regiment, beside all other to many causes
of pity and sorrow, to behold?

Now for a surplussage M. Horn, to end this your greatest matter withal, so
often, so facingly, and so fondly alleged of all your brethren, I must tell you,
ye put not the case altogether right: Ye abuse your Readers. The principal
matter was not, whether Cecilian was laufully consecrated, this was but a
coincident, and a matter dependant. The principal matter was, whether Felix (of
whom Cecilian was in deed ordained) were a traitor, Traditor.
as they then called such as in the time of persequution, delivered to the
hands of the Infidels, the holy Bible to be burnt. This was Question facti, non
iuris: as the Lawyers say. And such as a lay man may hear well enough. The
other was coincident and accessorie. And in such cases the Lawyers say, Alciat.
l. no^ plures Cod. de sacros. ecclesiis.
that a lay man may at least wise incidently hear and determine a cause
Ecclesiastical. These and many other things mo, that might here be said, do
mollify and extenuate Constantines fault, if there were any: and how so
ever it be, this is ones sure, that your own authorities do quite ouerbeare
you, and prove the Popes Primacie.

M. Horn. The.32. Division. page 21. b.
Athanasius also that most godly Bishop, being over much vvronged in the
Council at Tire, did fly and appeal from the judgment of that (77.) The
77. Untruth. This was no appeal of Athanasius, as shall appear. Socr. li.1.
cap 34. Theod li. 2 cap. 28
Synod unto Constantine the Emperor, delaring unto him his griefs, beseeching
him to take the hearing of the matter before him self: which the Emperor
assented unto, writing unto the Synod assembled at ^yre, commanding them
without delaie to come unto his Court, and the^e to declare before me (says
this most Christian Emperor) whom ye shall not deny to be Gods sincere
minister, how sincerely and rightly ye have judged in your Synod. When this
Synod was assembled at Tire, the Catholic Bishops of Egypt, vvrote unto the
honorable Flauius Dionysius whom the Emperor had made his Lieutenaunte, to
see all things well ordered in that Council, and did desire him, that he
would reserve the examination and (78) The.78. untruth. That was no Synod at
all, but Nego^iu^ Imperatorium, An Imperial or Courtlye trial, ^s Athanasius
calls it*
judgment to the ^mperour him self: yea they do adjure him, that he do not
meddle with their matter, but refer the judgment thereof to the Emperor,
who they knew well, would judge rightly according (.79.) The.79 untruth. No
such words in Athanasius. Athanas. Apol. 2. ^o^. 91. and ^3.
to the right order of the Church.

The third Chapter: Of Constantines Dealing in the cause of Athanasius.
Stapleton.
THIS objection of Athanasius his appeal (as you call it) to Constantine, is a
common objection to all your brethren, and has been used namely of M. Jewel in
his lying Reply in the fourth Article more then ones. For the which (if I
listed to follow the fond vain of M. Nowel) I might call you M. Horn, a seely
borower of your fellows Arguments, etc. But to leave that peuish toy to boys,
of whom M. Nowel in the time of his Scholemaistershippe may well seem to have
learned it, and to answer briefly the whole matter, first I refer you to my
former answer made to M. Jew. in my Return, etc. in the fourth Article. And
now for a surplussage, I say with Athanasius himself (who knew this whole matter
better I trow, then you or M. Jewel) that this which you call a Council and a
Synod at Tire, from the judgment of which Synod you say Athanasius appealed
unto Constantine, referring the whole matter to his hearing, this, I say, was
no Synod or Council at all. For of this very assembly of the Arrian Bishops
at Tire, where they accused Athanasius before the honorable Flauius Dionysius,
the Emperors Lieutenaunt there, of grieuouse crimes, as of killing Arsenius,
who then yet lived, and of a fact of his Pri^st Macharius, for ouerthrowinge
of an Altar, and breaki^g of a Chalice, of this assembly, I say, thus does a
holy Synod of Catholic Bishops and Priests gathered together at Alexandria,
out of Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, and Pentapolis, pronounce and affirm, as
Athanasius in his second Apology (the book by your self here alleged)
records. Praecla^i Euseb^ani, quo veritatem scriptaque sua obliterent,
Athanas. in Apo^. ^
nomen Synodi suis actis praetexunt, quumres ipsa negotium Imperatorium non
Synodale haberi debeat. Quippe vbi Comes praesideat, and milites Episcopos suo
satellitio cingant, and Imperatoria edicta quos ipsi volunt coire compellant.
These ioly Eusebians (these were Arrians) to the intent they may blotte out the
truth, and their own writings, do pretend to their own doings the name of a
Synod, whereas the matter it self ought to be counted an Imperial matter, not
the matter of any Council or Synod. Lo Master Horn, you with the Arrians,
will have this to be a Synod: but we with the Catholic Bisshoppes of Egypt,
Thebais, Lybia, and Pentapolis, and with Athanasius him self, deny flattelye
it was any Synod at all, but only Negocium imperatorium, a matter Imperial, a
civil matter, a lay or temporal controversy. I trust we with the Catholic
Bishops, and namely with Athanasius, shall have more credit herein, then you
M. Horn, and Master Jewel, with the Arrians. But why do those Catholic
Bishops deny this matter to be any Synodall or Council matter? Quippe vbi.
etc. As in which matter (say they) the County, the Emperors Lieutenaunt, was
president, and soldiers closed the Bisshops round about, and the Emperors
proclamations compelled such to mete as them listed. Behold M. Horn, for this
very cause that the Emperor and his Lieutenaunt bore the chief rule, therefore
I say, did those Catholic Bishops account this matter to be no Synod at al.
See I pray you M. Horn: Homo homini quantum interest, stulto intelligens. See
how far square and extreme different your opinion is from the judgment of
the Catholic Fathers and Bisshops so many Above 12. hu^dret years.
hundred years past. You M. Horn and your fellows, will have al Synods and
Councels to be called, ordered, directed, M. Horn clean contrary to the
Catholic Bisshops of the Primitive Church
governed, confirmed, approved and wholly governed of the Prince and his
officers. And without the Princes authority, commission, order, direction,
confirmation, and royal assent, you will have no Synodes or Councelles of
Bishops to avail, or to have force. Contrariwise, these Catholic Bishops in
the East Church, do for this very cause reprove and reject the Assembly of
certain Bishops, for no Synod at al, because al was there done by the
authority, order, direction, and power of the Princes Lieutenaunt. And they
do make a plain distinction between Negotium Imperiale, and Synodale, between
an Imperial matter, and a Synodall matter: as who should say, If the
Emperor bear all the stroke, it is no Synod, nor so to be called.

Therefore these Catholic Fathers say again, in the same place within few
lines after: Si velut Episcopi sese Iudices voleba^t esse, Athanasius ibide^.
quid opus erat vel Comite, vel militibus, aut edictis ad coeundum
imperialibus? If these fellows would be them selves Judges as Bishops, what
neded them to have either the County, or the souldiars, or any Imperial Edicts
to make them assemble? As who would say: In the Bishoply judgment, in the
Synod of bishops, it is not meet either to be summoned by the Prince, or to
have his Lieutenaunt present, or to have his guard of Souldiars. These matters
become the temporal Court, and the Civil Consistory, where by force of
subjection, laws do proceed. They become not the Synods of Bishops, where
with quiet of mind, with godly deliberation, freely and franckly, without
fear or partiality, Gods matters ought to be treated, discussed, and
concluded.

Therefore again these Catholic Fathers do say of this Arrian Conuenticle at
Tyrus: Qua front talem conuentum, Athanasius ibid.
Synodum appellare audent, cui Comes praesedit? With what face dare they call
such an assemblye, by the name of a Synod, over the which the County was
president? And yet will you M. Horn, that the civil Magistrate shall be the
president and Supreme governor, in and over al Synodes? May not a man now
clappe you on the back, and say, Patrisas, Arrianisas? And that you are as
like to the cursed Arrians, as if Arrius him self had spet you out of his
mouth? Those Fathers cry yet again unto you and say: Ibidem.
Quae species ibi Synodi, vbi vel caedes, vel exiliu^, si Caesari placuisset,
co^stituebatur? What face of any Synod was there, where at the Emperors
pleasure, either death or banishment was decreed? This co^uenticle therefore at
Tyrus was no Synod. Neither could therefore Athanasius appeal from any Synod to
the Emperor. But that which Athanasius then did, and which you untruly call
an Appeal from the Synod, was only a complaint to the godly Emperor
Constantine, against the unjust violences of the honorable (as you call him)
Flauius Dionysius: wherein also those Catholic Fathers above mentioned, shall
witness with me against you. For thus they write: Quum nihil culpae in
comministro nostro Athanasio reperirent, Comesque summa vi imminens plura
contra Athanasium moliretur, Episcopus comitis violentiam fugiens, ad
religiosissimum. Imperatorem ascendit, depre^a^s and iniquitatem hominis and
aduersariorum calumnias, p^stula^sque vt legitima Episcoporum Synodus
indiceretur* aut ipse audiret suam defensionem. Whereas they could find no fault
in our fellow Priest Athanasius, and the Countye by force and violence
wrought many things against Athanasius, the Bishop declining the violence of
the County, went up to the most religious Emperor, complaining both of the
injurious dealing of the Lieutenant, and of the slanders of his Adversaries,
and requiring that a laufull Synod of Bisshops might be called, or else that
The Emperor would hear him to speak for him self. What manner of Appeal
Athanasius made to Constantine the Emperor.
By these words we see, that Athanasius appealed not from any Synodicall
sentence of bishops to the Emperor, as a Superior Judge in Synodicall
matters, but from the violence and injuries of the Lieutenaunt, to his Lord and
Master, the Emperor him self for to have justice and audience, not in any
mate^ of Religion or controversy of the faith, but in a matter of felony laid
to his charge, as the murder of a man, and an outrage committed by one of his
Priests in a Church. For the which his adversaries sought his death. And yet
when they came before the Emperor, they changed their action, and pleaded no
more upon the murder, which was found to be so evident a lie (Arsenius being
brought forth alive, before the benche, when they accused Athanasius of his
death) neither upon the Chalice broken, that being also a very ridiculous and a
plain forged matter, but they pleaded a new actio^ of stoppi^g the passage of
corn from Alexandria to Constantinople, and accused hi^ as an enemy to the
Imperial court and City. For prouf whereof, the Arria^s brought in false
witnesses, and periures. Athanas. Apol. 2. page 384. Socrates lib. 1. c. 27
Theodor. li. 1. ca. 32
But yet the Emperor (as they write) moved with pity, satis habebat pro morte
exilium irrogare: thought it enough instead of death, to banish him. Which he
did at the importune suite and clamoures of the Arrian bishops, sor quietness
and unities sake in the church. But afterward in his death bed the Emperor
repentinge him, commanded Athanasius to be restored to his Bisshopricke
again, though Eusebius the Arrian then present, labored much to the contrary.
In all this, there was no Ecclesiastical or spiritual matter, but mere Civil
matters in hand.

Neither was it any Ecclesiastical matter, that the Catholic Bisshops of Egypt
as you allege M. Horn) desired and ad^ured Flauius Dionysius the foresaied
County to reserve the examination and judgment of, to the Emperor himself.
But the matter was such as we have before rehearsed, matters and actions mere
Civil. Namely they adjured that injurious and partial Magistrate, the
foresayed County, not to proceed farther against their Patriarche, then so
grieuoslie attainted, but to refer the whole matter to the most Religious
Emperor, where they doubted not to find more favor. Apud quem (say they)
licebit and iura Ecclesiae, and nostra proponere. Vide Apol. 2. Athan. sol.
427. Im^ress. Bas^l. An. 1564.
Before whom we may put forth both the rightes of the Church, and our
own. Meaning that by his clemencye, they might be suffered to proceed in
that matter among them selves orderly as the right of the Church and of the
Canons required: not (as M. Horn falsely translateth it) that the Emperor
would judge according to the right order of the Church. There are no such
words in the letters of the Catholic Bishops of Aegipt alleged by M. Horn.
Otherwise, to seek any judgment of Church matters, at the Emperors hands,
be you bold M. Horn, Sozom. lib. 3. c. 8. Tripart. li. 4. c. 15. Athanas.
Apol. 2. Athanas. in epist. ad solitar. viagentes. page 459.
no man knew better then Athanasius him self, that he could not do it. For
it is Athanasius, M. Horn, that being restored, as I have said, by
Constantines last will and Testament, and after again the second time banished
under the Arrian Emperor Constantius, by the means also of those Arrian
Bishops, appealed to Pope Julius, as his competent and ordinarye Judge, and was
by him restored to his Bishoprike, together with many other Bishops of the
East, Paulus of Constantinople, Asclepas of Gaza, Marcellus of Ancyra, Lucius
of Adrianople, with many other, Athanasius and M. Horn of a clean contrary
judgment.
appealing then likewise to Pope Julius. It is Athanasius that says: When was
it heard from the creation of the world, that the judgment of the Church
should take his authority from the Emperor? And what could that learned
Father say more directlye against you and your whole book M. Horn? Verily
either that most learned and ancient Father, whom the most famous Fathers of
al Christendom have always from time to time reverenced and honored as a
most glorious light and a singular pillar of Gods Church, either that most
excellent Bishop, I say, in whose praise even out of the testimonies only of
the best writers a just Treatise might be gathered, did foully err and miss of
the truth: either you M. Horn, and your fellows are in a great error, and do
defend an exceeding absurdity, damnable both to you and all that follow you,
forswearing your selves by book Oath, when ye swear, that in conscience you
believe, which you ought not ones so much as to think. For see yet what this
Notable Bishop pronounces against you. It is Athanasius that says it. If
this be the judgment of bishops, Athanasius vbi supra: pagina eade^ Fol. 3 b.
what has the Emperor to do with it? Else if Caesar's threats conclude these
matters, to what purpose have men the Names of Bisshoppes? Contrary wise say
you, M. Horn. It is a principal part of the Princes royal power, to have the
supreme government in all manner causes Ecclesiastical or Spiritual.

O Barbarous heresye from the creation of the world never heard of before. O
Antichristian presumption. I say, Antichristian presumption: I learn of that
most constant bishop Athanasius so to say. For it is he that says these
words. What has Constantius omitted, that is not the part of an Antichrist?
Or what can he, when he comes, Athanasius in epist. vt supra page 470.
do more? Or how shall not Antichrist at his coming find a ready way
prepared for him of this Emperor to deceive men? For now again instead of
the Ecclesiastical judgment, he appoints his palace to be the benche for
Ecclesiastical causes to be heard at. Seque earum litium summum principem et
Authorem facit. And he makes himself the Supreme governor and chief doer of
those controversies: he speaks of ecclesiastical. Now M. Horn, not our
Gracious Sovereign, of her own desire takes upon her such government: but
you most miserable clawebackes, In decernendo pri^cipe^ se facere episcoporum:
and praesidere iudicijs ecclesiasticis
and wretched flatterers do force her Grace to take that Title, the taking and
practicing whereof by the assured verdyt of this most learned Father, is a
plain Antichristian presumption. For lo what he says yet again in the same
page. Who is it, that seeing the Emperor to make him self the Prince of
bisshops in decreeing of matters, and to be president over Eccleclesiasticall
judgments may not worth^ly say, that this Emperor is the very abomination of
the d^solation, which was foretold by Daniel? See and behold M. Horn, what a
most horrible absurdity you labor in your book to persuade: See to what an
extreme inconvenience you force men's consciences, when you tender them the
Oath, comprising the same and more, which here Athanasius accompteth the
practice of Antichrist. Se last of all what traitors you are to God and your
Prince, which have persuaded her most Gracious highness to take upon her such
kind of government which is a preparation to Antichrist, and resembles the
abomination of desolation foretold by Daniel. And thus much your own Author
Athanasius. You see how well he speaks for you.

Socrat. li. ^ Cap. 28.
Now that you allege out of Socrates that Constantin threatened Athanasius he
should be brought, whether he would or no, it anaunceth nothing the Authority
of Constantine in Ecclesiastical matters. For so much many a Prince does to
him, that lawfully called to a Council will not come, at the Churches
commandment. Wherein he is rather a Ministerial then a principal doer.
Neither does the place by you alleged out of Socrates, prove that Constantine
examined and judged the doings of the whole Council, but only whether they
had proceeded against Athanasius of enmity or malice: And as Socrates there
writes, Socrat. li. 1. cap. 34.
Constantin said, the suyte of Athanasius was, that in his presence he might
(being driven thereto by necessyty) complain of such injuries as he had
suffered. And it appears by Theodoretus by you alleged in the said first
book, that the determination and definition of these matters rested in the
Bisshops, the execution in the Prince. For the labor of Constantine with
Athanasius then was, only that he would appear before a Synod of
Bisshoppes, which had accused him diversely before the Emperor, and of those
Bisshoppes be tried. Which the Emperor did, as Theodoret writes, (...).
Theod. lib. 1. cap. 28.
Believing the accusers of Athanasius as Priests, and thinkinge their
accusations to be true. (...). For he was utterly ignorant of their deceytes
and craftly dealinges, says Theodoret. Thus he judged not him self over
Athanasius, but only procured, that to keep peace in the Church, the bisshops
might assemble together, and try their own matter among them selves.

M. Horn. The.33. Division. Page 22. a.
There were no Church mattiers, or Ecclesiastical causes, wherein the
continual practice of the Church of Christ, in this Emperors time, yea and
many hundredth years after, did not attribute the (.80.) The 80. untruth:
boldly avouched, but no way proved.
supreme rule, order, and authority unto Emperors and Kings, upon whom
(.81.) The 81. untruth. Socrates belied, as shall appear.

In proaem. lib. 5.

Lib. 1. De vit. Constable.


al Church mattiers did depend, as witnesses Socrates, who shows this
reason of that he does thoroughout his Ecclesiastical History mention so much
the Emperors. Because that of the Emperors ( says he) after they began to
be Christians, the Church matters do depend, yea the greatest Councels have
been, and are called together, according to their appointment. Eusebius
commends the great bountifulnes of Constantine toward all estates, But, (
says he) this Emperor had a singular care over Gods Church, for as one
appointed of God to be a common or universal Bishop, he called Synodes or
conuocations of Gods ministers together into one place, that thereby he might
appeace the conte^tious striuinges that were among them in sundry places. He
disdayned not to be present with the^ in their Synodes, and to sit in the
midst of the^, as it had been a meaner personage, commending and approving
those that bente them selves of good meaning to godly unity, and showed him
self to mislike on the other side, and to set naught by such, as were of
contrary disposition.

Stapleton.
The general assertion that M. Horn here avouches, that in Constantynes time,
the continual practice of the Church attributed in all Ecclesiastical causes
the supreme rule to Emperors, is but a great untruth boldly avouched, but no
manner of way yet proved, as has been declared, nor hereafter to be proved, as
it shall by Gods grace appear. Again that he says: All Church matters did
depend of the Emperors, and for witness thereof alleges Socrates, is an
other no less untruth also. For this pretty syllable, All, is altogether M.
Horns, and not Socrates, Socrates ^ prooemio lib. ^.
pretely by him shifted in, to help forward a naughty matter. The very text
alleged by M. Horn, has not that word, nor speaks not so generally. But
it is no rare matter with men of M. Horns brotherhood, to ouerreache their
Authors, and therefore the less to be wondered at, Art. 4. Fol. 139.
though not the less to be borne with. And to this place of Socrates I have
before answered in my Return against M. Jewel. That which follows out of
Eusebius, proves M. Horns purpose never a deal. Except M. Horn think some
weight to lie in those words, where the Emperor is called a Common or
Universal Bis^hop: as though. we should gather thereby, that the Emperor was
then, as the Pope is now, and has allwaies been. Except these words help
M. Horns primacy, nothing is there that will help it, read and consider the
place who lists. But as for these words what sense they bear, no man
better then Constantine him self by the report of the same Eusebius also, can
tell us. Constantin in deed was called of Eusebius as a common bishop, that
is, as a common ouerseer, (...). Lib. 1. ca. 37. de vita Constant.
by reason of his passing zele and singular diligence in furdering Gods true
Religion. But that he exercised therein no such supreme government as M. Horn
fancyeth, neither made him self bishop of bisshoppes, but stayed him self
within the limits and bounds of his own Jurisdiction, it appears
manifestly by these his words spoken to a great number of bisshoppes, as
Eusebius records it in his own hearing to have been said. I am also, says
the Emperor, a bishop. (...), Lib. 4. ca. 24. de vit. Constant.
(...). But you are bisshoppes (or overseers) of those things that are within
the Church. But I being by God set over those things that are without the
Church, am also as it were a bishop, or ouerseer. Mark well these words M.
Horn. Your allegation avouches not the Emperor absolutely to be a bishop:
but (...). Appointed of God as a certain common bishop. that is, resembling
for his great zeal to Gods Church, the very office and person of a bishop.
But here the Emperor distinctly expresses the tru^ bisshops office and
vocation to be different from his own office and calling. He confesses, I say,
expressly, that the bisshoppes are appointed of God to be the Rulers overseers
and directers of those things that are within the Church, that is, that do
concern the government of spiritual causes, and matters mere ecclesiastical.
But him self he acknowledges to be ordained of God over those things that are
without the Church, as of wordly and civil matters over the which he being the
Emperor was the supreme governor, and in that respect he thought he might
after a sort call him self also a bishop, which sounds, an Ouerseer, Ruler,
and Guyder of such things as are to his charge committed. And verily after the
pattern and example of this Noble first Christian Emperor, first I say that
openly professed and defended the same, it may well be thought, the words spoken
to Christian Princes at their Coronatio^ time, have been conceived and used. The
which also, that the Reader may see how distinct and different in deed the
vocatio^s are of Princes and Bisshops, and yet how in some sort they both are
bisshops, that is Overseers of Gods people, as Constantine professed hi^ self
to be, I will here insert the very words usually rehearsed to Princes at their
coronatio^ time by the bishops anointing them. Vide Pontificale impressum
Venetiis An. 1520.
These are the words. Accipe Corona^ regni tui, quae licet ab indignis,
episcoporum tame^ manibus, capiti tuo imponitur, In nomine Patris, and Filij,
and Spiritus Sancti: Quam sanctitatis gloria^, and honore^, and opus
fortitudinis intelligas significare, and per hanc te participe^ ministerij
nostri non ignores. Ita vt sicut nos in interioribus Pastores, restoresque
animarum intelligimur, ita and tu contra omnes aduersitates, ecclesiae Christi
defensor assistas, regnique tibi a Deo dati: etc. Take the Crown of your
kingdom, which is put upon your head by the hands of bisshops, though
unworthy, in the name of the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost. The which
Crown you must understand, does signify the glory and honor of Godlynes, and
the work of Fortitude: By this also understand, that you are partakener of our
Ministry. So that, as we are known to be the pastors and gouerners of men's
souls in matters internal, so you also should assiste as a defendour of the
Church of Christ, and of the kingdom given to you by God, against al
aduersites. You see here M. Horn, that as in the words of king Iosaphat in the
old law, and of Co^stantin the first Christian Emperor, so to this day in the
Coronatio^ of al Christian Princes there is made a plain distinction between the
Emperors or Princes Office, and the Office, charge and commission of a
bishop, co^missio^ I say committed to him not of the Prince, but of God. And
dare you then to confound the^? Or dare you for shame M. Horn make the world
believe, that Co^stantin bore himself for a Supreme Governor in all causes
ecclesiastical or spiritual, when he him self in plain words confesses, that
of spiritual or Ecclesiastical matters the bisshops are of God (not of him)
appointed the Rulers and overseers, but he has of God committed unto him the
Charge and rule of those matters that are out of the Church, that are in deed
no Church matters, but matters of policy, matters of civil government, matters
of this world, and concerning this present life only?

M. Horn. The 34. Division. Page 22. a.
The Ecclesiastical histories make mention of many Synodes or councelles,
called or assembled at the appointment and order of this Emperor. But the most
famous and notable, was the Nicene Council: about the which, consider and
mark, what was the occasion, by whose authority it was summoned and called
together, and what was the doings of the Emperor from the beginning unto the
dissolution thereof: and ye shall see plainly as in a Glass, that by the
order and practice of the Catholic Church, notified in the order of this
general Council, the (.82) The 82. untruth. That vvil never appear in the
order of this Council.
supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, is in the Emperor and and civil
Magistrates, and your (83.) The 83. untruth. Not M. Fekenha^^ but M. Horns
opinion is cleerelye condemned by the agreement of these 318. Father^.
opinion condemned by the uniform agreement of.318. of the most Catholic
Bisshops in the world, commending, and allowing for most godly, what so
ever the Emperor did in, or about this council. The occasion of this famous
and most godly council, was the great dissension kindled, partly about a
necessary Article of our belief, partly about a ceremony of the Church.
Arrius incensed with ambitious envy, against Alexander his bishop at
alexandria, who disputed in one of his lessons or treatises, more subtily of
the divinity than advisedly, as the Emperor lays to his chardge, quarreled
Sophistically against him, and maintained an horrible Heresis. Besides this,
the Churches were also divided amongst themselves, about the order or
ceremony of keeping the Easterday The Emperor sent Hosius with his letters,
as I said before, into the East parties to appeace the furious dissentio^
about both these matters, and to reconcile the parties dissenting. But when
this duetiful service of the Emperor, took not that effect which he wished
and hoped for, then as Sozomenus vvriteth, he summoned a council to be holden
at Nice in Bythinia, Lib. 1. c. 17
and vvrote to all the chief Ministers of the Churches every where, (.84.) The
84. untruth There appears in Sozomene no such Imperial commandment, but
only that he called them to mete at a day.

Lib. 1 c. 7. Lib. 3. De vit. Constable. Lib. 8. c. 14 Theod. lib. 1. cap. 9.


commanding the^ that they should not fail to be there at the day appointed.
The self same also does Theodoretus affirm, both touching the occasion, and
also the summons made by the Emperor. Eusebius also vvriting the life of
Constantine, shows with what carefulnes, the godly Emperor endeavored to
quench these fires. And when the Emperor (says Eusebius) savve that be
prevailed nothing by sending of Hosius with his letters, Considering this
matter with him self, said, that this war against the obscure enemy troubling
the Church, must be vanquished by an other (meaning himself.) Therefore, as
the capitaines of Gods army, toward his voayge, he gathered together a
Synod ecumenical, and he called the Bisshops together by his honorable
letters, and that they should hasten them selves from every place. These
things, touching the occasion and cal^ing of this general counsel by the
Emperor, are affirmed to be true also, by Nicephorus the Ecclesiastical
historian. Yea, the whole counsel in their letters, to the ^hurches in
Aegipt, and the East parts, do testify the same Synod, to be called by the
Emperor, saying: The great and holy Synod, was gathered together at Nice, by
the grace of God, and the most religious Emperor Constantine, etc.

The.4. Chapter. Of Constantin the Emperor his dealing in the Nicene Council,
and with Arius after the Council.
Stapleton.
Master Horn here enters to a great matter, and makes large promises both
to prove his principal purpose effectually, and to confound M. Feke^ham
manifestly. But he will I trow, when he has al said, be as far from them
both, as if he had held his peace. First to prove a Supreme government in
Constantin, he tells us that Constantine summoned the great Council at Nice
in Bithynia: but if he had set in out of Ruffinus, Ruf. lib. 1. cap. 1. hist.
ecclesiast.
Ex Sacerdotu^ Sententia: by the will, mind, and consent of the Priests, that
is, of the bisshops: then had he marred all his matter: and therefore wilily he
left it out. If he had added also out of Theodoret (whom he alleges to
prove that the Emperor summoned this Counsel) why and wherefore the Emperor
would be present at the Council him self this imagined Primacy that Master
Horn so depely dreameth of, would have appeared a very dream in deed.
Theodoretus lib. 1. ca. 7. hist. ecclesiast.
The Emperor was present (says Theodoret) both desirous to behold the Number
of the Bisshops, and also coveting to procure vnyty among them. These and such
like causes do the Ecclesiastical histories allege. But for any supreme
government that the Emperor should practice there, as namelye that his Royal
assent was necessary to confirm the Counsel, or that without it Arius had not
been condemned, and that he judged the heresy or any such matter, as you now
M. Horn do attribute to the Prince, having your whole religion only by the
Princes Authority enacted and confirmed, for any such matter I say, neither in
this Council nor in any other do the Ancient histories record so much as
one word. Your new Religion M. Horn, has set up a new kind of government
such as all the Christian world never knew nor heard of before.

Now that you say, the occasion of this famous and most godly Council, was the
dissension partly about a necessary Article of our belief, partly about a
ceremony of the Church, which ceremony you say after, was, of keeping the
Easterdaye, if it be so as you say (as it is most truly) what say you to your
own Apology that says, that the usual keeping of Easter day is, a matter
of small weight, and to your great Antiquary Bale, that says it is but a
ceremony of Hypocrites? In Centu. De script. ecclesiast.
Suerly Constantin made a greater account of this uniform observation then
so, seeing that it was the second chief cause that caused him to summon this
famous, and most godly Council* as your self calls it. Seeing also that he
makes them not much better then Jews that privately in his time kept Easter
day otherwise, then Rome, Eusebius. li. 3 cap. 18. de vit. Constable.
Afrik, Italy, Aegypte, Spaigne, France, Greece, Britanny, and many other
great countries that he him self reakoneth up. And here by the way falls
out in M. Jewel a lie or two, saying that our Country.700. years together kept
their Paschal day with the Grecians otherwise then we do now. Ye see I have
abridged.300. years and a half at the lest. For Constantin wrote these words
straight after the Nicene Council ended, which was kept in the year of our
Lord.328.

M. Horn. The.35 Division. Page 23. a.
The Bishops (as I said before) when they thought them selves, or their
Church iniuried by others, were wont to appeal and fly unto the Emperor,
as the (.85.) The 85. untruth, ever avouched, but never proved.
supreme governor in all matters, and causes Temporal, or Spiritual, the
which appears most plain, to be the practice of the Church by these
Bishops called unto the Nicene counsel. For when they came to Nice,
supposing them selves to have now good opportunity, being nighe unto the
Emperor, to revenge their Being private quarrels, they could be ^o
ecclesiastical matters touching religion, which is ever common. Sozom. li. 1.
cap. 17. Li. 1. ca. 8.
private quarelles, and to have redress at the Emperors hands, of such
injuries as they thought the^ selves to sustain at others bishops hands, each
of them gave unto the Emperor, a Libell of accusations, signifying what
vvronges he had sustained of his fellow Bishopes, and prayed aid and
redress by his judgment. The Emperor forseyng that these pryuate quarelings,
if they were not by some policy, and wise devise sequestered, and laid aside,
would much hinder the common cause, took deliberatio^, appointing a day,
against the which they should be in a readiness, and commanded them to prepare
and bring unto him all their libelles and quarelling accusations, one against
an other: (Mark by the way, the craft and practice of Satan, to stay and
overthrow good purposes, that even the godly fathers and Bishops, vvanted
not their great infirmities, preferring their own private trifles, before the
weighty causes of Gods Church. And the vvisdome, zeal, and humblenes, of his
most Christian Emperor, who so little esteemed his own honor, and authority,
that he would rather seem to be inferior, or for the time no more than equal
with his subjects, to the end, he might by his humbling of him self,
advance and exalt Gods glory, to the edifiyng and quietness of his Church.) The
day came (which was the day before the first Session should be in the
council, as Socrates says) the Bishops did not sleep their own matters,
but had their bills in a readiness, and delivered them unto the Emperor. This
vigilant noursefather unto Gods Church, had cared and devised so diligently
for the common cause, as the Bishops had done for their private quarelles:
and therefore, when he had received their Libelles, very (.86.) The 86.
untruth. He did it religiously, not politiqu^ly.
politiquelye, says: The 87. 88 and 89. untruths. Sozomenes text in three
places falsified.

Sozom. li. 1. cap. 17. Theod. lib. 1 cap. 7.


(because he vvoulde irritate none of them for that time,) That the day of
general judgment should be a fit time for these accusations. and Christ the
Judge, then would judge al men: As for me (.87.) it is not leafull to take upon
me (.8^.) the judgment of (.89.) such Priests, accused, and accusing one an
other. Whereunto, nevertheless, he added this privy nippe, to pynche them
vvithal. For of al other things (says he) this is least seemly, that
Bishops should show them selves such, as ought to be judged of others. And
so caused the Libelles to be cast into the fire, giving them an earnest
exhortation to peace and quietness.

Stapleton.
It is a world to see the singular logic, and deep reasoning of M. Horn,
that can of such slender premises infer such mighty conclusions. For the
Emperor to be the Supreme Governor in all matters or causes temporal or
spiritual, it appears most plain (says he) to be the practice of the Church
by these Bisshops c^lled unto the Nicene Council. Answer first M. Horn. How
could this possiblye be a practice of the Church, that never before was used
in the Church? Except you will say, that even heathen princes may be your
Supreme governors in all causes Ecclesiastical. You know before this
Constantine there was never Christian Emperor, to whom bisshoppes might put
up their complaints as to their Supreme governor, only Philip excepted. Who
is never read, ever to have meddled with the lest matter or cause
Ecclesiastical, but lived rather like a close Christian, being afearde to
displease the Romain Legions, who then were in manner al heathens, and who (as
the world then went) bore all the stroke in electing of the Emperor, and in
the continuance also of him. Contrariwise, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 27.
that he was subject to the Bisshops, it appears well by the doing of Pope
Fabian, shutting him out at an Easter time, from the number of co^municants,
because he sticked to confess his sins, as other Christians did. Answer
therefore first to this, how you auouche that for a practice which was or
could never be used? Well let this go for an other untruth.

Now let us hear how ioylely you will prove, that the 318. Fathers of the
Nicene Council, do condemn M. Fekenhams opinion, which before you promised to
do. The cause is to your seeming, that certain Bisshops accused one the other
before the Emperor Constantine. But how can this be a good motive for you M.
Horn, to pronounce him therefore a Supreme Governor in all causes temporal and
spiritual, seeing it does not appear what those causes were, which the bis^hops
did put up unto him? They might be, and so it is most likely they were, causes
temporal. Verily your self confesses, they were private quarrels: and so no
matter of faith and religion, (of which can grow no private quarrels, but
common controversies) but as it may seem, it was some private co^te^tio^ between
neighbor and neighbor (for at that time every town had bis bisshops, yea many
mean Villages also) concerning the limits and bounds of their possessions,
or ^uch like matter, which is a matter plain temporal. Beside this they were
not al at dissension but certain, and perchance very few: how is then M.
Fekenham condemned by 318. Bisshops of Nice? I see you will play small game,
rather then ye will sit out. I will now bring you for M. Feke^ham and for the
Popes supremacy, no such trieflinge toys and folishe gheasses: but a
substantial author Athanasius him self, that recites out of Pope Julius
epistle, that this famous and most godly synod decreed: Athanas. Apol. 2.
that no bishop should be deposed, unless the Pope were first thereof
advertised: and that nothing owght to be determined in Council, but that he
should be thereof made priuye before. But why do I crave aid against you of
this Council, seeing your own example plainlye destroys your imagined
Primacy, in that Constantine answers to these quarreling bisshops, that it
was not lawful for hi^ to be their Judge? M. Horn co^uicted by his own
example of Co^sta^tines doings.
Which sentence of his being so plain, you more grosslye then truly or
politykely would elude, as thowgh Consta^tin meant no such matter, but
politykely spoke this because he would not irritate them, or least by private
quarrels the weighty cause of the faith in hand should be hindered. Such gay
gloses that destroy the text, may you by your extrauagant Authority make at
your pleasure. But the sentence of Sozomene only laid forth, shall both
discover your bastard gloss, and open also your untrue handling of his text.
For Constantine refusing to judge of the bisshoppes complaints, calling them
first (as Ruffinus at large reherseth) Gods, Ruffin. lib. 1. c. 2. hist. suae
ecclesiast.

Sozom. li. 1. cap. 17


and such as ought to judge over him, not to be judged of him, or of any men at
al, but of God only, he adds and says as Sozomenus your alleged Author
reports. As for me, (...), being a man (which words you guilfully left out)
it is not lawful to take upon me (...), such judgment not the judgment: as
you absolutely but untruly turn it: For straight he expounds what manner of
judgment it is not lawful for hi^ to take upon him: adding immediately (...)
when priests are parties plaintifs and defendants, not of such Priests etc. as
you, Three untruths of M Horn. in translating of one greek sentence. Ruffin.
lib. 1. cap. 2.
now the third time in one sentence, most lewdely and liyengly do translate
it. These words therefore of Constantine, thus spoken to the Bisshoppes, were
not politikely (as you gloss Master Horn) but religiously and reuerentlye
devised, as to whom in plain words he said: Deus vos constituit Sacerdotes,
and potestatem vobis dedit de nobis quoque iudicandi, and ideo a vobis recte
iudicamur. Vos autem non potestis ab hominibus iudicari. God has appointed you
Priests: And has given you power, to judge over us also: And therefore we are
orderly judged of you. But you can not be judged of men. Here by the way,
Master Horn: The best, the noblest, and the wysest Emperor that ever
Christendom had, confesses the Bisshoppes his superioures and judges: Show
you where ever any wise or good Bishop so flatly agnised the Emperor his
superior or Judge in matters of Religion.

Now that this fact of Constantine proceeded not of policy, but of reverence:
behold, how this example was interpreted afterward above a thousand years
past, both of Emperors and of Bisshops. Council. Chalcedo. Act. 1.
Martianus that virtuous Emperor protested openly in the Council of
Chalcedon, that he was present there, after the example of Constantine, not to
show his power, but to confirm his faith. And Saint Gregory putting Mauritius
the Emperor (who in a chafe had called him fool) in mind of the duty he
owed to Gods ministers, rippeth up to him particularlye this very fact of
Constantine, refusing to judge upon the bishopes complayntes etc. and adds in
the end as an (...), these words. Gregor. li. 4. epist. 31
In qua tamen sententia pie Domine, sibi magis ex humilitate, quam illis
aliquid praestitit ex reuerentia impensa. In which sentence yet (my good Lord)
Constantyne more profited him self by humility, then he did the Bishopes, by
the reverence he showed them.

It was says Saint Gregorye, Reuerentia impensa, a reverence showed to the
bishopes, that Constantine would not judge over their complaints: It was
politikelye done, says. M. Horn. Such a politic prelate has Winchester
diocese of him. Verily of that notable See with such prelates lately
beautified, and now of this man so contaminated, we may say as Cicero said of
Pompey the great his palace possessed of Anthony that Infamous Rybalde. O
domus antiqua, q^ dispari Domino dominaris? In Phil. 2.
For with the like sincerity do you through the whole book proceed, sometime
flatly belying, sometime nypping their sentences, Eusebius. lib. 3. De vita
Constant.
but well nere continually concealing the circumstances and whole effect of your
alleged Authors, as we shall in the process see.

M. Horn. The.36. Division. Page 23. b
The next day after, they assembled at the Emperors palayce, he commanded
them to go into the Council house, to consult of the matter, (the counsel
house was within Themperors pallayce, trimly furnished with seats, aptly
ordered for such purpose, as it were in rovves.) They entered in, and vvayted
without any doings, til the coming of the Emperor, whose seat was of gold,
placed at the first beginning of the rovves: (.90.) The 90. untruth in
concealing the truth of the story as shall appear.
who being entered and placed in his seat, makes an oration unto them,
declaring the contentio^s spro^g up amongst them selves, to be the occasion
wherefore he called the^ together: and the end is (says he) that this
disease might be healed through my ministry. After this he makes an earnest
exhortation, moving them to quietness, forgiving one an other; for Christ
commands (says he) that who vvil receive pardon at his hand, shall also
forgive his brethern. After this most grave exhortation to unity, and concord,
in truth, he gives them (.91.) The 91. untruth. Theodoret has no such thing.
leave to consult of the matters in hand, prescribes unto them a (.92.) The
92. untruth. The Emperor prescribed no rule to the bisshops.
rule, whereby they must measure, try, and discuss these, and (.93.) The 93.
untruth. The syllable, All, foysted in, more then his Author has.

Socr. lib. 1. cap. 8.

Theod. lib. 1 cap. 7.


al other such disputations, and controversies, in matters of religion, to
vvitte, Sanctissimi spiritus doctrinam praescriptam, The doctrine of the most
holy spirit before written. For (says he) the books of the Evangelists, and
of the Apostles and also the Prophecies of the old Prophets, do evidently
teach us of Gods meaning. Wherefore laying a side al discord of enemity, let
us take the explications of our questions, out of the sayings of the holy
Ghost. When the parties waxed vvarme in the disputations, and the contention,
somvvhat sharp, then the Emperor, as a wise moderatour, and ruler, vvoulde
discourage none, but myldely caulmed such as he savv over hasty with mild
words, coolinge their heat: and commended such as reasoned deeply with
gravity.

Stapleton.
In all this talk is naught else but a heap of untruths, and vain gheasses,
nothing to the principal purpose material: which will well appear in a more
open declaration of that, which you have patchedly and obscurely showed, as it
were, a far of to your Reader, concealing (as your manner is) all that any
thing concerns the Bishops authority in those matters. First then you tell
us out of Eusebius, that Constantine in the Council of Nice, sat in a seat of
gold, placed at the first beginning of the rows. Eusebius. li. 3 cap. 10. de
vita Constant. Theodor. li. 1. c. 7.
But you leave out Modica, a small seat, or as Theodoret also calls it,
(...): sitting in the midst in a low seat: You conceal also that which
Eusebius your alleged author in that very place adds: Non prius in ea sedit,
quam annu^ssent Episcopi: He sat not down before the Bishops had geauen him
leave. For so imports the word (...): used by Eusebius and Theodoret also.
Which declares very well the Bishops superiority in the Council, where
matters of faith were to be treated. Now where you add out of Theodoret,
that the Emperor should give the Bisshops leave to consult. etc. Theodoret in
the place alleged has no such words. You imagine, by like, the Bishops had
of the Emperor such a license as your English Statutes require. That the
Convocation shall make no Ecclesiastical law without the Kings consent. No,
No. Constantine demeaned not him self so stately. You have heard what his
behavior was, and shall hear yet farther, by your next untruth, which is this.
You say, The Emperor prescribed them a rule whereby they should measure, try,
and discuss, these and all other such disputations, etc. But you say it
untruly. For immediately after the words by you alleged, to show thereby the
Emperors rule and prescription, Theodoret adds: These things and such like
he uttered, as a natural loving child, to the Priests, as to his Fathers. If
Children prescribe rules to their Fathers when they give them good counsel,
then did also Constantine here prescribe a rule to the Bishops. But if so to
say, is more then childish, consider M. Horn how like a babe ye have reasoned
against the authority of such blessed Fathers, the Fathers of that most holy
and learned Council.

Verily S. Ambrose, who knew, I trow, better what was done in the Nicene
Council then M. Horn does, and is of somewhat more credit too, reports
far otherwise of Co^stantines doings, then M. Horn cou^terfeiteth. Thus he
says: Ambros. Lib 5. Epist. 32.
And I pray you M. Horn, mark his saying well. Si co^ferendu^ de fide,
saderdotum debet esse ista collatio: sicut factu^ est sub Co^stantino Augustae
memoriae principe, qui nullas leges ante praemisit, sed liberum ded^t iudiciu^
sacerdotibus. If conference must be had of the faith, this conference ought to
be kept of Priests: as it was done in the time of Constantine a Prince of noble
memory: who (when co^trouersy of the faith spro^g up) did not before prescribe
any laws, but left to the Priests the free judgment and determination Yet
says M. Horn, that Constantine prescribed to the Bisshops, a rule whereby they
should measure, try and discuss the controversy in hand. Wherein observe
diligently (gentle Reader) that S. Ambrose is direct contrary to M. Horn, not
only touching this particular fact of Constantine (the one saying tha^ he
prescribed before hand no laws at all, but left to the Bishops the trial of
the controversy free, the other auouching that he prescribed a rule to try
and discuss the matter by) but also touching the whole estate of the question
between M. Horn and M. Fekenham here. For S. Ambrose will have the conference
and trial of the faith to appertain to Priests chiefly and only. For these
words he spoke against the young Valentinian, who being seduced in his
minority, as our late Sovereign King Edward was, would have the matter of
faith to be tried in Palaice before him and his benche, as matters of faith
are now in the Parliamente concluded. Contrariwise M. Horn will have the
supreme judgment of matters of faith to rest in the Prince, and all things
measured by that rule and square that the Prince prescribes. You see how the
judgment of the Ancient Fathers, accords with the opinion of vpstarte
Protestants.

But will you know, M. Horn, what Constantine intends in that his
exhortation made to the Bisshoppes? He finds fault, and worthelye, with such
as were faultye for their division and dissension in Relligion, and does
refer them to holy Scripture, that does euidentlye instruct us of Gods
mind. But (wherein your liegerdemaine bursteth out) you shufle in of your own
this syllable All. a pretye knacke, I promise you, to sweet your answer
withal. It is true, that we must measure and discuss our controversies by
Scripture, Traditions are to be regarded, where Scripture fails.
and never resolve against Scripture: So where there is no plain Scripture,
there the Apostolical traditions, the decrees or General Councelles, the
authority of the universal Church make a good plea. And these Nicene Fathers
added unto the common Creed this word (...): expressinge lively the unity
of Christ's Divinity in one substance with the Father, though the word appear
not in scripture, and though the Arrians would never receive or allow it.
Eutiches the Archeheretique deniyng that Christ had two natures, was wont to
ask of the Catholics: In what scripture lie the two natures? To whom Mamas
the Catholic Bishop answered, where find you Homousion in the Scripture? Vide
Act. 1 Chalced. Council. pa. 776. col. 1.
Well says Eutiches, in case it be not in the holy scripture, it is found in
the exposition of the holy Fathers. The^ replied Mamas: Eue^ as Homousio^ is
not found in the scripture, but in the Fathers exposition and interpretation:
So is it with these words two natures of Christ, which words are not in
Scripture, but in the Fathers. Ye may hereby perceive, M. Horn, that ye must
not sequester and sonder the Scripture, from the common allowed exposition of
the Fathers: nor give judgment in all causes by bare scripture only, as ye
would make us believe, but take the faith and faithful exposition of the
Fathers withal. In like sort objected the Eunomians against Gregory Nazianzen
for the Godhead of the holy Ghost. Gregor. Nazian. lib. 5. De Theolog.
(...)? From whence bring you us forth this strange and unwritten God? But
Gregory Nazianzen answers them, and you withal, M. Horn. (...). The love of
the letter, is a cloak to them of their wickedness. Thus you see, M. Horn,
how well Patrisas, and how like you are to your progenitors and auncetours,
ancient heretics, Arrians, Eutychians, and Eunomians. Is this the ground,
M. Horn, that moved you among other Articles proposed to the fellows of the
new College in Oxforde, to make this one also, unto the which they should
swear, Art. 1. An. 1566. Angl. 18. Mart.
or rather forswear: that out of holy Scripture all controversies might
sufficientlye be convinced? I wish here, if I speak not to late, to that godly
foundation, to the which being (though unworthy) a member sometime thereof, I
ought of duty to wish the best, rather to forsake (as many, God be praised,
have done) the comfortable benefit of that society, then by absolute
subscribing to such a daungerouse Article, a snare in deed against many
Articles of our Faith, to fall to the approving of your heresies, and so to
forsake the Catholic society of all Christendom, and of that Church
wherein our Godly founder (Bishope Wicame of famous memory) lived and died.
Thus much by the way. To return to you M. Horn, a vehement persequutour of
that young company, I tell you again, to make your matters more apparent, The
Apology has shifted this syllable, Al, into a sentence of S. Hiero^s.
ye have slilye shifted in this pretty syllable, All. The like part has the
Author of your Apology played with S. Hierome, turning him to their purpose
and yours here against Traditions, saying: Omnia ea quae absque testimonio
scripturarum, quasi tradita ab Apostolis asseruntur, percutiuntur gladio Dei.
All things (say they) which without the testimonies of Scriptures are holden,
as delivered from the Apostles, be throughlye smitten down by the sword of
Gods word. Where to frame the sentence to his and your mind, ye have by like
authority, set in this syllable All, also.

M. Horn. The.37. Division. page 24. b. Eusebius. li. ^ De vita Constant. Socr.
li. 1. cap. 8. Socr. li. 1. cap. 9. Theod. li. 1 ca. 13.

When they had agreed of the chief points, wherefore they were assembled,
the Emperor him self calls forth Acesius a Bisshoppe at Constantinople, of
the Nouatians religion, and (.94.) The.94. untruth. For he had but private
talk with him, no open examination.
examineth him openly, touching these Articles, whereunto the whole Council
had agreed and subscribed. He vvriteth his letters to the Church at
Alexandria, where the controversy touching the Divinity of Christ began,
declaringe, that he him self together with the Bishops in the Counsel, had
taken upon him (.95.) The.95. Untruth. For Constantine did not this as the
Judge over Doctrine, or as Supreme governor, but as desiring above measure to
serve the church with the Bishops* as he protests in the same se^te^ce
saii^g: (...) which words you nippe of from the middle of the sentence.
the searching forth of the truth, and therefore assures them, that al
things were diligently examined, to avoid all ambiguitie and doubtfulnes:
wherefore he exhorts and wills them all, that no man make any doubt or
delays, but that cherefully they return again into the most true way. He
vvriteth an other to all Bisshoppes, and people where so ever, vvherin he
commands* that no vv^itinge of Arius, or monument conteyninge Arius
doctrine, be kept openly or secretly, but be burnt under pain of death. After
that all the matters were conclu^ded, and signed with their hands
subscription, the Emperor dissolueth the Council, and licenseth every one of
them to return home to his own bisshopricke, with this exhortation, that
they continue in unity of faith: that they preserve peace and concord amongst
them selves, that from thence forth they abide no more in contentions: Sozomen.
li. 5. c. 25.
and last of all, after he had made a long oration unto them, touching these
matters, he commands them, that they make prayer continuallye for him, his
children, and the whole Empire.

Stapleton.
Socra. li. 1 cap. 10.
There is no matter here greatly to be stayed upon. The matter of Acesius
proves little your purpose. Unless perchance, ye think that Constantine
examined Acesius of his faith, King He^ries sitting upon Lambert.
and heard his cause, as King Henry did Lambert the sacramentaries cause,
sitting upon him as Supreme head, and pronouncing by his Vicegerent Cromwell,
final sentence against him. For the which sentence M. Fox wonderfully
reueleth with the King, and reuileth him too: which discourse if any man be
desirous to see, I remit him to M. Foxes mad Martyrologe. The.553. leaf
Socr. lib. 1. cap. 10. Niceph. li. 8. ca. 20
The talk of Constantine with Acesius the Nouatian was only private, as both
Socrates and Nicephorus do report it. Open examination no Writer mentions.
It is Master Horns untruth.

His Proclamation that no man should keep Arius books under pain of death,
does not justify this supremacy by you imagined. This was but an outewarde
execution of civil punishmente in the assisting of the Nicene Decrees. Now,
touching that you tell us, how Constantine licenced the Fathers to depart, if
he said: Gramercy most reverend Fathers, for your great pains and trauail,
now may you in Gods name, resort to your cures and flock, God speed you,
God prosper your journey: Theod. li 1. ca 14.
And if he bare their charges too, that were poor Bisshoppes, as he did, in
case he would not suffer them to depart till all matters were throughlye and
finallye discussed, What then? What supremacy makes all this? Or how is this
any thing like to the Supremacy now sworen unto?

M. Horn. The.38. Division page 24. b.
Arius count^^feiting a false and a feined confession of belief, like an
hypocrite* pretending to the Emperor, that it was agreeable to the faith of
the Nicene Council humbly beseching the Emperor, that he would unit and
restore him to the (.96.) The.96. Untruth. The very words of Arius falsified.
mother Church, and therefore having friends in the Emperors Court (as such
shall never want fautours about the best Princes) was brought into his
presence, whom the Emperor him self examined diligently, and perceiuinge
no disagreement (as he thought) from the agreement made in Nicene Council
(.97.) The.97. Untruth. No such words in Theodoret, or in any other of the
ecclesiastical Historia^s Socr lib. 1 cap. ^8.
absolved and restored him again, whereunto Athanasius, who knevv Arius
thoroughly, would not agree, and being accused therefore unto The Emperor, was
charged by letters from him, that he should receive Arius, with these
threats, that if he would not, he would (.98.) The 98. Untruth. No such
thing neither in Socrates nor in Theodoret, for any matter of Arius.

Theod. li. 1. ca. 27.


depose them from his Bisshoprike, and commit him to an other place. The
Arrians heaped up many and horrible accusations and slanders upon Athanasius,
whereupon the Emperor does summon a Council at Tire, and sends
commandment by his letters ^o Athanasius, that without all excuse, he should
appear there, for otherwise he should be brought whether he would or no. He
vvriteth to the Counsel his letters, vvherin he declares the causes why he
called that Counsel. He shevved what he would have and what they ought to
do, and prescribes unto the^ the form and rule whereby they should judge and
determine in that Synod. Athanasius appeared, appealed, fled to the Emperor,
and declared the injuries offered against him in that Council. The Emperor
took upon him the hearing of the cause, Soc. lib. 1. cap. 34.
sent his letters to the whole Synod, commanding them without al excuse or
delay, to appear before him in his palaice, and there to show how uprightly
and how sincerely they had judged in their Synod, as I have shevved (.99.)
(.99.) A heap of untruths as before in the.32. Division and third chapter.
before. Wherein observe diligently, that the Emperor takes upon hi^, and no
fault found therewith, to examine and judge of the doings of the whole Counsel.
Thus far of Constantine and his doings, in the execution of his ministry, and
especially in perfourming that part, which he called his best part, that is
his government, and rule, in Ecclesiastical matters, wherein it is manifest,
that by the practice of the Catholic Church for his time approved and
commended by all the Catholic Priests and Bishops, in the Nicene Council,
the supreme government, authority, and rule, in (,100.) The.100. untruth.
Facing and impudent, generally avouched but not in one particular proved.
all manner causes both Ecclesiastical and Temporal, were claimed and
exercised by the Emperor, as to whom of right, such like power and
authority, belonged and appertained.

Stapleton.
Behold now an other Argument of M. Horns imagined Supremacy. Arius
hypocriticallye dissemblinge his heresy, and pretending his faith to be
agreeable to the Nicene faith, humbly besecheth Constantine, to unite and
restore him to the Mother Church. And so he was absolved and restored.
Theodor. li. 1. c. 14.
Truly here had ye hitte M. Feckenha^ home in deed, had there been any such
thing in your Author, as in deed, there is not, nor can be, unless
Constantine had been also a Priest. In deed he released him from exile, being
before circumuented by a crafty Epistle of his and Euzoius together, Ruff. lib.
1. cap. 11. Tripart. li. 3. ca. 6.
which in words seemed to agree with the Nicene Council, but in meaning far
disagreed. If ye call this, uniting to the Mother Church, your Mother has a
fair Child, and a cunning Clercke of you: And yet were ye much more cunning,
if ye could find any such disordinate and folish false phrases in any man's
pen saving your own. Neither can I tell in the world, where to find, or
where ye found this peuish heretical fond phrase, unless it were of Arius him
self, of whom ye seem to take it. And yet durst not he, as stark an heretik
as he was, Hist. trip. lib. 3. ca. 6 Sozomen. li 2. c. 27.
to hasard so far as ye have done. In deed in his crafty and subtle
letter, so ambitiously and coulourably penned, that Constantine supposed, it
agreed very well with the very definition of the Nicene Council, in the end
thereof, M. Horn has no Author but Arius to help him.

M. Horn vresteth eue^ Arius words.


he made suit unto Constantine to be received again into the Catholic
Communion, in these words, speaking for him self and Euzoius his mate:
Quapropter rogamus vntri nos per pacificam and Dei cultricem pietatem tuam
matri nostrae Ecclesiae iubeatis. Wherefore we beseech your honor being a
peaceable Prince, and a true worshipper of God to command that we may be
united to our Mother the Church. Ye see, good Reader, if M. Horn has any
Author, who, Sozom. lib. 2. c 27
and of how good credit he is: even no better then Arius him self. And yet in
this point is M. Horn worse then he, It is proved by Constantine himself
that it was the bisshops part and not his to restore Arius and other
heretics to the Church.
and corrupts and wresteth not only the Catholic writers, but Arius words
too. For Arius does not desire Constantine to restore him, as M. Horn faineth,
but to give out his commandment; that he might be restored: and by whom was
that, M. Horn, but by the Bishops? And this thing Constantine him self well
understood, and therefore though glad to see them (as he thought) to have
changed their mind, yet ( not presuming (as Sozomen writes) to receive them
into the Communion of the Church, before the judgment and allowance of mete
men according to the Law of the Church^) he sent them to the Bishops assembled
then (for an other matter) in Council at Jerusalem, that they should examine
his and his companions faith: Et clementem super eis sententiam proferrent:
Trip. lib. 3. cap. 6. Sozo. vbi supra. Ruff. li. 1. eccles. suae hist. ca. 11.
Trip and Sozo. vbi supra. Trip li. 3. cap. 10 Ruff. li. 1. cap. 11. Theodore.
li. 1. ca. 14. Trip. li. 3. ca. 10. Socrates li. 1. ca. 38.
and that they should give a merciful judgment upon them, if they did truly
repent. Ruffine also writes agreeable unto this adding, so that Alexander the
Bishop did thereto assente. Eusebius and other dissembling Catholic bisshops,
which were in heart Arians still (as it did afterward appear) forthwith (in the
Council) received Arius into their communion. But when he came to Alexandria,
he could not there be received. The Catholic bishop Alexander of Alexandria
yet living, would not admit him. Then remaining there a long time as
excommunicated he desired (says Theodoret) to be by some means restored
again, and began to counterfeite the Catholic. But when Alexander his
bishop and Athanasius his successor could not be so circumuented, he attempted
ones again the Emperors favor. And so by the means of Eusebius of Nicomedia
an Arria^ bishop in heart, he was brought to the Court at Constantinople, and
to the Emperors speech, the second time after his banishment. Where the
Emperor desirous to try him, asked Arrius, if he agreed with the Nicene
Council, upon which request he offered to the Emperor a supplication and a
foorme of the Catholic confession, pretending to swear to that, but deceauing
the prince with a contrary faith in his bosom, and swearing to the faith in
his bosom. By these means The Emperor dimissed him And therevpo^ the faction
of Eusebius went forthwith (...), with their accustomed violence (says
Theodoret) to Alexander the B. of Constantinople, Theodor. lib. 1. cap. 24.
Socrat. li. 2. cap. 29.
and required him to receive him into Communion. The Bishop utterly refused to
do it notwithstanding the Courtiours request or Princes pleasure: because
(says Alexander) being by a whole Counsel condemned, he ca^ not be restored.
The faction of Eusebius thretned Alexander, Theodor. vt supra. Ruff. li 1.
eccles. hist. ca. 13. ^ripart. li. 3. cap. 10. Socrat. li. 1. cap. 38.
that if he would not by fair means restore him, they would force him thereto
by foul means, saying: As against your will we have made him come to the
Emperors speech, so to morrow against your will, we will make you to receive him
into your Church. To this point therefore, the matter was now brought, that
Eusebius with his faction conducted by force Arius to the Cathedral Church at
Constantinople there by violence to Church him: But lo, as they were going with all their heretical band to the church to play this part, God showed his mighty
hand, even as he did upon the Egyptians in the read sea, specified in the old
Testament, or upon Judas in the new. For in the way Arius was driven to seek a
place to ease nature: The notable death of Arius.
where suddenly he avoided with his excrementes his very bowels and entrails:
and in that filthy place gave over his foul filthy stinking soul. A mete
carpet for such a squier. And this is, lo, the mother Church whereunto Arius
was restored and united. For other restitution by the true Catholic Bishops,
whose office it was as ye have heard, to restore him, had he none. And now
with this miserable and wretched end of this Archeheretike Arius, will I also
end the doi^gs of Constantine the great, wherein I have so far forth
proceeded, as M. Horn has ministered occasion. As for the Council of Tyrus,
whereof here again mention is reiterated, I have spoken both in this book, and
also against M. Jewel, as is before noted. And now may I boldly unfold your
conclusion, M. Horn, where you say that the Nicen bisshops agnised this kind
of regiment in the great Constantine* and say quite contrary, they agnised no
such regiment which also I have proved against you eue^ by your own examples
of Constantine, and the Nicen Fathers, especially of Athanasius, present at the
said Council.

M. Horn. The.39. Division. page 25. b.
Constantines sons, claimed and took upon them, the same authority, that
their Fathers had done before them: and as Zozomen (.101.) The.101. Untruth.
Sozome^ belyed. They made laws against the Idolaters but not laws
ecclesiastical.

Theod. li. 2. cap. 1.


reports of them, did not only uphold and maintain, the ordinances made by
their father Constantine, in Church matters, but did also make new of their
own as occasion served, and the necessity of the time required.

Constantinus, after the death of his father, restored Athanasius (whom his
father had (.102.) deposed) to his bishoprike again, vvriting honorable and
loving letters to the Church of Alexandria, for his restitution.

Constantius deposed Liberius, the Bisshoppe of Rome, for that he vvoulde not
consent to the condemnation of Athanasius, in whose place Foelix was chosen,
whom also the Emperor deposed for the like cause, and restored again Liberius
unto his bisshoprik, who being moved with the Emperors kindness (as some
write) or rather being overcome with ambition (.103.) The.103. Untruth.
Liberius never became an Arrian. Socr. li. 2. ca. 36.37.
becam an Arrian. The.202. Untruth. For Constantine the great did not depose
Athanasius. Sabell. Platin.
This Emperor deposed diverse bisshops, appointing other in their places. He
called a Synod at Millayn, as Socrates witnesses, saying: The Emperor
commanded by his Edict, that there should be a Synod holden at Millayn. There
came to this Council above.300. Bishops out of the West Countries. After
this, he minded to call a general Council of all the East and West Bishops
to one place, which could not conveniently be brought to pass, by reason of
the great distaunce of the places, and therefore he commanded the Council to
be kept in two places, at Ariminum in Italy, and at Nicomedia in Bythinia.

The.5. Chapter. What Ecclesiastical government the Sons of Constantine the
Great practiced.
Stapleton.
IF Constantines Sons claimed the same authority that their Father had in
causes Ecclesiastical, then were they no supreme Judges, no more then their
Father was, who was none as I have said and showed. Yet says M. Horn, They
not only maintained their Fathers ordinances in Church matters, but also made
new of their own, But all this is but a loud and a lewd lie. Which (to be
short) shall sone appear in the words of Zozomene (M. Horns Author) who in
the book and chapter quoted by M. Horn writes thus: Li. 3. c. 17.
The Princes also (he means Constantines Sons) concurred to to the increase
of these things (he speaks of increasing the Christian faith) (...).
showing their good affection to the Churches no less then their Father: and
honoring the Clergy, their servant, and their domesticals, with singular
promotions and immunites. Both confirming their Fathers laws, and making also
of their own, against such as went about to sacrifice, to worship idols, or by
any other means fell to the Greeks or Heathens superstitions. Lo, M. Horn,
hear what your Author says. As before Constantine promulged laws against
Idolatry, and honored the Church of Christ, and the ministers thereof, so did
his Sons after him. As for Church matters, as Constantine the Father, made no
laws or decrees thereto apertaining, no more did his Sons. It is but your
impudent untruth. Three untruths of M Horns in four lines.

Tripart. lib. 3. ca. 2.


Now touching the first and eldest son of Constantine, called also
Constantine, we have here of him as many lies as lines. First in that M. Horn
says, that his Father deposed Athanasius, who was deposed by the Bishops, and
not by Constantine, for he banished him, but depose him, he neither did, nor
could. The second, that this Constantine restored him to his bishopric again:
wherein he belyeth (and so makes the third lie) his Author Theodoret, Theod.
lib. 2. ca. 1. M. Horn now. God be thanked has found his supre^ head in
co^sta^tius the Arria^ Emperor
who speaks of none other restitution, but that he released him from exile
and banishmente: which ye wot is no Bishoply, but a Princely function and
office. But now we may be of good comfort. For having boren out this brunt, I
trust we shall shift well enough for all the residue. For now, lo, we have an
Emperor, that as far as I can see, took upon him in deed, in many things M.
Horns supremacy. Which may be proved by Athanasius, Hosius, Hilarious, and
Leo^tius Bisshops of the very same time: But praise be to God, Athanasius ad
solitartam vitam agentes, vbi and literae Hosij recitantur ad Co^stantium.
Hilarious in lib. contra Constantium. What liking the catholics the^ living had
of yt. What Hosius said to him for this supremacy. Vide Suidam in Leontio.
What Leontius said to him for this supremacy.
that the same men (al notable lights of the Catholic Church) which declared
that he used this authority, do withal declare their great misliking thereof:
and make him (so^ of the^) a plain foreru^ner of Antichrist: as I have before
declared out of Athanasius. Meddle not Sir Emperor (says Hosius) with matters
of the Church, neither commau^d us in such things, but rather learn them at
our hands: God has betake^ and committed to thee, the Empire, and to us,
has, he committed Church matters. And Leontius B. of Tripolis, at what time
this Constantius being present at a Synod of Bisshops was very busy in talk to
set forth certain co^stitutio^s, says boldly unto him: Sir Imaruail with my
self why that ye leaving your own, busy your self with other men's affairs: the
common wealth and warlik matters are committed to your charge: the which your
charge you forslow, sitting among the Bis^hops and m^ki^g laws co^cerni^g
matters Ecclesiastical, wherein ye have nothing to do. And if this man deposed
Bishops, as ye say, then have ye found a fair welfauored president to ground
your primacy upon. How well favored a pre^side^t he is, and how worthy to be
followed, if ye list to see, M. Horn, ye may learn of M. Nowel who saw farther in
this matter a great deal, then your prelatship. He has laid forth no less
then.13. Articles against this your supreme governor (M. Horn) to prove that
he was for his busy government in deed a very Antichrist. Thus you jar
a^diu^ble again one against an other, and can never agree in your tales. As
for that he called the Counsel at Ariminu^, and else where, that induces no
such primacy as I have and shall better herafter declare, namely when I com to
your own author the Card. Novvel fol. 114.
Cusanus: In the mea^seso^, ye have ministered to me a good matter to justify the
Popes primacy. For behold Damasus broke and disanulled all that was don at
Ariminu^ (says Theodoret) because his consent wa^ted thereto.

And here that Council which the Emperor by his supreme government (as M. Horn
fansieth) so^moned, Theod. li. 2. cap. 22.
the Pope as a Superior governor to this supreme governor, quite disanulled,
which made S. Ambrose to say: Ambros. li 5. ep. 32.
Merito Conciliu^ illud exhorreo. I do for good cause abhor that Council.
For which cause also, it is to this day of no authority at all. Thus al M.
Horns examples run rou^dly against hi^, and quite ouerturne his purpose. For
why? How can possibly a false cause be truly defended? That you say, Liberius
the Pope of Rome became an Arria^ is a slau^derous Untruth. It is your
brethre^s common objection, and has so often be^ soluted by the Catholics, that
your part had be^ now (beari^g your self for a learned Prelate) not to resume
such rusty reasons, but to reply against the Catholics answers and solutio^s,
if ye were able. The worste that ever Liberius did (to make any suspision in
him) is, that after banishment he was restored, Athanas. ad solit. vita^ age^t.
Tripart. li. 5. ca. 17
and yielded to Co^sta^tius. But Athanasius says expressly, that the same his
yelding was not to the Arria^ heresy, but to the deposing of him from his
Bisshoprik. And that was all that the Emperor required of Liberius, as it may
appear by the learned and stout co^municatio^ had between this Liberius and the
Emperor in Rome, as Theodoret at large records. And to this he was driven by
force of tormte^s, says Athanasius. Now for hi^ to become an Arria^ is
volu^tarily to teach, to believe, or to allow the Arria^ heresy. Are they al,
trow you, Caluinists in England which for fear of displeasure, of banishmente,
or of loss of goods, do practice the order of the Caluinists supper or
Communion? As they are no right Catholics, so are they not proprely
Caluinistes or Heretics. They are neither hot nor cold. God will therefore
(but if they repent) spue them out of his mouth. As for Liberius, S. epist. 74
Basil, and here is. 75
Epiphanius, S. epist. 165
Augustine, lib. 2.
Optatus, and S. lib. 3. de Virgin.
Ambrose do speak honorably and reuerentlye of him, and do reken him among
the new of the Roman Bishops: which they would never have done, if (as M
Horn says) he had been, become an Arrian, It seems M. Horn is of alliance
with M. Jewel. So hard it is for him to tell a true tale. Theod l. 4 cap 5.6.7.
Princes by Synodes (104) do ordeine and condemn Bisshops.
Now to the next.

M. Horn. The.40. Division. Page 26. a.
Valentinianus the Emperor, after the death of Auxentius, an Arrian bishop of
Millaine, calls a Synod of bisshops at Millayn to consult about the ordering
of a new bishop. He prescribes unto them in a grave or ation, in what manner
a man qualified ought to be, who should take upon him the office of a
bishop. The.104. Untruth. A marginal note of that which cannot be found in
the Text.
They pass to the election, the people were divided, till at the last they
all cry with one consent, to have Ambrose, whom although he did refuse, the
Emperor commanded to be baptized, and to be consecrate bishop. He called an
other Synod in Illirico, to apeace the dissentio^s in Asia and Phrigia, about
certain necessary Articles of the Christian faith: and did not only confirm
the true faith by his (.105.) The.105. Untruth. Joined with a great follye.
royal assent, but made also many godly and sharp Laws, as well for the
maintenance of the truth in doctrine, as also (.106.) The.106. Untruth. Boldly
avouched, but no way proved.
touching many other causes, or matters Ecclesiastical.

The sixth Chapter: Of Valentinian the Emperor.
Stapleton.
VAlentinian the Emperor comes in good time. I mean, not to prove your
Primacy, M. Horn, but quite to overthrow the same. For this is he that made
an express Law, that in Ecclesiastical matters, only Ecclesiastical men
should judge. S. Ambrose witnesses it expressly in an epistle he wrote to
young Valentinian, this man's son. The form of the law was this. In causa
fidei vel ecclesiastici alicutus ordinis eum iudicare debere, Ambr. lib. 5.
epist. 32
qui nec munere impar sit, nec iure dissimilis. Haec enim verba rescripti sunt,
Hoc est sacerdotes de sacerdotibus voluit iudicare. That in the cause of faith,
or of any ecclesiastical order, he should judge, that was neither by office
unequal, neither in right unlike. Those are the words of the Rescript. That
is, he will have Priests to judge over Priests. Thus S. Ambrose plainly and
expressly in one sentence quyte ouerturneth al M. Horns supremacy.

Yea so far was this Emperor from al government over Priests in matters
ecclesiastical, that even in matters civil or temporal, he would not suffer
priests to be called to the civil court. For thus it follows immediatlye in
S. Ambrose. Quinetiam si alias quoque argueretur episcopus, and morum esset
examinanda causa, Ibidem.
etiam hanc voluit ad episcopale iudicium pertinere. Yea farther, if a bishop
were otherwise accused, and some matter of behauyour or outward demeanor were
to be examined, that matter also he would to belong to the judgment of
Bisshops. Behold, gentle Reader, what a supreme governor in all causes both
spiritual and temporal over priests and Bisshops M. Horn has brought forth.
Verily such a one, as in very civil causes refuses government over them.

But this is he that comm^unded Ambrose to be consecrated bishop of Millayn^
(says M. Horn) and in that election prescribed to the bisshops in a grave
oration, what a qualified man a bishop ought to be etc. What then M. Horn?
was he therefore supreme governor in all causes ecclesiastical? Yea or in this
very cause was he, think you, the supreme governor? If you had told us some
part of that grave oration, somewhat therein perhaps would have appeared either
for your purpose, or against it. Now, a grave oration he made, you say, but
what that grave talk was, or wherein it co^sisted, you tell us not. Verily a
grave oration it was in deed, and such as with the gravity thereof, utterly
ouerbeareth the light presumption of your surmised supremacy. For this among
other things he said to those bisshops gravely in deed. (...) etc. Theod. lib.
4. c. 5.
Such a man therefore do you place in this bisshoply throne, that we also which
direct the Empire, may gladly submit our heads to him, and reverence (as a
medicinable remedy) the rebukes that he shall make over us: for men we are, and
must needs fall sometime. So, M. Horn, would this Emperor have a bishop
qualified (and so was in deed this Ambrose then chosen passingly qualified)
that he should tell and admonish boldly the Prince of his faults, and the
Prince should as gladly and willingly obey him, yea and submit his head unto
hi^, not be the supreme Head over hi^: as you most miserable clawbackes
(unworthy of al priestly preemine^ce) would force modest princes unto. This was
the grave lesson he gave to the bisshops (as Constantin before to the Fathers
of Nice) (...): as a natural loving child, Theod. li. 1. cap. 7.
(...), to the Priests as to his Fathers: not to them as his servants or
subjects in that respect.

You say farther (but you say untruly, to be always like your self) that this
Emperor confirmed the true faith (decreed in a Synod in Illyrico) by his royal
assent. As though your Reader should straight conceive, that as the Queen's
Majesty confirms the Acts of parliament with her highness royal assent, and
is therefore in deed the Supreme and undoubted Head over the whole parliament,
so this Emperor was over that Synod. But Theodoretus (your Author alleged)
says no such thing. Only he says. (...). Theod. lib. 4. cap. 7.
Those things that had been decreed and established by the Bisshoppes, he sent
abroad to those that doubted thereof. Other confirmation then this, is not in
your Author or any otherwhere mentioned. And this was plain ministerial
execution of the decrees, no royal confirmation of them.

M. Horn. The 41. Division. Page 26. a.
Theodosius, was nothing inferior to Constantine the great, neither in zeal,
care, or furtherance, of Christ's Religion. He bent his whole power, and
authority, to the utter overthrow of superstition, and false Religion,
somevvhat crept in again, in the times of Iulianus, and Vale^s, the wicked
Emperors. And for the sure continuance of Religion reformed, he made many
godly Laws, he defended the (.107) The 107. untruth. Flauianus in that matter
between the Emperor and the bisshops of the west proved a perjured person.
godly bishop of Antioche Flauianus, against the bishop of Rome, and other
bishops of the VVeste, who did (.108.) The 108. untruth mere slau^derous.
falsely accuse him of many crimes: and at the le^gthe, by his careful endeavor
in Church matters, and his (.109.) The 109. untruth. There appeared no such
Supremacy over Church matters in Theosius.
Supreme authority therein, this most faytful Emperor, says Theodoretus,
set peace and quietness amongst the Bishops, and in the Churches. He called
a convocation of the Bishops, to the end that by common consent, al should
agree in unity of doctrine confessed by the Nicen council, to reconcile the
Macedonians unto the catholic Church, and to elect and order a Bishop in
the sea of Constantinople, which was than vacant. When the two first
points could not be brought to pass, as the Emperor wished, they went in
hand with the third, to consult amongst them selves touching a fit Bishop
for Constantinople. The Emperor, to whose judgment many of the Synod
consented, thought Gregory of Nazianzene, most fit to be Bishop: but he
did (.111.) The 111. untruth, For he was for a time the bishop there, as
shall appear.
utterly refuse that that charge. The 110. untruth. All this was but one
Council, though they are told (to make a show of Supremacy in the emperor) as
if they were.3. several Councels.


Than the Emperor commands them, to make dilligent inquisitio^ for some
godly man, Sozom. li. 7 c. 6.7.8
that might be appointed to that rovvme. But when the Bisshops could not
agree, upon any one, the Emperor commands them to bring to him the names
of al such, as every one of them thought most apt to be Bishop, written in a
paper together. He reserved to him self (says Sozomenus) to choose whom he
liked best. When he had read over once or tvvyse, the sedule of names, which
was brought unto him, after good deliberation had with him self, he chose
Nectarius although as yet he was not christened: and the Bisshops maruailing
at his judgment in the choice, (.112.) The 112. untruth. The bisshoppes might
(if they had listed) most lawfully have removed him.
could not remove him. And so was Nectarius baptized, and made bishop of
Constantinople: who proved so godly a bishop, that all men deemed this
election to be made by The Emperor, not without some miraculous inspiration of
the holy ghost. This Emperor perceiving, the Church had been long time
molested, and dravve^ into parts by the Arianisme, and like to be more
grievously torn in sonder with the heresy of Macedonius, a B. of
Co^sta^tinople, and knovving that his supreme government, and empire, was
given him of God to maintain the common peace of the Church, and confirmation
of the true faith, summoneth a Synod at Constantinople, in the third year of
his reign (which is the second great and general council of the four
notable and famous ecumenical councels) and when all the bisshops whom he
had cited, were assembled, he comes into the council house amongst them, he
made unto them a grave exhortation, to consulte diligently, like grave Fathers
of the matters propounded unto them. The Macedonians depart out of the City,
the Catholic Fathers agree, conclude a truth, and send the canons of their
conclusion to the Emperor (.113.) The 113. untruth. For not to be so confirmed
as M^^ior. fancieth. That is, by the way of Supreme government etc.
to be confirmed, vvriting unto him in these words: The holy counsel of
bisshops assembled at Constantinople to Theodosius Emperor, the most reverent
obseruer of Godliness, Religion, and love toward God: We give God thanks,
who has appointed your Emperial government for the common tranquillity of his
Churches, and to establishe the sound faith. Sith the time of our assembly at
Constantinople by your godly commandment, we have renewed co^corde amongst
our selves, and have prescribed certain Canons or rules, which we have annexed
unto this our writing: we beseech therefore your clemency to command the
Decree of the Counsel to be stablished by the letters of your holiness, and
that ye will confirm it, and as you have honored the Church by the letters
wherewith you called us together: even so, that you will strengthen also the
final conclusion of the Decrees with your own sentence and seal.

After this he calls an other (.114.) The 114. untruth. This was no other,
nor no Council at al.
Council of bisshops to Constantinople of what Religion so ever, Sozom. li. 5.
cap. 10.
thinking that if they might assemble together in his presence, and before him
confer touching the matters of Religion, wherein they disagreed, that they
might be reconciled, and brought to unity of Faith. He consulteth with
Nectarius, and sits down in the Council house amongst them al, and
examineth those that were in Heresy, in such sort, that the Heretics were
not only asionied at his questions, but also began to fall out amongst
themselves, some liking, some misliking the Emperors purpose* This done, he
commands each sect, The 115. untruth in reasoning. For all this proves no
whit any spiritual Supremacy in Theodosius,
to declare their faieth in writing, and to bring it unto him: he appoints
to them a day, vvhereat they came as the Emperor commanded, and delivered
unto him the fourmes of their faieth in writing: when the Emperor had the
sedules in his hands, he makes an earneste prayer unto God, for the
assistance of his holy spirit, that he may discern the truth, and judge
rightly. And after he had read them al, he condemns the heresies of the
Arians and Eunomians, renting their sedules in sundre, and alovveth only, and
confirms the faith of the Homousians, and so the Heretics departed ashamed
and dashed out of countenance.

The.7. Chapter: Of Theodosius the first, and his dealing in causes
Ecclesiastical.
Stapleton.
THis Theodosius had no greater care to further true religion, then ye have to
sla^der and hinder it: A heap of lies gathered together in the one story of
Theosius.
and that by notable lying, as it will, al other things set a part appear, by
the heap of lies, that in this story of this one Emperor, ye gather here
together. And first that ye call Flauian the godly bishop of Antioche: For
albeit, he stood very stowtly in the defense of the Catholic faith and suffered
much for it, yet in that respect for the which, he is here by you alleged, he
was not godly. As one that came to his bisshoprike, against the canons and
contrary to Socra. lib. 5. cap. 15. Theo. li. 5 cap. 23. Sozo. li. 7. cap. 11.
Vide Amb. epist. 78. tripart. li. 9. cap. 26. and 44.
Siricius, and Anastasius, would not receive hi^ into their communion. Neither
could he be settled quietly, and received as Bishop, until he had reconciled
himself to the Pope, and that his fault was by him forgiven. For the which
purpose he sent to Rome a sole^pne ambassade: And so it appears, that the.2.
line after ye adioyne a fresh lie, that the bishop of Rome did falsely accuse
him of many crimes, who laid to him, no less crimes, then all the world did
beside, which was perjury, and schism. Then as though ye would drop lies, or
lie for the whetstone, ye add that by his supreme supreme authority, Theod.
lib. 5. cap. 23.

The popes primacy proved even by M. Horns own storye. Reconciliation to the
pope*


which neither your author Theodoretus has, nor any other: yea directly
contrary to the declaration of Theodoretus, who in the very chapter by you
alleged recites the ambassade I speak of, which is a good argument of the
Popes Supremacy: and may be added to other examples of M. Doctor Hardings, and
of mine in my Return etc. against M. Jewel in the matter of reco^ciliatio^. For
as favorable as the emperor was to him, and for all the Emperors supremacy: the
Emperor himself commanded hi^ to go to Rome, to be reconciled, he being one
of the four patriarchs. And Flauianus was fayn also, to desire Theophilus
bishop of Alexandria to send some body to Pope Damasus, to pacify and
mollify his anger, and to pardon hi^: who sent Isidorus for that purpose. And
as I have said, Flauianus himself afterward sent Acatius and others his
ambassadors. Which Acatius pacified the schisms that had continued.17. years,
and restored, as your own author Theodoretus says, peace to the Church, pace^
(says he) Ecclesiis restituit. Which words though Theodoretus, does speak of
was called (he says) to elect Socra lib 5. cap. 6. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 8.
Gre. Niss. in vita Greg. Nazianzen. Nicep. lib. 12. cap. 11.
Which (in case Though in deed he did not long enjoy it, but voluntarily, and
much against this good Emperors mind, gave it over, to avoid a schism, that
grew upon his election. For whom Nectarius (that M. Horn speaks of) was
chosen, Sozom. li. 7. cap. 8. (...). Theod. lib. 5. cap. 9. (...).
being at that time unbaptized. And so chosen by the Emperor, as M. Horn
says, that the Bisshops though they meruailed at the Emperors judgment, yet
they could not remove him. Wherein ye may note two untruths, the one that M.
Horn would gather Theodosius supremacy by this election. Of the which
election or rather naminge (for the Emperor only pricked him) I have already
answered in my Return against M. Jewel, and said there more at large. And the
bisshoppes, with common consent of the whole Synod, do pronounce him and creat
him bishop, as also intheir letters to Pope Damasus they profess. The other
that the Bisshops could not remove him. Yes M. Horn that they might, Can. apos.
79. Can. Nic. ^. La^d can. 3. Aurel 2. can. 1. 1. Tim. 3.
as well by the Apostolical, the Nicene, and other canons of the Church, as by
the very plain holy scripture, and by S. Paul by express words forbidding
it, for that he was Neophytus. Suerly of you that would seame to be so zelouse
a keeper of the sincere word of God, and so well a scriptured man, this is
nothing scripturelye spoken: And therefore this your saying must needs make
up the heap. Yea and therefore they might lawfullye have infringed and
annichilated this election: saving that, they bore with this good graciouse
Emperor, that tendered Christ's Church and faith so tenderlye, even as
Melchiades before rehearsed bore with the good Constantin.

Here may we now add this also to the heap, that ye would infer this
Soueraynety in Theodosius, because the Fathers of this general Council desired
him to confirm their decrees and canons. Which is a mighty great copiouse
argument with you throughout your book, all in few words easy to be
answered and avoided. For this kind of confirmation is not, nor ever was
required, Why and to what end the Emperors confirm the laws of the Church.
as though their ordinances were void and frustrate without it: as all that ye
now do, have don, or shall do in your synodes and conuocations without the
ratification of the Queen's Majesty. Which thing for decrees of the Church, ye
do not, ye have not, nor ever shall be able to prove. But to this end, were
the Emperors required to confirm Councels that the willing and toward people
might have the better lyking in them, and be the more allured carefully and
exactly to observe them, upon the good lyking of their prince: And withal that
the froward and maligna^te people, that make no great account of the censures
of the Church, because yt does not presently touch the body, or any temporal
loss, might for fear of civil and temporal punishment, be brought the sooner
to keep and observe the^. And this little short, but so true an answer, as ye
shall never with all your cunning honestly shift it of, may suffice to euacuate
and emptye a great part of your book resting in this point.

But to show in this place, ones for all, How Emperors have and may deal in
General Councils.
how emperors have dealed and may deal in General Councils, either for calling
them, or for confirming them, or for their demeanor in them, I will put
certain points or Articles, and note thereby what the practice of the Church
has been in this behalf: to thentent that the Reader may know, what it is
that we defend, and what had been your part to have proved, least walking
always in generalities, we spend words without fruit, and bring the cause to
no certain issew. And this I profess to take of one of your own special
authors M. Horn, the Cardinal of Cusa, out of who^ you allege afterward a
long process, Horn fo. 85. col. 1. c.
as one that made wholly for you. And in very deed he speaks as much for the
Emperor, and for his prerogative in ordering of general Councels, as he could
possibly find by the continual practice of the Church from Constantines time
down to his, which was to the late Council of Basil under Sigismunde the
Emperor, in the year. 14.32.

Cusanus lib. 3. c. 9. de Co^cordia Catholica.

Lib. 9. epi. 54.


The first poi^t the^ is, that Ki^gs and Princes, ought to be careful and
dilligent that Synods and Councils may be had, as the especial advocates of the
Church, and as of greatest power to procure quiet paisible passage to Councils,
abiding there and returni^g home again. Example in an admonition of S. Gregory
to Theodorike the French King, exhorting to see a Synod called in his realm
for the repressing of Simony.

Cusan li. 3. cap. 10.
The second point is, that to such Synods Princes ought to come with all
meekness, reverence and humility, and with gentle exhortations. Examples are
Riccharedus, Sisena^dus, and Chintillanus Ki^gs of Spain, as we shall hereafter
more largely declare, in certain of the Toletane Councels.

Cap. 13.
The third point is, that as Ki^gs and Princes for their own provinces do call
prouincial Synods, so the Emperorus for the whole corpse of Christe^do^ do call
General Councils. No^ quod coactiue sed exhortatorie colligere debeat. Not that
by force or co^straint, but by way of exhortation he ought to call the^.
Examples are the Council of Aquileia under S. Ambrose: the 4. General Council
under Pope Leo: the sixth under Agatho: the 7. under Adria^ the first with the
rest, as of each in their places we shall declare.

The fourth: that the Emperor in case of a general schism, ought first to
certify the Pope of the necessity of a Council, and require his consent to
have it in some certain place assembled. So did Valentinia^ and Martia^ the
Emperors to Pope Leo for the Chalcedon. In epist. praeambu. Cha^c. council. In
6. Syn. Act. 1.
So did Constantin the 4. to Pope Agatho for the sixth general Council.

The fifth point is, that the Pope summoneth and calls al general Councils,
far otherwise the^ do the Emperors. For the Pope as the chiefest, and as
having power to command over al other bisshops for the principality of his
priesthood, Cap. 15.
by the power committed to him over the universal Church, has to command al
faithful Christians, especially bisshops and priests to assemble and mete in
Council. But the Emperor exhorts and inuiteth bisshops, but commands the
lay, to a Council. And the Canons do command, Tripart. hist. lib. 4. cap. 9.
and 19.
that without the Authority of the bishop of Rome no Council ca^ be holde^.
Not so in the Emperor. For the Ephesin co^ue^ticle was disanulled, because Leo
his legates were rejected, though Theodosius the yo^ger, did co^firm it and
allow it. So the great Counsel of Ariminu^ was condemned, because Pope Damasus
sent not thither, though Constantius the emperor summoned it and allowed it. And
the great Counsel of Sardica prevailed, Athanaes. Apolog. 2.
because by Pope Julius it was called and allowed, though Co^sta^tius the^
Emperor resisted it and refused it. And thus much for the first beginninges of
the Counsel. Now in the Counsel it self, what is the Princes part, and what the
bisshops, it shall appear. Let the^ the sixth point be, that at the Council
being, the Princes office and care ought to be, to provide that altumult and
d^sorder be avoided and to remove such as are to be removed* Cap. 14.
So did the judges in the Chalcedo^ Counsel, remove Dioscorus from the be^ch,
and admit Theodoret, the one by pope Leo condemned, the other reconciled. So
when the parties waxed warm, they did their best to bring the^ to a calm. So
did also Co^sta^ti^ in his own person in the first Nicene Council, as M. Horn
has himself alleged, and as Eusebius reports.

Fol. 24. a. Lib. 3. De vit. Constable Cap. 13. Cap. 17.
Seventhly the Lay Magistrates or Princes: being placed in the Council in the
rooms of Emperors and kings, Non habent vocem Synodicam, sed solum audire
debent: have no voice as a part of the Synod, but only are there to hear.
This practice is clear in all the Councels, as it shall appear in the
particulars hereafter. The judges therefore and Princes delegates mentioned in
the Chalcedon and other Councels, are in the Councels, much after a sort, as
the Speaker in our Parliaments. To open and set forth to the Council all
matters to be treated upon. To appointe (by the advice of the Council) the next
metings, to break of the present session, to promulge the Councels Sentence:
and such like matters as belong to more orderlye and quiet proceeding in all
things.

Cap. 18.
Eighthly the force and Vigor of the Sentence in Counsel depends only of the
Bisshops, which make the Counsel, and non ex Imperiali commissione, and not of
the Emperors Commission, whose Authority is inferior to the Synod, says
Cusanus. And so the Continual practice will prove.

Ibidem.
Ninthly the Emperor, the Princes, and their Orators do subscribe as witnesses
of that is done: but as judging and determining, only the bisshops in all
Councels have subscribed.

Cap. 22.
Tenthly for the end and consummation of all Councels, the Emperors and
Princes ought to provide, that such things as are decreed and determined by the
holy Councels, may be observed, and by laws and penaltyes they ought to force
their subjects to the observation thereof. But to confirm by way of
Ecclesiastical Authority and Supremacy, it has ever belonged only to the
bisshops of Rome, as by the continual practice of the Church it has and shall
yet better appear. In this sense, and as I have already said, Emperors have
confirmed, and by their edictes established the Councels, laws, and decrees of
the Church. And thus you see M. Horn particularly and plainly what we
attribute to Emperors and Civil Princes in the calling, ordering and
confirming of Councels, and what we deny most justly unto them. If you prove
that which we grant, you show your self a slender scholar, and a weak
adversary, that will take upon you to confute that practice, the limits and
conditions where of you know not, which is altogether to fight in darkness
or with your own shadow. If you can prove that which we deny, let the
truth go on your side. But you neither have in this book, neither shall ever
be able to prove it. To avoid therefore hereafter the superfluyte of
unfruitful talk, as well for mine, as for the Readers ease, in all your like
objections of Emperors calling and confirming of Councels, I will refer you
to the answers and distinctions presently made.

To return now to Theodosius, and to you M. Horn, we have one untruth more
to charge you withal: for that you would establishe this peerlesse and Supreme
Authority in Theodosius, because he having received in writing the faith as
well of the Catholics, as of the Eunomians, Arians, and other heretics, after
the reading of them, rented all the shedules, saving that which was delivered
by the Catholics, whereupon the heretics departed ashamed and dashte out of
countenauce. Whom he had, as ye also write, before examined of their faith,
and that after such sort, that they were not only astonyed, but began to fall
out among themselves, some lyking, some mislyki^g the Emperors purpose. But
alas good M. Horn, why are ye your self, now as ye seame to me so suddenly
dasshed out of countenance? Yea and which is maruayle in so hard a metal, me
thinks somewhat asshamed to, and wonderfullye astonished withal. Why man? Pluck
up your heart, and be of good cowrage. You will perchance say I board with
you, and am set upon my merry pynnes. I would to God the matter were such
as yt might be better lawghed at, then pitied. And that it might serve more for
Democrytus, The one of them ever lawhed, the other ever wept
the^ Heraclytus, and yet to say the truth, there is cause and to much for
them both. Perchance now some man will think I do but ieste when I speak of
shame: I would God yt were or might ons be truly said of you, yt were a
goodly sparcle of grace growing. Well I put of that to other men's judgment. But
that ye are dashed out of countenance, yea that ye are wonderfully astonished, M.
Horn no less astonished in the telling of this story then the Aria^s and other
heretics the^ were when the thing was don.
and that even for the same cause, and after the same manner as the Arians and
other heretics the^ were, I dare say it, and prove yt to. For if the Arians
were asshamed and dasshed out of countenance, upon these doings of Theodosius
only, how much more are you asshamed and dasshed out of countenance, whose
heresies are condemned, by so many Kings and Catholyke Emperors? Or if ye say
ye are not asshamed, then must I reply, o shameless fellow, and more
impudente then the Arians. I now add, that ye are more astonished then the
Arrians and other heretics with this fact of Theodosius, and therefore full
slily and wylilye, what was the doings of the Emperor ye have ouerhipped,
which if ye had put in, would have served, as well against you, as yt did
against them. And therefore the memory of yt so astonished you, that ye durst
not for shame name the matter, and yet for folly could ye not forbear to
patche yt in, as a special matter aduauncyng your supreamacy. For first, Why
M. Horn has left out the principal matter of his own storye.

Tanquam cauis bibe^s in Nil^.

How Theodosius the Emperor dashed the Heretics out of countenance.

Socrat. li. 5. cap. 10. The Heretics fell at division before Theodosius, when
upon he teareth their sheduls of their faith which they offered.


as Theodosius did not allow, the open disputations of the Arians,
Macedonians, Eunomians, which were very ready to the same, so if he had been
living of late, he would not (and eue^ for the same cause he disalowed the
other) allowed your late westmynster disputations: being more mete to lead
the common people out of the truth, then to confirm them in truth, whereof
we have alredie somewhat towched. But now I pray you M. Horn tell us what was
the Emperors purpose that some heretyks lyked, some mislyked? wherein as yt
were the dog drinking in Nilus, as the old peruerbe is, for fear of
stinging ye dare not tarry. Well because ye are astonished at the memory of yt, I
will tell it for you. The Emperor demanded of the heads of the sect, whether
they did allow and receive, the fathers of the Church, that wrote before the
division began: Yea marye, say they, what else? we reverence and honor them
as our masters: for fear (says the story) least if they had said
otherwise, the people would wonderfully have misliked their doings: well said.
says the Emperor. Are ye then co^tente, for this matters co^trouersed to
stand to their sayings and testimony? Here they began the one to stare upon
the other, and wiste nere what in the world to answer, and finally fell out as
your self write, amongs the^ selves. Now let the Emperor call the Anabaptists,
the Zwinglians, the Lutherans, and demand of them, the same question, would
not the matter so fall out think you? Yea has yt not already so fallen out,
and daily so falls out more and more against you and your Brethern, to your
great shame? And think you, that if Theodosius were living now, he would not
deal with your Bills, as he dealed with theirs? Would he not tear a sonder
the shedules, of al your false faithless faith? Yes that he would assuredly.
The greauouse remembrance of this did, so astone you, that it caused you, thus
to leave the matter it self, that was by some liked, and by some misliked, and
to tell a liking or mislikinge of I can not tell what.

Ye may see the full answer of this, in the Confutation of the Apology fol.
31. Cod. Omnis vtriusque sexus.

The Popes Primacie proved by the doings of Theodosius, and the Councils by M
Horn alleged. Vide To^. 1. Council. in Council. Aquil. page 397. col. 1. b


Now how so ever ye have maimed the narration of the storye, and making the
best ye can of the matter for your purpose, primacy can ye make none of it.
For the doing of Theodosius reaches not to the determination of any thing in
question already not determined, but to the execution of the Nicene Council:
commanding by express decree, that al should obey the faith of Damasus Pope
of Rome, and of Peter Patriarche of Alexandria, both defenders of the Nicene
Council.

Let me now a while after all this your miserable wresting and writhing, and
liberal lying to, deal shortly and simply with you: and see whether I can
pycke out any thing of Theodosius and these councils doings for the Popes
primacy. Why then? Is it not Theodosius that refers the decisio^ of
Ecclesiastical causes to the Bisshops? Was it not he, of who^ S. Ambrose said:
Ecce quod Christianus co^stituit Imperator. Noluit iniuria^ facere
sacerdotibus. Ipsos interpretes co^stituit sacerdotes. Behold what the
Christian Emperor has appointed. He would not do injury to the Priests. He
has appointed the Priests them selves to examine the matter? Was it not this
Theodosius the great, M. Horn? Yes surely it was he. Was it not Theodosius, to
whom Saint Ambrose enjoined penance, which he most humbly obeyed? Where was
Theodosius Ecclesiastical supremacye then? Is it not Damasus the Pope,
Tripart. li. 9. ca. 30.
that calls these Bisshops assembled at Constantinople, even to Rome, there
to aid and assist him in keeping of a Council? What? Said they to him, Sir we
have nothing to do with you, (...).
ye are a foreign Bishop to us of the East? Nay nay, they confess that he
called them as his members (the^ must he needs be the head) to the Council at
Rome. Yea they confess, that by his letters they came to the Council at
Constantinople: they declare their good will and readiness to come to Rome too:
Theod. li. 5. cap. 9.
but for their excuse they allege many reasonable causes, none of those that
the Protestants allege at this day. And finally in the name of the whole, they
send certain of their Bishops thither. Now further, do not these Fathers
decree at this their general Council, Can. 5.
that the Church of Constantinople, should be the first and chief of al other
after Rome? Do they not then therein acknowledge the Popes Primacie? It is
written, M. Horn: Ecclesiast. cap. 2.
Sapientis oculi in capite eius, stultus in tenebris ambulat. The eyes of a
wise man are in his head always open, and in a readiness to direct him in his
way: whereas the folish man walks in darcknesse, being uncertain and unsure
which way to take or to go. Now whether your eyes priyng and seking forth this
story of Theodosius were opened or shut, I leave the judgment to the
indifferent Reader: But this dare I firmly auouche, that these things which I
have now last rehearsed, beside other, that I willingly omit, draw much
nearer to make the Pope supreme head of the Church, then any thing ye have
brought forth, for the doings of Theodosius, to make him Supreme Head.
Which when ye have al said and done be nothing agreeable to the articles in
question between us, concerning our princes regiment. And therefore if the
matter were much stronger of your side, touching Theodosius, yet did ye nothing
touch that ye owght to touch.

M. Horn. The.42. Division. page 27. b.
Theodosius left his two sons Emperors; of the which I vvil say but
little: yet wherein it may most (.116.) The.116. untruth That vvil never
appear.
manifestly appear, that the supreme government in causes Ecclesiastical
belonged to the Emperors.

Archadius the Emperor, when Nectarius the bishop of Constantinople was
dead, and so the sea vacant (.117.) The 117. untruth. Such certification
appears not in the story.
was certified thereof he causes John Chrysostom to be called from Antioch:
he commands the other bishops collected into a Synod, that they admonish
Chrysostom of Gods graces, and what belongs to such a chardge, and that
they choose and order him to be the bishop of Constantinople. In which dooinge,
(says Theodoretus) the Emperor declared what careful endeavor, he had about
the holy (.118.) The 118. untruth. False translation, as shall appear. Li. 5.
ca 27
Church matters. But this supreme authority, to care, appoint, and procure
worthy and good Pastors or bishops, when the seas were vacant, appears
more plainly in Honorius the Emperor, brother to Archadius, whom the bishop
of Rome him self in his decrees, and his Glosars on the same, confess and
acknovvledge to have the oversight, rule and government in the elections and
orderinge of bishops, yea (119.) The 119. untruth. No such rule, or
government confessed by the Bishop of Rome. Luithprand.
over the bishop of Rome him self.

After the death of Pope Sozimus, were two Popes choosen at ones in a great
Schism, the one Bonifacius primus, the other Eulalius, whereof when the
Emperor Honorius, had notice being at Millayne, he caused them both to be
banished Rome: But after seven months, Bonifacius was by the Emperors
commandment, called again and confirmed (.120.) The 120. untruth. He was
then to the temporalties of the bishoprike restored, but he was the true Pope
before.
by his authority in the Apostolical sea. This Bonifacius being now
settled in the Papacy, by humble suite to the Emperor, provides a remedy
against such mischiefs in time to come. The case was this, says the
Glosator, Boniface the first, did beseech Honorius the Emperor to make a
Law, whereby it might appear, what were to be done, when two Popes were
chosen at ones by the vndiscreetnes of the Electours, contendinge amongst them
selves. Did. 79. Si duo.
Honorius did than constitute, that neither of those twain should be Pope,
but that in a new Election a third should be chosen by common co^sente. If
two (says the Emperor in his Law made at the humble suit of Bonifacius)
by chance against right be chosen, thorough the indiscreet contention of
the Electours: we permit neither of them to be Priest or Pope: but we judge
him to remain in the Apostolic sea, whom the divine judgment, and the
common consent does appointe from amongst the Clergy in a new Election.
Upon this word, Gratian. did. 63.
where the Emperor says (we permit) the Glosar says, and so the
Emperor does not only abrogate the claim of both those that be chosen in
the contention, but does make them both for that time unable, and does
decree an other to be taken out of the Clergy for that time. Again the Glosar
interpretinge this (the divine judgment) says: this is the meaning that the
Emperors will and election must stand, the Clergy and the whole people
acceptinge with thankful mind whom the Emperor does choose. For the
Emperors were called in those days holy, and their rescriptes and judgments
Divine. Here you see by the (.121) The 121. untruth. Carolus Molineus is none
of the Popes Glosars.
Popes decrees and Glosars, that the Emperor had the supreme rule and
government in Church causes, and this was the (.122.) The 122. untruth,
utterly unproven
continual practice of the Church for the most part, yea even the bishops
of Rome before they were ordered and consecrated, had their election ratified
and confirmed by the Emperors, their Lieutenant, or other Princes.

The.8. Chapter. Of the Sons of Theodosius, Honorius and Archadius.
Stapleton.
Now follow in rue Theodosius his sons: Archadius and Honorius, of whom M.
Horn says he will say but little, belike, because he has said to much of
their father alredye, and more then he can justify, or for that he will make
us a short tale, but yet a sweet. And wherein it shall most manifestly appear,
that the supreme government in causes ecclesiastical belonged to the
Emperors. Al Archadius doings here stand in appointinge S. John Chrysostom
to be bishop of Constantinople, a most worthy man who dowbteth? The election
of S. John Chrysostom by Archadius makes him no supreme head.

Tripart. lib. 10. c. 3. Socrates. lib. 6. c. 2.


And I would to God as this his first dealing with Chrysostom was to his
worthy praise: so he had not by his after dealinge blotted and blemished the
same.

As for this election, first Archadius did it not of his own Supreme
authority, but the fame of John Chrysostom being great, and after some debate
about the election, Intra modicu^ te^pus co^muni decreto omniu^ clericoru^,
and laicoru^ Imperator Archadius euocauit eum. Within a little while (says
Socrates) by the common decree and agreement of all the Clergy and of all the
lay, the Emperor Archadius sent for him from Antioche to Constantinople, and
so by the common decree of al estates (as the order of election then was) he
was elected bishop, not by the Emperors supreme and absolute Authoryty, as M.
Horn fancyeth. The^ Theodoret though he tell not so much, yet does he not
attribute the matter to the Emperor: as a part of his gouuernement. Which
that it might some ways appear, M. Horn thought good to spyce a little the text
with the powder of his false translation, that yet so it might somewhat relys
in the Readers conceit for his surmised primacy. For Theodoret says not, that
in this doing, the Emperor declared what careful endeavor he had about the
holy Church matters, but (...), the care that he had about Gods or godly
matters. Which care is commendable as in all men, Theod. li. 5. c. 27
so in princes especially, for the greater good they are able to do. (...).

Circa res diuinas.


But such care of Gods matters emporteth no gouuernement in such matters. As
neither the care of Church matters imports jurisdiction: Though yet that
sounds nearer to jurisdiction then the care and zeal about godly matters. And
therefore M. Horn thought good with this little poor help of false
translation, a little to itche forward his miserale and barraine cause. And
that we should the more favorably winck at his liegerdemain, he phraseth it,
the holy Church matters. Speaking very holily and reverently, that we might not
suspect him of forgery. Whereas in the original text of his author, there is no
word, of either Church* or holy Church. Last of all, though we granted him
(which we neither will nor may, considering the whole story, as Socrates
describes it) that Archadius him self appointed John Chrysostom to be Bishop,
yet makes it not any jot to prove any Supremacy in him, either in all, or in
any cause ecclesiastical. Unless we will have every lay patro^ that prese^teth
his Priest to a benefice, to be supre^ head also: or measure the matter by the
greatenesse and weight of the patrimony and living, M. Horns primacy
overthrown by his own example. Gorgius Alexand. in vita Io. Chrysostom.
and not by the weight of reason. But now M. Horn, in an il time for your
self, and for your supremacy, have ye here put me in remembrance of this
Archadius, and S. John Chrysostom. If you would purposely have sought a mean
to have given your self a great and a shameful fall, that all that behold
you, might laughe you al to skorne: ye could not have found lightly any where
else a better occasion. For this Archadius being Emperor of the East, as
Honorius was in the West, was excommunicated of Pope Innoce^tius for banishing
of the said S. Chrysostom being most wrongfully deposed by his enemies, by the
procurement of Archadius his wife. Now Sir I beseech you tell me who is supreme
head, Archadius th Emperor excommunicated by the Pope.
the Emperor, or he that exco^municateth The Emperor, especially being under an
other Patriarche and reside^t so far of, as Constantinople is from Rome? The
next narration seeing it touches nothing, but matters of election, requires no
great answer: namely seeing M. Horn him self, has made a sufficient answer
against him self. For if The Emperor made a law touching th'electio^ of Popes,
at the Popes own desire, belike here was no great Supremacy: eue^ no more then
the Pope was content either to give hi^, or to suffer at his hand. Neither the
banishing of both Popes from Rome, especially in a schism, as this was, by M.
Horn here specified, causes any spiritual jurisdiction, the matter it self
being mere temporal, as the matter of the election being (in this case) only
begun, not brought to perfection. Beside this, here is no presidente of our
elections in England. For here is both the Emperors, the Clergyes, and the
peoples consent in the Bishoppelye election.

I would now pass over to the next matter, saving M. Horn here comes in
with his Glosatour and Glosar after such a cunninge sort, lawlike, and
gloselike, that it would not be to hastily lepte over. First he alleges the
Glosatour, as he calls him, and that I am assured, is meante, and so to be
proved of him that is the common expositour of the Canon Law, as appears by
Master Horns own allegations. But that he brings out of his Glosar, I am
assured, is not to be found in him that he calls Glosatour. And so have we
an other extraordinary gloss by M. Horn now first authorized. A nevve gloss of
the Cano^ law, now first authorized by M. Horn.
But perchance ye will marvel, good Reader, especially ye that are exercised
and travailed in the Canon Law, that M. Horn should have so deape and rare
knowledge in the gloses of the Canon law, that percha^ce this question might
appose the best Doctor in the arches, onles it were M. D. Ackworth M. Horns
son in law, who percha^ce by his fathers special co^mision, though perhaps
M. Horn never read the glosar him self, has authorized us a new glosar. And
now me thi^keth your ears itch to hear what glosar this should be. It had been
well don for M. Horn to have eased his Reader and me to in so doutful a matter.
But seeing we have found him out at the length out he shall, and all the world
shall now know him, and shall know M. Horn much the better by and for him.
Therefore to be short, it is Carolus Molineus a frenchman, whose gloss is as far
as I can yet learn, scarce seven years old, or therabout, Vide editionem iuris
canonici in. 4, Lugduni cum glos. 1559.
scarsely past his infancy, and would hardly be allowed to speak, unless M.
Horn had bisshopped it. Wherefore I see no cause, but that I may according to my
manner, score up this to. But yet if M. Horn will needs have him a Glosar
(with the which perchance I will not greatly stick, especially in that sense,
as merely we call a Glosar in our tongue, that is a vain liar) and think he
may truly so call him, I will not much contend with him. For if he skape
scoring up for calling him Glosar here, surely he shall by no means skape
for calling him the Popes Glosar the tenth line immediatlye following. For
Mollineus is so the Popes Glosar, that he loves the Pope, and allows his
authority, even as well as M. Horn him self: as appears as well by his notes
adjoined to the old interpretour of the Canon law, new and fresh set out, as
by his other works extant in print, condemned among other inhibited books by
the late General Council. And who would have thought that M. Horn had such
wise, wily, witty, fresh fetches? I perceive a ragged Colte may yet prove a
good Horse.

M. Horn. The.43. Division. page 28. b.
Sabellicus speakinge of the contentious entrance of Damasus the first into
the Papacy, which was not without great bloodshed, as Volateranus says,
does note the ambition of the Prelates, to be the cause of such contention
about their atteininge of such roumes. For now (says he) the ambicious desire
of honor, had by little and little, begone to enter into the minds of the
Bishopes. The which was proved over true, not only in the elections of the
Bishops of old Rome, but also in many Bishops of other Cities, especially
of nevve Rome. These diseases in the Church ministers, and the disorders
thereout springyng: the Emperors from time to time studied to cure and
refourme: wherefore Theodosius and Valentinianus when they savve, the great
hoouing and shoouinge at Constantinople, Liberat. cap. 4. Socr. lib. 7. cap 29.
about the election of a Bishop after the death of Sisinius some speakinge to
prefer Philippus, other some Proclus, both being ministers of that Church,
did provide a remedy for this michiefe, to vvitte, they them selves (.123.) The
123. untruth. No such decree appears: neither in Liberatus nor in Socrates.
made a decree, that none of that Church should be Bishop there, but some
stranger from an other Church, and so the Emperors sent to Antioche for
Nestorius, who as yet was thought both for his doctrine and life, to be a
sit pastor for the flock, and made him Bishop of Constantinople.

Stapleton.
This man is now again in hand with the Emperors ordinance concerning the
election of the Bishop of Constantinople: but by the way, or being as he is in
deed, al out of his way and matter to, he towcheth what slaughter there was at
Rome, when Damasus was made Pope, and so runs back again out of the way,
and out of his matter: which he might full well have let alone, saving that he
would show his great familiarity and affinity with Julian the Pelagian. M.
Horn follows Julian the Pelagian. Aug. lib. c co^. Julian. De constituendo
Episcopo dissensione^ populi Romani insultabu^dus obiectas. Volat. Ant lib. 22.
page 499. multi mortales ex vtraque part interfecti. Sabel. ennead. 9. li. 9.
Vi and armis certatu^, competitore superato. et c Ad Dam. Damasus Primacy
recognized by S. Hierom
Who for lack of good matter to justify his own, and to infringe the Catholic
doctrine, fell to controlle the Catholics for their manners, and namely for
this dissension at the creation of Damasus. Of which cotentio^, Sabellicus,
says M. Horn, speaks: and Volaterranus says it was not without much
bloodshed. As though Sabellicus said not also, that the matter was tried with
strokes. But where to find or seek it in either of them, M. Horn leaves us
to the wide world. But what is this, M. Horn, against Damasus Primacie, who
was also a true and a good godly learned Bishop: whom S. Hierome for all this
contention, recognized as head of the Church, and as great a Clerk as he
was, yet being in doubt by reason of diverse sects about Antiochia in Syria,
with what persons to communicate, most humbly requires of him to know, with
whom he should communicate, and with whom he should not communicate?

What is then your argument, M. Horn? Is it this? Damasus entered into the Sea
of Rome by force and bloodshed: Ergo, the Emperor at that time was Supreme
governor in all causes Ecclesiastical. Verily either this is your argument,
or else you make here none at al: but only tell forth a story to no purpose,
except it be to deface the holy Apostolik See of Rome, which in deed serves
ever your purpose both in books and in pulpitts. What so ever it be you have
in hand beside, the Pope may not be forgotten.

Now that you tell us of a decree made (by The Emperors Theodosius and
Valentinianus) that none of the Church of Constantinople should be Bishop
there, but some stranger from an other Church, you tell us a mere untruth:
Your alleged Authors Socrates and Liberatus speak no one word of any such
Decree. Liberatus cap. 4. in Breuiario. Socrates li 7 ca. 29 Niceph. li. 14. c.
34 35.
The words of Liberatus (who translated in manner the words of Socrates) are
these: Sisinius being departed, it seemed good to the Emperors, to appoint none
of the Church of Constantinople to be bishop there, but to send for some
stranger from Antioch in Syria (from whence they had a little before John
Chrysostom) and to make him Bishop. And this word for word has also
Socrates, but he adds more: (...). Because of the vain triflers and busy
heads that were of that Church. Of any Decree that the Emperor should make,
none of them both do mention. But at that time only the case then in
Constantinople so standing, and their luck before being so good in John
Chrysostom, who from a stranger became their bishop, it pleased the Emperors
so to do. And all this they did by way of provision for the Church quiet, not
by way of absolute authority or any forceable Decree, as M. Horn fableth and
over reaches his Authors.

M. Horn. The.44. Division. page 28. b.
As Constantinus and Theodosius the elder, even so Theodosius the second a
very (.124.) The 124 Untruth Theodos. in these doings by you alleged, was
ungodly
godly Emperor, having and practicing the (.125.) The 125 untruth. Utterly
unproven
supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, seeinge the horrible Heresies
spronge up and deuidinge the Church, but specially by Nestorius, did (126)
The.126. Untruth. For not by his authority.
by his authority call the third general council at Ephesus, named the first
Ephesine council, geuinge straight (.127.) The 127. Untruth. He gave no such
Commandment.
commandment to al Bishops wheresoever, that they should not fail to
appear at the time appointed, and further used the same power and authority,
in the ordering and gouerninge thereof by his (.128.) The.128. Untruth The
Counsel resisted and refused the ordering of this Lieutena^t John. Cyril. ep.
22. To^ 4. Liberat. cap. 6. All this was a leude fact which never ca^ to
effect, and vvherof they al repented after, yet M. Horn builds upon it.
Lieutenau^t Ioannes Comes Sacrensis, that other Godly Emperors had been
accustomed to use before him* according to the continual practice of the
Church, as it is plainly set forth in the book of general Councelles.

In this council there happened so grievous contention betwixt Cyrillus Bishop
of Alexandria, and John Bishop of Antioche, both being otherwise godly and
learned me^, that the council was divided thereby into two parts: the
occasion of this Schism was partly, that Cyrillus and certain other with
him had proceeded to the condemnation of Nestorius, before that Ioa^nes with
his company could com, and partly for that Ioa^nes of Antioch suspected
Cyrillus of certain Heresies, misdeeming that Ciril had made the more haste to
confirm them before his coming. He therefore with his associates
complains, and lays to Cyrilles chardge, that he did not tarry according to
the commandment of the Emperor for the coming of the Bisshops of other
Provinces, which were called thither from all parts, by the commandment of
the Emperor: That when the noble Earl Candidianus commanded him by
vvriting, and without vvriting, that he should presume no such matter, but
that he and those that were with him, should abide the coming of the other
Bishops, never thelesse he proceeded: that he and his company were the
authors of dissension and discord in the Church* and that they had given the
occasion, that the rules of the Fathers, and the decrees of the Emperors were
broken* and trode^ under foot: wherefore they judge Cyrill of Alexandria,
with Memno^ bishop of Ephesus, to be deposed from their bisshopriks, and
Ecclesiastical ministry: and the other their associates to be excommunicate.
The which their doings they signify to the Emperor Theodosius by their
Synodical letters, to understand his pleasure, in (.129.) The 129. untruth.
The story has no such words.
allowing or disallovvyng of their Synodicall acts. After this came the
bishop of Romes legates, before whom in the counsel Cyrillus and Memno^
offered up their libelles, deposing a contestation against John and his party
to have them cited, and render the cause of their deposition. The bisshoppe of
Romes legates, with the consent of the council, on that part, sends for
Ioannes and his parties, who returns this answer: Neither send you to
us, nor we to you, because we look for an answer So did alvvaies
Schismatiks, such as these were.
from the Prince touching you. Therefore says Liberatus: Cyril and Memnon,
seeking to revenge the^ selves, did condemn John and all those that stood with
him, who suffered many displeasures at Ephesus thoroughe the pride of these
twain. The Emperor sends to the whole Council his answer in
writing, on this sort: We allow the condemnation of Nestorius, Cyrillus,
and Memnon: the other acts and condemnations, which you have made, we
disallowe, obseruinge the Christian faith, and uprightness which we have
received of our fathers and progenitors. Liberat. cap. 8.
etc. Certain of the Bishops did satisfy the Emperor (.130.) The.130.
untruth. These words nipped of in the middle. Because the great and general
council doing all things regularly, has condemned Nestorius. By vhich
appears, the Counsel gave sentence over the Heretik, not the emperor.
who^ he commanded to enter into the Church, and to ordeine an other Bishop
for Constantinople in the place of Nestorius. These things thus done, the
Emperor dissolved the Counsel, and commanded the Bishops to depart every man
to his own country. Within a while after, the Emperor perceiving the
dissension betwixt Cyrill and John to continue, which he thought was not to
be suffered: called Maximianus, and many other Bishops that were then at
Constantinople, with whom he co^sulted, how this schism of the Churches might
be taken away. Whose advise had, the Emperor sent a noble man, Aristolaus
with his letters to Cyrill and John, commanding the^ to come to an agreement
and unity betvvixte them selves, otherwise he vvoulde (.131.) The.131.
untruth, the word depose, is not in Liberatus.
depose and banish them both. Whereupon follovved a reconciliation between
the two bisshops, and much quietness to the Churches.

The.9. Chapter. Of Theodosius the Second: and of the Ephesine Council, the
third General.
Stapleton.
HERE follows now an other Emperor Supreme head of the Church, as well for
calling of the first General Council at Ephesus, as also, for ordering and
governing of it by his Lieutenaunt. If M. Horn do or can show any decree or
determination in matter of faith, or any other Ecclesiastical matter made by
Theodosius or his deputy, then were it somewhat. He shows no such thing, nor
can show any such matter. All this ordering and governing, is concerning the
external and outward matters, and to see al things done quietly and orderly:
and by civil punishment to correct such as disobey the Council. All the which
are no matters of spiritual government. Let us then consider the
particularities.

The calling of the Ephesine Council by this Emperor Theodosius (which yet was
at the request of Cyrillus the Patriarch of Alexandria, Niceph. li. 14. c. 33
not by the Emperors own authority) M. Horn sets forth in these words:
giving straight commandment to al Bis^hops wheresoever, that they should not
fail to appear. As though the Emperor had so peremptorily cited them, and
summoned the^ both, as Princes and Civil Magistrates do cite their subjects
for civil matters. Whereas the history of Nicephorus by him alleged, gives
forth no token of such peremptory commandment, but rather of the contrary. For
the Emperor in his letters whereby he summoned them, Niceph. li. 14. c. 34
adds this reason or threat to them that would draw back. Qui enim vocatus
non alacriter accurrit, non bonae is conscientiae esse apparet. For whosoever
being called, hasteneth not, verily he appears to have an evil conscience. In
which words he rather charge their conscience before God, then their loyal
obedience to him: as Iosaphat did to the Priests and Leuits of the old Law,
as before has been showed. 2. Paral. 19.
Neither uses any other threat or force of commandment to express so much
as an ynckling of that gloriouse supremacye that M. Horn would so feign find
out.

Again, Vide Cyril. Epist. 22. Tom. 4.
the ordering and governing (as you call it) of the Council, by Ioannes Comes
the Emperors Lieutenaunte, was such as Cyrillus and all the Catholic
Bishops of that Council, complained of. First, because he made no true
relation to the Emperor, what was in the Council done. Then because he
labored to have John of Antioche with his confederates, reduced to the
Communion of the holy Council having broken the Canons: To the which request,
the Council resisted plainlye, saying: It is not possible to force us hereto,
except both that which they have done against the Canons, be disanulled: and
also they become humble suppliauntes to the Council, as such which have
offended. When John the Lieutenant could not win his purpose this way, by
force of authority, which those Bishops acknowledged none at all, for any
matter Synodicall to be concluded, or decreed, he went about by a slight to
compass them. He desired them, to give him in writing a confession of their
faith: and I, said he, will cause the other to subscribe thereunto, and so to
agree with you. This he did (says the Council) that after he might make his
vaunte, and say. I have brought these bisshops to an atonement, Conciliaui eos
ad amicitia^ humanis inter se offensis dissidentes. No^ exponimus nos
contumeliae.
being at variaunce among them selves, upon worldly displeasures. And the
Council espiyng this, replied again, they would not give the world occasion
of reproach and shame. And as for the confession of their faith which he
required, they answered. We be not called hither as heretics, but we are come
hither to restore the faith that has been despised, which also we do restore.
And as for the Emperor, he has no need now to learn his faith he knows it
well enough, and he has been baptized in it.

Thus we see the ordering and gouerninge, which M. Horns cause depends
upon, of this Lieutena^t and Emperor too, was a mere tyra^nical violence, not
such as other godly Emperors accustomed to use before him as M. Horn
avouches. So did not Constantine in the Nicene Counsel. Nor Theodosius this
man's Grandfather in the Council of Aquileia. Cyrill. vbi supra.
But this was such a tyrannical government, that Cyrillus and the whole Synod
writes thereof thus. We be all in great vexation, being kept in with the
guardes of souldiars, yea having them by our beds side when we sleep:
specially we, says Cyrillus. And the whole Council beside, is much weried and
vexed, and many are dead. Many other also, having spent all, do now sell their
necessaries. This, lo, was the honorable government of M. Horns supreme
head. M. Horn grou^deth his primacye upon the doeings of John a Schismatical
Bishop.
By force of arms to extort a consent. Such a governor would the great Turk
be, or the Souldan, if he ruled again. But such rough paterns please very
well this rough and rude Prelate. Similes habent labra lactucas. Whereas
therefore he calls this Emperor Theodosius, a very godly Emperor, seeing he
calls him not godly in this place, but in respect of his actions hereafter to
be by him rehearsed, which are very lewd and naught, as it has and shall yet
better appear, it is a plain untruth, Donec poenite^tia^ agatis, et
anathematisetis, haeretica capitula quae a Cyrillo Alexa^drino episcopo
exposita sunt co^tra Euangelicam and catholicam doctrinam Liberatus. cap. 6.
what so ever he were in other things. And therefore either he should have
forborne so to call him, at the least in this place, or should have found
some better matter for him to have practiced his Supremacy upon.

For all Master horns declaration rests in this, that he defended John the
Bishop of Antiochia, and a few of his confederates, the fautours of
Nestorius, in this Council condemned. Who made Cyrillus and the residew of
the Ephesine Fathers (two hundred in number) heretics, and called their doings
heretical, as euidentlye appears by the self same Author and chapter, that
M. Horn takes for his help and aid. But to sweet this unsavory declaration
wythall, he calls this Ihon a godly man: and wandering here and there in by
circumstaunces, leaves owte this, least the godly Reader might sone suspecte
this Primacye, standing upon no better ground.

Yet will M. Horn say, that Theodosius practiced this Supremacy here. First
by the Earl Candidianus his Deputy, The causes why M. Horn takes Theodosius
for Supreme head.
who on the Emperors behalf inhibited Cyril and the other, that they should
not proceed til the coming of John the Patriarche of Antiochia. Then, that
after the said John had condemned Cyril and Memnon, and deposed the^ from their
Bishopriks, the Emperor confirmed John's sentence. Thirdly that seeing the
dissension betwixt Cyril and John to grow more and more, commanded them to
agree, otherwise he would depose and banish them both. Last of all, that John
being cited to answer before the Popes Legate, would not come, but said, he
looked for the Princes answer.

The said causes ansvvered.
But these things neither severally nor jointly are of any force. First,
Candidianus doings, as ye see, go no further then to the external moderation,
disposition, and order of the Councels doings. Which, as we have before said,
is one point of the Emperors dealing in Councelles, as the Churches best
Son, not as Supreme governor thereof. Secondarily, the Emperor deposed not
Cyrill, but the schismatic assemble of John and his co^sociates to the
number of.34. as Liberatus writes: Cap. 6.
and that contrary to the mind of all the residue, whose sentence though
wrongfully given, Theodosius sinistrally affected and seduced, does confirm.
Wherein he is no principal worker, but an executour of the sentence. Thirdly,
the Emperor threatened no deposition or deprivation, but banishment only, which
is no Spiritual but Civil punishment, and so impertinente to our matter.
Therefore where you add, he would depose the^ to ye are but a Glosar.
Liberatus cap. 8.
And as good a glosar for the Pope as your brother Molineus. For Liberatus your
author, has no such word. Only he says. He threatened to send them both to
Nicomedia in banishment. Last of al, John being such a man, and so vpholde^ by
the Emperor, what marvel if he would not appear before the Popes Legate,
Proufes for the Popes primacy taken out of the Ephesine Council and M. Horns
own author. Prosper in Chronic. Euang^li. 1. cap. 4. Nicep. lib. 14. cap. 34
Con. ^lorses. 5. et 8. Chal. syn. Act 4. pagina. 871. ^^le^^ine confe^sed the
presidente of the Ephsine counsel by two Emperors. Pro Mar. vide act. 3 Co^c.
Chal.
of who^ he thought he should be condemned? There is no felo^ by his good will,
that would appear at the Kings be^ch, but would refuse it, if he might be
assisted therein. And yet it is an ordinary and a lawful cowrt, that not
withstanding: and should be, though an hundred such should refuse it.

Well Sir: Now that ye have spent and empted your proufs for the upholding of
Theodosius primacy, wherein ye work like one that taking upon him to guide
other in the night, would put out the candle or torch and conducte them by a
lantern, let us for our side see, if we can fetch any better light as well from
other, as even from your own Author, and from the doings of your own council
and your own Emperor, for the bishops and the popes ecclesiastical primacy. I
say then that the head and preside^te of this council was Celestinus the Pope:
and in his stead the foresaid Ciril, and not the Emperor or his deputy.
Upon this as a certain truth all the ecclesiastical writers as well Latins as
Greek, uniformly agree, yea the whole council yt self of Ephesus agniseth this
Coelestine as their presidente and head, as appears by the next general
council of Chalcedo shortly following, and in the Ephesin councils letters to
the Emperor Theodosius him self: and to the Emperor Valentinian. And least ye
should think, the spiritual men, and the councels encroched to much upon
the Emperors jurisdiction, and did the^ injury, as ye, your Apology, M.
Jewel, and your other brethren complain, lo The Emperor Marcianus, and the
Emperor Justinian in their open proclamations do plainly profess, that Pope
Coelestine by his deputy Cyril, was president of that Counsel. Pro Iusti edict.
eius tom. 2. council.

M. Horns primacye destroyed by his own author.


I trow M. Horn this is no lantern light shut up in a dark dymme Horn, but
good torche light, or rather the fair bright light of the son it self.

In case all this will not serve the turn, we will draw somewhat nearer, even to
your own author, your own Emperor, yea your own words to, and by them
prove our intent: and then I trust ye will be fully satisfied. Who is he then
Master Horn, that writes: Multos in hoc mundo reges esse, and non esse vnum,
sicut Papa est super Ecclesia^ mundi totius. There are many Kings in the world,
and no one King of the whole: as the Pope only is the governor over the Church
throughout the whole world: Surely it is your own author Liberatus. And hereby
appears well M. Jewels great error, Liberatus in breuiar. cap. 22. tom. 2.
co^, page 119. M. Jewels error. In his Reply fol. 254.

M. Horn notes not the author and chapter of his declaration and why? Euag.
lib. 1. cap. 4.


and M. Nowelles to, affirming stoutely and assuredly, that one man can no more
have the rule of the whole Church, the^ of the whole world. Liberatus a writer
about xi c. yers past, reports that assertion, spoken of a holy bishop to
the Emperor Iustinia^, and yet accounted therefore neither foolish nor wicked.
You began your narratio^ with the dissentio^ of Cyrillus and John's, but your
memory or your truth failed you, when ye left out the author of who^ ye took
it and the chapter. Perchance ye were here astonished, as the heretics were
before Theodosius. For eue^ in this place your author shows, that Coelestin
was the president of this counsel, by his deputy Cyrill: to who^ he gave
instructions and informatio^s by letters, how he should demean hi^ self with
Nestorius, and prescribes him a certain order for his doings. And therefore
Cyril him self, at what time he should pronounce final sentence of depriuatio^
against Nestorius, says he was forced thereto by Coelestinus letters. In the
giving of which sentence, Cyrillus gave sentence against Nestorius by
Celestinus. Cyril. epi. 11. and. 12. Tom. 4. Cyril. epi. 17. Proved against M
Horn by Theodosius himself that themperor is not supreme head in matters
ecclesiastical.

M. Horns own example also of Candidinianus turned against hi^. Cap. satis
euidenter distin. 96.


neither the^peror, nor his Lieutenant, had any thing to do, either in allowing
or disallowing: and that will I prove unto you eue^ by your own supreme head
Theodosius writi^g to Cyrillus, vt perturbatio quae ex co^trouersiis istis
accidit, secu^du^ ecclesiasticos canones dissoluatur, that the hurly burly
which the^ was for controversies of religion, might be pacified and quieted
according to the ecclesiastical canons. Now by the ecclesiastical cano^ the
ending and determination of matters spiritual apperteyneth to the clergy, and
not to the layty. Now also both to answer you, and to take some ha^dfast
against you of such things, your self have alleged: will ye know M. Horn
whether the doings of the earl Ca^didianus the^perors deputy, reached to the
discussio^ or determination of any matter ecclesiastical, or no? I say, no. And
for my saing to be confirmed I appeal to your own supreme head Theodosius,
and plead for my self, the very co^missio^, that he gave to Ca^didianus.
Deputatus est Ca^didianus magnificus Comes tra^sire vsque ad sanctissima^
synodu^ vestra^, ac in nullo quide^ quae facienda sunt de pijs dogmatibus
quaestiones communicare. Illicitum namque est, eu^ qui non sit ex ordine
sanctissimorum episcoporum ecclesiasticis immiscere tractatibus. I have sent,
says the emperor Theodosius, the noble earl Candidinianus, as my deputye unto
your holy Synod, geuinge him in charge, not to meddle in any point towchinge
questions to be moved abowte godly doctrine and Religion. For yt is unlawful
for him, which is not of the order of holy Bisshoppes, to entermedle with
Ecclesiastical matters. But yet ye say, John and his fellows would not
appear before the Popes Legates: A true man ye are in this point. It was so in
deed, wherein his doings were as good as yours and your fellows Protestante
bisshops, This John refused to come before the Popes Legates and the Counsel by
as good right, as M Horn and his fellows refused the Counsel of Trent.

Liberatus cap. 6.

M. Horns supremacye destroyed by his own author a^^ chapter.


which being and that with a large saufe conducte, called to the late Council
of Trente, durst not, ye knew your cause so good, show your face in such an
ordinary and learned consistory. Ye knew ye were no more able, to show good
cause why ye have deposed the Catholic Bisshoppes, then could your John, why
he deposed Cyrillus and Memnon. And therefore he being called to give a
reckoning of those his doings before Pope Celestins Legates, who were then
president themselves (for Cyrill and Memnon then both put up their complaints
to the Popes Legates, the^ newly come from Rome to Co^sta^tinople) and before
the whole Counsel of Bisshops, durst not appear.

But lo now out of your own place and chapter, an other open proof against
you, for the Popes, and the ecclesiastical primacy. For not withstanding all
that ever your Emperor and supreme head did, and for all his allowing of John's
wicked proceeding: the Popes Legates and the Council with a more Supreme
Authority resumed the matter into their hands: to who^ also Cyrill and Memnon
bisshops of Ephesus unjustly deposed, offered their bills of co^plainte:
wherevpo^ John was cited to appear. who played the night owlespart, not able to
abide the clear light of the Popes authority, and of so honorable a Council.
And so have ye concerning this Ephesine Council spoken altogether, as we say,
ad Ephesios, and very poor aid are ye like to take at this Councels hands.
Nay, ye are quyt ouerbore^ and ouertilted therewith. As it shall yet more at
large appear to him that will vouchesafe to read, that I have written of this
matter against M. Jewel, Art. 4. fo. 837. et. 138
in my Return of untruths.

M. Horn. The 45. Division. Page 30. a.
Eutyches stirred up much trouble in these days: wherefore he was cited to
appear before Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople, and other Bisshops
assembled in a Synod, to answer unto his heresies: who vvoulde He was an
heretik I vvarrant you, that vvoulde not appear before his bishop, but fled
to the Prince. Liberat. cap. 11.
not appear but fled unto the Emperor Theodosius, and declares unto him
his grief. The Emperor sends unto the Synod with Eutiches, one of his
chief officers Florentius, with this mandate: Because we study carefully for
the peace of Gods Church, and for the Catholic Faith, and will by Gods
grace have the right Faith kept, which was set forth by the Nicene
Council, and confirmed by the Fathers at Ephesus, when Nestorius was
condemned: we will therefore there be no offense committed about the
aforenamed Catholic Faith, and because we know the honorable Florentius,
to be a faithful and an approved man in the right faith, we will that he
shall be present in your Synod, because the conference is of the Faith. He was
there asistaunt unto the Fathers and (.132.) The.132. untruth. Flore^tius used
no examination at al.
examined Eutyches openly in the Synod, (.133.) The 133. untruth. He never
asked hi^ but one question.
diverse times of his faith, and finally said unto him: He that (says
Florentius) does not confess in Christ two natures, does not believe aright:
and (.134.) The.134. untruth. Not so. that is not by Flore^tius, but by the
Counsel he was condemned, and deposed.
so was Eutyches excommunicate, deposed, and condemned. Eutyches rested not
here, but obtained that the Emperor did command a new Synod to be had at
Constantinople, wherein to examine the acts of the former, whether that all
things touching the proceeding against Eutyches, were don orderly and rightly,
or no. He appoints besides Florentius, diverse (.135.) The 135. untruth,
Nicephorus has no such thing.
other of his nobles to be in this council, to see the doings thereof. But
when Eutyches could not vvin his purpose in neither of these Synodes, he
procures by frie^dship of the Empress Eudoxia and others, that the Emperor
should call a Synod again at Ephesus: to the which Synod the Emperor
prescribes a form of proceeding. This Synod was a wicked conuenticle,
wherein the truth was defaced and Heresy approved, the Emperor being
seduced by Chrysaphius, one of the privy chamber, and in most favor withdraw him.

The.10. Chapter, of Eutyches the Archeretike.
Stapleton.
AS Eutyches that false monk did, so do ye fly from your ordinary Judges to
such as be no Judges in the matter. Neither the presence of Flore^tius, or any
other the Emperors deputy in the council, makes the Emperor, as I have said
and showed before, a supreme head. And in as much as the Emperor says, that
because the co^fere^ce is of says, he would his deputy to be present: that is
granted (when matters of faith are debated) not only to Emperors, Did. 96.
Vbinam. Chal. Act. 3. pa. 838. Cabil. can. 6. Milleuit. Cap. 19.
but to al Christian me^. But hereof yt may be inferred that in Councils
assembled for discipline ecclesiastical, and not for faith, the^peror and his
deputy have nothing to do: which infri^geth the greatest part of your
supremacy. And which is plain both by the rules, and by the practice of the
Church expressed in the Councils of Chalcedon, of Cabylon, and of Milleuitum.
Now as we grant the Emperors deputye may be present in the Council, where
matters of faith are in debate: so how he is present, and to what end, and
that he has no authority to determyne and decide the controversies, we have
already proved by Theodosius him self. To stop belyke this gappe, ye imagine
Florentius to play the Judges part, as to examyne Eutyches openly in the Synod
of his faith, and how he believed. Examination Florentius used none, but as any
lay man beside might have don, he demanded what he believed: which demanding
is not to determine, what and how he ought to believe. Again where you add,
diverse times of his faith, this is an other untruth. For Florentius in all that
Synod never asked him but one question (which you here allege) and that after
the Synod had now condemned him. But I suppose ye would fasten the Judges
part upon him, because he said to Eutyches, he that does not confess in
Christ two natures, does not believe a right. This might any other man have
said to, and this is but a simple sentence. And as simple as yt is, ye thought
not very simply, but dubly and craftily, yea altogether falsely, minding to
bear the ignorant reader in hand as though this had been the final sentence.
And therefore ye say, and so was Eutyches excommunicated, deposed, and
condemned. But by whom, I pray you, Master Horn? By Florentius, or Flauianus
in the Council? And when and how, I pray you? Did not the Council before
these words of Florentius, demand of Eutyches his faith? Liberatus cap. 11.
Yea, did not they tell him? Thou must confess this, and curse all doctrine
contrary to this faith? Now when Eutyches would not, and said, as ye say in
many things, he would not, because the holy scripture had no such matter,
then did the Council curse him: And after this curse Florentius spoke the
words by you rehearsed. Afterward was he cursed again, and deprived of his
priestly honor, not by Florenrius, but by his own bishop Flauianus, as it is
contained in the chapter by you quoted. Yea that more is, a plain place withal
of the Popes primacy to. For both Flauianus sent this his Se^te^ce to Rome, and
Eutyches thus condemned, co^playned by his letters upon Flauianus, and
appealed, to Pope Leo. But Eutyches rested not here: The Popes primacy proved
by M, Horns own author and chapter.
(says M. Horn) In deed in Eutyches we have a pattern of you and your
fellows, that will be ruled by no law or order of the Church. This Eutyches
being first three several times cyted by his own bishop and Patriarche
Flauianus, would not appear before him, but by the means of one Chrysaphius
his Godde child, a buskyn gentleman about the Emperors preuy chamber,
brought the matter to the Prince. Then a prouincial Synod being called by the
Emperor, and Eutyches condemned, he appealed from the Emperor to Pope Leo.
Being by him also condemned, he would not yet yield. No in the general
Council of Chalcedon being thrice summoned by the whole Council of 630.
Bisshoppes, his pride and obstinacy was such, that he would not appear, nor
being there with full consent condemned, would yet yield thereunto. And al
because the.ij. natures of Christ in one person (which he denied) was not
expressly found in the Scriptures. In all these (except his only appealing to
Rome) he showed him self as right an heretic, as any that now lives. But
this is a wonderful folly, or rather madness in you to proceed on, and to allege
farther matter of Theodosius doings for calling other Councels in the
mayntenance of Entyches at Constantinople and Ephesus, Leo epist. 51. ad.
Pulcheriam.
and by and by to declare, that the said synod of Ephesus, was a wicked
conue^ticle, as it was in deed, and as Leo calls it, Non iudicium, sed
latrocinium. No judgment, but a tyrannical violence, and al things there done
against Flauianus, afterward reuersed by Pope Leo: a most certain argument of
his supremacye. And yet ye call your Emperor, a godly Emperor, neither showing
of his repentance, nor of any his good doings. Thus ye see how pitefully
every way ye are cast in your own turn.

M. Horn. 46. Division. Page 30. b.
Leo the first, Bishop of Rome a learned and a godly bishop, although not
without al, faults, makes hum^le supplication unto Theodosius the Emperor,
and unto Pulcheria: that there might be a general Counsel called in Italy, to
abolishe the wicked error in Faith, confirmed by the violence of Dioscorus.
The self same Bishop of Rome with many bisshops kneeling on their knees, did
most humbly beseech in like sort Valentinianus the emperor, that he would
vouchesaulfe to entreat and exhort Theodosius the Emperor to call an other
Synod, Liberat. cap. 12.
to revoke those evil acts and judgments, which Dioscorus had caused to be
don in the condemnation of Flauianus Bishop of Constantinople and others. In
which examples it is manifest, that the bisshops of Rome did (.136.) The.136.
untruth. The Popes never acknovleaged any such matter, and Leo lest of al other,
acknovvledge the supreme government, direction and authority in calling of
Councels, which is (.137.) The.137 untruth. It is no ecclesiastical cause at
al, as the Emperors use it.
one of the greatest amongst the ecclesiastical causes or matters, to be in
the Emperors, and Princes, and not in them selves.

The.11. Chapter. Of Pope Leo the great, and first of that name.
Stapleton.
IT is well and clerkly noted of you M. Horn, that Leo, being a godly and a
learned bishop was not yet without all faults It was well spied of you, least
men should think he was borne without original sin (which I dowbt whether
you will grant to Christ's mother) or take him for Christ him self. For who, I
beseache you, is without all faults?

But what a holy, virtuous and godly man this Leo was, I let pass to speak
(though very much might be said therein) because the good or evil life of a Pope
or any other man is not material to the doctrine which he teaches, or to the
matter we have now in hand. But verily for his right faith, true doctrine, and
found belefe (for the which you seem to tax him) I will with ij. short saynges
only of ij. general Councils shortly note to the Reader, both what an
absolute doctor this Leo was, and what a malapert comptroller you are. The
Chalcedo^ Council of 630. bishops do expressly and plainly profess their
Judgment of this blessed father Leo (in their solemn subscription) in these
words. Nos sum orthodoxum esse sanctissimum patrem nostrum Archiepiscopum
Leonem perfectissime nouimus. Act. 4. pa. 871. col. ^. Tom. 1. Con.
We most perfitly know, that our most holy father Leo the Archbishop, is of
right judgment in religion, in the highest degree. Lo M. Horn those fathers
so many and so learned with one consent do say: Not that they think or believe,
but that they know: and that not superficially or slenderly, but perfectissime
most perfytly, most exactly, most assuredly: And what know they so surely?
Forsothe that their most holy father Leo is Orthodoxus, a right beleuer, a true
Catholic, a sound teacher of Gods people. And not only so, after a common or
mean sort, but Sum Orthodoxum: Catholic and right believing in the highest
degree: without any blotte or blemish in that respect. After such a Sentence,
so protested and pronounced, of such, so many, so learned, and so ancient
fathers above vnleuen hundred years paste, in such and so solemn an assembly
for the absolute and undoubted commendation of that excellent prelat, whence
crepe you, with your lewd surmise, or with what face dare you deface him? With
the like constant and absolute co^mendatio^ (without any surmised exception at
al) in an other general Counsel, Council. Constant. 5. Act. 1. page 74.

Tom. 2. Council.


the next after this, he is called by the common voice of the East Bisshops,
Illuminator and Columna Ecclesiae. A geuer of light, and a pillar of the
Church. You come to late, M. Horn, to blotte or to blemish the Reverent
memory of so blessed, so learned and so much commended a father. His light so
shyneth that no horn can dymme it. His doctrine is so strong, that no surmise
can weaken it. The more you kick at this pillar, the more you break your
shinne. The more you deface him, the greater is your own shame.

Therefore as your glosing here was causeless, so surely your meaning is
gracelesie. Verily such as if ye had expressed it, would forthwith have
disgraced and quyte overthrown your false conclusion immediately following,
freighted almost with as many lies as lines. For touching his suyte to the
Emperor to have a Council called, you must understand M. Horn, that the
bare calling of Counsels such as Emperors have used, is not one of the
greateste among Ecclesiastical causes, nor, to speak properlye, any matter
Ecclesiastical at all, but a provision by the way of exhortation for the
bishops to meet in some conuenyent place without breach of the civil order,
which forbids Illicita collegia: that is, Tit. de Illicitis collegijs.
unlawful assemblies, as the same should for such be accounted if the^peror
had not allowed them: And not only the^peror, but any other prince being lord
of the territory or soil, where the bishops would assemble. In deed the
discussion and determination of matters of faith in Councelles may well be said
to belong to the great and weighty causes of the Church, but this belongs not
to lay princes: and this not withsta^di^g, Leo is so far of from acknowledging
this supreme government and authority in calling of councels, that if I be not
deceived, ye your self do know and believe the contrary, and therefore durst
not speak what ye thought, but under such dark and mystical talk. For I pray
you, M. Horn, what is the fault ye find in Leo, worthy to be thus touched by
you unless yt be, that he most plainly and seriously auowcheth this supreme
authority to rest in the sea of Rome? And then fare well your goodly
conclusion. What other secret faults, by your so quick prying egles eye, ye
have in him espied, I wot not. But your brethern of the best and learned sort,
find, as far as I can find, none other fault then this that I have said:
which is no fault at al. And therefore in your shrewde and unhappy meaning,
thowgh not in your express pe^ning, yt is a very untruth. Yet if ye well
pretend ignorance, and make men believe ye know no such thing in Leo, but that
yowre conclusion is true, and takes place as well in him as other bisshops,
then will I load and press you, Prouf^ out of ^eo for the popes primacy. See
his 3 sermon where he calls S. Pet. head of the Church. Epist. 82. vel alias
84. ad Anastasium cap. 11. Tom. 1. council. page 700.

Ad vnam Petrisedem vnersalis ecclesiae cura conflueret. Ibidem.

Vt pro solicitudine quam vniuersae ecclesiae ex diuina institutione
dependimus: episto. 87. ad episcopos Aphrican.


with such good and euide^te proufs, fetched no farther then from Leo him self,
that ye shall be feign, if ye have any grace to acknowledge the truth. For
whether ye regard his doings or his sayings, both are in this point most
notable.

S. Peter's primacy he does every where confess. As appears in many of his
sermons, and in his other works. For Leo says: Quoniam and inter Apostolos,
in similitudine honoris fuit quaedam discretio potestatis: and quum omnium par
esset electio, vni tame^ datu^ est, vt caeteris praeemineret. Whereas all the
Apostles were of like honor (he means in Apostleship and priesthood) yet was
there difference of power amo^gs them, and where as al were of like elected,
yet was yt given to one to be peerlesse above the other. Wherein he means
Saint Peter. Leo says, that where other Bisshops have their several and
appointed care, the care of the universal Church comes to the only see of S.
Peter. Leo says, that even by Gods own ordinance, he takes care, for the
whole Church. And Leo says, Vt ab ipso quasi quodam capite, dona sua velut
in omne corpus diffunderet, vt expertemse ministerij intelligeret esse diuini,
qui ausus fuisset a Petri soliditate recedere: hunc enim in consortium
indiuiduae vnitatis assumptum, id quod ipse erat, voluit nominari, Leo epist.
87. ad epis. Vicnne^. prouinciae: tom. 2. co^c. f^l. 705. Extra de elect and
electi potest c. fundamenta. Jewel Page 311. A vvretched corruption made of
Pope Leo his words by M. Ievve^. V^de dict. c. fundamenta in. 6. and did. 19.
ca. ^^a Dominus: in editio. Iugd. 1559
dicendo. Tu es Petrus and super hanc Petram etc. that from S. Peter the
Apostle as from the head God powers al his gifts into the body, and that God
took him into the fellowship of the indivisible unity. The meaning whereof Leo
him self expounds, saying, that he shall not be partaker of Gods mystery
that departs from Peter's sowndenes: and for that Christ who is called in
scriptures the rock, gave the same name to Peter. And here yt shall not be much
out of the way to note, that M. Jewel recyting this place, does not only
dissimble that this is written of the godly and learned man Leo: but also
fathereth yt upon Pope Bonifacius, who writes it to, but as ye see, not
originally. And most lyingly for vnitatis puts in trinitatis: as though Leo
and Bonifacius should make S. Peter one of the three parsons of the blessed
Trinity. Being in this point, the popes glosar, as good as Molineus, or M.
Horn him self. Which Molineus in this place gloseth apase, but not for the
pope, but as much as he can against him. And yet for this matter much better
then M. Jewel, reading as well here as otherwhere in the canon law: vnitatis,
and non trinitatis. This now by the way, to show you, that there be more
popes glosars, then Molineus, and withal, one of M. Jewels pretty knackes,
worthy to be added for an after reckoni^g to such as M. D. Hardi^g, D. Sanders,
and I have most rightfully charged him with.

Let us now return to Leo, and see whether as in words he did amplify this
supreme authority: so in his doings he practiced it, or no. Who is he then,
Dict. epist. 87. Dedimus literas ad fratres and coepiscopos Tarraco. Cartha.
Lusitanos atque Gallicos eisque concilium Synodi generalis indiximus. epistola.
93 ad ^urbiu^. cap. 17.

Vicem curae nostrae proficiscenti a nobis fratri and consacerdoti nostro
Potentio delegantes* epistola 87. ad episcopos Aphrican.

Dilectioni tuae vicem mei moderaminis delegaui, epistol. 82.

To. 1. Con. pa. 742. Vicem ipse meam co^tra temporis nostri haereticos
delegaui, atque propter ecclesiarum pacisque custodiam, vt a comitatu vestro
non abesset, exegi. epist. 55. ^om. 1. Council page 674 In ipso Leon. 57.
Consensiones Episcoporu^ sanctoru^ cano^u^ apud Nicaea^ conditaru^ regulis
repugna^tes, in irritu^ mettimus, and per authoritatem beati Petri Apostoli
generali prorsus definitione cassamus. Ad Pulcheriam epist. 55. Tom. 1. council.
page 672. Epistola 47. and 49.


that reuerseth the unlawful doings of Bisshoppe Hilarious at France? Leo.
Who is he, that calls to a general Council the Bisshoppes of Tarracone,
Lusitania, France and Car^hage? Leo. Who is it that appoints his deputye
Potentius to hear and refourme matters Ecclesiastical in Aphrike? Leo. Who is
he that does appointe Anastasius the Bisshoppe of Thessalonica, to be his
deputye and vicegerente for matters Ecclesiastical in those quarters? Leo. Who
is he that restored to his bisshoprike the learned Theodoretus bisshoppe of
Cyrus dwellinge far of in the east, unjustly deposed of Maximus his own
Patriarche, and of Dioscorus? Leo. Who is he that sends his deputy Julian to
the Emperor Marcian to remain in his cowrte, and to supplye his office, in
such things as should be done, against heretics in those quarters? Leo. Who
is he that did annichilate and reuerse by the authority of S. Peter the
Apostle, the doings of a number of Bisshoppes at Constantinople, before the
Bis^hoppe of Alexandria and other patriarchs contrary to the canons of Nice?
Leo. Who is he that sends his Legates to be presidentes in the great Council
at Chalcedo? Leo. Which him self signifies in his letters as well to the whole
Counsel as to the emperor Marcian. Epist. 59. and 61. Act. 3. Chal. co^c.
Epist. 33.40 ^4.55 Epist. ^8. Leo epist. 47.
Who is he that confirmed the Decrees of the Council of Chalcedo, being thereto
required, as well by the whole Counsel, as by the emperor Marcia^? Leo. Who is he
that confirmed Anatholius and Proterius the ij. chief Patriarchs in the
East, one of Constantinople the other of Alexandria? Leo. And who is he that
in summoning the Council of Chalcedon, yielded not otherwise to the Emperors
appointment for the place, but with an express exception, saying? The honor
and right of the Sea of S. Peter the most blessed Apostle, reserved* Leo.
Wherein he expressly signified, that the Summoning of the Council of right
appertayned to his Apostolic See. What say you to all this, Master Horn?
How well does, Pope Leo, acknowledge your supremacy? For shame leave of ons
these lyinge conclusions. Hard yt will be I trow, yt seameth to be so natural
an humor in men of your religion. But yet nothing is hard to the willing, and
to him that will heartily seek for grace at Gods hand. The which I pray him of
his mercy send you: And learn I pray you to find fault with your self, as
ye have great cause, rather then with this good virtuous bishop, It is in the
477. untruth. In our Return^ Art. 4. folio 142.
faultlesse I dare say for such matters, as ye take for great faults in
him. But to end this matter, I must commend you for one thing, for ye have
escaped one scoringe that your fellow M. Jewel did not escape: for writing that
Leo did kneel with other bishops, which the words of his author Liberatus by
you here truly rehearsed, do not importe.

M. Horn. The.47. Division. Page 3^. a.
Nice. lib. 15. cap. 12. Leo epist. 44.
Marcianus, a godly Emperor, and very studious about the Christian Religion,
succeeded Theodosius, who besides that of him self, he was much careful to
suppress al heresies, and to refourme the Churches, restoring Religion to
purity without error, was also hastened hereunto by the earnest suit of Leo
bishop of Rome: who in diverse and sundry epistles, declaring unto him in
most humble wise, the miserable state of the Church, does beseech him, that
he would vouchsaulfe to call a general council. Many other bisshops make the
same sui^e unto the Emperor, and to the same end complaining unto him, Act. 1.
of the miserable destruction, and horrible disorders, in Church causes. An
example and pattern of their supplications, vvherby (138.) The.138. untruth.
Neither by Leo his epistle neither by the bisshops supplication any such thing
does appear.
may appear, that they acknowledged the Emperor to be their Supreme
governor, also in Ecclesiastical causes, or matters, is set forth in the
Chalcedon council, in the supplication of Eusebius, the bishop of Dorelaum;
unto the Emperor: who makes humble supplication as he says, for him self,
and for the true or right faith. we fly unto your godliness (says this bishop
unto the Emperor) because both we and the Christian faith, have suffered much
wrong against al reason: humbly craving justice, and for that Dioscorus has
done many, and that no small offenses, both against the faith of Christ and us:
prostrate, we beseech your clemency, that you will command him to answer to
the matters, we shall obiecte against him: (.139.) The.139. untruth. In nippi^g
of a clause in the midst, utterly ouerthrovvi^g M. Horns principal purpose.
wherein we will prove him to be out of the catholic faith, defending heresies
replete with impiety. Wherefore we beseech you to direct your holy and
honorable commandment, to the holy and universal council of the most
religious Bishops, to examen the cause betwixt us, and Dioscorus, and to make
relation of al things, that are done, to be (.140.) The.140 untruth False
translation. In epist. praeamb.
judged as shall seem good to your clemency. The Emperor protesting that they
ought to preserve the furtheraunce of the right faith and Christian Religion,
before al other affairs of the common wealth: sends their letters of
summons to all bishops, commaundinge them to repair to Nice, a city in
Bithinya, there to consulte and conclude, an unity and concord, in religion,
and matters perteining thereunto, that hereafter all altercation and
doubtfulnesse be taken clean away, and an wholesome truth in Religion
established, addinge (.141.) The.141. untruth Marcian used no such threats.

Vide epist. preamb. Co^c. Chal. Tom. 1. Co^. page 734. col. 2.


threats, and punishment to them that would refuse to come at the time
appointed. VVha^ thassembly was made at Nice of all the bishops, and that the
Emperors could not come thither, to be present in the Synod personally,
which they had promised and did much coueite, they write unto the whole
Synod, vvilling the^ to remove from Nice unto Chalcedon without delay: where
they assembled at the Emperors (.142.) The 142. vntr. At his exhortation, not
commandment.
commandment, to the number of.630. bishops.

The, 12. Chapter. Of the Emperor Martian, and of his calling the Council of
Chalcedon.
Stapleton.
M. Horn is now harping again upon his old string of calling of Councelles:
and would establish Marcianus ecclesiastical primacy thereby. But either his
eyes, his luck, or his matter was not good, to hap upon no better place then
he does, which does bear him quyte over, and sets forth pope Leo his
primacye sending his ambassadors and vicegerents to Constantinople to reform
heresies, and to pardon and reco^cyle such heretical bishops as were
poenitente: Ep. 42. and 44. alias 44. and 46. Tom. 1. Conc. dicta epist. 42
alibi est. 44.
unto whom he adioyneth as his delegate, even the Bishop and Patriarche of
Constantinople. And declares this his doings in his letters as well to the
Emperor him self: as to Anatolius the Patriarche. Now, what if pope Leo
requires a council at the Emperors hands? what does this blemish his
authority, more the^ if the Pope now should require the Emperor, the french and
Spanishe kings, and other princes, as he did of late, to send their bisshops
to the council? Verily that the Emperor so should do, it was of all times
most necessary in Marcian his time: the.3. patriarchs of Alexandra,
Antiochia, and Jerusalem, with a great number of Bishops in the East, taking
then the Archeheretike Eutyches part, against the good and godly Catholic
bishop Flauianus, whom Dioscorus with his faction murdered. Was it not then
high time to seek al aid and help, Generale Concilium ex praecepto
Christianoru^ principu^, and ex co^sensu Apostolicae sedis placuit co^gregari.
Epist. 59. alias. 61. ad luxe nale^. ^om. 1. Council. page 676. So^ra. li. 1.
cap. 8. ^ouncels (...) not be kept without the con^ent of the Pope.
Beatissimi Petri iure atque honor serua to. Ep. 45. alias. 47. To^. 1. Co^c.
page 663. col. 2. a.
both spiritual and temporal? Or is it any diminution to the spiritual power,
when the temporal power does help and assist it? Or think you, would this
perniciouse pestilent fellow Dioscorus, and his faction any thing have regarded
Pope Leo his ecclesiastical authority, which before had so notoriously
transgressed both Gods laws and man's laws, unless the good Emperor had
joined his assistaunce unto it? And this may be answered for the calling of
many other general Councels by the Emperors: especially of the first seven
hundred years after Christ, when the Patriarchs them selves were
Archeheretikes, and the matters not like easily to be redressed by the Church
authority only. Yet neither did any Catholic Prince call, or could call a
Council without or against the Popes will and consent. If ye think not so, as
in deed ye do not, then think you far a wrong: And the godly and learned
Bishop Leo, as you call him, is able, if you be capable and willing toward any
reformation, sone to refourme your wrong judgment. Who declares expresselye,
that even the Council of Chalcedo was summoned, by the commandment of the
Emperors, with the consent of the Sea Apostolic. Surely it was a rule and a
Canon in the Church, above.12. hundred years now past, that no Council could
be kept (as Socrates witnesses) without the authority of the Bishop of Rome:
And that by a special prerogative and privilege of that See. This prerogative
Leo also does signify, speaking of this Emperor Marcian, who called the
Chalcedon Council, but yet, says he, without any hinderance or prejudice of S.
Peter's right and honor, that is by and with his consent, being S. Peter's
successor, in the Apostolic See of Rome.

I meruail much, that ye frame this supremacy of Marcian by the supplication
of the Bishop Eusebius, desiring the Emperor to procure by his letters that he
counsel would hear his cause against Dioscorus, which serves rather for the
Councels primacy. The removing also of the Council from Nicaea to Chalcedo,
does serve to as little purpose. Vide Tom. 1. Council. page 735. and 736.
For the cause of the tra^sposing was, for that Leo by his ambassadors had
signified, that the Bishops would not assemble, unless The Emperor would be
there personally, for fear of sedition and tumult of Eutyches disciples. It
was therefore translated to Chalcedo, being nigh to Constantinople, that the
Emperor might be there the more co^modiously. And so that which was done by
the good Emperor to assure and honor th'Eclesiastical authority, ye turn it
to the hinderance and derogation of it. But in the supplication of Eusebius
which you have put so at large in your book, it is a world to see how untruly
you have dealt, partly with nipping of sentences in the midst, partly with
false translation. First you leave out at the very begi^ning of the Bishops
supplication, wherein he shortly declares the whole effect of his request,
saying: Act. 1. Co^c. Chal. page 741.
The intent and purpose of your clemency is to provide for all your subjects,
and to help all that are injuriously oppressed, but especially such as bear
the office of Priesthod. By this beginning it appears, the Bishop requested
only the Emperors external and civil power for redress and help against
injuries. And because this should not so appear, you thought good to leave it
quite out. Again in the process, where the said Bisshoppe says: Prostrate
we beseech your clemency that ye will command Dioscorus to answer to the
matters we shall object against him. It fololoweth which you leave out, the
evidences of his doings against us being read in this Council, by which words
the bishop required the Council to be his Judge, not the Emperor: and least
that should appear you leave it out: At the end where the latin has, perferre
ad scientiam vestrae pietatis omnia quae geruntur, you turn it: to make
relation of all thin-that are don, to be judged: where you have put in these
words ( to be judged) of your own liyng liberality, more then your latin has:
and al to persuade, that the bishop requested here the Emperor to be the
Judge between Dioscorus and him. Which (if ye had put in the whole words of
your Author) would have easily appeared nothing so, but rather the contrary:
as by the places by you omitted, and now by me expressed, the circumspect
Reader may sone perceive. Thus like as your doctrine, so is your manner of
writing, false, imperfect, and untrue.

Again in all this tale, Master Horn, though you tell us at large how the
Emperoures Marcian and Valentinian sent their letters of Summons to all
Bisshoppes commanding them, In epist. Praeamb. Council. Chal^ed. Tom. 1. Page
733.734. and 735. col. 2
etc. Yea, adding threattes and punishments to those that refused to come at
appointmente, Yet you tell us nothing that the Emperor first wrote unto Pope
Leo, and obtained his consent and Authority. And then that in his letters of
Summones to al Bishops, certified them expressly of the Popes pleasure, and
last of all that the Popes Legates required the Emperors to be present
personallye at the Council, or else they would not come there them selves. All
this you let pass. In deed it makes not for you. But it shows against
you and for us, very well and plainly, that the supreme summon and citing of
the bishops to that general Council, In epist. praeamb. vbi supra.
yea and the Emperors own presence there, proceeded directlye and principally
from the Pope and his Legates. It declares well the Popes supremacy in that
affair, as we shall in many other more points decypher unto you anon more at
large. Neither does the Emperor use in his letters of Su^mon, the words of
commandment, but says: Venire dignemini. Vouchesafe ye to come. And again.
Adhortamur. we exhort you to come. This was the practice of Emperors (as I
have noted before out of Cusanus) by the way of exhortation to call Councels:
not by forceable commandment, by threats and punishment, as you untruly
report.

M. Horn. The.48. Division. page 31. b.
The Emperor assigns Judges and (143.) The.143. Untruth. They were no rulers
such as M. Horn sancieth. Act. 1.

The cause of discord was that they taught not quod veritas aut doctrina
patrum requirit: that which truth or the Fathers doctrine requires. This you
omit. For why? It shevved your ovn case.


rulers in the Sinode about.24. of the chiefest of his Nobles and Senators.
After all the Bishops and the Judges were assembled in the council house,
which was in S. Euphemies Church: the Emperor Martianus, with Pulcheria,
enters in amongst them, and makes an Oration unto the whole Council, to this
effect. First he declares, what zeal and care he has for the maintenance
and furtherance of true Religion: Then he shows, that partly the vanity,
partly the avarice of the teachers, had caused the * discord and error in
Religion: He adds the cause wherefore he chardged them with this travail:
And last of all he (.144.) The 144. Untruth. The Emperor prescribed no form
at al for determini^g of matters in controversy.
prescribes a form, after which they must determine the matters in
controversy. This done, the Judges sat down in their places, and the
Bisshoppes arovve, some on the right hand, and others on the left hand. And
when that Dioscorus was accused, and the Judges willed him to use his
lavvfull defense, there began to be amongst the Bisshops vvhote schools,
vvanting some modesty, wherefore the Judges at the first stayed them with
mild words. VVilling them to avoid confusion: but being earnest, they
ouershot the modesty of so grave men: wherefore the honorable Judges and
Senate of the Laity, appointed by the Emperor, did reprove them saying: These
popular acclamations, neither becomes Bisshoppes, neither yet help the
parties: be ye quiet therefore, and suffer all things to be rehearsed and heard
in order with quietness. When the Judges and Senate, had duly examined the
causes, they gave (.145.) The.145. Untruth. notorius. The Judges deposed not
Dioscorus, but the Counsel.
sentence to depose Dioscorus and others: So that this their judgment seemed
good to the Emperor, to whom they referred the whole matter.

The.13. Chapter. Of the Chalcedon Council, and how the Emperor with his
deputies dealed therein.
Stapleton.
WE are now in order come to the Counsel of Chalcedo, the acts whereof being
very long and tedious, the leaves in the great volume rising to the number of
one hundred and more, M. Horn has here and there pried out good matter as he
thinks, to depresse the Popes primacie withal. Wherein he so handles
himself, that he seems to me for many causes never to have read the acts, but
to have taken things as they came to his hands, ministered by his friends, or
by his Latin Masters. Ones, The answer concerning the Counsel of Chalcedo
this is sure, that for some of his allegations, a man may pore in the book,
til his eyes dasel again, and his head ache, ere he shall find them, and in such
prolixitie of the matter, when he has found them, and well weighed them: a man
would think, The Ephesine and the Chalcedo^ Council shevved in a dark horn.
that M. Horn had either lost his wits, or else were him self a sleep, when
he wrote those arguments: or else which is worst of al, that he was past al
shame and grace. For as ye saw, good Readers, the Ephesine so shall ye now see
the Council of Chalcedo, by no clear candle or torche, but all in a dark
horn. Wherein he plays like a false wily marchaunte, that will not show
his wares, but in a dark shop. But by Gods help I shall bring his naughty
marcha^dise into the bright shining light, that al men may openly at the eye
see all the leudnes of it.

And to begin, with the first action of the said Council, and to follow M.
Horns steps with a little tracing, there sterteth up at the first (I will
speak with the least) a brace of lies, beside other vain and impertinent
talk. See the.1. ^ome of councelle the 736. leaf and 737. col. 2. and 1.
Of his Judges, whereby he would have the Reader to think, that these noble
men were Judges in the decision and determination of matters ecclesiastical, he
comes altogether to short, as ye shall anon understand. And therefore this
shall be the first lie. The second lie is that he says. The Emperor
prescribed a form, after which they must determine the matters in
controversy. For in all the Acts of that Council, there appears no such
form or prescription made. It is usual with M. Horn, in every Council to
report such a prescription. But as he has often said it, so has he not once
proved it, or showed it by any one Authority, but his own, which is a singular
authority, See the 831. leaf. col* 2.
to lie as lewedly (almost) as M. Jewel. Yet to bleare the Readers eye, and
to seame handsomely to furnish his matter by some president and example, he
lays forth for his proof, that these Judges gave sentence to depose
Dioscorus the Patriarche of Alexandria, and others. This is altogether false.

For first they were no competent and ordinary Judges being mere lay men, 4.
Causes to prove that Dioscorus was not deposed by them*
especially in causes ecclesiastical to depose a Bishop. Secondlye, puttyng
the case, they had been lawefull and ordinarye Judges, yet was yt no final and
judicial sentence. For a final sentence must decide and determine the matter,
by an absolut co^demnatio^ or absolution: which was not done here, this
pretensed sentence being as your self write, co^ditional: So that this their
judgment seemed good to the Emperor, to whom they referred the whole matter.
And here by the way falls out an other untruth: Videtur nobis iustu^ esse.

See the 847. leaf col. 2.


for the Nobles them selves do not call this saying a Judgment, but say, yt
seems unto us just. Which words by law importe no final judgment. Fourthly
and last, this was no judgment, neither was Dioscorus deposed here in this
action (for in the beginning of the next action, the Judges confess, that
sentence was not yet given upon Dioscorus.) but in the third action: and that
not by these Judges, as ye call them, but by Pope Leo his deputies, and the
residew of the Bishops without any referring of the matter to The Emperor as
the Judges do here.

Martians oration returned upon M. Horn.
The rest ye talk of in this place is of no weight: and if it weyeth any thing,
yt weieth against you, as Marcians oration, which tends to this, that in new
questions and dissensions of religion, we must have a special regard to the
doctrine, teaching and writing of the former fathers and councils: which rule
and form of Judgment prescribed by him you quit left out, as a rule in deed,
importing a plain destruction of your new gospel. See the 740. leaf col. 1.
Now if the making of an oration by a lay man imploieth any authority, voice,
or iuriseictio^ in the Counsel, then were many lay men (the ambassadors for
their Princes, that made orations there, yea and found many faults to in the
Church, and desired the reformation of them) members and Judges of the late
Council of Trent, which is notoriously false: and so is that also that ye write
of the noble men at Chalcedo. And whereas they found fault with the populare
acclamations of the Bishops, which of a great zele to the catholic faith
cried out against Dioscorus and other that deposed the godly Bishop Flauianus,
and that they would not receive Theodoretus, nor hear such matters as he had
to propose, because he for the time, held against Cyrillus and other
Catholics: and that these noble men endeavored to set an order and quietness
among them, does plainly show, M. Horn^ argume^te for the exclamatio^ returned
upon him self. See the 743. leaf. col. 1.
wherein these noble men's office did rest: as nothing touching the definition
of any matter spiritual, but to provide that al things might be don with
order, indifferency and quietness. For if a man consider, what disorder,
tumulte, cruelty, yea and murder too, fell in the second Ephesin Council,
which customably is rather called a Conuenticle, and a co^spiracy, for the
maintenance whereof, ye make Theodosius a very godly Emperor, and how that
Dioscorus and his co^federats, would not suffer the Catholic Bishops
Notaries, as the manner was, to write the acts there done: but thrusted them
out, and put in Notaries of his own at his pleasure, how he came to the other
notaries and brake their wrytinges and fingers to: See the 750. leaf. 1. and.
2. col

See the 847. leaf col. 2.


how that he forced the bishops to subscribe to a blanke: that is, in clean
paper, wherein nothing was written: how that, Dioscorus would not suffer the
epistle of Leo the Pope sent to the Council to be read: and finally, how that
he slew the blessed Bishop Flauianus: he that, I say, co^sidereth and well
weighs the premises, and that a great number of those schismatical bishops
were also with Dioscorus at Chalcedo, shall sone perceue, what need there was of
these noble men's assistance, and that they might well have to do there, though
not in ruling and judging any spiritual matter, yet in the indifferent ruling
and direction of the Catholic Bishopes external doings, and to see that al
things might proceed with quietness and without parcialitie. Which answer
ones made, will serve also for many other General Councels. But what a wicked
Cham are you, M. Horn, that reveal to the common people in your vulgar
books, the faults and disorders of your most holy and reverent Fathers, the
Fathers of so famous, and so learned a Council? Verily Constantine the Great,
that noble Emperor, Niceph. li 8 ca. 16
would cast his Imperial garment (he said) to hyde a Bisshops fault, if by
chance he should see any. And becomes it your vocation, bearing the room of
a Bishop your self, to tell the people of the Bisshops whot schools, of their
want of modesty, and of ouershoting them selves? You a Bishop of Gods Church?
Nay your sprit shows it self more bucherly then Bishoply, and as mete to
carry a rake as a Rochet.

M. Horn. The.49. Division. page 32. a.
Act. 2.
In the next action, the Judges and Senate after rehersall made, what was done
before, do propounde unto the Synod, what matters were now to be
consulted of, and wills them to make a pure exposition of the faith, and
that without any sinister affection, declaring that the Emperor and they, did
firmly keep and believe, according to the faith received in the Nicen Council:
whereunto the Bisshops also accord, and says, that noman makes, or may
attempt to make any other exposition. Certain of the Synod desired to hear
the Symbol of the Nicen Council recited, which the Senate and Judges granted
unto them.

Stapleton.
By this also it may easily be seen, wherein the duty and office of these
Civil Magistrates did stand. videl. to see the Bishops requests, of reading this
book or that book, this evidence or that evidence, put in execution. And so
it makes rather against M. Horn then with him.

M. Horn. The.50. Division. Page 32. a.
After that it was agreed upon by the whole Synod, that Dioscorus should be
deposed, Act. 3, 630. Bisshoppes. (.146.) confess the Princes supremacy in
Ecclesiastical causes.

The.146, Untruth. most ridiculous, a^ shall appear.


the Synod vvriteth unto the Emperors Valentinianus and Martianus, saying in
this form: Grievous diseases neadeth both a strong medicine and a wise
Physician: For this cause therefore, the Lord over al has appointed your
godliness as the best and chief Physician over the diseases of the whole world,
that you should heal them with fit medicines. And you most Christian
Emperors, receiving commandment from God above other men, have given
competent diligence for the churches, framing a medicine of concord unto the
Bishops (.147.) The.147. Untruth. In co^cealing the next sentence following
opening the whole matter.
This, thus in way of Preface said, they declare what they have done touching
Dioscorus, they shevve the cause and reasons that moved them thereunto: both
that the Emperor should consider his wickedness, and also the sincerity of
their sentence.

Stapleton.
Now lo M. Fekenham must needs yield and give over. For even the whole Counsel,
to the number of.630. Bishops does confess (says M. Horn) the princes
supremacy in causes ecclesiastical (it is well, it is not yet in all causes
Ecclesiastical) And therefore this note is fastened in the Margente, as it were
with a tenpeny nail, and yet al not worth a hedlesse pin. For I beseech you,
Master Horn, how can this notable conclusion of yours take any anchor hold
of any saiyngs of the Council by you here alleged? How far and how deaply
your sharp sight can pearce, I know not. But for my part I must confess my
self so blind, that I can see no cause in the world why ye should furnish your
margent with such a iolie note.

Well, I perceive every man can not see through a millstone: But yet either my
sight and my brain to, fails me, or all this great prouf stands in this,
that the Council calls the Emperors, the best and chief physicians over
the disseases of the world, for framing a medicine of concord to the Bisshops:
By my trowth, it is well and worshipfully concluded, and ye were worthy at the
least, to be made a poticarie for your labor. Saving that it is to be feared,
if ye should proceed on the body, as ye do now with the soul, ye would kill
many a poor man's body, with your old rotten drugges, as ye do now kill many
a soul with your pestiferous poisoned drawght of heretical potions, they take
at your hands. But now to answer to you, and to your so far fette phisike:
A Copy of M. Jewels rhetorike in his Reply, the 225. page.
I pray you M. Horn, why do ye cut of the tail of your own tale? Why do ye
not suffer the fathers to speak their whole mind? And to ruffle a little in M.
Jewels rhetorycke, what? were the fathers stayed with the choygnecoughe, and
forced to break of their matter and tale in the myddest? Mark well gentle
reader, and thou shall see the whole Counsel of.630. bisshops set to schole, and
kept in awe, and not suffered to utter one word more, then M. Horn will give
them leave. For the next words that immediately follow in the same matter are
these. Act. 3. fol. 861. col. 1.
Pontificibus co^cordiae medicina^ machinantes: vndique enim nos congregantes
omne commodastis auxilium, quatenus factae interimantur discordiae and paternae
fidei doctrina roboretur. For you (say the fathers to the Emperors) assembling
us from all places, have helped all that may be, to pacify and kill these
divisions and dissensions, and that the faith and doctrine of our fathers may
be strenghthened. What word is here M. Horn, that any thing towcheth your
purpose? Here is nothing, but that the counsel was assembled by their good
help, which as I have often declared, serves not your turn to make them
supreme heads. Now because throwgh their means the Council came together,
in the which a quietness was set in religion, the Council calls them
physicians, why the fathers call the Emperors the chief Phisitio^s.
yea and the chief: as they were chief in deed, in respect of their cyuill
authority wherewythe they did assiste the Council, and did help by this
ministry of theirs, not by any judicial sentence, or other Ecclesiastical
act (which ye shall never show) to quiet and pacefie the great dissensions
then reigning and raging. And so were they physicians in deed, but the outward
not the inward physicians. The fathers were the inward physicians. They made
the very potion, for the disease. And because we are ons entered into the talk
of physicians, they were the very physicians of the soul. The scripture says
of the king: regem honorificate: honor the king, 1, Pet. 2. Ecclesiast. 38.

1. Timo. 5. Heb. 13. Ecclesi. 4.


yt says also of the physician: honora medicum. Honor the physician. But
what says yt of the priest? The priests, says S. Paul, that gouuerne
well are worthy of double honor: again, obey your rulers (meaning the
Ecclesiastical rulers) for they watch to give a reckoning for your sowles.
And the Ecclesiasticus says, humble thy soul to the priest. So that ye may
see M. Horn, the priests to be the true and highest physicians, as far
passing and exceeding the other physicians, as the soul passes and excedeth
the body: and then must the spiritual primacye needs remain in them. And
that do these Judges here even in this Action, expressly proteste and
confess against you. For they say touching the point of doctrine then in
question. Quod placuit reuerendo Concilio de sancta fide, ipsum nos doceat. Let
the Reverend Council it self teach us and infourme us, what is their pleasure
touching the holy faith: You see here, they took no suprem gouernemente in this
cause ecclesiastical, in determining, I say, the true faith: (as you will make
Princes believe they may and ought to do) they yet being the Emperors
deputies, but learned humbly of the holy Council, what their determination in
such matters was. Thus at the length your great mighty ^ost, is thwyghted to a
pudding pryck. Neither shall ye be able of al these.630. bishops to bring one,
that mayntained your pretensed supremacy. And when he proves yt to you good
reader by these 630. bisshops, or by any one of them I dare say M. Feke^ham
will take the oath, and so will I to. For it is as true, as the nobles gave
sentence to depose Dioscorus and others. Who is not, as yet deposed and that
will I prove by M. Horn him self: who says, that in this actio^ the whole
synod agreed, M. Horn contrary to him self in on leaf.
that Dioscorus should be deposed: and so full pretely does he call back that he
said not fyftene lines before: and proves him self, against him self, that
their saying was no sentence.

M. Horn. 51. Division. Page 32. b.
In the fourth Action, when the rehearsal of al things passed before was
done, the Judges and Senate asks if all the Bisshops agree: whereunto they
ansvvered yea, yea. The Synod had requested the Judges and the Senate, to make
suite to the Emperor for five Bisshops, which otherwise (.148.) The.148.
untruth. There is no such must in all the Council.
must be deposed, as was Dioscorus, which they did, and made this relation
unto the Synod: That the Emperor, perceiving the humble suite of the Synod,
does license them to determine touching the five, what they thought good:
admonishing them notwitsta^ding, to give good head what they did: for that they
must make an account to God of their doings.

Stapleton.
M. Horn would feign faste^ some ecclesiastical judgment, upon these lay
men, as the depositio^ of certain bishops: which he shall find, when he ca^ find
that they deposed Dioscorus. It is plain, says M. Horn, for the whole council
makes humble suyt, to the Emperor, to license the^ to determine towching five
bisshops, which otherwise Must be deposed, as Dioscorus was. Ha good M. Horn,
have ye found now at the length, a must? That is well and in high time espied
out of you, or else al these your great doi^gs must lie in the mire. But I
believe when we have al done, we shall find no must, but a plain mist, that ye
like a wily shrew, have cast before the eyes of the simple readers, to blind
the^ withal. If I say not true, the^ like a true man of your word point with
your finger, the leaf and line where, in all the acts of this counsel your must
lies. I am assured, that neither in the 4. actio^ whereby ye now plead, nor in
the.1. actio^, whereby ye have already pleaded (which both places spoke of those
five bishops) is any mutteri^g in the world of your musting. Truth it is that
in the first actio^, these senators, thowght it reasonable, that Dioscorus and
these five bishops, being the ringleaders of that wicked conuenticle at
Ephesus, should be deposed, but not by the way of any final or judicial
sentence, as ye fable. But as they thowght them worthy to be depryued, so
neither did they depryue the^, nor thought them selves or the Emperor mete
parsons to depryue them, but the council. A sancto concilio secundu^ regulas,
ab episcopali dignitate fieri alienos.

Page 831. col. 2.


And therefore immediately follows that they should be put, from all their
bishoply dignitye. But by whom M. Horn? A sancto Concilio: by the holy
council. And how I pray you? secundum regulas. According to the canons. Then
here stands the case. The Emperor, and not withowt cause, was in this
mind, that as they might and owghte by the Canons to have been depryued, so
that execution should have been done accordinglye: for example sake, as yt was
allredye done upon Dioscorus. And yet leaving the final determination (as
otherwise he could not choose, if he would follow the Canons by his deputies
alleged) to the Bishops. And this is the License ye falsely speak of. The
true meaning of the place by M. Horn alleged. Anno. 25. He^. 8. c. 19.
Sententiae vestrae permisit deliberare de Thalassio and quae vobis placuerint.
Fol. 872. col. 2. Liberatus. in Breuia. cap. 13. (...).

Quia consenserant in subscriptione epistolae Leonis, etc.


For proprely license it was none, neither does the latin word enforce it, but
that he permitted and suffered them to do therein their pleasure: which words
do not necessarily declare his ordinary authority to let them (as the Prince
may let your Convocation Decrees by act of Parliament) but only the geauing
over and yelding to the Fathers, in that matter, from his own mind and
sentence, which he thought good and reasonable. The Fathers on the other side,
thought not best to exact the rigor and extremity of the Canons, but seeing
these five were heartily penitent, and had subscribed to the Epistle of Leo,
which before they refused, and for fear of a great schism, as Liberatus
notes, that happily might by this rigorouse dealing ensue, took the milder
way, and suffered them to remain in their dignity, and in the Council with
them. See now M. Horn, if this be not rather a mist then a must, a dark
mist, I say, mete for thieves as Homer says, and not mete, as he says, nor
acceptable to the shepherd. How unmeet then for you M. Horn, that takes vpn
you to be the shepherd and pastor of so many thousand souls, that should keep
your flock, from al such hurtefull mystes of false doctrine? Yea to feed them
with the same, and to make him believe, and that by the authority of this
honorable Council, that ye feed them well, and that ye must so feed them. And
yet, lo, like a blind Prophet ye have said truer then ye wist of: saying they
must be deposed as Dioscorus was. For Dioscorus was not deposed at all, by
those whom ye fable to have geauen sentence. Again see what falls out
otherwise against you. For if the lay judges deposed in the first action
Dioscorus, Dicta pa. 931. col. 2. Videtur nobis secundum quod Deo placitum est,
iustum esse si placuerit diuinissimo and pijssimo Domino nostro, eidem poenae
Dioscorum reverend. episcopum Alexandriae, and Iuuenalem reverend, episcopum
Hie^os. and Thalassium etc.
they deposed also these five. For all comes under one trade and course of
words. And thus every way ye walk in a miste, wandering pitifully to and
fro, ye can not tell whyther.

M. Horn.52. Division. Page 32. b.
In the fifth Action, the Judges willed the Synod, to read those things,
which were agreed upon touching the Faith: vvhereabout began a great
contention, one part of them allowing, an other sort disallovving that was
read amongst them. The judges seeing the exclamations and confusion that was
amongst them, appoints a Comitty, choosing forth of sundry parts a
certain number to go aside with the judges, to make a resolution. When they
prevailed nothing, they threatened the whole Synod, that they would signify
these (.149.) The 149. untruth. The word disordered, levvdely added to the
text, to make color of reproach.
disordered clamours unto the Emperor, which they did. The Emperor immediately
of his (.150.) The.150. untruth. Not by any his supreme authority but at the
bisshops choice and pleasure, as shall appear.
Supreme authority, appointed the order of Committies, which the judges had
devised before: giving them in commandment, that going aside by them selves,
they should co^sult and conclude a truth in Faith, with such plainness, that
there might no more doubts arise thereof, whereunto al should agree. The
Synod obeyed, and followed the Emperors direction, and the Committies with
the Judges goes a side into a secret place, makes conference, concludes,
and comes again into the Synod, and recites their determination* whereunto
the whole Synod gave their consent, and so the Judges commands, that this
their definition should be shevved unto the Emperor.

Stapleton.
Ye show nothing that either the Emperor or his deputyes, made any definition
of the faith. Now the^ if the Fathers could not agree, the emperor did well to
find out some means by committies to bring them to agremente, which is no
spiritual matter. And so ye come not nighe to that ye should have proved by a
great deal. But let us a little consider the manner of these Co^mitties, the
cause and the end thereof: and we shall see M. Horn quyte overthrown with his
own sway, and a most evident argument of the Popes supremacy. At the beginning
of the fyfte Action a form of the faith being openly read, all the Bisshops
cried, praeter Romanos and aliquos Orientales, beside the Romans and some of
the East: Council. Chalced. Act. 5. pa. 879. col. 2
Definitio omnibus placet. The determination pleases al.

Upon this when they could not agree the Popes Legate stood up, and said. If
these men agree not to the letters of the Apostolic and most blessedman Pope
Leo, command it that we have them copied out that we may return home, and
there keep a Council. The cause of the Co^mitties made in the v. Action.
For this lo was the cause of all that garboyle. Dioscorus with Eutyches were
already condemned: the Nestorians in like manner. And the form of faith after
a sort was agreed upon, but not in such sort as in the Popes letters it was
conceived. And against the foorme of the Popes letters all the Bisshoppes of
Egypt, of Asia, of Illiricum, Ponthus and Thracia, very hotlye resisted,
affirming that the definition was otherwise perfect enoughe. Which the Romans
and certain of the East Bisshppes as earnestly denied. Hereupon the judges to
make the matter come to an agreement, made first a Committy in this sort: that
of all the foresaid provinces, three should be chosen, and they together with
the Romans and six of the East Bisshoppes should confer a part. But this
order being misliked, and the greater number of Bisshoppes still crying to have
it pass, as it was first conceived, not passing upon the form conceived in
the Popes letters, the judges asked those that so cried, Page 880. col. 1.
whether they allowed the letters of Pope Leo, or no? When they answered, Yea:
and that they had already subscribed thereunto, the Judges inferred. Let
then that be added to the definition which is in those leters comprised. The
Bisshops of Aegipt and other crying always to the contrary, the debate was
signified to the Emperor. The Emperor sent back again, that they should
take the order of Committye appointed, or if that liked them not, Si vobis hoc
no^ placet, singuli fide^ sua^ etc. Si autem neque hoc velit vestra sa^ctitas,
cognoscite quia in partibus Occide^talibus fieri habet synodus, eo quod etc.
then they should make an other Co^mittye by their Metropolitanes, and every
man declare his mind, that so the matter might come to an end. But (says the
Emperor) if your Holiness will none of this neither, then know you
certainelye, that you shall come to a Council in the west parts, seeing you
will not here agree. And this also was that the Popes Legates before required.
And the Bisshoppes of Illyricum as excusing them selves, cried. Qui
contradicunt, Romam ambulent. These which do not agree, let them walk to Rome.

Had Master Horn and his fellows been in that case, they would have cried:
what have we to do with Rome, or with that forayne Prelate, the Pope? But the
Bisshoppes and Fathers of those days knew a better obedience to the Sea
Apostolic. And therefore in the end the Popes Legates with a few other of
the East, prevailed against all the rest of Egypt and Asia, of Illyricu^,
Pontus and Thracia: and endited the form of their definition of the faith,
according to the tenor of Pope Leo his letters, inserting his very words to
their definition. Otherwise as the Emperor and the Popes Legates before
threatened, they should al have trotted to Rome, and there have finished the
Council. Such was the Authority and preeminence of that Apostolic See of Rome,
and so well declared in this fifte Action out of which M. Horn concealing the
whole issue, order, and cause of the debate, thought only by a simple
commyttye, to prove his Supreme Government in the prince. Thou see now
gentle Reader, that by the prince his own confession, by the Legates
protestation, and by the end and issue of the whole Action, the Superiority
rested in the Church of Rome, and in a Council to be had there, in case they
would not presently agree. So hard it is for Master Horn to bring any one
Authority, that makes not directly against him, and manifestly for us.

M. Horn. The.53. Division. Page 33. a.
The Emperor comes into the Synod place, in his own person, with
Pulcheria, his nobles, and Senators* and makes unto the Synod an oration, of
this effect. He cares for nothing so much, as to have all men rightly
persuaded in the true Christian faith: He declares the occasions, It was
because he would (...) Doctrini^ Patrum. The doctrine of Fathers: wi^h you
leave out.
why he sommoned the Synod: He commands that no man be so hardy, hereafter
to hold opinion, or dispute of the Christian faith, otherwise than was
decreed in the first Nice^ counsel, he charge the^ therefore, that all
partaking, co^ten^io^, and covetousness laid apart the only truth may appear
to al men. He declares his coming into the Synod, to be for none other cause,
the^ (.151.) The 151. untruth, in dissembling a great part of the Sentence.
to confirm the faith, and to remove from the people in time to come, all
dissension in Religion. And last of al, he protests his whole care, and
study, that al people may be brought into an unity, and vnifourme agreement in
pure religion, by true and holy doctrine. The chief Notarie humbly asks of
the Emperor, if it vvil please him to hear their Ergo. it was before defined
w^^hout the emper^r royal assent.
definition read: The Emperor wills that it should be recited openly: he
enquireth of them al, if every man consented thereunto: they answer, that it
is agreed upon by all their consentes. Whereunto they add many acclamations,
commend^ng the worthiness of his Emperial government, co^cluding: By the O
worthy Emperor, the right faith is confirmed, heresies banished, peace
restored, and the Church reformed. After these acclamations, the Emperor
does openly declare unto the Synod a For execution of the Counsel.
statute, which he makes to cut of and put away from thencefoorth, al manner
occasion of contention about the true faith, and holy Religion. The whole
Synod desires the Emperor, to dissolve the council, and to (.152.) The 152.
untruth. No such words in the Acte^
give the^ leave to depart: whereunto the Emperor would not consent, but
(.153.) The 153. untruth, as before
commands that none of them depart.

Stapleton.
Here is nothing, whereupon ye should frame any conclusion of Supremacy.
Concerning Marcians oration we have spoken somewhat before: and now ye give us
more occasion, especially to note your true and accustomable faith, in the true
rehearsal of your Author. For if ye had not here maimed and mangled your own
allegation, ye had made your self a full answer, for all this your bible babble,
to prove the Emperors supremacy, for that they called or were present in the
Councels. We (says this noble Emperor) are come into this present Council,
How and why Princes are present in Councels.
not to take upon us or to practice any power therein, but to strenghten and
confirm the faith, therein following the example of the religious prince
Constantine. By which words he declares, that the Emperors authority and
power takes no place in the Council, to determyn or define any thing (which
neither is found of the doings of Constantine, or this Marcian, or of any
other good Prince) but only by civil penalties, to confirm and strenghthen the
decrees, as did Constantine, and as this Emperor did also, as appears by his
words spoken to the Synod, Fol. 893. col. 2.
in this sixth action by you recited. These words of Marcian ye have cut from
the residue of the sentence: least otherwise it should have by Marcian him
self appeared that ye were but a glosar, a Popes glosar I say, as your brother
Mollineus is: when ye wrote of the five Bishops, Multum quide^ estis itinere
fatigati, labore^ perfere^tes. veruntamen sustinete tres adhuc aut quatuor
dies. Et prese^titibus magnifice^tiss. nostris iudicib. quaecu^que vultis
mouete, competens aedepturi solatium. Nullus vestru^ antequa^ perfecti termini
ex omnib. profera^^ur a S. co^cilio discedat. Fol. 894. col. 1.
that otherwise must have been deposed. Concerning the staiyng of the Fathers,
that would have departed, which ye enforce as a thing material, if ye had not
followed your accustomable guise of dismembring your Author, ye should have
found a small matter. Ye have (says Marcian to the Fathers) ben much weried by
your journey: and have taken great pains. Yet bear you, and stay you for
iij. or.iiij. days longer: And our honorable Judges being present, move you
what matter your heart desires, and ye shall not fail of convenient comfort.
But let no man depart, til all things be fully finished. What leave is there
asked here to depart, or what commandment is made to stay and tarry? No, no,
M. Horn: Princes were not the^ so Imperial over Bishops, as your dissolute
heresies have caused of late some to be.

M. Horn. The.54. Division. page 33. b.
Bassianus, of late the Bishop at Ephesus, co^plaineth unto the Emperor, to
direct his letters to the Synod, to have his cause heard. The Emperor
commands the Synod to hear the matter. The Judges commands Stephanus
Bishop of Ephesus, to make answer unto Bassianus his complaint. After due
examination had by the Judges, openly in the Synod in this co^trouersy, the
Judges asked of the Synod, what they judged to be done. The Bisshops adjudged
Bassianus to be restored. But the Judges appointed by the Emperor, would not
(.154.) The.154 Untruth. They neither allowed nor disallovved any sentence of
the Council, but shevved only their advise and mind.
allow that sentence, but deemed neither of them both worthy to occupy that
Bisshoprike, and that there should be a third chosen, and admitted to that see,
to the which (155) The.155. Untruth. It was no judgment at all.
judgment the whole synod did accord. After the end of this Council, the
Emperor does confirm the determination thereof by his public Decree.

Stapleton.
M. Horn will not leave his laical judgment so: (being marvelous propense and
inclined that way) belike because, he is become by the Canons a lay man him
self, through his unlawful marriage: and therefore yet ones again, they by
their judgment, if we will credit M. Horn, do reuerse the judgment of the
whole Synod, in the cause of Bassianus and Stephanus. In deed, if M. Horn
could prove, that the whole council had first given sentence, here had been
somewhat for him with some good countenance, to have set forth and furnished
his new primacy withal. But now neither the whole Synod gave yet judgment in
the cause, neither was it any judgment given by the lay men, more then was
before against Dioscorus. For lo, M. Horn, they say, nobis videtur, it
seems to us. But will ye see it is no sentence? Then I pray you mark well
what follows. Act. 11. page 915. col. ^ Totu^ aute^ co^cilio sancto
relinquimus quatenus sententiam quae in haec causa fuerit visa, depromat.
After they had told their mind and opinion, they add and say: But we leave
the whole matter to the Council, to give what sentence, it shall please them
in this matter. Ye will say, yet the whole Counsel followed the advice of the
judges. Then it appears it was but an advise, no sentence that they gave
forth before. Else it were marvel, if so suddenly they went from their own
determination. But will ye see, how wisely this matter is handled of M. Horn?
If the first was a resolute and a final sentence of the whole Counsel, what
authority had the lay men to infringe it? Or how ca^ ye say they did infringe
it, when they left afterward the whole determination thereof to the Counsel?
Thus ye see every way, that the more ye strive and strugle in this matter, and
with this counsel, the more ye mesh and inta^gle your self. But perchance as
ye see, or may see if ye be not blind, that ye are in the pytte or fast in
the mire: so ye see not how to get out. And ye will say, as ye say and truly
to, that the Judges asked the Synod, In talibus sanct. Co^c. contingit
freque^ter, vnum ex praesentibus reverend, episcopis aliquid dicere, and quod
ab vno dictu^ est, ta^quam ab oi^bus simul dicatur, and subscribatur and
intelligatur. hoc ab exordio subsecutu^ est in tantum vt vno dice^te.
scribamus, sancta Synodus dixit. Act. 1. pa. 791. col. 2.
what was to be don, and that they adjudged Bassianus to be restored. I grant
ye Sir: ye play now the true reporter: but either ye do not, or will not
understand that which ye report. For ye shall find a rule, and that even in
this Synod, that sometime yt is written (by the Notary) the Synod says, when
the whole Synod says not, but some of the Synod. And ye being so well
trauayled by your self, or your friends in this Synod, should have considered
this rule, necessary to bring you out of the pytte of error ye are fallen in.
Well perchance, as ye lack no courage, ye will not so give over, and will say
the matter fares not so here: and when yt is said The Judges asked the Synod,
the true understanding of the place by M. Horn alleged.
yt must be taken for the whole Synod. Now you put me to my shifte in deed:
But I trust to shift whith you well enough. What say ye the^ to Liberatus, by
you often reheresed, that says as I say, that the whole Synod did not agree,
that Bassianus should be restored, but part of the Synod: and therefore the
matter was put over to an other meting, at which meti^g the whole Synod
uniformly agreed, that as well Bassianus as Stephanus should be removed? In case
this answer will not content you I will I am assured, if any most reasonable
answer will content you, set you over to such witnesses, as your self hitherto
have best liked and sought all your help and aid for your supremacy at their
hands: I mean your Judges and senators the Emperors deputies. For whereas ye
allege the matter, as finally determined in the.11. action, the very same
matter was resumed in the.12. action. Because (say they) that after our often
moving the matter to you, and requiring, that ye would give sentence
concerning the bisshoprike of the holy Church of Ephesus, Gloriosissimi iudices
dixerunt. Quoniam sepe nobis interloque^tibus and pescentibus proferri
sententiam de episcopatu sancta Ecclesiae in Epheso co^stituto, perfecta
respo^sio no^ est data, Venerabile etc.

Act. 12 pa. 916. col. 3.


there is no perfytte and resolute answer made: Let the holy gospel etc. I
trust by this time M. Horn, ye will wisely give over this matter of Bassianus
and of all the residewe of this Council, that ye have unjustly pleaded upon:
and require of us to believe you no better, then ye can show cause. Unless ye
will have us upon your bare word to credit you. which I think wise men, will
not be to hasty to do, except ye can show some as good commission, as the
Apostles had. For the bringing forth whereof, we are content to give you a
good long day. As for this council whereupon ye would seem your proufs should
rest, ye have not showed yt to us by any good and clear light, but as ye
have done before, the Nicen and Ephesine, very obscurely and imperfectly.

The.14. Chapter. Containing evident proufes out of the Chalcedon Council, for
the Popes and bishops Supremacy, in causes ecclesiastical.
NOw good Reader thowghe M. Horn be sufficiently already answered for the
solutions of his arguments, as we need not greatly to stay here longer, yet if
we can show you no fayrer nor clearer light, for the illustratio^ and
confirmation of our assertion, and that even from this council, then M. Horn
has don for his: than for my part, I shall yield to M. Horn, and so I suppose
M. Fekenha^ will to. Wherefore following M. Horns trace and steps we will ro^ne
over the Acts of the said Counsel, though wonderful long and tedious, and
compendiously gather some material thing for our side.

Act. 1. pa. 737. col. 1. b Paschasio and Luce^tio reverend. Episcopis, and
Bonifacio religiosiss. presbytero tene^tibus locu^ sanctiss. et reuerendiss.
^rchiepis. almae vrbis Romae Leonis Anatolio etc. Act. 1. pa 741. co. 1. a^
Quia Synodu^ facere ausus est sine authoritate Romanae sedis: quod nu^qua^ rite
factu^ est, nec fieri licuit Rome head of all Churches.

Act. 1. p. 740. co 2 c Romam ^cclesiaru^ omnium caput. Act. 1. page 741. col.
1. a.


First then to begin with the first Sessio^, it is most certain, that the Popes
Legates, be named and placed before al other Bishops and Patriarchs, though one
of them was but a Priest and no Bishop. Here shall ye find the wicked B. of
Alexandria called to an account for mainteining the doings of a Council,
whereunto the B. of Rome gave no consent or authority, which (as it is avouched
there) was never lawful to do. Here shall ye find and hear Rome called the Head
of all Churches. Here shall ye find that Pope Leo gave commandment to his
Legates, that they should not suffer Dioscorus to sit among the other Bishops,
but to stand as a person accused, and defendant, and so the Legates told the
Senators, and that in case they would suffer the matter to go other wise, that
they should be excommunicated: and thereupon he was commanded to sit in the
middle a part from the rest. Here shall ye find that the learned Bishop of
Cyrus Theodoretus, deposed by Dioscorus and Maximus his own Patriarche, was
received and placed among the bishops, Euag: lib. 2. ca. 16. Dioscorus
commanded by Leo to sta^^, and not to be placed among the Bisshoppes.

Universal Bishop.


because Leo had restored him. Here shall ye find that nor lay men, nor
Priests, have voice in the Council, but Bishops only. Here it appears why the
Civil Magistrate is present in the Council: not to geaue sentence, or to Act.
1. pa. 742. a. Recipiens locum a Sanctiss. episcopo inclytae vrbis Romae.

The Pope restores Thedoretus the Bisshoppe.

Act. 1. pa. 775. col. 1. a. Petrus Presbyt. dixit. No^ est meu^ subscribere,
episcoporu^ ta^tu^ est. It appertains to Bisshoppes only to subscribe in
Council.


bear the greatest sway there in matters Ecclesiastical, as M. Horn
imagines: but, as it appears by Theodosius the Emperors commission given to
the Earl Elpidius, to see there be no tumulte, Nullu^ fieri tumultu^
permittere, sed si que^ videretis co^turbationibus and tumultui studente^, ad
les^ione^ sanctae fidei, hu^c cusiodiae mancipare, and ad nostram perferre
notitiam and causam quide^ ordine prouenire, interesse autem iudicio, et opera^
dare celere^ and circumspectam probationem a sancta Synodo fieri. Act. 1. pa.
744. b.
and in case he see any troblesome or tumultuous person, to the hurt and
hinderance of the Catholic faith, to imprison him, and to certify The Emperor
of him, to see the matters proceed orderly, to be present at the judgment
giving and to procure that the Council spedily and circumspectly prove their
matters. In this Sessio^ ye shall find that not only Flauianus, that godly
Bishop and Patriarche of Constantinople wrongfully deposed by Dioscorus,
appealed to Rome, but that Eutyches also that Archeheretique, iustlye condemned
by Flauianus, for his relief, pretended an appellation made to Leo by him
self.

In the second Session Leo his Epistle was read, the Council cries out, Why
lay men are present in Councils.
Petrus per Leonem loquutus est. Peter has spoken out of Leos mouth. But of
all, the third Session is so freighted with ample and plain testimonies for
the Ecclesiastical Primacy, Act. 1. p. 790. col. 1. c. and 823. col. 2.
that I must rather seek to restrain and moderat them, then to amplify or
enlarge them.

In this third Session, Appeals to Rome from Constantinople.
Pope Leo is called the universal Archbishop, the universal Patriarche, the
Bisshopee of the universal Church, Act. 2. page 834 col. 1. b.
the Pope of the universal Church the Catholic or universal Pope. And now must
M. Jewel, if he be a true man of his word, yield and subscribe: Peter speaks
in Leo.
being answered even Universal Bishop, Act. 3. pa. 839 col. 2. b. 840. col. 2.
b. Universal Patriarch. pa. 842 col. 2. b. 844. col. 2. a. Vniuersalis Ecclesia
Papae. 858. col. 1. b. Catholicum Papam Leonem. pa. 835. col. 2 a.
by the very precise words and terms of his own, though peuishlye and
folishly proposed, question: The pope universal bishop.

M. Jewel must subscribe.

Act. 3. page 847. col. 2. b. etc.

The popes legates give ^e^^e^ce against Dioscorus the Patria^ch of Alexandria.

Leo per nos and per praesente^ Synodum, vna cum ^er beatiss. and o^ni laud
digno beato Petro Apostolo, qui est petra and crepido catholicae ecclesiae, and
ille qui est rectae fidei fundame^tum, nudauit eu^ ta^ episcopatus dignitate
qua^ etiam ab omni sacerdotali alienauit ministerio.


In this sessio^ the Popes Legates pronounce sentence against Dioscorus, the
Patriarche of Alexandria, and do, by the Authority of Leo and S. Peter, (who
is called there, the Rock and the top clyffe of the Catholic Church) depryue
him of all priestlye ministry and bisshoply dignity, for that he communicated
with Eutyches being by a Council condemned, for that he presumed to
excommunicate Pope Leo, and being thrice per^mptorely summoned to the Council
would not come. And how are ye now M. Horn and your fellows to be countted
Bisshoppes, that refuse, the authority of the general Council of Trente, and
durst no more show your face there, then durst Dioscorus at Chalcedo? And can
no better defend the deposition of the Catholic Bisshops in England, then
could Dioscorus, the deposition of Flauianus at Ephesus? And to say the truth,
ye can much less defend your self. And where is now your act of parliament,
that annichilatteh and makes void al Ecclesiastical Authority, saving of such
persons as are inhabitants, within the realm? Dioscorus was a fool that could
find no such defense for him self: Our protestant bishops are in the same
case as Dioscorus was.
or else he neded not to have passed a button for the Council of Chalcedo:
Unless happily we think we have a special privilege, and as we be environed,
and as it were walled up, from the world by the great Ocea^ sea, as the poet
writes of us: Et penitus toto diuisos orb Brita^nos: so we may take our
selves to be exe^pted and closed up from the faith and religion of all
Catholic people in the world. Act. 3. pa. 858. col. 1. b. 835. col. 2. b.

Paschasius vice beatissimi Leonis presidens suscripsi, dict. page 858.

The popes legate president of the Council.

Act. 3. page 867. col. 1. b.

Vocis beati petri orbi co^stitutus interpres. The council co^^e^seth ^eo to be
their head and ruler.

Quibus tu quidem, sicut membris caput praeeras, in his qui tuum tenebant
ordinem beneuolentiam praeseferens. Imperatores vero ad ornandum decentissime
praesidebant, sicut Zorozabel and Jesus Ecclesiae Jerusalem aedificationem
renouare circa dogmata adni^e^tes. Act. 3. in relatione synodi ad Leone^ pa.
867. col. 1. Act. 2. page 867. col 2. a. Cui vineae custodia a saluatore
commissa est. Act. 3. page ^68 col. 2. a. Rogamus igitur and ^uis decretis
nostrum honora iudic^u^, et sicut nos cu^i^i in bon^s adiecimus consonantiam,
sic et firmit as tua filijs (quod dece^) adim^leat, et mox Omnem volis gestorum
vim insinuauimus ad comprobationem nostrae sinceritatis et ad eorum quae a
nobis gesta sunt, firmitatem et consonantiam.


But let us go forth with owre matter: Ye shall then find in this third
session, that the Popes Legate was presidente of the Council for Leo, and
subscribed before all other. In this session the whole Counsel calls Leo the
interpretour of S. Peter's voice to al people. In this session the whole Counsel
says that Leo, the^ far of at Rome, was president and ruler of the Counsel,
as the Head is ruler of the body. And that the^perors were preside^ts there
most dece^tly, to adorn and set forth the same, end^uoring to renew the
building of the Church of Jerusalem concerning matters of faith, as did
Zorobabel and Jesus in the old law. And this place only were sufficient, to
answer your whole book, and to show either your ignorance or froward
quarrelling in making such a stir and business, for Princes authority in
Councils. In this sessio^ the whole synod says, that the keeping of the
vineyard (that is of the whole Church) was committed of God to L^o. In this
session the whole Council, thowghe Leo his Legates were present, and confirmed
al things that there passed towching matters of faith, does yet nevertheless
pray Leo him self also to confirm their decre^s. And here might the Author of
your Apology Master Horn, if yt pleased him, as merely have iested and
scoffed against these.630. Fathers, as he does against the Fathers of the late
Counsel at Trente, for the clause: salua Apostolicae sedis authoritate: Here
might be demanded of these.630. Fathers, what they neaded in this case, the
matter being resolved upon by the whole Council, yea by his own deputies to, to
send to Rome to Pope Leo, to have their decrees yet further confirmed? Here
also might be demanded of those 630. The childish toys of the Englis he
Apology.
Fathers, whether yt were not a mere folly to think the holy ghost posted to
Rome: that if he staggered or stayed in any matter, The Emperor Marcian desires
Leo to confirm the fathers decrees.

Epist. 59. and 60.


he might there take Council, of an other holy ghost better learned, with such
other childish or rather Jewish toys. Neither the Counsel only, but Marcian
al^o the Emperor prayed Leo, to confirm that which there was concluded of the
faith. In this sessio^ the Senators (that ye would neades have to be the chief
Judges) desire they may be taught of the fathers of this Council such things
as appertain to the faith, The Senators require to be taught of the fathers.
as of them that should give a reckoninge as well for their sowles,
Scientesigitur quia, and Deo ratione^ reddituri estis tam pro animabus singuli
vestri, quam and pro nostris omnibus qui and doceri, quae ad religionem
pertinent, recte desideramus. Act. 3. page 832. col. 2. a.

Eu^ebius the bishop besecheth the Council he may be restored to his bishoprik.
Et dum adhuc in memoria retinetis, quae antea inter nos and praesatum Dioscorum
acta sunt, decernite omnia quae aduersus nos gesta sunt viribus carere: and
nihil nobis ea monumenta quae unjust co^tra nos facta sunt nocere. Habere vero
nos and sacerdotalem dignitatem etc. Quod impetrantes incessanter gratias
agamus vestrae sanctitati.


as for their own sowles.

Now where as ye catch as yt were a certain ankerhold of the supplication of
Eusebius of Dorileum: consider I beseache you his supplication to the Council
too, and weighe them both with the balance of indifferente judgment. I pray
and most humbly beseech your holiness holy father: (says he) to have mercy on
us. And while the things passed betwixt Dioscorus and me, be yt in fresh
remembrance, decree you all those doings to be void, Act. 3. page 836. col.
1. a.

The authority to give sentence of depositio^ or excommunication given ^o the
bishops by God.


and that those things which wrongfully passed against us, may not be
prejudicial or hurtful to us, and that we may be restored to our bisshoply
dignity again: which if we obtain, we shall for ever give thanks to your
holiness. In this session ye shall find, that it was no final or resolutory
sentence that the Senators gave against Dioscorus, Ioannes episcop.
Germaniciae ad Dioscoru^ Senatus aduersus tua^ reuerentia^ promulgauit
sente^tiam si hoc placuisset sanctissimis episcopis quibus hanc infer a
Domino Deo creditum est.
but a declaration of their mind and resolution: the full authority
notwithstanding remaining in the Bishops to whom (and not to the Senatorus) God
had given authority to give such kind of sentences. Further now, though I have
already sufficiently showed the insufficie^cy and feebleness of that your weak
collection: yet because ye have so honorably adorned your marge^t, with no
less the^ 630. Fathers confessing your supremacye, and al for that they call
the^peror the best and chief physician: Act. 3. page 846. col. 1. c.
I will be so bold, thowgh but a poor and a seco^dary phisitio^, to say
somewhat more to your great and far fetched, neither good theological, nor good
phisical argument, and to return your wise phisical reason upon your own head
by the very same fathers, and the very same place that your self allege. For
even in the same page, it follows, M. Horns mighty great phisical note
returned upon his own head.
that perchance Dioscorus might baue obtained pardon, of those his so great
and excessive enormities if being as the case required throughlye poenitent he
had sowght for a medicine at the hands of the Council. Et sort super tantis
ac talibus iniquitatibus veniam adipisci potuisset, si per dignam poenitentiam
adscisceret medicinam ab hoc universally Concilio. Vide and sequentia, Act 3.
page 861. col. 1. c.
But because he endured in obstinacy, he was cut away by deposition and
excommunication from the Church, as a rotten and pestiferouse member, to save
and preserve the residewe of the body. Behold master Horn, the fathers are
now the physicians that might have cured Dioscorus (if he had been curable) of
his disease: Marcian confesses the fathers to be the physicians.

Tandem remedia culpabilis erroris inuenta sunt. and mox: Sacerdotes quid
obseruari in religione debeat, perspicua definitione docuerunt. Act. 3. page
863. col. 1. c.

These fathers enquire of faith by Pope Leo his authority.

Fidem diligenter inquirit authoritate beatiss. Leonis. Act. 3. page 865. col.
2. a.

Sancta and magna synodo habente regularem potestatem. Act. 3. page 865. col.
2. a.

The Emperors by their law can not condemn them whose belief the council
allows.

??? Quia non possunt sacerdotes constitutione damnari, quos synodicum ornat
super conseruanda religione iudicium.

Act. 3. page 865. b. Act. 4. page 872. col. 1. c.

Qui a vobis damnatus est ignora^te diuo Vertice, and nobis. Dioscorus
condemned without themperours knowledge or his deputies.

Act. 3. pa. 837. co. 1. b Obse^ro vt iudices nunc sint praesen^es. Quando
quaedam regularia examinantur, neque iudices neque aliquos laicosinteresse
oportet.

Act 3. page 838. col. 2. c.

Euag. li. 2. c. 16. Niceph. li. 15. cap. 30. Lay me^ ought not to be in the
counsel when matters of reformation are in hand

Propter fidem no^ est damnatus Dioscorus. Act. 5. pa. 880. col. 1. a.
D^oscorus was not condemned for matters of faith.

??? The bisshops that did not agree, be threatened to be sent to Rome.

Act. 5. p. 880. col. 2. a Qui contradicunt, Romam ambulent. The fathers give
up the sentence, not the Emperor or his agentes.

Act. 5 page 882. Desinimus igitur. etc. Si episcopi fuerint, alienos ab
episcopatu, and clericos a clero: si vero monachi aut laici fuerint,
anathematizari.

Act. 5. page 885. Vniuersalis Synodus discordiam, quae aduersus rectam and
catholicam fide^ exorta est, expelli fecit. etc. Act. 6. pa. 889. co. 1. c

The form of the Popes Legates subscription.

Paschasinus episcopus vice domini mei beatiss. atque Apostolici vniuersalis
Ecclesiae Papae vrbis Romae Leonis Synodo praeside^s statui, consensi, and
subscripsi. Wherein stands Marcian the Emperors co^firmatio^. page 893. col.
2. a. The Pope confirms the election of the Bishop of Antioche.

Sanctus ac beatiss. Papa Episcopatum Maximi Episcopi Antiochenae Ecclesiae
confirmauit.

Act. 7. p. 896. c. 1. a. Rome ever had the primacie.

Roma semper habuit primatum.

Act. 10. pa. 910. c. 1. Act. 12. page 916. Act. 16. pa. 938. co. 1. c The Pope
an inuicible champion against all errors. Vnde nobis impenetrabile in o^ni
errore propugnatore^ Deus prouidit Roma. Ecclesiae Papam.

Act. 16. p. 940. c. 2. a. Act. 16. p. 938. c. 1. c. The Pope vvoulde not
allow the decree of the Council concerning the auauncing of the patriarch of
Consta^ti. Leo. ep. 59. and 61. ad Iuuenale^ and alios episcop. Chalced.
Synodi. Leo. ep. 71. ad Anat.


and notwithstanding he was the captain of that myscheuouse co^uenticle at
Ephesus, he might if he had sowght for it accordingly, have found perchance
favor, not at the Emperors, but at the councels hands, and neither been
deposed nor excommunicated. Yea the Emperor Marcia^ him self confesses, that
these fathers found out a remedy for those nawghtie errors. And how I pray
you? Because they made a plain and an open determination, what was to be
observed concerning faith and religion. Thus at the length your gay and fresh,
your mighty and notable note of.630. Fathers confessing your physical supremacy
is not worth one pipte nutte. In this session ye shall find, that this most
famous Council did diligently enquire upon matters of faith: By whose
authority M. Horn think you? By the Emperors? Nay. But by the authority of
the most blessed Leo: as the Emperors Valentinian and Marcia^ themselves
confess. I trust now also ye will the better believe these.630. Fathers,
saying to Dioscorus, that they had the regular and ordinary authority against
him. What say you now, for your self and your fellows? How will ye
maintain the unlawful deposinge of the Catholic Bisshoppes, and other in the
realm by by your civil and parliament authority, seeing that the Emperors
Valentinia^ and Marcian write, that those Bisshops can not by themperours law
be condemned, whom the ecclesiastical Counsel commends for true religion?
Many things else are to be said out of this Session, but I will break of, and
shortly run over the residewe: noting this only for the.4. Session, that it
is there declared, that Dioscorus was deprived and excommunicated to, by the
Popes Legates and the Council: the Emperors deputies, which in all other
Sessions were present, being then absent, and without themperours or their
knowledge. Which gives a check mate to all your supremacy, and to all your
book withal: yea and that with a seely pawn of one only line. This is so
declared as I say, in the fourth session: but the sentence passed against
Dioscorus in the third sessio^, Dioscorus not daring to show his face, and
requiring, that themperours vicegerents might be there present: to whom
answer was made, that when matters of correction and reformation are in hand,
as these were (for Dioscorus was not condemned for heresy and matters of
faith, but for his disobedience against the pope, the council, and the canons)
neither the Judges, nor any lay men owght to be present. Which answer M.
Horn, for all your heuing and sheuing, against the ecclesiastical
reformation, gives an other paune mate also in one short sentence, to a great
part of your book, and to al such ecclesiastical visitation as is given to the
prince, by act of parliament.

In the fyfte sessio^ a little variance fell among the Fathers for the framing
of the final sentence: whereupon the Senators said, that if they did not agree,
a Council should be kept in the west parties: meaning at Rome. The Bishops of
Illyricum cried (as I have before showed) they that do not agree, let them
trudge to Rome. In this session when they were all afterward agreed, the final
and resolute sentence of the matter in controversy, with a denunciation of
deposition and curse against such as should repine against it, is pronounced
by the Bishops, without any voice or consent of the emperor, or of his age^ts.

In the sixth session was present Marcian the emperor with the noble and
virtuous Empress Pulcheria, to whom Aetius the Archedeaco^ of Constantinople
declared, that now the discord lately risen among the people in matters of
faith, was pacified by the holy Council: and then read to him their final
determination and sentence. Unto the which sentence were annexed the
subscripions of all the Bishops: And first of the Popes vicegerent, after the
form of these words.

I Bishop Paschasine President of the Council, in the stead of my most
blessed Lord; and the Apostolical Pope of the universal Church, of the City of
Rome, Leo, have determined, consented and subscribed. Then follow the
subscriptions of his two colleages, one of them being no bishop: after who^
Anatolius the Patriarch of Constantinople, and so other Patriarchs and
bisshops. Marcia^ seeing the full and uniform consent of al these.630. bishops,
does allow and confirm their decree, and stre^gtheneth it with a civil and
political punishment appointed against the tra^sgressours. And in this
properly rests the Princes office and authority, in affairs ecclesiastical.
In the seventh session it is declared, that the election of Maximus bishop of
Antioche was confirmed by Pope Leo. In the tenth Actio^, it is openly avouched,
quia missi Apostolici semper in Synodis prius loqui and co^firmare soliti sunt.
That the Popes legates were always wont in Councels to speak first and to
confirm first. In the twelueth Actio^ the controversy about the Bishop of
Ephesus was ended by the Council, not by the^perours deputies, as it has been
showed. In the.16. and last Session, yt is said, that Rome ever had the
primacye: The whole council says to the emperor, that God had provided for
the^ an invincible champion against all errors, meaning of Pope Leo. In this
session a great part of the fathers thowghe contrary to the Nicene decrees,
auaunced the patriarche of Constantinople, to gratify the emperor making his
chief abode there, above the patriarchs of Alexandria, Antiochia, and
Jerusalem. But the Popes Legates would not thereto agree, no nor Leo him self:
though the whole Counsel besought him: but confirmed al other things that the
Counsel had determined upon: and caused Anatolius the patriarch of
Co^sta^tinople, to surcease from this his ambitious claim: and to confess his
faut. Last of al in a letter of Paschasinus one of the Popes Legates in that
Counsel touching the comdemnation of Dioscorus, this pope Leo is expressly
called, Caput Vniuersalis Ecclesiae. Head of the universal Church. Many other
things might be gathered for this purpose, Tom 1. Conc. page 945 Gregor. lib.
4. epist. 38, Cap. 14.


as well out of the Acts of this Council as otherwhere, especially that S.
Gregory writes that of this holy Council, his predecessors were called
Universal Bisshppes.

M. Horn. The.55. Division. Page 33. b.
This Synod being finished, the Emperor banished Dioscorus into the City of
Gangren. Which thing done: The no^les of the City (says Liberat^s) assembled
together to choose one, both for life and learning, worthy of the Bisshopricke:
for this wa^ (.156.) The.156. untruth Nipping of the Author alleged, as shall
appea^e. Lib. c. 15.
commanded by the Emperors Decrees. At the length P^oteriu^ v^^s ^ade
Bis^hop: against whom the seditious people raised one ^imotheus Hellu^us, or
Aelurus, who in conclusion, murdered Proterius. The catholic Bissoppes,
which maintained the Chalcedon council, made humble supplication unto Leo the
Emperor, both to revenge the death of Proterius, and also (.157) The.157.
untruth. Not to depose, but, vt expelleretur to expel to banish
to depose Timotheus Hellurus, as one not Lavvfully instituted in the
Bishoprike on the contrary part, other Bishops make supplication unto him, in
the defense of Timotheus, and against the Chalcedon council. When Leo the
Emperor had considered the matter of both their supplications, for good and
godly consyderations he vvrote his letters to the Bisshops of every city,
declaring both these causes, and vvilling them to send him (.158) The.158.
untruth false translation. Consule^s quid fi^ri oporteret Ask^ng counsel what
he should do. Cap. 16
their advise, what was best to be done: from whom he received an^vvere,
that the Chalcedon Council is to be maintained even unto ^eath: whereupon the
Emperor vvriteth to S^ila his Lieutenaunt of Alexandria, that he should
maintein the Chalce^on Council. Stila did as the Emperor commanded: he
expelled Timotheus Hellurus, and (.159.) The 159. untruth Liberatus says that
an other was placed, decre to populi, which you leave out.
placed an other in his room, named Timotheus S^lefacialius, or Albus, who
lived quietly all ^he reign of Leo, and Zeno, the Emperors, til Basilicus gat
the Empire, who restored Timotheus the Heretic: But when Zeno recovered the
Empire, this Timotheus poisoned him self, in whose place the Heretics chose
one Peter Mogge. After that Zeno the Emperor knevv of the crafty dealing of
the heretics, he vvrote to his Lieu^enaunt Anthemius, that he should deprive
Peter Mogge, and restore Timotheus to the bisshopricke, and further, that he
should punish those, that were the authors to enstall Peter Mogge. Anthemius
receiving the ^mperours mandate, did depose Peter Mogge, as one that was but a
counterfayt made bissop, contrary to the laws of the Catholic Church, and
restored Timotheus Salefacialius, who being restored, sent certain of his
Clergy to the Emperor to render him thanks.

The.15. Chapter, of Leo and Zeno Emperors.
Stapleton.
THis collection stands in the banishing of Dioscorus, and in the election
and deposing of bishops: Proterius was chosen vniuersorum sententia, by the
verdit of all the Citizens of Alexandria, Liberat. cap. 14.
as the manner of choosing then was, both before and after. The Emperors
commandment was not the only cause thereof, but the commandment of the
Council, for execution whereof the Emperor gave forth his letters, also. For
concealing whereof in your first allegatio^ out of Liberatus, you leave out the
word, Et: Also, where Liberatus says: For this was also commanded by the
Emperors edictes. The word Also, you leave out, to make your Reader believe,
that the only Absolute commandment of the Emperor was the cause, that
Proterius was ordered bishop in the place of Dioscorus. Whereas themperours
edict came forth, partly for avoiding of tumultes, which the heretical
adhere^ts of Dioscorus were likely to raise: And which they raised in deed,
straight after the death of Marcian the emperor, and remouyng Proterius made
Timotheus to sit in his place: partly for executing the Chalcedon Councels
Decree, which was that a new bishop should straight way be ordered at
Alexandria in the room of Dioscorus, Act. 4.
whom they had deposed. Now Timotheus was an open heretic, standing against
the Counsel of Chalcedo, and a murderer withal of his lawefull bishop
Proterius, and therefore no great account to be made of the Emperors doings
toward him he being no bishop at al in deed. Now where the Emperor
commanded an other to be put in his place, it had been well done, if ye had
placed also (as your author does) the whole words and doings of the emperor:
which was, dict ca. 15.
that Stila his deputy should set in a^ other. But when M. Horn? when all the
Bissops had answered that the Council of Chalcedo was to be maintained even to
death: And that the foresayed Timotheus was unworthy to be called either
Bishop or Chaistian man. And how M. Horn? Decreto populi. With the consent
of the people: which kind of choosing Bishops was then no new thing in the
Church, but Ambros. li. ^. Epist. 32. Con. Ant. can. 16. Con. Sard cap. 1.
used both before and after. As for the banisshing of Dioscorus (being before
deposed of the Council) I think your self will confess yt to be no spiritual
matter.

M. Horn. The.56. Division. page 34. a.
After this Timotheus, Ioannes de Talaida was choosen, whereof when Acatius
Bishop of Constantinople heard, he being offended with John, for that he had
not sent unto him synodical letters, to signify of his election, as the manner
was,) he joined him self with the fautours of Peter Mogge, and accused John
unto the Emperor, as one not sound in Religion, nor fit for the Byshoprike.
Peter Mogge espying this opportunity, dissembleth an unity and reco^ciliation,
and by his friends, vvynneth Acatius, who breaks the matter to the emperor,
and persvvadeth him to depose Ioa^nes de Talaida, and to restore Peter Mogge:
so that the same Peter would first receive and profess the Henotico^, that is,
the confession of the unity in faith, Lib. ca. 18.
which the Prince had set forth, vvherof this is the effect. Zeno the
Emperor, to al Bishops and people, throughout Alexa^dry, and Aegipt, Lybia, and
Pe^tapolis: For so much as we know that the right and true faith alone, is the
begi^ning, co^tinua^ce, strength, and inui^cible shyld of our Empire: we labor
night and day in prayer, study, and with Laws to increase, the Catholic, The
princes supremacye in (.160.) al causes.
and Apostolic Church by that faith. Al people next after God, shall bow down
their necks under our power. Seeing therefore, that the pure faith, does on this
wise preserve us, and the Romain common wealth, many godly fathers have humbly
beseched us, The.160. untruth joined with folly. No such Supremacy can be
gathered of the text.
to cause an unity to be had in the holy Church, that the members displaced
and separated through the malice of the enemy, may be coupled and knit
together. And after this, declaring his faith, to agree which the Nicen
council, and those that condemned Nestorius, and Eutiches, (he says) we curse
those that think the cont^ary. After which curse, declaring all the articles
of his faith, he concludes with an earnest exhortation unto the unity of
faith. The Emperor, says Liberatus, supposing that Ioannes de Thalaida, had
not meant rightly of the Chalcedo^ counsel, but had do^ al things fainedly,
vvrote his letters by the persvvasio^ of Acatius, to Pergamius and Apolonius
his Lieutenantes, to (.161.) The.161. vntr^th. Not to depose, but, ^t
pellerent, to drive out and to banish*
depose John, and enstal Peter Mogge. John, being thus thrust out, repaired to
the B. of Antioche, with whose letters of co^mendacion, he vve^t to
Si^plicius bishop of Rome, and desired him to write in his behalf unto
Acatius bishop of Constantinople, who did so, and within a while after,
died.

Stapleton.
The like drifte as before, follows now also, and therefore the less need of
any long or exquisite answer. Saving that a few things are to be considered,
as well for the weighing of M. Horns reasons, as for such matters, as make for
the popes primacye even in those stories that M. Horn reherseth. As,.1. Sigeb.
in Chron. Pantal.
that pope Simplicius of whom M. Horn makes mention excommunicated Peter the
Bishop of Alexandria here mentioned benig an Eutychian. Again that Acatius
bishop of Constantinople, here also recited by M. Horn, was also
excommunicated by pope Felix. What?.2. Isidor. in Faelice^. To. 2. Co^c. Sig.
Part.
says M. Horn, a butto^ for your popes curse. If that be a matter
ecclesiastical, our Emperors have cursed as well, as your popes: Eue^ our
Emperor Zeno that we are now in hand withal. Say you me so M. Horn? Then
show me I beseech you, by what authority? For no man (you say your self
afterward) has authority to excommunicate, but only the Church and those who
receive authority thereunto by commission from the Church. page ^05. col. 2.
Thus you say even in this book. Bring forth then the Emperors commission:
Otherwise think not, we will cry sanctus sanctus to all ye shall say. And if
you bring forth the commission, then are you undone, and al your primacy. For
if the Emperor has his commission from the Church, then belike the Church is
above him. Unless as ye have found a new divinity, so ye can find a new
law, whereby he that takes the co^missio^ shall be above him that gives it.
This curse then M. Horn was no ecclesiastical curse: no more surely then if
you should, if Maistres Madge played the shrewe with you, What manner of curse
Zeno the e^perours curse was.
be shrewe and curse to, her shrewes heart. It was a zelouse detestation of
heretics, as if a good catholic man should now say, cursed be al wicked
Sacramentaries. And whom I pray you did he curse? Any, trow ye that was not
accursed before? No, but chiefly Nestorius and Eutyches: which were before by
general Councils excommunicated. Yet for all that we have our margent dasshed
with a fresh iolye note, that the princes supremacy is in all causes. I pray God
send you M. Horn as much worship of yt, as ye had of your other late like
marginall florishe owte of the Chalcedon Council. Yet let us see what proufes
ye lay forth: Why? say you: Was not Zeno required to cause an unity in the
church. Ye mary was he, and so was Constantine and Marcian to. Yea Marcian for
that, was called the chief physician to. But we neade not put you any more in
remembrance hereof, least ye take to much pride of yt. Yea but zeno says,
that after God all people shall bow their necks to his power. It is so in
deed M. Horn. But unless ye can prove, that he said to his spiritual power
(which he said not, Hostiu^ generationes co^tere^tur. oe^s aute^ incuruabunt
post Deum sua^ potestati nostrae ceruicem.

Libe. c. 18 Gentes hostiles conterentur, atque exti^gue^tur, and oe^s collae
sua imperio secu^du^ Deu^ nostro submittent. Nice. lib. 16. c. 12. Libe. c. 18
Libe. c. 18 Nice. lib. 6. cap. 15. To. 1. co^c. page 961. col. 2.


nor meante not) a good argument (the more pittye) has quyte broken his neck.
Neither yet does Zeno speak of the necks of any his subjects, but (as yt
seems) of such nations as were his enemies. And assuredly such words al
pagan Emperors use. And yet they are not, I trow, therefore supreme
governors in all causes spiritual. Now yt would require some tracte of time,
fully to open either how M. Horn has confounded, maimed, and mangled his
authors narration, or to show that these things even in the true narration of
the stories, that he reherseth, make fully against him, and for the Popes
primacy. For this Ioannes Talaida (says Liberatus) appealed to Pope
Simplicius even as Athanasius did. Simplicius writes to Acatius, who
answers: that he did all this withowt the Popes consent, by the Emperors
commandment for the preservation of the unity in the Church. To who^
Simplicius replied, that he ought not to communicate with Petrus Moggus for
that he agreed to the Emperors order and proclamation: unless he would
embrace the decrees of the Counsel of Chalcedo. Thus letters going to and fro,
Simplicius died and Felix succedeth: who does both deprive him from his
bisshoprike, and excommunicateth him, for taking part with the said Petrus
Moggus. After the death of Acatius, succedeth Flauianus, who would not suffer
himself to be enstalled without the Popes consent. Within short time,
Euphemius was Patriarche of Constantinople: who received synodicall letters
from this Pope. These and many other things else might here be said, even out
of the chapter upon which Master Horn himself pleads, which we pass over.

But for the Princes Supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, what has M. Horn in all this division? His marginal Note lies in the dust. What has he beside? He
says. The Emperor by his Lieutenants deposed John Talaida, the Patriarche of
Antioche. But this is untrue. The Emperor in deed commanded his Lieutenants,
Liberatus Cap. 18.
vt pellerent eum: to expulse and drive him out from his bisshoprike, but to
depose him, that is to make him now no Bishop at all, that lay not in the
Emperors power. He did (as merely of him self a wise prelate said in King
Edwardes days, being then in the Tower for the Catholic faieth) but take
away the Ricke, John remained bishop still. And that with this John Talaida so
it was, appears well by Liberatus your own Author, M. Horn. For this John
Talaida (says Liberatus) appealinge from the Emperors violence to Pope
Simplicius, habe^s episcopi dignitatem, remansit Romae, remained at Rome,
having still the dignity of a bishop, who also afterward had the Ricke also.
For the Pope endewed him with the bishoprike of Nola in Campania. Now as
Emperors and Princes have power (though not lawful) to expelle, and deprive
men of the Church from their temporal dignities, and possessions: so to deprive
a man of the Church from his office of ministry, to depose a bishop or a
priest from his spiritual Jurisdiction and Authority (which deposition only is
a cause ecclesiastical) to the Church only from whom such Authority came, it
belongs. Princes deprivations, are no ecclesiastical depositions Take this
answer ones for all M. Horn, you which untruly report, that Princes deposed
bisshops.

M. Horn. The.57. Division. Page 35. a.
This Pope Simplicius considering the great contentions that were accustomably
about the election of Popes, did provide by decree, that no Pope should
hereafter be chosen without the authority of the Prince, which decree,
although it be not extant, yet it is manifest enough, by the Epistle of King
Odoacer put into the Acts of the third Synod, that Simmachus the Pope did
keep at Rome, vvherin the King does not only auouche, the decree of
Simplicius, but also adds: We marvel, that without us any thing was
accounted, seeing that whiles our Priest (meaning the bishop of Rome
Simplicius) was on live: nothing ought to have been taken in hand without us.

The.16. Chapter of Simplicius, Felix.3. and Symmachus Popes of Rome.
Stapleton.
IF Pope Simplicius by decree, gave the Prince Authority to confirm the chosen
Pope, what helps this your supremacy? Nay does it not much impair the same?
For then all the Princes Authority in this behalf depends of the Popes decree
as of a Superior law. And so he is subject both to the law, and to the
lawemaker. And yet this is all that in this Division has any manner inckling to
iuduce the Princes Supremacy in any cause ecclesiastical. But if M. Horn would
have looked but a little further and upon the first line of the next leaf, he
might have found in the said Synod, that the sea of Rome has the priestly
primacy over all the whole world. And that Councels must be confirmed by that
see, with such other like matter. For whereas this King Odoacer, beside the
decree touchi^g the chosing of the Pope (which as your self say he made at the
Popes request) made also an other concerning not alienating Church goods, the
whole Synod rejected and condemned it, for these.ij. causes expressly. First
(says Eulalius a bishop of Sicily, whose sentence (the other bisshops saying
the same) the whole Synod followed) because against the rules of the Fathers,
this Decree appears to be made of Layemen, though religious and godly, In
Synod. Romans 3. sub Symmacho. Tom. 1. Conc. page 1004. col 2.
to whom that any authority was ever given over Ecclesiastical goods, it is
not read. Secondlye it is not declared to be confirmed with the subscription
of any bishop of the Apostolic See. Now whereas, the holy Fathers In the
Nicene Council, Can. 4. and 6.
have decreed, that if the Priests of any whatsoever province (keeping a
Council within their own lymities) shall attempt any thing without the
authority of their Metropolitan or their bishop, it should be void and of
none effect, how much more that which is known to have been presumed in the Sea Apostolic, the Bishop thereof not present ( Qui prae rogatiua beati
Apostoli Petri per vniuersum orbe^ primatum obtinens sacerdotij, statutis
synodalibus consueuit tribuere firmitate^.
which bishop by the prerogative of the blessed Apostle Peter, having through
the whole world the Primacy of priesthood, has been wont to confirm the
Decrees of Councels) presumed I say, of layemen, though certain bisshops
agreing unto it (who yet could not preiudicat their Prelat of whom it is known
they were consecrated) is undoubtedly void and of no effect, neither any way
to be accounted among Ecclesiastical decrees? Thus far that Synod by your
self alleged M. Horn. God reward you for giving us such good instructions
against your self. Or if it came not of you, but of your friend, let him have
the thanks therefore. But if it so falls out against your wills both, yet
God be praised, that as by sin he works sometime a greater ame^dement, and
turns horrible temptations into a more confortable calmness then before the
storm came, so also by your unhappy meaning has yet brought us to a happy
information of such doctrine as utterly overthrows your heresye.

For here you see M. Horn, not only the lay Magistrate, yea the King him
self, yea though he were religiouse and godly, utterly excluded from all
authority in causes Ecclesiastical (whereby your fantastical Primacie
vanishes clean away) but also that the Pope (whom you call a foreign power)
has the Primacy, the chiefty and supreme praeeminence of Priesthode, not
only in Rome or the Roman Province, but (says this Synod by your self
clerckly alleged) per vniuersum orbem, throughout the whole world, and then
if you be a part of the world, he is your Primate too. Thus much says this
Synod: and thereby utterly overthrows the whole effect of the Oath, in both
those parts for the which the Catholics refuse to swear unto it. Verily if
ye go on as you have hitherto, you will surely be espied for a preuaricatour,
that is, for a double faced Proctour, secreatlie instructing your clients
adversary, but in face protesting to plead against him. For better
instructions, no hired advocate could have geauen us, then you the
Counterpleader have ministered unto us.

M. Horn. The.58. Division. page 35. a.
Next after Simplicius was Foelix the third chosen, Act. 1.
who after his confirmation, sent many letters as well to the Emperor, as to
Acatius Bisshoppe of Constantinople, about the matter betwixt John and Peter,
but when he could not prevail in his suite, he made John Bisshoppe of Nola
in Campania. One of the letters that Pope Foelix vvrote unto Zenon the Emperor
about this matter, is put into the fifth Synod of Constantinople: wherein the
Pope after the salutation, does most humblye beseech the Emperor, to take his
humble suite in good part. He shows that the holy (.162.) The 162: Untruth.
These words Apostolic and Catholic, left out.
Church makes this suite, that he will vouchesafe to maintain the unity of
the Church, that he will destroy Heresies, that breaks the bond of
unity, that he will expel Peter Mogge both out of the City, and also from
Church regiment: that he would not suffer Peter being deposed, Vide Tom. 2.
Co^c. pa. 13. in epist. Felicis ad Petrum. Haec legate sancta Dei Apostolica et
Catholica eccles. vt ab ipsa propter praedictas causas depositu^ ad co^munione^
no^ suscipias, sed per diuinas apices vestrae serenitatis ab Antiochiae
confinio propelli^e, pro ipso au^t co^stituite vnu^ operib. sacerdotiu^
ornantem etc. Tom 2. Conc. Act. 1. Synod 5. page 19. b.
to be admitted to the Communion of the Church: but that by his honorable
letters, he would banish him out of the bounds of Antioche. And (says this
Bishop of Rome Foelix unto the Emperor) In his place appoint you one that
shall beutifie the Priesthode by his works.

Stapleton.
You proceed still to bring authorities against your self. This Peter was
deposed I confess: But by whom, M. Horn? Not by the Emperor, but even by
Pope Foelix as appears but one leaf before the place which your self
allege. And in case it was to painful for you to turn back a leaf or two
before, yet might you have vouchsaued to have read the next lines before your
own allegatio^. In the which Foelix signifies, that he was so deposed, and
therefore requesteth The Emperor to expel him, and to place some other mete man
for him: which thing Popes do at this day, requiring Catholic Princes to
remove heretical Bishops, and to place good in their room, neither yet
therefore are, or ever were Princes accounted, enacted, or entitled, Supreme
governors in all causes Ecclesiastical. Your new Religion, has invented this
new Title. This Pope Foelix also excommunicated Acatius of Constantinople, for
bearing with this Peter Mogge, as witnesses Liberatus. Whereby appears
clearly the Popes Primacie over the ij. chief Patriarchs of the East Church
of Constantinople and Antioche. And you again are with your own examples
clean overthrown.

M. Horn. The.59. Division. page 35. b.
Anastasius the Emperor (.163.) The.163. Untruth. As before.
deposed Macedonius Bisshoppe of Constantinople, as one that falsified the
Ghospels, as Liberatus says.

Stapleton.
If this Macedonius falsified the Ghospel, he was I wene, worthy to be deposed.
But your Author uses not this word Deposed, but he says, he was expulsed.
Which might be, being, by an ordinary and an usual course, Liberatus cap. 19.
by the Bishops first deposed. But because the matter is not clear on your
side, and if it were, it did not greatly enforce: by reason Anastasius him
self was a wicked heretical Emperor, and so no great good deduction to be
made from his doings: I let it pass.

M. Horn. The.60. Division. page 35. b.
About the election of Symachus, Platina mentions what great division and
sedition arose, in so much that the parties were feign to agree, to have a
Council holden for the determination of the matter. And there was a Council
appointed at Rauenna (says Sabellicus) to the end that the controversy might
be decided according to right, before the king Theodoriche: before whom, the
matter was so discussed, that at the last, this Pope Symachus was confirmed.
Nevertheless this fire was not thus so quite quenched, but that four years
after, it blased out sorer again. VVhereat the king (says Platina) being
displeased, sent Peter the Bisshoppe of Altine to Rome, to enjoy the Sea, and
both the other to be (.164.) The 164: Untruth. Platina says not so, but vt
pulso vtroque sedem teneret.
deposed. Whereupon an other Synod was called of 120. Bisshops, wherein
(says Sabellicus) the Pope him self defended his own cause so stoutlye, and
cunningly, and confuted (says Platina) all the objections laid against him,
that by the verdict of them all, he was acquitted, and all the fault laid to
Laurence and Peter.

Stapleton.
What may be said for the doings of Princes in the election of the Clergy, and
how your examples agree not with our practice, I have already said somewhat:
and that I say to this too. But in the Division following, we shall say to this
more particularlye.

M. Horn. The.61. Division. page 35. b.
But to thentent it may the better appear what was the Kings authority about
these matters, mark the fourth Roman Synod, holden in the time of this
Symachus, and about the same matter of his, which although it be mangled and
confusedly set forth in the Book of General Councels, because (as it may
seem) that they (.165.) The.165. Untruth. Slaunderouse and malicious
would not have the whole truth of this dissension appaare: yet vvil it
show much, that the Princes had (.166.) The.166. Untruth. That counsel will
shevve they had very small.
no small entermedling, and authority in Synodes and Church matters. This
Synod was summoned to be kept in Rome by the (.167.) The.167. Untruth. The
King him self in the counsel declares, that not by his commandment, but by
the Popes letters, this Synod was su^moned.
commandment of the most honorable King Theodoriche. He declares that many
and grievous complaints, were brought unto him against Symachus Bisshoppe of
Rome. Symachus comes into the Synod to answer for him self, geaueth
thanks to the King for calling the Synod, requires that he may be restored
to such things as he had lost by the suggestion of his ennemies, and to his
former state, and then to come to the cause, and to answer the accusers. The
more part in the Synod, thought this his demand reasonable: Decernere
tamen aliquid Synodus sine regia notitia non Praesumpsit. Yet the Synod
presumed not to decree any thing without the Kings knowledge. Neither came it
to pass as they vvisshed: for the King commanded Symachus the Bisshoppe of
Rome, to answer his adversaries before he should resume any thing. And
(.168.) The.168. Untruth. Not so. But because as the Council protested, it
perteined not to him or to any man's else.
so the King committed the whole debating and judging of the matter to the
Synod, which concludes the sentence with these words: Wherefore according
to the Kings will or commandment, who has committed this cause to us, we
refourme or restore unto him (to Symachus) what right so ever he ought to have
within the City of Rome, or without.

Stapleton.
Here has M. Horn an other fetch to prove Princes to have the chief interest
in matters ecclesiastical: as for the depositions of Bishops, yea of the Pope
him self. And first he is angry, that this matter in the book of Councels is so
mangled and confusedly set forth. But it is an other thorn then this that
pricketh him, that he will not disclose to all the world. For to say the
truth, he sees in his own conscience, that of all Councelles, M. Horn
complains, but dares not show where the thoro pricketh him.
the self same Council that he here alleges, does so set forth the Popes
Primacie, that the grieuouse remembrance thereof, causes him to speak, he can
not tell what. Verelye, if M. Horn had stepped forth but one foot further, and
turned his eye upon the next leaf, there should he have found a clercklie
work made by Eunodius in the defense of the Council, that he is in hand
withal. There should he have found most evident authorities for the Popes
Supremacy upon all states temporal and spiritual. He should also find the
same book to be confirmed by.CC. and.xxx. Bishops assembled at Rome in a
Synod. Leave of therefore, M. Horn this complaint, and complain of that, Tom.
1, Conc. pa. 1009.
that grieueth you in deed, and that is not of confusion, but of the confession
ye find there of all the Bishops concerning the Ecclesiastical praeeminence,
liyng so open and thick, like a great block in your way, that ye could not
pass over to these your allegations that you have here patched in, but that
you must needs stumble and break your shinnes thereat: which grieueth you full
sore. But let us now see, what good and wholesome herbs, ye being so cunning a
gardener, have gathered out of this garden, that as ye think lies so
vnha^somlie and sluttishly. Ye say first that this Council was called by the
commandment of the right honorable King Theodoriche. Make him as honorable as
ye will. But other then an Arrian shall ye not make of him. If ye knew he was an
Arrian, Martinus Pol. Sabellicus
your honor might have been better bestowed else where. If ye knew it not,
then is your reading to small, I trow, to furnish such a book as this is. And
yet to say the truth, small reading will serve the turn too. Ye say he called
a Council: So he did. But how did he call it? Forsooth with the consent of the
Pope Symachus, though the Counsel were called against him. For when the
Bisshops had told the King, that the Pope him self ought to call Councels,
Tom. 1. Conc. pa. 1007. col. 1.
by a singular privilege due to the Sea of Rome, because to that See, first the
merit and principality of S. Peter, and after the authority of Councils,
singulorum in Ecclesijs tradidit potestatem, gave power over every thing in the
Churches, the King made aunsweare, that the Pope had declared his consent to
it by his letters. Yea and the Bishops not satisfied with the Kings so saying,
required a sight of the Popes letters: which the King showed unto them out of
hand. The Pope also him self being present, licensed the Bishops to examine his
own matter. And a little after: Affectu purgationis suae culmen humiliat. For
desire of purging himself he hu^bleth his high authority or dignity. Yet M.
Horn adds: the Synod presumed not to decree any thing without the Kings
knowledge. If they had said they ought not, then had ye said somewhat. But
presume not, and may not, are two things far a sonder. Though yet in one
sense in deed they might not, nor ought not to have proceeded with the Kings
consent, or without, against the Pope, who has no Judge in this world but God
only: Neither ca^ he be judged by his inferiors. Nec aliquid ad se praeter
reuerentia^ de Ecclesiasticis negotijs pertinere. pa. 1007. col. 2
And so these Bishops told the King to his face. And finally the King refers
the whole matter to the Synod, and plainly protests, that it was the Councils
part to prescribe what ought to be done in so weighty a matter. As for me
(says the King) I have nothing to do with Ecclesiastical matters, but to
honor and reverence them, I commit to you, to hear or not to hear this
matter, as ye shall think it most profitable, so that the Christians in the
City of Rome, might be set in peace. And to this point, lo, is al M. Horns
supremacy driven. The Bishops proceeding to sentence, do declare that Pope
Symachus was not to be judged by any man: neither bound to answer his
accusers, but to be committed to Gods judgment. And the reason the Counsel
gives. That it appertains not to the sheep, but to the pastor, Vnde
secu^dum principalia praecepta, quae nostrae hoc tribuunt potestati, ei
quicquid ecclesiastici intra sacra^ vrbem vel foris iuris est, reformamus
totamque causam Dei iuditio reseruantes, vniuersos hortamur. etc. Pa. 1008.
col. 2.
to foresee and provide for the snares of the wolf. And the^ follow the words
that you rehearse, which are no judicial sentence, but only a declaration that
he should be taken for the true Bishop as before. But to meddle with the cause,
and to discuss it iudicially, they would not, because as they said, by the
Canons they could not. And therefore immediately in the same sentence, that ye
have in such have broken of in the middle, it follows: We do reserve the
whole cause to the judgment of God.

Set this to the former part by you recited, being a parcel of the said
sentence, as ye must needs do, and then have ye sponne a fair threade: your
self proving that thing, which of all things ye and your fellows deny.
That is, that the Pope can be judged of no man. And so have ye now made him
the Supreme Head of the whole Church: and have geauen your self such a
foul fall, that all the world will lawghe you to scorn, to see you find
fault with this Council, as mangled and confusedlye set forth, which so
plainelye and pithelye confounds to your great shame and confusion, all that
ever ye have brought, or shall in this book bring against the Popes
Primacye. So also it well appears, that if there were in the world nothing
else to be pleaded upon but your own Council and sentence, by you here
mangled and confusedly alleged, M. Fekenham might upon very good ground refuse
the oath: and ye be compelled also, if not to take the oath for the Popes
Primacy, being of so squemish a conscience, yet not to refuse his authority by
your own Author and text so plainly avouched.

M. Horn. The.62. Division page 36. a.
As it is and shall be most manifestly proved and testified by the oecumenicall
or general Councels, vvherin the order of Ecclesiastical government in
Christ's Church has been most faithfully declared, and shevved from time to
time (as your self affirm) that such like government as the Queen's Majesty
does claim and take upon her in Ecclesiastical causes was practiced (.169.)
The.169. Untruth. Such like gouernemente was never practiced by any Catholic
Emperor.
continually by the Emperors: and approved, praised; and highly commended by
(.170.) The.170. Untruth. Not by one good Bishop, or godly Father.
thousands of the best Bisshoppes and most godly fathers that have been in
Christ's Church from time to time: even so shall I prove by your own book
of General Councels (.171) The.171. untruth Slaunderouse.
mangled, maimed, and set forth by Papish Donatistes them selves, and other
such like Church vvriters, that this kind, and such like government, as the
Queen's Majesty does use in Church causes, was by continual practice, not in
some one only Church or part of Christendom (whereof you crave proof, as
though not possible to be shevved) but in the notablest Kingdoms of al
Christendom, as (.172.) The.172. Untruth. Neither in France nor in Spain
shall you ever show it.
France and Spain, put in ure: vvherby your vvilfull and malicious ignorance
shall be made so plain, that it shall be palpable to them whose eyes ye have so
bleared, that they cannot see the truth.

The.17. Chapter of Clodoueus, Childebert, Theodobert, and Gunthranus, Kings of
France.
Stapleton.
Master Horn now takes his journey from Rome and the East Church (where he
has made his abode a great while) to France and to Spain: hoping there to
find out his new found Supreamacye. Yea he says: He has and will prove it
by thowsandes of the best Bisshops. Vndoudtedly, as he has already found it
out by the.318. Bisshops at Nice, by the 200. bisshops at Ephesus, and by the
630. bishops at Chalcedo: (who stand each one in open field against him) so
will he find it in France and in Spayn also. If he had said he would have
found it in the new found lands beyond Spayn among the infidels there, that
in deed had been a mete place for his new found Supremacy. Verily in any
Christened country by hi^ yet named or to be named in this book, he neither
has nor shall find any one Counsel or bishop, Prince or Proui^ce, to agnise or
witness this absolute Supremacy that M. Horn so depely dreameth of. And that
let the Conference of both our labors try: M. Horns answer, and this Reply:
As also who has bleared the Readers eyes, M. Horn, or Master Fekenham.

M. Horn. The 63. Division. page 36. b.
Clodoueus about this time the first Christian King of France, baptized by
Remigius, and taught the Christian faith: perceiving that through the
troublesome times of vvarres, the Church discipline had been neglected and much
corruption crepte in, does for reformacion hereof call a national council or
Synod at Aurelia, and commands the bisshoppes to assemble there together,
to consult of such necessary matters as were fit, and as he delivered unto
them to consulte of. The Bisshoppes do according as the King (.173.) The.173.
untruth. The Bisshoppes were not so at the Kings commandment as M. Horn
fancieth.
commands, they assemble, they commend the Kings zeal, and great care for
the Catholic faith, and Religion, they conclude according to the Kings mind,
and does (.174.) The 174. untruth. Notorious, as shall appear.
refer their decrees to the judgment of the King, whom they confess to
have (.175.) The 175. untruth. For not in approving doctrine, as M Horn here
craftly vvuld infer.
the superiority, to be approved by his assent. Clodoueus also called a Synod
named Conciliu^ Cabiloneum, and commanded the bisshops to consider if any
thing were amiss in the discipline of the Church, and to consulte for the
reformation thereof: and this (says the bisshops) he did of zeal to Religion
and true faith.

Other four Synodes were summoned afterward in the same City at sundry
times, by the commandment of the King, named Childebert, moved of the love
and care, As Clodoueus and Childebert here, so Charles the French King that
now lives called a Synod at Poyssy by Paris of late yers. And yet is he not
of his subjects taken for the supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical.

Aurelia 1. Tom. 1. Conc. pa. 1046. a. Turonense 2. Can. 22


he had for the holy faith, and furtheraunce of Christian Religion, to the same
effect and purpose that the first was sommoned for.

This King Childebert, caused a Synod of Bishops to assemble at Paris, and
commanded them to take order for the reformation of that Church, and also to
declare whom they thought to be a provident Pastor, to take the care over the
Lords flock, the Bishop Saphoracus, being deposed for his just demerites.

Stapleton.
M. Horn so tells his tale here, as if this King Clodoueus had had the
Bisshops at his commandment to keep Councels and conuocations at his
pleasure: yea and that they referred their Decrees to his judgment. But now so
it is in deed, that neither the Prince proceeded herein by way of meare
commaundememente, neither the bisshoppes referred to him any such Judgment
over their determinated Sentence. For proof of the first: both the Bisshoppes
in this very Council at Orleans do say to the King, that they have
deliberated upon these matters secundum vestrae voluntatis consultationem
according to the co^sultation kept by your will, and the Bisshoppes of an other
Council holden after this at Toures in France also do say of this Synod,
quam inuictissimus Rex Clodoueus fieri supplicauit, which the mighty King
Clodoueus made suit to be called. But because as the lawiers do note, the will
of a Prince, and the will of a father, do not differ from their commandment,
therefore that Council which the King by suite and supplication obtained to be
called, Aurelian. 1. in principio.
is yet termed to be done praecepto and iussione, by commandment of the
Bisshoppes themselves at the Council. For proof of the second, I bring you
the words of the Council, which you in telling your tale, thought good to
leave out. The bishops do say unto the Prince. Definitione respondimus etc.
Ibidem.
We have by determining answered to the intent, that if those things which we
have decreed, be approved right also by your Judgment, the Sentence of so many
bisshoppes, may confirm and strenghthen the Authority of such a consent, as of
the King and great Stuarde to be observed. In which words they refer not
the Definition to his Judgment, but do show that if his consent do
concur, then his Authority is confirmed by the verdite of Bisshops so great
and so many.

But ye say they confess him to have the superiority: And those words ye
couche craftily among the rest, To. 1. co^ci. pa. 1046. col. 1.

M. Horn to prove his supremacy alleges a bishop deposed for less
fornication then him self uses.

Vide Tom. 2. Council. page 149. col 1. and Conc. Aurel. 5. can. 4. page 1.


to make your Reader think, that the King had the Superiority in approving
doctrine. But this is an untruth. They call hi^ in deed Regem, ac Dominum
maiorem, their King or great Stuard. Which is in respect of temporal things,
and of his worldly principality, not of any Superiority in allowing or
disallowing their Synodical decrees. And I pray you good Sir, was Saphoracus
deposed by the King, or by the Bishops? and was he as you say deposed for his
just demerits? It had been well done to have told us, why he deserved to be
deposed. But I suppose either ye know yt not, or else ye will not be known
thereof like a wyly shrewe. Forsurelye as far as I can gather, yt was for
that, he being a Bisshoppe used the company of his wife which he married before
he was priest, contrary to the old canons, and a late order taken in the
Council at Orlyans. If it be so, in what case be you with your madge:
pretending her to be your lawful wife, yea and that after your taking of
holy orders.

M. Horn. The.64. Division. page 37. a.
A Princes charge.
Theodobertus King of France, calls a Synod at Auerna in France, for the
restoring and establishing the Church discipline. Gunthranus the King, called a
Synod, named Matiscone^s.2. to refourme the Ecclesiastical discipline, and to
co^firm certain orders, and ceremonies in the Church, which he declares
plainly in the Edict, that he sets forth for that purpose. Wherein he
declares his vigilant and studious carefulnes, to have his people trained and
brought up, under the fear of God, in true Religion, and godly discipline, for
otherwise (says this Christian King) to whom God has committed (.176.) The
176. untruth. Crafy co^nayau^ce as shall appear. A bisshops jurisdiction.
this charge, shall not escape his vengeance. He shows the bisshops that
their office is to (.177.) The.177 untruth. A part of the Sentence nipped quyt
of, in the midst.
teach, comfort, exhort, to reprove, rebuke, and correct, by preaching the
word of God. He commands the elders of the Church, and also others of
authority, in the common weal, to judge and punish, that they assiste the
bisshops, and sharply punish by bodily punishment, such as vvil not amend
by the rebuke and correction of the word, and Church discipline. And
concludes, that he has caused the Decrees in the Council, touching
discipline, and certain ceremonies to be defined, the which he does publishe
and confirm, by the authority of this Edict.

Stapleton.
We have now two Kings more of France: But in both these to prove your
purpose, you have nothing. King Gu^tranus himself confesses in the place by
you alleged: that God has committed to the Priests the office of a fatherly
authority: Tom. 2. Council. fol. 179.
And shows to what end the Princes meddle with matters of religion. that is,
that the sword may amend such persons as the preachers word can not amend.
And yt is worthy to be considered, that among other decrees that this Council
made, and the King confirmed, yt was ordained, that the Lay man where so ever
he met a priest should show him reverence and honor. Conc. Matiscon. 2.
can. 15.
And in case the Priest went a foot and the Lay man rid, the Lay man
should a light, and so reverence him, as now the Christians are compelled to
do in Turkey to the Turks. And so I trow this Council makes not al together
for your purpose and supposed Primacy. Only it makes to encreace the nombre of
your untruths. For whereas you first talk of the Princes vigilant and
studiouse carefulnes, to see the people brought up in true religion and godly
discipline, you add as the Princes words. Otherwise I, to whom God has
committed this charge, shall not escape his vengeance. In making the Prince to
say, this charge, you would make your Reader think, the Prince acknowledged
a Charge over true Religion etc. And therefore you put in the margin, to
beutifie your book withal, A princes charge. But the Prince speaks of no
such charge, as shall anon appear. And when you add to this, that the Prince
showed the bisshoppes, that their office is to teach, etc. there you leave
out, absque nostrae admonitione, without our admonishment, by which appears,
the Bishops knew their office, though the Prince held his peace: and that it
depended not of the Princes supreme government, as you would have folcke to
think. These couple of untruths shall now evidently appear by the whole words
of the King, as they were in order by him uttered, which you have confusely set
out, putting the later part before the first, and the first last, adding in
one place, and nipping in an other, thus to blind and bleare your Readers
eyes, whom plainly you ought to instruct. For these are the words of King
Guntranus to the bishops of Mascon. Matiscon. 2. Tom. 2. Conc. page 179.
Although without our admonition, to you (holy bisshops) specially belongs
the matter of preaching, yet we think verily you are partakeners of other men's
sins, if you correct not with dailye rebuking the faults of your children,
but pass them over in silence. For neither we, to whom God has committed the
kingdom, can escape his vengeance if we be not hofull of the people subject
unto us. In these words orderly laid out as the King spoke them, thou see
gentle Reader, first that the King talks not of this charge, Platina.
as M. Horn untruly reports him, meaning a charge over religion, for the King
expressly speaks of the charge of his kingdom: declaring, that as he, for
negligence in his charge, so the bisshoppes for negligence in their charge,
shall both increase the wrath of God. Also that without his admonition (which
words M. Horn nipped quyte of in the midst) the bishop has to preach,
to rebuke, to punish and correct the transgressors of Gods law. Such patched
proufes M. Horn brings to prick up the poppet of his strange fantastical
primacye.

M. Horn. The.65. Division. page 37. b.
After the death of Anastasius the^peror, Justinius reigned alone a right
catholic Prince, who immediately sent messengers unto the bishop of Rome, who
should both co^firm the authority of the sea, and also should provide peace for all churches, so much as might be, with which doings of the^peror, Hormisda the
bishop of Rome, being moved, sent unto the emperor, with consent of Theodoricus,
Legates (178) The 178. untruth. A part of the Sentence broken of prejudicial.
The pope is the kings Ambassador. the popes humble suit to the^peror, (179.)
for the Aria^ heretics.

The 179. untruth slanderous.


Martinus Penitentiarius tells the cause of this legacy was, to entreat
the^peror to restore those bishops, which the wicked Anastasius had deposed.
This godly emperor Justinius (says Martin) did make a law, that the Churchs of
the heretics, should be consecrated to the Catholic religion, but this Decree
was made in John the next Popes days. The which edict when the King
Theodoriche, being an Arian (says the same Martin) and King of Italy, herd, he
sent Pope John (says Sabellicus) with others in embassage unto the^peror, to
purchase liberty for the Aria^s. Justinius received these Ambassadors
honorably, says Platina, and the^peror at the length overcome with the humble
suit of the Pope, which was sauced with tears, granted to hi^ and his
associats, that the Arians should be restored, and suffered to live after their
orders. In this history, this is not unworthy the noting, that the Pope did
not only show his obedience and (180) The 180. untruth. This fact proves no
subjection on the popes part.
subjection to the godly Emperor, but also that the secular Princes, ordained
(181.) The.181. untruth. The law of Justinius was no Ecclesiastical law at al.
Laws ecclesiastical, with the which the Pope could not dispe^ce. For all
this business arose about the decree, which the^peror had made in an (182.) The
182. untruth, as before.
ecclesiastical cause or matter. If the Popes authority in these causes, had
been above the Emperors, he needed not with such lovvlynes, and so many tears
to have besought the Emperor to have revoked his decree and edict.

The 18. Chapter. Of Justinius the emperor, and John the Pope.
Stapleton.
NOw has M. Horn for this turn left France, and is returned to the^perours
again: but so that he had been as good, to have kept hi^ self in France still.
For though he decketh his marge^t with, the Pope is the Kings Ambassador: M
Horns confuse narratio^.
and again. The Popes humble suit for the Arria^ heretics (which yet is a stark
lie as we shall ano^ declare) yet by that time the whole tale is told (whereof
this man makes a co^fuse narratio^) neither he nor his cause shall win any
worship or honesty thereby. I will therefore open unto you gentle reader the
whole story, truly and faithfully, and that by his own authors Platina,
Sabellicus, and Martinus. The story truly and fully opened.
This Anastasius was a wicked Emperor, as M. Horn here confesses. And yet two
leaves before, he made a president of his doi^gs for deposing of bishops. He
defended John the patriarch of Co^sta^tinople a great heretik who by his
assistance most injuriously and spitefuly handled the Legates that Pope Hormisda
sent to hi^, Sabellic. Plat. in Homisd. 1.
exhorting hi^ to forsake and renounce his heresy. The said heretik Emperor
Anastasius sent answer by the Legates to Pope Hormisda, that it was the^perours
part and office to command, and not the Popes, and that he must also obey
the^peror. Surely a fair example for your new supremacy. After the death of
this Anastasius strike^ with lightni^g from heaven for his wiked heresy and As
Platina well notes. Qui Apostolicae sedi debita^ veneratione^ etc. Sa^e^. en.
8 li. 2. page 454.
disobedience succedeth this Justin, a right Catholic prince by M. Horns own
words and co^fesio^, who i^co^tine^tly sent to Rome his ambassadors, which
should show dew reverence of faith to the sea Apostolic. Or as Platina in
other words writes: qui sedis Apostolicae authoritatem confirmarent. That
should confirm the authority of the Apostolic See. And what was that I pray
you M. Horn, but to confirm the Popes primacy, M. Horns own story confirms
the Popes Primacy.
so little set by before of the wicked Anastasius, and the heretical bishop
John of Constantinople? And therefore gramercye that forsakinge France ye have
browght us even to Constantinople, and to the Emperor there: sending his
ambassador to Rome, to recognize the Popes most high authority. You tell us
yet farther, that the Pope Hormisda sent Legates to Justinius. And there you
break of suddenly. But what followed? Forsooth immediately it follows in the very
same sentence: Platina in Hormisda. 1.
which Justinius received honorably the Popes Legates sendi^g forth to mete
the^, the more to honor the^ a great multitude of Mo^ks and of other Catholic
and worshipful me^, the whole clergy of Co^sta^tinople, and John their bishop
co^gratulating also. At whose coming, the Emperor thrust out of the City and
the Churches, the schismatikes called Acatia^s (of their Author Acatius) whom
Pope Felix had excommunicated. Now go forth, Gods blessing of your heart, God
send us many more such adversaries: And to say the truth, M. Jewel and your
fellows are not much worse to us. But yet go forward, for I hope we shall be
more deaply bound to this good Catholic Emperor anon: and to you to, for
bringing to our hand without our farther traiuail, such good and effectual
matter for the Popes superiority. This godly Emperor made a law, say you, that
the Churches of heretics should be consecrated to the Catholic Religion. What
did he M. Horn? Happy are ye, that he is fair dead and buried many years ago,
for fear lest if he were now living, your temples and synagogs would be
shortly shut up, as they are now in Antwerpe, and in all Flanders here, God be
praised. But who tells this? Forsooth say you Martinus Poenite^tiarius. But
lo, how wisely this tale is told, as though both Sabellicus and Platina the
Authors of your narratio^ did not write the like. King Theodoricke took not in
good part, but eue^ to the very heart, these doings of Iustine. And why M.
Horn: M. Horn calls Theodorike now an Arria^, which before he calls
most honor^ble.
Because (as ye say now like a true man) he was an Arria^. Say ye so M. Horn?
Does the wind wagge on that side now? For Theodoricus was, not two leaves
before, The most honorable King Theodoriche, and the Supreme Head of the
Church of Rome to. But who says M. Horn, that he was an Arrian? Forsooth say
ye, Martin: and forsooth say I, the matter is ones again fitly and clerkly
handeled. For not only Martin, but Platina and Sabellicus, from whom ye
fetch your story, write it also. This Theodorike sends his Ambassadors to
Iustine, yea he sends Pope John him self, who with most humble suite sauced
(as you write) with tears, entreats the Emperor, that the Churches might be
restored to the Arrians. The Pope was then belike an Arrian him self. Surely
the simple Reader, can gather none other thing by you, especially the same
being dasshed in the margent to. Ye have not done well to tell half the tale,
and to tell it so suspitiouslye. What the Popes ^uit was to ^ustinus the
Emperor
The cause then of his earnest suite was, that otherwise Theodorike threatened,
to shut up all the Catholic Churches in Italy, and under his dominion.
Yea your Author Martinus writes, that he menaced to kill all the Catholics in
Italy: whom he calls Christianos. This was the cause of his ernest suite,
not for the favor he bore to the Arria^s, but for the favor he bore to the
Catholics and their Churches. Justinius received those Ambassadors, as you
truly say, honorably. And as Sabellicus writes, the Emperor was not only
crowned of Pope John, but at his first coming most humbly and reuere^tly fell
at his feet before him and honored him. But Justinius did not so honorably
entertain him at Constantinople, Excepit Justinius pontificem vententem multa
veneratione, dimissusque ad eius pedes adorauit.
but Theodorike at his return did deal with him as homly, casting hi^ into
prison at Raue^na, where what for hunger, what for loathsome filthiness of the
prison, shortly after he died a Martyr. About which time or a little after, he
slew the honorable Senators, Symachus and Boethius. Which thing al your three
Historiographers do write. Where ye will us to note that, not only the Pope
showed his obedience and subjection to the godly Emperor, but also that the
secular Princes ordained laws ecclesiastical, etc. Your double note will prove
but a double untruth. For the Pope in this supplication obeyed not the godly
Emperor Iustine, but the Arrian King Theodorike: Neither was it obedience of
duty, Martinus Pol. col. 98 Plat. in Joan. 1. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 9.
but a submission of charity: partly to qualify the fury of the Arrian
tyrant, partly to save harmless the whole number of Catholics in Italy,
which by The Emperors edict should consequently have been destroyed. Again this
decree of Iustine was no ecclesiastical matter, concerning any alteration of
religion, any deposing of Bishops, any order of Church discipline or such
like, but only a decree for banishi^g of Arrian heretics, and of overthrowing
their Synagogs: which manner of decree being of denou^ced heretics, belongs
properly to the civil Magistrate, and is an external or temporal matter, no
spiritual or ecclesiastical cause, namely such as we join issue with you.
King Phillip has banished heretics out of this land and has commanded their
Syn^gogues to be overthrown. But he is not therefore taken for Supreme
governor in all causes, or in any cause ecclesiastical: Neither do or ever did
his subjects swear to any such Title.

M. Horn. The.66. Division. page 38. a.
Within a while after this ^hon, was Agapetus Pope, whom Theodatus the
King, sent on his Embassage unto the Emperor Iustinianus, to make a suit or
treaty in his behalf. When the Emperor had enterteined this Ambassador
with much honor, and granted that he came for, touching Theodatus, he
earnestly both with fair words and soul, assailed this Pope, to bring him
to become an Eutychian: the which when he could not win at his hands,
being delighted with his free speech and constancy, he so liked him, that he
foorthvvith (.183.) The.183. Untruth. For Pope Agapetus deposed Anthymus and
placed Menna in his room not justinian.
deposed Anthemius bishop of Constantinople, because he was an Eutychian, and
placed Menna a Catholic man, in his room. Agapetus died in his legacy, in
whose room was Syluerius made Pope, by the means, or rather, as Sabellicus
says, by the commandment of the King Theodatus, the which until this
time, was wo^t to be done by the authority of the Emperors (says Sabellicus)
for the revenge whereof Iustinianus was kyndled to make wars against
Theodatus. Syluerius was shortly after quarrelled vvithal by the Emp^resse,
through the means of Vigilius, who sought to be in his room, and was by the
Emperors (184) The.184. Untruth. By violence banished, not by authorite
deposed.
authority deposed. The which act although it were altogether unjust, yet it
declares the authority that the Prince had over the Pope: who like a good
Bishop, as he would not for any threats do contrary to his conscience and
office: so like an (185) The.185. Untruth. Ridiculouse.
obedient subject, he acknovvleged the Princes authority: being sent for, came:
being accused, was ready with hu^blenes to have excused and purged him self:
and when he could not be admitted thereunto, he suffered him self (186)
The.186. Untruth. As shall appear.
obedie^tly to be spoiled of the Bissoplike apparaile, to be displaced out of
his office, and to be clothed in a Monastical garement.

The same measure that Vigilius did give unto Syluerius, he himself being Pope
in his place, received shortly after, with an augmentation, for he was in
like sort within a while (187) The 187. Untruth. By violence he was
banished, not by authority deposed. See our Return. Art 3. page 77.
deposed by the Emperors authority, because he would not keep the promise
which he had made unto the Emperesse, and was in most cruel wise dealt
with all: which cruelty was the rather shevved to him by the means and
procurement (as Sabellicus notes) of Pelagius, whom Vigilius had placed to be
his Suffragan in his absence.

The.19. Chapter. Of Justinian the Emperor, and diverse Popes and Bisshoppes
under him.
Stapleton.
ALL this stands in two points. First, that an other Pope, Agapetus by name,
was again sent in Embassage of Theodatus the King. But this (as Liberatus
writes) was a tyrannical force, Libera^us cap. 21.
made both to the Pope, and to the whole Senate of Rome. These Arrian and
barbarouse Gothian Kings are no fit examples of gouernmente due to godly
Catholic Princes. And their utter destruction followed immediately after, under
Belisarius Justinians Captain. Such blessed presidents M. Horn has found out,
to build his imagined Supremacy upon. The next point is, in the deposing of two
Popes by the Emperor Justinian, wherein we need by so much the less to enlarge
our aunsweare, for that M. Horn freely and franckly of him self confesses
that they were unjustly deposed. Again, that you say, the Pope suffered him
self obediently to be spoiled etc. If your tale were true, that were you know,
Tom. 2. Conc. in vitae Siluerij. Platina in Siluerio. Liratus. c. 22
but an homly obedience: but now he suffered not that spoil as you imagine,
obediently: but was brought to that point by a very craft and train, as in
Platina and Liberatus it may be seen. This therefore may pass for an other of
M. Horns untruths. So hard it is for such Protestant Prelates to tell a true
tale. With the like truth you write, that the Pope like an obedient subject,
acknowleged the Princes authority. And why? Because forsooth he suffered himself
to be cloistred up by force of Belisarius (or rather his wife) the Emperors
Captain. If such patience parforce prove a subjection, then is the true man an
obediente subject also to the thief, when he yeldeth him up his purse in
the high way to save his life.

But we say if there had been just cause to depose them: yet neither
the emperor, nor the Council could lawfully have deposed them. And because good
Reader, If ye will see more of these two Popes, se the co^futatio^ of the
Apology. Act. 1. Co^sta^t. 5. syn. to. 2. Con. p. 71. c. 2. b. Definite
sa^ctissimi ipu^ alienu^ esse, and nudu^ ab o^ni epis. dign. atque efficacia.
Ibid. p. 67. col. 2. a. Agapetus Anthimu^ co^de^nauit ^t oi^ dign. sacerd. and
officio nudauitet oi^ episcopat. and orthodoxonoi^e. Justin. in authent. in
constit. co^t. Anth. Vide 5. Synodu^ Co^st. Act. 1. pa. 67. col. 1. b. Et
Liber. c. 21. To. 2. Conci in vita Vigilij. Liberatus. Cap. 22.
thou shall have a short and a ready proof, and that framed to thy hand
already by M. Horn, I remit thee to the fourth Roman Council, whereupon M.
Horn lately pleaded, and to the very same sentence that M. Horn did him self
allege. But yet by the way I must score up as an untruth, that Justinian
deposed Anthimus. For it was not Iustinia^, but Pope Agapetus that gave
sentence of depositio^ against hi^: nor he was not deposed at that time, but
before. In deed Iustinia^ executed the sentence, and thrust him out of
Constantinople, and banished him, though thempresse took part with him. For
fiirst we find, that Agapetus was desired by a supplication of diverse of the
East, to depose him. We have also in the acts of the.5. general Council
declared, that Agapetus did depose him. In case these testimonies will not
serve, ye shall hear Justinian him self, that shall tell you that it was not he,
but Agapetus that deposed Anthimus. Que^admodum nuper factu^ esse scimus circa
Anthymu^, qui quide^ deiectus est de sede huins vrbis a sancto and gloriosae
memoriae Agapeto sanctiss Romans Ecclesiae pontifice. Even, says Justinian, as
we know it happened of late to Anthimus, who was displaced from the sea of
this imperial city by Agapetus of holy and gloriouse memory, bishop of the
holy Church of Rome. Neither was Vigilius deposed by the Emperous authority,
as M, Horn fableth, but for not yelding to the Eutychian Emperesse, Justinians
wife, he was by a train brought to Constantinople and so banished. And all
this was done rather by the wicked Emperesse, then by Iustinia^: who (as
Liberatus writes) restored again both Siluerius (though by the means of
Belisarius he was carried away again into banishment) and Vigilius also,
though he dyed by the way in Sicilia. This Emperesse was a^ Eutychian hereti^e.
Such examples only make for M. Horn


M. Horn. The.67. Division. page 38. b.
About this time, Epiphanius Bishop of Constantinople, as Liberatus, sayih,
died, in whose roune the Empress placed Anthymus. About which time, was
great strife between Gaianus and Theodosius, for the bisshopricke of
Alexandria, and within two months, says Liberatus, the Empress Theodora
sent Narses a noble man, to enstall Theodosius, and to banissh Gaianus:
Theodosius being banisshed, the sea was vacant: whereunto Paulus (who came to
Constantinople to plead his cause before the Emperor, against certain
stubborn monks) was appointed, and he received, says Liberatus, (.188.)
The.188. untruth. The words of Liberatus foully malmed in the midst.
authority of the Emperor, to remove heretics, and to ordeine in their
places men of right faith. This Paulus was shortly after accused of murder,
whereupon the Emperor sent Pelagius the Popes proctour, lying at
Constantinople, joining unto him certain other bissops (.189.) The.189.
Untruth not with co^missio^, but to do it by their means, without whom (by
order of the canons) he could never have done it.
with commission to depose Paulus from the bissoplike office, which they did:
and they ordered for him Zoilus, whom afterward the Emperor deposed, and
ordered Apollo, who is now the Bishop of Alexandria (says Liberatus).
Certain Monks met with Pelagius in his return from Gaza (vvher Paulus
was deposed) toward Constantinople, bringyng certain articles, gathered out
of Origenes works, minding to make suyte unto the Emperor, that both Origin
and those articles, might be condemned, whom Pelagius for malice he bare to.
Theodorus bishop of Caesarea in Cappadocia, an earnest fautor of Origin, did
further all that he might. Pelagius therefore does earnestly entreat the emperor,
that h^ would command that to be do^ which the Monks sued for: to wit, that
Orige^ with those articles should be damned. The which suit the emperor
granted. being glad (.190.) The.190. Untruth. False translation. Gaude^s se
etc. Being glad, that him self gave judgment etc. The Author thereby,
notes the Emperors ambitiousnes.
to give judgment upon such matters, and so by his commandme^t, the sentence of
the great curse against Orige^, and those articles were dravve^ forth in
vvriting and subscribed with their hands, and so sent to Vigilius the bishop
of Rome, to Zoilus bissop of Alexandria, Euphemius of Antioche, and Peter
bishop of Jerusalem. These Bishops receiving this sentence of the curse
(.191.) pronounced by themperours co^maundme^t, and subscribing thereunto:
Origin was condemned being dead, who before long ago on live was condemned.

Stapleton.
Here is a myngle mangle I can not tell whereof, and a tale told of a tubbe, for
any reason or certain scope that I see in it. Here have we now, that
themperours wife places and sets in bishops to. For it was Theodora the
Eutychian Emperesse that placed and displaced the bishops here named: saving
Paulus which was made by Pelagius the Popes Legate at Constantinople: The.191.
Untruth, These words pronounced by the Emperors co^ma^deme^t, are not in
Liberatus Lib. c. 20. and. 23 Accepit abimpera. potestate^ super ordinationem
Ducu^ ac tribunoru^ vt remove ret haereticos, and pro eis orthodoxos ordinaret.
Lib. c. 23.
which thing M. Horn concealeth. But I marvel by what warrant that Empress
did all this. I dare say not by M. Knoxes and his fellows, of whom I have
spoken. And what bishop, think you, that she sets in? No better surely then
her self: that is, Anthimus the captain of the heretics of that time. But
this gear goes handsomely in and out, all things I warrante you in dew order
and proportion: even in as good, as the matter is good it self. For now M.
Horn, after he has declared, that Anthimus was deposed from his bishoprike,
is returned to show how he was first ordered and made bishop. We have then a
tale told, to no purpose in the world, of Paulus the bishop and a murderer,
deposed, and well and orderly to, I trow by Pelagius the Popes proctour, and
so how M. Horn frames his primacy hereof, God woteth, I wotte not in all the
world. For as for Justinians commission to depose bishops, if M. Horn mean of
such as King Edward gave in England of late, it is M. Horns commission and not
Justinians. Neither has his author any such thing. But only that the emperor
gave the bishop authority, to appoint Captains and other of the Emperors
officers, to help forward the execution. Nay says M. Horn, the wurste is
behind. For Justinian the emperor gave his judgment upon Origenes and cursed
him to. Here in deed somewhat might have been said saving that we have said
somewhat alredie of such manner of cursing, and sauinge that M. Horn of his
great courtesy has eased us, and has made (I trow against his will, but
nothing against his skill) a full answer for us: saying that Origenes was long
before this time, yea yet lyvinge condemned. The^ was there here no new
sentence or determination made by Justinian, but a confirmation of the old:
and no more matter of supremacy, then if a man should beshrewe Luthers cursed
heart for his new broched heresies, and curse them and him to: his heresies
being many hundred years before condemned, and cursed by many a good virtuous
clerk, and by many general and other Councils to Neither did Iustinia^ give
any sentence of curse against Origin him self, Cap. 23.
but as Liberatus says; at his commandment or procuri^g the chief
Patriarchs, of Rome, of Alexandria, of Antioch, and of Jerusalem did it and so
by the ordinary Judges in this case, not by the Emperors only or absolut
commandment he was condemned. And we find in the acts of the.5. general
Counsel, Action. 4. Co^. 5. Co^sta^. ca 11.
Origin condemned with Arius, Macedonius, Euthyches and other.

M. Horn. The.68. Division. page 3^. a.
When Theodorus bishop, of Caesarea in Cappadocia heard of this condemnation,
to be revenged he labored earnestly with the Emperor, to condemn Theodorus
Mopsuestenus a famous adversary of Origin, the which he brought to pass by
overmuch fraud, abusing the Emperor to the great slander and offense of the
Church. Thus in all these Ecclesiastical causes, it appears the Emperor had
the (.192). The.192. untruth. The bisshops not the Emperor had the chief
intermedli^g, as it has well appeared.
chief entermedling, who although at the last was beguyled by the false
bisshops: yet it is worthy the noting by whom this offense in the Church
came, which appears by that, that follovveth: I believe that this is
manifest to al men (says Liberatus) that this offense entered into the Church
by Pelagius the Deaco^, and Theodorus the Bishop, the which eue^ Theodorus him
self, did openly publishe with clamours: crying, that he and Pelagius were
worthy to be burnt quick, by whom this offense entered into the world.

Stapleton.
M. Horn now will bring us a pretty conclusion and prove us, because bishopes
be at dissension and abuse the Prince assisting now the one part, now the
other that the prince is supreme head. Evil successe^, o^ princes i^^ermedling
i^ causes ecclesiastical.
Whereof will rather very well follow this conclusion. Experience shows that
princes the more they intermedled in causes of religion, the more they troubled
the Church, the more they were the^ selves abused, and also misused others:
Therefore princes are no mete persons to be supreme heads in such causes.
Examples hereof are plenty.

Constantin the great persuaded by the Donatistes most importunat suyt, August.
Epist. 166.
waded so far over the borders of his own vocation, that (as S. Augustine
writes) a sanctis antistibus veniam erat petiturus, Tripar. l. 3. c. 8. and.
12.
it came to the point he should ask pardon of the holy bishops. The same
Emperor by the suit of the Arrians meddled so far with bishops matters, that he
banished the most innocent, most godly, and most learned bishop Athanasius:
whereof in his deathebed he repented, willing him by testament to be restored.

Theodosius the first, Niceph. li. 12. c. 24.
persuaded with the smothe tongue of Flauianus the unlawful and perjured bishop
of Antioch did take his part wrongefully against the west bisshops and the
greatest part of Christe^dom: wwhereof we have before spoken.

Theodosius the second, defended the Ephesine conuenticle against Pope Leo,
seduced by Dioscorus and Eutyches, Co^. Chalc. Act. 1. and 10.
or rather abused by one of his privy chamber Chrysaphius an Eunuche: and
wynked at the m^^dering of holy Flauianus, whom the Chalcedon Coun^^ll calls
Martyr.

Lib. ca. 18.
Zenon the Emperor deceived by Acatius of Constantinople, banished John Talayda
the Catholic patriarch of Alexandria, who appealed from the Emperor to Pope
Simplicius. And now in like manner this Emperor Justinian while he was over
busy in ecclesiastical matters, as one that took great delight (so notes
Liberatus) to give judgment in such matters, Cap. 23. and. 24. Council. Chalc.
Act. 10. in fine.
being deceived by Theodorus of the sect of Acephali, condemned Theodorus
Mopsuestenus and Ibas two most catholic bishops, and highly praised in the
Chalcedon Council, whereof sprung up in the Church a most lamentable tragedye
for the space of many years as all writers do pitefully report. Niceph. lib.
17. ca. 29.30. and 31.
This same Justinian also banished the good bishop of Constantinople Eutychius
for not suffering him to alter Religion. But he restored him again in his
deathbed, as Constantine did Athanasius. He would have banished also
Anastasius an other Catholyke bishop of Antioche, because he would not yield to
his heresy of Aphthartodocitae. Such examples ought rather to teach Princes not
to intermedle with matters above their vocation (truly as much as the soul
passes the body) then to give them any presidentes of supreme gouernemente,
yea IN ALL CAUSES, as Master Horn and his fellows, as long as Princes favor
them would give unto them.

M. Horn. The.69. Division. page 39. a.
This Pelagius as yet was but Suffragan or proctour for the Pope, who
afterward in the absence of Pope Vigilius his master, crepte into his See, in
the midst of the broiles that Totylas King of the Goths made in Italye,
when also he came to Rome. In the which History is to be noted the Popes
(.193.) The.193. Untruth. This was no subjection in ecclesiastical matters, but
Rome being then conquered by Totylas, Pelagius vithall the City submited them
selves.
subjection to Totylas, whom humbly on his knees he acknovvleaged, to be his
Lord, appointed thereto of God, and him self as all the rest to be his
servant. Note also how the King sent him Embassadoure, what charge, and
that by Oath, of his voyage, of his message, and of his return, the King
straightly gave unto him: how buxomelie in all these things he obeyed: How
last of all tovvard the Emperor (being commanded by him to tell his message)
he fell down to his feet, and with tears both to him and to his Nobles, he
ceased not to make most lamentable and humble supplication, till without
speed, but not without (.194.) The.194. Untruth. Slanderous as shall appear.
reproach, he had leave to return home. But least you should take these
things, to set forth that Princes had only their jurisdiction over the
Ecclesiastical persons, and that in matters Temporal, and not in causes
Ecclesiastical, mark what is written by the Historians. Platina amongst
the Decrees of this Pope Pelagius, tells (and the same witnesses
Sabellicu^) that Narses the Emperors other deputy, Ioyntelye with Pelagius
did decree, that none by ambition should be admitted to any of the holy
Orders. Pelagius moreover vvriteth unto Narses, The.195. Untruth. For the
Decree of Narses was no ecclesiastical matter but an execution of the church
Canons made before.
desiring him of his ayed against all the Bisshoppes of Liguria, Venetiae, and
Histria, which would not obey him, putting their aff^aunce in the authority
of the first Council of Constantinople. In which Epistle amongst other
things he vvriteth on this wise: Your honor must remember what God wrought
by you at that time, when as Totyla the tyrant possessing Histriam and
Venetias: the French also wasting all things, and you would not
nevertheless This proves naught else but that (as Pelagius the first has
ordained) the sec^lar word helped, when the spiritua^l could not prevail.
suffer a Bis^hoppe of Myllaine to be made, until he had sent word from
thence to the most mild Prince (meaning the Emperor) and had reciued answer
again from him by writing what should be done, and so both he that was
ordained Bisshoppe, and he that was to be ordained, were brought to Rauenna at
the appointment of your high authority. Not long after, Pelagius. 2. because
he was chosen In^ussu Principis, without the Emperors commandment, and could
not send unto him by reason the town was beseged, and the huge risyng of the
waters stopped the passage: as soon as he might being elected Pope, he sent
Gregory to crave the Em^erours pardone* and to obtain his good will. For in
those days (says Platina) the Clergy did nothing in the Popes election
except the election had been allowed by the Emperor.

Stapleton.
M. Horn tells us a tale after his old wont, that is without head or
tail, to abuse his ignorant reader with a confuse heap of disordered and
false words. Pelagius was sent by the Romans to King Totilas to entreat of
peace, and that he would for a time cease from war, and give them truce.
Saying that if in the mean while they had no succor, Sabellic. Aeneld. 8.
lib. 4.
they would yield the city of Rome to him. Pelagius could win none other
answer at his hands, bu^ that they should beat down the walls, receive his
army, and stand to his curtesy and mercy. Totilas being afterward in
possession of the City* co^cerni^g pope Pelagius set Ambassador to the emperor.
and fearing wars from the Emperor Justinian, sent Pelagius to Justinian, to
travail with him for peace: sending him withal word, that in case he would
invade Italye, he would destroy Rome, and pluck it down fast to the ground.
Totilas took an oath of Pelagius and his other ambassadors to do his message
faythfullie, and to return again their ambassade exployted. Pelagius most
pitefullye and with many tears layethe before Justinian the miserable state
and the utter destruction and desolation of Rome impedente, unless he would
forbear war with Totilas: yea he and his fellows fell upon their knees
most humblye beseching him to have compassion of the city. But in fine
Iustinia^ would not relent. Whereupon sone after their return, Rome was set al
on fire by Totylas, and no living creature, man, woman, nor child suffered
there to inhabit. Prye now M. Horn and pycke out here what ye can to
establishe your primacye: your folly is to open to be in this matter with many
words refuted. Here is no one matter Ecclesiastical, and that ye see well
inowghe: and therefore your self as fast as ye can wound steal away from
yt, and prove your matter otherwise. But Sir ye shall not so steal away, but
beside the note of extreme folly, to busy your self and your Readers with
that, which your self can not deny, nothing to towch spiritual matters, but
that ye shall carry with you a lie or two. Else tell us why you will have us to
note the Popes subjection to Totylas, Platina in Pelagio. 1. Sabell. Aenead. 8
lib. 4.
seeing that neither Pelagius was then Pope, Vigilius yet living at
Constantinople, neither was he any other way subject, then as to a Tyrant. For
Totilas (who for his rage and crueltyes was called Flagellum Dei, the Scourge
of God) at that time took Rome, and entered with the conquest. Pelagius did
that homage to him, to obtain mercy for his poor Cytyzens. And when Totylas
seeing him coming toward him, said: What means this o Pelagius? come thou
to me as a suppliant? Pelagius answered, saying. Yea Sir I come to you, seeing
God has made you my Lord. But have mercy, I beseech you, upon ^our servant,
have mercy upon the poor Captive City. And this lo was the subjection of
Pelagius made to Totylas, which you wish to be noted M. Horn, as though it
made any thing for the Popes subjection in spiritual matters. Tell us also why
ye write, that he departed with reproach. What reproach had he at Justinians
hand? Your author Sabellicus shows of none. But see the man's folish wilynes.
In deed Sabellicus writes that Pelagius was noted as a fauorer of Anthimus:
but then says he withal, that Pelagius did detest it of all things to seem
to favor him. Well, to supply this defect of his superfluous liyng talk of
Pelagius be bri^geth forth a decree against symony, made by Pelagius and Narses
th'Emperors deputy. This is no matter of faith, M. Horn, no, nor no new decree
of manners, but such as had been decreed long before. And therefore but an
execution of the old Canons: which Narses might meddle withal well inoughe. There
is then to make up the matter yet ones again a declaration concerning the
interest of the Emperor in the election of Bishops and Popes too: whereunto
at this time we need not greatly to say any thing: so much has been said hereof
before.

M. Horn. The.70. Division. page 40. a.
About the time of Pelagius the first his Papacy, was there a Council holden
at Towers in France, by the license and consent of Arithbertus the King, for
the reformation of the Church discipline, wherein appears, that the Kings
authority was (.196.) The.196. Untruth. In that Council there is no such
thing.
necessarily required to confirm and strengthen the discipline. For where
they decree of the maids or vviddovves, that shall not be married, without
the consent of the parents, which is an especial matter Ecclesiastical,
they declare (.197.) The.197. Untruth. They declare that the due observation
thereof (not the strength) depe^ded upon those Princes good laws.
the strength thereof to depend upon the commandment of the Prince. Not only
(say they) the Kings, Childebert and Clotharius of honorable memory, kept and
preserved the constitution of the laws touching this matter, the which now
the King Charibert their successor has confirmed or strengthened by his
precept.

Stapleton.
Now is Master Horn revolted to France again, but not to tarry there long.
For suddenly he returns again to Constantinople. His short tale consists
in two lies. First when he says the Kings authority was necessarily required
to confirm the discipline of the Church. For that neither is in the Council,
neither can be gathered out of it. The second is, that the Counsel declares
that the strength of their Decree, being a special matter Ecclesiastical
depends upon the commandment of the Prince. For the Council declares
only, that those good Kings of France kept the Constitution of the Church in
that behalf: Tripart. li. 7. ca. 4.
and forced by law the due observation thereof. Like as Iouinian the
Emperor, made it death by law, to defile a Virgin or Nonne. Though that
sin before, was by the Church condemned. All this does but multiply
words. It proves nothing your imagined Supremacye. Mary if you will know M.
Horn, what this Council by your self alleged, makes for the Popes
Supremacy, I will not let to tell it you. The Fathers of the Council do
say: Conc. Turo^. 2 can. 21.
What Priest is he that dare be so bold, as to do contrary to such Decrees
as come from the Sea Apostolic? And a little after. And whose authority may
take place, if it be not theirs, whom the Apostolic See sends and makes
his deputies or Referendaries? Our Fathers have ever kept that, which their
authority commanded. Thus you fight well for us, but nothing for your self.

M. Horn. The.71. Division. page 40. a.
The Emperor Iustinianus calls the Bisshoppes of all Churches unto a
General Council at Constantinople, the which is called the fifte
oecumenicall Synod, to repress the insolence of certain Heretics, who
taught and maintained Heresies and Schisms, to the great disquieting of the
Church against the doctrine establisshed in the four forenamed General
Councelles. In the time of this Council Menna, Euag. li. 4. ca. 38.
the Bisshoppe of Constantinople departed out of this life, in whose room the
Emperor placed Eutychius. The Emperor governs and directs all things in
this Council, Niceph. li. 17. ca. 27.
as the Emperors before him had done in the other General Synodes, as
appears by the vvriting, which he sent unto the Bisshoppes, wherein he
shows, that the right believing godly Emperors his ancestors did alvvaies
labor, to cut of the heresies sprung up in their time, by calling together
into Synod the most religious Bisshops, All this is granted, but M. Horns
Primacie never a vvhitte thereby furdered.
and to preserve the holy Church in peace: and the right faith to be sincerely
preached and taught. He allegeth the'xa^ples of Co^sta^tinus Magnus, Theodosius
the elder, Theodosius the younger, and Martianus the Emperors: who (says he)
called the former general Councelles, were present them selves in their own
persons, did aid and help the true confessors, and took great travail
upon them, that the right faith should prevail, and be preached. Our
forenamed ancestors of godly memory ( says he) did strengthen and confirm
by their laws, those things which were decided in every of those Councelles,
and did expulse the Heretics, which went about to gainesaye the
determination of the four forenamed General Councelles, and to unquiet the
Churches.

He protests, that from his first entrance, he made these beginnings and
foundation of his Imperial government, to vvitte, the unity in faith
agreeable to the four General Councelles, amongst the Church ministers,
from the East to the West: the restraigning of schisms and contentions
stirred up, by the fautours of Eutyches and Nestorius, against the Chalcedon
Council: the satisfying of many that gainsaied the holy Chalcedon Council,
and the expulsion of others, that perseuered in their errors, out of the holy
Churches and Monasteryes: To the end that concord and peace of the holy
Churches and their Priests, being firmly kept, one, and the self same
faith, which the four holy Synodes did confess, might be preached
throughout Gods holy Churches, He declares how he had consulted with them
by his letters and messengers about these matters, and how they declared their
judgments unto him by their writings: not vvithstanding seeing certain
Heretics continue in their heresies: Therefore I have called you ( says he)
to the royal City ( meaning Constantinople) exhorting you being assembled
together, to declare once again your minds touching these matters. He
sh^vveth that he opened these controversies to Vigilius the Pope, at his being
with him at Constantinople: And we asked him ( says he) his opinion herein:
and he, not once nor twice, but oftentimes in writing, and without writing,
did curse the three wicked articles, etc. We commanded him also by our
Judges, and by some of you, The Emperor (198) commands the Pope to com to
the sinod.

The.198. Untruth. For not in that sense as M. Horn imagines. vilz to enforce
thereby a Supreme gouernemente.


to come unto the Synod with you, and to debate these three Articles together
with you, to the end that an agreeable form of the right faith might be set
forth: and that we asked both of him and you in writing touching this matter:
that either as wicked articles, they might be condemned of all: or else, if he
thought them right, he should show his mind openly: But he answered unto us:
that he would do severely by him self concerning these three points, and
deliver it unto us. He declares his own judgment and belief, to be
agreeable with the faieth set forth in the four General Councelles. He
prescribes unto them the special matters, that they should debate and decide
in this Synod: whereof the final end is (says he) That the truth in every
thing may be confirmed, and wicked opinions condemned. And at the last, he
concludes with an earnest and godly exhortation, to seek Gods glory only, to
declare their judgments agreeable to the holy Gospel, touching the matters he
propounds, and to do that with convenient speed. Dat. 3. Nonas Maias,
Constantinopoli.

Stapleton.
Here M. Horn, as he has other Emperors and Princes, so would he now bear
Justinian in hand also, that he is and ought to be the Supreme head and
governor in all causes even Ecclesiastical and Spiritual. But Justinian, if
you will hearken to his laws and Constitutions, will tell you flatly that
such a head agrees not with his shoulders. He will not be made such a monster
at your hands. You shall find him as very a Papist for the Popes Supremacy,
as ever was any Emperor before him, or sense him. For who I pray you was it, M
Horn, that by open proclamatio^s and laws for ever to continue enacted, that
the holy Ecclesiastical Canons of the four first Councels shall have the
strength and force of an imperial law? Justinians testimonies for the Popes
primacie.

Co^st. 131 ex tra^sl. hal Sancimus, vt sancti ecclesiastici canones, qui^a
sanctis. 4. Co^cilijs, Niceno, Constant. Ephesians. and Chalcedon. expositi sunt,
vicem legum obtine ant. Praedictorum enim sanctorum Concilioru^ decreta perinde
vt sacras scripturas suscipimus* and canones vt leges custodimus. Ac propterea
sancimus, vt secundum eorum definitiones sanctiss. veteris To. Papae, primu^
oi^m sacerd. sit. Su^mi po^tificatus apice^ apud Romam esse nemo e^ qui
dubitet. Lib. 1. Cod. Justin. de summae Trinitate. Ideoque oe^s sacerdotes
vniuersi orientalis traectus et subijcere et vnire sedi vest. Sanctitatis
properauimus. and mox. Nec eni^ patimur quicqua^ quod ad ecclesiaru^ statu^
pertinet, quamuis manifestu^ and indubitatu^ sit quod mouetur, vt no^ e^t
vestrae i^notescat Sanct. quae Caput est oim sanctaru^ eccli^aru^. Secu^du^
eoru^ definitiones etc. vt supra constable. 131. Sancimus sacras seque^tes regulas
etc. constable. 5. Secundu^ diuinas regulas sancimus sacras per omnia sequentes
regulas. constable. 6.


Was it not Justinian? Who is yt that embraces the decrees of those holy
Counsels, even as he does the holy and sacred scriptures? And keeps their
Canons as he does the imperial laws? Who but Justinian? Who enacted also, that
according to the definition of those four Councels, the Pope of Rome shall be
taken for the chief of all Priests? Justinian. Who in an express law
declared, that no man doubts, but that the principality of the highest
bisshoprike rests in Rome? Justinian. Who declared to Pope John, that he
studied and labored, how to bring to subjection, and to an unity with the Sea of Rome all the priests of the East? Justinian. Who told him, that there
shall be nothing moved perteining to the state of the Church, be it never so
open and certain, but that he would signify it to his Holiness, being head of
all holy Churches? Justinian. Who declared, that in all his laws and doings
for matters ecclesiastical, he followed the holy Canons made by the Fathers?
Justinian. Who published this law that, when any matter ecclesiastical is
moved, his lay officers should not intermedle, but suffer the Bissoppes to
end yt according to the Canons? This self same Justinian.

What great impudency then is it for you to obtrude him this title of supreme
governor, which so many of his express laws do so evidently abhor? What
shame, infamy and dishonor should it be for him, to accept any such title,
the Canons of the holy Catholic Church, Sequentes igitur ea quae sacris
definita su^t Canonib. Co^. 123. Si ecclesiasticu^ negotiu^ sit, nullam
co^munione^ habento ciuiles magistratus cu^ ea disceptatione, sed religiosiss.
episcopi se cundu^ sacros canones negotio fine^ i^ponu^^^. Constable. 109.
Haereticos and illi dixeru^t, et nos dicimus, quicu^que me^brum sanctae Dei
catholicae and apostolicae ecclesiae no^ sunt. in qua and omnes sanctissimi
totius habitati orbis paetriarchae tam Romae occidentalis, quam huius regiae
vrbis, and Alexa^driae and Theopolis and H^erosolymoru^, and oe^s sub ijs
co^stituti episcopi vno ore Apostolicam fide^ and traditione^ praedica^t. Qui
igitur inco^taminata coi^one, in Catholica ecclesia Dei ama^tiss. huius
sacerdotib. no^ participant, opt. iure vocamus haereticos.
and his own laws, standing so plainly to the contrary? What? would you have
him an heretic, as you are? Has not he in his Laws pronounced him to be an
heretic, that does not communicate in faith with the holy Church, especially
with the Pope of Rome and the four patriarchs? Has he not also in his said
laws showed, that the Pope of Rome has the primacy over all priests, by the
first four general Councelles, unto the which the Pope and all other
patriarchs have agreed? Obtrude not therefore this presumptuous Title to this
Emperor, who of al other most shunned it. Bring forth M. Horn, what
ecclesiastical Constitutions and decrees you will or can, made of this Emperor
Iustinia^. Al will not serve your purpose one jot. This only of the diligent
Reader being remembered, that all such laws he referred to the Popes judgment:
that he made not one of his own, but followed in them all, the former Canons
and holy Fathers. Last of all that he enacteth expressly, that in ecclesiastical
matters, lay Magistrates shall not intermeddle, but that bishops shall end al
such matters according to the Canons. These three things being well remembered
and borne away, now tell on M. Horn, and bring what you can of Justinians
Constitutions in ecclesiastical matters.

The effect of all your Arguments in this Division, rests upon this
point, that Justinian made Laws for matters ecclesiastical, which thing I
need not further answer then I have done. Saving partly, that this lie of M.
Horns would not be ouerpassed: wherein he imagines all things here spoken to
be done in the fifte general Council at Constantinople: whereas a great part
of them were done in an other Counsel at Constantinople under this Emperor,
which M. Horn does here unskillfully confou^de. Partly also to show yet ones
again, that Justinian himself does so expound his doings, Co^stit. 42 in
Nouel. Qua^ sententia^ ta^. etsi per se vale^tem, multo tame^ adhuc
valentiore^, reddit maiestas imperatoria, quae regia hac vrbe ipsu^ expellit.
How themperours be said to strengthen the laws of the Church. Tom. 2.
Council. page 21.
that M. Horn can not well wreste them to his purpose. For Justinian says. We
following the holy fathers etc. and so forth: as we by many places of Justinian
have declared before. Again speaking of things decreed in the Synod against
Zoaras. Your sentence, says he, being of power by yt se^fe, our imperial
majesty has made yt yet much stronger, which does expulse him out of this
imperial City. Lo M. Horn the decree of the Synod is strong, though the
Emperor never confirm it, and where is then become your imperial primacye?
Now farther you hear to what purpose the princes assiste: that is for the
furtheraunce of the execution. The bishops had deposed Zoaras, but they by
their power could not thrust him out of the City and banishe him. This must be
don by the civil power, and this did Justinian, and by that made the Councels
law the stronger. And so ye now hear of Iustinia^ himself, what is the
meaning of that which you here and so often allege, that Princes stre^ghthe^
the laws of the Church. And to show that the Supreme government, which is the
final Sentence and Judgment rested in the bisshops, not in the Emperor, in
the first Actio^ Theodorus the Emperors Officer, brings in the playntif
Bishops of Syria, and says to the Synod. Vt in his interpellantes, vos ipsis
finem imponatis. To the intent that you considering these supplications, may
make an end of the^. And in the same Action the Emperor himself again
affirms, that: Act. 1. page 61.
As often as the Sentence of the Priests has deposed any from their holy
rowmes, as unworthy of priesthood, so often the Empire was of the same mind,
and made the same order or co^stitutio^ with the Authority of the priests.
Where you see M. Horn, that the deposing of Priests or Bishops, proceeded
first from the Authority, Sentence and Judgment of the Priests: And was
afterward put in execution by the Imperial laws. That is, to say all
shortly. The bishops deposed. The Prince banished. For by death in those days
Princes proceeded not against the clergy though deposed and condemned in
general Council. I might now go forward for any thing of weight remaining:
sauinge that your marginal note, that the Emperor commands the Pope to come
to Council, stays me a little, as making some good appearance for you. Ye say
he commanded the Pope, but if ye had proved withal, that he had such
authority to command, then would the matter run better on your side: or
that ye could show that at this commandment he came to the Council, which
ye are not able to show. But yet am I able to show he came not. So that this
induces rather the Popes primacy, especially considering, In praeam. epist
Co^c. Chalced.
that he was at Co^sta^tinople, even when the Council was kept. Marcia^ also
sent his letters to Pope Leo to come to Chalcedo, and yet he came not, but sent
his deputies thither for hi^.

M. Horn. The.72. Division. Page 41 b.
The (.199.) The 199. untruth. There is no such Title.
Title prefixed to the first general Council, summoned by the commandment of
Justinian, tells in effect generally, both the matter and also who had the
chief authority in the ordering thereof: for it is entitled: The divine
ordinance and constitution of Justinian the Emperor against Anthymus, Seuerus,
Petrus, and Zoaras, Mennas the universal Archebisshop and Patriarche of
Constantinople, was present in this Council, who had adjoined unto him,
placed on his right hand, certain Bisshops, coadiutours, named and (.200.) The
200. untruth. Flat and open, as it shall appear.
appointed by the commandment of the Emperor, sent out of Italy from the sea
of Rome. When they were set thus in Council, The Emperor sent Theodorus one of
the masters of the Requests, or his Secretary, a wise man, unto the Synod:
Bisshops, Abbottes, and many other of the clergy, with their bills of
supplications, which they had put up unto the emperor, for redress of certain
matters Ecclesiastical. Theodorus makes relation unto the Synod hereof,
delivers the Bills of supplication to be considered on: presents the
parties to the Synod, and shows that this is themperours pleasure, that they
should (.201.) The 201. untruth. Not to dispatche (that word is not in the
Council) but finem imponere, to make an end of by final Sentence. The prince
the highest potentate next to God (202) in all causes.

The.202. untruth. You over rech your Author. In all causes, is more the^ your
Author said. God reserueth to the prince the fulness of direction in (.203.)
Ecclesiastical causes.

The 203. untruth, as before. For of Ecclesiastical causes, the Author
speaks not, but of banishing heretics.


dispatche and end these matters. Paulus the Bisshoppe of Apamea, in his bil of
supplication, offered to the most godly Emperor in the name of al his,
acknowledges him to be the highest Potentate in the world next unto God: who
has magnified his Empire, and throwe^ his aduersaris under him: because he
mainteineth the only and pure faith: offreth unto God pure Leven, that is to
say, true doctrine as incense, and burns the chafe (meaning false religion)
with unquenchable fire. And after the declaration of their Faith talking of
the Eutychian or counterfaite catholic, He desires the emperor, to whom God
has reserved the full authority to direct, to cut him from the Church, and to
expulse him out of his Dominions. In like sort the religious men, and the
Monasteries of Secu^da Syria, do offer up a book of supplication unto the
Emperor, beseeching him that he vvil command the Archebishoppe Mennas,
president of the council, to receive their book, and to (.204.) The.204.
untruth. False translation: for not, to considre, but Canonice finem accipere
to conclude etc.

The 205. untruth. A part of the sentence nipped of, quyte ouerthrovving M.
Horns purpose.


consider of it according to the Ecclesiastical Canons. The Emperor makes a
law and constitution, to ratify and confirm the judgment of the Synod
against Anthymus, and other heretics: wherein also he decrees touching many
other ecclesiastical matters or causes: as, No man to Rebaptize: to profane
the holy Communion: to call Conuenticles: to dispute further in those matters
concluded on: to publishe or set forth the Heretical books: to communicate
with them. And so knitteth up all, with this conclusion. We have decreed
these things for the common peace of the most holy Churches: Tom. 2. council.
pa. 20 Act. 1. Co^sta^. pa. 20 Prima ergo est sententia quae in Consta^tinopoli
co^tra Anthimum lata est, secunda autem sententiae quae in Constant. fuit
co^tra Seuerum Petru^ and Zoaram. Terita co^stitutio est ordinaria. Quarta
autem actio in Hierosolymis, et haec omnia in 4. me^sibus facta and sancitae
fuerunt.
these things have we determined by sentence. (.205.)

Stapleton.
You go on M. Horn, ever like to your self, and to your brother M. Jewel.
For as at the first, you begin with a great untruth, so you proceed on with
a great many more. I mean not that ye call the first for the fifte, let the
printer bear this, but for the residewe ye must take it upon your own
shulders. As first where ye speak of the title: there is no such title prefixed
before the Council: there is such a sentence in deed. But that it is a title
prefixed before the Council, as though this ordination were made before the
Council, and so should tell both the matters and who had the chief authority in
the ordering thereof, this is no simple lie. But ever ye shoot to far, or
come to short home. After those words by you rehearsed yt follows (which you
leave out) ad Petrum Archiepiscopu^ Hierosolimoru^: To Peter Archbishop of
Jerusalem, to who^ Iustinia^ did send this co^stitutio^, not before the
Counsel, but the Counsel being ended. The order of these sentences, as it is
declared in the acts of the Counsel was this. First there was a sentence given
at Constantinople against Anthymus. The^ was there an other sentence given
there against Seuerus, Petrus, and Zoaras. The^ was the constitution of
Justinian (whereof ye speak) made and sent to the bishop of Jerusalem, which
kept there also a Council and condemned Anthimus. And all this was done in four
months. And therefore yt ca^ not be the true title of this Counsel. And much
less tell the matter and who had chief authority there. But every man is not so
cunning as you, to make men ween, that the egg was a chycke before the hen
had hatched. Yet for one thing I here commend you, for telling us that the
Popes Legates in this Council were set in the right hand of the Patriarche
Menas, which I suppose makes somewhat for the Popes primacye. But that you
add, they were named and appointed by the commandment of the Emperor, I can
not comme^de you. For it is untruly said. They were the Popes own Legates and
deputies, of his own naming and appointing, not of the Emperors. For it
follows in the same Constitution of Justinian, Tom. 2. Conc. pa. 20. b.
touching these Legates: Omnibus quidem ex Italica regione ab Apostolica sede
nuper missis. All being lately sent out of Italy from the Sea Apostolic. In
like manner where you say, Theodorus a Master of the Requests to the Emperor,
(as you call him) delivered to the Synod the Bills of supplication to be
considered on, such consideration you find not in the words of Theodorus:
but this you find him say to the Synod. V^ in his interpellantes, vos ipsis
finem imponatis. To thentent that by your means in these matters they may be
ended and concluded. This the Emperors officer required of the Synod: that
they would make an end of the complaints laid in by certain Bisshoppes and
Monks. And this you conceal, and alter clean to a simple consideration, as
though the Council should have considered, and then the Emperor concluded.
And therefore yet ones again in this very Division, Tom. 2. Conc. pa. 23. col.
1.
you tell us of a book of supplication made by the Monasteries of Secunda
Syria, to the Emperor, that Menna the president of the Council should receive
their book and consider of it according to the Ecclesiastical Canons. The
words of your Author are: Quae in ipso insita sunt Canonice finem accipere
conuenientibus ad ipsum etc. that the contents of their book of supplication,
be ended and determined Cononically (not considered only) and that by the
accord (not of Menna only, whom only you name, being the bishop of
Constantinople) but, of the most holy Romans and the holy Synod. Thus your
false doctrine can not appear (when it comes to trial) but lode^ always
with fardels of untruths. But now I trow we shall quickly lose this
advantage. For strayte ye bring us forth a bishop that calls the Emperor
the higheste potentate in the world next unto God, maintayning the only and
pure faith: offeringe unto God pure leven of true doctrine, as incense, and
burning the chaff (meaning, as ye say, false religion) with unquenchable fire.
And think you M Horn, that if Iustinia^ now lived, he would take your
doctrine for pure fine flower, and not rather for stynking musty chafe or
bran? Well you have heard his judgment in part already. As for your bsshop
if he had said, in all causes, as you make hi^ to say in the margin, he had said
well toward your purpose, but nothing toward the truth. And therefore ye
having espied the former words not to come iumpe to your purpose, ye
vndershore them with an other saying of the said bisshoppe, who speakinge of
an heretyke, desires the Emperor to whom God had reserved the full authority
to direct, to cut him from the Church, and to expulse him out of his
dominions. Ye are not for all this much the nearer: for wherein the good bishop
meante the full direction, he him self shows: that is, in cutting away of
heretics, and expulsing them out of his dominions. And therefore your goodly
marginal note that, God reserueth to the Prince the fullness of direction in
causes Ecclesiastical quayleth, and is not worth a rushe: Neither is yt to be
collected by the express words of the bishop: and if yt were, saving for
your shrewd meaning and mistaking, yt were not greatly material. For it might
stand right well, meaning of the full and final direction, which is the
execution. Ye now lay forth many ecclesiastical co^stitutions: and among other,
Constable 42. Haec decreuimus sanctorum patrum canones sequuti.

^om. 2. C^c. pa. 62 Haec sente^t^auimus, sequentes sanctorum patru^ dogmata.


that no man shall dispute further in matters of religion ons concluded (where
are your Westmynster disputations the^?) and that the emperor had decreed all
those things by sentence, for the common peace of the Church. Ye say the truth,
but not all the truth, for ye have most falsely, following your accustomable
humor, left out iij. or iiij. words strayt ways following. We have (says
Justinian) determined these things following the decrees of the holy fathers.
Which words do set your self and your primacy to, quyt beside the sadle. And
thus, as the^perours conclusion, that knitteth up al, knitteth up our
conclusion to, for the ecclesiastical primacy, and unfolds al your false
conclusio^s in this your false book: So, if ye take and join the very
beginning of the said constitution to the wynding up of yt, the matter will be
much clearer: and so clear that Iustinia^s co^stitutio^ that your self do bring
forth, Conc. Constant. 5. Act. 1. To. 2. page 61.
may serve for a sufficient answer to al your book: concerning princes
intermedling in causes Ecclesiastical. We do (says Iustinia^) no strange
thing, or such as the^perors have not ben accustomed unto before, in maki^g
this present Law: (meaning against Anthimus, Tom. 2. Conc. Synod. 5. Act. 1.
page 61. col. 2. a

Rem non insolitam im^erio and nos facie^tes ad praesentem veni nus lege^.
Quoties enim sacerdotu^ sententia quosdam indignos sacerdotio de sacris sedibus
deposuit, que^ admodu^ Nestorium, Eutychen, Arrium, Macedonium and Eun^mium, ac
quosdam alios ad iniquitatem non minores illis: toties imperium eiusdem
sententia and ordinationis cum sacerdotum authoritate fuit: sic que diuina and
humana pariter concurrentia, vnam consonantiam rectis sententiis fecere:
quemadmodum and nuper factum esse contrae Anthymu^ scimus, qui quide^ deiectus
est de sede huius regiae vrbis a sanctae and gloriosae memoriae Agapeto,
sanctis. Ecclesiae antiquae Romae pontifice, eo quod etc.


Seuerus, and Zoaras) for as often as the bishops by their sentence have
deposed and displaced out of their holysees and dignities any unworthy parsons,
as Nestorius, Eutyches, Arius, Macedonius, and Eunomius, and certain other as
nawghty as they were: the^perors following their sentence and authority decreed
the same: So that ecclesiastical and temporal authority co^curring together,
made one agreement in right judgment. Even as we know it happened of Late
touching Anthimus, who was thruste out of the sea of this imperial cyty by
Agapetus of holy and gloriouse memory, the bishop of the most holy Church of
old Rome.

M. Horn. The.73. Division. page 42. a Nothing may be don in Church matters,
without the princes authority.

Al things being thus done, by the commandment of the Emperor, in the first
Action, and so forth, in the second, third, and fourth, after many
acclamations, the President of the Council Mennas, concludes: saying to the
Synod: That they are not ignorant of the zeal and mind, of the Godly
Emperor, toward the right Faith, and that nothing of those that are moved in
the Church (.206.) The.206. untruth double both in the text and in the margin:
standing in false tra^slatio^. Nihil eoru^ quae in sanctissima ecclesia
moue^tur co^uenit fieri. To. 2. council. p. 78. co. 2
ought to be don without his will and commandment.

Stapleton.
Now go ye M. Horn clerkly to work. For if ye can roundly and hansomly prove
this, ye may perchance set a new head upon Justinians shoulders: which yet
would be but an vgle and a monstrouse sight. But this is neither clerkly, nor
truly don of you; to turn Co^uenit, yt is mete, semely, or convenient: into
oportet, yt must or ought. I marvel ye bearing the state of a bishop, have so
little faith and honesty: or dwelling so nighe Winchester schole, so little sight
in the grammar. Mennas had condemned Anthimus: the Bishops and other cried,
that forwith he should co^de^ne Seuerus, Petrus, and Zoaras: as he did a while
after. To whom Mennas answered, that it was mete to co^sult with the emperor
first. which is very true: for his great zeal to the faith, and for that he
had the exequution of the sentence, this is like your other knacke before,
that Dioscorus and other must be deposed. Nos sicut scit vostra charitas,
apostolica^ sedem sequimur and obedimus: and ipsius commun^catores,
co^municatores habemus, and condemnatos ab ipsa and nos condemnamus. Act. 4.
page 87.
And surely I would have meruayled if Mennas had taken Justinian for the
supreme head who within four lines after declares the Pope to be the
supreme head: and that he did follow and obey hi^ in all things, and
communicated with them, that did communicate with him: and condemned those
whom he did condemn. Who also gave Anthimus the heretik a time of repentance
appointed by Pope Agapetus, and proceeded in Sentence against him, according to
the prescription of the Pope, Cyrillus Epist. 10. and 11. and Coelest. epi. 12.
inter epist. Cyril.
as Cyrillus proceeded against Nestorius in the Ephesine Council, according to
the limitation of Pope Celestinus.

M. Horn. The.74. Division. page 42. a.
Such is the authority of Princes in matters Ecclesiastical, that the Godly
ancient Fathers did not only confess, that nothing moved in Church matters
(.207.) The 207. untruth. The godly Fathers never confessed so.
ought to be done without their authority, but also did submit themselves
willingly with humble obedience, to the direct^on of the Godly Emperors, by
their laws (.208.) The 208. untruth. Notorious and impudent: often avouched,
but never proved.

Cod. lib. 1. tit. 17.


in all matters or causes Ecclesiastical, which they vvuld not have done* if
they had thought, that Princes ought not to have governed in Ecclesiastical
causes. The same zealous Emperor does declare, that the authority of the
Princes laws does rightly dispose and keep in good order, both spiritual and
temporal matters, and drives away all iniquity: wherefore he did not only
gather together as it were into one heap, tha laws that he him self had
made, and other Emperors before him, touching civil or temporal matters: but
also many of those laws and constitutions, which (.209.) The 209. untruth
Not which his Ancestors, but which the Apostles and fathers of the Church
had made before.
his ancestors had made in Ecclesiastical causes: Yea, there was nothing
perteyning to the Church gouernemente, which he did not provide for, order
and direct by his laws and Constitutions: Nou. Co^ 3. Themperours
ecclesiastical Laws.
wherein may evidently appear the authority of Princes, not only over the
persons, but also in the causes Ecclesiastical. He made a common and general
law to all the Patriarchs, touching the ordering of Bisshoppes, and all
other of the Clergy, and Church Ministers: prescribing the number of them to
be such, as the revenues of the Churches may well sustain: affirming that
the care over the Churches, and other religious houses, perteine to his
oversight: And does further inhibite, that the ministers do pass forth of one
Church to an other, without the license of the Emperor or the Bisshoppe: the
which ordinance he gave also to those that were in Monasteries. He (.210.)
The.210. Untruth. Not he, but the Canons of the Church before gave that
authority. He only puts the matter by his law in execution Co^st. 5.
geaueth authority to the Patriarche or Bisshoppe, to refuse and reject,
although great suit by men of much authority be made. He prescribes in what
sort and to what end the Church goods should be bestovved, and threatens
the appointed pains to the bishop and the other Mynisters, if they
trangresse this his Constitution.

He prescribes in what sort the Bisshoppe shall dedicate a Monastery: be
gives rules and fourmes of examination, and trial of those that shall be
admitted into a Monastery, before they be professed: in what sort and orders
they shall live together: He (.211.) The.211. untruth. Not he, but the Church
prescribed that order and rule. Constable. 6.
prescribes an order and rule, vvherby to choose and ordeine the Abbat: He
requires in a Monastical person, diuinorum eloquiorum eruditionem, and
conuersationis integritatem: Learning in Gods word, and integrity of life.
And last of all, he charge the Archebisshoppes, Bisshoppes, and other church
Ministers, with the publisshing and observing of this his constitution: Yea
his Temporal officers and Judges also, threatening to them both, that if they
do not see this his Law executed and take the effect, they shall not escape
condign punishment.

He protests, that Emperors ought not to be careful for nothing so much, as
to have the mynisterye faithful toward God, and of honest behavior
toward the world, which he says, vill easily be brought to pass, if
the holy rules which the Apostles gave, and the holy Fathers kept, and made
plain, be observed and put in ure. Therefore, says he, we following in all
things the sacred rules (meaning of the Apostles) do ordeine and decree, etc.
and so makes a constitution and law, touching the qualities and conditions,
that one to be chosen and ordered a Bishop ought to have, and prescribes a
form of trial and examination of the party, before he be ordered: adding
that if any be ordered a Bishop, not M. Horn is not so qualified. for he has
(he says) a wife Ergo M. Horn by his own law, yea of the Apostles making,
must lose his Bisshoprik. Constable. 57
qualified according to this constitution, both he that orders, and he that
is ordered, shall * lose their bisshoprikes. He adds furthermore, that if he
come to his Bisshoprike by gifts or rewards, or if he be absent from his
Bisshoprike above a time limited, without the commandment of the Emperor,
that he shall incur the same penalties. The like orders and rules he
prescribes in the same constitution for Deacons, Diaconisses, Subdeacons, and
Readers: commanding the Patriarchs, Archbisshops and bisshops to promulgate
this constitution, and to see it observed under a pain.

He af^irmeth that this has been an ancient Law, and does by his authority,
renew and confirm the same: that no man have private Chapels in their
houses, wherein to celebrate the divine mysteries: whereunto he adds this
warning unto Mennas the Archebisshop, that if he knevv any such to be, and do
not forbid and refourme that abuse, but suffer this constitution of the
Emperor to be neglected and broken, he him self shall forfait to the Emperor
fifty pounds of gold.

Constable. 58.
Also that the ministers keep continual residence on their benefices:
otherwise the Bishop to place others in their rooms, and they never to be
restored.

Stapleton.
We shall now have a long rehearsal, full three leaves, of many
Ecclesiastical Laws, made by Justinian the Emperor. But who would think
that M. Horn were either so folishe to make such a stir for that no man
denies, and the which nothing proves his cause, or to rehearse such
constitutions of Justinian, that partly overthrows his Primacy, partly
displaceth him from al bishoply and priestly office? But what shall a man say
to them that be past all shame, and have no regard what they say or do preach
or write? Or how is this world bewitched, thus patiently to suffer, such men's
sermons and books, Constable. 6. Hoc au^t futuru^ esse credimus, si sacraru^
regularu^ obseruatio custodiatur qua^ iusti laudandi et adorandi inspectores et
ministri Dei tradideru^t apost et sancti patres custodieru^t et explanaru^t.
Sancimus igitur sacras per oi^a seque^tes regulas. etc. aut in virginitate
degens a principto, aut vxore^ habens ex virginitate ad eum veniente^, et no^
vidua^. and mox: de caeter^ au^t nulli permittentes aa positione legis vxore^
habentitalem imponi ordinatione^.

Ibidem.


yea and to give them high credit to? Tell me then and blushe not M. Horn,
whether ye be not one of them, that for lack of such qualities, as Iustinia^,
according to the holy rules and Canons ye spoke of, requires in a Bishop,
must lose your Bishoprik, and those also that ordained you? Is not this one of
the qualities, that a Bisshoppe should have no manner of wife when he is
ordered? Yea that his wife that he had before he was ordered Priest or Bishop,
must have been a virgin and no widow at the time of marriage? Is not this one
of the holy rules, which the Apostles gave, and the holy Fathers kept and
made plain, which Justinian would have observed and put in ure? Now again
for Priest, Deacon, or Subdeacon that marieth after he is ordered, does not
Justinian eue^ in your own constitution say, that he must forth: with be
spoiled of all Ecclesiastical function and office, and become a lay man? Look
now well about you Master Horn, and about your fellows Protestante
Bisshoppes, and tell me, if this rule take place, whether ye can show among
them all, Sacro Statim cadat ordine, et deinceps idiota sit.
any one Bishop? And so by the merueilous handy work of God, ye are
neither Parliamente nor Church Bishops. What do ye tell me of Justinians
constitutions touching Monks and monasteries, There is not a Protestant
Bishop in England by the co^stitution that M. Horn him self alleges.
and of the rules and fourmes that he prescribed to them? He says in deed,
that he has a special care to see the monastical rules and fourmes according
to the will of the holy Canones observed. He says that through the pure and
devout prayers of religiouse men, all things do prosper in the common
wealth, both in peace and in war. How well M. Horns doctrine agrees
with Iustinia^s for the monastical life.
If then Justinian threatens punishment, as ye truly say, both to spiritual
and temporal magistrates for not publishyng and causyng his Constitutions made
for religiouse men to be observed: how sharply and roughlye would he deal
with you, your fellows, and masters, that by your preachinges have caused so
many monasteries to be so pityfully overthrown? How should you escape
condign punishment, think you, that make no better of these Justinians, and
not his, but rather the holy Fathers, rules concerning the monastical life,
then to call the said holy life a foolis^e vow, an horrible error, and a
monkish superstition?

M. Horn. The.75. Division. page 43. b.
When this Emperor understood, by the complaints that were brought unto him
against the Clergy, Monks and certain Bishops, that their lives were not
framed according to the holy Canons, and that many of them were so ignorant,
that they knevve not the prayer of the holy oblation and sacred Baptism:
Perceiuyng further, that the occasion hereof was partly, by reason that the
Synodes were not kept according to the order appointed, partly for that the
Bishops, Priests, Deacons, and the residue of the Clergy, were ordered,
both without due examination of the right faith, and also without testimony
of honest conversation: Protesting that as he is mindeful to see the civil
Laws firmly kept, even so he ought (of duty) to be more careful about the
observation of the Sacred rules and divine Laws, and in no wise to suffer them
to be violated and broken. He renueth the constitutions for the Clergy,
touching Church causes, saing. This answers all your process, M. Horn, The
Emperor foloveth the canons The Canons were made of Bisshops in Councels and
Synods. Ergo he follows the Bisshops. If he follow the^ he goes not before
the^, He does not direct them prescribe to them, or govern them, but is
directed prescribed, and governed of them.
Following therefore those things, that are defined in the sacred Canons, we
make a Pragmaticall or most full and effectual Law, whereby we ordeine that
so often as it shall be neadfull, to make a Bishop. etc. And so goes forwards
in prescribing the form of his election, examination, and approbation. And
shuts up the Law about the ordering of a Bishop with this clause: If any
shall be ordered a Bishop against this former appointed order, both he that is
ordered and he also that has presumed to order against this form, shall be
deposed. He decrees also by Prouiso, what order shall be kept, if it chance
that there be any occasion or matter laid to the charge of him that is to be
ordered, either Bishop, Priest, Deacon, Clergy man, or else Abbot af any
Monastery. But above all things says he, we enact this to be observed, that
no man be ordered Bishop by gifts or rewards: for both the geuer, taker, and
the broker, if he be a Church man, shall be deprived of his benefice, or
clericall dignity, and if he be a Lay man, that either takes reward, or is a
worker in the matter between the parties, we command that he pay double to
be given to the Church. He gives license nevertheless, that where there has
been somethyng given, by him that is ordered Bishop, of custom, or for
enstallation, that they may take it: so that it exceed not the sum
prescribed by him in this Law. We command therefore that the holy
Archebishoppes, namely of the elder Rome, of Constantinople, Alexandria,
Theopolis, and Jerusalem, if they have a custom to give the Bishops and
Clerks, at their ordering under twenty pou^des in gold: they give only so
much as the custom allows: But if there were more given before this Law,
we command that there be no more given then twenty pounds. And so he
sets a rate to all other Ecclesiastical persons in their degrees, and
according to the ability of their Churches, concluding thus: Surely if any
presume by any means to take more than we have appointed, either in name of
customs, or enstallations, we command that he restore threefolde so much to
his Church, of whom he took it. He does utterly forbid bishops and
Monks, to take upon them gardianship: nevertheless, he lice^ceth Priests,
Diaco^s, and Subdeaco^s, to take the same on the^ in certain cases. He
commands two Synods to be kept in every Province yearly. He prescribes
what, and in what order, matters shall be examined, and discussed in them.
Besides these, he enioyneth, and does command all Bishops, and Priests, to
celebrate the prayers in the ministration of the Lords supper, and in baptism,
not after a whispering or vvhyst manner, but with a clear voice, as thereby
the minds of the hearers, may be sturred up with more devotion in praisyng the
Lord God. He proves by the testimony of S. Paul, that it ought so to be. He
concludes, that if the religious bisshops, neglect any of these things, they
shall not escape punisshment by his order. And for the better observing of this
constitution, he commands the rulers of the provinces under him, if they se
these things neglected, to urge the bisshops, to call Synods, and to accomplissh
all things, which he has commanded by this Law to be done by Synods. But if
the Rulers see notvvithstanding, that the bisshops be slothful and slack to
do thies things, then to sygnify thereof to him self, that he may correct their
negligence: for otherwise he vvil extremely punissh the Rulers them selves.
Besides thies, says this Emperor, we forbid and enjoin the Religious
bisshops, Priests, Deacons, Subdeacons, Readers, and every other Clergy man, of
what degree or order so ever he be, that they play not at the table plays (as
cards, Con. 133.
dyce, and such like plays, used upon a table) nor associat or gase upon the
players at such plays, nor to be gasers at ay other open syghts: if any offend
against this decre, we command that he be prohibited from all sacred
ministry for the space of three years, and to be thrust into a monastery. After
thies Constitutions made for the government of the secular Clergy (as you term
it) in causes ecclesiastical, the Emperor desce^deth to make statutes,
ordinances and rules for monastical persons (commonly called Religious)
declaryng, that there is no manner of thing, The prince has supreme
government over al persons (.213.) i^ al manner causes.
which is not thoroughly to be searched by the authority of the Emperor, who
has (says he) received from God the common government and principality over
al men. And (.212.) The.212. Untruth. These laws show no such principality.
to show further that this principality is over the persons, so well in
Ecclesiastical causes as Temporal, he prescribes orders and rules for them,
and commits to the Abbottes and Bisshoppes (jurisdiction) to see these rules
kept, concludynge that so well the Magistrates, The.213. Untruth. Impudent.
That set i^ the margin, which is not i^ the text.
as Ecclesiastical persons, ought to keep incorrupted all things which
concern godliness: but above all other the Emperor, who owghte to neglecte
no manner of thing pertaynyng to godliness. I omit many other Laws and
Constitutions, that not only this Emperor, but also the Emperors before him
made, touching matters and causes Eccesiasticall, and do remitte you unto the
Code, and the Authentikes, where you may see that al manner of causes
Ecclesiastical, were ouerseene, (.214.) The.214. untruth. That can not be
found either in the Code, or i^ thauthe^.

August. Epist. 48.

Constable. 133.

Solitaria vita atque in ea contemplatio, res plane sacra est, et quae suapte
natura animas ad Deu^ adducat. Neque ijs tantum, qui eam incolunt, sed etiam
omnibus alijs puritate sua and apud Deu^ interpellatione competente^ de se
vtilitate^ praebeat. Vnde and oli^ ears Imperatoribus studio fuit habita, and
nos non pauca de dignit. and honestate eoru^ legibus co^plexi sumus. Sequimur
eni^ sacros in hoc canones et sanctos patres qui hoc co^prehe^deru^t legibus.
qua^doquide^ nihil no^ peruiu^ ad inquisitione^ maiestati existit imperatoriae,
quae co^munem in oe^s hoi^es moderatione^ et principatum a Deo percepit.


ordered and directed by the Emperors, and so they did the duetifull service
of Kings to Christ, In that (as S. Augustine says) they made laws for Christ.

Stapleton.
All this gear runs after one race, and altogether stands in the
execution of the ecclesiastical Laws. Neither is there any thing here to be
stayed upon, but for that he has furnished his margent with his accustomable
note, that the prince has the supreme government over all persons in all
manner causes. Which as yt is largely and liberally spoken: so is his text to
narrow to bear any such wide talk. Yea and rather proves the contrary, if
he take the next line before with him, and stops also his fellows
blasphemous railyngs, against the holy monastical life. The solitary and the
co^templatiue life (says Justinian) is certainly an holy thing, and such a
thing as by her own nature co^ducteth souls to God: neither is it fruitful to
them only that lead that life, but through her puritye and prayers to God
gives a sufficient help to other also. Wherefore themperours in former times,
took care of this matter, and we also in our Laws have set forth many things
touching the dignity and virtue of religious men. For we do follow in this
the holy canons and the holy fathers who have drawn out certain orders and
Laws for these matters. For there is no thing that themperours majesty does
not thoroughly search. Which has received from God a common government and
principality over all men. Now this place as ye see, serves expressly for the
Churches principality, whose holy Canons, and holy Fathers the emperor, as he
says, does follow. By which words appears, Sequimur sacros Canones and
sanctos patres.
he made no one Constitution of his own Authority. And therefore has M. Horn
craftily shyfted in this word Authority which is not in the Latin: as though
the Emperors Authority were the chief ground of these Constitutions, whereas
it is but the second, and depending only upon former Canons and writtinges of
holy Fathers. Yet has this ioly gloser placed in his margin a suprem
government and principality in all manner causes. Which is not to be found any
where in the text, but is a gloss of his own making. Wherein me thinks, M.
Horn fares as certain Melancholic passionated do: whose imagination is so
strong, that if they begin earnestly to imagine as present, either the sight or
voice of any one that they excedingly either love or fear, by force of their
imagination, do talk with them selves, or cry out suddenly, as though in very
deed, not in imagination only the thing desired or feared, were actually
present. Verily so M. Horn, being exceeding passionated to find out this
supreme government in all causes, by force of his imagination, puts it in his
margin, as though the text told it him, when the text talks no such matter
unto him, but is utterly domme in that point and hushe. This passion has
uttered it self in M. Horn not now only, but many times before also, as the
diligent Reader may easily remember.

Brach. 1.2.
M. Horn. The.76. Division. page 45. a.
Arriamiru King of Spain, (215) The.215. Untruth. He commanded not in M.
Horns se^ce. That is, as supre^ governor but as the Counsel it self says, as
Pijssimus filius noster: Our most godly Son.
commanded two Conucels to be celebrated in a City called Brachara, the one
in the second year of his reign, the other the third year, wherein were
certain rules made or rather renewed touching matters of faith, touching
Constitutions of the Church, and for the duties and diligence of the Clergy,
in their offices.

VVambanus King of Spain (.216.) The.216. Untruth. No such thing in the
Counsel, nor that Vva^banus called it at al
seeing the great disorders in the Church, not only in the discipline, but
also in the matters of Faith, and about the Administration of the
Sacraments, calls a Synod at Brachara, named Concill. Brachar. 3. for the
reformation of the errors and disorders about the Sacraments and Church
discipline.

The.20. Chapter. Of Ariamirus, Wambanus, and Richaredus Kings of Spain, and
of Pelagius.2. and S. Gregory. 1. Popes.
Stapleton.
NOW are we gone from France and Constantinople to, and are come to Spain, and
to the Councils called of King Ariamirus and King Wambanus. But the Fathers at
these Councels tell M. Horn for his first greeting and welcome, that they
acknowleged the authority of the Sea of Rome: and therefore being some
controversies in matters ecclesiastical among the^, they did direct them selves
by the instructions and admonitio^s sent from the Sea Apostolic. Vide Brac. 1.
tom. 2. Conc. page 216. et 217 Can. 18. and. 23.


M. Horn. The.77. Division. page 45. b.
About this time after the death of Pelagius.2. the Clergy and the people
elected Gregory.1. called afterward the great. But the custom was ( says
Sabellicus) which is declared in an other place, that the Emperors should
ratify by their consent, th'electio^ of him that is chosen Pope. And to stay
th'Emperors approbatio^ ( says Platina) he sent his messengers with his
letters, to beseech The Emperor Mauritius that he would not suffer th'electio^
of the people and Clergy to take effect in the choice of hi^. etc. So much did
this good man ( says Sabellicus) seking after heavenly things, contemn
earthly and refused that honor, for the which other did contend so
ambitiously. But the Emperor being desirouse to plant so good a man in that
place, would not condescend to his request, but (.217.) The.217. Untruth. That
is not in Sabellicus.
sent his Ambassadors, to ratify and confirm the election.

Stapleton.
This authority touches nothing but th'electio^ of the Pope wont to be
confirmed by the Emperor for order and quietness sake. And that but of custom
only (for the custom was says Sabellicus) not of any Supreme government of
the Prince in that behaulfe, as though without it, the election were not good.
Yet I commend M. Horn that, he reherseth so much good co^mendacion of Pope
Gregory, that sent hither our Apostle S. Augustine. But I marue^l how he can
be so good a man, and the religion that came from him to England no better then
superstiton and plain Idolatry, as M. Horn and his fellows do daily preach
and write. And ye shall hear a non that he goes as craftily as he can, and as
far as he durst to obscure and disgrace him.

M. Horn. The.78. Division. page 45. b.
Richaredus King of Spain, rightly taught and instructed in the Christian
faith, by the godly and Catholic Bisshoppe Leander Bishop of Hispalis, did
not only bring to pass, that the whole nation, should forsake the Arrianisme
and receive true faith, but also did carefully study how to continue his
people in the true Relligion by his means nevvelye received. And therefore
commanded all the Bisshops within his Dominions to assemble together at
Toletum, in the fourth year of his reign, and there to consult about staying
and confirming of his people in true faith and religion of Christ by godly
discipline. When the Bisshoppes were assembled in the Convocation house, at
the Kings commandment: the King comes in amongst them, he makes a short,
but a pithy and most Christian oration unto the whole Synod: Wherein he
shows, that the cause wherefore he called them together into the Synod,
was To repair and make a (.218.) The.218. Untruth. False translation.
instaurare formam, is not to make a nevve form, but to repair the old.
new form of Church discipline, by common consultation in Synod, which
had been let long time before by the heretical Arianisme, the which stay
and let of the Arrian^ Heresies, it has pleased God (says he) to remove and
put away by my means. He wills them to be joyful and glad, that the
ancient manner to make Ecclesiastical constitutions for the well ordering of
the Church, is now through Gods providence reduced and brought again to the
bounds of the Fathers by his honorable industry. And last of al, he does
admonisshe and exhort them before they begin their consultation, to sast and
pray unto the Almighty, that he will vouchsaulfe to open and show unto them a
true order of discipline, which that age knevv not, the senses of the Clergy
were so much benumbed, with long forgetfulness. Whereupon there was a three
days fast appointed. That done, the Synod assembleth, the King comes in,
and fitteth amongst them: he delivers in vvriting to be openly read amongst
them the confession of his faith, in which he protests, with what endeavor
and care, being their King, he ought not only to study for him self, to be
rightly given to serve and please God with a right Faith in true Religion: but
also to provide for his subjects, that they be thoroughly instructed in the
Christian faith. He affirms and thereto takes them to witness, that the
Lord has stirred him up, The dutiful care of a Prince about religion.
inflamed with the heat of Faith: both to remove and put away the furious
and obstinate Heresies and Schisms, and also by his vigilant endeavor and care
to call and bring home again the people unto the confession of the true faith,
and the Communion of the Catholic Church. Further alluding to the place of S.
Paul, where he says, that through his ministry in the Gospel, he offers
up the Gentiles unto God, to be an acceptable Sacrifice: he says to the
Bisshops, That he offers by their mynisterie, this noble people, as an holy
and acceptable Sacrifice to God. And last of all with the rehearsal of his
Faith, he declares unto the Bisshoppes, That as it has pleased God by his
care and industry to win this people to the Faith, and unite them to the
Catholic Church: so he chardgeth them, now to see them stayed and confirmed
by their diligente teaching and instructinge them in the truth. After this
Confession was read, and that he him self, and also his Queen Badda, had
confirmed and testified the same with their hands subscription: the whole
Synod gave thanks to God with many and sundry acclamations, saying: That
the Catholic King Richaredus is to be crouned of God with an everlasting
croune, for he is the gatherer together of new people in the Church. This
King truly ought to have the Apostolic reward, reward, who has performed
the Apostolic office. This done, after the Noble men and Bisshops of Spain,
whom the worthy King had converted, and brought to the amity of faith, in
the Communion of Christ's Church, had also given their confession openly, and
testified the same with subscription: the King vvilling the Synod to go in
hand to repair and establissh some Ecclesiastical discipline, says to the
Synod, alluding to S. Paul's saying to the Ephesians to this effect: That the
care of a king ought to stretch forth it self, and not to cease til he have
brought (.219.) The.219. Untruth. No such words in that sentence
the subjects to a full knowledge and perfect age in Christ: and as (220)
The.220. Untruth. The ki^gs whole words foully maimed and mangled, as shall
appear. A Princes special care for his subjects
a king ought to bend al his power and authority to repress the insole^ce of
the evil, and to nourish the common peace and tra^quility: Eue^ to ought he
much more to study, labor, and be careful, not only to bring his subjects from
erours and false religion, but also to see the^ instructed, taught, and trained
up in the truth of the clear light, and for this purpose he does there decree
of (221) The.221. Untruth. No such words in the Council.
his own authority, co^ma^ding the Bisshops to see it observed, that at every
Communion time before the receipt of the same, all the people with a loud voice
together, do recite disti^ctly the Simbol or creed, set forth by the (222)
The.222. Untruth It was not of the Nicene Counsel, but of the Constantinople
Council.
Nice^ counsel. When the Synod had co^sulted about the discipline, and had
agreed upon such rules and orders, as was thought most mete for that time and
church, and the King had considered of them, he does by his assent and (223)
The.223. Untruth. For not by authority of Supreme gouernemente (as M Horn
drives it) but only for the execution of it in his Dominions.
authority, confirm and ratify the same, and first subscribeth to the^, and
then after hi^ all the Synod. This zealous care and careful study of this and the
other above named princes, providing, ruling, governing, and by their Princely
power and authority, directing their whole Clergy, in causes or matters
Ecclesiastical, was never disalovved, or misliked of the ancient Fathers,
nor of the bisshops of Rome, til now in these later days, the insaciable
a^bitio^ of the clergy, and the overmuch negligence and vva^tones of the
Princes, with the gross ignorance of the whole laity, gave your holy father
(224) The 224. Untruth. Slanderous and blasphemous. Lib. Epist. 7. Epist. 126.

The Pope at that time co^me^ded the Princes government in causes
Ecclesiasiastical.


the child of perdition, the full sway to make perfect the mystery of iniquity:
yea, it may appe^e by an Epistle that Gregorius surnamed great, B. of Rome,
vvriteth unto this worthy King Richaredus, that the B. of Rome did much
commend this careful (225) The.225. Untruth. S. Gregory speaks not there of
any government at all. The (226) Prince calls Councels and governs
ecclesiastical causes without any doings of the Pope therein.
government of Princes in causes of religion. For he most highly commends the
doings of this most Christian King. He affirms that he is asshamed of him
self, and of his own slacknes, The.226. Untruth. avouched in the margin, but
not a whit proved in the Text.
when he does consider the trauail of Kings in gathering of souls to the
celestial gain. Yea what shall I (says this B. of Rome to the King) answer at
the dreadful dome when your excellency shall lead after your sel^ flocks of
faithful ones, which you have brought unto the true faith by careful and
continual preaching, etc. Although I have meddled and don nothing at al with
you, doing this (227) The.227. Untruth. S. Gregory's words excedinglye over
reached.
altogether without me, yet am I partaker of the joy with you. Neither does
Gregory blame this King as one meddling in Church causes, vvherin he is not
Ruler: but he praises God for him, that he makes godly constitutions against
the unfaithfulness of miscreants: and for no vvorldly respect will be persuaded
to see them violated.

Stapleton.
We are now upon the soden returned into Spain: But wonderful it is to
consider, how M. Horn misordereth and mistelleth his whole matter, and
enforces as well other where, as here also by Richaredus, that which can not
be enforced: that is, to make him a Supreme head in all causes Ecclesiastical.
Ye say M. Horn, he called a Synod to repair and make a new form of the
Church discipline. But I say you have falsely translated the word, instaurare,
which is not to make a new thing, but to renew an old: which differs very
much. For by the example of the first, Queen Marie repaired and renewed the
Catholic Religion. By the report of the second, you made in deed a new form
of matters in King Edwardes days, never used before in Christ's Church. You
say also he removed from Spain the Arrians heresies. I grant you: he did so.
But think you M. Horn, Tom. 2. Co^c. p. 168 col. 1. b.
if he now lived, and were prince of our Country, he would have nothing to say
to you and your fellows, as well as he had to the Arrians? Nay. He and his
Council has said something to you and against you already, Page 168. Ante
co^municationem Corporis Christi. Page 169. Secundum formam co^cilij
Co^stantinop. S^mbolu^ fidei recitetur.

Et mox. Et ad christi corpus et sanguine^ praelibandu^, pectora populoru^ fide
purificata accedant. Deijs symbolis vide tom. 2. Council. page 392.


as we shall anon see.

You say: he commanded the Bisshops that at every communion time, before the
receipt of the same, the people with a loud voice together should recite
distinctly the Symbol or Creed set forth by the Nicene Council. It happens
well, that the Nicene Council was added. I was afeard, least ye would have
gonne about to prove, the people to have song then, some such Geneuical Psalms
as now the brotherhod most estemeth: Whereunto ye have here made a pretty
foundation, calling that after your Geneuical sort, the Communion, which the
Fathers call the body and blood of Christ: and the King him self calls the
communicating of the body and blood of Christ. Now here by the way I must
admonish you, that it was not the Nicene Creed (as ye write) made at
Constantinople that was appointed to be rehearsed of the people. The which is
fuller then the Nicene, for avoiding of certain heresies: fuller I say, as
concerning Christ conceived and incarnated of the holy ghost (which thing I ca^
not tell how or why your Apology, as I have said, has left out) with some
other like. This Council then has said somewhat to you for your translation,
and much more for your wicked and heretical meaning, to convey from the
blessed Sacrament, the real presence of Christ's very body.

But now M. Horn take you and your Madge good head, and mark you well, whether
ye and your sect be not of the Arrians generation, which being Priests,
contrary to the Canons of the Church, which they as mightily contemned as ye
do, kept company with their wives, but yet with such as they laufully married,
before they were ordered Priests. The Protestants follow the Arria^s in
their carnal lechery. Can. 5. Tolet. 3. c. 1
Who returning to the Catholic faith from their Arianisme, would feign have
lusked in their leacherie, as they did before being Arians. Which disorder this
Counsel reformeth. The same Council also commands, that the decrees of all
Councels, yea and the decretall Epistles of the holy Bisshops of Rome, should
remain in their full strength. Because forsooth by Arrians they had before ben
violated and neglected, M. Horns Madge must be sold for a slave by this Counsel
which M. Horn him self allegeth. Illi vero canonice, multeres quide^ ab
Episcopis venu^dentur. et pretiu^ ipsum pauperibus irrogetur. Canon. 5.
as they are at this day by you and your fellows utterly despised and
contemned. So like ever are young heretics to the old. Vnu^ nor is, omnes nor
is. And this is M. Horn, one part of the repairing, and the making (as you
call it) of a new form of the Church discipline, ye spoke of. But for the
matter it self, ye are al in a mu^mery, and dare not rub the galde horse on
the back for fear of wincing. Now all in an il time have ye put us in
remembrance of this Council: for you must be Canonically punisshed, and
Maistres Madge must be sold of the Bisshoppes, and the price must be given to
the poor. I would be sorry she should hear of this gear: and to what
pitiful case ye have brought her by your own Counsel. Mark now your margent
as fast and as solemnly as ye will with the note: The duetifull care of a
Prince about Religion: with the note of a Princes special c^re for his
subjects, and with such like. I do not envy you such notes. In case now,
notwithstanding ye are so curstly handeled of King Richaredus and his Council,
ye be content of your gentle and suffering nature, to bear it al well: and will
for all this still go forward to set forth his Primacie, be it so. What can ye
say therein further? I perceive then ye make great and deep account that he
subscribed before the Counsel, A great difference betwixt the subscription
of themperours and of the Bisshops. Sext. Syn. Constable. act. 17. and. 18.
Georgius miserante Deo, etc. Definens, subscripsi. Subscriptio pijss. and
christ. dilecti Co^st. imperat. Legimus et co^sentimus. act 18 Vt patet in
dict. tom. 2 Council. and Isidor. videl. Era. 627. Hoc est. an. 589 Beda. li.
1. cap. 23. in Hist. gent. Angl.
whereof I make as little: considering here was no new matter defined by him or
the Fathers, but a confirmation and a ratification made of the first four
Councels. Which the King strengthens by all means he could, yea with the
subscription of his own hand, because the other Kings his predecessors had been Arians. Otherwise in the first.7. General Councelles, I find no
subscription of the Emperors, but only in the sixte, proceeding from the said
cause that this does, that is, for that his predecessors were heretics, of
the heresy of the Monothelites: but not proceeding altogether in the same
order. For the Emperor there subscribeth after all the Bisshops, saying only:
We have read the Decree and do consent. But the Bishop of Constantinople
says: I George by the mercy of God Bishop of Constantinople to my definitive
sentence, have subscribed: after the same sort other Bishops also set to their
hands. And this was because the matter was there finally determined against the
Monothelites. In case this subscriptio^ will not serve the matter, M. Horn has
an other help at hand: yea he has S. Gregory him self, that (as he says)
commends Richaredus for his government in causes Ecclesiastical: and this is
set in the margent as a weighty matter, with an other forthwith as weighty,
that this Richaredus called Councels, and governed Ecclesiastical causes,
without any doing of Pope Gregory therein. But by your leave, both your notes
are both folish and false. Folish I say, for how should Pope Gregory be a doer
with hi^, being at that time no Pope, the counsel being kept in the time of
Pelagius.2. S. Gregory's predecessor, in the year.589. as it appears by the
account of Isidorus living about that time: and S. Gregory was made Pope in the
year.592. by the account of S. Bid. False, I say: for Richaredus called not
Councelles, but one only Council: yea and false again. For there was no
government Ecclesiastical in Richaredus doings. Neither is there any such
word in the whole Council by M. Horn alleged, nor any thing that may by good
consequence induce such government. I say then further, ye do most
impudently, in going about to make your Readers believe, that Richaredus and
other Princes after him, were taken for Supreme heads of the Church, till now
in these later days: and most blasphemously in calling the Pope, for this
matter, the child of perdition. As well might you for this cause have called
Gregory so too. Who is surnamed, as ye here write, the Great. But God wotteth,
and the more pity, not very great with you and your fellows. Of al books,
his writings bear most full and plain testimony, for the Popes singular
praeeminence: which thing is in an other place by me largely proved, that
though the matter here seems to require somewhat to be said, I need not say
any thing, See the 4. Article the 9. page and certain following.
but only remit the Reader to that place where he shall find that S. Gregory
practiced this Supreme authority, as well in Spain, as other where, throughout
the whole Christened world. But what says S. Gregory? Forsothe that the King
Richaredus by his careful and continual preaching, brought Arrians into the
true faith. S. Gregory says well. And yet you will not (I trow) say: The Prince
himself preached in pulpit to the Arrians. What then? Verelye that which he did
by his Clergy, and to the which he was a godly promoter, that he is said to
do him self. As to preach, to convert heretics, to decree this or that,
and briefly to govern in causes Ecclesiastical. All which the Prince in his
own person or of his own authority, never does. But by his furderance such
things being done, he is said sometimes (as here of Saint Gregorye) to do
them him self.

M. Horn goes about craftily to disgrace and slander Saint Gregory.
We might now pass to the next matter, saving that as ye without any good
occasion or bettering of your cause, bring in that Richaredus woorked these
things without Pope Gregory: So it may be feared, ye have a worse meaning,
and that ye do this altogether craftily to blemishe and deface Saint
Gregorye with the ignoraunte Reader. Else tell me to what purpose write ye, that
Saint Gregorye was asshamed of him self, Greg. li. 7. Ep. 126.
and his own slacknesse? Why bring you in these words of Saint Gregorye,
What shall I aunsweare at the dreadful doom, when your excellencye shall
lead with you flocks of faithful ones, which ye have brought into the true
faith, by careful and continual preachinges? I must then either to refourme
your ignorance (if ye knew it not before) or to prevent your readers
circumuention by your wilye handeling of the matter, like to be perchance
miscarried: if ye knew it before, Greg. li. 6. Epist. 37.
admonish you and him, that this is spoken of S. Gregorye in deed, but as
proceeding from a maruelouse humilitye and lowlines.

The worthy doi^gs of S. Gregory.
In like manner as he wrote to Saint Augustine our Apostle in the commendation
of his doings, wherein yet undoubtedly he was a great doer him self many
ways, as by the History of Bid clearly appears Otherwise though Richaredus
doings be most gloriouse and worthy of perpetual renoune, Nauclerus Generat.
21. pa. 752
yet shall S. Gregory match him or pass him. Neither shall he altogether be
void of his worthy commendation, concerning his care for the refourming of
Spain, and repressing of heresies there, either by his authority, or by his
learned works. Verily Platina witnesses, that by the means of this
Gregory, the Goths returned to the unite of the Catholic faith. Plat. in
Greg. 1.
Which appears not at that time any otherwhere, then in Spain

Hearken farther what Nauclerus one that you often rehearse in this your book,
writes of him: In super Beatus Gregorius, etc. Beside this Saint Gregory
compelled the Ligurians, the Venetians, the Iberians, which had confessed their
schism, by their libell to receive the Decrees of the Council of Chalcedo:
and so brought them to the unity of the Church. He reduced them from
Idolatrye, partly by punnisshmente, partlye by preaching, the Brucians, the
people of Sardinia, and the husbandmenne of Campania. By the good and mighty
authority of his writings, and by Ambassadors sent in conueniente time, he
sequestered from the body of the Church, the Donatiste Heretics in Affrique,
the Maniches in Sicilie, the Arrians in Spain, the Agnoites in Alexandria.
Only the Heresy of the Neophites in France, rising by Symoniacall bribes, as
it were by so many roots, was spread far and wide: against the which he
valiauntlye fought, laboring mightelye against it, to the Queen
Brunechildis, and to the French Kings Theodoricus, and Theodobertus, till at
the length a General Council being summoned, he obtained to have it
utterly banned and accursed. This says Nauclerus of other Countries.

Now what need I speak of our Realm, the matter being so notoriouse, that by
his good means, by his study and carefulnes, we were brought from most
miserable idolatry to the faith of Christ? And therefore as our Venerable
Countreyman Bid writes, we may well and ought to call him our Apostle. S.
Gregory our Apostle. Lib. 2. c. 1.
Recte nostrum appellare possumus and debemus Apostolum. Quia cum, etc. For,
says he, whereas he had the chief Bisshoprike in all the world, and was the
chief Ruler of the Churches, that long before were converted to the faith, he
procured our Nation, that before that time was the Idols slave, to be the
Church of Christ. So that we may well use that saying taken from the Apostle.
All were it, that he were not an Apostle to other, yet is he our Apostle. We
are the seal of his Apostlesship in our Lord God. It appears that S. Gregory
had to do in Ireland also by his Ecclesiastical authority. Greg. lib. 2 cap.
36.
Thus much have I here spoken of S. Gregory, either necessarily, or (as I
suppose) not altogether without good cause: Surely not without most deape heart
grief, to consider how far we are gone from the learning, virtue, and faith,
which we now almost one thousand years past, received at this Blessed man's
hands. Which altogether, with our new Apostle M. Horn here, is nothing but
Gross ignorance. And this blessed and true Apostle of our English Nation, no
better then the child of perdition. That is, as he means in deed, a plain
Antichriste. I pray God, ones open the eyes of our Country, to see who is in
deed the true Antichrist, and who are his messengers and forerunners, thereby
carefully and Christianly to shun as well the one as the other. Christ is the
Truth it self, as him self has said. Who then is more nere Antichriste, then
the teacher of Untruths? And what a huge number has M. Horn heaped us up
in that, hitherto has been answered, being little more then the third part of
his book? Yea in this very Division how do they muster? Some of them have
already ben touched. But now to the rest more at large, let us over run the
Division shortly again.

First besides his false translation, putting for repairing the order of
Ecclesiastical discipline, M. Horns Untruths laid forth.
to make a new form thereof, as though that King altered the old Religion of
his realm, and placed a new never used before in Christ's Church, as M.
Horn and his fellows have done in our Country, beside this pety slight, and
diverse other before noted, he has so maimed and mangled the words of King
Richaredus (wherein the whole pithe of this Division rests) to make some
appearance of his pretensed Primacie, that it would loathe a man to see it, and
weary a man to express it. Namely in the text where his Note stands of a
Princes special care for his subjects. Tom. 2. Conc. page 167. col. 2.
The whole words of the King are these: The care of a King ought so far to
be extended and directed, until it be found to receive the full measure of age
and knowledge. For as in worldly things the Kings power passes in glory, so
ought his care to be the greater for the wealth of his subjects. But now
(most holy Priests) we bestow not only our diligence in those matters
whereby our subjects may be governed and live most peaceablye, but also by
the help of Christ, we extend our selves to think of heavenly matters, and
we labor to know how to make our people faithful. And verily if we ought to
bend all our power to order men's manners, and with Princely power to repress
the insolency of the evil, if we ought to give all aid for the increase of
peace and quiet, much more we ought to study, to desire and think upon godly
things, to look after high matters, and to show to our people being now
brought from error, the truth of clear light. For so he does which
trusts to be rewarded of God with abundant reward. For so he does, which
above that is committed unto him does add more, seeing to such it is said, Luc.
10.
what so ever thou spendest more, I, when I come again, will recompense thee.
This is the whole and full talk of Richaredus the king to the Council touching
his duetyfull care about religion.

Compare this, gentle Reader, with the broken and mangled narratio^ of M.
horn, and thou shall see to the eye his lewd pelting and pelting lewdness.
Thou shall see, that the king protested his care in gods matters to be (not his
dew charge and vocation, as a king) but an addition above that which was
committed wnto him, and to be a work of supererogatio^, and that he exte^ded
him self of zeal above that, which his duty and office required. Al which M.
Horn left out, because he knew it did quite overthrow his purpose.

He says again of king Richaredus, that he decreed in the Council of his
own Authority, commaundyng the bisshops to see it observed: which words also
he has caused to be printed in a distinct lettre, as the words of his Author
alleged. Council. Tolet. 3. Cap 2. Tom. 2. page 169. Col. 1.
But they are his own words, and do proceed of his own Authority, not to be
found in the whole process of the Kings Oration to the Council, or in the
Counsel it self. But contrariwise the Council expressly says of this
Decree: Consultu pijssimi and gloriosissimi Richaredi Regis constituit Synodus.
The Synod has appointed or decreed by the advice of the most godly and
gloriouse King Richaredus. The Synod M. Horn, made that Decree by the advice
of the King. Vide Gregor. lib. 7. epist. 126.
The king made it not by his own authority commanding. etc. as you very
Imperiously do talk. Again where you say that S. Gregory did much commend
the careful government of Princes in causes of Religion, S. Gregory speaks
not of any such government at all. It is an other of your Untruths.

Last of all, where Saint Gregory says of humility, as we have before
declared, to the king: Et si vobiscum nihil egimus: Although we have done
nothing with you: You to amplify the matter, enlardge your translation with a
very lying liberality, thus. Although I have meddled and don nothing at all
with you, doing this altogether without me. For these words, meddle, at all,
and doing this altogether without me, is altogether without and beyond your
Latin of Saint Gregory. Whom you ouerreache exceeding much: Making him not
so much as to meddle with the Kings doings, and that the king did altogether
without him: Which yet (if Nauclerus your common alleged Author be true of his
word) did very much with the King, Nauclerus vbi supra: and Platina.
and furdered many ways the converting of the Arrians in Spain to the
Catholic faith.

But so it is. As in all your proufes you ouerreach mightily the force of your
examples, co^cluding Supreme gouernmente in all causes, when the Argument
proceeds of no gouernemente at all, but of execution, and so forth, even so
in your translations (wherein yet you look singularlye to be credited, scarce
ones in ten leaves, bringing one sentence of Latin) you over reach
marueilouslye your original Authorities.

Such is your untrue and false dealing, not only here, but in a manner
throughout your whole book. And now to end this Second book, with a
flourishe of Master Jewels Rhetorique, to sweet your mouth at the end
Master Horn, that so with the more courage we may proceed (after a pause
upon this) to the Third and Fourth, let me spur you a question.

M. Jewel ^n his Rely. pa. 91
What M. Horn? Is it not possible your doctrine may stand without lies? So
many Untruths in so little room, without the shame of the world, without the
fear of God? Where did Christ ever command you to make, your Prince the
supreme governor in all causes? By what Commission, by what words? Or if
Christ did not, who ever else commanded you so to do? What law? What Decree,
what Decretall, what Legantine, what Provincial? But what a wonderful case is
this? The Supreme gouernemente of Princes in all causes Ecclesiastical, that we
must needs swear unto by book oath, yea and that we must needs believe in
conscience, to be so ancient, so universal, so Catholic, so clear, so
gloriouse, can not now be found, neither in the old Law, nor in the new, nor
by any one example of the first 600. years.

THE THIRD BOOK: DISPROVING THE PRETENSED PRACTICE OF Ecclesiastical
government in Emperors and Kings as well of our own Country of England, as of
France and Spain, in these later.900. years from the time of Phocas to
Maximilian next predecessor to Charles the.V. of famous memory.
M. Horn. The.79. Division. Fol. 47. b.
Next after Sabinianus, an obscure Pope, enemy and successor to this Gregory,
succeeded Bonifacius. 3. Who although he durst not in plain dealing deny, or
take from the Emperors, the authority and jurisdiction in the Popes election,
and other Church matters: yet he was the first that (.228.) The.228. untruth.
Slanderous. Sabel. Plat. Paul. Dia. Volater. Naucler. Martinus.
opened the gappe thereunto: for as Sabel. testifies, with whom agree all
other vvriters, for the most part: This Bonifacius immediately upon the
entrance into his Papacy, dealte with Phocas, to win that the Church of
Rome, might (.229.) The.229. untruth. Not to be Head, but to be so called.
be head of all other Churches, the which he hardely obtained, because the
Grecians did challenge that prerogative for Constantinople. After he had
obtained this glorious and ambitious title, of the bloody tyrant Phocas, and
that with (.230.) The.230. untruth Slanderous.
no small bribes: like unto one that having a beam in his own eye, went about
to pull the mote out of his brothers, he made a decree, that every one should be
accursed, that prepared to him self a way into the Papacy, or any other
Ecclesiastical dignity, with friendship or bribery. Also that the bisshops in
every city, should be chosen by the people and Clergy: and that the election
should be good, so that the Prince of the City did approve the party by the^
chosen, and the Pope addi^g his authority thereto, had ones said, volumus and
iubemus: we will and command. But says Sabell, both these decrees are
abolished.

The first Chapter. Of Phocas the Emperor, and of Bonifacius the.3. Pope.
Stapleton.
HAVING now good reader, passed the first six hundred years, and having
answered to M. Horns arguments, for such proufes as he pretends to serve
him, for things don within those.600. years: I am in a great doubt and stay
with my self, what order to take for the residewe of mine answer. We have
gone over little more then one half, of that part of M. Horns book, wherein
he takes upon him to be the challenger, and an apponente: and if we weighe the
number of years, in the which M. Horn takes his large race and course, they
yet remain almost a thowsande to those that be already passed. If we measure
the leaves, almost the one half rest behind to the number of.42. Beside the
remnante of his book, wherein he plaith the defendants part. I speak thus
much for this consideration. If I should largely and copiouslye answer the
residewe, as I have begone, and fullye unfold his fond follies, confuting
every point, the book would wexe to big and huge. On the other side, if I
should lightlye and breiflye pass yt over, perchance M. Horn would brag
and say he were not, no nor could be answered.

But yet bethinkinge my self well upon the matter, the compendiouse way
seems to me at this time best. Wherein I could be so short and
compendiouse, that with one line, I should sufficiently discharge my self for
the whole answer, in saying shortly, but truly, that there is not, no not one
only authority apt and fyt to conclude his purpose. I could also shifte him
of an other way: and because M. Jewel with other his fellows groundeth him
self upon yt, as a good and a peremptorye exception, I might boldly say, M.
Horn, al your proufes after Gregory come to late: your.600. years are empted,
spente, and gone.

Again I might and truly, seeing that his pretensed proufes, of the first six
hundred years are so faint and weak, yea seeing that he is quyte borne down,
with his own authors, in the same book, chapter, leaf, and sometime line to,
that him self alleges: say, that either it is most likelye, that he cannot
bring any good or substancial matter, for the latter 900. years, or what so
ever yt be, it must yield and give place, to the Fathers of the first six
hundred years. And with this answer might we, contemning and neglecting al
his long ragmans roll, that hereafter follows, set upon him an other while,
and see how valiantly he will defend his own head. Which God wot he will
full fayntelye do. Well I will not be so precise, The order to be taken here
after in answering the residewe of M. Horns book.
as to let yt alone altogether, but I shall take the mean, and as I think,
the most allowable way: neither answering all at length, and stitch by stitch
with diligence, as I have hitherto used, nor leaving all, but taking some
advised choice. Wherefore if hereafter he bring any accustomed or stale
merchandise, yt shall pass: but if any fine fresh, far sought, and far
bowght merchandise come, we will give him the lokinge on, and now and then cope
with him to. Go to then M. Horn, take your weapon in your hand again, and
besturre your self with yt, edglynge, or foyning with the best advantage ye
can.

Ye say then Bonifacius the third opened the gappe to take away from
The Emperor the authority and Jurisdiction of the popes election: Ye say it,
but ye do not, nor ca^ prove it. Ye say that he won of Phocas, that Rome
might be head of all Churches, meaning thereby, as appears well by that which
follows, and by M. Jewel and your other fellows, that it was not taken so
before. Plat. in Bonifa. 3.
Whereof I have already proved the contrary by the Council of Chalcedo: by
Victor, yea the Emperors Valentinian and Justinian: and otherwise to. Adoi^
Chroni. Beda de sex Era. Martinus Polonus. Paulus Diaconus.
But this you report untruly. For the Popes suyte was not, that his See might
be the head of al Churches, but that the sea of S. Peter which is the head of
all Churches, might be so called and taken of al me^. And the reason is added
by Ado, Paulus Diaconus, Beda, Martinus, and others, because the Se^ of
Constantinople, wrote her self at that time the Chief of all others. This
new attempt, caused the Pope to make this suyt. Not that either it should be
so (for so it had been without the Emperors Autorytie) or that then it was
first called so. Ye say he wanne this gloriouse and ambitiouse title with no
small brybes. Ye say it, but ye neither prove it, nor can prove yt. And sure I
am, that none of your authors ye name in the margent, Sabel. Acnea. 8. l 6.
Platina, in Boni. 2. Paul. Dia. de gestis Lo^gobar. li. 4. c. 11. Naucler.
Gener. 21. Martinus Polon. Volateranus.
says so. Neither do I yet see, whervppon ye should ground your self, unless
it be upon your strange grammar, turning Magna contentione, with great
contention, or with much ado, into no small brybes: as ye did lately conuenit,
into oportet. And for this that ye call this a gloriouse and ambitiouse title,
obtained by this Bonifacius: truth it is, that as this title was ever due to
the Church of Rome, and confessed as I have said, by Councels, Emperors and
other long before the time of this Phocas or Bonifacius, so neither this pope,
nor any other of his successors usurped or used it, as a title. These be your
manifold falshods M. Horn, lapped up in so few lines. After your lewd
untruths, follows a copy of your singular wit. For to what end, with what
wisdom, or with what benefytte of your cause recyte you two decrees of this
Bonifacius? I will give you leave to breath on the matter, M Horns folly.
least upon the soden you might be apalled with the question. The best
answer, I wene, you could make, would be to say, that hereby appears the
Ambition of pope Bonifacius, 3. And then to prove that Ambition in him, by
these decrees, I think, it would trouble you much more. For in the one he
expressly decrees against Ambition, in the other he allows the consent of
lay princes in a bisshops election. But it is well, that as Sabel. says: Both
these decrees are abolisshed. Whereof it will follow, if that be true, that if
the decrees were good, and made for you, then yet they continewed not, but were
abolished. If they were naught, and made against the pope, yet the fault was
soon amended. Thus how so ever it fall out, you see how wisely and to what
great purpose you have alleged those decrees.

M. Horn. The.80. Division. Fol. 48. a.
Now began this matter to brue by little and little, first he obtained to
(.231.) The 231. untruth, as before.
be the chief over all the Bisshops, then to cover vice with virtue, and to
hide his ambicion, he condemned al ambicion in laboring Spiritual promocion,
and in the election of Bishops, where the confirmation before was in the
Emperors: because the Emperor gave him an I^i^he, he took an ell, because he
had given him a foot, he would thrust in the whole body, and turn the
right owner out, For (.232.) The 232. untruth. The Emperor by that decree is
not left out,
leuing out the Emperor, he puts in the Princes of the Cities, from whom
he might as easily afterward take away, as for a shevve he gave falsely
that unto them, that was none of his to give: granting unto them the
allowance of the election: but to him self the authority of ratifying, or
infringing the same, choose them whether they would allow it or no. And to
shevve what authority he would reserve to him self, borovving of the
tyrant, speaking in the singular nombre. Sic volo, sic iubeo, so will I, so do I
command: for the more magnificence in the plural nombre, he princely lappeth
up all the matter with volumus and iubemus, we will and command: Which
words, like the Law of the Medes and Persians, that may not be revoked, if
they once pass through the Now M. Horn does his kind.

Sabel.


Popes holy lips, must needs stand, allow or not allow, who so list,
with full authority the matter is quite dashed. But thanks be to God for all
this (the decre is abolished) follows immediately. For (.233.) The.233.
untruth. 4 popes came between and 25. years.
shortly after, Isacius the Emperors Lieutenant in Italy, did confirm and
ratify the election of Seuerinus the first of that name, for says Platina.
The election of the Pope made by the Clergy and people in those days, It was
so, vi, non iure, by force not by right.
was but a vain thing, unless the Emperor, or his Lieutenant had confirmed
the same.

Stapleton.
Whereas ye say this Bonifacius left out the Emperor (who had the confirmation
of them before) in his decree concerning the election of Bishops and put in the
princes of the city, and gave falsely that to them, which was none of his to
give: if ye mark the words of the decree well, the Emperor is not left out, but
left in as good case as he was before. Unless ye think the Emperor is prince
of no city: or that all cities were at this time under the Emperor, whereas
even in our Europa, the Emperor had nothing to do, in England, France,
Germany Spain, no nor in many places of Italy. And I must put you in
remembrance, Fol. 38.
that before this time, when Justinian was Emperor, king Theodatus did
confirm the election of pope Agapetus, as you rehearse out of Sabellicus.
Neither did the pope as of him self, and of new give any authority to princes
in election more the^ they had before. But by his decree renewed the old order
of election of bishops. Which was wont to pass, by the consent of the clergy,
prince, and people, with the popes confirmation afterward: Therefore ye say
untruly surmising that the decree of Bonifacius, was in this point immediately
abolished. Verily your example of Isacius the Emperors Lieutena^t little
serves your purpose, who shortly after, you say, Bonifa. 4. Theodat. Bonifa.
5. Honor. 1.
confirmed and ratified the election of Pope Seuerinus. For first between this
confirming of Seuerinus, and the death of this Bonifacius, four Popes came
between, and well nere.30. years. Again as touching this ratifieng and
confirmation that Isacius the Emperors Lieutena^t practiced, will you see how
orderly it proceeded? Verily by mere violence, by spoiling the treasure of the
Church of S. John Lateranes. At the distribution of which treasure afterward
so orderly obtained by the Emperor Heraclius, the Saracens fell out with the
Christians, Sabellicus Aenead. 8. lib. 6. page 535.
(because they had no part thereof with the Greek and Romayn Soldiers)
forsook the Emperors service, got from the Empire Damascus, al Egypt, and at
length Persia it self, and embraced Mahomet then living and his doctrine, which
since has so plaged all Christendom. So well prospered the doings of this
Isacius: and such wholesome examples M. Horn has piked out to furnishe his
imagined supremacy withal.

M. Horn. The.81. Division. page 48. a
Sisenandus the king of Spain, Tol. 4.
calls forth of all parts of his dominions the Bishops to a City in Spain,
called Toletum. The purpose and manner of the kings doings in that council,
the Bishops them selves set forth, first as they affirm: They assemble
together by the praecepts and commandment of the king, to consult of certain
orders of discipline for the Church, to refourme the abuses that were crept in
about the Sacraments and the manners of the Clergy. The king with his nobles,
comes into the counsel house: He exhorts the^ to careful diligence, that
thereby al errors and abuses, may be vvypt a way clear out of the Churches in
Spayn. They follow the kings (.234.) The.234. untruth. The king followed
their direction, not they the Kings in causes ecclesiastical.
direction, and agree upon many holsom rules. When they have concluded, they
beseech the king to co^tinu his regim^t, to govern his people with justice and
godliness. And when the King had given his assent to the rulers of discipline,
which they had (.235.) The.235 untruth. Not simply agreed upon, but fully and
finally had decreed and determined.

Tol. 5. Tol. 6. Desinitis itaque etc. Tol. 7.


agreed upon, they subscribed the same with their own hands.

The like Synod Chintillanus king of Spain, did conuocate at Toletum, for
certain ceremonies, orders, and discipline, which was confirmed by his
precept and (.236.) The 236. untruth. By the bis^hops decree not by the kings
decree.

Decreto nostro sancimus.


decree, in the first year of his reign. And an other also by the same king,
and in the same place, and for the like purpose, was called and kept the
second year of his reign.

Chinasuindus King of Spain, no less careful for Church matters and
Religion, than his predecessors, (.237.) The.237. untruth. For not by his
Supreme Authority, Studio Serenissimi Regis By the favor and endeavor etc.

Tol. 8.


appoints his bisshops to assemble at Toletum in convocation, and there to
consult for the stablishing of the faith, and Church discipline, which they
did.

Reccessiunthus King of Spain, commanded his Bisshops to assemble at Toletum,
in the first year of his reign, and there appointed a Synod, wherein besides
the Bisshops and Abbottes, there sat a great company of the noble men of
Spain. The King him self came in amongst them, he makes a grave and very
godly exhortation unto the whole Synod, he professed how careful he is,
that his subjects should be rightly instructed in the true faith, and
Religion. He propounds the form of an In that Oath, there was, I vvarrant
you, no Supreme government etc.
Oath which the clergy and others of his subjects were By the virtue of a
Canon made in Tolet. 7.
wont to receive, for the assurance of the Kings saulfty. He exhorts them
to ordeine sufficiently for the maintenance of godliness and justice. He moves
his nobles that they will (.238.) The.238. untruth. Not to assiste, but in all
poi^ts to obey and follow the ordinances of the Synod.
assist and further the good and godly ordinances of the Synod. He promises
that he vvil by his princely authority, ratify and maineteine what so ever
they shall decree, to the furtherance of true Godliness, and Religion. The
Synod makes ordinances: the clergy, and nobility there assembled subscribeth
them: and the King confirms the same with his (.239.) The 239. untruth. No
such matter in the Council.

Tol. 9. Tol. 10.


royal assent and authority. He called two other Synodes in the same place for
such like purpose, in the seventh and eight years of his reign.

The 2. Chapter: Of other kings of Spain, and of the Toletane Councels holden
in their reigns.
Stapleton.
WE are yet ons again come to Spain: and we have now seven councels summoned
there, by these four kings, that M. Horn here names. But surely there is
nothing, whereby to fasten this primacy upon them. But here are many plain
and open things, that do so blemish and spotte M. Horn, and his Madge and their
children with a most shamful reproach of perpetual infamy, as these councils
here by him alleged, may seem to remain in this his book like the salt Stone,
wherinto Lothes wife was turned: that is, Tol. 4. ca. 40.
as a perpetual monumente of his shame and dishonestie for ever. For where is
the clericall crown that these fathers require, in M. Horns head? What a
number of decrees appear in these councelles by M. Horn rehearsed against the
filthy fornication and marriage of such persons both men and women as had
professed chastytie? Tol. 6. c. 6. Tol. 8. c. 4. and 5. and 7 Tol. 9. c. 10
Tol. 10. c. 5.
For the which Potamius the bishop of Bracarie is deposed: as was before
Saphoracus (whom as ye heard, M. Horn browght in for an example of his
proof) in France. And here have you, that not only Maistres Madge shall be
a slave, but her children to, thus incestuously begotten, shall be made bond
men. I pray you then what do all these Counsels so muster here: unless yt
be to represente to us, and to all that shall read and see M. Horns book
hereafter, that he can allege no Counsels, but such as make against him? For
behold how many things these Counsels decree, of which M. Horn, and his
pewfelowes observe never a white. Else where are the hallowed tapers to be used
in the vigils decreed in those Councels? Tol. 4. ca. 8 Tol. 7. ca. 3 Tol. 10.
c. 5
Where is the Mass so expressly in those Counsels mentioned? Where is the
order and discipline decreed there against renegate Nonnes? But to let these
things pass, what has M. Horn, in all those Councils to justify his primacy
by? Verily in the first Council by him alleged Sisenandus the king entering in
to the Synod, Tol. 4. in praefat.
began his talk to the bishops, Coram sacerdotibus Dei humi prostratus, lyenge
flat groueling on the ground before the priests of God. And in all that Council
he only exhorted the bishops to make some decrees for reformation of the
Church. In the second Council by him alleged, where he says the Synod was
confirmed by the princes commandment and decree, the words of the Council
write expressly the contrary. Tol. 5. in. praefat.
For the bishops there of their conclusion in that Synod do say. Ex praecepto
eius, and decreto nostro sancimus. This we ordain by the kings precept, and
our decree. It is their decree M. Horn not the princes. And so in the next
Council following, Tol. 6. c. 2.
this Synod is called, the bishops constitution or decree: not the kings. In
the third Council by you alleged, the bishops confess they were there
assembled, Tol. 6. in praefat.
Regis salutaribus hortamentis absque impedimento: by the wholesome exhortations
of the king without let, signifiyng that by the kings means they were quietly
assembled, Tol. 7. in praefat.
and nothing else. As also in the next Council following they say Studio
serenissimi Regis and caet by the endeavor or favor of our most gratiouse
king. Nay in the next Council by you alleged the king and his nobles
confess them selves subjects to the bishops in such matters. Tol. 8. in
praefat.
The king speaking to the bishops says. En Reuerendi patres excelsiori mihi
venerationis honor sublimes, coram vobis aduenio etc. Behold Reverend
fathers, high to me in a more higher degree of honor, I come before you etc.
And touching his nobles (of whom, as M. Horn notes, there sat in the Synod
a great Company) he charge them, Ibidem.
vt nihil a consensu praesentium patrum sanctorumque virorum aliorsum mentis
ducant obtutum: that in no point they should direct their intention from the
consent of the fathers and holy men there present. In which words you see M.
Horn, his nobles were not there to govern, to direct, or to ouerrule the
bishops: but rather to be governed directed, and instructed of the bishops.
And then as I said, what is there in all these Counsels that may any ways
further this vehement imagination of your supremacy? And how much is there that
ouerturneth the same, and establishes the Clergies supremacy, in such causes
to them apperteyning? For beside all this, Tol. 8. c. 4.
lo what the Fathers in this very Council do yet farther protest. They say,
that Christ is the head, and the bishops the eyes. They say, that they being of
the highest do rule by the highness of their order: and do govern the
multitude of people, Nam dum secundum Carnis assumptae mysterium, Ecclesiae
suae fuerit dignatus caput existere Christus, merito in membris eius intentio
Episcoporu^, officia peragere cernitur oculorum. Ipsi enim de sublimioribus,
celsitudine ordinis regunt and disponunt subiectas multitudines plebium. Tol.
8. ca. 4.
under their subjection. And therevppon they say that Bisshoppes among other
their virtues, must excel in kepinge of chastitye. And they further do
declare, that such as be faultye therein, shall be thruste out of their
bisshoprikes. Yet one thing there is, that semethe colowrablye to serve
Master Horn, that is, that the nobility also subscribeth. Which should seame
to imploye a voice and a consent. Unto the which our former answer may serve
well enough, that the Bisshops decreed and ruled, not the Nobles. Again this may
serve, Vide Co^c. 5 and Con. 8.
that here in all these Councels, was no new matter of faith determined: but
most of all this I am assured will serve, to say that many things were in
those Councils, enacted for the assurance and succession of the Prince and of
other cyuill and polityke matters, to the which noble men may subscribe well
inowghe.

M. Horn. The.82. Division. Fol. 49. a.
Distin. 631. cap. 21.
Vitalianus being chosen Pope, sent his messengers with Synodicall letters
(according to the custom, says Gratian) to signify unto the Emperor of his
election. In this Popes time (says the Pontifical) came Constantinus the
Emperor to Rome, whom this Pope with his clergy, The.242. untruth
Slanderous.
met six miles out of the City, and did humbly receive him. It is vvonderfull
to consider (although the Historians, being Papists for the most part, (.240.)
cover the matter so much as may be) what practices the Popes used to catch
(.241.) The 241. untruth. The Emperors never had it.
from the Emperors to them selves, the superiority in governing of Church
matters: when they savve, that by stovvte and brave presumption, their
ambitious appetites could not be satisfied, they turned over an other leaf,
and covering their (.242.) The 242. untruth Slanderous and Railing.
ambitious meaning with a patched cloak of humility and lovvlinesse, they won
much of that, which with pride and presumption they had so often before this
time attempted in vain.

With this vvily lovvlinesse, Donus the next saving one to Vitalianus, (.243.)
The.243. untruth. He brought it not, but restored it etc. As shall appear.
brought under his obedience the Archebisshop of Rauenna. There had been an
old and (.244.) The 244. untruth Notorious and facing.
continual dissension betwixt the Archebisshop of Rome, and the Archebisshop
of Rauenna, for the superiority: The Rauennates accompting their sea (.245.)
The.245. untruth. Their first strife was not about the Superiority: but about
Tria capitula. Pontifical.
equal in dignity, and to owe none obedience to the sea of Rome, for they
were not subject thereunto: To finishe this matter, and to win the
superiority, Donus first practiced with Reparatus the Archebisshop of Rauenna,
to give over unto him the superiority, Anno. 620.
and become his obedientiary, and that (as it may appear by the sequel)
without the consent of his Church. After the death of Reparatus, which was
within a while, Theodorus a familiar friend to Agatho the Pope, and a stout
man, (whom (.246.) The 246. untruth. It was not that Theodorus, but an other,
as shall appear.
Agatho did honor with his Legacy unto the syxth general Council at
Co^sta^tinople) because his Clergy vvoulde not vvayt on him on Christmas day,
solempnely (.247.) The 247 untruth as shall appear.
conducting him unto the Church as the manner had been, did give over the
title, and made his sea subject to the Pope for envy and despite of his Clergy,
(says Sabellicus) vvherevvith the Rauennates were not content, but being
overcome by the authority of the Emperor Constantin, who much favored Agatho,
they bare it as patiently as they might. And Leo the second, successor to
Agatho, made an end hereof, (.248.) The 248 untruth gross and impudent, as
shall appear.
causing the Emperor Justinian to shevve great (.249.) The 249. untruth. It
was because they would maintain their old disobedience.
cruelty unto the whole Cyty of Rauenna, and to Felix their Bishop, because
they would have (.250.) The 250. untruth. It was Constantin not Justinian.
recovered their old liberty. And so this Pope Leo by the commandment and
power of the Emperor Justinian, brought Rauenna under his obeisance, as the
Pontifical reports. These Popes through their feyned humility and obedience
unto the Emperors, which was but duty, won both much favor and aid at the
Emperors hands, to atchieue their purpose much desired.

The.3. Chapter: of Vitalianus, Donus and Leo the.2. Bishops of Rome: and how
the Church of Rauenna was reconciled to the Sea Apostolic.
Stapleton.
WHy Master Horn? Put case the Pope signifies his election to the Emperor?
Put case the Popes were sometime stowte and brave? And sometime again
covered their ambitiouse meaning with a patched cloak of humilitye and
lowelines? what if the Church of Rauenna after long rebellion became an
obedie^tiarie to the apostolic see of Rome? Sabell. en. 8. lib. 6. Raue^nas
ecclesiae ad officium reuocata est. Platina ad Donum, hoc decus refert.
Platina. Praeterea tantum doctrina and sanctitate valuit, vt Rauennatem
Ecclesiam a Romana ^am pride^ segregatam. etc.
This is the effect and contents almost of one whole leaf. What then I say?
Knitte up I pray you, your conclusion. Ergo a Prince of a Realm is supreme
head in all causes ecclesiastical and temporal. Well and clerckly knitte up by
my sheathe. But Lord what a sort of falshods and follies are knitte up
together, in this your wise collection? As concerning the stowtnes and cloked
humility of the Popes, your authors the Pontifical and Sabellicus write no
such thing, but commend Vitalian, Idem in Leone. 2. Contudit superbiam
praesulum Rauennatum, quod Agatho inchoauerat. Instituit enim ne electio cleri
Rauennatis valeret, nisi eadem Romanae sedis authoritate co^firmata fuisset.
Antea vero Hyparchorum potentia freti, diuina atque humanae omnia pro arbitrio
animi miscebant, nemini obte^perantes, quasi Romans pontificibus pares. Tom. 2.
Council. fol. 280. col. 1. a.
Donus, Agatho, Leo, for very good Popes, yea and for this their doing
concerning the Church of Rauenna. Other writers commend these Popes also, for
good and virtuous men. But I perceive they are no mean or common persons that
must serve for witnesses in your honorable consistory, your exceptions are so
precise and peremptorye. Yet I beseache you sir, in case ye will reiecte all
other, let the Emperor Constantin himself serve the turn for this Vitalian.
Who, at what time the bisshops of the east being Monothelites, would not
suffer Vitalians name to be rehearsed according to the custom in the Church at
Constantinople, did withstand them. And why, think, you M. Horn? for any
feigned holiness? No, no, but propter collatam nobis charitatem ab eodem
Vitaliano dum superesset in motione tyrannorum nostrorum. For his charity
employed upon us, says the Emperor, whil he lived, in the removing and
thrusting out, of those that played the tyrants against us. Why do ye not
bring forth your authors, to prove them dissemblers and Hypocrites? but you
shall prove this, when you prove your other saying, that there had been an old
and a continual dissensio^ between these.ij. Churches, Vide Gregorium li. 2.
epist. 54 indict. 11. ad ^oan. Epis. Raven.

Li. 4. epi. 54. ad Martianu^ epi. Raue^. Epist. Io. Raue^nat. ad Grego. li.
10. epi. 55.

Quae universally ecclesiae iura sua tra^smittit.

Rauennati ecclesiae quae peculiariter vestra est.


and that the Raue^nates were not subject to the sea of Rome. This is well to be
proved, that they ought to have been subject to the sea of Rome, not only by a
common and an universal subjection, as to the sea of all Churches: But as to
their patriarchall see withal. It is also as well to be proved, that in S.
Gregory's time, who died but.72. years before Donus was made pope, the
Archebishops of Raue^na, acknowledged the superiority of the Church of Rome:
as appears by sondrye epistles of S. Gregory: and receyuid their Palle from
thense, a most certain token of subjection: matters also being removed from
thense to the popes consistory, yea the bishop of Raue^na confessing that Rome
was the holy See, that sent to the universal Church, her laws, and prays
S. Gregory not only to preserve to the Church of Rauenna which peculiarly was
under Rome, her old privileges: but also, to bestow greater privileges upon
her. Wherein appears your great untruth, and folly withal: in that you say,
there had been an old and continual dissension betwixt the Archbishop of
Rome and the Archbishop of Rauenna for the superiority. Now you see the
dissension was not continual, nor very old, it being so But 72. years before.
Tom. 2. Co^ p. 279. b.
late subject to the Sea of Rome in the time of S. Gregory. Herein appears
also an other of your untruths, where you allege out of the pontifical, that
Pope Leo brought Rauenna under his obeisaunce. For the pontifical says.
Restituta est Ecclesia Rauennas sub ordinatione Sedis Apostolicae. The Church
of Rauenna was restored or brought home again under the ordering of the Sea
Apostolic. In which words (if you had truly reported them) would easily have
appeared that the rebelliouse child was then brought home again to obedience,
not that then first it was brought under subjection, as you untruly and
ignorantly surmise. You say also as ignorantly or as untruly, that Theodorus
the Archebishope of Rauenna who submitted his Church to Pope Agatho, was a
familiar fre^d to Agatho, and was of him honored with his legacy to the sixth
general Council of Constantinople, intending thereby to make your reader
think he did it of friendship or flattery, and not of duty. But your conceytes
have deceived you. For the legate of pope Agatho in that Council, so familiar a
friend of his, and so much by him honored, was one Theodorus, presbyter
Rauennas, a priest of Rauenna: as both in the life of Agatho, Tom. 2. Conc. pa.
277. a. and 282. b.
and in the very Council it self evidently appears. Neither could that priest
be afterward the same bishope that so submitted him self, for that submission
was before the Council, as in the life of Agatho it appears. So lernedly and
truly, M. Horn in his talk proceeds.

With like truth M. Horn tells, that Theodorus made his see of Rauenna
subject to Rome, because his clergy did not so solemnly conducte him to Church
upon Christmas day, as the manner had been. Would not a man here suppose, that
this was a very solemn prelat, that forlacke of his solemnyty, Naucler. Gener.
23. page 771. Omnis Clerus eu^ destituit.
would forsake his whole clergy? But it is not possible for these lying
superintendentes to tell their tales truly. The story is this. Theodorus the
Archebisshop of Rauenna (says Nauclerus) minding upon Christmas day before
the son risyng to say Mass in S. Apollinaris Church, was forsaken of al his
clergy. And until it was toward noone they came not at him: at what time by
the means of the Exarchus, they brought him to Church. The cause of this
enmyty that the Clergy bore to him was, as Nauclerus writes, for that he was a
great alms man, and liberal of the Church goods, and also very busy to keep
his Clergy in good order. For this cause they hated him, and in so solemn a
day utterly forsook him: Which is more, I trow M. Horn, then not so
solemnly to conducte him as the manner was. To lack the ordinary solemnity,
and to be clean destitute are two things. And there is a difference, you
know, between staring and stark blind. I think your self M. Horn as holy
and as mortified as you be, would be very loathe to show your self in S.
Swithens Quyer at Winchester upon a Christmas day al alone, without any one of
your Ministers as seely as they are. Again where you say that Leo the second
made an end hereof causing the emperor Justinian to show great cruelty etc. This
is a very gross lie. For Leo the second was Pope only in Constantins time
father to this Justinian. 2. And the cruelty that Iustinia^ showed to the whole
City of Raue^na was after the death of this Leo. 2. at the lest twenty yers,
under Co^sta^tine the Pope, at the later end of Iustinia^s reign, being
restored then from banishment, but yet continuinge in all his former cruelties.
And as Nauclerus writes, Naucler. Generat. 24. p. 779
he changed never a whit his former life, only excepted, that (after his
banishment) he ever showed Reverence to the Sea Apostolic, otherwise then
before (his banishment) he was wont to do. And therefore hearing that Felix the
bishop of Rauenna disobeied the Pope, he commanded his Lieutenant in Sicilie
to punish them: which he did in deed very cruelly and barbarously. But that he
did of his own accord, not by the causing (as you ignorantly affirm) of Leo
the.2. Who was dead at the lest.20. yers before, nor by the causing of
Constantine the Pope then, for ought that appears in the Stories. And
therefore where you conclude, that Pope Leo by the commandment and power of
Justinian brought Rauenna under his obeissance, as the Pontifical reports,
you belie the Pontifical and the whole storye of that time to to ignorantly.
The Pontifical in deed says: Percurrente diuale iussione etc. By the
commandment of the Emperor sent abroad, the Church of Rauenna was restored
etc. But Justinian it names not. It means Constantine the Emperor who
straight after the.6. Council ended, promulged that edicte, Leo the.2. being
then Pope. Such a long and tedious matter it is to open M. Horns untruths.

M. Horn. The.83. Division. page 50. a.
But Benedictus the second, who succeeded next to Leo the second, vve^t in this
point beyond al his predecessors, for Constantin being moved with his
(.251.) The.251. untruth. Sanctitate permotus: moved with his holiness faith
Platina: and Sabellicus also.
humanity, piety, and fauourablenes toward al me^, when he sent to
the emperor for his confirmation: the emperor sent, says Platina, a decree, that
from henceforth, look whom the Clergy, the people, and the Romain army, should
chose to be Pope, al men, without delay, should believe him to be Christ's true
vicar, abiding for no confirmation by the emperor, or his Lieutenant as it had
been wont to be done. etc. For that was wont to be allowed in the Popes
creation, that was confirmed by the Prince him self or his vicegerent in Italy.

Here first of al it appears (if this story be true) how this interest of
the Prince in this Ecclesiastical matter thus continuing (.252.) The.252.
untruth. No longer then from Pelagius the first, and that by his decree.
long time, although many vvayes assailed, and many attemptes made by the
Popes, to shake it of, was at the length through their flattery (which their
Parasites call humility) given unto them of the^perours, to whom it
apperteined. But whether this story be true or not, or if it were given, how
it was given, or how long the gifts took place, or how it was taken away
and returned to the former right, may well be called into question, for there
is good (.253.) The.253. untruth. No good token ca^ beshewed
tokens to show, that it was not given in this sort. For these two Popes
who sat in the Papal seat (.254.) The.254. untruth. benedictus 2. sat one
year and.10. Months. Pa^taleon.
but.10. months a piece or there about, were in (.255.) The.255. untruth.
Bened. 2. was in as much favor, as Agatho, with this Emperor
no such favor with The Emperor, as was their predecessor Agatho, who made
great suit unto the emperor for such like things, and obtained his suit, but
with a special Prouiso for the reseruatio^ of this authority still to remain
unto the^perors, as witnesses the Pontifical and Gratian. He received from
the Emperor letters (say they) according to his petition, wherebye the sum
of moeny was releassed that was wont to be given (to the Emperor) for the
Popes Consecration: but so that if there happen after his death any election,
the Bisshoppe elect be not consecrated before the election be signified to the
Emperor by the general decree (he means the Synodicall letters) according
to the ancient custom, that the orderinge of the Pope may go forward, by
the Emperors knowledge or consent and commandment. The Glossar upon Gratian
notes upon these words: Which sum was wont to be given: For every
Bishop was wont to give something to the emperor at his election. But did not
the emperor commit Symony in releasing this right under this condition, that his
consent should be required in the election? answer, no: because both these
belonged to hi^ of right before, wherefore he might now remitte the one.

But as I said, let it be true, that Constantin gave over this jurisdiction,
but Volateranus adds to this suspected donatio^, this clause, found true by
experience, which donatio^ (says he) was not long after observed. And in deed
it was kept so small a while, (.256.) The 256. untruth. A false and a fond
illation, as shall appear,
that within one year after or little more, when the electors after long
altercation, had agreed on Conon: Theodorus the^perors Lieutena^t (as says
Sabellicus) gave his assent: and Platina shows the same, although not so
plainly. So that by this also it appears, that if still it appertained to
the^perours Lieutenant, to give his asse^t to the Popes election, that than
this gift is (.257.) The.257. untruth. Slanderous to al Historiographers:
Sabell. Naucler. Volater. Platina and the rest.
either fained of the Papists (and that the rather under the name of
Constantinus, to bleare therevvith the ignorauntes eyes, as though it were the
grant of Constantine the great, as they do about Images with (.258.) The
258. untruth. peuish and stark foolish.
the name of the Nicene Counsel) or by like the gift was not so authe^tically
ratified, as it was unadvisedly promised: but how so ever it was, it held
not long: the Pope himself solempnely with the consent and decree of a
whole Council, resigning all the foresaid grant unto the Emperors for
evermore.

The.4. Chapter. of Benedictus the.2. Pope, and Constantine the.5. Emperor.
Stapleton.
I Can not tell whether this matter is by M. Horn more untruly, or more
vnwiselye handled. The Emperor Constantin moved with the great virtue of
Benedictus the.2. gave over to him, says Platina, his accustomable right, in
the confirmation of the Popes election. Nay says M. Horn, Trithem. de
ecclesi. scriptorib.
This was through their flattery, which their parasites call humility. Then by
you Platina was the Popes flatterer. Verily such a flatterer he was, that for
his free speaking against the Pope he was imprisoned. And it is not likely that
he which was so free with the Pope the^ living, would flatter with the Popes
that were dead. You add farther to prove the emperor did not give up the Popes
confirmation. For it is not (say you) any thing likely: Proper arguments not
worth the answering. The pope supreme head by the place M. Horn him self
brings in.
for Pope Agatho could not obtain it, and it was kept but a small time: and the
Pope him self with the consent of a Council not long after resigned it: Have ye
done M. Horn? then I pray lap up your as wise a conclusion, as before. Ergo
the Queen of England is the supreme head. But now what say you to this M.
Horn, that Constantin agnised the Pope for the true vicar of Christ? Does not
Platina write this, whose words your self rehearse? Let the Popes co^firmatio^
weigh as it may weigh: which makes neither with nor against this supremacy.
Do not these three words, Christ's true vicar, weigh down, and beat al in
pieces, your sely poor light reasons of your co^firmatio^? Brought in I ca^ not
tell how, and al out of ceason, and nothing pertayni^g to the kings of England.
Who never had any thing to intermedle, for the ratifying of the popes
election. But what an extreme impudency is this? Or who but very evil him
self, can suspect so vily, and draw al things to the worste? If the pope be
humble, the^ he is (with M. Horn) an hypocrite and a flatterer. If he be
stout, he is a tyrant, ambitious, and proud. Contrary wise if the Emperor be
cruel (as we shall see anon of Harry 4. and Friderike the first) then he does
but his right: If he do his duty, as this Constantinnowe, Theodosius,
Valentinian, Marcian and Justinian before, the^ they are deceived with
flattery. Woe be to you that call evil good, and good evil. For as before we
said, Vitalianus, Donus, Agatho, Volater. Anthrop. lib. 22. Sabel. Aenead. 8.
lib. 6. Fol. 49. a
Leo 2. were al commended of all writers, so is this Benedictus 2. highly
praised not only of Platina, but of Sabellicus and Volaterane, both for his
lerning and for his holiness. And in respect of those qualyties (say they)
Constantine sent the decree that M. Horn is so grieved withal. Yet all this to
M. Horn is hypocrisy. And the Historians, he says, were papists for the
most part. It is true they were so: not only for the most part, but
altogether hitherto. For what other historians, what other Councels, what
other Church can you show since Christ's time, then of very papists? If you
refuse the papists historians, you must hold your peace, and let all this
discourse pass, from Constantine the first, down to Maximilia^ next
predecessor to Charles the fyft. You must begin only since Luthers time:
Which yet for very shame you have clean omitted, not speaking one word, of
Charles the fyfte or of Ferdina^de his brother the late most renowned
Emperors, or of any their gouuernement in causes ecclesiastical: whose
examples yet you might as well have browght, as of any other Catholic Emperor
sense Constantines time, the first. But that in these, men's eyes and ears yet
living, and knowing certeynely the contrary, would have condemned you: In the
other being out of the memory of men yet living, you thought you might by such
homly shifts as you have made with patched false and forged narrations, work
yet somewhat with the unlearned Reader, which trusts you better then he
knows you. If this be not true, tell me the cause Master Horn, why coming
down to Maximilian Charles his next predecessor, and to Lewys the french
king next before Frauncis the first, you come not lower to Charles him self,
and to king Frauncis of France? Why I pray you, but for the reason above
said? Well. If you had come lower, you might in deed have found protestant
historians for your own tothe. But now, coveting to have a color of
Antiquity for your doings, you are driven to allege only papist historians,
papist Counsels, papist doctors, papist Emperors. Brefely all your
Authorities, testimonies and allegations, none other but of papists. Yea the
Scriptures them selves of whom have you them, but of papists? No merueyll
therefore if you are so continuallye by your own Authorities beaten down. In
the mean season, what historians, what Councels, what Doctors, have you in
any time of all the Church, to speak any one poor word for your ymagined
supremacy? No, no, M. Horn. Either you that now live are not the Church of
Christ, or else Christ has had no Church, these thousand years and upward.
Either you must condemn so many ages before you, or they must condemn you.
Would God our dear Country would ones consider this one reason, and worthily
regard the same.

To return to you, Master Horn, what moves you to say, that the Electours
after long altercation agreed on Conon, and Theodorus the Emperors Lyeutenant
gave his assent, inferring thereof, that the Popes election still appertayned
to the Emperors Lieutenant, and to his assent? Your tale is myngled with
untruth, and your consequent hangs loosely. For first altercation in the
election of Conon there was none. Sabellicus your own alleged Author says.
In nullo vnquam Pontifice creando mayor extitit Ordinum consensus: There was
never more agreement of all degrees in the creatyng of any pope, then in this
Conon. Sabel. Aenead 8. l. 6
And as for the Emperors Lieutenants assent, he adds. Praestitit and
Theodorus Exarchus suum assensum. Theodorus also the Lieutenant gave his
assent: which he infers, not as you do, to show that the Lieutenants
assent was either of right or necessity required, but to declare, that this
pope without any altercation, for his singular virtues in deed, was chosen
with the consent of all men, yea of the Lieutenant him self. And thus your
whole and only proof fails, whereby you would persuade us, that the decree
of Constantine the Emperor was so sone after abolished, or else not at al made,
but (as you most peuishly talk) feigned of the Papist historia^s: being yet al
such, as wrote before Luther was borne, and therefore by no reason in the
world likely to be counterfayters either for our vauntage, or for your
disauauntage. Else by the same reason you may reject al histories and Councils
and doctors to (because they al make directly against you and your doctrine,
not only in this, but in all other your heresies) and say, that the papists
have feigned stories, devised Councels, forged old doctors, yea and
counterfayted the Scriptures also, which I pray God, you Caluinistes of
England do not ones attempt to auouche, as the Swe^cfeldians have already
begone.

M. Horn. The.84. Division. Fol. 51. a.
But I return again to Agatho, who (as I said) being in great favor with
Constantine the Emperor, Determined (says Platina) to have a council to
decide the error of the Monothelites. But (.259.) The.259. untruth. Not for
that cause but because he could not otherwise have had the Emperors aid and
assistance. Constable. 6.
because he could not him self by his own authority, call a general
council, for that belo^ged to the Emperor, who in that time was busy in the
vvarres against the Saracens: He waited (says Platina) for the return of the
Emperor.

This Constantinus surnamed Pogonatus, about the year of the Lord 680. calls
the Bishops out of all coasts unto a general Council: in his letters of
Sommons to Donus (but committed to Agatho Bishop of Rome, Donus being dead) he
admonishes him of the contention betwixt the sea of Rome and Constantinople,
he exhorts him to lay aside al strife, feruencie, and malice, and to agree
in the truth with other, addinge this reason: For God loves the truth, and
as Chrysostom says: He that will be the chief amongst all, he must be minister
unto all (by which reason made by the Emperor, it may seem, that the pride
of those two seats, striuinge (.260.) The.260. untruth. A false. lewd, and
malicious surmise, as shall appear.

The Bishop of Rome, at the Emperors (261) commandment in Eccl. matters.

Act. 1.


for superiority and supremacy, was a great nourishment of the Schism,
which was chiefly in outvvarde shevve only for doctrine.) He protests that
he will shevve him self indifferent, without parciallitye to any part or
faction., only seekinge, as Godde has appointed him, to keep the Faith that
he had received vvholye and without blotte. He exhorts and commands the
Bishop of Rome, not to be an hinderaunce, but to further this Council with
sending such as are fit for such purpose. The bishop of Rome obeys the
Emperors (.261.) The.261. untruth. Notorious The Emperor plainly denies and
disclaymeth such Authoryte of commau^ding the bisshops.
commandment. And the like letters the Emperor sends to George Bishop of
Constantinople, and others. The Emperor sat in the council him self, as
President and moderatour of all that action: having on his right hand a great
company of his Nobles, and of his Bishops on his left hand. And when the
holy Ghospelles was brought forth, and laid before them, as the (.262.)
The.262. untruth. The Counsel has no such words.
judges, whose sentence they ought to follow, as it was also wont to be
done in the fornamed Councels: The deputies for the bishop of Rome stand
up, and speak unto the Emperor in most humble wise calling him most
benign Lord, affirminge, the Apostolic seat of Rome to be It was then true,
in Temporal matters.
subject unto him, as the servant unto the Master: and beseechinge him that he
vvil command those that took part with the bishop of Constantinople,
which had in times paste brought in nevve kinds of speech, and erroneous
opinions, to shevve from whence they received, their nevve devised Heresies.
The Emperor commands Macarius Archebishoppe of Antioche, and his side to
answer for them selves. And after diverse requests made by him to the
Emperor, and granted by the Emperor unto him, the Emperor commands the
Synod to stay for that time.

The.5. Chapter. Of the sixth General Council holden at Constantinople under
Pope Agatho.
Stapleton.
Master Horn, as he says, returns again to Agatho, wherein he does well:
for this has been an extrauagant and an impertinent discourse. But he
returns withal to his accustomable dealing: saying that pope Agatho of his
own authority could not call a council. Which neither his author Platina
says, nor any other, nor he him self proves. He could M. Horn have called
a Council, (and so he did call at Rome at this very time a great Council of
an.1^5. Bisshoppes, our contreyman S. Wilfryde Archbisshoppe of York and the
Apostle of Sussex being one of them) without the Emperor, and such as this
Emperor him self confesses to be a general Council. Beda lib. 5. ca. 20.
Conc. 6. Act. 4. pa. 306.

Consta^tinus omnibus sanctissi. vniuersalis Synodi Apostolica sedis conciliu^
repraesentantib. Ibidem. Act. 18. fo. 409. col. 2. a.

The cause why Pope Agatho joined with the^peror for the Council to be had.
M. Horns reasons out of the 6. General Council for his Primacy.

Tom. 2. Council. fol. 280. col. 2. a.


But because, the schism of the Monothelites was deaply settled in Greece, and
was fast and depelye rooted by continuance of.46. years, not only in the
Bisshoppes of the chief sees, as Constantinople, Alexandria, Antiochia, and
others, but also in the Emperors withal: full godly and wisely, that the
Council might be more effectual and fruytful, he thowght good to work with
the advice and assistance of the Emperor: and so he did: And this his godly
policy had his prosperouse success accordingly.

Master Horn will now recite to us his collections out of this Council
called, the.6. General Council, that he has gathered, (but how well and
fytlye to prove his matter, ye shall anon understand) for the confirmation of
his new erected primacy. And first he glaunceth at the Sea of Rome, surmising
that because the Emperor exhorted the Pope to unity, the pride of Rome and of
Constantinople striving for superiority and supremacy was a great nourishment
of the Schism. This is a lewd and a false surmise. For the Emperor in that
place expressly tells (by the report of the Greek Patriarchs) the cause
of that strife to be, quod verba quaedam nouitatis intromissa sunt, that
certain new doctrine was brought into the Church. And will Master Horn
have his unproven surmise, to waighe down the Emperors plain confession?

The malice you talk of Master Horn, is in your self* It was not in Pope
Agatho. The Emperor protests, you say, to keep the faith that he had
received wholly and without blotte. Would God all Christen Princes had done so.
You had had then Master Horn, no place in our country to preach and
set forth your damnable heresies.

You say farther: The Bishop of Rome obeyed the Emperors commandment. And
this also you note very solemnly in your Margin. But both your text and your
margin, by your leave, lies. For the Emperor in his letters to the Pope
(wherein he invited him to this Council) says plainly. Ibidem.
Inuitare and rogare possumus ad omnem commendationem and vnitatem omnium
Christianorum, necessitatem vero infer nullatenus volumus. Well we may move
you and pray you to fall to an unity, but force you by no means will we. Where
then is this forceable commandment that you imagine? You would feign have
the Emperors very Imperial, over Popes and Bisshoppes: You would, as
Auxentius the Arrian Bishop did, Amb. li. 5. epist. 32. Suidas in Leontio.
Laicis ius sacerdotale substernere, bring under the Lay Princes foot, the
Priestly right and Authority. You would have them, as the Arrians persuaded
Constantius, (...) being set to govern one thing, to take upon them an
other thing. This with your predecessors heretical Bisshoppes, your
prelatship also would Emperors should take upon them. But they expresselye
refuse so to do: they proteste the contrary: they abhor such lewd
clawebackes. You add farther, that in the Council, the holy Gospelles was
brought forth and laid before them, as the judges. This is a flat untruth.
The Council has no such words, I mean that the Gospels were Judges. No
doubt but by the ghospels the Council did judge and determine the
controversies, and had always those holy books before the^, as also a Sign of
the Cross and other relikes, De Concord. Cathol. li. 2. cap. 6. 1. Cor. 4.
as Cusanus writes. But a Judge must speak and pronounce a Sentence. Such is
not the Scripture, but such are they that be (as the Apostle says)
Dispensatores mysteriorum Christi, the dispensours of the mysteries of Christ,
the ordered teachers of his word, the successors of his Apostles. But you to
make folk wene, that Scripture alone were the only Judge, as though the book
could speak and give sentence it self, without a Teacher or Pastor, stick
not, to falsify and missereporte the holy Council, seeing by true dealing you
ca^ prove nothing. Act. 5. fol. 301.
But it makes perhaps for you, that the Popes Legates, call the Emperor most
benign Lord, and affirm the Apostolic see of Rome to be subject to him. But
they do not, I am assured, add, in all spiritual matters. And so are ye nothing
the nere to your purpose: and as the Popes Legates call him Lord, so pope Agatho
calls him his son.

And that which the Legates said of the Sea Apostolic, the same Pope Agatho in
his letters said of the City of Rome, Act. 4. Council. 6. Constant. page 289.
a. Gregor. li. 2. epi. 20. li. 3. epi 16. Instit. lib. 4. cap. 11.
calling it seruilem Principatus sui vrbem: A Cyty subject to his government.
And it may be well thought, the Legates spoke in no other sense, then did their
Lord and Master. But as for such phrases S. Gregory spoke as humbly and as
basely to the Emperor Mauritius (which Calvin also has noted) as ever any
Pope before him, or after him did to any whatsoever Emperor. He called
Mauritius his good Lord, and him self, his unworthy servant. But yet (as I
have at large proved against M. Jewel) he practiced in Ecclesiastical causes an
universal Supremacy throughout all Christendom.

And now beside, that I have said, in as much as the Popes.3. Legates, two
being priests, and one but a Deacon, The Popes Legates are first named, and
do speak first in the Counsel.

How the Emperor is president of the Counsel.


be, as well in the rehersall of the Bishops names, as in the placing of the
Bishops, first named, and do first speak in this action, I think I may make
thereof also a better collection for the Popes Primacy, then you have made
against it. Whereas you say the Emperor was president of the Council, I grant
you in that sense, as I have before declared: and that is, concerning
thexternal order, moderation, and direction of things to be done and heard
quietly and without parciality in the synod: but not for any supremacy in
giving sentence, against their wills, as the emperor him self even now declared.

M. Horn. The.85. Division. Fol. 51 b. Act. 2.

In the next session after the self same order observed, as in the first,
Paulus themperours Secretary began to put the Council in remembrance of the
former days proceeding. The Emperor commands the Acts of the Chalcedon
Council to be brought forth and read. At length when a manifest place was
alleged out of Leo the Pope, the Emperor him self (.263.) The.263. untruth.
For it was no disputation, but a simple interrogation.
disputed with Macarius on the understanding thereof. The Secretary having
offered the books of the fifte Council, the Emperor commands the Notary to
read them. The Notary began to read, and within a while the Popes Legates
rising up, cried out this Book of the fifte Synod is falsified, and there
alleged a reason thereof, vvhervvith the^mperor and the judges being moved,
began to look more narrovvly to the book, and espying at the last, that three
quaternio^s was thrust into the beginning, the emperor commanded it should not
be red. Note here, that the Popes Legates were but (264) The.264. untruth. This
does not prove the^ plai^tife parties, as it shall appear.

Act. 3.


the plaintify parties in this Counsel, and not the judges thereof, the which
more plainly follovveth: either parties stryuing upon a like corrupt place.
The Emperor commanded the Synod and the Judges (which were Layme^) to
peruse the Synodical boks, and (.265.) The 265. untruth. The lay Judges were
not co^maunde^ to determine any matter.

Constable. im. dixit. Sed vnam operatione^ no^ intelligis, eum dixis se^et mox:
and quomo do intelligis Dei virile^ operationem? fol. 285. c. 2. a. act. 2.


to determine the matter, which they did. George the Archbishop of
Constantinople most humbly beseeches the Emperor that he vvil cause the
letters which Agatho the Pope, and his Synod sent unto the Emperor to be
read ones again: the Emperor grants his request.

Stapleton.
In these two sessions ye can pyck no matter of any substance to help you
withal: no, not of themperours disputation. And God wotte, this was but a
slight and a cold disputation, to demand two things of Macarius, and that
by interrogation only. I trow ye shall find, but vj. or vij. lines before, a
better place for the popes supremacy: where yt is said, that pope Leo his
epistle was taken of the Chalcedon Council as the foundation of the catholyke
faith, being conformable to the confession, of the blessed S. Peter the prince
of the Apostles. But you bid us, note here that the popes legates were but
the plaintiff parties in this Council, and not the Judges thereof. Your reason
is, because they first spoke and accused the forgery committed in a copy of
the fifte Council. If you had marked the practice of other Cou^cells before, M.
Horn, you would not though hired thereto, have made this Note to your
Reader. For so is it in deed, that the popes legates, by the way of
prerogative in all Counsels, semperprius loqui and confirmare soliti sunt,
were always wont to speak first. So did they in the Chalcedon Council first
speak against Dioscorus, and removed him from the benche where other bishops
sat, Chalc. Co^. Act. 10. p. 910.
making him to sit in the myddest, where the defendantes place was. And one
of the popes Legates then so earnestly speakinge and requiringe to have him
removed, the Emperors deputies said unto him. Si iudicis obtines personam,
non vt accusator d^bes prosequi. If you bear the person of a Judge, Ibide^
Act. 1. p. 741. a
you ought not to plead as an Accuser. In which words the Judges did not
infer (as M. Horn here does,) that the Popes Legate was no Judge, because he
accused as a party plaintiff, but rather because he was a Judge (bearinge the
Popes person) he wished him to forbear accusing. But the popes Legates, as
they were always the Judges to decree and subscribe before all other bishops
against heresies, so were they ready to accuse and betraye the Demeanours of
Heretics before all others. For why? As in the Chalcedon Council it is
written. Missi Apostolici semper in Synodis prius loqui and confirmare soliti
sunt. Act. 10. vt supra.
The popes Legates were always wont to speak formest in Councels, and to
confirm before all others. And by this the prerogative of the Sea Apostolic
was expressed. And as in the Chalcedon Council the popes Legates were the first
that spoke against Dioscorus, and yet were also the first that gave sentence
against him (as I have before proved) so in this Council, as the popes
Legates spoke first against the false and forged evidences, so they were the
first (as we shall anon see) that condemned the forgers thereof, Macarius with
his fellows. And yet to speak properly, The popes Legates were not plaintiff
parties either here, or in the Chalcedon council.
the popes Legates neither here nor in the matter of Dioscorus, were parties
plaintifs. For as there they only, required to have the sentence of pope Leo
executed, touching Dioscorus his place in the Council, so here they only
required the evidence to be tried, suspecting it as forged, as it was in deed
found to be. And this they required, not as plaintiff parties, but to have
execution. which execution was in the ordering of the Emperor or his deputies.
For look what the chief bishops, or the whole Council required, that the
Prince or his deputies (the Judges) did see executed quietly and orderly.
Cusanus lib. 3. de Concord. Cathol. c. 17. and 18.
Wherein co^sisted their whole authority and travail, as we have before showed
out of Cusanus. But to Judge and determine belonged only to the bishopes.

M. Horn. The.84. Division. page 52. a.
In the next session the order and form observed as in the first, the
Emperor commanded first of al Pope Agatho his letters to be read: in the
which letters is manifestly confessed by the Pope him self: so well the
Emperors (.266.) The. 266. untruth. The contrary, which is the Popes primacy
is there clearly confessed.

The prince is Christ's Vicar in earth, in causes (.267.) Ecclesiastical by
the popes confession Act. 1.


supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, as the Popes obedience and
subjection unto him in the same. For in the beginning, he declares what
pleasure and comfort he conceived of this, that the Emperor sought so
carefully, that the sincere Faith of Christ should prevail in all Churches:
that he used such mildenes and clemency, therein follovvyng the example of
Christ, in admonishyng him and his, to give an account of their Faith, which
they preached: that being emboldened with these comfortable letters of the
Emperor, he performed his ready obedience in accomplishinge the Emperous
praeceptes effectually. That he made inquisition for satisfiynge of his
obedience (to the Emperor) for apt men to be sent to the Council: the which
thing, says the Pope to the Emperor, the studious obedience of our service,
would have performed sooner, had it not bee^ let, by the great circuit of
the Province, and long distances of place. He protests that he sends his
Legates according to the Emperors commandment, not of any sinister meaning,
The.267. untruth. Not in causes Ecclesiastical, but for execution of the laws
ecclesiastical.
but for the obedience sake (to the Emperor) which (says he) we owe of duty.
He makes a confession of his faith, concerning the controversy, adding the
testimonies of many ancient fathers. And he does protest, that he with his
Synod of the Western Bishops, believes that God reserved the Emperor to
this time for this purpose. That he (the Emperor) occupyinge the place and
zeal of our Lord Jesus Christ him self here in earth, should give just
judgment or sentence, on the behalf of the Evangelical and Apostolical
truth.

Stapleton.
What exceeding and intolerable impudency is this, to be so bold as to bring
forth Pope Agatho his letters, against the Popes supremacy? If a man would
purposely and diligently seek ample and large proufes for the confirmation of
the same, he shall not lightly find them more plentiful and more effectual,
then in this epistle, read and allowed of the whole Council. Act. 4. page 290.
col. 2. a.

Cuius (Petri videlicet) adnitente praesidio haec apostolica eius ecclesia,
nu^qua^ a via veritatis, in qua libet erroris part deflexa est. Cuius
authoritate vtpote apostolorum omniu^ principis semper omnis caetholica Christi
ecclesia, et vniversals synodi fideliter amplectentes, in cunctis sequutae
sunt. Omnesque venerabiles patres apostolica^ eius doctrinam amplexi: haeretici
au^t falsis criminationibus ac derogationu^ odijs insequuti.


By the help (says Pope Agatho) of S. Peter, this Apostolik Church never
swerued from the truth into any error. Whose authority as chief of all the
apostles all the Catholic Church of Christ, al general Councels faithfully
embracing, did always follow in all things. Whose apostolic doctrine all the
reverend fathers embraced: and the heretics, with false accusations, most
spitefully deface and persequute. Of like authorities ye shall find great
store, as well in this session, as else where in Page 300. col. 2. a. and pa.
303. co. 1 a. and page 304. col. 2. c.
this Council. Yea the whole Council confess, that S. Peter was with them by
his successor Agatho, and that S. Peter spoke by Agatho his mowthe. And if
this will not suffice, the emperor himself confesses the like.

By these and the like testimonies yt is clear, that the Emperor himself,
took the fathers to be the judges, in this controversy, and most of all the
Pope. To the which saying, it is nothing repugnante, that Pope Agatho,
according to the Emperors Letters, did diligently and obediently as well send
his own deputies to the Council, as procured that other were also sent thither.
Yes, says M. Horn: In those letters is manifestly confessed by the Pope him
self, as well the Emperors supreme government in Ecclesiastical causes, as
the Popes obedience and subjection in the same. This is largely spoken M.
Horn. O that your proufes were as clear, as your asseuerations are bold. Then
were you in deed a ioylye writer. But M. Jewel can tell you, that bold
asseueration makes no proof. For how I pray you show you this out of the
Popes own letters? You tell us many things, that the Pope sent his legates,
caused also other bisshops to repair to the Council, and would have caused
more to come, if great lettes had not hindered him. And all this you say, to
perform his ready obedience, for satisfying of his obedience, the studious
obedience of his service, and yet ones again, for the obedience sake which he
owed of duty. Here is I trow obedience on the Popes part, enoughe and enough.
But here is not yet in ecclesiastical causes: Here is not yet the Emperors
supreme gouuernement. Here is not, subjection in the same, that is, in
Ecclesiastical causes. Then M. Horn has affirmed four things, and proved
but one. And has he, trow we, proved that? Verily as well, as he has proved
the rest, of the which he has spoken never a word. For what obedience was
this that the Pope so many times speaks of? Was it any other, then that at
the Emperors earnest request he sent his legates, and summoned the bishops to
the Council? Yes, will M. Horn say: It was upon the Emperors commandment,
that he so did, and not at his simple request. Then remember I pray you the
Emperors words before alleged, in which he protests, that he can only
inuit and pray the Po^e to come to a Council, and that force him he would
not. And if the Emperors own words suffice not, then as you have brought the
Pope against him self, so I pray you M. Horn, hear him speak now for him
self. And that in the self same letters where he talks so much of
Obedience, which you liked in him very well. I assure you M. Horn you shall
hear him so speak for him self, that if he had by spirit of prophecy
foresene this lewd objection that you have made, he could scante in playner
terms or more effectually have answered you, then now he has by the way of
prevention confuted you. For behold what he says of the Emperors calling
him and moving him to assemble this Council. He says. Nequaquam tam pia
lateret intentio audientiu^, Council. 6. Constant. Act. 4. pa. 288. col. 2. b.
humanaue suspicio perterreretur, aestimantium potestate nos esse compulsos,
and non plena serenitate ad satisfaciendum etc. commonitos, Diuales apices
patefecerunt ac satisfaciunt, quos gratia spiritus sancti, imperialis li^guae
calamo, de puro cordis thesauro dictauit, Commonentis, non opprimentis,
satisfaci^ntis, non perterre^tis, non affligentis, sed exhortantis, and ad ea
quae Dei sunt secundu^ Deum inuitantis. Lest any that hear hereof, should be
ignorant of this godly intention, or the suspicion of man should fear,
thinkinge (as M. Horn here does) that we were forced by Authoryte, and not
very gently exhorted to answer and caet. the Imperial letters have declared
and do declare, written and directed from his Maiestyes pure heart, through
the grace of the holy Ghost, wherein he warns, not oppresses, he requires,
not threatens, not forces, but exhorts, and to Godly things according to
God inuiteth. Lo M. Horn, you are I trow sufficiently answered, if any thing
can suffyse you. The Emperor forced not the Pope by way of commandment, or
supreme gouuernement (as you allwaies imagyne) but exhorted him.

He proceeded not by way of oppression or threats, as by virtue of his
allegiance or in pain of displeasure, but by gentle admonitions and requests.
So did all the good Emperors before proceed with bishops in ecclesiastical
matters: Constantin the first, Theodosius the first and second, Valentinian the
first, Marcian, Justinian, and now this Co^stantin the fyfte: not as with
their subjects or vassals in that respect, but rather as with their Fathers,
their pastors and by God appointed Overseers. The obedience then that pope
Agatho so much and so often protested, proceeded of his own humylytie, not of
the Emperors supremacy: of great discretion, not of dew subjection namelye
in Ecclesiastical causes. For saying the Emperor in his letters so meke, so
gracious and so lowly, he could do no less (and the better man he was, the
more he did) but show him self again lowly and humble also. But when
Emperors would tyrannically take upon them in Church matters, there lacked not
Catholic bishops, as stout and bold then, as the pope was humble now. So
were to Constantius that heretical tyran Liberius of Rome, Hosius of Spain,
and Leontius of the East. So was to Valentinian the younger S. Ambrose, to
Theodosius the second, Leo the first, to the Emperor Anastasius pope
Gelasius, to Mauritius S. Gregory. But M. Horn, if this do fail, has yet
ready at hand an other fresh, iolye coulorable shifte: that the Emperor, even
by Agathos own confession, occupied the place and zele of our Lord Jesus
Christ in earth, to give just judgment and sentence, in the behalf of the
truth. Now are we driven to the hard wall in deed. This gear ronneth roundly.
And if I should now, thowghe truly, interpret, and mollify this sentence
according to (...), and the mind of the speaker then would you so urge and
press (...) the bare letter, that I should have much a do to rydde my hands
of you. But God be thanked, Act. 4. pa. 301. c. 1. c. Vt eius fidei causa^
(sicut aeqtas exigit, and sanctoru^ patru^ sacraru^que quinque synodoru^
decreuit i^structio) exequi dignemini, et redemptoris iniuria^ defidei suae
conte^ptoribus per eius praesidium vlciscamimin^. Vide sequentia.
who has so provided that Agatho him self, does so plainly declare his own
meaning, and your false handling of the matter, even in the very next
sentence immediately following: that all the world may evidently see, that for all
your holy euangelical pretenses, and cloked cowlours, ye seek not the trowthe:
but to tryfle, to toy, and contentiouslie to confound all things. For it
follows. That ye would voutchsauf (says Pope Agatho to the Emperor) to
exequute the cause of Christ's faith according to equitye, and the instructions
of the holy fathers, and the five general Counsels, and by Gods help to
revenge his injury, upon such as condemn his faith. And this saying of
Agatho M. Horn, may well serve for a full and a sufficient answer to al your
book, for princes intermedling in Councils, and for making laws concerning
matters ecclesiastical. You see by this place their gouuernement is no other,
but to aid and assiste for putting in execution the decrees of Councels, and
the holy Fathers Instructions. Wherefore ye may put up your ioly note wherwyth
ye would seame to furnishe and bewtifie your matter and margent here, in your
purse: and the less yt be seen, the better for you, for any good, that ever
your cause shall take by it.

M. Horn. The.87. Division. page ^2 b.
In the next session, the Emperor sits as (268.) The.268. untruth. He was
not president nor Moderatour, after M. Horns sense.
President, and Moderatour, accompanied with many of his nobles, sitting about
him. On his right hand sat Georgius the Archbishop of Constantinople, called
nevve Rome, and those that were with him: on the other side, upon themperours
left hand, sat the Legates of the Archbishop Agatho of old Rome, these two
as (.269.) The.269. untruth. The popes Legates were no agent parties.
agent parties. When they were thus set, the Emperors Secretary brought
forth the Ghospels, puts the Emperor in mind, what was done the sessio^
before, and desires his majesty to cause Macarius and his party, to bring out
likewise their testimonies, as the Legates from Agatho of old Rome had don, for
their party. The Emperor commands, Macarius obeith, and desires that his
books may be red: the Emperor commands they should so be.

Stapleton.
M. Horn here notes the sitting of the Popes Legates on the left hand, and
the Bishop of Constantinople on the right hand: which either makes nothing,
for the abasing of the Legates authority, either, that does not so abase them,
as does that I have said auaunce them, that they are rehearsed, both in the
naming and placing as well in this very place, as throughout all this Council,
before al other bisshops: beside the prerogatives, which we have and shall
declare they had in this Council. And M. Horn must remember that in the fifth
general Council they had the right hand: Fol. 41. col. 2.
as him self confesses. Neither was the Emperor President in this Council,
neither the bisshops, the Agent parties, as M. Horn here untruly says, but
when the Sentence came to be pronounced, Supra lib. 2. Cap. 7.
the Bishops alone gave it without the emperor. A moderatour in deed in external
order and quiet to be kept, the emperor was, not only in this, but in all other
Councils, as I have showed before out of Cusanus, but not in geui^g solutio^s
to the reasons propounded, or in giving final sentence in matter of doctrine, as
the word Moderatour in the schools sounds, Act. 7. The.270. untruth. This
proves it not, as shall appear.
and as M. Horn would have it here to be understood.

M. Horn. The.88. Division. page 52. b.
After the shevving of the allegations on both sides, the Legates of old Rome,
desire the Emperor that they may know, if the adversaries agree on the
tenor of their two forsaid suggestio^s. The adversaries beseech the^peror,
that they might have the copies of the^: the^peror commands, that without
delay their request should be fulfilled. The books were brought forth and
sealed with the seals of the Judges, and either of the parties. This again
(.270.) proves that the Popes Legates were none of the Judges, but one of the
parties. And so in the eight, ninth, and tenth actio^, the same order of doing
is observed in like sort, as before, in such wise that no one in the Synod,
neither the whole Synod, does (.271.) The.271. untruth. For they gave Iudgeme^
against the heretic without him,
any thing without license, and the direction of the Emperor, the president
and chief ruler in all those causes.

Stapleton.
M. Horn is now harping upon the same stringe that he was harping upon before,
twice in the former leaf: that the Popes Legates were no Judges, but parties and
plantiues. In the one of the former places, he gives no cause, but will have
us believe hi^ upon his bare word. Here and in the other, he gives us a cause,
that nothing concludes, for hi^, but rather against hi^. The Monothelits, to
make their matter bear some good cou^tena^ce, brought forth freshely many
authorities of Athanasius, and other fathers on their side. The Popes Legates
espying, the chopping and chau^ging, the cutting and hewing, the mayming and
mangling of those testimonies* discried this falshod to the Counsel. Upon this
an exact search, conference, and comparison was made of other books in
the^perous and patriarchs of Co^sta^tinople library, and the extractes as well
of those books, as of such as the Popes Legates had delivered, were brought
forth to the Council, to avoid suspicion of al sinistrous working, sealed with
the Judges seals. So that the fathers and the Legates gave the judgment (as yt
afterward appears) that the books were corrupted. The Judges to their charge
took, that by the notarye the books should be indifferentlye and vprightlye
vewed and examined, and the true testimonies to be browght to the Council. I
maruayle Master Horn, that this so good an argument escaped you in the
Chalcedon Council: wherein likewise, the Legates first of al began to speak
and work against Dioscorus, and caused him to be displaced of sytting among
other bishops, Missi apostolici semper in synodis prius loqui, et co^firmare
soliti sunt. Chalc. syno. act. 10 fo. 910. c. 1
and to sytte in the midst as a defendante. And yet they were his Judges, and
they only pronounced the final senta^ce against him: to the which the whole
Council condescended. Ye are then far wide M. Horn, from the cause, why the
Legates so intermedled. The cause then was, not as ye either ignorantly or
maliciously pretend, for that they were parties: but for this, that the popes
Legates were wont ever in counsels to speak first, and to confirm first* as
I have not much before largely declared. To that place for a fuller answer
hereto I remitte the Reader.

M. Horn. The.89. Division. page 53. a.
In the end of the eleventh Action, The Emperor assigns certain of his
noble counsailours, to be the directours in the Synod, for that he was to be
occupied in other weighty affairs of the common weal. Hitherto we see how
the^mperor in his own person with his lay Princes also, was the (272)
The.272. untruth. He was not the judge in matters there concluded, ergo not
supreme governor.
supreme governor, was the President, ouersear, commander, ratifier, and
directour, of al things done in the Council. The Popes Legates and all the
whole Council, humbly yelding al these things unto him (.273.) The.273.
untruth. They yielded no such thing but reserved to the^ selves the final
Sentence and judgment. M. Horns post ^as^, Act. 11. fo. 350. c. 2. c.
alone. The residue of the acts, or any thing therein done, was likevvyse his
deed, by his deputies, although he him self in person, was not present.

Stapleton.
Why good Sir? why make you such post haste? What are you so sone at the end
of the.11. action? Where is the beginning and the middle? where is the.6.
Action? Where are the.8. the.9. and the.10. Action? I see your have is great:
what will you leap over the hedge, ere ye come at it? And I might be so bold,
I would feign demand of you the cause of your hasty posting. Perhaps there is
some eye sore here, or some thing that your stomach ca^ not bear. What?
Greaueth yt you to hear, that our Lady was pure from all manner sin?
Castitate^ Maria sanctae ab o^ni co^tagioue liberatae et corporis, and animae
and intellectus. Act. 8. folio. 313. Iubetemitti in dyptichis sanctaru^
ecclesiarum nomen sanctae memoriae Vitaeliani papae Romae. Act. 8. fol. 315.
Conjectures why M Horn has made this post have.
Or does yt appalle you to hear the patriarch of Constantinople, and all the
bisshops his obedie^saries, with the bisshops that were under the patriarche of
Antioche, after they had heard readen the letters sent from pope Agatho and his
Council at Rome, and advisedly considered them, which (as I have told you)
were stuffed with authorities concerning the popes primacy, to yield to the
truth, and after.46. years to forsake and abandon their great schism and
false heresy? Does it dasel and amase you to hear the patriarche of
Constantinople to confess to the whole Council, that if the name of Pope
Vitalianus were received again into their dypticha, which they had raced out,
that those which had sondred and sequestered them selves from the Catholic
Church, would forthwithe return thither again, whereunto the Emperor and
all the Council by* and by agreed, and therevppon the Council made many
gratulatorie exclamations? And is there any other way to stay and redress
this huge schism in England or else where, but even to put in our Church
books the Popes name, and to embrace again his Authority? Or do ye take yt
to the heart M. Horn to see here the pleadinge of Macarius the heretyke (which
is also M. Jewels and your ordinary fasshion) as pleadinge upon the doings
of heretical Bisshops and Emperors grounding him self upon a number of
patriarchs of Constantinople, of Antioche, and diverse other bisshops with
their Counsels, yea upon the Emperor his father and his great graundfather,
teachings and proclamatio^s, quite rejected and refused? Or is it a corsy unto
you, that the heretical writings of Macarius as soon as they began to be
read, were straight condemned of the bishops, not looking for the Emperors
pleasure therein, though he him self was then present thereat? Act. 11. p.
362. Act. 10. Act. 8 fol. 321. col. 1. c Sancta synodus dixit. Ecce and hoc
testimoniu^ sancti patris peremisti. No^ congruit orthodoxis ita
circumtruncatas sanctorum patrum voces destora re^haereticoru^ potius proprium
hoc est. An humble and a reasonable request to the Queen's Majesty and her
council.
Or is there yet any other lurking sore privily pynching your stomach? Namely
that ye see to your great greef, that the fathers give us an assured mark to
know you and M. Jewel by, what ye are, by your wretched wresting and
wrething, and miserable chopping and paring the ancient fathers writings:
wherein ye are the true scholars of these Monothelites, whose practices are
discried in the.6. the.8. the.9. the.10. and the.11. sessions? The allegations
of the Popes Legates, being found truly, faithfully, and semely done. I trow
it nypped you at the very heart root, when ye read (in case ye ever read
yt, and have not trusted rather other men's eyes then your own) the Synod to
say, to that cursed and unhappy Macarius, that it was the property of an
heretyke, to nyppe and break of, to mangle and mayme, the fathers testimonies.
And therevppon he being often taken with the manner, and now confessing the same,
was forthwith deprived, and his bishoply attierment plucked from his back.

And I would to God, yt might please the Queen's Majesty, and her honorable
counsel to play the Supreme heads as this good Emperor Co^stantinus and his
Judges did, and to make an indifferent search and vewe: whether the catholics
in their late boks, or M. Jewel. M. Horn, and other their fellows, play the
Macaria^s or no: and thervppo^ (eue^ as M. Horn said the emperor Constantine
did) to give just judgment and sentence. Which is a ready and a sownde way for
the quailing and appeasing of this huge scisme. And without the which, books
will excessyuely grow on each part, and rather to increase of co^tentio^, the^
to any full pacificatio^. And for my part the fault being fownd (as I dowbte
nothing yt will be) and confessed therevppon on their part with an hearty
renu^ciatio^, of al schism and heresy, I would not wish their riches to be
plucked from them: but that they should remain in as good worldly estate as
they now are in. This is all the hurt I wish the^. But now M. Horn to return
to the matter, ye see that this was but a poor judgment, and a poor selie
supremacy, that ye give to your Emperor and his nobles. Wherein in effect whil
ye would seem to advance and exalt the^, ye make their office not much better,
the^ the registers and notaries office. Which office though it be honest and
worshipful to perchance, yet I dowbte whether it be honorable: as not many
years past one of your fellows and protestant prelates said to one that thowed
his Register. I tell thee: my regesters office, is an honorable office. Well, M.
Jewel.
let yt be honorable to: I suppose for all that, it shall not make him supreme
head of the Church withal. And so has M. Horns argument a great foil.

M. Horn. The.90. Division. Fol. 53. a.
The bishops and Clergy, which were of the Province of Antioche, when
Macarius was deposed by the judgment of the Synod, do make supplication unto
the Judges, the Emperors deputies and counsailours, that they will be means
unto the Emperor to appoint them an other Archbishop in the place of Macarius
now deposed.

Stapleton.
And will ye play me the Macaria^ still M. Horn? Good reader consider of M.
Horns dealings, eue^ in this counsel, that I have and shall declare, whether M.
Horn does not altogether resemble Macarius shameful practice in his
allegatio^s. One of your reasons the^ M. Horn, to prove Co^stantines supremacy
by, is, that the Antiochians sewed to the emperor to appoint an other
Archbisshop in the place of Macarius. The appointment of an Archbisshop
imployeth no supremacy: Diverse Kings of England have appointed bisshops and
Archebisshops in their Realm: And yet none ever took upon them either the name
or Authority of a Supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical, until in this
our miserable time, heretics by authority of Princes, to establishe their
heresies, have spoiled Gods Ministers, and the Church of her dew Authority and
government And I have told you before M. Horn, that this Co^stantin himself
has disclaimed your supremacy, of supreme judgment in causes ecclesiastical.
Whereof also the very next matter, immediatlye rehearsed before the thing you
allege, is a good and a sufficient proof.

I will therefore demand a question of you. Ye see, Macarius is deposed, and
that, as you confess here your self, by the Judgment of the Synod. Might now
the emperor keep him still and that laufully in his bisshoprik, if he had so
would, or no? If ye say he might not, the^ is he no Supreme Head. Except ye
will say, he was lawfully deposed as an heretic: and therefore the emperor could
not keep him in. This also as yet makes against your supremacy. For the^ the
Judgment of the bisshops is above themperours power. But I will further ask
you, whether if Macarius had been heartily poenitent, and had recanted his
heresy to, the emperor might the^ have kept him in? Now take heed ye be not
brought to the streights, which way so ever ye wind yourself. If ye say he may
(as ye must, if ye will have the emperor Supreme Governor in all causes
ecclesiastical) then is the whole Counsel against you, Act. 12. subfinem.
utterly denying him al hope of restitution, though the Judges at the^perours
commandment, being moved with mercy, proposed this question to the Synod. If
ye say he may not: The bisshop^ primacy proved by the said place that M. Horn
alleges.
then do ye your self spoil the emperor of his Primacy. Thus ye perceive every
way ye are in the briars, being convicted by the very place by your self
proposed.

M. Horn. The.91. Division. Fol. 53. a.
The Judges make them aunsvvere, that it was the Emperors pleasure, that they
should determine amongst them selves, whom they would have, and bring their
decree unto the Emperor. At the last the whole Synod do offer their
definition subscribed with their hands to the Emperor, besechi^g him to
(.274.) The 274. untruth, wilful and Notorious as shall appear.
examen and confirm the same. The Emperor within a while says: we have
read this definition, and give our consent thereunto. The Emperor asked of
the whole Synod, if this definition be concluded by vnifourme consent of all the Bishops, the Synod ansvvered: We al believe so, we be al of this mind, God
send the emperor many years: Thou have made al heretics to fly, by thy means
al Churches are in peace, accursed be al Heretics. In the which curse, the
whole Synod curses Honorius Pope of Rome with the great curse, whom the
Synod names in.17. Action, one of the chiefest of these Heretics, who are
here cursed. The Emperor protests, that his zeal to conserve the Christian
faith undefiled (.275.) The.275. untruth in leaui^g out words material.

VVherin consists the office of Bisshops.


was the only cause of calling this Synod. He shows what was their
parts therein, to vvyt, to weighe consideratly by Gods holy Scriptures, to put
away al noueltye of speech or assertion, added to the pure Christian faith, in
these latter days by some of wicked opinion, and to deliver unto the Church
this faith most pure and clean. (.276.) The.276. untruth, in nippi^g of the
chiefest part of the Sentence.

The princes most acceptable service to God.


They make a co^mendatory oration unto the^peror with much ioyfulnes
declaring, that this his fact about this Synod in procuring to his subjects
true godlynes, and to all the Church a quiet state, was the most comely thing,
the most acceptable service, the most liberal oblatio^ or sacrifice, that any
Emperor might or could make unto God. And declaring the humble obedience to
his precept or sommons of the Bishop of Rome, who sent his Legates, (.277.)
The.277. untruth. That appears not in the Council, neither was that the
cause of his absence.
being sick him self, and of them selves being present in their own
persons, they do most humbly beseech him to set his seal unto their doings,
to ratify the same with the Emperial wryt, and to make edictes and
constitutio^s (.278.) The.278. untruth. Ex more, after the manner, left out.
wherewith to confirm the Acts of this Council, that al controversy in time
to come, may be utterly taken away. Al which the Emperor granted unto them,
adding his curse, as they had done before, so well against all the other
Heretics, as also against Honorius late Pope of Rome, a companion, fautour,
and co^firmer, ( says he) of the others heresies in all points. After this,
the Emperor directs his letters to the Synod at Rome of the Western
Bisshoppes, wherein he commends their diligence about the confuting of the
heresies. He describes the miserable estate the Church was in, by means of
the Heresies: for, says he, the inuentours of Heresies are made the chief
Bisshoppes, they preached unto the people contention in stead of peace, they
sowed in the Church for^vves, cockle for wheat, and all Church matters
were troubled, and clean out of order. And because these things were thus
disordered, and impietye consumed Godliness, we set forward thither,
whereunto, it becommed us to direct our goinge ( meaning to seek by all
means the redress of these disorders in Church matters) we labor with
earnestnes for the pure faith, we attend upon Godliness, and we have our
special care about the Ecclesiastical state. In consideration whereof, we
called the Bisshoppes out of far distaunte places to this Synod, to set a
Godly peace and Quietness in the Church matters etc. To this epistle of the
Emperor, Leo the second Bisshoppe of Rome, makes aunsvvere (for Agatho was
dead) bye letters, whereof this is the effect. I give thanks unto the King
of Kings, who has bestovved on you an earthly Kingdom, in such wise, that
he has given you therevvith a mind to seek much more after heavenly things.

Your pietye is the fruit of mercy, but your authority is the keeper of
Discipline: by that the Princes mind is joined to Godde: But bye this the
subjects receive reformation of disorders. Kings ought to have so much care
to refourme and correct naughtynes amongst their subjects, as to triumph
over their enemies: for in so dooinge they make their authority subject to
serve him, bye whose gift and protection they reign. Wherefore saying that
the holy mother the Church, which is the Body of Christ, enjoys by means
of you her sincere and principal child, an invincible soundnes. Therefore it
is written of you, most merciful Prince, and of that same holy Church
dispersed throughout all the world, Esai. 49. Psalm. 98.
Kings shall be thy noursinge fathers, and in like sort it is written, the
honor of the King loves judgment: in that you set much more by heavenly
tha^ by earthly things, and do prefer without comparison the right faith,
before all worldly cares: what other do you herein, than make right judgment
bond and serviceable to Gods honor and religion, and to offer unto his
divine Majesty, an oblation and burnt Sacrifice, The pope accursed for heresy
by the sentence of the emperor, the synod and the bishop of Rome.
of sweet savor upon the altar of your heart? God inspire, increase and
replenishe your princelye heart, with the light of the Catholic doctrine,
whereby the clouds of the heretical prauity, may be driven away. I received
most joyfully the Synodical acts, with your letters of highest authority, by
the Legates your humble servants, which were sent unto the Council, from
my predecessor Agatho, at your commandment. Wherefore with thanks geuinge I
cry unto the Lord: O Lord save our most Christian King, and hear him in the
day he calls upon thee: By whose godly travail the Apostolic godly doctrine
or Religion, shines through the world, and the horrible darkness of heretical
malice is vanished away. For through your travail, God assisting the same,
that mischief which the wicked craft of the Devil had brought in, is
overthrown: the benefit of the Christian Faith, that Christ gave to the
salvation of man, has won the over hand. The holy and great General
Council, which of late has been congregate at Constantinople bye your
(.279.) The 279. untruth. No such words in the Latin text.
order and precepte: wherein for the service and Ministry sake that ye owe to
God, you had the chief rule and government, has in all points followed the
doctrine of the Apostles, and approved Fathers. Here is left out: that the Sea
Apostolic. Beati Petri autoritate confirmat confirms with the Authority of
S. Peter, the 6. General Council.
I do deteste therefore and curse al Heretics, yea Honorius also late Bishop
of this sea, who labored profanely to betray and subuerte the immaculate
faith. O holy Church, the mother of the faithful, arise, put of thy mourninge
weed, and clothe thy self with joyful apparaile, behold thy Son the most
constant Constantine, of al Princes thy defendour, thy helpe^ (be not afraid)
has girded him self with the swoorde of Gods word, wherewith he deuideth
the miscreauntes from the Faithful: has armed him self in the coat armor of
Faith, and for his helmet the hope of Salvation. This new David and
Constantine, has vanquished the great Goliath thy boasting enemy, the very
Prince and chieftayne of all mischief and errors the Devil: and by his
careful travail the right faith has recovered her brightness, and shines
thorough the whole world.

Stapleton.
In all this one leaf and an half, and more there is nothing material but that
may be avoided by my former answer. And as touching Pope Honorius we might
yield, that for his own person he was an heretyke, and accursed to, by the
sentence of the emperor, the synod, and the bishop of Rome. I mean either
that the pope is not the head of the Church: Concerni^g pope Honorius that M.
Horn makes an heretyke.218. patres in 5. synodo Romana. Nisi a fide
exorbitauerit.
or that the Queen of England is supreme head there. Neither of these, shall he
be able to prove by any collection that he can bring of Honorius his heresy
while he lives. If he say, I have already declared out of the Council at Rome,
in the time of king Theodoricus, that the Council yt self could not judge the
Pope: I will grant yt him, and will never step back from yt. But then you
must Master Horn, take of the fathers there assembled, the understanding
withal: that is, unless he swerve and straye from the faith. Ye will now
happelye reply aagaine, and say: how shall the^ the pope (whom ye make the
universal bishop of the whole church) direct the said church in a true and
a sownde faith, him self being an heretyke? Or how can yt be, but the whole or
the greater part of the church, shall with the head miscarie also? Or how is
yt true, that we heard at your hands even now, that the church of Rome was
never carried away with any errrour in faith? Or how is yt true, that ye said,
that Peter had a pryuilege not only for him self, but for his successors also
(which ye make the popes) not only not to err them selves, but also to
confirm their brethren, and to remove all error from them? We answer that
in case the Pope by his open law and decree made with the consent of his
brethern in Synod or consistory, promulged to be observed throwghe
christendomme, do set forth any heresy, that your replies are good and
effectual. But such a decree ye have not showed, nor ever shall show. For,
from making any such law the blessed hand of God does uphold, and ever has
vpholden, the popes for his promise sake. Promise, I say, made to S. Peter,
not for his own private person, but for the safeguard of the church, which
otherwise must needs have a great wrack in the faith, if the Rock and head
thereof should publikly decree heresy. In case therefore the pope be pryuately
a close heretycke to him self, or to other to, without any open setting forth
or proclaiming his error by a common law (as Honorius was, if he were an
heretic) he is not proprely to be called an heretic as he is a Pope, nor the
church of Rome can be said to have erred. Neither the other inconveniences will
ensue that ye brought forth.

But verily what soever Honorius in his own person was, yet certain it is,
that the Sea of Rome both in his time and ever after, was always clear of this
heresy, yea and was a contynual persecutor thereof. For both in the time of
Honorius him self, Pirrhus the patriarche of Constantinople was bannished by
the Emperor Heraelius into Afrike at the suyte of the Church of Rome (as
Platina, Plat. in Honor. 1. Sabel Acnead. 8. lib. 6.

Tom. 2. Council. in gest. Theodori. page 228.


Sabellicus and other do testify) for this heresye: and also in the time of
Theodorus the Pope within three years or there about after the decease of
Honorius, this Pirrhus came out of Afrique to Rome, recanted there his Heresye,
and was by the Pope therefore reconciled: though afterward again ad proprium
impietatis vomitum repedauit. He returned to the vomytte of his impietye. This
Pope also Theodorus wrote to Paulus of Constantinople a defender also of this
heresye, warnyng and rebukinge him thereof.

All this was before the time of this general Council and of Pope Agatho. And
therefore notwithstanding the private error of Honorius, which he never
taught or preached publicly, but only in letters coming forth in his name
after his death, was surmised to be such, yet Pope Agatho in his letters
(read and allowed of the whole Council) most truly said, that his
Predecessors kept always sownde and unviolated the faith, Act. 4. Council.
6. Constable. pa. 291. c. 1. a. etc.
and did also in this very Heresye labor continuallye with the Bisshoppes of
Constantinople (Pyrrhus, Paulus, Petrus, and Sergius) to have it suppressed and
extinguisshed.

So that as I said, though we grant, that Honorius was an Heretic for his
own private opinion, yet that he or his Church ever decreed or publicly
allowed that Heresye, it can never truly be granted.

And yet it seems very strange, that if Honorius were an Heretic, that
Pope Agatho neither in his letters read in the whole Council, Act. 4. page
209.300. and 304.
where learnedly and particularlye he confuteth and recyteth all the Bisshoppes
that held that heresye, neither yet in the letters of the Roman Synod of
one hundred and five and twentye Bisshoppes read also in the Council naming
again particularly the Bisshoppes of that heresy, in neither of them, I say,
should ones name Honorius. For neither could he be ignoraunte thereof, neither
could his dissimulation have cloked the matter, but rather have much hasarded
his creditte and estimation, both with the Emperor, and with the whole
Council.

It is marvel also, that Zonaras a Greek Writer, Vide zonara^. Tom. 3 page
74.
reakoning up of purpose all the Heretical Bishops condemned in this sixth
General Council, names not yet at all, Honorius the Pope of Rome.

Farther it is very likely, that if he were so known an Heretic, Venerable Bede living so shortly after that time, and recording in his Ecclesiastical
History, diverse of this Popes letters directed to our Country, should
somewhere touch this matter, or should not at the least so Authenticallie
recite his doings and writings, as he does of other Popes before him, and
after him. Verelie in his letters recorded in Saint Bid, Beda li. 2. hist.
ge^tis Angl. cap. 17.18. and 19.
he commends highlye the books and works of Saint Gregory the first his
Predecessor, in the which his heresye (if he held any such) is, as by other
Catholic Fathers rejected.

But of this matter I have also spoken against Master Jewel: to the which
this that I have here said, and that to this may be added. The Conclusion both
here and there is that Honorius as Pope never decreed nor allowed this heresy
or any other, Art. 4. fol. 112. and 113.
nor was not as Pope condemned. And how it is to be understood, that the Pope
may err, and yet the Church of Rome not err, because it is by M. Rastell
sufficiently declared against M. Jewel, M. Rastel in his third book against M.
Jewel. fol. 144. and.145.
to that place I refer also the Reader. Al things in all places must not be
said to the unfruitful werinesse both of the writer, and of the Reader.

Whereas now M. Horn enforces his pretensed supremacy, for that the Synod
offered to the Emperor their definition subscribed with their hands, beseching
him to examine and confirm the same, mark him good Reader, and eye him well.
For in these three words, subscription, examination, Two legerdemanes of M.
Horns: one mete for a Macaria^, tho. there for a gay grammarian.
and confirmation, lie couched two untruths besides two Legerdemaines: One mete
for a Macarian, the other for a iolie fresh Grammarian. Your text M. Horn
where it makes mention of this subscription, neither speaks of examination,
nor yet of confirmation. And as for confirmation, we could bear it well enough,
saving I know ye have a shrewd meaning, that would not well be borne withal.
And therefore for ones, we will be so bold to put you to your prouf, and
desire you to show in this place any word of confirmation. I know he did
confirm and ratify this council, as yt appears otherwher. But with such a
confirmation as the fathers could not use: that is, banisshing the gainsayers
putting them owte of his protection. But now to your examination. Act. 18.
fol. 409. Col. 1. c.


Why M. Horn? After the Pope at Rome in his own person with a.125. Bishops,
and after that his Legates with 289. Bishops at Constantinople, have resolutely
and definitiuely determined the matter against the Monothelites, hang al these
doings upon a new examination and approbation of the Emperor, that if he like
them not, then all is dasshed? Then have the Fathers sponne a fair threde.
Then have ye now at length after long searching and hunting in the acts of this
Synod, beaten out somewhat for your purpose in deed. Go on therefore M. Horn.
Prove this, and then let your Emperor, a Gods name, have set on his head, not
only his Imperial, but the Popes triple crown too. Show your cards then, M.
Horn: The whole Synod say you, offers their defininito^ subscribed with
their hands to themperor, beseching him to examine and confirm the same. Well
said: But now in what part of the Council lie these words? In so notable a
matter and conclusion as this is, why do ye not send your Reader to the leaf or
to the action at least? And why is not this conclusion with a ioly note,
dasshed into your marge^t? Surely the occasion being so good, and the matter so
importa^t, there must needs be some great stay, that among so many ioly Notes,
this only is omitted. Hanc definitionem prae manibus deferimus vestro
serenitatis proposito recensendam.

Acti. 18. Fol. 398. Col. 2.


Wot ye then what it is, good Readers? Forsooth a wonderful stay in deed. For I
assure you there are no such words in the Council. He has all this while
outfaced us with a card of ten. There is none other, but this, that Theodore
the Deacon told The Emperor: that he had at hand ready the Councils definition,
to be read to him at his highness will and pleasure. Whereupon the emperor by and
by answered: Let it be read. And when it was read, The Emperor asked the
Counsel, whether they were al agreed to the definition the^ read, which when
they had al protested, by many acclamations, The Emperor subscribed also
thereunto, not examini^g or triyng it in any manner at al, but plainly
protesting, that he was ready to obey as well all the former Councils as that,
and for their parts they should answer before God in the last judgment, whether
they had said well or evil. Now whether rece^senda^ does signify to be examined,
or to be recited and rehearsed, there is no more to do, M. Horn, but to call a
fair quest of Gra^marians, your own nigh neighbors at Winchester schole. And
if they give sentence for you, the^ let the Emperor, as I have said, wear
the Popes threefolde Crown.

Act. 18. page 401.
Now for your other Macarian practice: ye have dissembled, as well the Bishops
subscription, which was as I have showed, iudicially done, definiendo, the
Popes Legates subscribing first: as also The Emperors, which was only
consentiendo: by consenting: and put to after all the Bishops had subscribed.

There is yet an other Macarian feat played here by M. Horn worth the notyng
both for a trial of his honesty and for the Readers edifiyng. He has made two
special notes in his margin: the one, wherein consists the office of Bishops.
The other: The princes most acceptable service to God. Two good notes in deed
and well worth the noting, if they be uprightly noted.

The office of Bishops is, as M. Horn alleges, to deliver unto the Church
the faith of Christ most pure and clean. Act. 18. page 401. Col. 2. c.
But how, he tells not. His feate is quite to nippe of the words immediately
following, which are these. (Sicut praedictum est) Quatenus secu^dum sancta and
vniuersalia quinque Concilia and statuta sanctorum venerabilium patru^, ita eam
nos custodiamus vsque in mortem. To thentent that (as we have before said,
says the Emperor) we also may keep the faith, even to death according to
the five holy and general Councels, and according to the decrees of the holy
Reverent Fathers. If you had put this clause to the office of Bishops, M. Horn,
as the Emperor did, al England should have seen that you and your fellows
were no Bishops, who so lightly and so impude^tly condemn the doctrine of the
holy fathers, and do allow but four general Councels, as your brethren here
in Antwerpe do allow but three. But it went against your conscience, Edward.
6. Ann. 1. Tilet. in Confutaet. Confess. Minist. Antwerp. page 15. b. Act. 18.
vt supra.
to tell that, which should condemn your conscience. Likewise in the princes
service to God, you say: the Emperor protested his zeal, to conserve the
Christian faith undefiled: but you leave out again, what he says immediately
after: secundum doctrinam atque traditionem quae tradita est nobis tam per
Euangelium, quamque per sanctos Apostolos, and statuta sanctorum quinque
vniuersalium Conciliorum, sanctorumque probabilium patrum. According to the
doctrine and tradition delivered unto us as well by the Gospel, as by the holy
Apostles, and by the decrees of the five holy General Councels, and of the
holy approved fathers. If you had told this part of the princes duetye, and
had given the Emperor leave to tell out his whole tale, the Reader should
sone have espied, what damnable wretches you are, that persuade Princes to
profess the Gospel only with out regard of former Councels, and of the
traditions of the holy fathers. And then your two marginal notes, either would
not at al been noted, or at least to your utter shame have been readen. Other
your nippinges and curtallinges of your places might here be noted.

As that in the Councels request to the Emperor, for ratifieng their
determination with his edict, you leave out ex more after the manner, whereby is
insinuated a customable practice of Emperors (as we saw before in Justinian)
to procure by edictes and proclamations the execution of Councels. Act. 18. pa.
404. Supra: lib. 2. cap. 19.
As also in your long allegation of pope Leo his letters (which al we grant
unto you, and you never the nerer) we might note at the least half a dosen such
nippinges and manglinges of the text. But I thinck, M. Horn (all that has been
said being well considered) you look for no great triumph, for this field:
But are content to blow the retrayte. Be it so then.

M. Horn. The.92. Division. page 55. a.
Bamba King of Spain commanded a Synod to be had at Toletum in the fourth
year of his reign: the occasion was this. There had been no Synod by the
space of.18. years before, as it is said in the preface to this Council, by
means whereof the word of God was despised, the Church disciplicine
neglected, all Godly order distourbed, and the Church toste and tumbled, as a
ship without a rovver and stern, (meaning a King to call them together in
Synod). By the careful zeal of this King, being called together they
consulte how to refourme errores about Faith, corruption of discipline, and
other disorders against godliness and Religion. And at the end they do give
great thanks unto the noble and virtuous King, by whose ordinance and
careful endeavor, they were (.280). The.280. untruth The word co^mauded, is
not in the text. Aggregati sumus. vide tom. 2 page 270. col. 2. Tol. 12.
commanded to this consultation: who as they affirm of him, coming as a
nevve repayrer of the Ecclesiastical discipline in these times, not only
intended to restore the orders of the Councelles before this time omitted, but
also has decreed and appointed, yearly Synodes to be kept hereafter.

Eringius king of Spain commands the Bishopps and other of his Clergy, to
assemble together at Toletum in one Synod the first year of his reign. Tol.
13.
And called an other to the same place, the fourth year of his reign: to
consulte about reformation of the Church discipline. When the Bishops, and
the residue of the Clergy were assembled in their convocation, at the
commandment of the king: he him self with many of his nobility and
counsailours, comes in to them: he declares the cause wherefore he summoned
this Synod: he shows the miseries the whole country has sustained, and
the plagues: he declares the cause, to be Gods wrath kindled by means of
the contempt of Gods word and commandment: And he exhorts them that
they vvil with Godly zeal, study ^o purge the land from prauity, by
preaching, and exercise of Godly discipline, and that zealously. He does exhort
his Nobles, that were there present, that they also would care diligently
for the futherance hereof: he delivers unto the Synod a book, containing
the principal matter vvherof they should consulte. And last of all, he
promises by his hand subscription, that he vvil confirm and ratify what
the clergy and nobility shall conclude, touching these articles, for the
furtherance of godliness and Church Discipline.

Egita, King of Spain, (.281.) The 281. untruth. Of these.3. Councils or of
any ratifiing thereof by the kings Authorite or Royal assent in the Tomes of
the Councils there appears nothing.
caused in his time also three Councelles to be had and celebrated at
Toletum, for the preservation of Religion, with the Church Discipline in
sincerity and purity: who also confirmed and ratified the same with his
Royal assent and authority.

The.6. Chapter. Of three Kings of Spain, and of the three later Toletane
Councels kept in their reigns.
Stapleton.
ALM. Horns force is now suddenly removed from Constantinople to Spain, where
he now blows a larme again. But God be thanked for all this great fight,
there is little hurt done. Yea after all this tossing and turmoiling, and
after all his great stir and broile against the pope and the clergy, he is
upon the soden becomme such an entiere and so well affectioned friend to
them, that (but I trow unawares, and therefore worthy the less thank) he
transporteth the supreme authority as well in temporal as spiritual matters
from the king to the clergy. For I beseache you M. Horn, are not diverse of the
matters specified in the twelueth and thirtenth Council at Toledo plain Civil
and Temporal? As concerning the confirmation of King Ernigius royal
Authority succeeding to King Bamba being shorn a Monk? Tolet. 12. Vide Tom.
2. Council. Fol. 417. and. Tolet. 13. fol. 425 Votorum meorum studia vestris
iudicijs dirimenda co^mitte^s. pa. 425. and 417.

His votoru^ meoru^ in sinuationib. quaes^ vt fortia paternitatis vestrae
adiutoria prorogetis. Luce eni^ clarius constat, quod aggregatio sancta
po^tificu^ quicquid censuerit obserua^du^ per donu^ spiritus sancti, oi^o est
ad aeternitatem praefixum. Tol. 13. fol. 426. c. 1. b M. Horn unawares makes
the Clergy Supreme Judges in Civil causes.


Concerning the release and exoneration of the people from certain grieuouse
payementes and exactions? Concerning also the goods of certain Traitors with
such like? Does not the King pray the Prelates to discuss his requests with
their judgments? Do not they confirm his royal Authority with their
Synodicall Decree? Does not the King in his book offered to the Council say,
that he most humbly and deuoutlye lies prostrate before their Reuerente
assembly? Coram caetus vestri reuerentia humilis deuotusque prosternor? Does
he not desire them concerning his other civil ordinances, to put to their
strong and helping hand? Does he not plainly say, that what so ever the holy
assembly of Bisshops decrees to be observed, is by the gift of the holy
Ghost established for ever? Let me now, Gentle Reader, play Master Horn his
part, and make for me his accustomable conclusion. The King requires of the
Clergy the confirmation of his Decrees and ordinances, as well concerning
matters of Faith and Religion, as concerning Civil matters: Ergo the Clergy has
the Superioritye in both. And with this Argument, does Master Horn lap
up here his Spannishe matters. Saving that he tells us of three other
Councels holden at Toletum under Egita their King, which in all the volumes of
the Councels appear not, this under Eringius, the.13. in number being the
last: and therefore till he tell us, where those Councelles may be found,
seeing he has so often belyed the known Histories, I will make no courtesy to
note this for an Untruth also, this being a matter so utterly unknown.

And now farewell Spain for this time. For Master Horn has many other
mighty, large, and far Countries to bring under his conquest and Supremacy:
as well truly, as he has already conquered Spain: which will be to leese the
field and all his matter, glad to escape with body and soul: with small
triumph, and shame enough. Go to then Master Horn, and take your journey
when and whither it pleases you. You will wish, I trow, when you have all
said and done, that you had tarried at home and let this great enterprise
alone.

M. Horn. The.93. Division. page 55. b.
Although about this time the Popes devised (282) The.282. Untruth. Horrible
and Slanderous.
horible practices, vvherby to win them selves from under the over sight and
comptrolment of the Emperor or any other, and to have the only and Supreme
authority in them selves over all, as (.283.) The.283. Untruth* as before is
proved
they had already obtained to their Church the Supreme Title, to be Head of
other Churches: Yet the Emperors had not altogether surrendered from them
selves to the Popes, their Authority and jurisdictions in Church matters. For
when the Church was grieuouslye vexed with the controversy about Images,
there were diverse great Synodes or Councelles called for the decidinge of
that troublesome matter by the Emperors: and at the last, that which is
called the Seventh General or Ecumenical Council was caled and summoned to be
holden at Nice in Bythinia, by Constantine and Irene the Empress his Moother,
who was the Supreme vvoorker and Governor (although but an (.284.) The.284.
Untruth. mere Sla^derous.
ignorant and very superstitious woman, I will say no vvoorse) in this
matter. For her Son was but about ten years old, as Zonaras affirms,
and she had the whole rule, although he bare the name. After the death of
Paul, the Emperor appoincted Tarasius the Secretary to be Patriarche at
Constantinople, the people lyked well thereof. But Tarasius the Emperors
Secretary refused the office, and vvoulde not take it upon him, till the
Emperor had promised to call a general Council, to quiet the (.285.)
The.285. untruth false translation, vt Eccles^ae vniantur. To unite the
Churches which were in a schism.
bravvles in the Church about Images. The Emperor vvriteth to the Patriarche
of old Rome, and to the other Patriarchs, vvilling them to send their
Legates, unto a Council to be holden at Nice in Bithynia. The Bishops
assemble at Nice by the commandment and decree of the Emperor, as they
confess in diverse places of this Council. When the Bishops were set in
Council, and many Lay persons of the nobility with them: and the holy
Ghospelles were brought forth, as the manner was (although the holy Gospells
were not made (.286.) The.286. untruth As much in this Council as in any other.
Judges in this council, as they ought to have been, and were in all the
forenamed general Councels) Tarasius comme^deth the vigilant care and fervent
zeal of the Emperors, about Church matters: for ordering and pacifiyng
vvherof, they have called, says he, this council. The Emperor sends unto
he Synod, certain counsailours with the Emperors letters patentes, to this
effect. Constantinus and Irene, to the Bisshoppes assembled in the second
Nicene Synod, by Gods grace our favor and the commandment of our Imperial
authority. He shows that it apperteyneth to the emperial office, to
maintain the peace, concord, and unity, of the whole Romayne Empire, but
especially to preserve the estate of Gods holy Churches, with all possible
care and council. For this cause, he has with pain gathered this council
together: gives license also and liberty to every man without al fear, to
utter his mind and judgment frankely: to the end the truth may the better
appear. He shows the order he observed, in making Tarasius Bishop: He
prescribes unto the Bishopps what is their office, and what they should do:
propounding unto the^ the holy Ghospelles, as the right and (287.) The.287.
Untruth He said not so.
only true rule they should follow. After this be mentions letters brought
from the Bishop of Rome by his Legates, the which he commands to be openly
read in the council: and so appoints also other things that they should
read. There was (.288.) The.288. untruth. The definition of the faith was
made without the Emperors Authority.
nothing attempted or done in this council, without the authority of the
Emperors, as in all the former general councels.

And so at the end, the whole Council put up a supplication to the
Emperor, for the (.289.) ratifiyng of al their doings. The which when the
Emperor had heard openly recited and read unto them, they forthwith allowed,
signed, and sealed.

The.7. Coapter. Of the.7. General Council holden at Nice.
Stapleton.
PHY on all shameless impudency. M. Horns exceeding impude^ci for alleging
for hi^ the. 7. General Council. Qui venerandas imagines idola appellant,
anathema. Act. 4. fol. 535. et act 7. fol. 603. Fol. 15.

M. Horn is by this Council declared an Heretic.


Does it not shame you M. Horn ones to name this.7. General Council, which
does so plainly accurse you and your fellows, for your detestable saiyngs,
writings, and doings, against the holy Images, and against all such as call
them Idols, as ye do in this your book? If the authority of this Counsel
furnished with the presence of.350. Bisshops, established with the co^sente of
the Pope, and the four other Patriarchs, and ever since of all Catholic
people both in the Latin and Greek Church highly reuere^ced, may take no
force, I know not what law eclesiastical may or ought to take force. If you and
your fellows be no heretics (and it were but for this point only) according
to the rule and prescription, before by me out of the Emperor Justinians
writings rehearsed, who is, was, or ever shall be, an heretic? And can ye then
for very shame meddle with the Council, yea to crave aid of this Council to
healpe you to erect your new Papalitie? Out upon this your exceeding shameless
demeanor. Yet were your impudency, the more to be borne withal, if beside the
matter of Images, there were not also, most open and evident testimony of the
Popes Supremacy in this Synod. Certainelye as in the Council of Chalcedo,
after Pope Leos letters were read, and in the sixth General Council, after
Agathos letters were read: all the fathers received and allowed, and highly
reverenced the said letters, and were directed by them, towchinge matters of
faith then being controuersed: Even so yt fared also here. The letters that
Pope Adrianus sent to the emperor, and to the Patriarche of Constantinople
towching the Reverend Images being proponed and read to these Fathers, they
did most uniformly, and most joyfully co^desce^de to the co^tentes of the^:
And in full testimony thereof, Act. 2.
each one set to his hand and subscriptio^. The said Adria^ writes to Tarasius
the patriarche of Co^sta^tinople, that o^lesse, he had well known Tarasius good
sincere zeal, and catholic faith touching Images, and the six general
councils, that he would never have consented to the calling of any Council.
Nequaquam ad Synodum conuoca^da^ co^sentiremus. Dict. act. 2. fol. 483. Col. 2.
b. Ibide^ fol. 485. Col. Tripart. lib. 4. cap. 9. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap. 22.
Whereby ye see M. Horn that the Pope has such a voice negatyue, in summonyng
and ratifiyng of Councils, that if he only had drawn back, it had been no
lawful Council: According as the old Canon alleged in the ecclesiastical
story commands, that without the Popes Authorityte no Council ought to be
kept, and according as for that only cause diverse councils were abolished, as
the Antiochian in the East, and the Ariminense in the West. And the said Pope
Adrian says to Tarasius. Vnde and ipse Beatus Petrus Apostolus Dei iussu
Ecclesiam pascens nihil omnino praetermisit sed vbique principatum obtinuit and
obtinet: cui etiam and nostrae beatae and Apostolicae sedi, quae est omnium
Ecclesiarum Dei caput, velim beata vestra sanctitas ex sincera mente and toto
cord agglutinetur. Saint Peter feding the Church by Gods commandment has
omitted nothing at all, but ever has had the principality, and now has: to
whom and to our blessed and Apostolyke see, which is the Head of all Gods
Churches, I would wish your blessed holiness with sincere mind, and withal
your heart to join your self. The Emperor him self says, that the council
was called by synodical letters sent from the most holy patriarch. And a little
after, by whose exhortation and in a manner commandment we have called you
together, Cuius hortatu and veluti iussu vos congregauimus.

^ct. 1. fol: 463.


says The Emperor to the bis^hops. The Popes Legates are named first and
subscribe first: The Popes letters were read first of all in the Council: And
that (Tarasius him self confesses) Praerogatiua quadam. For a certain
prerogative dew to the Pope. Other places also of like agreablenes ye shall
find here.

These be the letters M. Horn, that ye speak of, which as ye say the^peror
commanded to be read openly. Wherewith, that ye dare for shame of the world ones
to meddle, as also to talk of the story of Paulus and Tarasius, I can not but
most wonderfully maruayle at. This Paulus was patriarche of Co^sta^tinople
immediately before Tarasius, Tom. 2. Conc. fol. 608.
and volu^tarily renou^ced the same office, and became a monk, mynding to do
some penance the residue of his life, for that he had set forth the wicked
doings and decrees of themperours against the images. Zonaras Tom. 3. and Tom.
2. Council. fol. 464.
The Emperor was very desirous to place Tarasius in his room, but he was as
unwilling to receive that dignity. And when the Emperor urged and pressed him
vehemently: he answered. How ca^ I take upon me to be Bishop of this see, being
sondred from the residew of Christ's Church* and wrapped in excommunication.
Ecclesiae a reliquis ecclesiis auulsae and anathemati subiectae.

Zonar. ibidem.


Is not this then pretely and gayly done of M. Horn, to take this counsel as a
tro^pet in his hand, to blow and proclaim him self to all the world an
heretyke? Plead on a pase M. Horn, as ye have done, and you shall purchase
your self at length great glory: as great as ever had he that burnte the temple
of Diana, to win to him self a perpetual memory. To the which your glorious
title for the increase and amplifying of the same, let your Untruths, which
are here thick and threefolde be also adjoined. That the Popes about this time
devised horrible practices, to have to them selves only the supreme authority:
M. Horns untruths.
that Irene Constantines Mother was an ignorant and a superstitious woman: that
the matters in the.7. General Council were not judged according to the
Gospelles: that there was nothing attempted or done in this Council without
the authority of the Emperor. In all this I hear very bold asseuerations,
but as for proufes, I find none: And none will be found when M. Horn has done
bis best, this year, nor the next neither.

M. Horn. The.94. Division. page 57. a.
Gregorius.3. sent into France for succor to Charles Martell, yelding and
(.290.) The.290. Untruth. Joined with a Sla^der.
surrendering up unto him, that which the Pope had so long sought, by all
subtle and mischievous means, to spoil the Emperor and the Princes of.
The.192. Untruth. Captain and notorious, io^ned vith extreme folly, and
gross ignorance.
This same Gregory the third (says Martinus Poenite^tiarius) When Rome was
besieged by the king of Lombardy, sent by ship unto Charles Martell, Pipines
father, the Keys (.291.) The.291. Untruth. False translation as shall appear.
of S. Peter's confession, beseeching him to deliver the Church of Rome from the
Lombardes. By the keys of S. Peter's confession, he means (.292.) all the
pre-eminence, dignity, and jurisdiction, that the Popes claim to them selves
(more and besides that, which al other church ministers have) over and above
all manner persons Ecclesiastical or Temporal, as given of Christ only to S.
Peter, for his confession, and so from him to the Popes of Rome by lineall
succession. Saying that this Pope who was passingly well learned, both in
divine and profane learning, and no less godly, stout, and constant (if you
will believe Platina) (.293.) The.293. Untruth. He yeldeth no jurisdiction at
al in ecclesiast. matters to the lay Prince.
yeldeth and commiteth all this jurisdiction and claim that he has, over all
persons Ecclesiastical and Temporal, so well in causes Ecclesiastical as
Temporal, unto Charles Martell a lay Prince, and great Master of France: it
appears that Princes may laufully have the rule, government, and charge, in
Church matters. The heirs and successors of this Charles Martell, did keep
these keys from rusting. They exercised the same jurisdiction and government
in Ecclesiastical causes, that the Emperors and Kings had don, from the time
of Constantine the great, until their time, which was almost.400. years. For
Carolomanus (.294.) The.294. untruth. He Was brother to Pepin, and son to
Charles Martell.
son to King Pepin, and nephew to Charles Martel, no less Princelike than
Christianly, exercised this his (.295.) The.295. untruth. Carolomanus exercised
no Supreme authority in ecclesiastical causes Synod. Francica.
Supreme authority in Ecclesiastical causes, and made notable reformation of
the Ecclesiastical state. He summoned a Council of his Clergy, both Bisshoppes
and Priests.742. year from the incarnation of Christ: wherein also he him
self sat with many of his nobles and counsailours. He shows the cause
why he called this Synod. That they should give advise (says he) how the
Law of God and the Church religion (meaning the order and discipline) may be
restored again, which in the time of my predecessors, being broken in sonder,
fell clean away. Also by what means the Christian people may attain to the
salvation of their souls, and perish not, being deceived by false priests.
He declares what ordinances and decrers were made (.296.) The.296. untruth.
Not by his, but by the bishops Authority.
by his authoriy in that Synod. We did ordein Bishops through the Cities
(says he) by the counsel of the Priests, and my nobles, and did co^stitute
Bonifacius to be the Archbisshop over them (.297.) The.297. untruth. Which is
the Popes Legate, left out. Naucler.
We have also decreed a Synod to ^e ca^^e^ together every year, that the
decrees of the Canons, and the Laws of the Church, may be repaired in our
presence, and the Christian Religion amended. etc. That the money whereof the
Churches have been defrauded, be restored. We have degraded the false
Priests, Deacons, and Clerks, being adulterers, and fornicatours, and have
driven them to penance. We have utterly forbidden, al manner hu^ting and
hauki^g to the Clergy. We decree also, that every priest dvvelli^g in the
diocese, be subject unto his own bishop, and that alvvaies in Lent, he make
an account and shhevv to the bishop the manner and order of his ministry,
touching baptism, the Catholic faith, prayers and the order of Masses. And
vvha^soeuer the bishop shall go his circuit to co^firm the people, the priest
shall be ready to receive hi^ with collectio^ and help of the people. That the
priest seek for new Chrism alvvaies on Mau^dy thursday at the bishops hand,
that the bishop may be a witness of his chaste life, of his faith and doctrine.
We decree further, that no unknown bishop or Priest, be admitted into the
Church ministerye, before he be allowed bye the Synod. He makes many such
like, for the reformation of the Clergy, in what sort they shall be punished, if
they commit vvho^dome, and likewise against sorcery, vvitchcraft,
diuinacions, incantations, and al kind of profane superstitions. If there were
no more examples of any Church history, but this (298) The.298. untruth. For
all that Carolomanus here did, was don by the Co^missio^ of Pope Zacha^ias.
of Caloroman, it vvoulde suffice to make plain that to the Princes authority
apperteineth, to make Laws, and to the Clergy to ge^^ him counsel out of
Gods word, how to frame the discipline, to the edifiyng of Gods Church.

The.8. Chapter: Of Charles Martell, and of the keys of S. Peter's Confession.
Stapleton.
M. Horns great provves.
AS far as I can see, al M. Horns noble prowes and great conquests have been
and shall be upon the land. By the which he has brought and will bring (if ye
will believe him) under his new Papacy many great and noble countries: yea
Moscouia and Aethiopia to. But happy yt is, that he is not yet come to the
Late new found Lands: where the new Christian people do as fast, and as
reverently embrace the Popes authority, as we, after we have been Christian men
now these thowsande years, do reiecte yt, and that with most shameful
vilany. But as I said, I find no martial acts of M Horns, upon the sea, but
this only, which is so notable and wonderful, All the Popes authority sent
away by sea in a ship.
that this one way serve for all. For Lo he carries all the Popes authority
away in a ship, to France: sent thyt^er by the Pope him self, as him
self says. For as much as he sent to Carolus Martellus, the keys of Saint
Peter's confession. So that now the Pope has, being thereto forced by Master
Horn, belyke in some terrible combat upon the seas with sending these keys,
so spoiled him self of all his jurisdiction, that he has no more left, then
have all other Ministers of the Church, and every other poor selye Sir John.
This is Master Horn, a iolye triumphante victory, as ever I read or heard
of: and these be as wonderful keys. Some great and strong wonders have I
read, done by keys. Miracles done by keys.
As in Italye, that such as be bytten with mad dogs have been cured by the
Church door keye of Saint Bellins Church: who being a blessed man, Coelius
Rhodiginus Lect. antiq. lib. 17. cap. 28. Gregor. li. 6. epist. 23.
died al to torn with dogs. And this is written of a great learned man of
late memory, borne about those quarters. I have read also, of meruelouse
great miracles done by keys, that had towched the holy relics of Saint
Peter at Rome: written by Saint Gregorye, our Apostle, as a thing most
certainelye and notoriouslye to him and to others known. But yet Master Horn
these your keys seame to me incomparablye to pass all other: And for the
straungnes of the matter, and for my better instruction, I would full feign be
resolved at your hands but of two dowbtes that trouble and incomber me.

First saying that this Pope, as Master Horn recites out of P^^^ina,
passingly well learned both in divine and profane l^^rninge, and no less
godly, stout, and constante, has yielded over to a lay Prince (by sendinge
to him in a ship Saint Peter's keys) all his jurisdiction and claim, M.
Horns meruelouse exposition of Saint Peter's keys.
that he had over all causes Ecclesiastical or temporal, yet for all this
good Master Horn, in this so weightye a matter, I would crave at your hands
a little of your good help to satisfy my mind, yea and your wise discrete
readers mind to.

For I having but a dull insight in such matters, for my part, see no great
wisdom, virtue, or learning, and less stoutnesse in Gregory for these his
doings. Your authors in this story, are here, Martinus and Platina. If we
shall by them measure his wisdom and stowtenes, and other qualities whithal:
Martinus. Synodum pene.1000. episcoporu^ Romae celebra^do veneratione^
sanctaru^ imaginu^ co^firmat, atque violatores generali sente^tia
anathematizauit.
yt was partly, for that by his great carefulnes he procured, that Rome being
oppressed by the king of Lombardie, was releyued: partly and that most of al
for that by a council holden at Rome almost of one thowsande bisshops, he
condemned and accursed the wicked Emperor of Constantinople Leo, for defacyng
again after the 7. General Council (being persuaded thereto by an heretical
monk) the holy images, as your author Martinus in Gregory's story writes:
And Platina says, that he both excommunicated the emperor Leo, and by sentence
declared him to be no Emperor. And so not whithsta^ding the keys of S. Peter
were sent away by ship, he reserved to him self one of S. Peter's keys, and a
little more authority then ye were ware of, yea so much, that he has given you
a sore blow in the face whith his key, and declared, you and your fellows,
and your great Emperor to, Zonaras: Tom. 3.
very arrant heretyks. I must now ons again be so bold as to trouble your
wisdom: with an other as necessary a question, and that is: by what
authority ye auouche, that these keys were nothing else, but the popes
supreme authority and jurisdiction? Your authors Martinus and Platina say no
such thing: M. Horn shows no author for his iolie exposition.
No nor any other, that I could ever chance upon. If this be your own new
fresh invention, then have you a iolie pregnante wit, and ye have deceived
as well others, as the late reverent father, M. Bayne, late bishop of Lichfeld
and Coue^trie, his expectation, sometime your reader in Ca^bridge, that was wont
to call you quouis connu duriorem: that is, harder then any Horn. But I pray
you good Sir is your authority inuoydable? Must we neads sing sanctus, sanctus,
sanctus, to al your sayings? and say of you as Pythagoras scholars were wont
to say: ipse dixi^: and reason no further? Let poor blont fellows be so bold
upon you for ones, to hear from you some better authority then your own
naked word for this noble exposition. Namely seeing that your book is not
authorized, by the Queen's commisioners, as some others are. M. Horns book is
not set forth by the Queen's authority.
And thowgh yt were, yet might we crave so much at your hands, seeing that you
auouche that, which (for all your pretty exposition) was not done by this
Gregory, nor could possible be done, unless he had been as frantycke as ever
was mad Collyns of Bethelem. Nor I trow, any man would make or believe
any such fond declarations, but such as have lost their five wits. And
therefore I say, of all your shameful lies, this may be crowned for a
notoriouse, a captain and an Imperial Lie.

For will you see gentle Readers, What were the keys that were sent to
Charles Martel
what were in deed these miraculous keys that M. Horn has with such a
strange Metamorphosis turned into all the preeminence, dignity, and
Iurisdlction that the Pope has above other Church Ministers? Verily not in all
the xiiij. books of Ouides Metamorphosis can there be found, a more fabulous,
more ridiculous, or more unsavory and insensible change, though he talk
there of full many, as of men and women changed into birds, into stones, into
bestes, into stars, and into I can not tell what, then is this one most
singular and rare invented Metamorphosis of M. Horns exact devise. And truly
M. Horn you having such a number of good versyfiers to your neighbors, in the
famous and well ordered schole of Winchester, it should be an eternal monument
of your singular wit, if you did procure this your excellent Metamorphosis to
be put also in verses, and to be adjoined to the other of Ouides, for the
rarite and singularnesse thereof. Such as I trow all Europe, yea all the wide
world again will not be able to show the like. Well: In the mean season
that the worthy memory hereof may not utterly be extinguished, I will shortelye
and rudelye shadow it out, leaving to more excellent wits, and conning
workmen (of which you shall not want M. Horn, if you earnestlye procure them)
to set it forth in his colors. First then it is to be understood gentle
Readers, that both before the time of this Gregory.3. and in his time, and
after his time, the toumbe, chapel or monument where S. Peter's body lay in
Rome, was called of the Romayn writers Confessio B. Petri. S. Peter's
Confession. Witness hereof before the time of Gregory. the.3. is the
Pontifical of Damasus, as Georgius Cassander has noted out of Petrus
Vrbeuetanus. Georg. Cassander in Ordine Romano.
Thus Cassander writes upon the word Confessio. Frequens est haec vox in
Pontificali Damasi. Ante Confessionem S. Petri, de qua P. Vrb. Confessio,
inquit, Capsa vel sepulchrum, vel potius corpus B. Petri conditum sub altari.
P. Vrb. in scholijs in vitas Po^t. Damasi.
This word Confessio, says Cassander is often found in the Pontifical of
Damasus. Before S. Peter's Confession. Whereof Petrus V^beuetanus says. By S.
Peter's Confession is meante, the Cophyn or toumbe, or rather the body of S.
Peter laid under the Altar.

This was a phrase to express that place, where the memory of S. Peter and of
his most blessed Confession confessing there Christ, and dying there a glorious
Martyr for Christ was by the blessed Relike of his body there present,
honored and contynewed. In the life of Gregory.3. it is written of a Synod
of.93. bishops holden in S. Peter's Chapel at Rome: Tom. 2. Conc. pa. 434. col.
2. c

Ibide^ page 445. c. 2.


Coram sacrosancta Confessione Sacratissimi corporis B. Petri residentibus and
caet. The bishops sittinge before the holy Confession of the most blessed body
of S. Peter. And with the like phrase it is written of Zacharias his successor,
that he offered up before the Confession of S. Peter many Jewels and much
treasure. Such phrases are ryfe in the 2. Tome of the Councels, and in the
writers of those ages. This being first known, let us now consider the
allegation of M. Horn. He says Gregory.3. sent by ship to Charles Martell,
the keys of S. Peter's Confession. His Author is Martinus poenitentiarius, one
of the poenitentiaries at Rome. The latin of Martinus is this. Claues ex
Confessione B. Petri Apostoli accipiens, direxit nauali itinere. Here M. Horn
has clerkly turned: Claues ex Confessione B. Petri, The keys of S. Peter's
Confession. The latin of this English, were. Claues Confessionis, not Claues
ex Confessione. As if I should say, Claues ex Ecclesia direxit. It were not
well Englished I trow. He sent the keys of the Church. But: He sent kayes
from the Church: Which might be other keys pardie, then the Church keys.
And so is it in this place. Pope Gregory the third sent to Charles Martell,
keys from the Confession of S. Peter. But not: the keys of S. Peter's
confession. The keys of S. Peter's Confession were Claues Regni coelorum: the
keys of the kingdom of heaven, which Christ gave to Peter, and to only
Peter. And the which were not I trow material keys, such as might be sent
away, either by sea, or by land. But keys from S. Peter's Confession were
keys from the body of S. Peter: keys which had touched that holy relike, and
which by that touch was made it self a Relike. How prove we this, you say?
Forsooth very plainly and evidently by a witness well nere a thousand years
old, by one of the four Doctors of the Church, by our Apostle, learned S.
Gregory the first. Gregorius Secundino seruo Dei incluso lib. 7. epistol. 53.
Indict. 2.
Such keys from S. Peter's confession to be sent to devout persons for holy
Relikes, was in his time and long before his time an usual matter. S. Gregory
writing to Secundinus an Anachoret (as it seems) among other relikes, as an
Image of our Savior, of our Lady, and of S. Peter and Paul, and a Cross
also, mentions also this kind of Relike, saying. Clauim etiam pro
benedictione a sanctissimo Corpore Petri Apostolorum principis etc. We send
you also by this bearer, a keye for a benediction from the most holy body of
Peter the Prince of the Apostles. A keye from the body, was a keye that had
touched the body, or the place where the body was interred. And will M. Horn
now say, that S. Gregory sent away to this poor Anchoret his whole
preeminence, dignity, and jurisdiction etc? Or because he sent also to one
Theodorus a Physician of Constantinople, Lib. 6. epist. 25.
Clauem a sacratissimo Petri Corpore, a keye from the most holy body of S.
Peter, thinks M. Horn, that this Physician had, All the Popes preeminence
and jurisdiction given him? Or because in like manner he sent to Theotistas and
Andreas, two noble men about the Emperor, for a benediction of Saint Peter,
Clauem a sacratissimo eius corpore, Lib. eode^. epist. 23.
a keye from his most holy body, were they also promoted with all the Popes
preeminence, dignitye and Jurisdiction, as you affirm Charles Martell was here
of Pope Gregory.3. for having such a Relike sent him by ship?

S. Gregory said, he sent those keys for a Benediction, not for a
Jurisdiction. He sent it to the Anchoret, vt per ipsum a maligno defenderetur,
cuius signo munitum se crederet. Lib. 7. epistol. 53.
That by him from the devil he might be defended, by whose token or remembrance
he thought him self guarded. Lib. 6. epistol. 25.
He sent it to Theodorus the Phisicyan, with a piece of S. Peter's chain
enclosed, vt quod illius collum ligauit ad martyrum, vestrum ab omnibus
peccatis soluat. that the same which had tied S. Peter's neck to martyrdom, may
lose yours (says S. Gregory to the Physician) from all sins, meaning from
the pains of sins. Lib. eode^ epist. 23.
He sent it to the two Noble men, vt per quam omnipotens Deus superbientem and
perfidum hominem peremit, per eam vos (qui eum timetis and diligitis) and
praesentem salutem and aeternam habere valeatis. To thentent that as by that
keye God ( Of this Miracle, Vide Greg. loco citate
miraculously) show a proud and wretched man, so by it you (says he to
them) which fear God and love God, may have also both present sauegarde and
everlasting. This was M. Horn the popes meaninges and intentes in sendinge to
devout persons, to Noble men, and to princes, such relikes of keys from the
Confession, that is from the body or chapel of S. Peter. And thus whereas M.
Horn, by his wonderful inuentyue wit had made a strange metamorphosis, of
a Relic from S. Peter's body, into all the preeminence dignity and
Jurisdiction of the Pope above other Church Ministers, they are now again by
a happy revolution, God be thanked, returned to their former shape, and appear
as they did before, in their own natural likeness. And that with more truth
a great deal, then Lucians Ass having trotted many years over downs and
dales, came at length by eating of red roses to be Lucian him self again as
it was before, and as they say, it was never other.

But if M. Horn notwithstanding all this, will yet uphold his strange
metamorphosis, and delight him self still therein, the rather because S. Gregory
in all those places speaks but of a keye, and not of keys, as Gregory the.3.
is said to have sent to Charles Martell: then lo M. Horn for your full
satisfaction in this point, yet an other place of S. Gregory, wherein he
sends even keys also. Writing to Columbus a bishop of Numidia, at the end
of his letters he says. Lib. 2. epist. 47. Indict. 11.
Etiam Claues beati Petri in quibus de cathenis ipsius inclusum est, tibi pro
benedictione transmisi. I have sent you also by this bearer the keys of S.
Peter, in which there is of his chains enclosed for a benediction. Lo M. Horn
here are sent to a bishop of Numidia not the keys from or of S. Peter's
Confession (which you see are but keys of or from his toumbe or body) as to
Charles Martell only were sent, but the very keys of S. Peter him self. But
what? Had that bishop therefore all the popes preeminence and Jurisdiction
sent him? Nay this notwithstanding, what Jurisdiction and supreme government
this very pope practiced over Numidia and all Afrike to, both in these very
letters partlye appears, and more largely it may appear, if you vouchesafe
M. Horn to read that little only which in this matter I have said to your
pewefelowe M. Jewel, Art. 4. fol. 10. and 11.
in my last Return of untruths upon his most lyinge Reply. And here you
hear S. Gregory say he sent him, these keys, pro benedictione: For a
benediction, not for a Jurisdiction. For a holy Relike: not for a supreme
dignity. For a devout remembrance, not for a princelye preeminence: As you
most fondelye and ignorantlye do pronounce. Yea and this you so follow and
pursewe from hence forewarde, as the very ground and foundation of all the
Supreme government, which you would so feign fasten upon princes heads, a
thing of them never yet so much as desired or dreamed of.

For lo upon this ioyly ground you build and say. The heirs and successors
of this Charles Martell, did keep these keys from rustinge. Verily I think
in deed both he and his godly successors, used that Relike and many other
deuoutely, and did not suffer it to ruste about them. A point for this relike,
say you. I say: They exercised the same jurisdiction and government in
Ecclesiastical causes, that the Emperors and kings had done from the time of
Constantine and caet. Verelye and so think I to. But you see now Master
Horn, at least every discrete Reader sees, that from the time of Constantin
hitherto, never Prince but heretics, as Constantius and Anastasius with a
few such, gouuerned in causes Ecclesiastical. Namely in all things and
causes, as you by Oath make folk to swear, I should say, forswear.

But as touching this Charles Martell, and Carolomanus his son (whom you
call his nephewe, and king Pipins son) and their gouuernement in
Ecclesiastical causes, gouuernement they had none, nor exercised none. You tell
us of such a thing, but you prove no such thing. The whole dealing of Gregory
the.3. with Charles Martel and of pope Zachary with Carolomannus his son, was
only that they should take the Church of Rome in to their protection,
(being then the most mighty princes in this part of Christendom) saying the
Emperors of Constantinople had by heresy (as Leo then the Iconomache) and
other crueltyes, rather forsaken it and oppressed it, then succored it, and
defended it. And therefore of this fact of Gregory the.3. Sabellicus a most
diligente chronicler, Sabellicus Aenead. 8. lib. 8.
writes thus. Tum primum Romanae vrbis Apostolicaeque sedis tutela, quae ad
Constantinopolitanos principes (si quid grauius accidisset) omnia sua desideria
confer consueuisset, Gallorum est Regum facta. Then began the French princes
to take upon the^ the protection of the Cyty of Rome and of the Sea Apostolic,
which had been wont (before) to refer al their griefs to the Emperors of
Constantinople, if any weightyer matter had befalle^. And again. Suscepit
nihil grauate pientissimu^ patrociniu^ Carolus Po^tificis rogatu. Charles at
the request of the pope took upon him willingly that most charitable or godly
protection. And this lo was that which Pope Gregory by sendi^g keys from S.
Peter's Confession to Charles Martel, did seek and few for at his hands. M.
Horn shoots far wide to imagine herin all the popes Jurisdiction, dignite
and preemine^ce to be sent away by ship into France. Nauclerus Generat: 25. p.
793. co. 1.
And as for Carolomanus, of whose supreme government M. Horn fableth here so
much, within.4. years after this great Authoryty exercised, went to Rome,
offered hi^ self to the pope, and was shore^ in for a Monk. And what or wherein
co^sisted his Authoryty? He summoned a Counsel you say, and many decrees were
made there by his Authoryty. Yea but why tell you not that pope Zacharias at the
request of Bonifacius, gave to him and to this Carolomanus, a special
Co^missio^ by his letters to call this Synod, and to decree therein such things
as Bonifacius should think behoueful for that time? Why in your very narratio^
do you eue^ in the midst of your allegatio^ where you talk of this
Bonifacius, leave out quite, and nippe of these words: Qui est missus S.
Petri. Who is the Popes Legate? Why deal you not truly, and why tell you not
al? Forsooth because truth is none in you, and al makes against you. In
Nauclerus you may see and read at large the Popes Commission to Bonifacius and
to the Prince for keeping this Synod, and for orderi^g the same. Nauc. pa 790.
and 791.
Yet you tell all for the Emperor, as though the Pope had don nothing. O
wilful malice, and malicious wilfulness. M. Horn is not content to be blind
him self. He will also make his readers bli^d. And because he loves not the
truth, or the truth loves not him, therefore he would his Reader should learn
the falsehood and be as false as him self is.

But again what impudency is this, to bring Carolomanus doings, by the which
even in your own narration, the holy Chrisme, the mass, and other orders of
the Church, that ye have abolisshed, are confirmed? Mass confirmed, and M.
Horn degraded by Carolomanus his supreme head.
and your whordome with M. Madge, is punished by derogation, penance, and
otherwise even by your own supreme head, Corolomanus? Which did not degrade any
priest actually him self, or caused any to be degraded, by his supreme
authority (as ye seame by a false sense to infer) but caused them by the
ordinary means, and according to the rules and canons to be degraded. Who also
made him self no Church laws, as M. Horn here untruly notes, but did al by
the authority of Pope Zacharias, who (as I have said, Nauclerus generat. 25.
pa. 79.
and as in Nauclere it appears) gave Commission to Bonifacius the Bishop to
keep a Synod in the Dominion of this Carolomanus, in which Synod all these
Church laws were made. All which evidently proves the Popes Primacy at that
time, not the Princes.

M. Horn. The.95. Division. page 58. a.
About this time was one Bonifacius not Pope, but as they call him the great
Apostle of the Germanies, the like for all the world to our Apostle here in
England, Augustinus Anglorum Apostolus: Either of them (.299.) The.299.
untruth. Slanderous and vylainouse.
might be called, the Popes Apostles, whose great champions they were. And
even such Ecclesiastical matters as our Apostle treats of, has this
Apostle in his Epistles to the Pope, as this. He asks his holiness when fat
bakon should be eaten: The Pope answers, when it is well smoke dried or resty,
and then sodde^. Likewise he asks whether we shall eat Dawes, Crows, Hares,
and wild Horses: The Pope bids him to beware of them in any wise. Also he
asks him how, if Horses have the falling sickness, what we shall do to
them: The Pope answers, hurl them into a ditche. He asks what we shall
do with Beasts bitten with a mad dog, the Pope bids him keep them
close, or hurl them into a pit. He asks if one Nonne may wash an others
feet, as men may: the Pope answers, yea, on Gods name. Also he asks,
how many Crosses, and where aboutes (.300.) The.300. untruth. His question
was otherwise, as shall appear.
in his body, a man should make them. These and a great many such like,
are the Popes and his Apostles, Ecclesiastical matters. But leaving these
trifles, note that in those Ecclesiastical matters, which he did to any
purpose, the lay Princes had the entermedling, as appears (.301.) The.301.
untruth. The contrary by that epistle appears.
by the Pope Zacharias Epistle to this Boniface. It is no marvel though this
King Charoloman, as also Charles the great, and other noble Princes, after
their time established by their authority in Synodes many superstitions, and
(.302.) The.302. untruth. The church was not then idolatrous.
idolatrous obseruaunces, as of Masses, Chrysmes, and such like abuses, being
moved with the zeal, that all Princes ought to have, but vvanting the pure
knowledge that good and faithful Bisshoppes should have instructed them
vvithal: saying such (.303.) The.303. untruth. Slanderous and contrary to
your own sayings after.
blind bussardes as this Boniface, had the teaching of them, who like blind
guides, led them in the bottomless pit of all superstitions and false
religion.

The.9. Chapter: Of S. Boniface the Apostle of Germany, and of S. Augustine our
Apostle.
Stapleton.
HEre is interlaced a lying slaunderouse patche al from the principal matter,
against our apostle S. Augustyn, and S. Boniface an English man, Beda in
martyrologio.
and a blessed Martyr slain in Phrisia by the infidels, commonly called the
Apostle of Germanye. But what a Ghospel is this, that can not come in credit,
but by most slaunderouse vilany, and that against S. Augustine, whom we may
thank and S. Gregory that sent him, that we are Christian me^? S. Gregory
commends him for learned and virtuous, and sets forth the miracles
wonderfully wrought by him in our Country. And think you now M. Horn, that you
with all your lewd, lying railing, or M. Jewel either, can stayne and blemishe
that blessed ma^s memory? No, no: ye rather amplify and auaunce his glorious
renown, and prove your selves most wretched and detestable liars: as I have
sufficiently of late declared in my Return upon M. Jewels Reply. Art. 3. fol
124. and sequentibus.
They need not M. Horn your co^mendatio^, which in such a person as ye are,
were rather their disco^mendatio^. For the ill man's disco^mendation is to a
good man a very commendation: as contrary wise to be commended of an il man, is
no true praise, but rather a a disgracyng and a dispraise. Therefore where ye
call these blessed me^, and other bishops of this time bli^d bussards, and say
that in Charles the great, and other Princes then, lacked pure knowledge, ye
declare your self what ye are, M. Horns contradiction to him self.
a very blind hob about the house, neither able to keep your self from lying,
nor yet from co^tradictio^. For M. Horn I would to God, either your self, or a
great sort of your fellows Protestant bisshops, had beside his virtue, the
learning of Charles the great, Charles the great learned in the Latin and
Greek tongues.
being well seen as well in the Greek as the Latin tongue. And see now how well
your tale hangs together. For the very leaf before Gregorye the.3. was
passinglye well learned, both in divine and profane learning, and no less
godly. And the fowrth leaf after, your self bring forth Alcuinus an
Englishman of great learning, as ye say, that says, as ye write, that God
incomparably honored and exalted Charles the great, above his auncetours with
wisdom to govern and teach his subjects with a godly carefulnes. Which
wisdom stood, as your self declare, in ordering matters Ecclesiastical.
Vide Po^t. in vitae Zachar.
And Pope Zacharias that ye here speak of, was well also seen in the Greek
tongue: Into the which he translated out of Latin S. Gregory's Dialoges. And now
what a blind bussarde are you, that plead upon this Zacharias epistles to
Bonifacius to prove this Charlemains supremacye, wherein the Popes primacy is
evidently and openly declared, (as I have before showed) if ye were of this
ignorant: or what an impudent and a maliciouse person are you, if ye wittinglye
and willingly allege that for you, which is most strong against you? For this
Council that ye ground your self upon, De synodo autem congregata apud
Francorum prouinciam mediantibus Pipino and Carolomano, excellentissimis filiis
nostris iuxta syllabarum nostrarum commonitionem, per age^te vices nosiras tua
santitate qualiter egistis cognouimus, and omnipotenti Deo nostro gratias
egimus, qui eorum corda co^firmauit, vt in hoc pio opere adiutores existerent,
et omnia optime et canonice peregisti, tam de falsis Episcopis et fornicarijs
et schismaticis, quamque etia^ et c.
was called in deed by Pipyn and Caroloman, but according as the Pope had given
them Commission in his letters: And this Bonifacius was the Popes Legate there:
For concealing whereof, you left out: Qui est missus S. Petri: Who is the Popes
legate. And the Princes were but ayders and assisters unto him. And Boniface
proceeding very well and canonically deposed the false, the adulterouse, and the
schismatic priests. Which so yrketh M. Horn at the very heart, remembering
that if him self were well and canonically handeled, he should bear a much
lower sail, then to bear either any Bisshoplye or priestly office, that
faring like a mad man, he speaks he wot nere what: and even there, where with
his egle eyes he finds fault with other men's blindness, he shows him self,
most blind bussard of al. For he may as well find fault with Moses Law, and by
the supreme authority of his new Papacy, he may laugh to scorn Moses to, as
well as Bonifacius, and call hi^ blind bussard also, for his madd laws
forbidding the eating of the Camel, the Hare, the Swine, the Egle, the
Goshauke, the Crow, the Raven, the Owl, the carmora^t, Zacha: ad Bonifac. Tom.
2. Council. fol. 450. Col. 2.
and such like. He might also as well make him self pastime and ieste merely
at the Canons of the sixth General Council, that he so lately spoke of,
forbidding the eating of puddings and things suffocated. Why M. Horn is so
outragius against S. Bonifacius. Leuit. 11.
And perchance the question of beasts bitten with mad dogs has more
matter in it, then M. Horn does yet withal his Philosophy consider, Me^ waxe^
mad with eating of svvines flessh bitte^ with a mad dog. Lycosthen. de
Prodigijs. Anno. 1535. In VVirtenberge^si. ducatu. etc.
or that some of his good brethren in Germanye have of late considered, fealing
as it were, the smart of this their ignorance, which feading upon swines
flessh, bitten of a mad dog, waxed as mad as the dog, and falling one
upon an other, most pitifully bitte and tore one the others flessh. As for the
question concerning the Nu^ne, M. Horn has no great cause to mislike.

Now in case Bonifacius had demanded of Pope Zachary, whether a lewd,
lecherouse, false Friar, might lurk and luske in bed with a Nun, and then
cloak their incest under the name of holy wedlock, and that Pope Zachary had
given as honorable an answer, as his late Apostle friar Luther, has done,
as well by his books,as by his damnable doings: then lo, had Bonifacius ben the
true and sincere Apostle of Jesus Christ. And then should he have been M.
Horns Idol. Tom. 2. Council. fol. 452. Col. 2 Na^ et hoc flagitasti a nobis
sanctissime frater, in sacri canonis praedicatione, quot in locis cruces fieri
debeant. Fol. 453. Col. 2. c.
Neither did Bonifacius dema^d these matters because he was ignorante, or in
any great doubt: but to work more suerly. And the Pope in his answer,
tells him, that he was well seen in all holy scripture. As for the question
how many crosses a man should make in his body, is not Bonifacius, but your
question. For the question was, of crosses to be made, in saying the holy cano^
of the mass. The name of the which holy canon ye can no more abide, then the
devil the sign of the holy cross: of whom ye have learned, thus to mangle
your allegatio^s, and to cast away both crossing and cano^ wythal.

M. Horn. The.96. Division. page 58. a.
Adrianus the first, Pope, being much vexed through his own (.304.) The.304.
untruth. Slanderous.
furious pride, by Desiderius king of Lombardy, sends to Carolus Magnus, and
requires him of his aid against the Lombardes, promising to make him (.305.)
The.305. untruth. It appears not so in any history. Did. 634.
therefore Emperor of Rome: Charles comes, va^quisheth Desiderius, and so
passes into Rome, vvho^ the Pope received with great honor; giving to him in
part of recompense, the title of most Christian king, and further to augment
his benevolence toward Charles, desired him to send for his Bishops into
France, to celebrate a Synod at Rome: where in were gathered together of
Bishops, Abbottes, and other Prelates, about.154. In which counsel also
Carolus him self was present, as says Martinus. Gratianus makes report
hereof out of the Church history on this wise. Charles after he had
vanquished Desiderius, came to Rome, and appointed a Synod to be holde^ there
with Adrian the Pope. Adrian with the whole Synod, delivered unto Charles,
the right and power to elect the Pope, and to dispose the Apostolic sea.
They granted also unto him, the dignity of the ancient blood of Rome. VVerby
he was made a Patricia^, and so capable of the emperial dignity. Furthermore
he decreed that th'Archbishops and bishops in every proui^ce should receive
their inuestiture of him: so that none should be consecrate, onles he were
co^me^ded and inuestured Bishop of the King. VVo so ever would do contrary
to this decree, should be accursed, and except he repented, his goods also
should be co^fiscate. Platina adds, Charles, and the Pope, the Romans and
the French swear the one to the other, to keep a perpetual amity, and that
those should be enemies to the^ both, that anoyed the one.

The 10. Chapter. Of Charlemayne, and of Adrian, and Leo Bishops of Rome.
Stapleton.
THat Adria^ was vexed by king Desiderius throwgh his own furiouse pride,
Magnitudine animi, consilio, doctrina, et sanctitate vitae, cu^ quouis optimo
pontifice comporari potest.
who was a very virtuous learned man, is nothing but your follishe furiouse
lying, as also that he promised to Charles to make him Emperor, if he would
aid and help him: No history says so, except M. Horns pe^ne be an history.
Now what does it further your cause, that this Charles had the right and power
to elect the Pope, and the inuesturing of Bishops, seeing he held yt not of
his own right and title, but by a special and a gratiouse grant of the Pope
and his Synod, as your self allege? Nay verily this one example clearly
destroys al your imagined Supremacy, and all that you shall bring hereafter
of the Emperors claim for the election and inuesturing of Bishops. For the
dilligent Reader reme^bri^g this, that the first Original and Authority hereof
sprung not of the Imperial right or power, but of the Popes special grant
made to Charlemayn the first Emperor of the west after the tra^slatio^ thereof,
must also see, that all that you bring hereafter of th'Emperors claim in this
behalf, proves no Primacy in the Prince, but rather in the Pope, from who^
the Authority of that fact proceeded, by which fact you would prove a primacy.

Horn. The.97. Division. page 59. a.
Not long after, Charles, perceiving the Churches to be much molested and
drawn in ^ parts, with the Heresy of Foelix, calls a council of all the
Bishops under his dominions in Italy, France, and Germany, to co^sulte and
conclude a truth, and to bring the Churches to an unity therein, as he him
self affirms in his Epistle written to Elepandus Bishop of Tolet, and the
other Bishops of Spain: We have commanded ( says Charles) a Synodall
council to be had of devout Fathers from all the Churches thoroughout our
signiouries, to the end that with one accord it might be decreed, what is to
be believed touching the opinion we know that you have brought in with new
assertions, such as the holy Catholic Church in old time never heard of.
Sabellicus also makes mention of this Synod vviche was conuocated to
Frankeforth: ad Caroli edictum: at the commandment of Charles.

Stapleton.
This gere serves for nothing but to prove that Carolus called a council: and
here M. Horn says Sabellicus also makes mention of this Synod co^uocated
to Fra^ckford. Your also M. Horn, Sabell. Aen. 8. li. 8 da^nata est haeresis de
abolendis imaginib.
is altogether superfluous, seeing that ye named no other author before, that
spoke of this Synod, for Sabellicus is here post alone. Well, let it be
Charles that called the Synod, but why do ye not tell us, what was done
there, as does Platina, and your own author Sabellicus also, declaring that
such iconomaches and image breakers as ye are, Platina.

Theophilatius and Stephanus Episcopi insignes, Adriani nomine synodu^ Franco
ru^ Germanorumque Episcoporu^ habuere: in qua, and caet.


were there condemned for heretyks? why do ye not tell us also, who were chief
in that Counsel: which were Theophilatius and Stephanus Pope Adria^s Legates?
And here appears the wretched dealing of the author of your Apologye, for his
duble lie, as well in that he would by this Synod prove, that a general
council, may be abolished by a national as for saying, this Council did
abolishe the Seventh General Council, whereas it confirmed the said General
Council, with a like Decree. A duble untruth of the Englih Apology abovvte
this Synod.
And with this the strongest part of your Apology lies in the dust. For
whereas the chief and principal part of it is to deface the Council of Trent:
and to show that by private authority of one nation, the public and common
authority of a General Council might be well enough abrogated: he could find
no color of proof but this your Council of Franckford, which now as ye hear,
does not infirm, but ratify and confirm the.2. Nicene Council. As made for
the honoring, and not for the vilaining of holy Images.

M. Horn. The.98. Division. page 59. a.
Carolus Magnus calls by his commandment the Bisshoppes of France to a
Synod at Arelatum, appoints the Archebisshoppes of Arelatum and Narbon to be
chief there. They declare to the Synod assembled, that Carolus Magnus of
feruente zeal and love toward Christ, doothe vigilauntlye care to
establishe good orders in Gods Church: and therefore exhort them in his
name, that they diligently instruct the people with godly doctrine, and
exaumples of life. When this Synod had consulted and agreed of such matters
as they thought fit for that time, They decree that their doings should be
presented unto Carolus Magnus, beseeching him, that where any defectes are in
their Decrees, that he supply the same by his wisdom. If any thing be
otherwise then well, that he will amend it by his judgment. And that which
is well, that he will (.306.) The.306. Untruth. Not so in the Counsel. But
vteius adiutorio perficiatur.

That by his help it might be ended or brought to pass. Not ratified by his
Authority.


ratify, aid, and assist by his authority.

By his commandment also was an other Synod celebrated at Cabellinum,
whereunto he called many Bysshoppes and Abbotes: who as they confess in the
Preface, did consulte and collecte many matters, thought fit and necesarie
for that time: the which they agreed nevertheless to be allowed, and
confirmed, amended, or (.307.) The.307. Untruth. Of allowing or dissalovvinge,
the Council speaks not.
dissalovved. As this Council refers all the Ecclesiastical matters to the
(308) The.308. Untruth. In misreportinge the Council.
judgment, correction, disalovving or confirming, of the Prince: so amongst
other matters this is to be noted, that it prohibiteth the covetousness and
cautels, vvherevvith the Clergy enriched them selves, persuading the simple
people to give their lands, and goods to the Church for their souls health.
The Fathers in this Synod complain, Can. 6.
Can. 25.
that the ancient Church order of excommunication, doing penance, and
reconciliation, is quite out of use: Therefore they agree to crave the Princes
(.309.) The.309. Untruth. They craved the Princes help, that the Canons might
be put in execution.
order, after what sort be that does commit a public offense, may be
punished by public penance. This Council also enueigheth against, and
(.309.) condemns gadding on pilgrimage in Church ministers, Lay men, great
men, Can. 45.
and beggars: al which abuses (says the Synod) after what sort they may be
amended, the Princes mind must be known. The.310. Untruth. Notorious. It
condemns certain abuses thereabout, it condemns not the use it self.


The same Charles calls an other Council at Maguntia. In the beginning of
their Preface to the Council, they salute Charles: the most Christian
Emperor, the Author of true Religion, and maintenour of Gods holy Church.
etc. Shevving unto him, that they his most humble servants are come thither
according to his commandment: The Prince is the Governor of the Church
appointed of God (.311.) in ecclesiastical causes.
that they give Godde thanks: Quia sanctae Ecclesiae suae pium ac deuotum in
seruitio suo concessit habere rectorem. Because he has geauen unto his holy
Church a governor godly, and devout in his service: The.311. Untruth.
Avouched in the Margin, but not to be found in the Text.
who in his times opening the fountain of godly wisdom, does continually
feed Christ's sheep, with holy food, and instructs them with Divine
knowledge, far passing through his holy wisdom, in most devout endeavor
the other Kings of the earth, etc. And after they have appointed in what
order, they divide the states in the Council: the Bisshops and secular Priests
by them selves, the Abbottes and religious by them selves, and the Lay
Nobility, and Justices by them selves, assigning due honor, to every person:
it follows in their petition to the Prince, They desire his assistaunce, aid
and confirmation, of such Articles as they have agreed upon, so that he judge
them worthy: beseeching him, to cause that to be amended, which is found worthy
of amendme^t. In like sort did the Synod congregated at Rhemes (.312.)
The.312. Untruth. By the order of vvulfarius Archbisshop there: left out of the
Text.
by Charles, more priscoru^ Imperatoru^, as the ancient Emperors were wont to
do, and diverse other, which he in his time called. I would have you to note,
besides the authority of this Noble Prince Charles the Great, in these Church
matters (which was none other, but the self same, that other Princes from
Constantine the Great had and used) that the holy Council of Mogu^tia, does
acknovvledge and confess (313) The.313. Untruth. In plain speech no such
thing appears.
in plain speech, him to be the ruler of the Church (in these Ecclesiastical
causes) and further that in all these councels, next to the confession of their
faith to God, without making any mention of the Pope, they pray, and command
prayer to be made for the prince. Imputatur quibusda^sratrib. eo quod auaritiae
culpa hominibus persuadeant vt abrenu^ciantes seculo res suas ecclesiae
conferant: quod penitus ab omniu^ me^ tib. eradicandu^ est. Can. 6. et Can. 7


Stapleton.
The calling of Councels either by this Carolus, or by others, as I have often
said, proves no Supremacy: neither his confirmation of the Councils, and so
much the less, for that he did it at the Fathers desire, as your self
confess. But now, Good Reader, take heed of M. Horn, for he would stilie make
the believe, that this Charles, with his Council of Bishops, should forbid
lands and goods to be given to the Church of any man for his souls health,
and to be prayed for, after his death, which is not so. In deed the Council
forbids, that men shall not be entised, and persuaded to enter into
Relligion; and to give their goods to the Church only upon covetousness.
Animarum etenim solatium inquirere sacerdos, non lucra terrena debet. Quoniam
fideles ad res suas dandas non sunt coge^di, nec circumueniendi. Oblatio namque
spontanea esse debet: iuxta illud quod ait Scriptura. Voluntary sacrificabo
tibi.

For a priest (says the Council) should seek the health of sowles, and not
worldly gains, and Christians are not either to be forced, or to be craftily
circunuented to give away their goods. For it owght to be a willing offering
according as yt is written: I will willingly offer sacrifice to thee. and in the
next canon yt is said: hoc vero quod quisque Deo just and rationabiliter de
rebus suis offert, Ecclesia tenere debet. What so ever any man has offered unto
God justly and reasonably, Can. 39.
that must the Church keep still. Now for prayers for the dead, there is a
special Canon made, in this Counsel that in every Mass there should be
prayer made for such as be departed owte of this world: Prayers for the dead.
And yt is declared owte of S. Augustyne, that this was the gwise and fasshion
of the anciente Church. The like slight M. Horn uses touching pilgrimage:
the which his own canon highly comendeth, thowghe full wisely and discreetly
yt preuenteth and reformeth some abuses. Wherefore ye shall hear the whole
canon. I will shifte no word, but only from Latin into the english. Can. 44.
In the former cano^ the counsel forbadde, that priests should go on pilgrimage
without the consent of their Bishop to Rome or to Towers a town in France:
where at the tomb and relics of blessed S. Martyn innumerable miracles were
done and wrowght: as among other Gregorius Turonensis Bishop there and a
faithful reporter, not by uncertain hearesay, but by present eiesight, most
fully declares. The which holy relics the hugonotes of late in France have
with most vilany dishonored and consumed. After which inhibition it follows.
Pilgrimage.

Ca. 45.


For say the Fathers, some me^, which unadvisedly under the cowlour of prayer,
go in pilgrimage to Rome, to Towers and other places, do err very much.
There are priests and Deacons and other of the Clergy, which living
dissolutely think them selves to be purged of their sins, In eo purgari se a
peccatis putant, et ministeri^ suo fu^gi deberi, si. etc.

Note here well how the church of this age, decreed openly against abuses, and
vvinked not at them, as Protestants vvoulde make folk believe. Hieron. in
Epist. ad Paulinu^. Tom. 1.


and to do their office, if they ones come to the foresaid places.

There are nevertheless lay men which think they have freelye sinned, or
may freely sin, because they frequente these places, to make their prayers
in. There be some Noble men, which to scrape and procure money under the
p^etence of their pilgrimage to Rome or to Towers, oppress many poor men, and
that which they do upon covetousness only, they pretend to do, for prayers
sake, and for the visiting of holy places. There are poor men which do this,
for no other intent, but to procure to them selves a greater occasion to beg.
Of this number are they, that wandering hither and thither, feign nevertheless
that they go thither: or that are so foolisshe, that they think, they are by
the bare view of holy places, purged of their sins: not considering that
saying of S. Hierome. It is not praise worthi^ to have seen Jerusalem, but to
have lived virtuously at Jerusalem. Of all which things let us look for
the judgment of our Emperor, how they may be amended. But those who have
confessed themselves to their parrissh Priests, and have of them taken
counsel how to do penance, if employing them selves to prayer, and alms
giving, and to the refourming of their life and manners, they desire to go on
Pilgrimage to Rome or else where, are of allmen to be commended for their
devotion.

The Fathers also desire the Emperors healpe and assistaunce, not his Order,
as you untruly report, for public pe^naunce: Beside, if it had pleased you,
ye might have cast in also a word or two more. Can. 25.
Vt secundum ordinem Canonum pro merito suo excommunicetur. That according to
the order of the Canons, he may according to his deserts be excommunicated. And
now, good Reader judge thou, how truly, how wisely, or how to his purpose this
gere is brought forth of M. Horn: and what a singular good grace this man
has, so well to plead against him self and his fellows, for the Catholics.
And now would I be in hand with Leo, saving that Master Horns Marginall
Note, seems to take me by the hand, and to stay me a while: And yet we will
forth with shake him of, and desire Master Horn to ouersee his text ones
again, and to square his Note to his Text, and not his text after his
perverse and preposterous order, to his note. I say then, M. Horn, ye have no
words, nor matter in your text to call Carolus Magnus Governor in Ecclesiastical
causes, and because, beside your Note Marginall, ye note the matter also so
fast in your text, which is not in the Fathers text, saying: the Fathers say
in plain speech, that he was ruler of the Church in Ecclesiastical causes, I
will note as fast as you, and that is your one false lying in your text, and the
other in the margent. Onles ye may by some new Grammar and like Divinity;
prove that, in seruitio suo, in his service, is Englished also, In
ecclesiastical matters,

You tell us farther M. Horn, that in this Council of Ments, the States were
divided. The Bisshoppes and secular Priests by them selves. The Abbottes and
Religious by them selves. But you tell us not, wherein every State was occupied
and busied in that Council. That in deed made not for you. in Concilio
Moguntiaco. Tom. 2. Co^c. p. 630
The Council then says: In prima turma consederunt Episcopi, etc. In the first
rewe sat the Bisshops with their Notaries, reading and debating upon the holy
Ghospel, the Canons of the Church, diverse works of the holy Fathers, and namely
the Pastoral of S. Gregory: searching and determining thereby, that which
belonged to wholesome doctrine, and to the state of the Church. In the second
rue sat the Bisshops and approved Monks, having before them the rule of S.
Benet, and seking thereby to better the life of Monks to increase their godly
conversation. In the third rue sat the Lay Nobility and Judges. But what to
do M. Horn? To conclude of matters of Religion, as the lay Burgeses and
Ge^tlemen do in our Parliame^ts? No, no: Neque nos, 1. Cor. 11.
neque Ecclesia Dei tale^ consuetudine^ habemus. Neither we, nor the Church of
God have any such custom or manner. But there they sat In mundanis legibus
decertantes. etc. Debating in worldly laws, searching out Justice for the
people, examininge diligently the causes of all that came, and determining
Justice by all means that they could. Thus were the States in that Council
divided, under that Noble Emperor Charlemain. And what could this Note help
you, M. Horn, or relieve you, except it were that you would give a preuy nippe
to the order of late Parliaments, where the lay not only of the Nobility,
but even of the Commons (whose sentences in treaty of Relligion, never sense
Christ suffered, were ever heard or admitted) do talk, dispute, yea and
conclude of Religion, and that in the highest and most secret mysteries
thereof, to the consequente of a General alteration.

You would no doubt, as gladdelie as Catholics, have the treaty and
decision of such matters in your own hands only (as in deed all
Protestauntes beside you, Calvin, Melanchthon, the Magdeburgenses with the
rest do expresselye teach, as I have both in this book, and otherwhere
declared) But this is the difference.

You are miserable clawbackes, and as Calvin writes, to extolle the Civil
Magistrate, you spoil the Church of her dew Authoryte. Institut. lib. 4.
Cap. 11.
But the Catholics think it not mete to flatter in Religion: But to give
that, which is Cesars, to Caesar: and that which is Gods, to God. Excepete we
should say, that now you will have Religion decided in parliament, and when,
Math. 22.
the Prince shall otherwise be affected, you will not have it so decided: and
that your Religion is Ambulatoria: a wandering and a walking Religion, teaching
one thing to day and an other to morrow. As in deed very properlye and truly
George the Noble duke of Saxony said of the Lutheranes at Wittenberge, when
yet your Religion was scante out of her swaddling clowtes. What the faith of my
neighbors of wittenberge is now this year, I know. But what it will be the
next year, I know not.

Yet you desire M. Feckenham to note here an other thing, besides the Authoryty
of this Noble Prince Charles the great (for so you call him) which (you say)
was none other but the self same, that other Princes from Co^sta^tin the great
had and used: which in deed is very true: for they had none, ne used none, as
has been proved, and yet I maruayle, where is then become the privilege of S.
Peter's keys sent to Charles Martell this man's grandefather, if he had, as you
say, none other but the self same Authoryte that other Princes from Constantin
had. If it was lost so soon, then how is it true, that you said before, the
heirs and successors of Charles Martell kept these keys form rusting. If it
was not lost, how had he no more the^ other which had S. Peter's keys more then
other had? But now to your note. You will M. Feckenham to note, that the holy
Council of Moguntia (I am glad you call it holy, for the^ you will not, I
trow misselyke with the division of the States there, that I told you of even
now, neither with the Rule of S. Benets Order, in that holy Counsel straightly
exacted) does acknowleadge and confess in plain speech him, (that is,
Charles the great) to be the Ruler of the Church in these ecclesiastical
causes. Now show these last words ( in these ecclesiastical causes) in any
parcel or place of the whole Council, in plain speech, as you say, and then
M. Fecke^ham I dare say, will thank you for your Note, and for my part I will
say, you are a true man of your word. Which hitherto, I assure you, I have
little cause to say, or to think. Your lying is almost comparable to M. Jewels.
Mary you are not in deed as yet so far in the lashe, as he is. But if you
come ones to Replying, as he has done, you will be a Pinner I doubt not, as
well as he, and tell your untruths by the thousands. For assure your self
M. Horn: as vera veris conueniunt, so an untrue and false doctrine can never
possiblye be maintained, without horrible lying, and main numbers of untruths.

M. Horn. The.99. Division. page 60. a.
Pope Leo.3. as the French Chronicles, and Nauclerus witnesses, sent
foorthvvith after he was made Pope Peter's keys, the Banner of the City, and
many other gifts unto Charles: requiring him, that he would cause the people of
Rome to become subject unto the Pope, and that by Oath. Charles minding to
gratify and pleasure Pope Leo (there (.314.) The.314. untruth. A lewd and a
false surmyse
was a cause wherefore) sent an Abbot on this business, and assured the people
of Rome to the Pope by oath. This Leo (his straight (.315.) The.315. untruth,
he was a most mylde and m^ke man.
dealinges with the Romans was so hateful unto them) was brought shortly
into much daungier of his life, but far more of his honesty, Certain of Rome
came to Charles to accuse this Pope: Charles puts of the examination of the
matter till an other time, promisinge that he vvoulde within a while come to
Rome him self: which he did; after he had finished his vvarres.

He was honorably received of the Pope. Sabell.
The eight day after his cominge into Rome, he commanded all the people, and
the Clergy to be called together into S. Peter's church: appointing to here
and examine the Pope, Platina. Sabell.
touching that he was accused of, in the open assembly. When the Clergy and
the people, were assembled, the King examineth them of the Popes life and
conversation: and the whole company (.316.) The.316. untruth. The bishops only
were asked their minds.
being willed to say their minds: answer that the manner has been,
that the Popes should be judged of no man, but of them selves. Charles being
moved with so (.317.) The.317. untruth. Charles took not the answer in
such part.
sore and grievous an answer, gave over further examination. Leo the Pope
(says Platina) who did earnestly desire that kind of judgment (to give
sentence be (318.) The.318. untruth. Platina meaned not so.
means in his own cause) went up into the pulpitte, and holdinge the
Gospels in his hands, affirmed by his Oath, that he was guiltles of all those
matters vvherevvith he was chardged. Whereunto Sabellicus adds, the Popes
own testimony of him self, was so weighty, as if it had been given on him
by other: so much avails a man's own good report made of him self in due
season, (.319.) The.319. untruth. Sabellicus had no such meaning.
for want of good neighbors. This matter, if it were as the Popes
flatterers write, thus subtily compassed: although Martinus says flatly, that
he was driven to purge him self of certain crimes laid to his chardge: yet
not vvithstanding, the king took (.320.) The.320. untruth. He took it not
upon him, but was required of the Pope him self to do it.
upon him, both to examine the matter, and to determine therein: and, as
appears, took their answer no less (.321.) The.321. Untruth. Not able to
be proved.
insufficient, than grievous: although he vvinked at it: because he looked
(.322.) The.322. Untruth. Lewd and sla^derous.
for a greater pleasure to be shevved him again in consecratinge him Emperor,
promised long before: which this Pope performed, and solemply with great
acclamations of the people, crowned him Emperor of Rome: For says Platina:
The Pope did this to show some thank fulness again to him, who had well Yea:
in manifold battayles, not in that Judgment.
deserved of the Church.

Stapleton.
This process stands in the accusation of Pope Leo the.3. that certain
Romans made against him to Charles, bearing with yt such a wonderful
strength for the establishing of the Popes Supremacy, that M. Horn may seem, to
play al by collusio^, and to betray his own cause. Regino in chronic. Captu^
excaecaueru^t, ac lingua^ eius radicitus absciderunt. Sed Deus omnipote^s
reddidit ei visum and loquelam. Mart. Poenitent.
For now has he by his own story, auaunced the Pope so (as he did also before
in alleging the Roman Council in the time of Pope Si^machus) that he may be
judged of no man. For all the clergy and people of Rome make answer to
Charles him self, that no man ca^ judge the Pope. This writes M. Horn owte of
Platina and Sabellicus: and other writers be of the same lykenes and
agreablenes in writing with the^. How then M. Horn? Where is now your primacy
become? I trust now at the length ye will discharge M. Feke^ham from this oath.
What say you to your own volu^tarie allegation, that no man forced you unto,
but the mighty truth: to the bewraying of your false cause and your great
folly? Yet least his said folly and preuarication should be to open, he will
say somewhat to yt, (because he may seame to work thowghe not as
miraculously, yet as wonderfully as ever did this Leo: who, his tongue being cut
of by the root, as some me^ write, could speak nevertheless) and though his
foul lying mouth against the Popes primacy be stopped by his own true
declaration, yet will he speak, not to any his own honor, as Leo did, but to
his utter confusion and shame. Forsooth says M. Horn, Charles took this
answer no less insufficient, then greauous. Well said, and in time M. Horn,
sauinge that yt is most untrue: and for the which as ye lay forth no prouf,
so shall ye never be able to prove yt. And yet, if ye could prove yt, ye
should do none other thing then that which ye do so solemnlye in the
rest of your book to prove that which being proved, does yet nothing relieve
your cause. And think you, Carolus his testimoni (out of Charles his book as
M. Calvin and M. Ievvel say) for the Popes Primacy. Li. 1. Car. ca. 6.
M. Horn, that we are so bare and naked from many good proufes, but that we
may and can roundly and redely disprove your fond foolish lie? Yea and by
that book, by the which your Apostle Calvin, and your great Jewel of
England, will (though not to their great worship) defeat the Second General
Council of Nice? The Church of Rome (says he) is preferred before all other
Apostolical Sees, not by the Decrees of Synodes, but by the authority of our
Lord him self, saying thou art Peter: and so forth. And says farther, that he
does most desire to obey the holsom exhortatio^s of Pope Adria^: and that
Italy, France, and Germany, The foresaid book overthrows M. Ievvel in his
Reply and in the Apology.
do in all things follow the Sea of Peter. And now wot ye what, M. Horn?
Forsooth this his answer proves M. Jewel, as well in the Apology (or who so
ever be the Author) as in his Reply to M. D. Harding, to have overthrown not
the Nicene Council (wherein this Adrians Legates bare the chief sway) as they
did also in the Council at Frankfoorde, as I have showed, but his own peevish
and fantastical imagination, that this Charles should at Frankford disalow the
said Nicene Synod. But I trow ye be as weary and as much ashamed ere this time,
of this counterfeit Charles book: wherein by the foolish and fond handling of
the iconomache, the cause of the Catholic Church is confirmed, as your
fellows will be shortly of this your book: The Popes Primacy proved by the true
Charles.
that I doubt not to all that be not sinistrallie affectioned, shall serve,
rather for the confirmation, then abrogation, of the Popes Primacie. And
because, as I say, I suppose ye will your selves shortly disclaim this peuish
book, I will send you to Carolus him self, in his Ecclesiastical decrees,
collected by Abbat Ansegisus, whom ye authorize in the next leaf. Vide
Constitut. Caroli ex Ansegiso collectas, impressas in 8. An. 1545. Parisiis.

Tom. 1. Council. pa. 196


Where ye shall find this plain decree. Neque praesul summus a quoquam
iudicabitur. No man shall judge the pope: which was also decreed in the time
of the great Co^stantyne and pope Syluester: yea before that time the like was
said in a council of Marcelline pope and Martyr, as I have otherwhere showed.

Now then thowghe there was no cause why Charles should be greaued with
this, that the whole Clergy and people well lyked and for the which there were
old ancient presidents: yet to go forth, and to smothe this tale withal, and
to show why Charles should quietly bear this grief, which was sone born,
being none at al: The new Gospel can not stand but by defacing of al
antiquity.
he adds an other lie, whereof we have alredie somewhat spoken: And that is,
because the Pope promised him long before, to make him Emperor. Yea good M.
Horn sone said of you, but not so sone proved. For neither your author
Platina says so, nor any other that I have hitherto read. Phy on your wretched
deali^g, and wretched cause that ye maintain, that ca^ not be vpholde^,
Platin. Homo certe mitis in genij, vt omnes diligeret, neminem odio haberet,
tardus ad iram, promptus ad misericordiam.
but with the defacing and dishonori^g not only of the clergy, but of this
worthy and (as your self call him) this Noble Prince Charles withal. I would
feign proceed to the next matter, but that your other untruths must or I go,
be also discovered: as that you say, without any prouf, yea against good prouf
to be laid to the contrary, that this pope Leo for his straight dealings was
hateful to the Romans: which your authors Sabellicus and Platina say not, but
the quite contrary. For Platina among his other manifold and notable virtues
tells, that he was a man, of myld nature, so that he loved all men, hated no
man: slow to wrath, ready to take mercy and pity of other. And Sabellicus
of this very matter says thus. Coniuratorum odium in Pontificem inde ortum
ferunt, Sabel. Aenead. 8. (...). 8.
quod illi liberius viuere assueti, far nequiuissent grauem Pontificis
Censuram. It is said the hatred of such as co^spired against him, spronge
hereof, that they accustomed to live more licentiously, could not abide the
Grave Rebukes and Censures of the pope. Now further, M. Horn being not able
to deny, but that as well Carolus, as all other gave over for any judgment they
would or could give against Leo, he falls to quarelli^g with Leo, for that,
for the which he owght to have co^me^ded him. The matter standing thus, and no
man stepping forth lawfully to prove any thing against Leo, Rhegino in chronic.
Cum nullus probator, aut testis legitimus appateret.
this good man, thowghe no man did or could force him to yt, yet knowing his
own innocence, took an open oath upon the holy ghospel, that he was gyltlesse
from such matters, as were objected against him. And here M. Horn being
pleasantly disposed says (as owte of Platina.) Leo did earnestlye desire that
kind of iudgmente: and adds by his own lying liberalyte, that Platina
mente, that Leo was desirouse to give sentence in his own cause. Whereas
Platina meante that Leo, was desirouse, upon the assured trust, of his own
integritye, that the matter might have been judged: and so worthy of
commendation, that he would submit his cause to judgment, where he neaded
not, as Symachus and Sixtus did before. And so are Platina his words, qui id
iudicium maxim expetebat, Nauclerus generat. 28. Impress. Coloniae. 1564.
to be understood. And perchance in some copies, id, is not seen. Nauclerus
which seameth here as in many other places to follow Platina, and to rehearse
his words, and whom M. Horn does here also allege, says. qui iudicium
maxim expetebat. Which did most ernestly desire to be judged. Which
judgment not proceedynge, he did as much as lay in him, that is, to purge
him self by his oath. Now where Sabellicus speaks of this purgation in the
commendation of Leo, saying, that a man's own report much avails made in
dew ceason, M. Horn adds this his pretty gloss, for want of good
neighbors. Yet I pray you good M. Horn take not the matter so grievously
against Pope Leo: The pope did more for his purgatio^ then has one of our
protestant prelates.
But remember that Leo being pope did more then a protestant Prelate, (whom ye
know full well) of late did, being perchance more then a suspicion, that a
wrong cock had trodden Cockerelles hen. And yet the said prelat was not put to
his purgation, and much less him self offered to swear for his own honesty.
I meddle not with the justifying of the matter one way or other: Some men say
that strypes may cause young striplinges to say, Tongue thoue lie: but not
truly to the eye, Eye thowe lie, which can not lie in that, which is his
obiecte. But let this go. I say yt, for none other cause, but only that ye
have not M. Horn so great cause to take the matter so hot, against Leo. S.
Peter's keys sent ons again to france, and yet the pope remayni^g pope still.

In Chron. Claues co^fessionis sancti Petri and vexillum dixerit.




And now to make up this matter, gentle reader, of Leo, this Leo also sends
Saint Peter's keys, yea and the banner of the city to, to Charles as M. Horn
tells us, yea the keys of S. Peter's confession as Rhegino tells us, and
yet for all that, he remained Bishop, Archebisshop, Patriarche, and Pope to:
yea and supreme head of the Church by M. Horns own tale to. But remember your
self better M. Horn. You said even now, they were sent away by Gregory
the.3. to Charles Martell, into France by ship. How then came the Pope by
them again? Or how did the successors and heyeres of Charles Martell keep
those keys from rusting, if his own Nephewe Charles the great, lost them,
and was feign to have them again by a new deed of gift? Or has every Pope a
new pair of keys from Christ to bestow as they list? Then the gift could be
but for term of life. And then where be the heirs and successors of Charles
Martell, which kept not you say those keys from rusting? O M. Horn. Oportet
mendacem esse memore^. A liar must have a good memory. Or will you say that
this Pope Leo sent to Charles these keys, as a gift to signify, Sabellicus
that the city was at his commandment, as Bellisarius after he had recovered
Rome from Totilas, of whom we spoke of before sent the keys of the city to
Justinian the emperor: Rhegino in Chron. claues ciuitatis cu^ vexillo detuleru^t.
and as some men write even about this time, this Charles received the keys
of the city of Jerusalem, with the banner of the said city? Yet all this will
not work the great strange miracle of supremacy that your keys have wrought.

M. Horn. The.100. Division. Fol. 61. a.
Ansegisus Abbas gathers together the decrees, that this Charles and his son
Lodouicus had made in their times for the reformation of the Church causes:
Amongst other these: The Canonical Scriptures Under the name of holy
scriptures
only to be read in the Churches: For the office of Bisshops in dilligent
preaching, and that only out of the holy Scriptures: that the communion should
be received three times in the year: The abrogati^g and taking away a great
number of holy days besides So^daies: and that children before ripe years
should not be thrust into religious houses: and that no man should be professed
a Mo^k, except license were first asked and obtained of the King. He decreed
also, and straightly commanded that Monks being Priests, Joan. A^e^tinus.
should study diligently, should write rightly, should teach children in
their Abbaies, and in Bisshoppes houses. That Priests should eschew
covetousness, glotony, alehouses or tauernes, secular or profane business,
familiarity of women under pain of deprivation or degradation. H^ provided to
have, and placed fit pastors for the bisshoprikes and cures to feed the
people. He ordained learned Scholemaisters for the youth, and made devout
abbots to rule those that were enclosed in Cloisters, says Nauclerus, As it is
said of King See our answer before to King David. ^o. 48
David, 1. Par. 16.
that he set in order the Priests, Leuits, singers and porters, and ordered all
the offices and officers required to be in the house of the Lord, for the
setting forth of his service and Religion: Even so this noble Charles left no
officer belonging to Gods Church, no not so much as the singer, porter or
Sexte^, vnapointed and taught his office and duty, as Nauclerus tells.
Besides the authority of this noble Prince in (.323.) The.323. untruth. Boldly
avouched, but never proved.
gouerni^g and directing al Church matters, his zeal and care therefore (in
such sort as the knowledge of that (.324.) The.324. untruth. Blasphemous
against the promises of Christ to remai^ alvvaie with his Church. M. Horn
names no Author of this long allegatio^, least he should be taken in trippes,
and his untruths be discovered, as before.
superstitious time would suffer) is plainly shevved in an iniu^ctio^, that he
gave to al estates both of the Layty and Clergy to this effect. I Charles, by
the grace of God King and governor of the Kingdom of France, a devout and
humble maintainour, and ayder of the Church: To al estates both of the Layety
and the Cleargye, wis he salvation in Christ. Considering the exceeding goodness
of God toward us, and our people, I think it very necessary we render
thanks unto him, not only in heart and word, but also in continual exercise,
and practice of well doing, to his glory: to the end that he, who has hitherto
bestowed so great honor upon this Kingdom, may vouchesaulfe to preserve us and
our people with his protection. Wherefore it has seemed good for us, to move
you, o ye pastors of Christ's Churches, leaders of his flock, and the bright
lights of the world: that ye will travail, with vigilant care and diligent
admonition to guide Gods people thorough the pastors of eternal life, etc.
Bringing the stray sheep into the foulde least the wolf devour them, etc.
Therefore they are with earnest zeal to be admonished and exhorted, yea to be
compelled to keep the^ selves in a sure faith, and reasonable continuance,
within and under the rules of the Fathers. In the which work and travail
know ye right well, that our industry shall work with you: For which
cause also we have addressed our messengers unto you, who with you by our
authority, shall amend and correct those things that are to be amended. And
therefore also have we added such Canonical constitutions, as seemed to us
most necessary. Let no man judge this to be presumption in us, that we take
upon us to amend, that is amiss, to cut of that is superfluous. For we read
in the books of Kings, how the holy King Josias travailed, goinge the
circuites of his Kingdom or visitinge, correctinge and admonishinge his
people, to reduce the whole Kingdom unto the true Religion and Service of God.
I speak not this as to make my self equal to him in holiness: but for that we
ought always to follow the examples of the holy Kings: and so much as we
can, we are bound of necessity, to bring the people to follow virtuous
life to the praise and glory of our Lord Jesus Christ, etc. And anon after
amongst the rules that he prescribes unto them this follovveth: Our answer
before to the Constitutions of Justinian, may serve here to these laws of
Charlemaine. Both in like manner professed their obedience in all such matters to
the Sea of Rome.
First of al, that all the Bisshoppes and Priests, read diligently the
Catholic Faith, and preach the same to all the people. For this is the first
precept of God the Lord in his Law: Hear o Israel, etc. It belongs to your
offices o ye pastors and guides of Gods Churches, to send forth thorough
your Diocesses, Priests to preach unto the people, and to see that they
preach rightly and honestly. That ye do not suffer new things, not
Canonical, of their own mind forged, and not after the holy Scriptures, to
be preached unto the people. Yea, you your own selves preach profitable,
honest and true things, which do lead unto eternal life. And enstructe you
others also that they do the same. First of all every preacher must preach
in general, that they believe the Father, the Son, and the holy Ghost to be
an omnipotent God, etc. And so learnedly proceeds through all the articles of
our Faith, after which becomes to the conversation of life, etc. And we do
therefore more dilige^tlie enioine unto you this thing, because we know,
that in the latter days shall come false teachers, as the Lord himself has
forvvarned, and the Apostle Paul to Timothe does witness. Therefore beloved
let us furnishe our selves in heart and mind, with the knowledge of the truth,
that we may be able to vvithstande the adversaries to truth, and that thorough
Gods grace, Gods word may increase, pass through and be multiplied, to
the profitte of Gods holy Church, the Salvation of our souls, and the glory
of the name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Peace to the preachers, grace to the
obedient hearers, and glory to our Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.

Stapleton.
Many Laws Ecclesiastical are here brought forth, set forth by this Charles,
with his great care, that reached even to the singer, porter or sexte^:
whereunto ye might add, that he made an order, that no man should minister in
the Church in his usual apparel: Naucler. gener. 28.
and that he him self frequented the Church erlye and late, yea at night
prayer to. But this addition perchance would not all the best have liked your
Geneuicall ministers. Then lays he me forth, an iniunction of this Charles in
matters Ecclesiastical. But consider his style Master Horn. What is it?
Supreme Gouuernour or head of the Church in all matters and things
Ecclesiastical? No, but a devout and an humble mainteyner of the Church.
Consider again the order of his doings Master Horn, which are to set
forth injunctions, to keep the clergy within and under the rules of the
Fathers. But from whence trow we, took Master Horn all this long allegation
of Charles his Constitutions? He places toward the end of his allegation, in
the margin, Joan. Auentinus, out of whom it may seem he took that later part.
But as for the former part thereof (whence so ever M. Horn has fetched it) it
is found in deed among the Constitutions of Charles set forth xx. years
paste. But there it is set though as a Constitution of Charles, yet not as
his own proper law or statute, Vide epitome^ Constitut. Carol. in. 8. An. 1545
but expressly alleged out of the Aphricane Council. For so used godly
Princes to establishe the Canons of the Church, with their own Constitutions
and laws. And in that Council whence Charles took this Constitution, where it
is said that Scriptures only should be read in the Churches, it is added,
Under the name of Scriptures. And it is farther added. We will also that in the
yearly festes of Martyrs, Council. Carthag. 3. Can. 47
their passions be read. Which things M. Horn here, but M. Jewel a great
deal more shamefully quyte omitted in his Reply to D. Cole: falsely to make
folcke believe, Vide Did. 19. In memoriam, and in decretis. 11. q. 1. Volumus
vt omnes.

Se before fol. 48.


that in the Church only Scriptures should be read.

But what neade I now seek further answer, when M. Horn of his own goodness,
has answered him self, as ye have heard, good reader, sufficiently already?
And I have before noted of this Charles and of his submission to bishops, and
namely to the bishop of Rome so far, that no Emperor I trow was ever a
greater papiste then he was, or farther from this Antichristian supremacy that
M. Horn and his fellows teach. For no less is it termed to be of Athanasius
that learned father, as I have before declared.

M. Horn. The.101. Division. page 62. a.
This noble Prince was moved to take upon him this government in
ecclesiastical matters and causes, not of presumption, but by the word of
God, for the dischardge of his princely duty, as he had learned the same both
in the examples of godly kings commended therefore of the holy ghost, and also
by the instructions of the best learned teachers of his time, whereof he had
great stoare and especially Alcuinus an Englisheman of great learning, who
was his chief Scholmaister and teacher: whom, as Martinus tells, Charles
made Abbot of Towers. Amongst other many and notable volumes, thu Alcuinus
vvriteth one, entitled De Fide sanctae and indiuiduae Trinitatis, which as
most meet for him to know, he dedicateth to Charles the Emperor. He
begins his epistle dedicatory, after the salutatio^ and superscriptio^,
thus: Seeinge that the Emperial dignity ordained of God, seems to be exalted
for none other thing, Alcuinus.
the^ to govern and profit the people, Therefore God does give unto them that
are chosen to that dignity power and wisdom: Power to suppress the proud,
and to defend the humble against the evil disposed: wisdom to govern and
teach the subjects with a godly carefulnes. With these two gifts O holy
Emperor, Gods favor has honored and exalted you incomparably above your
ancestors of the same name and authority, etc. What than? what must your
carefulnes most devoutly dedicated to God bring forth in the time of peace
the wars being finished, when as the people hasteneth to assemble together,
at the proclamation of your commandment ( he means that he expresses
afterward, by this assembly or co^course, the council that was now in hand
assembled, as he says, Imperiali praecepto: by the Emperors precept.) And
waits attentively before the throne of your grace, what you will command to
every person by your authority: what I say ought you to do? but to determine
with all dignity just things, which being ratified to set them forth by
commandment, and to give holy admonitions, that every man may return home
merry and glad, with the precept of eternal Salvation, etc. And least I should
seem not to help and further your preaching of the Faith, I have directed
and dedicated this book unto you, thinkinge no gift so convenient and worthy
to be presented unto you: seeinge that al men know this most plainly, that the
Prince of the people ought of necessity to know al things, and to By other
not in his own person. And so in all the rest.
preach those things that please God: neither belongs it to any man to
know better or more things, than to an Emperor, whose doctrine ought to
profit all the subjects etc. All the faithful has great cause to rejoice of
your godliness seeing that you have the priestly power (as it is mete so to be)
in the preaching of the word of God, perfect knowledge in the Catholic
faith, and a most holy devotion to the salvation of men. The prince has a
priestlie power to set forth Gods word.
This doctrine of Alcuinus, which no doubt, was the doctrine of all the
catholic and learned fathers in that time, confirms well the doings of
Charles and other Princes, in calling councelles, in making decrees, in
giving Injunctions to Ecclesiastical persons, and in rulinge and gouerninge
them in (.325.) The.325. untruth. ever avouched, but never proved.
all Ecclesiastical things and causes. If the government of this most
Christian Prince in Ecclesiastical matters be well considered, it shall well
appear, that this Charles the great, whom the Popes do extolle as an other
great Constantine, and patron unto them (as he was in deed, by enriching the
Church with great revenues and riches) was no whit greater for his martial
and Princelike affairs in the politic governance, than for his godly
ordering and disposinge the Church causes: although that in some things he is
to be borne with, considering the (.326.) The.326. untruth. Slanderous and a
plain contradiction.
blindness and superstition of the time.

Stapleton.
The contents of these matters stand in the high commendation, of this
Charles: which can not be commended inowghe, and whom the council kept at
Men's, commends even as M. Horn reports, for his godly wisdom in
continual feadinge of Christ's sheep with holy food, Al Charles comme^datio^
serves for nothing but for M. Horns disco^me^dation.
and instructinge them with divine knowledge, far passing thorowgh his holy
wisdom, the other kings of the earth. A wise man would now maruayle, to what
end M. Horn has heaped these and all his other praises of this Emperor who
truly can not be praised to much: but the truer and greater his praise is, the
more discommendation to M. Horn and to his book, being direct contrary to
the doings and belief of Charles, and this matter so certainly true, that
Master Horn him self can not deny yt. Beside, here appears a
contradiction the which Master Horn shall never shift away charging him
before for want of pure knowledge: whereof yet he does nothing else but purge
him almost four leaves following together: Fol. 58. col. 2.
as one having a priestlie power, to preach the word of God, and having
perfytte knowledge in the catholyke faith. And saying that all the catholyk and
learned fathers of that time confirm well the doings of Charles, which he him
self does here impugn, for Masses, Chrisme, and other points of catholyke
religion. Consider these things, good reader well, and then judge with
indifferency, who be the blind bussardes, that M. Horn spoke of.

Your note in the margent may be suffered well inowgh, being agreeable to your
text: unless yt be, that sometime good things be the worse for coming to
ill men's hands. The priestly power that Alcuinus means rests in this
point, that as the priests in their Synodes and preachinges set forth the
true fayeth, so do good princes set forth the same by their proclamations.
For you will not I trow say, that the Emperor him self preached in pulpyt
with gown and surplesse, or with cope and Rotchet, as you poor souls are
driven full against your wills to do. And so for all your note and shrewde
meaning, Charles is as far of from his supremacy as ever he was before. Yea I
will now prove, Naucler. generat. 28. and 11. q. 1. c. volumus. vbi allegatur
liber Theodosij.
after the usual sort of M. Horns reasoning against the catholics, that
bishops at this time, yea in the time of great Theodosius to, were supreme
heads as well in causes temporal as spiritual: For (by the decree of Charles,
and Theodosius) yt was Lawful for all men in all suites to appeal to the
bisshoppes, withowte any appeal to be made from their sentence and decree.
But of this we have spoken before more at large. Yet you tell us again here
after your manner that this Charles ruled and governed ecclesiastical persons
in all Ecclesiastical things and causes. This you conclude still. But this
clause, saying or assertion could never yet appear in any text by you
alleged. And here I might ruffle with you in M. Jewels Rethorike for this
clause, Supreme government in all Ecclesiastical things and causes: as he does
against D. Harding for the bare terms of Private Mass, universal Bishop,
head of the Church, Ievvel in his Reply page 302.
etc. and say to you. If Emperors and other Princes were supreme Governors in
deed in all Ecclesiastical causes, so allowed and taken in the whole world,
why were they never expressly and plainly named so? was there no man in the
world for the space of a thousand years and more from the time of Constantine
to Maximilian, able to express this name or Title? It had been the simpler and
playner dealing for M. Horn to have said. This Title can not yet be found,
Idem pa. 306.
and so to have taken a longer day. And again. This title of supreme
Governor in all Ecclesiastical causes is the very thing that we deny, and that
M. Horn has taken in hand to prove, and boldly avouches, that he has already
plainly showed it, and yet not in one of his allegations it can be found. As
though he would say, all the old fathers of the Church both Greeks and
Latins wanted words and eloquence, and either they could not, or they durst
not call the supreme Governor by his own peculiar name. And again thus. From
the time of Constantine the great to this Charles, there have been of Christen
Emperors above.30. and beside a great nombre of Christen Kings in Spain, in
France, yea and in our Country to, for their Constancy in faith, for their
virtues and knowledge far exceading the rest that have been sithence: (at least
wise by your Judgments which condemn these later ages) The nombre of them
being so great, their virtues so noble, their power so mighty, it is merueyl
M. Horn should not be able to show that any one of them all in so long time,
was so much as once Called, Entitled, Idem page 308.
Saluted or proclaimed, The supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical. And
last of al. This supreme Government, to the which we must needs swear by
book oath, so Ancient, so universal, so Catholic, so Gloriouse can not be
found neither in the Romain Empire, neither in all the East Church, nor in
France, nor in Spain, nor in England, but must be sought out, in broken
sayings of this and that man, and that by conjecture only. This I might, as I
said, in M. Jewels Rhetorike ruffle a litell with you. But because, as his
challenge it self (I believe) so far misliketh you, that you wish his tongue
had been tied to a pillery, when he uttered it at Paul's Cross, so this his
Rhetorike also pleases you, I trow, never a whitte. Therefore not to trowble
you, I am content to leave it. Only I desire the Reader to mark, that ever
you conclude, pronounce and affirm in your own words, Supreme Government
in all Ecclesiastical causes, but in your allegations and Authorities being so
thick, and so long, you can not for your life so much as once find it. And so
Christen men are sworen to that, which never since Christ was borne, was ever
read, seen, or herd of, in any Council or Doctor, Bishop or Father,
Emperor or Prince, Country or City whatsoever.

But to return to you Master Horn, whom I had almost forgotten, I will
note one most fond contradiction in you, and so pass to the next Division.
You say this Prince Charles the great, Page 63.
is in some things to be borne with, considering the blindness and
superstition of the time. And yet you say in less the^ twenty lines before:
This doctrine of Alcuinus (who was this Charles his Chaplain) was no doubt the
doctrine of all the Catholic and learned fathers in that time. Now good sir. Page
eade^.
If there were Catholic and learned fathers in that time, and the doctrine of
Alcuinus was the doctrine of the^, he also being themperors chaplain, and daily
instructor in Gods matters, why fear you in the^peror a corruption of the
blindness and superstition of the time? Or what blindness and superstition is
there in the time, when Catholic and learned fathers flourish in the time?
Except you will say, that to be Catholic and learned, is also a blindness and
superstition: and that heretics only do se or the unlearned only have the pure
worship of God? But so it is. That time co^de^neth this time. That Religion
co^de^neth yours. And therefore you must needs either call the^ blind, or
confess your self bli^d, which you ca^ not possibly do, why protestants can
not see the truth.
because you are bli^d in deed. And why? Forsooth because ever, when you look
up toward the former ages, you put upon your eyes a pair of spotted
spectacles: so that all that you se through those spectacles, seems also
spotted, foul, and evil favored unto you. And these spectacles are, The
contempt of the Church traditions. A pride of your own knowledge in Gods word:
A lothsomnes of austere and hard life to bear your Matthew. 10. and 16. Marc. 8.
Luc. 9.
own cross with Christ. A preiudicat opinion of preferri^g Calvin, Mela^chto^
and Luther before all the Catholic and learned fathers, for so you call the^, of
that age. With such like. If you wuld ones put of these foul spotted
spectacles, M. Horn, the^ wuld you never call the time of Catholic and learned
fathers, a time of blindness and superstition, but then would you se clerly,
your own blindness and superstition. Which with all my heart, I pray God you may
ones do ere your dye.

M. Horn. The.102. Division. page 63. a.
Although herein Lodouicus Charles his son were somvvhat inferior to his
father: Yet notvvithsta^di^g, he (.327.) The.327. untruth. He gave the^ over,
as shall appear.
reserved these Ecclesiastical causes to himself, and with no less care be
ordered the same, although in some things, being a very mild Prince, he vvi^ked
and bare over much with the (.328.) The.328. untruth. Slanderous.
ambition of the Popes. Shortly after, vvha^ as the forsaid Leo was departed,
was Stephen next elected Pope, and without the co^firmatio^ of the emperor,
took the Papacy upon hi^. All the histories agree, that he came shortly after
into France to the^peror, but wherefore, most of the^ leave uncertain. Platina
thinks to avoid the hursey burley in the City that was after the death of
Leo. Sabellicus thi^keth the^perors coronatio^ to be the cause. Nauclerus
says, he went in his own person unto the^peror Lodouik (.329.) The.329.
untruth. Ad vitandas seditiones left out in the midst.
about, or for the Church matters, which (330) The.330. untruth. It proves
not any such matter.
proves that the emperor had chief authority in ordering the Church business.
But our English Chronicles, as These some vvriters dare not shevve their faces
nor tell out their names.
some vvriters affirm, do plainly declare, that his coming into France, was
to make an excuse of his unlawful consecration, against the decrees made to
Charles by his predecessors, Adria^ and Leo, fearing therefore the sequel of
the matter he first sent his Legates before hi^ to be a preparatiue to his
purgatio^, and afterward came himself to crave his pardon. And the rather to
please the^peror, brought a most beautiful crown of gold for hi^, and another
for the Empress (331) The.331. untruth. This vvherof follows not out of
Nauclerus. Did. 63.
vvherof followed, as Naucle. says: Oi^a quae petiit a pio Imperatore
obtinuit, he obtained whatsoever he asked of the godly emperor. Now when
Stephen had dispatched al his matters, he returned home: and shortly after, an
other ecclesiastical cause happened, for within a while the bishop of Reatina
died, and there was an other chosen. And when the sea of Reatina (says
Nauclerus) was void, the Pope would not co^secrat the elect Bishop, onles he
had first license thereto of themperor. The circumstances of this story, make
the matter more plain. The earl Guido, had vvrite^ unto Pope Stephen to
co^secrat that bishop: vvho^ the Clergy and the people had elect: but the Pope
durst not enterprice the matter, till he were certified of the^perors
pleasure, and thereupon vvriteth again unto Therle the tenor whereof follows,
after Gratianus report: I have red your letters, wheri^ you require me to
co^secrat the newly elect Bishop of Reatin, chosen by the consent of the
Clergy and people, least the Church should be long destitute of a propre
pastor. I am sorry for the death of the other: but I have deferred the
consecration of this, for that he brought not with him, themperors license (vt
mos est) as the manner is. I have not satisfied your mind herein, lest that the
Emperor should be displeased at my doing. Therefore I require you (for
otherwise I ought not to meddle) to purchase the Emperors license directed unto
me by his letters, vt prisca consuetudo dictat, as the ancient custom does
will, and then I will accomplish your desire. I pray you take not this my
doing in evil part. VVherof it is manifest enough (says Nauclerus) that of
the Emperors at that time, the Bishops had their inuestitures: although Anto,
does gloss otherwise, saying that perhaps, this elect Bisshoppe was belonging
to the Court, who ought not to be ordered. Not only the textes of many decrees
in this distinction, does confirm this to be true, Did. 63.
but also Gratian him self, and the glossars, do in many places affirm, that
this was the ancient custom, and co^stitution in the Church, that the
election^ of the Bishops of Rome, and of other Bishops also, should be
presented to the Emperors and Princes, before they might be consecrated.

The.11. Chapter* Of Lewys the first, of Steue^.1. Paschalis.1. Eugenius.1. and
Gregory the.4. Popes of Rome.
Stapleton.
LVdouicus son to Charles the great, confirmed the popes election, and had
the inuestitures of bishops. Be yt so M. Horn, if ye will: what then? Have you
forgotten, that all that Authoryty was given to his father Charles the great, by
Adrian the pope, and that he held that only of the Popes gift? Again, many
hundred years together ere this time, France, Italy, Spain, England and
many other contreis were under thempiere of Rome. Would ye therefore infer
your argument, from that time to our time, and make those countries now
subject to the Empire, because they were then? If ye do, little thank shall ye
have for your labor: And truly the argument holds as well in the one, as in
the other: And when al is done, your cause of supremacy stands as yt did
before. Yet is the fine and clerkly handlyng of the matter by M. Horn, to be
withal considered: who like a wanton spanell, running from his game at riot,
hunteth to find the cause, why Pope Stephen (whom the stories call an
Angelical and a blessed man) came to this Emperor into France. Nauclerus
generat. 28. In Areopagiticis Hildiuini page 60 He is so called of the Emperor
Lodouike him self.
He tells three causes, out of three certain and known Authors: and then
tells us, that Nauclerus says, he came for Church matters, and so full
ha^dsomly concludes thereby, that the Emperor had the chief Authority
therein: which is as good an argument, as if a man would prove, the woman to
whom King Saul came and consulted with for certain his affairs, to have
been above the King. Your Author Nauclerus does specify what these causes
were: that is, to entreat the emperor, for his enemies, and for the Romans,
that had done such injury to Pope Leo, Nauclerus generat. 28. page 53.
of whom ye have spoken, and to pardon other that were in diverse prisons in
France, for the great owtragiouse offenses done against the Church. The good
Emperor satisfied his desire: and so he returned to Rome, and those also which
were banished with him. Also he says he went to the Emperor ad vitandas
seditiones: to avoid the tumultes that were rising in the City, which clause
M. Horn nipped quyte of in the midst of his allegation. Belike M. Horn him
self, thought not good to rest in that argument, and therefore he seeks a new,
and that is that the Pope came to excuse him self, of his unlawful
consecration, done without the co^sente of the emperor: And to make his way,
brought a most bewtiful crown of gold, one for him, and an other for the
Empress, whereof followed as Nauclerus says that he obtained, what so ever he
asked of the godly Emperor. But Master Horn how your whereof follows, yt
would trouble a wiseman, yea your self to tell. For to say the truth yt can
not follow. Nauclerus makes mention, as I have said what his demaundes were,
but of no such crown. Neither your other Authors Sabellicus and Platina.
Volat ant. Lib. 22.
But as well Platina as Volaterranus says the Emperor delivered to the Pope
at his return, a weightye and a massy Cross of gold, that he gave to Saint
Peter's Church.

Now Sir, do so much for me again, or rather for your self, to prove your
self a true man and somewhat to better your own tale, to tell us but one Author
by name good or bad, that writes, as ye say, concerning the.ij. Crowns, the
Pope brought with him, and of his purgatio^ and pardon that he should crave of
the Emperor. What M. Horn may do hereafter, The pretty proufe^ that M. Horn
uses.
good Reader, let him self well consider. But I pray thee in the mean ceason
consider, that he allegeth no better matter than this, that our Englissh
Chronicles (Bale belike, or some such honest man) and again, as some writers
affirm do plainly say so. Now though the creditte of our English Histories,
in this case be very slender: yet ye see, good Reader, how he plays and
dallieth with you, neither daring to name any Original Chronicler, nor any
other that does name the said Chronicler. But makes his proof only upon some
says, and hear says.

M. Horn. The.103. Division. page 64. a.
Immediatl^e after the death of Stephen Paschalis.1. was chosen Pope: He being
encouraged* by all (.332.) The.332. Untruth. No liklihode in the world can be
gathered hereof out of any good history.
likelihode, by his Predecessors like entrance, thinking to entreat the
Emperor so easily as Stephen had done. And boldened with a late made Canon by
Stephen, suffied him self to be enstalled and consecrate without the
Emperors inuesturing, leave and authority: Nevertheless being better advised
(mistrusting his presumptuous and disobedient fact would displease the
Emperor, as it did in deed) he sent by and by his Legates to the Emperor to
excuse him self, and lays all the fault on the people and clergy. The Emperor
accepting this excuse for that time warns the people and Clergy of Rome,
that they take good head, that they do no more offend against his Majesty, but
that hereafter they do warely observe and keep the old orders and
co^stitutions. He calls this attempt (.333.) The.333. Untruth. He does not
so call it, nor did not so take it.
plain treason. This Emperor called a Counsel at Frankeford, he bestovved
spiritual promotions, and (.334.) The.334. Untruth. He was first chosen of
the Clergy: Which M Horn has left out.
instituted his brother Drogo, the chief Minister or Bishop at Mettes.

In the mean while die^h Pope Paschalis, next to whom follovved Eugenius,
but elected not without contention, and lived but a while: after whom
succeeded Valentinus, who lived in the Papacy but forty days. Next unto him
was chosen Gregory the fourth, who was of so great modesty, says Platina,
that being elected Pope of the Clergy and people of Rome, he would not take
upon him the office, before he had his confirmation of the Emperors
Ambassadors, who^ the Emperor had sent to Rome for that purpose, and to examine
diligently that election. And Lodouicus the Emperor, did not this of pride,
but that he would not loose the privileges and rightes of The Empire. Note al
these things well, the Pope on the one part, vvha^ he was chosen without any
contention, yet would he not be co^secrat without the Emperors confirmation:
otherwise he thought it an immodest part. The Emperor on the other side, not
only sends his Ambassadors to co^firm, but or ever they confirm hi^, to
examine, and diligently to discuss, after what sort he came in, and whether he
were elected laufully or no. And this he did, not of a pride (say they) much
less of any vsurpatio^, but because he would not lose or diminissh the right
herein, that belonged to the Emperial (.335.) The.335. Untruth. It was no
right, of Emperial Majesty, but of the Apostolik authority.
May. Here, say they, he did it of purpose, because he would not lose his
right, and not his only, but the right of the Empire. But least it should seem
he did tirannously herein, and oppressed the church, or infringed her
liberties, it follows almost word for word, in both these vvriters
Platina and Nauclerus. For he was a mild, merciful, and most gentle Prince of
nature, and one that did always maintain the right and dignity of the
Church. Lo how great cleme^cy this is compted in him, and the defense of the
dignities and rightes of the Church: the which afterward, and now of the
Popes, is compted To do it now* as this Jews did then yt is counted no
tyranny at all.
the greatest tyranny and oppression of the Church that can be. But further to
approve this deed of Lodouike, the foresaid authors recite many Canons,
Decrees, and Constitutions, that this Emperor made in Ecclesiastical causes
and things: and especially for the reformation of the disordered behauiours of
the Bisshops and Clergy In so much that Platina co^paring the dissolutenes of
the church me^ in his time, cries out We wish the same: for the^ your
heresies should sone have an end
would God, O Lodouike, thou were alive in these our times, for now the Church
wants thy most holy ordinances, and thy discipline. The self same Lodouicus
(says Platina) called a Council of many Bisshoppes at Aquisgrane, to Gods
honor, and the profit of the Church dignity. The Prelates in the Preface to
this Synod, do declare, what was the care and authority of this godly
Emperor in this Synod. They affirm that the most Christian Emperor, had
called an holy and General Congregation or Counsel at Aquisgrane: He began
therein thoroughly to handle the matter, with wisdoms void of curiosity: he
counseled, yea warned the Holy Sinod assembled, what was nedeful to be
don, touchi^g certain chief Ministers of the Churches: He warned the^ further,
to dravv out of the holy Canons, and the sayi^gs of the holy fathers, a fourm
of institution for the si^ple sort of ministers, vvherby they might the more
easily learn to walk in their duties without offense. The Synod gives God
thanks, that he had preferred so holy, wise, and devout a Prince, to have the
(.336.) The.336. untruth. False tra^slatio^ as shall appear.
charge and oversight of his Church, and the Churches needful business or
matters. The Synod, according to the kings advertisement, furthered also
with his help otherwise, collecteth a form of Institution, vvherin is
contained at large, after what sort the Prelates ought to fra^e their lives,
rule, or govern the people committed to their cures, etc. This done, they
bring (337) The.337. untruth. missereporting. cora^ prolatam laudibus efferunt.
to the Prince their fourm of Institution, which they had devised. This
Emperor called an other Council at Ticinum in Italy for the causes hereafter
expressed. The matters or causes which the honorable Emperor Ludouicus did
command his Bisshoppes to consider of, are these: touching the state of his
kingedome: of the conversation of the Bishops, Priests, and other Churchmen:
of the doctrine and preachinge to the people: of writing out of Books: of
restoring of Churches: of ordering the people, and hospitalles for strangers:
of Monasteries both for men and women. (.338.) The.338. Untruth. According to
the rule of S. Benet, left out.
What so ever is out of order in these forenamed states, either through the
negligence of the guides, or the slouthfulnes of the inferiors, I am (said he)
very much desirous to know, and I coueite to amend or refourme them, according
to Gods will, and your holy advise, in such sort that neither I be found
reprouable in Gods sight, neither you nor the people incur Gods wrathful
indignation for these things, how this may be searched, found out, and brought
to perfection, that I commit to be entreated by you, and so to be declared unto
me. The lesser matters also, which in general touch all, but in especial,
some, and need refourmation: I will that ye make inquiry of them, and make
relation unto me thereof: as for exaumple, if the rulers in the Countries
neglecte or sell Justice, if they be takers or oppressors of the Churches,
widows, Orphans, or of the poor. If they come to the Sermons. If they do
reverence and obey duly their Priests. If they presume to take in hand any
new opinions or arguments that may hurt the people. etc.

The Bisshoppes after they had consulted upon these matters, do make relation
unto the Emperor, what they had done: shevving to him, that they had found
some of the Bisshoppes and chief Ministers faulty, and humbly pray the
Emperor on their behalf, that he will of his goodness grant those, some
space to amend their faults. They complain to the Emperor of Bisshops and
Priests for lack of Preaching, and that Noble men, and Gentlemen, come not
unto those (.339.) The.339. Untruth. Of fevv Sermons no complainte is made.
fevv sermons that be. And so then recite many other enormities, as about
Tithes, Incest, and such like, especially in religious persons, who for the
most part are (.340.) The.340. Untruth A tale falsely told and out of order.
clean out of order. And to bring these to their former order and state
rests (say they) in your disposition. Thus does this King take upon him,
and thus do the Bisshoppes yield unto him the (.341.) The.341. Untruth. No
gouernemente at al named or yielded in Ecclesiastical things.
gouernemente, as well of Ecclesiastical, as Temporal causes and things. On
this wise did Lodouicus alvvaies exercise him self: in so much that for his
careful gouernemente in Church matters he was surnamed Pius, the Godly,, as
his Father beforehim, was called Magnus, the Great.

Stapleton.
The principal tenor of the matters here contained, stands in the
confirmation of the Popes election, in calling councelles, and confirming laws
ecclesiastical. To all the which we neade no far fetched or new solution,
especially seeing M. Horn him self, furthereth yt so well, as declaryng that all
things were done according to the holy Canons, and sayings of the holy
Fathers: and that many of these matters towched the polityke gouernmente of the
realm. Yet let M. Fekenham now beware. For M. Horn proves yt high treason in
the people and clergy, for that Paschalis was made Pope wythowte themperours
consent. And so lo, at the length here is some face of antiquity, for our new
acts of Parliamente. Well found out, and like a good lawyer M. Horn. Yet I
beseache you tell us, which words of all that you rehearse imploye plain
treason. Ne a^plius simili exemplo imperatoria laederetur maiestas.
I am assured there are none, unless yt be these. that they do no more offend
against his majesty* as your self rehearse out of Sabellicus. And if ye call
this treason, and make no better prouf, I think neither good grammarian, nor
any good lawyer will take your part. For thowghe in latin laedere maiestatem,
be sometime taken for treason, yet yt is not always, neither can yt be
englished treason, but upon the circumstances, which declare the act to be
treason. And how will this cruel exposition stand I pray you with your own
declaration, in this leaf also: that this Ludouicus was a mild merciful, and
most gentle prince? Beside this, it is not like he took this matter so
heauely, for that even as Platina your author here writes out of Anastasius
bibliothecarius, a worthy author and living about this time, this Emperor
released to this Pope Paschalis his right that he had in the election of
Bishops, given before to Charles by Adrian the Pope. And here upon might I
as well conclude after your base and yet accustomable reasoning, Nauclerus
generat. 28. page 55. et did. 6^. Ego Ludouicus.
that the Princes of England should have nothing to do, with the election of
Bishopes. Yet, if there be no remedy, let yt be high treason to agnise the
Popes election withowte the Emperors confirmation. What is this to the prince
of England, that has nothing to do therewith, or to M. Feke^ham, seeing if al
be true, yet it makes nothing for the Emperors supreamacy, or against the
Popes supreamacy? A new kind of treason wherein a man may loose his head and
take no hurt.
The denial whereof in deed (the more pity) is taken for treason with us, but
yet thanks be to God, such kind of treason, as a man may lose his head and
take no hurt by yt, but much good: and that is to be a very true and a
blessed martyr.

But now touching the particular doings of this Emperor Ludouike, you tell us
he bestowed Spiritual promotions (and you tell us but of one only) and
instituted his brother Drogo the Chief Minister or Bishop at Mettes. And here
you leave out, Canonicam vitam agentem, clero eiusdem Ecclesiae consentiente
ac eligente, he instituted him being a man that lead a regular life, the
clergy also of that Church both confenting and choosing him. Nauclerus. page
55. Gener. 28.
This you leave out to make the world believe the Emperor bestowed Spiritual
promotions, of his own supreme Authorytie absolutely. And here you tell us of a
right belonging to the Emperial majesty, in confirming of the Pope. And yet you
forget, Fol. 63. b.
that in the very leaf before you confess, this was made by decrees of Adrian
and Leo Popes to Charles, this man's Father. And then was it not a right of
Imperial Majesty, but a Privilege from the Apostolic Authoryte. As for the
Clemency of this Prince so much commended, it was not as you imagine for any
supreme government, but for his most fatherly defending, aiding and succouring
of the Church. Namely in that most learned Council holden under him at
Aquisgrane, of which presently you do talk very much, prying out for some clause
that might make for your suprem government. And at last, finding none, with a
little false translation, you make the Synod to say of The Emperor, that he had
the charge and oversight of Christ's Church. Which al in Latin is but this one
word Procuratorem, Tom. 2. Conc. page 639.

Eius videlicet liberalissima largitione Copia^ libroru^ etc.


A defendour, a succourer, a maintainour, not a Supreme Governor with charge
and oversight. You add also the Synod was furthered with his help otherwise,
itching forth a little and a little, feign to find somewhat, and it will not be.
For all that furthering (that you so closely cover) was nothing else, but that
to his great charges, he furnished the Council with a goodly store of books,
and great plentye of the Fathers writings. Out of which they collected a
form of institution, etc. Not the Emperor. A non after you talk of
Monasteries for men and women: but you leave out: Secundum regulam S.
Benedicti. According to the Rule of S. Benet. Your unruly Religion could not
bear so much as the Remembrance of that holy Rule. And all that you tell of
the Emperors words to the Bishops in the Counsel of Tioinu^, In Con. Ticin.
page 705. page 706. Col. 2.
the Counsel calls it only Co^monitoriu^ an aduertiseme^t or admonition. No
charge or Co^missio^. You note to the Reader certain enormyties recited in
this Gou^cel. But wot you what those enormytes were? Forsooth these. That the
lay Nobilite, quia ad electionis consortiu^ admittuntur, Archipraesbyteris suis
dominari praesumunt, and quos tanqua^ patres venerari debueru^t, velut subditos
co^te^nunt. Because they are admitted to have a part in the Election, they
presume to over rule their chief priests. And whom they ought to reverence as
Fathers, they contemn as subjects. These were the enormyties there recyted M.
Horn. And do not you defend this very enormytie, even in this very place, and
by this very Council? When will you leave to bring Authoryties against your
self? As touching the matter of Incest, the Synod requires of the Emperor
that to bring such offenders to open penance, Ibid. Vt publicae possint
poenitentiae subiugari.
Comitum eius auxilio fulciantur, they may be vpholded with the help of his
Officers. Lo they require the Emperors help for execution. And yet you
conclude after your manner. Thus does the king take upon him, and thus do the
Bishops yield unto him the Government as well of Ecclesiastical as Temporal
causes and things. And this you conclude a government, which in all your
premises was not so much as named. Your Conclusion is always full and
mighty. But your proufes are void and fainte.

M. Horn. The.104. Division. page 66. a.
Pope Leo.4. vvriteth his humble letters unto Lotharius on the behalf of one
Colonus, who was chosen to be Bishop of Reatina, but he might not consecrate
him without the Emperors license first obtained thereunto, and therefore
prays the Emperor of his favor toward Colonus: Vt vestra licentia
accepta, ibidem, Deo adiuuante, eum consecrare valeamus Episcopum: That having
your license, we may have authority by Gods help to consecrate him Bishop
there. Upon this word, License, The Glosser notes, the consent of the
Prince to be required after the election be made. (.342.) The.342. untruth. You
take not the whole gloss. The next line makes clean against you. Sabell.
Platina.
Next to Leo, sauinge the (.343.) The.343. untruth. Pope Ione, Pope None.
woman Pope Johan, was Benedictus.3. chosen, who was ratified and confirmed
by the Emperors authority: who sent his Ambassadors to Rome for that
purpose. This Pope is commended for his greates godline: But he was over godly
to li^e long in that sea; nevertheless he was not so godly as the most of
his successors were altogether ungodly, as your (.344.) The.344. untruth.
None write so, but Bale and such other, which be your vvriters, not ours,
Apocal. 9.
own vvriters make report. And to note this change the better: Nauclerus
tells of diverse wonders: how the Devil appeared in an ugly shape, and
hurled stones at men as they went by: set men together by the ears:
bevvrayed thieves, and Priests of their Lemmans, and such like: How it rained
blood three days and three nights: How great Grassehoppers with six vvings,
and six fete, and two teeth harder then any stone, covered the ground, and
destroyed the fruits: not altogether unlike those Grassehoppers, that S. John
notes in his Revelation, to come from the botto^les pit, after the star was
fallen. After this followed a great pestilence: Which wonders, if they be
true, be not unworthy the noti^g considering the change that follovved. For
hitherto still from time to time, although some Popes did privily attempt the
contrary, yet the Emperors (.345.) The.345. Untruth: For none, but
Charlemaine and Lewis the.1 who at the length gave it over also,
alvvayes kept the confirmation of the Pope, the inuesturing of Bisshoppes, and
the ordering of many (.346.) The.346. Untruth. M. Horn can show none other.
other Ecclesiastical matters, till the next Pope began openly to repine at
the matter, and his successor after him to curse, and some of those that
followed, fell from chiding and cursing, to plain fighting for the same. In
the which combat, though with much a do, at length they vvrong them selves
from under the Emperors (.347.) The.347. Untruth. They were never under their
obedience in Ecclesiastical matters,
obedience: Yet alvvaies even hitherto, Princes have had no little interest in
Ecclesiastical causes, as hereafter shall appear.

The.12. Chapter. Of. Leo.4. Benedictus.3. Nicolaus. 1. Adrian.2: Martinus.2.
Adrian.3. and of the.8. General Council under Basilius the Emperor.
Stapleton.
WE go on still with the Popes confirmation: a matter, as ye know, nedelesse,
and such as might be spared, saving that M. Horn must take a foil even of his
own allegation and Glosar. Who, as he says, the Princes consent, is required
after the election, so he adds: Nisi aliud suade at scandalum, vel
praescripta consuetudo. Unless, says he, some offense, or a prescribed
custom move us to think otherwise. Then is M. Horn in hand with Benedictus
the.3. next Pope to the woman Pope Johan: who was confirmed by the Emperor.
But here M. Horn, a man may doubt of this point, whether this Benedictus was
next to Pope Johan. For if there was never such Pope Johan, then could not he
be next to her. And that it is rather a fable then a story, for all your great
business, your Apology, and others, make therein, Confut at Apolog. fol. 164.
I think it has been already sufficiently proved. Neither need you to make so
much wondering at the matter. Except ye list to wonder at your selves, which
do place the Popes Supreme authority in Princes, be they men, or women: Yea
and children to. And in so few years you have had all three. Man. Child. And
Woman. The less marvel had it been, if in so many hundred years, we had had
one woman pope, which yet as I said, is utterly false: as it has been
sufficiently proved.

But touching this confirmation of popes and inuesturing of bishops, which
Adrian and Leo granted to Charles the great, which Ludouicus his son gave
over again, which other princes coueted to have after in their own hands
again, and which was denied them, Gratian who has collected the examples of
both sides, gives forth a true and an evident reason, as well why to the one
it was first granted, as also why to the other afterward it was most justly
denied. Of the first he says. Did. 63.
The electio^s of Popes and of other bishops to be referred to Princes and
Emperors, both Custom and law has taught us, for the dissensio^s of
schismatiks and heretics, against who^ the Church has been defended oftentimes
with the laws of faithful Emperors. The election therefore of the Clergy was
presented to the Princes, to the intent that, it being by their authority
strengthened, no heretic or schismatike should dare to gainsaie it. And also
to the end that the Princes them selves as devout children should agree upon
him, whom they saw to be chosen for their Father, that in all things they
might aid and assist him. As it was in the example of Valentinian The Emperor,
and S. Ambrose. I, says the Emperor, will be thy aid and defense, as it
becomes my degree. And hereupon Pope Steven (of whom M. Horn talked even now)
made a Decree that without the Emperors Legates were present, no bishops
already chosen should be consecrated. And by reason of this Decree, the
Bishops of Reatina could not be consecrated, as M. Horn even now alleged.
But (says Gratian) because the Emperors, passing sometime their bonds, would
not be of the number of co^senters and agreers to th'electio^, but wuld be the
first that should choose, yea and put out to, oftentimes also falling to be as
false as heretics, assaied to break the unity of the Catholic Church their
Mother, therefore the decrees of the holy Fathers have proceeded against them,
that they should no more meddle with the election of bisshops, and that
whosoever obtained any Church by their voice, should be excommunicated. And as
Ezechias took away the brazen serpent, which Moses did set up, because it
was now abused: so the constitutions of our forefathers are sometime changed
by the Authority of the posterity, when such Constitutio^s mere positive are
abused. Then Gratian brings in diverse other decrees against the Confirmation
of Emperors, as of Gregory the.4. pope: of Lewys the first Charles his
son, Henry the first, and Otho the first Emperors: who all gave over by
open decrees this privilege granted first of popes upon good considerations,
and after repealed upon as good by the same authority.

And thus you see, M. Horn, by your own Authors, and by good reason (if ye
have grace to consider it) you are sufficiently answered for confirmation of
Popes, and inuesturing of Bisshops: a common matter in your book, and yet as
you see now, a matter of no weight in the world.

After this, M. Horn is in hand with the raining of blood three days, and with
many other wonders of this time: yea with the Devil him self that bewrayed
Priests Lemmans, which they kept in corners secret, that now M. Horn and his
fellows, are not ashamed to keep openly, and have learned a further lesson then
Priests of that age knew, that a Friar and a Nun may laufully wedde: whereat
the Devil him self perchance does as much wonder, as Master Horn here does
wonder at the Devils strange doings. M. Horns wonderful wisdom.
which yet are not so strange, nor so much to be wondered at, as perchance your
great wisdom is to be wo^dred at, to imagine that al these things chanced, for
that The Emperor had not as he was wont to have, the confirmation of the Popes
election, and the ordering of matters Ecclesiastical.

M. Horn. The.105. Division. page 66. b.
After Benedictus, was Nicolas chosen, whom the Emperor him self being
present, did confirm, as witnesses Nauclerus: At the same time, was the
Emperor Lodouicus.2. at Rome, who confirmed the Popes election. The same also
says Martin, to the which Volateran adds of the Emperor and the Pope: De
communi consilio ambo cuncta gerebant. Al^ things were done by common
counsel or consent of both, the Emperor and the Pope. And least it might be
thought he means not as well Ecclesiastical as Temporal matters: Sabellicus
makes the matter more plain, affirming that the Emperor and the Pope had
secret confer^nce together many days, and had consultation both touching the
matters perteining to Christian Religion, and also of the state of Italye. And
a little after talkinge of the Pope: The Pope decreed by the consent of
Lodouicus, that from thence forth, no Prince, no not the Emperor him self,
should be present in the council with the Clergy. unless it were when the
principal points of faith were treated of. Hitherto in all these
Ecclesiastical causes, the Emperor has the doing, as (.348.) The.348.
untruth. For never so well as the Pope had.
well or more than the Pope.

But this last decree, that by the allowance of the Emperor, the Pope made,
exempteth Temporal Princes: from Ecclesiastical matters in their councelles,
though in the most principal matters Ecclesiastical, concerning faith, it
leaves to them their (.349.) The.349. untruth. In matters of faith the
Emperors had no interestes of government.
interestes.

Stapleton.
M Horn him self, to help our matters forward brings forth a decree made
by the pope with The Emperors consent, that lay princes should not be present
in Councils, unless it were when the principal points of religion be treated
of: at the which he wondreth as of a thing unheard of. And yet he did, or
might have found as much in the acts of the Council of Chalcedo. Act. 3.
fol. 838.
Yea, he might have seen also that by the same decree, as well the people, as
the prince might be present, and as much interest had the one thereyn, as the
other. For, as the same Pope Nicolas said, Did. 96. vbinam.
geuynge a reason why the prince may be present, when matters of faith are
debated, Faith is common to all, and pertains as well to the layitie, as to
the Clergy, yea to all Christen men without exception.

Yet all was not gone from them, says M. Horn: for they had their interestes
still (he says) in the principal matters ecclesiastical, concerning faith.
But what intereste I pray you, tell us? Was it to determine or define any
thing, or that all determinations were void and frustrate without the^? Nay,
but only that they might be present, either to keep quiet and order, or else
(as Constantin and Marcian protested) ad confirmandam fidem, to strenghthen
their own faith: or last of all, to execute the Sentence and determinations of
bishops. And so were their Ambassadors present, in the late General Council at
Tre^t: And the Emperor and Kings were wished the^ selves to be there.

M. Horn. The.106. Division. page 67. a.
Martinus the second gat into the Papacy malis artibus by naughty means says
Platina, and as is noted in the marge^t, it was in this Popes time, that first
of all the creation of the Popes was made without the Emperors authority:
But this Pope died so shortly, as he came in naughtily. After vvho^ Adria^ the
third, like unto his predecessor, the second of that name (who by cunning
slight practiced to (.350.) The.350. untruth. Slanderous, as shall appear.
defraude the Emperor of his authority) espying opportunity by reason, that
Charles the emperor, as Sabellicus says, was far of, busied in the
vvarres, does promote this matter to be decreed by the Senate and the people,
and this he did immediately after he was made Bishop, and persuadeth the^, that
they do not hereafter wait for the Emperors approbatio^, and confirmation,
in appointing their Bishop, but that they should keep to themselves, their own
fredome. The which thing also Nicolaus the first, with others attempted, but
could not bring it to pass, as Platina reports. Who also vvriteth, that
the Romans had conceived an hope of great liberty in the hauty courage of
this Pope, being a Roman borne. But to their great grief, he within a
while was taken from the^.

Stapleton.
M. Horn has sone done with Nicolaus the first, and is from him leape^ to
Martinus the second. Between which two were, yet.ij. other Popes, Adria^ the
second, and John the.9. the time also of their regiment, being more the^ twenty
years: and under who^, especially under Nicolaus the first, and Adria^ the
second as great matters passed touching our present purpose, as under any
Popes else of many years before or after. For under this Nicolaus the first and
Adrian the second, the.8. general Council was kept at Constantinople, under
Basilius then Emperor in the East parts: All which matter M. Horn, being in
other Councels both General and National so diligent a chronicler, has
utterly drowned in silence. And yet he might Iwys have found as much apparent
matter for his purpose there, as in any other Council hitherto mentioned. For
Basilius the Emperor called also this Council, as other Emperors before him
did, and M. Horn might have furnished his book with some ioyly talk of this
Emperor also made to the bishops at the beginning of the Council, touching
his care and endeavor about ecclesiastical matters.

But there was a padde in the straw, I warrant you, that made M. Horn aghast,
and not so bold as ones to come nere it. Cusanus lib. 3. cap. 19. de Co^cordia
Catholica.
Ignorant thereof he could not be, having seen Cusanus de Concordia Catholica,
out of whom he alleges in this his book a large place, and that in the same
book, and but five chapters above the place, where Cusanus reherseth out of
this viij. General Council, diverse and long processes, to show of purpose
how the Emperor Basilius dealed and demeaned him self in that Counsel.
Ignorant therefore, Fol. 85. ex li. 3. cap. 13
I say, of this matter he could not be, nor lay for his excuse, that the Acts
of this counsel are not commonly set forth in the former Tomes of the
Councelles. Except M. Horn allege such books and chapters as he never saw
nor read, In Tom. 3. fol. 531. Colon impr. An. praesente.
and so utters his doctrine upon heresaye and report of others. Shortly
therefore to touch this General Council also, seeing that of all other in manner
both general and National somewhat has been said, and seeing now this
Council is also set forth in the last editio^ of the Tomes, I will in few
words declare both the Popes Primacy in the East Church then to have been
confessed, and the Lay Princes Primacy in Ecclesiastical matters to have been
none at all.

First, whereas Michael the Emperor of the East parts, a man given to al
licentiousnes and riot, had thrust out the godly Bishop Ignatius from the Sea
of Constantinople, Zonaras lib. 3.
by the persuasion of Bardas, whom for incest that bishop had excommunicated,
and placed in his room one of his Courtyars, and otherwise an heretic,
Photius by name, whom Pantaleon calls Phocas, other Photinus: Nicolaus the
first, then Pope of Rome after legacies to and fro, excommunicated Photius, and
Michael the Emperor for not restoring again Ignatius to his See. Tom. 2. Conc.
pa. 746.
There is exta^t a most learned and notable letter of this Nicolaus to Michael
the Emperor, where lernedly and copiously he discourses what obedience and
reverence Catholic Emperors have showed to the Bisshops of Rome, and how none
but heretics and schismatikes have disobeyed the same. And whereas this
Emperor Michael had (as he says) Commanded the Pope to send his Legates to
Constantinople about that matter, a phrase which you M. Horn make very much
of, this Pope lernedly and truly answers him, that Catholic and good
Emperors were not wont to command their Bisshoppes and Pastors, especially
the Bisshoppes of the Sea Apostolic, but with Reverence exhort and desire
them to such things as they required: which he proves by the examples of
Did 97. Victor.
Honorius, In epist. praeambu. Co^c. Chal.
Valentinian and Marcian, Cod. de Sum Trin. Nos reddentes.
Justinian, Conc. 6. Constable.
Constantin the.4. and Conc. 7. Nice.
Constantin the fifth in their letters to Bonifacius the first, to Leo the
first, to John the first, to Donus, and to Agatho Popes of Rome. In all which
their letters they use the words. Petimus, hortamur, inuitamus and rogamus, we
beseech, we exhort, we inuit, and desire you: with all gentleness and
Reverence, such as the Apostle commands al me^ to show to their Overseers,
that watch for their souls, and shall give acco^pte for the same. Heb. 13.
Also whereas this Emperor had by a Council of his Bisshoppes banished and
removed Ignatius, the Pope first sent his Legates to examine the matter a
fresh, and to refer to the Pope unto whom the Sea of Constantinople of right
appertayned: wherein the Legates passing their Commission overcome by flattery
and ambition in the Court of Constantinople, confirmed Photius by their
consent. But the Pope not consenting thereto, he cyted both Ignatius and
Pontius to Rome, as Julius cyted Athanasius, Tripart. li. 4. cap. 6.
and Eusebius with his accomplices, and required the Emperor Michael, that by
his good aid and favor they might appear. In the same letter also he
declares how in deed among the Ethnikes, the Emperor was also summus
Pontifex, the high Bisshoppe. But (says Nicolaus) Cum ad verum ventum est
eundem regem atque pontificem, Tom. 2. Conci. pa. 764.
vltra sibi nec Imperator iura pontificatus arripuit, nec pontifex nomen
Imperatorium vsurpauit. When Christ the true King and bishop came, then neither
the Emperor took any more upon him the high bisshops right or Authority,
neither the high bishop usurped any more the Imperial title. After this by the
example of Constantin the great, calling the bishops Gods, and not to be judged
of any man, of Theodosius the younger, charging his Lieutenant Candidianus in
the Ephesine Council, not to meddle with any matter or question of doctrine (as
has before been alleged) and of Maximus that blessed Martyr (whom Constans
the heretical Emperor nephew to Heraclius had put to death) he proves that
the^perorus judgment over bishops, is not, nor ought not to be of any force.
Zonaras lib. 3. page 71.
And therefore concludes that Ignatius being deposed by the Emperial sentence
only was not at al deposed, but remained as true bishop as before. Thus dealed
Nicolaus the first with Michael the Greek Emperor, not usurping any new
authority to him self, but following herein the examples of most holy and
ancient Bisshoppes before him, and requiring no more of the Emperor then his
most godly and Noble progenitors other Catholic Emperors had done. All
this could have no place in Master Horns chronicle, either because he had
not read so far, or else because his sleightes would have been to gross, to
have picked hereof any coulourable matter for his imagined Supremacye.

Under Adrian the second next successor to this Nicolaus, Vide Sanctiones
ecclesiasticas collectas a Franc. Iouerio. Impress. Par. An. 1555.
and under Basilius the Emperor next to Michael was holden at Constantinople
about this matter of Ignatius and Photius principallye, the.8. general
Council by the account of the Latins. In this Council the Legates of
Adrian, Donatus and Stephen Bisshoppes and Marinus a Deacon were president, as
in all other general Councelles before. In the first Action the Popes letters
to the Emperor were read, wherein he condemns the former Synod under
Michael, and wills that all the monimentes and records thereof be burnte. In
the beginning also of this Synod the Emperor Basilius, made an Oration to
the Synod, Cusanus lib. 3. cap. 19. De
declarynge with what Zeal and love to the unity of God his Church, he
had called them together, exhortinge them in many words to concord and
agreement. Confessing also that they, Potestatem Synodici iudicij diuinitus
acceperunt, Concord. Cathol. and Tom. 3. Council page 539. edit. postr.
have received from God (not by any his commission) the power and authoryte to
judge in Synods. He adds farther, that though he doubted not but that they
were altogether such as zealed the truth, and followed righteousness, yet (says
he) to thentent that it may appear that our Imperial majesty, secundum datam
sibi potestatis me^suram, in ecclesiasticis negotijs nihil tacuisse, eorum quae
debent atque conueniunt: has not in ecclesiastical matters, co^cealed any
thing of that which is dew and convenient, according to the measure of power
given unto her, deposcimus religionem vestram etc. We beseech your religion or
godlynes to overcome now al affection of partialyte and hatred, and to
resemble as much as is possible, the immutable, and unchangeable nature of God,
who never respects the person etc. In this Oration of the Emperor three
things I would you should note and bear well away M. Horn. First that the
bishops (by his confession) have power from God to judge and determine in
Councils. Their power and Authoryty herein proceeds not of the Princes
commission, as a supreme governor next unto God above the bishops in
ecclesiastical matters, but from God him self, says this Emperor. Secondly
that the^mperours power is a limited power, not the chief, Supreme, and the
highest in all manner causes and things. Thirdly how it is limited: Forsothe
not to command or prescribe to the bisshops what they shall do, decree or
determine in ecclesiastical matters, but to exhort them to concord and vnyty
in the same.

In the second Action, diverse of the Photians offering up their libelles of
repentance to the Synod, not to the emperor or his deputyes, were by the Synod
with impositio^ of hands reconciled. In the third and fourth Actions diverse
letters were read as well of Michael and Basilius Emperors to the Popes,
Nicolaus and Adrian, as also of the Popes to them again touching the
condemnation of Photius intruded by Michael, and the restoring again of
Ignatius. In the fifte Action Photius was brought in, and the popes letters
conteyninge his condemnation read before him, unto the which the whole Synod
cried. Recipimus haec omnia etc. We receive al these things, because they are
agreeable to reason and to the ecclesiastical rules and laws. In that action
also the Popes legates are called the presidents of the Council. In the sixth
Action the Photians appearing again, and being moved as well of the whole
Synod, as of the Emperor, to repentance, they yet perseuered obstinately in
their schism: Whereupon the Emperor gave them seven days of deliberation,
after which time, if they were not in the mean while reconciled, he bad them
appear again, saying. Ventura sexta feria in sancta and universally Synodo
state omnes, and quicquid definierit vniuersa Synodus, fiet. The next Friday,
be you here present in the holy and universal Synod: and whatsoever the
universal Synod shall define or conclude, that shall be done, where again you
see the Emperor judges not in the matters then in hand, Cusanus li. 3. c. 24.
but the Counsel. Yea he says plainly, that the restoring of Ignatius, was
not his doing, or his devise. But that long before, the most holy and most
blessed pope Nicolaus examining the matter thouroughly, decreed by Synod, that
he should be restored to the right of his See again, and together with the
holy Romayn Church, pronounced Anathema to all such that should resist that
decree and sentence. And we knowing this before, says the Emperor, fearinge
to have the judgment of the Curse promulged: Obsecundare Synodico iudicio
Romanae ecclesiae necessarium duximus, and huius rei gratia reddidimus ei
proprium thronum. We have thought it necessary to obey the Synodicall
Judgment of the Church of Rome, and for that cause we have restored unto him
his own See. Of such Authoryty was the Sentence of the Church of Rome, with
the Emperor of the East Church in those days. In the same action he says
yet farther. Hoc solum nostrum est si voluerit quis nominare crimina. Alia vero
omnia Canonibus and his, quibus imperiu^ Synodi creditu^ est, tradimus. This
only is our part to do: if any man will bring forth any crimes, or make any
accusation, to see it put up to the Council, etc. But all other things we
leave to the Canons, and to them to whom the Rule of the Synod is committed,
that is to bishops, as we heard him before say unto them. Thus much in
that Action.

In the seventh Action Photius appearinge again, Marinus one of the legates
commanded his staff to be taken from him, because it was a token of his
bisshoplye estate and dignyte. Libro. 3. c. 20. H^rtatorie alloquitur vos
Imperator.
In this Action (as Cusanus records) Bahanis the Emperors Lieutenant had
much talk with the Photyans, Hortatorie, by the way of exhortation, mouinge
them to unity and repentance. The only shifte of the Photyans was to say,
that the legates of the Patriarchs there present, did not their commission,
but condemned them contrary to the Patriarchs own wills and Judgments. Upon
this the Emperor offered them, that whosoever would stand by that surmise,
should by his provision be sent to the Patriarchs them selves, as to Rome, to
Antyoche, and to Jerusalem, and learn of them the truth. But they refused to
do so. At the length the Emperor seeing them obstinat and full of words to no
purpose, said to them. Omnes nouimus, quod laici estis, and non adduximus vos
latrare, and sine ordine facere verba. We know all, that you are but lay men.
And we brought you not hither to bark, and to talk out of order. But the
Emperor (says Cusanus) called them therefore lay men, because they were all
ordered of Photius who him self was no bishop: Such are you and all your
fellows M. Horn, no bishops at all, but mere lay persons, ordered of none at
all that was him self ordered. And whereas one of the Photians Eulapius by
name, began to talk with the Emperor, the legates of the Sea Apostolic
said. Eulapius is condemned and excommunicated of the Sea Apostolic: and
therefore the Emperor ought not to talk with him. Then the Emperor said. I
have oftentimes and much desired, that they might not perish: And therefore I
called them hither: but if they will not return to the Church, whatsoever the
Patriarchs shall judge of them, they shall, will they, nill they, stand unto
it. For no man can reiecte the power that is given to them (he means the high
bisshops) of Christ our God and Savior. Thus again you see Master Horn how
all the judgment rests in the bishops, Iubet Imperator vt loquamini: sed
videntes Iudices conuicia vestra, nec audire vos volunt.
and how the sentence of the Sea Apostolic preuayleth, and how buxomely (to
use your own word) and obediently the Emperor yeldeth thereunto, not
intermedling farther then to procure that all parts may be heard, that tumulte
may be avoided, and that the Judges (for so were the bisshops called in this
Actio^) may quietly proceed to Sentence, and last of all that same Sentence may
be put in execution, notwithstanding the indurat malice of obstinat heretics.

In the.8. Action all the schismatical conuenticles of the Photians are
condemned, and the records thereof burned. In that Action also diverse Image
breakers came to the Synod, and were reconciled: That sect also was again
accursed In the last Action the Canons were read, at the Popes Legates
commandment, Did. 63. Nullus.
to the number of.27. In the.22. Canon it is decreed, that no secular Prince
intermedle with the election or choice of any Patriarche, Metropolitan, or
Bishop whatsoever, which also is inserted by Gratian into the decrees. Finally
the Council being ended, Basilius the Emperor makes a long and a notable
Oration to the Synod, Cusanus lib. 3. c. 23.
expressing the dew zeal and dewty of an Emperor in all Synodes and Councels.
He avouches plainly, that to secular and lay men, Non est datum secundum
Canonem dicendi quicquam penitus de Ecclesiasticis causis: opus enim hoc
pontificum and sacerdotum est. It is not granted by the Rule of the Church to
speak any thing at al (in Council) of Ecclesiastical matters. For this is
the work, says he, of Bishops and Priests. And after, comme^ding the bishops
for their great pains and travail in that Council, he speaks to the lay
Nobylyte then present thus. De vobis autem Laicis, etc. But as touching you
that are of the lay sort, as well you that bear offices, as that be private
men, I have no more to say unto you, but that it is not lawful for you by any
means to move talk of Ecclesiastical matters, neither to resist in any
point against the integrity of the Church, or to gaynesaie the universal
Synod. For to search and seek out these matters, it belongs to Bisshops and
Priests, which bear the office of governors, which have the power to
sanctify, to bind and to loose, which have obtained the keys of the Church
and of heaven. It belongs not to us, which ought to be fed, which have need
to be sanctified, to be bound, and to be loosed from band. For of whatsoever
Religion, or wisdom the lay man be, yea though he be indewed with all
internal virtues, as long as he is a lay man, he shall not cease to be called a
sheep. Again, a bishop howesoeuer vnreuerent he be, and naked of all virtue,
as long as he is a bishop, and preaches dewlye the word of Truth, he
suffers not the loss of his pastoral vocation and dignitye. What then have
we to do, standinge yet in the room of sheep? The Shepheardes have the power
to discuss the subtiltye of words, and to seek and compass such things, as
are above us. We must therefore in fear and sincere faith harken unto them,
and reverence their countenances, as being the Ministres of Almightye God, and
bearinge his form, and not to seek any more then that which belongs to our
degree and vocation. Thus far the Emperor Basilius in the end and
Conclusion of the eight general Council, and much more in this sense, which
were here to long to inserte. I blame you not now Master Horn, that you so
ouerhipped this whole General Council, and the doings of those.ij. Popes
Nicolaus and Adrian.2. You saw perhaps or had heard say, that it made clearly
against you. And yet as I said before, apparently you might have culled out
broken narrations for your purpose as well out of this General Council, as
out of the other.7. But seeing you took such pains to note themperors
demeanor in the former.7. I thought it a point of courtesye Master Horn, to
requytte you again with this one general Council, for so many by you
alleged, to your very small purpose, as every indifferent Reader sees.
Whether this be not to our purpose, I dare make your self Judge. And now I
wonder what shifte you will make to avoid the Authority of this general
Council, or of this Emperor Basilius. Well. You may at your good leisure
think and devise upon it. I will now return to your text.

You say Martinus the second (whom other more truly call Marinus) gat into
the Papacy by naughtye means: What makes that to prove your Supremacye in the
lay Magistrate? It is noted, you say, in the margent of Platina that it was in
this Popes time, that first of all the creation of the Popes was made without
the Emperors authority. You should have told us withal in what printe of
Platina that note is found. I have seen Platina both of the Collen printe, and
of the Venyce print set forth with the Notes of Onuphrius, and yet I find
no such Note in the margent. It is by like the Note of some your brotherhood
in some copy printed at Basil: And then is it of as good Authority, as
Master Horns own book is: which is God wot, but course. Whose so euers
note it be, Did. 63. Cu^ long Princeps non aduocatur ad electione^ facienda^,
sed ad co^sensum electioni adhibendam.
a false note it is. For as of a hundred and ten Bisshoppes of Rome, before
this Marinus, scarce the fourth part of them was confirmed of the Emperors,
so the Emperors before this time never created Popes, but only consented to
the creation or election made by the clergy, and confirmed the same, for quiet
sake, and for the preservation of vnyty, as I have before showed. Adrians
decree that the people of Rome should wait no more for the Emperors
confirmation, was no defraudinge of themperours right, as you untruly report,
but a renewing of the old liberties and privileges dew to the Church by the
order of Canons and Councels, and the which never came to the Emperors, but
by the Popes own grauntes and decrees (namelye of Adrian the first and Leo.3.
as has before appeared) and therefore by them again reuocable without iniurye
done to the Prince, when the weal of the Church so required. As it was at
this time, the French Emperors busyed with wars against the Sarracens, and
not so careful of the Ecclesiastical peace (upon respect whereof that
Confirmation of the Pope was granted them) as were their predecessors. Which
negligence so increased, that in few years after as we shall anon see, they
not only left of the protection of the Sea Apostolic, but lost also the
Empire, Cusanus lib. 3. c. 3.
it being transferred to the Germains in Otho the first, whom also some
Germayne writers (namelye Cusanus) do account for the first Emperor of the
Weste, after the decay and breach of the East Empire.

M. Horn. The.107. Division. Fol. 67. b.
The next Pope Stephen had an obscure time, saving that Charles therein called
a Council at Collen, and after him Arnulphus the Emperor, other two: the one
at Moguntia, the other at Triburum.

The.13. Chapter: Of the last Emperors of Charlemaynes race, and of the Popes
of Rome of that age.
Stapleton.
HEre follow two Councils under Arnulphus the Emperor, the one at Moguntia the
other at Triburum. But what? Is there in that Councels nothing for you M.
Horn? Why? There is in the Council of Moguntia a whole Chapter entitled: Quid
sit proprie ministerium Regis. What is properly the office of a king. And in a
Chapter so specially debating of your matter in hand, could you find nothing
that made for you? Cap. 3. vide Tom. 2. Council. pa. gin. 780.
Then let us see whether there be any thing for us. The Council in that
Chapter says. The office of a king specially is, to govern the people of
God, and to rule with equity and Justice, and to provide that peace and
concord may be kept. And how? In ecclesiastical matters? We shall hear. For
(says the Council) he ought before all things to be a defender of the
Churches (I thought the Council would have said, Supreme Governor) and of the
servants of God, of widows, and Orphans, And so forth. Lo. M. Horn. The
office of the prince is to defend the Church of God, not to govern it, not to
alter and change the Religion, not to make Church laws etc. In all this
chapter look when you will, you shall not find one word for the Princes
supreme Government, or any manner of Government at al in matters
ecclesiastical. And yet this being as you say in the beginning of this book,
A principal part of the Princes Royal power, Fol. 3. b.
the Council of purpose treating in this Chapter only of the princes office and
power, it is more then maruayl that the matter should in such deep silence so
be wrapped up, that no word or half word thereof could appear. Verily in
the next chapter folowinge it is commanded and decreed, Cap. 4.
that the Churches and things to them belonging should apperteyn to bishops:
without any word of the Princes supreme Government in things of the Church.

M. Horn. The.108. Division. Fol. 67. b.
Of these Popes and those that follovved, as Formosus, Stephanus, Romanus,
Benedictus, Leo, Christophorus, Sergius, and a great company more, the
Historians give but an homely testimony, and Nauclerus says, that to satisfy
their voluptuous lusts, they did maliciously malice one another, as most cruel
Tyrants, and he added this reason. Cum non extarent qui eorum vitia
coercerent, because there was none to correct and chasten them for their evil
doings. For so long as the Princes exercised their (351) The.351. untruth.
slanderously surmised, but not able by any good Author to be proved.
authority in ouerseing carefully the Church matters, and the mynisters, so
well the Popes, as other Bishops, there grevve no such intolerable
disorders, neither were there such mo^sters (for so Nauclerus, terms these
Popes) that continued any space: But were by the Princes authority
suppressed, and therefore Nauclerus cites out of Platina, and affirms it to
be true, that the cause of these monstrous Rebels in the Church was: Quod
Resp. ignauos and desides principes habeat. Because the common wealth had
improfitable and slothful Princes. Thus these vvriters burdeine and charge
the Princes with the disorders and enormities in Christ's Church, wherein
they do them wrong, if they thought not, that it apperteined to the Princely
auritie to This we grant: But this comes nothing nere to the purpose, and
scope prefixed.
ouersee, care, and provide for the good order of Christ's Church: and to
redress, punish, and remove the inordinate euilles therein.

Stapleton.
M. Horn now russheth in with a bedroll of certain naughty popes, down from
Formosus to John the.13. Among whom I marueyl why you reckon Benedictus, Gener.
31. page 72.
of whom Nauclerus writes thus. Huius Benedicti laus est, quod intam
corruptis moribus grauiter and constanter vitam duxisse feratur. The
commendation of this Benedictus is, that in so corrupt manners of men, he is
said to have lived with gravity and Constancy. And namely for his great
humanity and clemency he was chosen. But much more I merueyle that among so
many badde you speak never a word of the good, namely of Anastasius of whom
it is written. Nihil habuit quo reprehendi posset. Page 74.
He was a man that could be charged with nothing. Page 74.
of Leo the.6. which nihil tyrannicum prae se tulit, rei diuinae consulens,
showed no tyranny in his behauyour, attending upon Gods service. Of Steven the
7. whose life was full of gentleness and Religion. Page 80. Ibidem. Page 85.
Of Leo.7. and Steven the.8. both commended Popes. Of Martyn the.3. who
followed also the gentle demeanor of Steven. Of Agapetus who is written to have been vir innocens and Reip. Christianae feruens amator, Saxo gra^. lib. 9.
An innocent man and a fervent tenderer of the Christian common wealth. Of whom
also the king of Denmark received the faith. All these good and virtuous Popes
in great affliction of wicked persons in those days (for lack in deed of
Justice in good Emperors) lived, and ruled the Church between this Formosus and
John the.13. or.12. more then twenty years. But. M. Horn like a foul sow
that nouseleth in the donghil and cares not for the fair flowers in the
garden, nouseleth him self among the evil bisshops, and can not abide to
speak one poor word for the good. And therefore as Me^mius objected to Cato
his nights Dronckennesse, for whom Cicero answers, why tellest thou not also
of his days dycing? he being in deed all the day in the affairs of the
Common wealth, so for the bedrol of your evil Popes Formosus, Plutarchus in
Catone Vticensi.
and the rest, I ask you whi you tell us not also of Anastasius, of Leo the.6.
and.7. of Steuyn the.7. and.8. of Martyn the.3. and of Agapetus, but that you
had rather be Me^mius the^ Cicero, rather a rash co^ptroller the^ a discrete
reporter?

M. Horn. The.109. Division. page 68. a.
Yea, Sabellicus so vvondereth at these tragical examples of the Bishops of
this time, and their horrible oblivion of Godly Religion, that he (.352.)
The.352. untruth: Sabellicus falsified, as shall appear.
ascribes the good and godly moderation that was in the Bishops, and the
dutiful execution of their office, from Charles the great, til the end of the
French Empire, which was an whole age: to be not so much of them selves,
and their own good vvilles, as of the awe and fear they had of the Princes,
kings, and Emperors, who were their guardians. And therefore concludes,
that it may be truly said, that this was the calamity of France, Italy, and
of the Church of Rome: Quod in ea gente desitum esset imperari: because there
was (.353.) The.353. untruth. False translation.
no king nor Emperor to bear rule, (354.) The.354. untruth. Sab. means no
such thing.
meaning that although there were kings and Emperors, yea^ did they not
execute their Princely office and authority, in ouerseing, correcting and
reforminge the Church matters, and her mynisters, and therefore the state was
miserable. In this confusion were all things, but especially in the Church of
Rome, till God stirred up the wise and mighty Prince Otho the first, whose
zeal, stoutnes and travail in reforming Religion and the disordred Church,
no tongue is able to express says Nauclerus.

Stapleton.
You make Sabellicus to say a great deal more the^ ever he said, or intended
to say. For he does not certaynely ascribe any such cause, as you pretend, but
only he says. No^ immerito quis suspicaretur. A man may and not without a
cause suspecte. But what M. Horn? That Popes kept evil rule, and were given
to al lewdenesse, because the Emperors did not ouersee them? So you would
have folk to think, Sabell. Aenead. 9. lib. 1.
and therefore you make Sabellicus to conclude, that this was the calamyte of
France, Italy and of the Church of Rome quod in ea ge^te desitum esset
imperari, because there was no king nor Emperor to bear rule. But false
translation makes no proof. Know you not M. Horn, what In ea gente, does
signify in english? Or if we may not find fault with your grammar, why
slacked your honesty so far, as to leave the english thereof quyte out? What,
was there a pad in the straw? Sabellicus then says, the cause of all that
calamyte was, because there was no king nor Emperor to bear rule, in ea
gente, in that stock or line of Charles the great, whose posterity had
hitherto lineally reigned, down to Arnulphus the last mentioned Emperor, and
the last in deed (by the opinion of most historians) of Charles his lineal
desce^t. After whom in deed the Church was in great trouble and disorder, for
the space of.50. or.60. years. But how? Did the evil Popes cause that
disorder? So would M. Horn following herein the steps of baudy Bale, that we
should think. But as I have noted before, in the compass of that.50. years,
there were diverse good, and virtuous Popes, ruling the Church more then twenty
of those.50. years. And the cause of all that disorder was not the only evil
life of certain Popes, but much more, the licentious lewdenesse of the
Italians, and especially the Romans at that time, who in deed for lack of
Justice on the Emperors parts (which is the thing that Sabellicus
co^plaineth of) lived enormously and lice^tiously, maki^g Kings among
themselves, and not only oppressing one an other, but also most vily and
cruelly handlinge their bisshoppes being good and virtuous. Of whom Stephen
the.8. a Pope of much holiness at that very time, Naucler. generat. 32. pa. 85.
Martinus Pol.
was of his Cytyzens so shamefully mangled and disfigured, that he was feign of
a long time for very shame to keep within doors, and so lived three years in
great vexation and trouble. The cause of all this trouble in the Church at
this time, if you list shortly to know (gentle Readers) Sabellicus agreing
herein with the other historians will clearly tell you. He says. Quantu^
Francorum pietate etc. Look how much Rome and all Italy breathed (as it
were) from alonge continuance of miseries, Aenead. ^. lib. 1.
by the godlynes and bountifulnes of the French Princes (Charles and his
issewe) one whole age (almost a.100. years) so much fell it back again in to
all kind of calamytie, by the space of almost.60. years through civil
Sedition. This calamyty began, from the last year of Adrian the.3. and ended
in the time of John the.12. And will you see whereof sprange this calamytie? M.
Horn imagines, it was because the Princes did not practice their
Ecclesiastical government over Popes. But Sabellicus a better historian then
M. Horn, adds immediately upon his former words, this Cause. ( Ex qua
iniuria videtur mihi orta ta^ta reru^ mutatio, quanta in humanis rebus facta
est)
Enimuero, praeter Normannos etc. Verily beside the Normans which wasted
France (of which outrage, that great change of things then made in the
world, seems to me to have sprounge) the Hunnes also people of Scythia, being
bold upon the troubles of France, coming down into Slauony, did conquer the
lands of Gepides and Auari, people then in those quarters so called. The
ouerru^ning the^ of foreign nations, and the Civil Seditions through out all
Italy caused this great calamyty that the historyans of this time complain so
much of. Which the more increased, for that the Emperors of that time,
Arnulphus, Conradus, Henry the first, yea and Otho him self until the later
end of his Empire, partly would not, partly could not repress the tyrants in
Italy, and other where.

In all which hurley burleys, In ta^ corruptis moribus Nauclerus generat. 32.
vbique Esai. 24.
in all which breaches of good order, licentiousnes of life, and corruption of
the world, if the heads also them selves, the chief bishops, sometimes fell
to disorder and lewdenesse of life, yt is the less to be maruayled of him that
will consider the course of Gods providence in this world, who suffers for
the sins of the people, vt sicut populus, sic sit and sacerdos. That like as
the people, so should also the Priest be: who says also in like enormities of
the world: Osc. 4.
Dabo pueros principes eorum. Esaiae 3. Et effaeminati dominabuntur eis. 2.
Reg. 24
I will give them children for their Princes, meaning not only children in
age, but children in wisdom, children in strength, and children in virtue. Of
which also expressly we read, that the wrath of God wexed hot against
Israel, and stirred up David to say to Ioab. Go and number Israel and Judah.
Of the which great vanity and oversight of that King, the plague fell upon
the people, and not upon the King. So God plagueth the wickedness of subjects
with the sins of their Rulers, and gives oftentimes to a froward flock, a
cursed shepherd. This consideration of Gods providence in that corrupt time
(not of corrupt faith (as you babble) but of corrupt manners) had more becommed a
man of your vocation, M. Horn, and a Divine, then such false and lewd
surmises as you have uttered. Which you could never so have cloked, if you had
opened the whole history and circumstaunces of the case to your Readers. But
this you will never do, say we what we will. Your ragged relligion must be
patched up with such broken cloutes of imperfecte narrations.

M. Horn. The.110. Division. page 68. a.
At this time was John.13. Pope, a man replete and laden with all
disshonestie and villainy, against (.355.) The:355. untruth. For these parties
were not sent to Otho against Pope John, but from him, and for him.
whom two of the chiefest amongst the Clergy (the one was a Cardinal
says Luithprandus, the other, master of the Rolls) made complaint unto
Ottho, most humbly beseching him, to have some compassion on the Church,
which if it were not spedilie reformed, must needs come to utter decaie.
After whom came the Bisshoppe of Millaine, and so one after an other, a great
many more, making the same suite unto Ottho: who being moved of his own
zeal to Gods glory, but now enflamed by the lamentable supplications of
these Bisshoppes. Rex pijssimus, says Luithprandus; Non quae sua sunt, sed
quae Jesus Christi cogitans: The most Relligious King having careful
cogitations, not for his own things, but for Jesus Christ's matters, addressed
him self with all convenient speed into Italy, to refourme Rome from
whence all the mischief sprang. When the Pope understood of his coming, he
prepared to receive him in most honorable wise, and with such humility
behaved him self toward the Emperor, and shevved such fair face of
repentance, that the well meaning Emperor, thought he had meant as he
pretended, and swore the Pope to obedience and loyalty against Berengarius
and Adalbertus, as Luithprandus vvriteth, and so returned into his country.
This Luithprandus is the more to be credited, for that he was living a famous
writer, and (.356.) The.356. Untruth: This Luithprand* was no Cardinal.
Luithpr. untruth.
Deacon Cardinal, even in the same time. The Pope immediately against both Oath
and honesty (.357.) The.357. his Author over reached.
practiced with Adalbertus, to depose this godly Emperor, and promised him
by Oath his aid. The reason or cause why John the Pope should hate this most
godly Emperor, who had delivered him out of the hands of Adelbert his
ennemie, and wherefore the Devil should hate God his creatoure, seems not
to be unlike. For the Emperor, as we have had good experience, understands
things pertaining to God, he works, he loves them, he mainteineth with maine
and might the Ecclesiastical and Temporal matters, he decketh them with
manners, and amendeth them by laws: but John the Pope is against all these
things. The Emperor seeks by diverse vvayes to reconcile this Pope, and to
bring him from his filthy life, to some honesty, and regard of his office.
When by no persuasions he can win him, he determines to depose him, and
(.358.) The.358. Untruth. That counsel was not called to depose him.
for that purpose, he calls a Council of the Bisshoppes of Italy, to the
end he may seek the refourmation, which he minds, and savv to be overmuch
nedeful by their advise.

Pope John, (.359.) The.359. untruth. He was run away before the Synod was
any thing tovvard*
seeing him self to be tried by a Synod, runs away, when all the people
savv their Pope was run away from them, they swore fidelity to
The Emperor, promising by their Oaths, that they would never hereafter elect or
make any Pope without the consent of the Emperor. Within three days after,
there was a great assembly in S. Peter's Church at the requests of the
Bisshops and people: In which Council sat the Emperor, with many
Archebisshoppes and others: to whom the godly Emperor propou^deth the cause of
their assemble, exhorts the^ to do al things with upright judgment: and the
Bisshops, deaco^s, Clergy, and all the people make solemn protestation, and
obtestat^on of their just and upright dealing in the cause propounded. And
because the chief matter touched the Pope that was run away: the holy
Synod said, if it seem so good to the godly Emperor, let letters be sent to
the Pope, and cite him to come and purge him self. The letters were directed
in this form: Otho by Gods grace Emperor, with the Archebisshops of
Liguria, Tuscia, Saxonia, and France, send greeting in the Lord to John the
Pope: We coming to Rome for our Service to God, and enquiring the cause of
your absence from your Church, were informed by the Bisshops, Cardinales,
Priests, Deacons, and the whole people, of such shameful doings by you, as we
are asshamed to rehearse: whereof these are part they charge you with:
The.360. untruth. A part of the sentence leaft out.
Murder, perjury, sacrilege, incest with twain of your own sisters: that in
your banquetes (which is horrible to be rehearsed) ye drink wine in the love
of the Devil: in your play at dice, you crave the help of Jupiter, Venus,
and other Devils: The.361. untruth. These words in the midst nipped quite
of. To vvho^^ the election of your Bishop belongs.
wherefore we pray you to repaier unto us your self. To this, the Pope
vvriteth this answer. I hear say ye will make an other Pope, which if ye
attempt, I excommunicate you all, that ye may have no license or power to
order any, etc. To this short answer the Emperor, with the Synod replieth,
telling him that they had written, to let him understand of the crimes
vvherevvith he was charged, and that he had sent them such an Such si M.
Horns answer to M. Fecke^ham in a great part
answer as rather became the folly of a child, then the gravity of a
Bishop: as for the power of bind^ng and losing, they say, he ones had as
Judas had, to whom it was said: Quaecunque ligaueritis super terram. etc.
What so ever ye bind on earth, shall be bound in Heaven, etc. But now he has
no more power against the Emperor and the Synod, The.362. untruth.
Luithpra^dus shows no such thing.
then Judas had when he went about to betraie Christ his Master.

These letters were sent unto him by two Cardinals, who returned, not
finding him: and therefore the Synod proceeds to his deposition: They beseech
the Emperor to remove Monstrum illud, that Monster, and to place some worthy
bishop in his room. Tune Imperator, placet inquit, quod dicitis: Your request
pleases me, says the Emperor (360.). The Clergy and the people (says
Nauclerus) does make humble supplication unto the Emperor, to provide for them
a worthy Bishop: to whom the Emperor answers: Choose you your selves
one, (361.) whom, having God before your eyes, ye may judge worthy, and I will
confirm him: The Emperor had no sooner spoken this (says Luithprandus) than
they all with one assent named Leo: The Emperor gave his consent: Et Ottho
Imperator, Leonem creat Pontificem, and Ottho the Emperor created Leo Pope
(as Sabellicus and Platina says) Here Luithprand, tell^th at large, how
after this creation of Leo, the Emperor (.362.) dissolved the Synod, and
what mischief the Monstrous Pope John vv^ought afterward. For by his
friends in Rome, Pope Leo was driven away. And after this Monster was dead,
the Romans elected Benedictus in his place, and requires the Emperor who
was than at Spolet, to confirm him: the Emperor vvoulde not, but compelled
them to receive Leo again. And here the Emperor summoned again a nevve
Synod wherein he (.363.) The.363. untruth pregnant. For neither the Emperor
deposed Benedictus, but Pope Leo him self, neither does Platina, Nauclere or
Sabell: make any mention of Synod called by the emperor thereaboute. Did. 63.
satte him self, for the Canonical deposition of Benedictus. notvvithstanding
this, says Nauclerus, Leo being weary of the inconstancy of the Romans, did
constitute by their consent in the Synod holden at Rome, that the whole
authority of chosing the Bishop, should remain in the Emperor, at it is
rehearsed in the decrees in these words: Being in the Synod at Rome in the
Church of the holy Savior: like as Adrianus Bishop of Rome granted to
Charles the great, the dignity of patricianship, the ordering of the
Apostolical sea, and the inuesturing of Bishops; So I also Leo Bishop of Rome,
servant of Gods servants, with the consent of all the Clergy and people
of Rome, do constitute, confirm, and corroborate, and by our Apostolical
authority, we do grant and give unto the Lord Ottho, the first King of
Dutchme^, and to his successors in this kingdom of Italy for ever, the
authority to elect after us, and to ordeine the Bishop of (.364.) The.364.
untruth. Su^mae soedis Apostolicae. Of the highest Apostolic See: leeft out.
Rome: and so Archbisshops, and Bisshops, that they receive of him, as they
ought the inuesturing and consecration (.365.) excepting those, who^ the
Emperor has granted to the popes and Archebisshops: The.365. untruth. vnde
debe^t: from whence it appertains, left out:
And that no man hereafter of what dignity or Relligio^ so ever, have power to
elect one, to the dignity of Co^sules blood, or to be bishop of the (.366.)
The.366. untruth. Su^mae: the highest. lef out again.
Apostolic See, or to make any other bishop, without The Emperors consent.
And if any be chosen bishop without he be co^me^ded, and invested by the King,
that in no wise he be consecrated, under pain of excommunication. As
Sabellicus notes this for a renowned matter, that the right of creatinge the
Pope, was now restored to the Emperial dignity: even so Nauclerus affirms,
this godly Imperour Otho, to be borne in totius Ecclesiae consolatione^, for
the consolation of the whole Church.

The.14. Chapter: Of Otho the first, Emperor: Of John the.12. and Leo the.8.
Popes of Romae.
Stapleton.
THis declaration runs all upon the deposition of the naughtye Pope John
the.13. or as most men call him, the.12. in a synod at Rome the Emperor Otho
being then present. But unless M. Horn can show, that this Emperor took him
self for supreme head in all causes ecclesiastical and temporal, and
utterly renownced all the Popes supreamacye, the case standing that this Pope
were a most wicked man (which we freely confess) and most unworthy of that
see, yet is M. Horn far of from iustifiing the matter. Wherein eue^ by his
own author and story, he should have been utterly overthrown, if he had made
thereof a true and a faithful report: which ye shall now hear, by us, and
that by his own chronographer, so that ye shall have good cause to be astonished
to see the most shameful and impudente dealing of this man. First then he
begins with a notoriouse lie. For neither this Cardinal, whom Luithprandus
calls Iohannem, nor the Master of the rolls, whom he calls Aronem, Vide
Naucleru^ generat. 33. page 89. and seque^t. Summus Pontifex et vniuersalis
papa. Luithpra^dus lib. 6. reru^ per Europam gestarum cap. 6. Naucler. generat.
32. page 85 Vide Trithemium. in scrip. and Chronograph. Pantaleonis.

Luithpra^di Ticine^sis Ecclesiae Leuitae re^um ab Europae Imperator. gestaru^
historiae liber 1. etc.


nor the Bishop of Millain and others here named were sent to complain upon
Pope John, to Otho: but sent to him by John the Pope him self, which John, his
author Luithprandus calls the high Bishop and the universal Pope, who most
humbly beseacheth him, that he would vouchsaufe for the love of God, and the
holy Apostle Petre and Paul, as he would wish them to forgive him his
sins, to deliver him and the Church of Rome to him committed, from the
tyranny of Berengarius and Adelbertus. Wheruppon the emperor gathered an army
and coming to Italy with all speed, expulsed from the Kingdom of Italy the
said tyrants: so, that yt seamed euidente that he was aided and assisted by
the most holy Apostles Peter and Paul, and (which is to be noted) he was
afterward anointed and crowned Emperor of the said John though so vicyous a
man, and swore also obedience unto him, as Nauclerus writes. Farther he did
not only restore him, those things whereof he was spoiled, but honored him also
with great rewards, as well in gold and silver, as in precious stones. And he
took an oath of the Pope upon the most precious body of S. Peter, that he should
never aid or assist the said Bere^garius and Adelbertus. M. Horn here
nedelesse enforces the credit of his author, as then living, yea and anaunceth
him to be a famous writer and a Deaco^ Cardinal, whereas he was, as far as my
book shows, and as far as Trithemius, and Pantaleon report of him, no
Deaco^ Cardinal at Rome, but a deaco^ of the church of Ticinu^, otherwise
called Pauia in Italy: Unless perchance he was such a Cardinal as the
Cardinals are among the pety canons of Poules in London. With like truth ye say
M. Horn, ij. lines after, that the pope practiced with Adelbertus, to depose
the Emperor, but your author speaks not so much, but only that the Pope
promised the foresayed Adelbertus to help him against the Emperors power.
Affirmans se illu^ co^tra imperatoris potentia^ adiuturum. Dict. ca. 6.
Then tell ye, in a smaller and distinct letter, truly enough, but altogether
confusely, of John's doings, writing out of your author, as we have good
experience, but who were that we, ye show not, nor to whom the words were
spoken.

Ye say, that the Emperor called a Council in Italy to depose him, that your
author says not, M. Horns confuse vvriti^g.
but that, after three days, the emperor had been at Rome, the pope and
Adelbertus being fled from thence, there was a great assembly in S. Peter's
Church, rogantibus tam Romany episcopis quam plebe, at the desire as well of
the Italian bishops as of the people: In the which council were present
beside the Bishops many noble men. And the Pope ran not away, because of this
Council (as you untruly report) but iij. days after that he was fled with
Adelbertus, the Counsel was called: and that not to depose him, but to call him
to his answer: as appears by the Emperors own oration. Who after that
Benedictus had rehearsed diverse of these horrible owtragies that ye specify:
the emperor and the council sent for him to purge him self. In the which
letters sent by the Emperor ye dissemble many things and dismember them, Cap.
9. Quod nos Ecclesiae vestrae vestrique defensores etc.
as the title of the^perours letters which was: Summo Pontifici and universally
papae Iohanni Otho. etc. To the high Bishop and the universal Pope, our Lord
John, Otho, and so forth. And by and by. We asked the cause of your absence,
and why ye would not see us, your, and your Churches defensour. And again.
Oramus itaque paternitatem vestram obnixe venire atque hijs omnibus vos purgare
non dissimuletis. Si forte vim temerariae multitudinis formidatis, iuramento
vobis affirmamus nihil fieri praeter Sanctoru^ Canonum sanctionem. We most
earnestly pray your fatherhode, that ye do not forslow to come and to purge
your self. If ye fear any violence of the rude and rash people, we promise
you upon our Oath, that nothing shall be done contrary to the Decrees of the
holy Canons. After this, ye rehearse the Popes short answer, which yet as
short as it is, does wonderfully trouble you, and ye dare not fully recite it.
I hea say (says this John) ye will make an other Pope, which if ye attempt, I
excommunicate you all, that ye may have no license or power to order any, or to
say Mass.

It is true that ye say afterward, that the Council desired the Emperor,
that the said John might be removed, and that the Emperor so answered. Yet ye
leave out part of his answer. And that is: and that some other might be found
who should rule the holy and universal See. How and in what sort the
Emperor had to do with the Popes deposition. Cap. 11.
Neither did they desire of the Emperor any thing else, but his assistance in
the remoui^g of him. Neither proprely to speak, otherwise then by co^senting
and assisting, did The Emperor create pope Leo. As appears by your author,
saying: that al said with one voice, Leone^ nobis in pastore^ eligimus, vt sit
summus and vniuersalis Papa Romanae ecclesiae. We do elect Leo to be our
pastor, and the high and universal Pope of the Roman Church, and do refuse
John the renegate for his wicked behavior. The which thing being thryse by
all cried owte, he was carried to the palace of Lateran: Annuente imperatore
with themperours consent, and the^ to S. Peter's Church, to be consecrated: and
the^ they swore they would be faithful, unto him. And in this election the
people also had their consent as well as the Emperor. And so can ye not make
this election to be a platte form, for your elections now in England.
Spera^s imperator cu^ paucis se Romae degere posse, ne consumeretur populus
Romanus ob multitudine^ exercitus, multis vt redire^t lice^tiam dedit. Quumque
hoc Johannes qui deietus est, papa cognosceret etc.


Your next untruth in this narration is, that ye say, that Luithprandus
shows, how the Emperor dissolved the Council. For he speaks no word of
the dissoluing of the council, but that he gave license to many of his
soldiers to depart: upon which occasion Pope John makes a new hurly burley.
And Benedictus of whom ye speak, that was set up in John's place, after
John's death by the Romans was thrust owte and Leo restored again. The which
Benedictus was not deposed by the emperor, Cap. 11.
Nauclere generat. 33. page 90. Platina in Bened. 5. and in Leone. 8.

Benedictu^ sanctae et Apostolicae sedis Romanae inuasore^ omni Pontificatus
and presbiteratus iure priuamus: ob elaecmosinam vero Domini imperatoris etc.
cuius opera in sede^ debitam restituti sumus, diaconatus eum ordine^ habere
permittimus, and non iam Romae sed in exilium destinanamus.

Luithpra^. Cap 11.


in the counsel ye speak of: Neyhter did the Emperor sommon any Council for
his depositio^, but only by fine force constrained the Romans to admit Leo,
and to swear unto him, as both Nauclere and Platina do write, of whom you take
your matter: But it was the Pope him self, who gave sentence against him,
deposed him and deprived him as well from his usurped papacy, as from all
bishoplie and priestly dignity: yea and banished him also from Rome. Yet at the
Emperors request, who effusis lachrymis rogauit Synodu^, with tears requested
the Synod for some mercy for him: the pope suffered him to remain in the
order of a deacon, but yet to live in banishment, not at Rome. And this
declaration, which ye have so slyly and craftily passed over, is a most evident
argument against your false assertion in this your book, yea and shows that
it is not the Emperor, as ye imagi^, but the clergy and the pope chiefly that
has the supreme authority in the deposing of bishops.

Whereas ye say further, that this Leo with his Synod, gave to Otho the
creation of the Popes, Vide Did. 63. In Synodo.
and the consecration of Archebishops and Bishops: you belie the Decree. For
it grants not to the Emperor the whole creation, and consecration, but only
the inuesturing of bishops: and that the popes election should not be taken as
effectual with out themperours consent. Therefore in the midst of your
allegation, you nippe quite of after the word, Consecration, vnde debent: From
whence they ought: whereby is declared that as the inuesturing and confirming
is granted to the Emperor, so the Consecration is referred to that order
according to which before by the Canons it ought to be. And therefore the
Decree at the end says: If any be chosen Bishop of the Clergy and the
people, except he be commended and invested by the King of Italy, let him not
be consecrated. By which words it is evident, that both the choice and the
Consecration or ordering of Bishops and Archebishops is reserved to the Clergy
and people. But thereto is required the commendation, inuesturing, and
confirmation of the Emperor: which, as I have before showed at large,
impaireth no jot the Popes Primacie, but rather confirms it: as a thing due
to the Emperor rather, by the gift and confirmation Apostolical, then
otherwise: and due unto him for order and quietness sake, not as any part of
his Princely power.

M. Horn The.111. Division. page 70. a.
When this godlyPrince was dead, vvhilest his son Ottho.2. was busied in
the vvarres against the Saraze^s: and after him his Son Ottho.3. was yet in
nonage, the Popes began to wax so evil, and the state of Christ's Church to
decaie as much as ever it did before: So dangerous a matter it is, to want
godly Princes to govern Gods Church, and to ouersee the Ministers thereof.

Stapleton.
It is well you call Otho the first a godly prince. For then I trust all that
we have so largely showed concerning his obedience to the Sea of Rome, yea to
that Pope John, so naughty a man as (thanked be God) never in our remembrance
the like by many parts lived, you will M. Horn allow for good and godly.
Which if you do, we shall soon be at a point touching this matter between you
and M. Fekenham: and will (I hope) recante and subscribe your self. M. Jewel
perhaps will bear you company. All that you add of the evil popes in the time
of Otho the.2. and in the noneage of Otho.3. is but a slanderous lie. For as
there were in that time some evil popes, Nauclerus generat. 33.
so were there also right good, as Donus the.2. and Benedictus.7. who ruled the
Church.8. years. And the other were not so badde as M. Horn makes them, but
by the reason of factions were much molested, and traitorously used, not for
want of the princes government in causes ecclesiastical, but for lack in
deed of the Princes Justice in orders temporal. For to see external Justice
ministered is a matter temporal, not ecclesiastical. Which for the reasons by
M. Horn alleged ceased in deed for a time in Italy, the Emperors being
allwaies in manner absent. So necessary it was to reduce that Country to
several Signories, as it now lives in, and has these many years in great
quiet lived.

M. Horn The.112. Division. page 70. b.
About this time Hugh Capet the French king, looked better to his Clergy in
France, and calling a Counsel at Rhemes of all the Prelates of France,
(.367.) The 367. untruth. The king deposed him not, but the Council: and
Arnulphus was restored by the Pope: and Gilbert deposed again.
deposed Arnulphus, whom Charles had made Bishop there, and made Gilbert the
Philosopher Bishop, whom afterward Otto.3. made Archebishoppe of Rauenna.
After Hugh, Robert his son succeeded, a Prince very well learned, and a
diligent labourer about divine or Church matters, which is the propre part
of a right king, says Sabellicus. When Ottho.3. ( surnamed for his
excellent virtues in that (.368.) The.368. untruth. Slanderous to that age.
vicious age, Mirabilia mundi, the maruailes of the world) herd of the great
misorder in Rome, for the reformation thereof he came into Italy: but or ever he
entered into Rome, Pope John.17. died, and there fell no contention ( says
Nauclerus) in the Popes Election, because the Prince (.369.) The.369. untruth.
False translation. Iussit obtinuitque. He commanded and obtained that his
kynsman should be named Pope. Platina
appointed by his commandment, Bruno to be pronunced Pope, who was called
Gregory.5. So soon as the Emperor departed from Italy, the Romans thrust
out Gregory, and placed one Placentinus, whom they call John.18. The Emperor
hearing hereof, came to Rome, hanged up the Consul, and put out John's eyes, and
restored Gregory into his sea again. I maruail that the historia^s ( says
Platina) do reke^ this John amongst the popes, which undoubtedly was in his
Papacy a thief, and a robber, for he entered not in by the door, as of right he
should have don. For he came in by a faction, corrupting with money and large
gifts Cresce^tius the Co^sul, a most covetous wretch, and no less a^bitious.
VVherby, the sharp judgment of the Emperor, is declared to be but upright
justice. So (370) The.370. untruth. This so that follows not, as it shall
appear.
that Platina maki^g Gregory to be the true Pope, and to have entered in by the
door, of whom he says. Ottonis.3. authoritate po^tifex creatur, he is created
Pope by the^mperors authority, and declaring the other that came in without
the^mperors consent to be a thief and a robber: seems to be of this opinion
(although to (.371.) The.371. Untruth: Platina was no flatterer, but a free
writer.
flatter the Popes vvithall, he durst not so plainly open his mind) that
without the Pope he creat with the Emperors confirmation and authority, he
is but a thief and a robber.

Ne^t unto him, says Nauclerus, was Syluester the second placed, by the
Emperors appointment. (.372.) The.372. Untruth. False translation. Ex
Imperatoris sententia, According to the Emperors will.
Who being a (.373.) The.373. Untruth. Slanderous. Syluester was no Coniurer.
Coniurer, had sold his soul to the Devil for this promotion. Nevertheless
he was, says he, so witty, so learned, and seemed so holy, that he not only
deceived the Emperor that made hi^ Pope, but all the world besides. In which
Otho the Emperor remaining at Rome, did deliberate after what sort, and by
what means he might reform, not only the Empire, but also ha^deling (.374.)
The.374. untruth, Ecclesiastical matters, Naucl. names not:
Ecclesiastical matters how he might reform the Laws of the Church, and bring
the^ into the ancient estate. Such was the careful travel of the Godly
Princes* in governing not only in Temporal, but also in Ecclesiastical
things and causes.

Benedictus the ninth, sold the Papacy to Gregorye the sixth. Syluester the
third, thrust in amongst them by friendship and briberye. To this case was the
Papacy brought now ( says Platina) that only he that was most mighty in
ambition and bribery, obtained this dignity: there was no room for good men.
Henricus the third, surnamed Pius, came to Rome to thrust out these three
monsters, says, Sabellicus, and to bring this to pass in better order, he
calls a Synod, wherein he (.375.) The.375. untruth. Sabellicus falsified, as
shall appear.
deposes these three monstrous beasts, and does create Clement the second.
The which done, he swears the Romans, that they shall never after be
present at the election of any Pope, onles they be (.376.) The.376. untruth.,
Sabellicus says not so.
compelled thereunto by the Emperor. But after the Emperors departure from
the city: Stephan perceiving the people to grudge somvvhat at Clementes
election, despatched him out of the way with a medicine for a Pope. Venenum
illi miscuit, he poisoned him ( says Sabellicus,) and immediatlye after his
death, entruded him self into the Papacy, without consent, either of the
Emperor, people or priest, and called him self Damasus.2. But within a while
he died also. In the meanetime the Romans sent to the Emperor, besechinge
him to appointe them some good man to be their Bishop. who made Bauno Pope,
and was named Leo.9.

The.15. Chapter. of Hugh Capet the French King: Otho. 3. Emperor: and of
Gregory.5. and Siluester.2. Popes.
Stapleton.
AMong all other Popes M. Horn, you could not allege any worse to your
purpose, Plat. in Greg. 5. Volat. lib. 22. Anthrop.
then this Gregory the.5. For if we shall believe Platina, Sabellicus,
Volaterane, Carrion and the other common writers: it is this Gregory that
instituted the.7. Electours in Germany, and the whole order and direction,
with his Oath also, to the Pope.

As touching Arnulphus the Bishop of Rhemes deposed by a Council there called
(as you say) by Hugh Capet the French King, and Gilbert put in his place,
Naucl. generat. 34. page 96.
it is true you say: but you tell not all. For afterward (as Nauclerus
reports) because Arnulphus could not be deposed, without the authority of
the bishop of Rome, M. Gilbert was deposed again, and Arnulphus restored.
Whereupon Gilbert fled to Otho, and was in a certain time after made Bishop
of Raue^na. This is the whole story M. Horn, and this declares the Popes
authority, above your Supreme Governor, Hugh Capet the French King.
Nauclerus Ibidem.


Where you add, that King Robert son to Hugh Capet, was a diligent labourer
about Divine or Church matters, if you had told forth, wherein, as your Author
does, saying: Composuit enim multas prosas and hymnos. For he made many proses
and hymns, to be song in the Church, your tale had been to small purpose:
except to make songs for the Church, do prove a man Supreme Governor in all
Church causes or things. And then you have more supreme governors then one*
not only in England, but in London, yea and in the Court too, I trow. Of John
the.18. and Gregory the.5. we shall say more anon.

But now whether Syluester the.2. were a coniurer or no, to your matter it
makes never a whit, and there is more to be said to the contrary, which
neadelesse we need not now to allege, then ye shall perchance, M. Horn^
inco^stant or ignodealing touching Syluester the.2.
this whole twelve months well answer unto. But I would now feign ask you M.
Horn, who is this Siluester? What was his name before I pray you? Forsooth,
gentle Reader, this Siluester is he, by whose election to be B. of Rhemes, M.
Horn in the last page, would prove the French king to be Supreme head of the
Church: And then to set forth the Kings Supremacy, he was Gilbert the
Philosopher, and now for to depresse the Popes Supremacy, being made Pope him
self, by M. Horns charm, is turned from a Philosopher to a Coniurer. But to
leave al other conjectures, and especially that it is not likely, that he
sold as ye say, his soul to the Devil for that promotion: seeing, that by the
report of your own Author Sabellicus, it is said that he instructed in learning
not only the French king, but the Emperor also, and therefore was in some great
likelihode of preferment, without any Magical art to be practiced for the
same, I say that your self unawarely have answered your self, in calling him
a Philosopher. For being so very few in the West part in those days skilful
in Philosophy and in the Mathematicalles, Siluester was no co^iurer.
Theodorichus de Nyem in lib de priuileg. and Iurib. Imperij. In volum. de
imper. et eccles. potest. page 832. impr. Basil. An. 1566.
if any were such, the common people took him by and by, for a Nigromancer
and a coniurer. And Theodorichus de Nyem, an Author by your self allegead (
Page.83. a) witnesses the same, saying that this Syluester was cunning in
liberal Sciences, and a noble Philosopher and Mathematical. I have seen (says
he) certain of his books most suttill in Philosophy. And for his such
excellent learning, multi Romani ipsum odio habebant, dice^tes, quod Magus
esset, nec non magicam artem exerceret. Many of the Romans hated him, saying
that he was a Coniurer and used witchcraft. Upon such vain rumors you also
call him a Coniurer M. Horn, uttering therein as much good skill, as you do
good will.

But how so ever it be, ye should not by your supreme authority, yet to the
bewraying either of your notable unskillfulness (as not knowing the said
Sluyester, to be the party ye speak of immediatlye before) or of your
notable peruersitie and ill dealing, so suddenly have turned him from a
philosopher into a coniurer. Did. 63. Tibi Domino Iohanni papae, ego rex Otho
etc. In Romae nullu^ placitu^ aut ordinatione^ faciam de omnibus quae ad te,
aut ad Romanos pertinent sine tuo consilio, et quicquid deterra S. Petri ad
nostra^ potestate^ peruenerit tibi reddam, and cuicunque etc.
Wherein yet if ye will strive and wrangle, to prove, that for all this gift,
Otho acknowledged the popes supreme authority, I remitte you M. Horn, and
your reader, to the very said distinction your self allege. Where ye shall
find, that this Otho or his grandfather, Otho the first, did by the usual
oath of themperours ever sythens given, agnise the pope for the supreme head
of the Church. So your own story plainly and fully opened, gives against
you a plain and a full testimony also, as well of your most unhonest and
false dealinge in the handlinge of this story, as of your most false, and yet
most accustomable assertion, that the supremacy of all causes ecclesiastical
remained in themperous and not in the popes. And as for Syluester him self,
how he repented at the end, and what a miraculous token God gave of his good
state, after his death, the learned Reader may see in Genesis 34.
Naucler Aen. 9. lib. 2.
Sabell. and In Syl. Artic. 4. page 114. Naucl. gener. 33. Arnulphu^ Rhemoru^
Pontifice^ synodo episcoporu^ habita ab vrbe deiectu^, in vincula coniecit.
Rhemis Gilbertu^ Philosophu^ posuit episcopum: Romani tamen pontificis edicto,
Arnulphus, reuocato Gilberto restitutus est, etc.
Platina, as I have otherwhere touched it against M. Jewel.

You rehearse here yet a number of popes in the creation or deposition of whom,
the emperor seemed to have somewhat to do. But altogether as we have often
showed, impertinently and otherwise lyingly, and against your self also
directly browght in. And to begin M. Horn even with your first example of
Arnulphus, I pray you, where find you in your author that the king deposed
him? Your author says no such matter, but that, the king did cast him in
prison, being first deposed by a synod of bishops. Yet he made ye will say,
Gilberte the philosopher bishop for him: and afterward Otho the.3. made him
archbishop of Raue^na. Ye might have added and pope to, as your author does,
if ye had meant to deal plainly, and especially that the said Gilbertus by
pope John's authority, was thrust out, and Arnulphus restored again (as you
heard before).

Ye do now partly (as before) belly Platina, and partly gheasse blindly, as
thowghe Platina durst not (to flatter the popes withal) plainly open his mind:
and as thowgh he should be of this mind, Platina in Ioh. 18. Cresceniij Romani
co^sulis pote^tia fretus que^ pecunia corrupissecreditum est: et mox. Miror
ergo historicos Ioanne^ ipsu^ inter po^tifices numerasse, cum viue^te ad huc
po^tifice Gregorio sedem occupasset.
that he that comes into the papacy without the^perours consent is but a
thief, and a robber. Which is as true as before ye made him therefore a
traitor. For Platina gives forth no such mening. But shows two causes why
this John came not in by the door. The one, that he came in by bryberie. The
other, that he usurped the sea being not as yet vaca^t, Gregory whom ye write
of, as yet lyui^g, and being the lawful pope chosen by the voice of the clergy,
and by the consent of the^peror, and all the people of Rome.

After all this ye say, that He^rie the.3. deposed three popes (whom you call three
monstrous bestes, of such a beastly sprite you are) and yet you lie in so
sayi^g. For the^peror by supreme Authorite deposed none. But only for quyetnes
sake (as Sabel. writes) coegit se dignitate abdicare. Forced the^ al to depose
the^ selves. which by force no maruail if he did. But by right neither he nor
any man living could have deposed any pope. They may be induced either by
reason or by force to depose the^ selves. Farther you say, this Emperor swear
the Romans that they should never be present at the popes election, unless
they were compelled by the^peror. It had been well done if ye had told us who
writes so, and withal, by what warrant the emperor could exclud the people from
their consent which hitherto they gave in the chosing of the popes. Sabellicus
your Author, writes of no such co^pulsio^. But that they should not so do,
without his permissio^, Sabel. Aene. 9. li. 2.
and the reason he addeh. Vt dignitas maneret illi inoffensa, cauereturque in
posterum pontificibus. that pope Clement the^ chosen might co^tinewe quietly,
and that also for the quiet of other popes to come he might provide. Al which
he did as a godly defendour, not as a Supreme Governor of the Church. Now if a
man would stand with you altogether and say ye belie Stephanus, and certain
other popes, of such as ye have here named, Vide Hermannum co^tractum in
chronicis.

Lambert. Schasnab. in histor. Germa. Othonem Frising. li. 6. cap. 33.


I think he should not say far from the truth. But yet because ye have some
authors on your side, I will not greatly charge your for this matter. You tell us
in thend of this process, that the Emperor made Bauno pope, and was named
Leo.9. But I tell you now. M. Horn, that the Emperors making was after unmade,
and this Bauno made pope by the Clergy in Rome. For where as this Bauno chosen
first of the emperor, came out of Germany to Rome, al in his Pontificalibus as
already pope, Hugo that famous and learned Abbat of Cluniacu^, and Hildebra^d
(who after was pope Gregory.7.) met him in the way and showed him: that
the^peror had no right to choose the pope, that the same right belonged to the
Clergy and City of Rome, that he should lay down his bishoply attire, Sabell.
Aened. 9. lib. 2. Naucler. gener. 35. page 120. Platina in Leo.9.
come to Rome as a private man, and then if he were thought mete, by the
lawful consent of the clergy and city, to be chosen. Their counsel he
followed, openly detestinge his former rashness, that at the Emperors only
choice he had taken upon him that high office. Thus afterward in Rome he was
lawfully chosen, there he was made pope, and named Leo.9. not by the Emperor
only, as M. Horn only tells. And this al historians in manner do witness.

M. Horn. The.113. Division. Fol. 71. b.
After this Leo, whom Hildebrand rid out of the way, says Benno
Cardinalis, was Victor the second made Pope, by the Emperors authority or
privilege. Shortly after, this Godly Emperor died being greatly praised,
Platina Ab. Vrspu.
and surnamed, Pius Henricus, for his dealing in the reformation of Church
matters. This Emperor had called two Councels, the one at Co^stance, wherein
he was himself present, and after that another at Moguntia, wherein both the
Emperor and the Pope, sat in Synod. This Pope says Nauclerns, came into
Germany about the Church matters, and ordered al things therein (says Abbas
Vrspur.) by the advice and counsel of themperor and other seculer Princes,
and the bishops. And as this Emperor had yet this interest in the Councel^,
and in the creation of the Pope himself, so had he the placing and displacing,
allowing and disallovving, in other spiritual promotions, as at large
appears in Naucler. Stephen.9. was chosen Pope after that Victor had dronken
of (.377.) The.377. untruth. Slanderous: Sabell^c.
Hildebrands cup. But this Sthphen lived not long: for says Benno If any other
than Hildebrand were chosen Pope, Gerardus Brazutus, Hildebrands familiar
friend would soon dispatche hi^ out of the way with poison. Alexander.2. was
chosen without the^perors authority or knowledge, with whose election the
whole Clergy of Lo^bardy was much offended, and refused to owe unto hi^ any
obedience, beseching the^peror that he would give them license to chose one of
their own: persuading him (378) The 378. untruth. they add By the law of
Nicolas the last pope before: which you untruly have left out
that there ought none to be elect without the consent of the king of Italy.
After they had license, they chose Cadolus the bishop of Parma, vvho^ all the
Clergy of Lo^bardy obeyed as their lauful Pope. The Cardinals (says Be^no)
knowing well Hildebra^ds ambition, did win with much suit the^perors favor and
aid to their new elected Pope Cadolus: the which did so depely perce the ha^t
of Hildebra^d, that he becam a deadly enemy to the^peror for ever after
contrary to the faithful duty that he had sworn unto hi^. Hard hold there was
betwixt these two (.379.) The.379. untruth. For one of them was not pope.
Popes so well with strokes as with words: they both gathered great armies,
and with their armies came into the field in their own persons, and fought
two cruel and bloody battles, and so ruled the (380) The.380. untruth.
Slanderous against the whole Church of that age.
Schismatical Church with Paul's (word, Peter's keys, being fast locked from
the^ both in Christ's Church: til the^peror sent Otto the Archebisshop of
Collein, giving him full authority, as he should see cause, to set in order the
Church matters. VVha^ Otto came to Rome with this large commission, he did
sharply reprove Alexander at the first, Platina.
Because he had taken upon him the Papacy without the^perours commandment,
and contrary to that order, which the Law it self, and the long custom also
has prescribed. Whose words Nauclerus tells thus: How comes this to
pass (says he) my brother Alexander, that contrary to the manner of old time
hitherto observed, and against the law prescribed to the Romain bishops many
years ago, thou have taken upon thee the Romain Papacy without the
commandment of the King, and my Lord Henry: and so beginning from Charles the
great, he names many Princes, by whose authority the Popes were either
chosen, confirmed, or had their election ratified: and when Le was going
forvvard in his oration, Hildebrand Tharchdeaco^ takes the tale (.381.)
The.381. untruth Slanderous, as shall appear.
out of his mouth, saying in great heat: O Archbisshop Otto, themperors and
Kings, had never any right at al, or rule in the election of the Romain
Bisshops. Tharchbisshop gave place to Master Archedeaco^ (.382.) The: 382.
untruth. For much more was said, before he gave place.
by and by: For Hildebrand knevv well enough, says (.383.) The.383. untruth.
Sabell. falsified, as shall appear. Sabellicus
Sabellicus, that Otto would relent easily, and agree with him. In such sort
also have other godly Princes been (.384.) The.384. untruth. mere slau^derous.
beguyled, trusting over much popish Prelates with their embassages. VVihin a
while after when the emperor heard of these doings, he sent straight to Pope
Alexander, to gather together the Prelates, promising that he himself would
come to the council to (.385.) The.385. untruth. Sabellicus falsified, as shall
appear.
set an order in the Church matters, that al things might be don in his own
presence, who used Alexander very ge^tly and frie^dly vvhervvith the Pope
afterward was so moved, and savv how he himself had be^ abused by
Hildebra^ds instigatio^s against so gentle a Prince, that he was greatly sorry,
that he had attempted to be pope without his assent. VVherupo^ says Be^no,
wha^ Alexander understood, that he was elected and e^stalled by fraud and
craft of Hildebra^d, and other the^perors enemies, in his sermon to the people,
he plai^ly declared, that he would not sit in the Apostolik sea, without the
license and favor of the emperor: and further said openly in the pulpit, that
he would send forthwith, his letters unto the Emperor for this purpose, so
greatly he repented him of his usurpation without the Emperors authority.

Hildebrande, who had long avvayted and (.386.) The.386. untruth. mere
slau^derous.
practiced to be Pope, impacient of any longer tariaunce, immediately after the
death of Alexander, gatte to be made Pope, and was called Gregory the seventh,
of whose election Abbas Vrspurgens. says* next to Alexander succeeded
Hildebrande, under whom the Romain common weal and the whole Church, was
endaungered and brought in a great peril with new errors and schisms, such
as have not been heard of: who climbed up to this high dignity without the
consent of the Prince, and therefore there be that affirm him to have usurped
the Papacy, by tyranny, and not Canonically instituted, for which cause also
many did refuse him to be Pope. In this election, Hildebrande (.387.) The.387.
untruth. The clergy of Rome, not he, made all the haste.
made post haste, for fear ^e had come short of his purpose. In so much that
Nauclerus says, before the exequies of Alexander were finished, the Clergy
and people that came to the burial, cried out, that S. Peter had chosen
Master Archedeacon Hildebrande to be Pope, vvhereupon the Cardinals went a
side and elected Hildebrande. But Benno, who was a Cardinal at Rome the same
time, A lewd lying tale contrary to al other vvriters Sabel. Platina,
Nauclere, Marianus, Anselmus and other.
says, that the self same evening and hour, when Alexander died,
Hildebrande was enstalled by his soldiers, without the assent of either
Priest or people: fearing lest delay vvoulde breed peril: to whose election
not one of the Cardinales did subscribe: in so much that Hildebrande said to an
Abbot, that came short to the election, brother Abbot ye have tarried over
long: to whom the Abbot ansvvered, and thou Hildebra^d have made over much
have, in that thou have usurped the Apostolik sea against the Canons, thy
Master the Pope being not yet buried. By which post have, i^portune clamours,
and violent election, it is easy to see, how Platina and those that follovv
him, do no less (388) The.388. untruth. slanderous in preferri^g the co^dened
fable of one man before all approved histories.
lie than flatter in praising this Pope, and setti^g forth so comely a form of
his election. Nauel. protests and promises in the telli^g of this Popes life
to keep an indiffere^cy and fidelity, in the report of the Chronicles: and
first reports the state of the Church under this Pope word for word as I
have rehearsed out of Abbas V^spurg. (.389.) The.389. untruth. in co^cealing:
For straight N^uclere adds.

Other and in manner al vvriter^ report the plain co^trary^. Naucl^r.


and to declare his further vprightnes in the matter, he tells what he
found written in a fine style amongst the Saxon histories: that the Bisshops
of France moved the Prince not to suffer this election, which was made
without his consent, for if he did, it might work to him much and grievous
daungier: the Prince perceiving this suggestion to be true, sent immediately his
Ambassadors to Rome, to demand the cause wherefore they presumed without
the Kings license, against the custom of their ancestors, to ordeine a
Pope: and further to command the nevve elected Pope, to forsake that dignity
unlawfully come by, unless they vvoulde make a reasonable satisfaction. These
Ambassadors were honorably received, and when they had declared their
message, the Pope himself, makes them this answer: He takes God to
witness, that he never coueted this high dignity, but that he was chosen, and
thrust violently thereunto by the Romans, who would not suffer him in any
wise to refuse it: notwithstanding they could by no means persuade him, to
take the Papacy upon him, and to be consecrate Pope, till he were surely
certified, that both the King and also the Princes of Germany, had given their
assente. When the King was certified of this answer, he was content and
willingly gave commandment, that he should be ordered Pope. He also recites
out of Blondus, and other vvriters, That the King gave his consent unto the
Popes election, sending the Bishop of Verselles, the Chancellor of Italy, to
confirm the election by his authority, as the manner had been, the which thing
also, Platina (says he) seems to affirm.

Afterward the Emperor called a (.390.) The.390. untruth. It was no
Council, but a schismatical conuenticle. Aue^tinus.
Council, which he held (as Sabellicus says) at Worms, vvhereat were all the Bisshops of France and Germany, except the Saxons. The Churchmen of Rome
sent their epistles, with grievous complaints against Hildebrand unto this
Council: In quibus Hildebrandum ambitus and periurij accersunt, eundemque
plaeraque auare, superbeque facere, conqueruntur: hocque reiecto, alium
pastorem postulant: Wherein they accuse Hildebrande, of ambition and perjury,
complainning that he does many things proudly and couetouslye, and therefore
desire, that he may be deposed, and an other pastor appoincted the^.

The (.391.) The.391. untruth. Ridiculous.
Fathers in this Council make a Decree for to depose Hildebrande, reciting
therein many his grievous and horrible crimes, that moved them thereto: And not
only the Bisshops of Germany and France, but also the Bisshoppes of Italy,
assembled together at Ticinum, a city in Lombardy now called Pauia, did
subscribe this Decree. This Synod being thus finished, the Emperor (says
Auentinus) vvrote two letters, the one to Hildebrand, the other to the people
and priests of Rome, wherein he commands Hildebrande, according to the
Decree of the Council, to return to his private life and estate* and the
Romans to forsake Hildebrande, and to choose to them selves a Pastor,
according to the manner of their ancestors. Who so lists to read these
Epistles, and the seditious (.392.) The 392. untruth. Railing.
traitorous, and tragical feats and practices of the Pope against the
Emperor, both before, and especially after this Decree, he may see them in
Orth winus Gratius, in Nauclerus, Aue^tinus, Sabellicus, and Platina.

The.16. Chapter. Of Henry the.4. and of Gregory.7. otherwised called
Hildebrande, Pope.
Stapleton.
A man might make a short and a true answer withal, to all this long tale,
and say that it is altogether extrauagante, and impertinente or rather directly
concluding for the Popes Primacie. For thowghe Henry the fowrth, would not
acknowledge Hildebrande, as pope, yet he acknowledged an other, whom him self
had set up, yea and the said Hildebrande to at the length to be the supreme
head of Christ's Church: as we shall anon declare. So that now we might pass
over, al these heinous accusations against this pope called Gregory the.7. as
out of your matter, sauinge that I think good to give notice to the reader,
that yet nevertheless ye shall never be able to justify them, as surmised and
feigned by your author Benno and other his enemies, Marianus Scotus saying of
Hildebrande.
whom he had justly excommunicated and deposed for their naughtines, vpholde^
and maynteyned by Henry the^peror being him self also justly excommunicated.
Marianus Scotus living about the same time, says, that this Gregory, was
accused of He^ries fautours of many false crimes, and makes the counsels
kept against him no better, then a conspiracy against God and his vicar, Lib.
3. aeta te. 6.

Conspirantes co^uenera^t in vnu^ aduersus Dominum and aduersus vicariu^ eius
papa^ Gregorium.

William of Malmes buries sayi^g of the same.

Hildebra^d had the gift of prophecy Lib. 3. de hist. Anglicana. Hildebrand
taken for the true pope by the godly and Learned bishop Anselmus Vide epist.
Anselmi apud Abbatem.


pope Gregory. Owre country man william of Malmesburie says, that he had the
spryte of prophecy, and tells as a certain and sure verity, by relation of
him that heard yt out of the mowthe of the famous Abbat of Cluniacum, called
Hugo, that this Hildebrand being but yet archdeacon and the Popes Legate in
France, having a bishop before him whom he did wonderfully suspecte for
symonie committed, but yet not convinced by sufficient proof, commanded him
to pronounce for his purgation: Gloria patri; and filio, and spiritui sancto.
The bishop pronounced rowndlie, Gloria patri and filio. But for his life he
could not then, nor all his life after, pronounce spiritui sancto. This Hugo
reported further, that Hildebrand foretold him of a great plague and
pestilence ere yt came: and told him also of certain of his pryuie thoughts.
It pleases you to make Platina but a lier and a flatterer, for that he takes
this Gregory to be the true pope, and to have been most wrongfully thrust out
by the Emperor. Ye seame rather to incline to Abbas Vrspergensis and
Nauclerus, who both yet make against you. For you shall find in Abbas that
Anselmus bishop of Luca a man as he writes, of an excellent eloquence, wit,
and Learning, and by whom God wrought miracles, as well in his life time, as
afterward, did ever acknowledge hi^ for the true pope, and the other suborned by
the Emperor, to be but an usurper. And so he wrote to the false pope in plain
words. What say you the^ to your own author Nauclerus, that, as ye say,
protests and promises in telling this popes life to keep an indiffere^cy and
a fidelity in the report of the chronicles? Opera Sigeberti Archiepiscopi
Mogunt. VVormaciae co^uentus indicitur. In conue^tu^ eum and Hugo Cardinalis
venit, tragoedia^ quandam apud pri^cipes de scelesta papae vita co^mentus falso
protulit.

Naucler. gener. 36. The crimes laid to Hildebrand were falsely laid to hi^,
by the confession of M. Horns own author whom he makes to be indifferente.
Gener. 37.

Abbas Vrspergens. Guiliel. Malmesb. li. 3. de hist. Anglicae. Blondus.

Naucler. Gener. 36. Pope Hilbrand purges him self by receiving the blessed
Sacrament.


Does not he condemn as feined and false forged lies, such things as ye here
allege? does he not, though he says Sigebertus and some other write to the
contrary, say that the doings of this Gregory were honest, and proceeded from a
zelouse faith? The like say I of your Councils holde^ in Italy. Whose folly and
falshod evidently bursted out as well otherwise, as in calling this Gregory the
disciple of Bere^garius: and one that browght in doubt the Catholic and
apostolical faith, of the body and blood of Christ. This was a most notoriouse
lie: for Hildebra^dus being as yet but archedeaco^, and notwithstanding the
Popes Legate, as I have said, in France brought this Bere^garius to a
reca^tatio^: first at Towers in France, and afterward at Rome also, himself
being the^ pope. Yea hi^sef, the^peror being present, after he had said Mass,
taking the body of Christ into his hand, said to the^peror. Sir I have
benaccused of you and your adhere^ts of diverse crimes, whereof if I be gylty, I
pray God, after I have received his body (which I ente^de presently to receive
for my purgatio^) to streke me with sudden death. Vpopn this this pope
received part of the holy host, and would that themperor should have done the
like for his purgation, but he refused so to do. And now take head to your
self and to your fellows M. Horn, least by your own Council of Pauia, one
of the most greauouse and most horrible crimes, falslye laid to Pope
Gregory, be not most truly laid to you, and your adherents being the very
true disciple of the heretic Bere^garius and me^ that bring in doubt, yea
that accurse and condemn the Catholic and Apostolical faith. Whose
condemnation made by Pope Gregory, with his decree that he made against your
co^cubines, does I trow much more grieve you, then does this matter of
the emperor, A conjecture why M. Horn is so much offended with Hildebrand.
or any wrong ye pretend, by this Pope, to have been done to him.

Now is your cloked dissimulation also in the handling of this story to be
considered, that dare not open the very cause of all this dissentio^ between
the pope and the^peror, and the euente thereof. Which dissension rose, for that
the emperor would not remove such symoniacall Bisshoppes, The cause of the
dissension between themperor and pope Hildebrand. Naucler, gener. 36.
as he kept about him, being excommunicated by Alexander the.2. Gregory's
predecessor. And that him self would not forbear to sell bisshopriks and
other spiritual lyuings. Whereof Gregory, as soon as ever he was elected,
admonished him, saying: that being confirmed by the emperor he would in no wise
suffer and bear with his doi^gs: and therefore willed him, either to procure
that some other man should be made Pope, or to amend those things, that were
amiss. This notwithstanding, the Emperor did confirm him: but being
afterward seduced, by such as Gregory had excommunicated and deposed, and
irritated by the Popes letters, being therein commanded to purge him self of
such crimes as he was charged withal, conspired against him, with his
adherente bisshoppes assembled (as ye write) at Worms: and declared him to be
no Pope. The Pope again accurseth all that wicked conuenticle with the
Emperor, and deposes him from his imperial dignitye: discharging all his
subjects of al such loyalty as they owed by oath unto him. Afterward also
this Pope excommunicated the Emperor and al his adherentes. The same year
(says Nauclerus) the Princes and the greater part of the people, began to
alienat their minds from him: By reason whereof a great diet was kept of the
Allemayn Princes at Openham. Naucler. gener. 36. page 135.
At the which the emperor was forced by the princes of Germany (which said if
he went not, and reconciled him self to the pope, they would exequute the
Popes sentence against him) to take his iorneye to the Pope, and coming to
Canossom where the Pope was, he put of all his royal attiermente, and bare
foted three days together, in a cold and hard sharp winter most humbly
craved pardon of the Pope: and at the length was by the pope, from the sentence
of excommunication upon certain conditions absolved. Which conditions being
by him broken, began as hot a stir as ever was before: So far forth
that this Gregory was forced to fly from Rome, A just judgment of God
against Henrye the.4. Henry the 4. appeleth to the pope.

Romans pontifice^, sanctam and ^niuersale^ sede^ Romanam appellamus. In literis
ad Henricum filiu^.


for fear of his power, to Salernum, where shortly after he died.

Now good reader will ye see the just judgment of God: and therein withal
a full answer to Master Horns impertinent process? After Gregory's death,
this Emperor was taken prisoner of his own son, and forced to resign and
give over all his royal and imperial dignitye, which rebelled against him,
as he rebelled against his spiritual father pope Gregory. And as fast as he
wrote letters before to depose Hildebrande (as ye write) wherein never the
less he refused not absolutely the pope, but Hildebra^de (who^ he took not for
pope) which thing I desire the Reader diligently to note, so being in this
distress in his letters as well to his son Henry (which was Henry the 5.) as in
his letters to the bishops and nobility of Germany (which letters ye deaply
dissemble) he appealeth to the pope, and to the holy and universal see of Rome.

Go on now M. Horn, and tell us hardly, Rogamus vos per authoritate^ To.
ecclesiae, cui nos co^mittimus and honore^ regni ne etc. Apud que^ si
interpellatio vestra, nullaque alia interue^tio ad presens prodesse peterit,
appellamus R. p. and sancta^ vniuersalem R. sede^ and ecclesiam. In literis ad
episcopos et pri^cipes.
and lie one as fast as ye will upon this Hildebrandus: that he poisoned:
first Leo the.9. then Victor the.2. and after him Stenen the.9. But suerlye
either ye are a great lier, or Hildebrande was not his crafts master, for all
that ye make hi^ so cunning in the art of poysoni^g. For where after Stephen,
there were two other Popes: Benedicte the tenth, and Nicolaus the.2. and after
them Alexander the.2. ye omitting those two, do tell us forthwith of Alexander
the 2. and how that this Gregorye, who had long awayted and practiced to be
Pope, immediately after the death of Alexander gate himself to be made pope.
And I am assured ye can tell us no better reason why he should poison, the
other first three Popes, then the other latter three. Neither can ye tell us
any probable reason why he should poison any one, or seek by this ungodly way
to come to that see, which as yet being but Archedeacon seameth even by your
tale, to have been of such creditte among the Romans, as was lightly no other.
As one that in so weighty a cause by the will and consent of the Cardinals
answered to Otho themperours Ambassador, wisely and soberly, and not as ye
fable, taking the tale out of his mowthe in great heat. As yt pleases you
also to fable, that the Archebisshop Otho, gave place to M. Archedeacon by and
by. And thervpo^ full like your self ye rushe in against popish prelates, as ye
call them, who have beguyled godly Princes, that trusted them overmuch. Whereas
Otho was feign to yield to Hildebrande of fine force of reason, Platina in
Alexan. 2. Naucler. gener. 36.
and to such examples of the ancient Church as he brought forth. For after
the words by you alleged, that Emperors or Kings never had right in the
election of Popes, he said farther. And if any thing was attempted by
violence, or otherwise then well, it was afterward by the Censures of the
fathers redressed. And so beginning (says Nauclere) from the first Emperors,
he continewed so long, until Anno (whom you call Otto tharchbishop) ^nswered,
that he was satisfised. This was no hot talk as you babble, but a learned
communication, sobre and discret. I pray you now further, to what end or
purpose serves this narratio^ concerning Alexander the.2. seeing that your
Antipope Cadolus was deposed, and the emperor feign to crave pardon for him:
Naucler. dict. Gene.
and seeing the bishops of Lombardy were reconciled to this Alexander at a
council holde^ at Mantua, the Emperor also ratifying Alexanders election? Go
on M. Horn and tell us that Platina and others do lie (and that Benno one
contrary to al others, and an Author in this matter expressly condemned only
says truth,) and flatter in praising this pope, and in setting forth a comely
form of his election: which, what it was ye dare not show, least yt should to
much disgrace your uncomely electio^s, and most of al your false assertio^s
against the Popes Primacy. Gregory, The same vvriteth Sabellicus Aenead. 9 lib.
3. and Nauclere gener. 36. page 133.
says Platina, was chosen with the consent of al good men. The words of the
election are noted to be of this sort and tenor. We the Cardinals, the clergy,
the acolites, the subdeaco^s, the priests of the Church of Rome, in the
presence of the bisshops and Abbats, and of many other, as well of the clergy as
of the Laytie this day being the xxij. day of April in S. Peter Church, called
ad Vincula, The form of Hildebrands election.
the year of our Lord God.1072. do elect, to be true vicare of Christ
Archdeaco^ Hildebra^d: a man of great learning, virtue, wisdom, justice,
co^sta^cie, religion, a modest, a sober, and a chaste man: one that governs
his house hold well, full of hospitality toward the poor, being brought up and
taught, even from his yowthe to his age in the lap of his holy mother the
Church: who^ we will to be ruler of Christ's Church, eue^ with that authority,
with the which Peter did ones rule it by Gods commandment. If this be a
comely form, of election, as in deed yt is, and as your self term yt, the^
has this comely form, answered al your false and deforme arguments made
against this Pope or his primacie. Yet to touch a few of your many fold
untruths, which do so swarm in this your narration, I am forced to prolo^g a
little more my answer. You report as of Sabellicus, that Hildebrande knew well
inoughe, that Otto would relent easily. But you should know well inoughe that
Sabell. has no such words. Only he says. Aenead. 9. lib. 3.
Facile tenuit vt Otho sibi assen tiretur. He obtained easily, that Otho
should agree unto him. And that was by his learned persuasion, not by any
covert collusio^, as you do lewdely imagine. Again you say, the^peror promised
he would come to the Counsel, to set an order in Church matters, pri^tyng those
words in a latin letter as the words of Sabel. Now there are no such words in
your Author Sabellicus of the^peror. But only that he desired the pope to call a
Council, for setting of order in Church matters, and that he would come. Vt se
present omnia fierent. Sabell. vt supra.
that al things might be done in his presence. The pithe of your argument lay
in those words: and therefore those words you falsely fathered upon Sabellicus.
You allege a long tale out of Benno against Hildebrande, as that after that
Council ended, Alexander had perceived he was ^nstalled by fraud and craft
of Hildebrand, but how true that tale is, it appears by that Alexander after
this Synod ended, Sabel. Aenead. 9. lib. 3. Naucl. generat. 36.
sent Hildebrande in to Apulia with an Army, to recover to the Church of
Rome such places as the Normans had taken away, the which Hildebrand
brought to pass. For had Alexander perceived such fraud and craft in
Hildebrande as you and Benno do surmise, he would not I trow so sone after
have put him in such trust and credit, in so weighty and important a
matter. And this being reported by Sabell. Nauclerus, and other common writers,
it is easy to judge what a liar your Benno is, In Indice lib. inhib.
and how worthily this very book of his de vita Hildebrandi is by general
Council forbidden and condemned. That which you allege out of Abbas
Vrspergensis against Hildebrand, Naucler. gener. 36.
is word for word recited in Nauclerus (whom you allege as one that
protests and promises to keep an indifferency and fidelity in telling of
this Popes life) but he adds immediately: Alij and fere omnes prorsus
contrarium referunt. Other writers and in manner al do report the clean
contrary: that is, al for the commendation of Hildebrand. But this you without
al indifferency or fidelity thought good to leave out, and against in manner al
writers to cleave to one Abbat. Marianus in sinc suae chronogr. Sabell. and
Naucler. vbi supra.
Of whom when you tell that many refused this Hildebrand to be Pope, Marianus
Scotus which lived in that very age, Nauclerus, Sabellicus and Platina will
tell you, that those Many, were none but Simmoniaci and fornicarij. The
Simoniacal and the fornicatours. Such as by brybery creped in to
Ecclesiastical promotions, and such as being Priests kept whores and
concubines, which you now call wives. M. Horn, to save your Madges poor
honesty. Naucler. gener. 36. page 133.
Where you tell us out of Nauclerus, that the bisshops of France moved the
Prince not to suffer the election of Hildebrande etc. You should have done well
to have told us out of Nauclerus the cause why these bishops so did. Verily
Nauclerus even in the midst of the sentence which you allege, says of
those Bisshoppes: Grandi scrupulo permoti ne vir vehementis and acris ingenij
atque fidei districtius eos pro negligentijs suis quandoque discuteret. They
sent to the Emperor, being sore afraid, left this Hildebrand being a man of a
vehement and sharp disposition and faith, would at length more roughly and
sharply examine them for their negligences: Lo, Master Horn the love of
licentiousnes, and the fear of discipline for their deserts, moved those
French Bishops to sewe thus to the Emperor against that Pope. But you
will never tell all, because (as I have said and must often say) al makes
against you.

You conclude with a peale of most slanderous and railing lies, sendyng us to
certain epistles wherein we shall find, you say, the seditiouse, traiterous,
and tragical feats and practices of this Pope against the Emperor etc. For in
Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Marianus Scotus, Volaterrane and Platina, I am right
sure there appears no such cancred matter as you rave of, except such as
they report upon false rumors.

But if you will see on the contrary part, what a godly and learned man he was,
how sharp an enemy to vice, namely to Simonye and Bauderye (for the which he
procured him self so much enemytie) You may read Master Horn, not only
Nauclerus, Sabell, and Platina with Volaterane, Blondus, Antoninus and other
late writers, but also Marianus Scotus, William of Malmesbury our countreyman,
Anselmus that notable Bishop of Luca, who lived all in the time of that
tragedy, and you shall find him in all points a most excellent Bishop and a
most godly man. The French Bishops for Simony, the Germayn Bishops for both
Simony and whoredom, the Emperor Henrye the fourth for his filthye lucre in
symoniacall practices, caused all the troubles of that age the most vertuose
Pope, always proceeding against those vices with the force of the spiritual
sword. For the which at the hour of his death he said. Nauclerus generat.
37. page 144.
Dilexi iustitiam: and odi iniquitatem: propterea morior in exilio. I have
loved righteousness: and I have hated iniquyte. Therefore I die in ba^nishment.

M. Horn. The.1^4* Division. page 74. a.
Henry the.5. came into Italy to end the co^trouersy and discord, that was
betwixt him and the Pope, for this (.393.) The.393. untruth Not for this
Supreme ^urisdictio^ in all Eccles. causes whch M Horn would prove, but only
for inuesturing of Bishops.
jurisdiction, and to make such compositio^ as might bring quietness both to
the Church and the Empire: But Paschalis the Pope did not much like of his
coming, as the Italian vvriters witness. The Emperor sends to the Pope,
the Pope again to him: certain couenau^tes were aggreed upon, and confirmed
by oath, and assured by pledges on both the parties. But the Pope could not,
or would not, keep promise with the Emperor, for that his Bishops did
vvithstande, and in no wise would stand to the agreement: vvereuppon
followed great tumult and a bluddy fray. The Emperor (.394.) The 394. untruth.
The Emperor broke his couena^tes first, not the Pope, as shall appear.
seeing they for their parts, would not stand to the couenauntes, which
were confyrmed so strongly by oath, and hostages, as might be, would not in
like wise be bound to his. Shortly after Easter follovving, there was a
friendly peace concluded betwixt the Emperor and the Pope, who crowned
Henry.5. Emperor, delivering unto him with his holy hand such privileges as
his ancestors were wont to enioie, and confirmed the same to him, never to
be taken from him under the pain of the great Curse. After this the Emperor
took an Oath of all the inhabitauntes in every City thoroughe Italy, for
their faithful obedience to him, and the faithful keepinge of of this his
prerogative, and privilege in (.395.) The.395 untruth. The oath of the Italians
mentioned in Nauclerus has no one word of any ecclesiastical thing or cause.
Ecclesiastical things or causes.

The.17. Chapter Of Henry the.5. Lotharius and Conradus, Emperors.
Stapleton.
GO on as I said M. Horn lustely, and tell your tale truly and fully: and
then as we have had you hitherto, so shall we have you still a very gentle and a
tractable aduersay. What? Were there such controversies, discordes and frayes
betwixt the Pope and Henry the fifth? The^ belyke yt is no very probable tale,
A fovvl^ lie of the Apology of England.
that your Apology writes, that by the Popes procuring this Henry took his
Father prisoner, as it is in deed a foul and gross lie. Yet at the length I
perceive there was a friendly peace concluded (as ye say) and the Pope with his
holy hand delivered to him such pryuileges as his auncetours were wont to
enjoy. I am glad M. Horn that the pope has any thing holy in him. It is
strange me thinks to hear at your hands of the Popes holy hand: namely seeing
your author Nauclerus, speaks of his hand only, withowt any other addition.
Dato sibi per manu^ Apostolici priuilegio inuestitu^ae ecclesiasticae.
Nauclerus gener. 38. In Lateranensi conuentu. Sabell. Aenead. 9. l^b. 4.
Belyke there is come upon you some sudden devotion toward the Popes
holiness. But lo, I see now the cause of your devotion. The Popes hand is holy
with you now, when he being forced and constrained, delivers up such
privileges, as with his heart he did not deliver: and therefore did afterward in
a Counsel of Bishops revoke al these doings. Which your author in the next
leaf (as also Sabellicus at large) does declare: and what stir and business
the Emperor made for it, swearing first to the Pope, that he would use no
violence, and that he would cause all the Bishops of Germany, which had been
made by Simonye, to be deposed. Who yet afterward brake both parts of his
O^he. Took the Pope out of Rome with him as prisoner, because he would not
confirm his symoniacal Bisshops: And after long vexation of the Pope, and
spoils of the Roman territory, extorted at the length by fine force his
consent thereto: which yet (after the Emperor being departed) he revoked (as
I said) in a full Council. And this perjury and violence of this Emperor, the
Italian Emperors do witness also. Briefly al came to this conclusion, that
Paschalis being dead, the Emperor shortly after, renounced to the Pope
Calistus the.2. all this inuesturing of Bisshops, and left to the clergy the
free election without the princes co^firmatio^: which was all that Paschalis
granted to this Emperor. For the grant of Paschalis (as it is recorded in
Nauclere) refers it self, to the former grauntes of his predecessors made
to Catholic Emperors. And farther he specifieth his grant thus. That he have
privilege to give the staff and the ring to al Bisshops and Abbats of his
dominions, Gener. 38. Page 183. and. 191.
being first freely chosen without violence or symonie: and to be afterward
consecrated or ordered of the bishop to whom they belong. But all this was (as
I have said) both revoked of Pope Paschalis, and given over of Henry the fifth.

M. Horns disse^bling of his authors narration.
But I pray you tell me, was your holy hand so unlusty and heavy, that ye could
or rather would not, set in this also, being a parcel of your authors
narration, and the final conclusion of this great controversy? Which as it
was the^ troblesom to the church many years: so it is troblesom also to your
Reader, as occupiyng a great part of your book, but no part of your
principal matter, and yet as little material as it is, in fine al against you.
And therefore ye shake the full declaration of the matter from your holy hands,
as a man would shake away a snake for fear of stinging.

M. Horn. The.115. Division. page 74. b.
The next Emperor to Henry, was Lotharius, who so labored with the Pope
to retain the inuesturing of Ecclesiastical persons, and besides that, he so
travailed in other Ecclesiastical causes, so (.396.) The.396. Untruth. Not so
well by a great deal. Otto. Frisingen.
well as Temporal, that says Vrspurg. Huius laus est a vindicata religione and
legibus: The praise of this Prince is, in that he reformed Religion and the
Laws.

Next to whom, was Conradus the Emperor, to whom the Romans vvrote
supplications, to come and chalendge his right in these matters, to reduce the
form of the Empire, to the old state which it was in, in Constantine and
Justinians days, and to deliver them from the (.397.) The.397. untruth. Lewd
and gross as shall appear. Naucler.
tyranny of the Pope. To whom also the Pope vvrote humble supplications, to
take his cause into his protection against the Magistrates of Rome, which took
upon them to reduce the Pope, to the old order and state of the (.398.)
The.398. Untruth. Not of the ancient Bisshops, but of the old heathen Priests.
aunciente bisshoppes of Rome.

Stapleton.
Let the Emperor Lotharius labor to retain the inuesturing of Bishops (which
as ye heard, Henry the.5. resigned before to Calistus) let him if ye will
needs use that word, reform the civil laws and religion to: the meaning
whereof is no more, but that he restored the civil Law (the use thereof being
disco^tinued many years) and restored Pope Innoce^tius the.2 to his See being
thrust out by an Antipope (whereof he was called Fidelis Ecclesiae aduocatus, a
faithful defe^der of the Church). Yet why do you utter such gross lies, M.
Horn telling your Reader, that the Romans besought The Emperor to deliver
them from the tyranny of the Pope? Neither Otho Fringensis, nor Nauclerus, who
rehearses his words have any such thing. The Romans at that time would be
lusty a Gods name, and reduce their state to the old magnificence of the
victorious Romans, being proud of a little victory which they had against
the Tiburtines. And therefore the Pope complained to the Emperor of their
tyranny, not they of the Popes tyranny. Yea they thrusted out the Emperors
Praefectus, and placed in his room their own Patricius. And so would shake
of as well the Emperor, as the Pope. Forth then with the story.

Let Pope Lucius.2. make humble supplication, to the Emperor Conradus, against
the Magistrates of Rome, concerning the civil regiment of Rome, Naucl. gener.
39.
and their subjection to the Pope in temporalities (for that was the matter and
no other, and yet were they feign shortly after to submit them selves to
Eugenius.3. the next Pope) Let all this be as you tell it not perspicuouslie,
but covertly, as though the Romans then would have been Schismatiques, as
you are now, and denied his Authority in Spiritual causes, as you do now,
let all this, as I say, be granted unto you: But then I pray you set your
conclusion to it, that therefore the Prince is Supreme Governor in all causes
Ecclesiastical, and then shall every child sone conclude with you, that your
Conclusion, concludes nothing to the purpose. For all the strife and
contention here, was partly about Temporal and Civil regiment, partly not
against the Popes Authority, absolutelye, but against such or such a Pope:
which thing I would have you well to note Master Horn, not here only, but
in all these and other quarrellings of Emperors against Popes. That they
never repined against the Popes Authority, as the Pope, but they repined
against this man or that man, whom they would not agnise for the Pope, but
some other by them selves elected.

M. Horn. The.116. Division. page 74. b.
Next to whom, follovved the Godly and zealous Emperor Frederike the first,
who (.399.) The.399. Untruth. Horrible and notorious* as shall appear.
seeing the horrible vices of the Romissh Church, commanded that no Legate of
the Church of Rome, should be suffered to enter into Germany, without he were
called or hired of the Emperor: nor would suffer that any man under the name
of appellation, should go unto the Court of Rome.

After the death of Adrian the fovvrth, Nauclerus. Vrspurg. Sabellicus.
the Cardinals fell out amongst them selves for the Election of a new Pope:
some stryuinge to have Rovvlande, other some contendinge to have Octauian a
man, (says Abbat. Vrspur.) in all points honest and religious. Herevppon
sprang an horrible schism and great discord. Rouland sent his Legates to the
Emperor Fredericus.1. and desired him that he would (.400.) The 400. Untruth.
False translation. vt seditione^ tolleret. That he vvoulde take away the
sedition, not take up the matter to his own arbitreme^t. Vspurg.
take up and end this contention by his authority. The Emperor commands
them both to come unto him at Ticinum, where foorthvvith he summoned a
Council to be holden about this matter, (.401.) The.401. Untruth. He minded no
such matter as shall appear.
minding to examine both their causes, and by searching to try whose cause
was the most honest. Rouland (.402.) The.402. Untruth. He was gone to this
William before he vvrote to Frederike, by Nauclerus.
being afraid to have the matter come to this trial, gets to William of
Sicilia, the Emperors mortal ennemie, and within twelve days puts on
his Cope, and names him self Alexander: for he purposed (belike) to make a
conquest of the matter. He alleged his election to be good out of all doubt,
and that he sent for the Emperors aid, and not for his arbitrament: and
therefore thought not good to bring his case into doubtful question. The 403.
Untruth. That appears not in Platina or Nauclerus.
The Emperor being offended with him, for that he would not obey his
appointment, sent two Bisshops to cite him, to come unto the Council by the
name of Cardinal, and not Pope: But Rouland refused, confuting their citation
with this Maxim or Principle, Romanum Pontificem a nemine iudicari debere:
The Pope ought not to be judged of any man. But when these Legates from the
Emperor came to Octauian, he straight ways obeyed, and they brought him to
Papia (.404.). The.404 untruth. In omitting the next sentence wherein the
Popes Primacie over the Emperor is manifestly declared.
Vspurg. says, that Rouland was oftentimes monisshed to come, and did
contemn all those monitions. The Emperor faite in the Council, (as Radeuicus
Frifinge^sis, who vvrote his acts, witnesses ^ad made an oration unto the
Bishops, wherein he declares, and that by the example of his ancestors
Constantinus, Theodosius, Iustinianus, and of later time of Carolus Magnus, and
other, that the power and authority to call Councelles, where the Church is
trou^led with any schisms, or other perilous distourbance, belongs to the
Emperor: Notvvithstanding he committed the desining of the controversy to
their wisdom and (.405) The.405. untruth. For he had none to give in that
behalf.
gave them thereunto authority. The Council debateth the cause, and
consulteth with men learned in the Law, and so concludes, that Octauians
election was good, and adiudgeth him to be the right Bishop of Rome. When
they had thus tried out the matter, Fredericus the Emperor says Platina)
Confirmat Octauianum Pontificem. Confirmed Octauian Pope. (.406.) The.406.
untruth. In leuing out that which follows P^^ vrbe^ equo insidente^ deducitet
de more adorat which shows plainly the Emperour^ inferiournes, not primacy.
The Emperor within a while after, sent Octauianus, new confirmed Pope,
toward Rome, who dyed in the journey. After whose death, the Emperor
called an other council at VVirtzberge (as Auentinus vvriteth) wherein were
a great number of Archebishoppes, and other Bishops, and also many of the
nobles and states of the Empire. In this Council a statute or Decree was made
by common consent. That from hence forth none should be Pope, onelesse he
were created by the consent of the Emperor, according as the custom had been
of long and ancient time. This worthy Emperor, whom the Chronicles call
Christianissimum, most Christian, for his zeal toward Gods Church,
endeavored not without great peril to him self and his estate, to retain the
jurisdiction due to the Princes, and thereby to refourme the horrible disorders
that were grown so high, that they overwhelmed the Church, as in like
sort diverse other Emperors end Kings, both before and after, had attempted,
but in vain: for the vvealthy pride, the fierce power, and (.407.) The.407
untruth. Railing ribauldry
traiterous treachery of the Pope and his Prelates was so mighty, violent, and
subtle, that there was no earthly power able to vvithstande or match with
them. And therefore Erasmus compteth the Popes of this time, and those that
followed, to be the Vicars and s^ccessours of Julius Caesar, of Alexander the
Great, of Croesus the rich, and of Xerxes the mighty: rather then of Christ,
the only If the only, the^ how is the Prince ^ouernour?

Or if the Prince notvvithsta^dingis, whi may not also the Pope be?


Emperor and governor of the Church. Bernarde calls Eugenius.3. in his
great pomp, and pride, rather the successor of Constantinus the high
Emperor, then of Peter the humble Apostle, and Abbas Vrspurg, who lived at
this time, when the Popes had spoiled the ^mperour, and other Princes
vvelnighe of (.408.) The.408. and.409. vntruth^ both ^launderours, never able
to be proved.
all jurisdiction, rulinge all by their own Decretalles, now about this
time set forth (.409.) as they listed, makes a lamentable complainte of the
horrible pride and covetousness of the (.410.) The.410. untruth. For he
speaks only of the clergi of Rome.
whole clergy, and concludes with these words: Gaude matter nostra Roma,
etc. Rejoice O our mother Rome, because the seluses of the hidden treasures in
the earth are opened, that rivers and heaps of money may flow unto thee in
great abundance. Be glad of the iniquity of the sons of me^, because money is
given to thee for the recompense of so great euilles. Be merry and iocund for
discordes sake, which is thy helper because she is rushte out of the infernal
pit, that plentiful rewards of money might be heaped upon the: thou have that
which thou have always thyrsted after: sing pleasant balades, for through
men's malitiousnesse, not by thy Godliness, thou have overcome the world.

The.18. Chapter: Of Frederike Barbarossa, and of Alexander. the.3.
Stapleton.
Master Horn good Reader, as he has hitherto, so does he still play Cacus
part. T. Liuius. Lib. 1. Dec. 1.
This Cacus stole Hercules Oxen, and because he would not have them espied
where they were by the track, he drew the^ into his cave by the tails
backward. Which thing Hercules seeing, did nothing mistrust they should be
there, M. Horn plays Cacus his part, that stole Hercules Oxen.
but yet as he passed by with the drove of his beasts, the beasts that were in
the den lackinge their company, began as the manner is to bellowe, whereby
all this theft was discried. This book of M. Horns is the very den of
Cacus, into the which by a pretye slight, he conueyeth in his stories and
other proufes, as a man may say, by the tail backewarde, that is not keeping
the right and customable way and order in making true and faithful
allegations, but craftelie and peruersely cutting and chopping away some part
of them: which partly lying in this his Cacus den, and as it were bellowing
for his company, bewrays all M. Horns sly dealings. So have ye hitherto
found it, and so shall ye still, good Reader, find it, and lo we have at
hand a ready proof Frederike says M. Horn, seeing the horrible vices of the
Romis^h Church, commaund^d that no Legate of the Church of Rome, should come
into Germany, etc.

First, Master Horn, what horrible vices of the Romissh Church, were those
you speak of? It is verily, naught else, t^en a horrible lie of your
schismatical mouth. The beginning of the sentence, of the which you have taken
the tail only, is this. Adrian the.4. our Countrieman, and Frederike the
first, were fallen at great variaunce. Naucler. gener, 39. page 215.
The Pope complained (says Nauclerus your own Author) that living between the
swords of the Romans and William of Sicilie, he was forsaken of the
Emperor, contrary to his great promises, and so vexed for the Emperors
sake, that he could not reast at Rome. The Emperor on the other side,
pretended many things, and namely the crowning of William the King of Sicilia,
Iamque ad id vsque processum est, vt Imperator nullum Romans Ecclesiae legatum,
etc. And now the matter broke out so far, that the Emperor commanded that
no Legate and so forth, as in Master Horns Allegation. You see now, good
Readers, it was no horrible vices of the Romissh Church as this horrible lying
spirit of M. Horn prateth, but a private quarrel between this Emperor and
that Pope, that occasioned the Emperor to forbid appellations to Rome, etc.
You see how this Cacus has drawn Nauclerus his words by the tail into
the lurkinge den of his lying Conclusion. And that their fellows now
drawing nere to the others company, the former joined with the later, have
euidentlye betrayed the notable theft of this lying and theeuinge Cacus.

But Master Horn, supposing the Emperor upon such respect had so done, tell
us, is the doings of this one Emperor, so prejudicial to our cause, and so
authorized above al exception or plea, that because he did so, we must
straightwaies confess he did well and laufully? Me think it were reason ye
should prove this withal. Well let this go, we will not charge you at this time
so straightly. Yet this question I must needs ask you: Whether this was so
done because he thought the Pope or See of Rome had no authority, or for some
private grudge and quarrel not against the Sea and Pope, but against this Pope.

If ye will say (as ye must needs say this quarrel was but a private and a
personal quarrel, then is the ordinary authority as yet nothing acrased
hereby, but your Argument is then much acrased. If ye will say, he denied, as
ye now do, all manner of authority of the Sea of Rome, then must I answer
you: It is not so. For he was crowned of this Pope called Adrianus Quartus, an
English man: and submitted him self after to Alexander the third, as we
shall anon see. And further I must answer you, that you are the very Cacus we
spoke of, and that these stole^ allegations from Nauclerus do bellow wanting
their company, and do discrie all your theeuish conueyaunce as we have before
declared.

Now next has M. Horn found a Rouland for an Oliver: a dissension betwixt
Roulande and Octauian for the Papacy. For the appeasing whereof, this Frederike
called a Council, and at length the matter being heard, confirmed Octauian,
who was called Victor the.3. as the other was called Alexander the.3. which
name ministers matter of merry pastime to M. Horn to solace him self withal,
as though Alexander named him self so, for that he purposed (belike) to make a
conquest of the matter. And here is dasshed in the marge^t, to set forth and
beutify his narratio^ withal, first, Vrspergensis, then Nauclerus, then
Sabellicus, then Platina, then Nauclerus again, then beside Radeuicus
Frisingensis in his next, Platina, and then Vrspergensis again. As though he
took distinct and several matter from each one. Frederic. Octauianu^
Pontificem co^firmat, eumque albo equo in sidente^ per vrbe^ Ticinensem ducit,
and de mo^e adorat.

Platina in Alex.3. Tunc Episc. ad pedes so Octauiani prosternu^t. Imperator
quoque id ipsum fecit, vt ab eo indulgentia^ acciperent, and sibi obedientiam
sacerent. Vspurg.

Quem Imperator in Concilio Papa^ declaratu^ adorauit, and equu^ eius de more
per vrbem deduxit.


Whereas in a manner al they run one way: and whereof I am most assured, al
against M. Horns own Primacie: part of their testimonies being cut of from
each of them, and so carried craftily by M. Horn into his Cacus cave, bewraieth
al M. Horns theft. Will ye prove the like regiment, M. Horn, by Frederike his
doings, that ye now maintain? Go to then, and see ye prove it us
substantiallye. He refused ye say Pope Rouland: yet he received Pope Octauian,
and confirmed him too, as ye say, yea and led him about the City of Pauia
sitting upon a white Horse, and then adored him too, as I with Platina and
Nauclerus say, or as Vspurgensis says, fell flat before his feet, to
receive pardon, and to become his obediensarie. Al which ye say not, and
therefore, I hear Hercules stolen oxen bellowe out of Cacus den.

Why Master Horn can your ears patiently abide all this? And is your Octauian
for all this, as ye write, a man in all points honest and relligious? Some
thing I perceive there was, that he is made a Saint after his death, Naucler.
geuer. 39.
and that as it is said, there were many miracles done at his Tomb in Luca,
where he was buried before the Image of Nicodemus. Can your stomach digest all
this Master Horn? And can you suffer your Supreme head, like a slave to kiss
the Popes feet, and to become the Master of his Horse? Can ye suffer Miracles
at the Popes tomb, and yet notwithstanding shall he be a man in all points
honest and religiouse? How chance we have not at the least for your comfort one
pretty nip, and to tell us that he called hi^ self Victor, for that he ente^ded
to be a victorious Co^querer, as he was in deed upon your Supreme head the
Emperor Frederike? Surely I marvel why ye should so favorably incline to
this false Antipope, rather then to the true Pope in deed, which was Rouland,
who as Platina writes, was elected of 22. Cardinals: and your Octauian but
of.3. only. And therefore was he, and Frederik that maintained hi^, and not
Rouland, the occasion of the horrible schism ye speak of. And this Rouland was
ever and is taken for the true Pope, yea and was so taken at length by your
Frederike also coming to him to Venice, and kissing his holy feet (for seeing
ye have made the Popes hand holy, Supra in the.114. Division.
I will be so bold to make his feet holy too) and ratifiyng and allowing him
by that humilitye, to be the Supreme head of Christ's Church. And so at the
length (for all your jesting) Alexander has made as great a conqueste upon
your false lying book, and new set up Primacie, as ever did the great
Alexander upon King Darius.

But lo, now ye and your companions, that can bear with Victors conqueste, can
not bear, the matter being all one, the like in Alexander. Wherein I see no
reason, but that perchance ye take Victor to be of your nighe cousinage, for
that he was, as ye are, a great schismatike. And therefore though Friderike did
suffer at the hands, yea and at the feet to of Victor, A fable of the Apology
and M. Fox touching this Alexander treading on the^perours neck.
as he did at Alexanders, yet roreth owte your Apology against him, that he
put ill fauoredly and mo^struouslie this Emperors neck under his feet. Which
seems to be but a fable of such as be parcial writers, and wedded to their
affections, to slander the Pope withal, as Carrion and such other are that
write yt: Although some catholyks perchance, report the same as does
Nauclerus, but with an addition. vel vt Blondus scribit, post quam Pontificis
pedes imperator exosculatus est, ad altar maius ambo principes se amplexati
and exosculati sunt. So that Nauclerus, Nauclerus. Gener. 40. In his mad
Martyrolog. Non tibi inquit, sed Petro, cui successores, pa^eo. Naucler. dict.
gener. 40.
which thowghe catholyke, yet much inclinable as the Germans commonly are to
the Emperors part, seems rather to like the narration of Blondus, that
the emperor did no other the^ the usual honor in kyssing the Popes feet. And if
the tale of th'Apology were true (which M. Fox does also with a ioly gay
picture set forth) thowgh yt make not for the commendation of the Popes
moderation and humility, yet yt makes for his supreme authority. I obey
says the Emperor, not to thee, but to Peter whom thou do succeed.

But to thentent that you M. Horn with the Apology and M. Fox, who always
like bestly swyne do nousell in the donge, and vente up the worste that may be
found against Popes and prelates, may have a just occasion (if any Charity be
in you) to commend the great moderation of this Pope Alexander 3. you may
remember, that this is he to who^ being in extreme misery through the
oppression of the Almayne Army, spoiling and wasting al about Rome, Naucler.
gener. 39. page 225.
Emanuel then Emperor in the East, sent ambassadors, promysing both a great
host against the Almayne Emperor Friderike, and also a vnio^ of the Grecians
with the Romain Church, if he would suffer the Romain Empire, so long divided
(from the time of Charlemayn) to come again to one head and Empire: to whom
also (being then in banishment) the said Emperor sent a second embassy, with
great quantytie of money, promysing to reduce the whole East Church under the
subjection of the West, all Greece under Rome, if he would restore to the
Emperor of Constantinople the Crown of the West Empire, from the which
Frederike seemed now rightlye and worthily to be deprived. To all which this
Pope (notwithstanding the great miseries he stood presentlye in, and was daily
like to suffer through the power of this Frederike) answered. Se nolle id in
vnum coniungere, Page 226.
quod olim de industria maiores sui disiunxissent. That he would not join
that into one, which his Forefathers of old time had of purpose divided. You
will not I trow deny M. Horn (all circumstances duly considered) but that
this was a very great and rare moderation of this Pope Alexander 3. more worthy
to be set forth in figures and pictures to the posteryty for sober and
virtuous, then that fact of him which Master Fox has so blased out, for
proud and hasty. Except your Charyties be such (as verily it seems to be)
that you take more delight in vice then in virtue, and had rather hear one
lewd fact of a Pope, then twenty good. If it be so with you, then is there no
Charity with you. For Charity, as S. Paul describes it, Thinks not evil,
1. Cor. 13. Protestants lack true Charyty.
reioyseth not upon iniquyte, but reioyseth with verytie. It suffers all
things, it believes all things, it hops al things, it bears all things
Contraryewyse, you not only think, but report always the worst: you rejoice
and take great pleasure upon the iniquytie of such as you ought most of all
men to reverence: you are sorye to have the veryty and truth told you. You
suffer and bear nothing in the Church: But for the evil life of a few you
forsake the Communion and society of the whole. You believe as much as pleases
you, and you hope accordingly. And thus much by the way ones for all, touching
your great ambition and desire to speak evil of the Popes, and to report the
worste you can do of them: which you in this book M. Horn have done so
plentifullye and exactlye through this whole process, No^ vt iudicaret eos,
aut causam sedis Apostolicae, sed vt a prudentibus viris addisceret, cui electo
obedire potius deberet. ^rsperg.
of the Princes practice in Ecclesiastical government, as if the evil life of
some Popes were a direct and sufficient argument to prove all Princes Supreme
Governors in all things and causes Ecclesiastical.

I could now show you other authorityes and places out of your own authors
concerning this storye, of Friderike the first making directly against you,
and wherein ye have played the Cacus. As where ye write by the authority of
Vrspergensis, that the Emperor sent for both these Popes to come to him,
mynding to examine both their causes. For yt follows by and by: not to judge
them, or the cause of the Apostolic see: but that he might learn of wise
men, to whether of them he should rather obey.

And is not this think you M. Horn, so craftily to cut of, and steal away
this sentence from your reader, a preatye pageant of Cacus? Namely seeing your
author Nauclerus writes also the like? Gener. 39.
And seeing ye demean your self so unhonestly, and vnclerkly in the principal
matter, M. Horn^ extraordinarye process and lewd ^ayling.
who will now care for your extraordinarye and foolish false excursions,
against the welthy pride, the fearce power, the trayterouse treachery of Popes
at that time? Or for Erasmus comparing the Popes to the successors of Julius
Caesar? Or for Vrspergensis owteries, against their covetousness, and not
against the Popes authority? As for S. Bernarde, who, you say found fault
with the pomp and pride of Eugenius. 3. how clearly he pronounces (that not
withstanding) for the Popes Primacy, I refer you (to be short) to the
Confutation of your lying Apology. All this impertinent railing rhetorike,
Confu. fol. 210.
we freely leave over unto you, to rail and roll your self therein, til your
to^g be weary again, if ye will, for any thing that shall let you. Only as I have
often said, I desire the Reader to mark, that as well this, as other emperors,
were not at varia^ce with the Sea Apostolic it self, or set against the Popes
Authority absolutely, but were at variaunce, with such a pope and such, and
were set against this man's or that man's election, not renouncing the Pope, but
renouncing this man or that man, as not the true and right Pope.

M. Horn. The.117. Division. page 76. a.
About this time, the King of Cicilia and Apulia, had a dispensation from the
Pope for money, Otto Friginge^sis.
to Inuesture Archebisshops with staff or crosier, ringe, palle, myter,
sandalles or slippers: and that the Pope might send into his dominions no
Legate, unless the king should send for him.

Stapleton.
Did the Kings of Sicilia procure a dispensation as ye say M. Horn from the
Pope to inuesture bisshops and to receive no Legate? Vid. de hoc Nau. genesis 41
p. 287. and 288.
Who was then the supreme head I pray you, the Pope that gave the
dispensation, or the King that procured yt? Ye see, good readers, how sauerlye
and hansomly this man, after his old guise, concludes, against him self.

M. Horn. The.118. Division. page 76. a.
Of (.411.) the doi^gs of the Kings of this Realm, in Eccles. matters, before
the Conquest look in the bok De postestate Regia set out by the Prelates, 26.
Hen. 8.
Our English Chronicles make report, that the Kings of this Realm, had not
altogether leafte of their dealing in Chur^he matters, but continued in part
their jurisdiction about Ecclesiastical causes, although not without some
trouble. Polychron. Polychro. Fabian. Polychro. Fabian.
The Popes Legate came into England, and made a Counsel by the assent of King
William the Conqueror. And after that in an (.412.) The.412 untruth. For all
this was but one Council.
other Counsel at Winchester, Polychron. Polychro. Fabian. Polychro. Fabian.
were put down many Bisshops, Abbatts, and priours by the procureme^t of the
King. The King gave to La^frauke the Archbisshoprike of Cantorb. and on our
Lady day the Assumption made him Archebisshope. On whit Sunday, he gave the
Archbisshoprike of York, unto Thomas a Canon of Bayon. When Thomas should
have been consecrated of Lanfranke, there fell a strife betwixt them, about
the liberties of the Church of York. The controversy being about Church
matters, was brought and referred to the Kings (.413.) The.413. untruth.
Fabia^ says not so: neither by the story appears so.
judgment, and Thomas by the Kings commandment, was feign to come to
Lanfrank to be sacred. And afterward, when there grevve greater contention
betwixt these tvvayne about Church matters, the Bishop of Rome remitted the
matter to be determined before the King, and the Bisshops of England, and so
at VVindesour before King William and the Clergy the cause was treated.
Polychron.
Also an other cause was moved before the King of the misorder of Thurstan,
Fabian. Polychron.
whom the King had made Abbot of Glastonbury, by whose judgment the Abbot was
changed, and turned to his own Abbay in Normandye. but the Monks (.414.)
The.414. untruth. They were spread into diverse houses, says Fabian, which you
leave out.
scattered about by the Kings hest. After this the King bestowed many
Bisshoprikes on his Chaplains, as London, Norvviche, Chester, Couentry, etc.
And ruled both temporalty and the spiritualty at his own will: says
Polychronicon: He took noman fro the Pope in his la^d, Polychron.
( he means that the King vvoulde suffer no Legate to enter into the land
from the Pope) but he came and pleased him: he suffered no Counsel made in his
own country without his own leave: Also he would nothing suffer in such a
council, but as he would assent. So (.415.) The.415 untruth. This, So that,
follows not, as shall appear.
that in giving, or translating of spiritual promocions, in giving his assent
to Councels, and suffering nothing to pass without his consent, in hearing and
determining Ecclesiastical causes, in restreining the Popes liberty, without
his special license, and in ruling the spiritualty at his own vvil: King
VVillia^ shows plain, that he (.416.) The.416. untruth. He never took hi^
self, for such.
took him self for the supreme governor within this Realm in all manner of
causes, so well Ecclesiastical as Temporal.

The.19. Chapter: Of England before the Conqueste, Of William the Conqueror,
Rufus his Son, and Henry the first, Kings of England.
Stapleton.
GOod readers, I do most heartily beseech you, even as ye tender either the
truth, or the salvation of your sowles, to have a good and a special regard
to M. Horns narration now following. For now at the length is M. Horn come
from his long and unfruitful wandering in Spain, France, Italy, Germany,
and other countries, to our own native country. Now, where as the late doings
in our Country are such, as we have sequestered our selves from the common and
usual obedience, that all other contries concerning authority in matters
ecclesiastical ever gave, with a singular and peerlesse preeminence to the sea
of Rome, and do yet sequester, the more pity, our selves daily more and
more, making none account of other good princes doings and presidents in this
behalf, and pretending partly in the acts of parliament, Consider the
substantial handling of the matter by M. Horn for England.
partly in the new english books, and daily sermons, that this is no new or
strange example in England, to exclude the Pope from all manner spiritual
jurisdiction to be exercised and practiced there by him: yt behooved our
protestants, especially M. Horn in this his book, that what so ever his
proufes were for other countries, yet for some convenient prouf of the old
practice concerning his new primacie in England, to have wrowght his matters
so substancially, that at least wise, for our own Country, he should have
browght forth good ancient and autentique matter. And will ye now see the wise
and even dealinge of these protestant prelates? Where they pynne up all our
proufes, within vj. hundred years after Christ: M. Horn for the first
thousand years shows no example of his primacie practiced then in Britannie
Fol. 93. Col. 2.
and what so ever we bring after, their Jewel tells us full merely we come
to late, M. Horn in this matter of Supreamacie most weighty to the poor
catholics, the deniyng thereof being more greauously punished by laws, then
any other matter now lying in controversy between the catholyks and
protestants in England: M. Horn I say, for this his own country, which as
approved Chroniclers report, and as him self after alleges, did first of all the Roman provinces, publicly embrace Christ's relligion: for one thousand
years, stands mute. And belike thinking that William Conqueror had
conquered as well all the old catholyke faith in England, as the Land and
people, fansieth a duble conqueste, one upon the goods and bodies, the other
upon the sowles and faith of the English men. But what shall I now say to
this noble and worthy Champion? shall I drive him a little back, M. Horn
begi^neth his new primacie with william Conqueror, as thovv^h he had
conquered both the land and the faith vvithall.
with M. Jewels peremptory challenge and tell him, that he comes to late by
almost five hundred years? Or shall I deal more freely and liberally with
him, then M. Jewel does whith us, and bydde him take the best help he can
for him self? Verily M. Horn had need I did so: And yet all will be to little
for his purpose: as well for that after the conquest he has no sufficient
prouf, for his pretensed supremacy, as for that, what prouf so ever he
brings, yt must yield and give place to the first thousand years, which
bear full testimony for the Popes primacie laufully practiced in our realm
before the conquest.

It were now a matter for to fill a large volume withal, to run a long by
these thousand years, and to show what prouf we have for the popes primacy
before the conquest. My answer would wax to big and to prolixe if I
should so do. But I will only put the good reader in remembrance of a
matter or two: I must therefore pluck M. Horn back from Williams conquest
and desire him to remember an other, and a better, Proufs for the popes
supremacy in Britanie before the Saxons time.

Beda hist. Ang. lib. 1. cap. 4.


and more aunciente conqueste with all, in Britannie, then Williams was, yea
about ix. hundred years before: when this Ilelande of Britanie was first
delivered from the tyrannical yoke, and miserable bondage of dyuelish
idolatry: But by whom M. Horn? Suerlie by pope Eleutherius, to whom king
Lucius sent letters desiringe him, that by his commandment he might be
christened. Fugatius and Damianus (whose holy relics are thought to be now in
Wales, and whose holy remembrance churches there dedicated to God in their
name, Obsecra^s, vt per eius mandatu^ Christianus efficeretur King Lucius and
the realm Christened bi^the popes legate^.

Ireneus li. 3 ca. 3. Ad ha^c enim propter potentiore^ principalitate^ necesse
est oe^m co^uenire Ecclesiam, hoc est, eos qui sunt vndique fideles, in qua
semper ab hijs qui su^t vndique co^seruata est ea, quae est ab Apostolis
traditio. Beda li. cap. 13. ^rosper in Chronic.


do to this day keep and preserve as it were fresh and immortal) sent to
England by the said Eleutherius, did most godly and wonderfully work this
great conqueste. If I should now ask M. Horn, what Lucius meant to send so
far for instructours and teachers of the Christian faith, namely France
being at hand: where about this time the Christian Churches were adorned with
many learned Bishops and Martyrs: though he would perchance seek many a
pretye shyfte, to shyfte away this demand, yet should he never make any good
and sufficient aunsweare, until he confessed the Popes primacye, to be the
very cause to send so far of. The which the blessed Martyr of God and great
learned Bishop of Lions in France Ireneus writing in the time of our first
Apostle Eleutherius does confess, writing: That all Churches must agree with
the Church of Rome, for that the said Church has the greater principality,
and for that the traditions of the Apostles have ever been kept there.

In case now the pope had nothing to do in matters ecclesiastical within
this Ileland in the time of the old Britains, why did pope Celestinus appoint
to the Scotts, their first Bishop Palladius as Prosper writes a notable
Chronicler of that age? Why did he also send into this Ileland S. German
Bishop of Antisiodorum, to bring by the Apostolical Authority the Britaynes
from the heresye of the Pelagians, as the said Prosper witnesses?

Let us now come to the time of the Saxons converted by S. Augustine: And
then shall we find so many, and so full testimonies both of the popes
primacie, and of the princes subjection, as I trow M. Horn him self, Pope
Celestinus practiced his supremacye in the Saxons time.
as impudent as he is, can not, nor will not deny them. Which I do ouerpasse,
by reason they are readely to be found in our worthy cou^triema^ S. Bid,
lately set forth by me in the English tongue, and in the Fortress also
adjoined to the same story, I will now add this only, that from the time
wherein Beda ends his story, to the conquest of the foresaied William, The
Popes supremacy in England sithence the Saxons time.

Beda. lib. 1 ca. 29. li, 3. ca. 14.22. and 25. li. 2. c. 4. and 19.


there appears in our domestical stories a perpetual and continual
practice of the said primacie in this realm by the popes, as well in those
books as be extant in printe, as in other: As in Asserius Meneuens. that
continues the story from the death of Bid, to the year of our Lord: 914.
in Henricus Huntingtoniensis, Gulielmus Malmesburiensis, Alphredus
Beuerlacensis, Rogerus Houedenus, Florilegiu^, sieve Mattheus
Westmonasteriensis, Chronica Ioha^nis Londoniensis, and many other yet not
printed (that I have not seen) and which are hard to be seen, by reason of the
great spoil of such kind of books of late made, in the suppressing of
monasteries and colleges. Fortress. par 2. c. 8. A co^plai^t for defac^ng of
Libraries
The which suppression, and it were for nothing else, but for the loss of so
many worthy Chroniclers, can not be to much lamented, the loss being
incomparably greater, then the loss of any princes treasure. The case is now
to be pityed, for that the very Library of the University of Oxforde has
felt the rage of this spiteful spoil, not so much as one book at this hour
there remaining. This is one of the worthy fruits of your new ghospel M. Horn.
As appears also by the late vprores in these low Countries where by the Gueses,
not only the Monasteries, but the Libraries also (namelye of the gray friars
in Antwerpe) be most shamefully defaced, King Alured: or Alphred the fou^der of
the university of Oxforde.

A schole of the Saxons at Rome. An. Dom. 880. Asserius Meneuensis. Gul.
Noueoburgens. M.S. Henr. Hungtington.

Ioannes Scotus. Idem Henricus. King Alured was anointed king of England at
Rome.

Asserius. Quo tempore Leo Papa.4. Apostolicae sedi praeerat, qui praefatum
infantem Alphredu^ confirmauit, et in filium adoptionis sibi accepit, and oleo
vnctum consecrauit in Regem. Vide deflorationes Alphredi Beuerlacensis.

A Patre suo Adelulpho Roman mittitur. and a papa Leone. 4 in Regem inu^gitur.
Of S. vvulstane bishop of vvorceter.


the books burnt to ashes, and the old monuments destroyed. The naming of
Oxforde, brings to my remembrance the noble and worthy fou^der of the
university there, I mean King Alurede. In whose time there was at Rome a
special schole or college, for English me^, priuileged and exe^pted from al
tax and tollages, by pope Martin the.2. at the desire of this King. Who sent
to him for a gift a piece of the holy cross. This King being learned himself
loved entierly learned me^, especially Ioa^nes Scotus, that translated out of
the Greek to^g the works of Dionysius Areopagita: whoo^ he used most
familiarly. This Alurede, being but yet young, was sent by the King Edeluulphus
his father to Rome accompanied with many noble men, where pope Leo the.4. did
confirm him, and took him as his son by adoption, and did also annoynte and
consecrate him King of England. The manifold practice of the said primacy
continued from this Kings time, even to the time, and in the time of blessed S.
Edward, the immediate predecessor of William, saving Harolde who reigned not
one full year. In the twenty year of the said King Edward, the blessed man
Wulstanus, that was before a monk and prior there, was consecrated bishop of
Worceter. A man of such notable virtue, and such austerity of life, as he
resembled the old virtuous and renowned religiouse men. As one that among all
other his notable qualities, continued so in praying, studiyng and fasting,
that somtymes in four days and four nights he never slepte: and that little
rest which he took, was upon a foorme in the Church, using none other
bolsterre, but his book, wherein he prayed or studied. This man, I say, was
made bishop, and confirmed by the popes Legates being then in the realm before
the Co^queste. He was confirmed by the popes legates before the conquest. Henry
Hu^tingto.
Our author does not write this of uncertain heresay, but of certain
knowledge, as a man of that age, and one, that as it seems, had seen this
blessed man, and talked with him.

To discourse upon other particularities as upon the continual appeal to Rome,
upon wills, charteres, and such other writings sent from Rome, to avoid
tediousnes I do purposely forbear. But I will now notify to the good reader
two things only. First that from the time of the good King Offa (in the year
of our Lord.760.) who gave after the example of Inas not long before him, Idem
He^r. Hunting. Polid. l. 4. The continual practice of the Popes Primacy in the
realm of England before the conqueste in payinge the Peter pence, and
receiving the palle.
to the Pope as to the Vicare of S. Peter, the Peter pence, even to the
conquest the payment of the said Peter pence has continued: and they were from
time to time levied, the Kings taking good diligent order, for the sure
paymente of the same. Secondly that from the time of S. Augustine, the first
Archebisshop among the Saxons, both he and al other Archebishops even to the
conquest received their palle from Rome: an infallible token of their
subjection to the Pope, as Peter's successor, upon whose holy tomb, the palle
is first laid, and after taken of, and sent to the Archebisshop. As these two
tokens of subjection continued from time to time, to the conqueste: so they
continewed also without any interruption, (unless it were very seldom, and
for a little space by reason of some private controversy, betwixt the Pope and
the King) even from thence to our fresh memory, beside many notable things
otherwise in this realm since the conquest, continually practiced, that serve
for the declaration and confirmation of the said primacy. Perchance M. Horn
will say to me, Sir, though I specify nothing before the conquest to justify
the princes supremacy, yet in the margent of my book, I do remitte the
reader, to a book made in King Henry the.8. days. De potestate Regia.
Wherein he may see, what doings the Kings of England had in this realm
before the conquest, for matters Ecclesiastical. A pretty and a clerklie
remission in deed, to send your reader for one thowsande of years together,
in the which ye should have laid out before hi^, your best and principal
proufs, to seek out a book, he wotteth not where, and which, when it is at
length found, shall prove your matter, no more substa^tially, then ye have done
hitherto your self. And therefore because ye work by signs and profers only
and marginal notes, I will remitte both you and my reader to a The.411. untruth,
for there is not as much as one example of this nevve Primacye brought forth
in that book concerning England. And therefore this is a marginal lie of M.
Horns. And so are ye now vvelcome to England M. Horn vvithall your ioly
company, that is with.400. untruths and more cleaving fast to your side
beside many a trym folly otherwise,
marginal note also, for your and his full answer.

Now then, let us go forward in Gods name, and see whether King William
conquered, both the land and the Catholic faith all at ones. Let us
consider if this King and the realm did not then acknowledge the Popes
Supremacy, as much, and as reverently as any Christian prince does now liui^g.
I say nothing of the oath he took the day of his coronation, promising by oath
to Aldrede Archbisshop of York that crouned hi^, at S. Peter's alter in
Westminster, before the clergy, and the people, that he would defend the holy
Churches and their governors. But tell your readers good M. Horn I beseech you,
why that King William, contrary to the ancient order, used ever before and
since, was not crowned of Stigandus the^ living and being Archbishop of
Canterbury, VV. Conquerours oath.

In addit. ad. Noueoburg. M.S. promitte^s se velle sanctas Dei Ecclesias, ac
rectores defendere.


but of the bishop of York. If ye can not or will not for very shame to betraie
your cause tell you reader, then will I do so much for you. Forsooth, the cause
was, that the Pope laid to his charge, that he had not received his palle
canonically. The said Stigandus was deposed shortly after in a Council holden
at Winchester in the presence of.ij. Ide^ Noueobur. M.S. Pallium canonice no^
suscepisti.

Fabian. par. 7. cap. 220.

The cause why the Archbishop Stiga^dus was deposed.


Cardinals sent from Pope Alexander the.2. and that (as Fabian writes) for
three causes. The first for that he had holden wrongfully the bisshoprik, while
Robert the Archbishop was living. The second for that he had received the palle
of Benett bishop of Rome, the fifth of that name. The third for that he
occupied the said Palle without license and leful authority of the court of
Rome. Guil. Malmesb. Stigandu^ perpera^ and falso Archiepiscopu^, per Card.
Romans and Armenfridu^ episcopum Sedunensem deponi passus est.

Polychronic. lib. 7. cap. 1.


Your author Polychronicon writes in the like effect. Neubrigensis also newly
pri^ted, touches the depositio^ of this Stiga^dus by the Popes Legate in
England, and reports that the Popes Legate Canonically deposed him. What
liking have you now M. Horn of King Willia^s supremacy? Happy are you with
your fellows, the protestant bishops, and your two Archbisshops, that the said
William is not now king. For if he were, ye se cause sufficient, Neub. lib. 1.
cap. 1.
why ye al should be deprived, as well as Stiga^dus. And yet there is one other
thing worse tha^ this, and that is schism and heresy. M. Horn and his
fellows are to be deposed, if he allow VV. Conquerours supremacy.
Who would ever have thought good reader, that the Pope should ever have found
M. Horn him self, so good a proctour, for the Papacy, against him self and
his fellows? For lo, this brazen face which shortly for this his incredible
impudency, will be much more famous, then freer Bacons brazen head, of the
which the scholars of Oxforde were wont to talk so much, does not blushe, M
Horns impude^cie.
to tell thee, good reader, to his own confusion of the Popes Legates, and the
Council kept at Winchester: And all this is ye wotte well to show, that King
William was supreme head in all causes as well temporal as spiritual. Then does
he plead on forth full lustely for the Pope: for King William hears a
certain Ecclesiastical matter being in controversy, and dependinge in the
Popes cowrte between the Archebisshop of York and the Archebisshop of
Caunterbury: the which cause the Pope had remitted to be determined by the King
and the bishops. Gul. Malmesb. Ex praecepto Alexandri. 11. ventilata est causa
etc. Adfuit Hubertus Legatus Papae.

Fabian. cap. 222. Polich. lib. 7. cap. 3. Guiliel. de Pontifi. Guil. Hu^tingt.


Well said M. Horn, and like the Popes faithful proctour. For hereof
follows that the Pope was the supreme head and judge of the cause: And the
King the Popes Commissioner, by whose commandment, the cause was sent over
to be heard in England. And yet was Hubertus the Popes Legate present at the end
this notwithstanding.

M. Horn would now belike make us believe, that King William also thrusted out
Abbats and supressed Monasteries, when yt pleased him. For he tells us, that
by the Ki^gs judgment Abbat Thurstan was changed, and his monks scattered
abroad: but he had forgotte to set in also, that his author, and others say:
that it was for slaying of certain of his monks, and wounding of certain
other. The monks also had hurt many of his men. And your author of the
Pollichronico^ tells, that these mo^ks were scattered abroad by the ki^gs
hest, by diverse bisshopriks and abbays: which latter words ye leave out. As also
you do in your Author Fabia^, who says not, they were scattred about, as you
report, as though they had been scattred out of their coats, as of late days
they were, but he says: they were spread abroad into diverse houses through
England: so that they changed but their house, not their Religion. And so
this was no spiritual matter that the king did, neither gave he herein any
judgment in any spiritual cause.

Now if all other arguments and evidences failed us, to show that king
William took not him self for supreme governor in all manner causes, as you
most untruly and fondly auouche, we might well prove it against you by the
story of Lanfranke, whom king William, Notable places of Lanfra^cus for the
popes primacie. Lanfran. contra Berengar: de sacrame^to Et hoc impio ore
garristi quod garrista nemo loquitur: no^ haereticus, non schismaticus. non
falsus aliquis Christianus. fol. 2.
as ye confess, made archbishop of Canterbury. Though according to your old
manner ye dissemble as well the depryuation of Stigandus, in whose place the
king set Lanfranke, as that Lanfranke receyuid his palle from Rome, and
acknowledged not the king, but the pope for supreme head of the Church. Which
thing does manifestly appear, in his learned book he wrote against your
great graundsier Berengarius. Who, as ye do now, denied then the
transubstantiation and the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament:
and called the Church of Rome, which had condemned his heresy, as ye use to
do, the Church of the malignante, the council of vanitye, the sea of Satan.
To whom Lanfrancus answers, that there was never any heretyke, any
schismatyke, any false Christian, that before him had so wyckedly babled
against that see. And says yet farther in an other place of the said book,
Quotquot a primordio Christianae Ecclesiae, Christiani nominis dignitate
gloriati sunt, etsi aliqui relicto veritatis tramite per deuia erroris incedere
maluerunt, sedem tamen sancti Petri Apostoli magnifice honorauerunt, nullamque
aduersus eam huiusmodi blasphemiam, vel dicere, vel scribere praesumpserunt.
Whosoever from the beginning of Christ's Church, Fol. 13. Beati patres
co^corditer astruxeru^t, haericum esse hoe^m omnem, qui a Romana and universally
Ecclesia in sidei doctrina discordat, in edit. Lo nan. in 8. An. 1551.
were honored with the name of Christian me^, though some forsaking the Truth,
have gone astray, yet they honored much the Sea of Peter, neither presumed at
any time either to speak or to write any such blasphemy. He says also, that
the blessed Fathers do uniformly affirm that man to be an heretic, that does
dissent from the Roman and universal Church in matter of faith.

But what need I lay forth to thee good Reader, Lanfra^ks learned books, or to
go from the matter we have in hand ministered to us by M. Horn, concerning
this matter sent to be determined before the King? Such as have or can get
either Polychronico^ or Fabia^, I would wish them to see the very place: and
tha^ will they meruail, that M. Horn would for shame bring in this matter
against the Popes primacy: for the confirmation whereof ye shall find in
La^franks reasoning before the King for his right upon the church of York
something worth the noting for the Popes primacy. Beside this he writes that
Lanfrank was a man of singular virtue, co^stancy, and gravity, whose help and
counsel for his affairs, the King chiefly used. And therefore your conclusion
that ye infer, of such premises as ye have specified, which as I have
showed, do not impugn, but establish the popes primacy, is a very fond, folish
and false conclusion. It appears well both by Fabian and by Polychronicon,
that he would sometime like a co^querour for his own lucre and safety, both
displace the English prelates, as he did the Knights and Nobles of the realm,
to place his own Normans in their room: and also have a piece many times of
his own mind contrary to the precise order of the Canons and laws
ecclesiastical. And this not only Fabian and Polychonicon, but before them both
William of Malmesbury does also witness. Such faults therefore of William
Co^querour and of others, that your author and other report in
disco^mendation, serve you notwithstanding (such beggarly shifts you are
forced to use) for good arguments and substa^tial bulwarks, Lib. De po^tif.
Angli.
to build your new supreamacy upon. And now might I or any wise man much
meruail, to consider how that ye have lade^ and freighted this one page of your
book with no less then.6. quotatio^s of the Polychronico^, and yet not one of
them serving for, but rather against you: yea each one overthrowing your
purpose. And therefore because ye would be the less espied, as throughout your
whole discourse, so here ye neither name book nor chapter of your author.
Beside that it is untrue that ye write, as out of Polychronicon, that the popes
Legates kept a Council before which was kept at Winchester. For he speaks of
none other but of that, Polychr. li. 7. ca. 1.
where Stiga^dus, that we spoke of, was degraded, and afterward kept streighly
in prison by William Conqueror. And the Bishops and Abbats ye speak of, were
not deposed by the King, but as your self write, Fabian. cap. 220.
by the kings means and procureme^t. Which was (as Fabia^ reports) all to
the intent he might prefer Normans to the rule of the Church, as he had
preferred his Knights to the rule of the temporaltie: that he might stand in
the more suertie of the land.

M. Horn. The.119. Division. page 77. a.
In like manner did his son William Rufus, who made Anselm Bishop of York
and afterward translated him to Cantorbury. But within a while strife and
contention fell between him and Anselm, Fabian.
for Anselm might not call his Synods, nor correct the bishops but as the king
would: the king also chale^ged the inuestiture of bisshops. This king also
forbad the paying of any money or tribut to Rome: as says Polychronicon.

The like inhibition made Henry the first, and (417.) The.417. untruth. He
made holy Church free says Fabyan. Fabyan.
gave Ecclesiastical promotions, Matthew. Par.
as his ancestors had done: wherefore Anselme fell out with the king, and
would not consecrate such Prelates, as he being a Lay man had made: but the
Archbishop of York (.418.) The 418 untruth. For the pleasure of the King
left out.
did consecrate the^, and therefore Anselme (.419.) The.419. untruth. he fled
not to Rome but was sent thither by the king.
fled the Realm. In an other council at London, the spiritual condescended,
that the kings officers, should punish Priests for whoordome. The cause of
this decree, as it seems, was, that a Cardinal named Ioannes Cremensis,
that came to redress the matter, after he had enueighed against the vice,
was him self the same night taken tardy. In the which council also ( says
Polydore) the king provided many things to be enacted which should greatly
help to lead a Godly and blessed life. Simeon Dunelmensis Hen. Huntingtonus
Roge. Houedenus. Matt. Paris. Mat. VVestmonast.
After this the king called an other Council at Sarisbury, Sommoning thither
so well the chief of the Clergy, as the people, and swore them unto him, and
unto William his son. Whereupon Polydorus takes occasion to speak of the
order of our Parliamente, though it have a French name, yet in deed to be a
council of the Clergy, Polidorus. Polidorus. Nauclerus. Abbas Vrsp.
and the Laity, whereof the Prince has a full ratifiyng or enfringing voice.
And not only ( says he) this king did make Bisshoppes and Abbottes ( which he
calls) holy rites, Laws of religion, and Church ceremonies ( as other
likevvyse call it ecclesiastical busynes) but the Princes of every nation,
begane every where to claim this right unto the^ selves of nami^g and denouncing
of Bisshops, the which to this day they hold fast with toothe and nail, Also
Martinus here notes. Until this time, and from thence (.420.) The.420.
untruth. flatly belying Martinus.
eue^ til our days, the king of Hungary makes and inuestureth according to
his pleasure, Bisshops and other Ecclesiastical persons within his Dominions.

Stapleton.
Concerning William Rufus King.
Ye shall now good reader see a more euidente testimony of M. Horns meruelouse
new logike and divinity, whereof I spoke even now. M. Horn buyldeth his new
primacie upon the doings of ill princes. Eusebius de vitae Constable. lib. 1.
prope finem.
For is not this a worthy and a clerkly conclusion? The wicked king Rufus
would not suffer the blessed and learned archbishop of Canterbury Anselme, to
call his Synodes and correct the Bishops: he challenged the inuestiture of
Bishops: he would pay no tribute to Rome. Ergo the Queen of England is
supreme head of the Church of England. The losenes and fondnes of this
argument, every child may sone epsy. By this argument he may set the Popes
crown upon the head of the wicked and heathen Prince especially the tyra^te
Licinius, with whom Eusebius co^paring the good and Christian Emperor
Constantine co^partner with him in the empire, and not in his wyckednes,
writes thus. (...), etc.

First then he watched and observed the Priests of God, that were under his
gouernemente, and whereas they had nothing offended him, he by curiouse and
subtyle working, devised pretensed matter to trouble and vex^ them. The
agreablenes between Rufus, and the tyra^t Licinius, for stayyng of
ecclesiastical councels.
When he could find no just matter to accuse them withal, he made a
proclamation that the Bishops for (...). etc.
no manner of matter should assemble together, and that yt should not be
lawful to any of them to repair to their neighbors Churches, (...). etc.
or to call any Synod, or place to consulte and debate, upon such things,
as apperteyned to the commoditye of the Church. This was his dryfte, by the
which he sowght their destruction. For either the Bishops were in danger to
be punished* if they tra^sgressed his law, or if they kept the law, they
broke the order and custom of the Church. For they could not advise the^
selves in any weighty matters but in a Synod. And this wicked man hated of God
gave this commandment, that he might work quite contrary to the doeinges of
good Constantyne, whom God loved. For he, such was his reverence to God, such
was his study and endeavor to have peace and agreemente, assembled Gods
priests together. M. Horn like the spider and the fly.

The worthiness of Bishop Anse^me. Guil Maelmesb. in lib. de Pontif. Henri^.
Hunting. in Histor. Angl.

The causes of dissen^io^ between King ^ufus and Anselmus Edmerus. de vita
Ansel. li. 2 Rege^ pro Ecclesiaru^ quae de die in die^ destrueba^tur
releuatione pro Christianae l^gis quae in multis violabatur renouatione, pro
diuersoru^ moru^ qui o^ni ordine hominum quotidie nimis corrumpebantur,
correctione coepit interpellare.


The Other co^trariwyse went about to dissolve those things that were well
ordained and to break peace and agreement. Thus far Eusebius of the heathen
tyran Licinius. Ye play therefore M. Horn like a very spider, that gathers
nothing but poison out of sweet herbs, and so do you out of good chronicles.
Ye are like to the fly that loves to dwell in the horse dong. I would to God
your Reader M. Horn, would either advisedly weigh, what an ill King this
William Rufus was, by the most agreeable consent of all writers: and what
strange and wonderful tokens were seen in his time, and how he ended his life
being slain by the glau^sing of an Arrowe, as he was a hu^ting: or the
excellent learning, co^stancy and virtue of the B. Anselmus: and the great
miracles, that God wrought by him, as well before, as after his death, set
forth by the best Historiographers of that time: especially of Henry
Hu^tington, William of Malmesbury, and one Edmerus. Who has made.ij. special
Treatises, the one concerning Anselmus doings, with this king and king Henry,
the other concerning his private life. The which I would wish the gentle Reader,
to read, to know the better the worthiness of this man, and withal, the state of
the co^trouersy betwixt hi^ and the two kings: William Rufus, and Henry Which
in effect concerning William Rufus rested in that the said William, would not
at the admonition of this good man as well leave of other faults, as also the
inuesturing of Bishops, the pilling of the spiritualty and te^poralty, and the
selling of bisshopriks, which was bought and sold as plainly as other
merchandise: as M. Horns Author Fabian, beside others does declare: The
beginning of the Kings displeasure against Bishop Anselme, rose principally for
that he would not according to his expectation give him in the way of thanks,
Edmer. lib 2.
a thousand pounds for making hi^ Archbishop of Canterbury. And yet as naught
as this king was, he never denied the Pope to be Supreme Head or Judge of the
Church, no nor the payment of the tribut called Rome shot: but for a time
pretending he knew not who was the true Pope (the church of Rome the^ being
troubled with schism) and he seeming for the time to favor rather the false,
then the true Pope, which was Vrbane. Whom, this notwithstanding, he
acknowledged for the true Pope: Edmer. dict. lib. 2. Attamen posthaec et
Vrbanum per VValterum Albanensem episcopum, qui palliu^ a Roma Anselmo
Cantuariam detulit pro Papa suscepit et principum suorum co^silio actus in
amicitiam suam virum recepit.
and received Walter the Popes legate that brought the Palle for Anselme, and
received Anselme also into his friendship. Henry of Huntington writes, that
the king him self sent for the Palle, the which being brought to Cau^terburie,
and set upon the Altar, was for the honor of S. Peter kissed of al men most
humbly kneeling.

We have now showed how and after what fasshio^ the king forbod the tribut to
be paid to Rome: the which, I marvel why ye tell it rather out of
Polichronico^, then Fabian, which says it as well as the residue ye allege.
But not for any of his good deeds. Henric. Hunting. Cap. 225.
For describing the death of this William, he tells, that the day when he
died, he held in his hands the three Bisshopriks of Canterbury, of Winchester,
and of Salisbury, and diverse Abbeies, of the which he let some to farm. Also
he restrained the money that of old time was paid to Rome, called Rome shot. Al
which is told of Fabia^ and the other Chroniclers, to show what a covetous man
he was, and injurious to the Church, not to show any practice of due and
laufull Authority thereby. Yet this serves notwithstanding M. Horns purpose
very well. What M. Horn? Will you have our Princes now like to William Rufus,
and his Father the Conqueror to tax and pille both the Spiritualty and
Temporalty of their realm, as they out of measure did? For so both
Polichronicon and Fabian report (which you conceal) that notwithstanding the
stay of this tribute to Rome, yet did this William pill and shave his people
with tribute, and misuse them with diverse other disorders. Or as Fabian says,
He pilled the Spirituality and Temporalty with unreasonable taskes and tributs.
Concerning king Henry the first.
Such a one you bring forth as a worthy example of your new Supremacy, and
yet can ye not fasten it upon him neither.

Edmer. lib. 2. De vita Anselmi.

Post ea omnia regauit Anselmum rex, quatenus ipsemet Romam iret.

Henr. Hungt. Rogatus a Rege perrexit Romam.

Ide^ He^ric. Hu^gt. Anno. 1107. statuit vt nu^qua^ per donationem baculi
pastoralis vel a^nuli, quisquam de episcopatu vel abbatia ^er rege^ vel
quamlibet laica^ manum in Anglia inuestiretur.

^ex antecessoru^ suorum vsu relicto, ^ec personas quae in regimen Ecclesiarum
sumebantur per se eligit, nec eas per dationem virgae pastoralis quibus
praeficie batur, inuestiuit. Edmer. lib. 2. de vita Anselmi.


But much less shall ye fasten it upon king Henry following who (though he were
for a time displeased with Anselme, for that he would neither consecrate those
Bishops, nor communicate with them whom the King had inuestured, and because
the Pope had so commanded, the matter yet standing in controversy) did not
fly, as ye write, but at the Kings desire went to Rome, to see if he could
mollify the Pope: And afterward the king was perfitly reconciled to him: and
the King made an ordinance and a decree, that from that time foreward, nor
Bishop, nor Abbat should be inuestured by the king or any other lay man, by
the pastoral staff and the ring. This writes Henry Archedeacon of
Huntington, a writer then living. The like also Edmerius Anselmes companion in
his exile writes. And that the king was very glad, that he had made peace
and accord with Anselme. And had great hope, that he should the sooner subdue
Normandy. Even as it chanced: for he had a notable victory, and took
prisoners his brother Robert and other Princes that assisted Robert.

The which thing he certified Anselme of by his letters sent to him into
England: and all men of those days imputed his victory to the agreamente
made with Anselme. Tell me now in good faith M. Horn, who was the Supreme
Head, the king that yielded to the Pope for inuesturi^g, Idem.
or the Pope that would never yield to him, nor the Emperor Henry the.4.
neither, in this matter, Omnes qui haec gesta tu^c te^poris audiere, ea meritis
co^cordiae qua^ rex cu^ Ansel. fecerat ascripsere Fabian. cap. 227.
but did excommunicate the Emperor: and king Henry was feign to forsake him
and his doings, though he were him self a mighty Prince and the Emperors
Father in law, by Maude the Empress his daughter.

I now also perceive that a Horn will not lightly blush, M. Horn shows him
self worthy to be punished for whoredom by his own story.
for if it could, ye would never for shame have told your Reader, of these
Priests that were punnished for whoredom, for saving of your own and Maistres
Madges poor honesty. And yet your whoredom infinitely excedeth theirs. For
they were punished for keeping company with their concubines or their wives
whom they had laufully married before they were ordered. But you after
Priesthod do marie, which never was allowed, but ever condemned as well in the
Greek Church as in the Latin. And now deck your margent as thick as ye
will, with Fabia^, Simeon Dunelmens. Rogerus Houedenus, Henricus Huntingtonus,
Matheus Parisie^s. Matheus Westmonasterie^s. and Polidorus, and blow out, as it
were out of your own horn, your own dishonesty and shame as long as ye will:
and see what supreamacy ye shall buyld upon such a fickle and filthy foundation.
Fabian.

Simeon Dunelmens. and Rogerus Houed. Rex tenuit Conciliu^ magnu^ apud Lo^donu^
de vxoribus sacerdotu^ prohibe^ lis, etc. Concessere namque regi iustitia^ de
vxoribus sacerdotu^, and improuidi habiti sunt: accepit eni^ rex pecuniam
infinitam de presbyteris and redemit eos.

Similia habet, and Henr. Huntington.


Verily your own authors do witness, that this king kept a great Council at
London, where among al other Decrees (says Fabian) one was, that priests
should forgo their wives. And if the popes Legate was taken as ye write, in
whoredom (who yet, as Mattheus Westmonast. writes, was no priest but a
correctour of priests, and thereby excused his fault) what does that relieve
your cause, or wherein does it save your honesty? For the king did not punish
these fornicatours, but by the clergies consent. Wherein they were by their
rash grant ouerseen and circumuented For the King took a great mass of
money of the parsons that were faultye, and so dismissed them. Ye tell us now
out of Polidore, that the parliament is in deed a Council of the clergy and
the Layetie. Lib. 11.

The order of the parliame^te abovvt the conqueste.

Parliame^tum est ex 3. gradibus sieve generibus: scilicet ex procuratoribus
cleri, militibus co^munitatis, ciuibus and Burgensibus, qui repraesenta^t totam
communitatem Angliae. Quia quilibet magnatum est ^bi pro propria persona and
non pro alia.


If ye mean an Ecclesiastical council, then Polydore neither says it, nor
means yt. For as he makes the parliamente an assemble for politic matters,
to the which the prelates also come as Barons: so for matters ecclesiastical
he appoints specialle the convocation. Truth yt is, that before the
conqueste and in William Conquerours time to (as appears by old records,
written as it seems about the conquest) the proctours of the clergy sat in
the Lower house. And the said records do show that the Parliament properly
stands and consists in.3. degrees: that is, of the proctours of the
clergy, of the knights of the sheere, and of the Burgeses and Citizens. For
they represent the people and comminaltie of the realm. As for the noble men,
bishops and other be there, for their own persons, and not for other: if we
shall believe the said ancient records. Now though these many years, for
matters politic the co^uocation have had nothing to do, yet as of^ as any
paieme^t is to be made, it takes no place by virtue of Parliament against the
Clergy, onles the Clergy do consent. If this be true in money matters, and if in
au^cie^t time the Clergy had to do in civil matters also (the which prerogative,
belik, they left volu^tarely, that they might the better attend their own
spiritual vocation) what an account ought of all good reason to be made of the
late parliament, M. Horns wisdom in reasoning against him self.
wherein mere Lay men have turned vpsidowne the state of the Catholic faith
against the full minds of the Clergy, I leave it to every wiseman well to
consider. But as I began to say, If Polidore means not the Parliamente to
be a Council of Spiritual matters, to what purpose, Polidorus lib. 11.
Admonebat ne sanctos ritus, neue religionis iura, et ceremonias verteret
pollueretque.
or with what great wisdom have ye alleged him: or that he calls the
making of Bisshops and Abbats, holy rites, laws of religion, and church
ceremonies: seeing that the King gave over the electing of bishops, and seeing
that your Author does show, that Anselme rebuked the King therefore?

Now to those matters of England M. Horn adds a great Untruth of the
King of Hungary, tellyng us out of Martinus, that the King of Hungary,
until this time, (which is the year of grace. 1110.) and from thence even til
our days makes and inuestureth according to his pleasure, bisshops etc. This
I say is a great and flat untruth. For Martinus here says plainly the
contrary, thus. At this time the King of Hu^gary (says Martinus) writing many
aduertisements to the Pope by his letters, gave over the inuesturing of Bishops
and of other prelates, Martinus Polonus in, Pascha li. 2. Renunciauit
inuestituris Episcoporum and alioru^ praelatoru^.
which until that time the kings of Hungary were wont to make. These are the
true words of Martinus in this place. Now what passing impudency is this of M,
Horns? That which his Author tells for the Popes primacy, this man wresteth
it to the Princes. And therefore whereas Martinus tells only, that until
that time kings of Hungary invested the Bishops, and adds farther that at the
same time the king of Hungary gave over the same into the Popes hands, M.
Horn both lewdely concealeth that, and also of his own, most impudentlye and
shamelessely adds, and from thence even til our days: which Martinus not
only avouches not, but tells also plainly the contrary: to wit, that, at
that time the king gave over al such matters. Farther to make the matter sound
more princely, you make Martinus say, that the king of Hungary invested
Bishops, according to his pleasure. Which words (according to his pleasure)
are not in Martinus at al, but it is a point of your descant, upon his plain,
and a fit of your own volu^tary, at your pleasure. In deed this sou^ded
pleasauntly in M. Horns ears, that by this exa^mple he might also go for a
Bishop, made at the Princes pleasure, and to be removed again at her highness
pleasure. But you heard before by the form of Paschalis his grant made to
Henry the.4. that though the Prince have the inuesturing and confirming of
Bishops granted him, yet it was never so granted to Princes, that their
only pleasure suffised to make a man a true Bishop. For first, whom the Prince
invested and confirmed, Vide Naucleru^ generat. 38. page 183.
he should be, libere praeter violentiam and simoniam electus, chosen freely
without violence or simony on the Princes part. Which great faults, both the
Emperors of Germany, and the kings of our land, such as had the inuesturing
of Bishops in their own hands, namely Henry the.4. Emperor, and William
Rufus of England, most grieuouslie and daily committed. Secondarelye though he
were invested and confirmed of the Prince, Did. 63. in Synod.
yet post inuestituram Canonice Consecrationem accipiant ab episcopo ad quem
pertinuerint, after the inuesturing let them (says Paschalis) be consecrated
of the Bishop to whom they belong. So likewise, Leo.8. in his grant made to
Otho. the.1. giving to the Emperor the inuesturing of Bishops, adds, Et
consecrationem vnde debent, and to be consecrated, where they ought to be.
Which words vnde debent, where they ought, you for the nonse left out in your
alleging of this grant made to Otho, to thentent that your inuesturing of the
Prince, Fol. 7^. Fac. 1.
being without any consecration at al of your Metropolitan (him self poor
man, being no Bishop neither) might seem to be good and sufficient, and to have
example of antiquity. For that purpose also ye make Martinus here to say, that
the king of Hungary made Bishops according to his pleasure. But you see now
it is not the Princes only pleasure that makes a Bishop, but there must be
both free election, without either forcing the Clergy to a choice, or forcing
the chosen to filthy bribery, and also there must follow a due consecration,
which in you, and al your fellows do lack. And therefore are in deed (by
the way to conclude it) no true Bisshoppes, neither by the law of the
Church, as you see, An. 2^. Henric. 8. cap. 14. An. 1. Elizab. cap. 1.
neither yet by the laws of the Realm, for want of due Consecration,
expressly required by an Act of Parliament, renewed in this Queens days in
Suffragane Bisshoppes, much more in you.

M. Horn. The.120. Division. page 74. b.
And he^e sithen I am entered into the noting of the practices of other
Countries in this behalf: I might not only note the doings about (.421.)
The.421. Untruth. not about this time, by 150. years at the least.
this time of Frederike King of Cicill, and James the King of Spain his
brother, in reformation of Relligion in their dominions, as appears in their
Epistles vvrite^ by Arnoldus de noua Villa, but also make a digressio^ to the
state of other parts in Christe^do^, as of the churches of Greece, of Armenia,
of Moscouia, etc. that acknowledged not any, but (.422.) The 422. Untruth.
They of Armenia never acknowledged their Prince for such.
only their Princes to be their supreme governors in all things next to Christ:
as especially also to note that most ancient part of Christe^dom southvvard in
Aethiopia, containing.62. kingdoms under the ruling of him vvho^ we misname
Presbyter Ioannes, as who say he were a Priest, and head Bishop over those
christian Realms, having such a power with them, as the Popes (423) The 423.
Untruth. Sla^derus.
vsurpatio^ has chale^ged here in Europe, to be an head or universal Priest
and king. If we may believe Sabellicus, who says that he has both often
talked with the Marchau^ts, that have their trafique there, and has also
diverse times enquired the matter by an interpretour of the inhabitaunts there
borne, they al say that his name is neither Presbiter Ioannes, nor Pretto
Ianes, but say they, his name is Gyan, that is, mighty, and they marvel
greatly what the Italians mean, to call him by the name of Priesthode. But
this they say, that all the suites or requests even of their great Bishops,
are brought before the king him self: and that all their benefices or Spiritual
promotions be opteined at his hands (.424.) The.424. untruth, most lewd in
nipping away the words following in the same sentence.
So that there being, as Sabellicus tells further, an exceadinge great
number of chief Prelates or Metropolitanes, and under every one Prelate at
the least twenty Bishops, all their suits and causes Ecclesiastical, being
brought unto him, and he the maker of all these Prelates, Bishops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons, he is called over them all, Clergy or Lay, in all
causes Ecclesiastical or themporall, Gyan the mighty, that is, the supreme
Ruler and Governor, and eue^ so has (.425.) The.425. untruth. Never able to
be justified.
continued sithe^ those parts were first Christened, (as they say) of Thomas
Dydimus, the Apostle, until our time. But this by the way, now from them to
return to our own country.

The.20. Chapter. Of the Armenians, and of the Aethiopians in Preto Ianes land.
Stapleton.
A MAN would think that Master Horn was with some strange spiritual
meditation ravished, M. Horn by a spiritual rauishme^t, is suddenly carried
from England to Moscouia Aethiopia, etc.
when he interlaced this digression, worthy belike depely to be considered,
being here, I can not tell whether more impertinently, or more falsely, between
the doings of king Henry and king Stephen that immediately succeeded him, full
wisely wrenched and writhed in. For he is now upon the sudden, as a man rapt
up and carried away not only into Spain, but into Greece, Armenia, Moscouia,
yea and Aethiopia too. And then is he as suddenly in England again. About a
four hundred years past, he was very busy, and to busy too, for his own
honesty with Spain: now after this long taciturnitie belike he has espied
out there, some notable matter for his purpose: And what is it think ye good
Reader? Forsooth he comes in, as it were in a Mummerie, and sends us to
Arnoldus de Villa Noua, and tells us that we shall learn by him of the doing
of Frederike king of Sicilie, and James king of Spain, in their Epistles written
by the said Arnoldus. But what this Arnoldus was, Heretic or Catholic, what
his books were, and where, and when they were printed, and where a man shall
find any thing of him, he tells us nothing.

Your brother Gesnerus, M. Horn, in his Bibliotheca makes mention of Arnoldus
a Phisitio^, and nu^breth his books. But of these epistles there is no word:
and marvel it is, that such a notable work should escape his hands. Suerlye
with much a do I suppose, I have chanced upon him, what in your brother
Illiricus and what in your other friend Gaspar Hedio that adds Paralipomena,
to Abbas Vrsper gensis, I have by them some feeling of this your great ghostly
rauishme^te, and feel at my fyngers ends that your Arnoldus (if he were no
better then Illiricus makes him) was your own dear brother, that is an
Heretic as well as your self: and also that in the vehemencye of this your
impertinente mad meditation you are carried away, Vide Paralip. Vrsperg. and
Matheum Flaccium Illiricum in catalogo testium veritatis.
one hundred and fifty years at the least, from the time ye should have
orderly prosequuted, and as many miles from the matter yt self. For this
Arnoldus is noted to have written like a blind and a lewd lying prophet,
abowte the time of Clemente the fifte, which was made Pope abowte the year of
our Lord.1306. This Arnoldus then taking upon him to be a prophet, says
that Antichrist should come within.34. years of his blind prophesiyng. Now
here for his part M. Horn also plays the lying prophet, Imo quod deterius
est videtur nobis quod pro nihilo habeant Ecclesiam Romanam, quia nulli
appellationi ad eam factae deferunt.
and tells us of wonderful epistles that his author wrote, one hundred
years before he was borne: Which epistles though they be very high and
mystical, yet there seems to be no great point of heresy in the^. And what
so ever reformation these kings went about, the epistles seem to give a plain
testimony, for the Popes primacy, and to find fault with certain religiouse
persons that they despised the Church of Rome, and did disallow appeals to
that See. Yea where he tells us with a great mighty assertion, and says.
Quod concluditur infallibiliter, quod Antichristus apparebit in mundo ab hoc
anno Domini.1354. infra immediate sequentes 34. annos, that is, that it is an
infallible conclusion, that Antechriste shall appear in the world, within
four and thyrty years immediately following after the year of our Lord.1354.
He says withal, that within the said 34 the Sarasyns should be destroyed,
and the Jews should be converted, and iurisdictionem summi Pontificis per
vniuersum orbe^ dilatari: and that the authority of the Pope, should be
spredde through owte all the world. Well, how so ever yt be, Arnoldus de Villa
noua seameth not greatly to further M. Horns primacy. And it seems to me that
by ignorance he takes one Arnoldus for an other. Bernard. Epist. Platina in
Had. 4 Sabel. En. 9. lib. 9.
In deed there was one Arnoldus Brixianus about this time, condemned for an
Heretik by Eugenius the.3. as S. Bernarde, Platina and Sabellicus do write.
Your Brother Bale says, that he was condemned, for that he said the clergy
might use no temporal jurisdiction. And so this Arnoldus might have served your
turn for the time, and somewhat for the matter to after your accustomable
reasoninge, if the authority of heretics may serve the turn. But let
Arnoldus and Spain to go for this time. for M. Horn has other great
countries, that about this time takes his part: as Grecia, Armenia, Moscouia
and Aethiopia to, which acknouledge their Princes only to be their supreme
governors in all things next unto God, which ye must believe without any
proof: belyke because yt is showed to M. Horn in this his Spiritual
revelation. For otherwise I am assured he shall never justify this most
untrue saying. And though perchance some of these countries did not at this
time, show to the sea of Rome such obedience, as they owght to have done,
especially the Grecia^s, and Moscouites, that follow the religion and order of
the greek Church: yet neither does M. Horn prove, nor ever shall be able to
prove that the Churches of these countries gave any such authority to their
princes: but that they ever took, for spiritual causes their patriarche and
other Bishops for the supreme heads, in all matters spiritual. Maruayle
now yt is, that M. Horn can not look upon the Grecians and Armenians, but
with one blind eye bleared with affection to heresy and hatred to the Pope.
Otherwise if he would look upon them with the better and indifferente eye,
there were more cause why he should regard as well the aunciente Greek
Church which acknowledged the Popes Supreamacye: as also the later
acknowledging the same, in the general council at Lions: whereof we have
spoken, and also afterward in the general Counsel at Ferraria and from thence
translated to Florence. Where also the Armenians were joined with the Roman
Church. But not then first. For Anno. 1145. Nauclerus Generat. 39. page 231.
Volater. Geograph. lib. 10. Otho Frising.
three hundred years before that, about.10. years before the death of Henry
the first in. S. Bernardes time, the Armenians submitted them selves to
Eugenius.3. sending their chief Metropolitan who had under him more the^ a
thousand Bishops to the Sea of Rome, who trauayling in journey of a year and a
half came to Viterbu^, scarce ij. days journey from Rome, where the Pope lay
the^, of who^ they were received, and instructed in all such things as they
sought at his hands, touching the order of the blessed sacrifice, the
observation of festival days and certain other points, wherein they varyed
from the rest of Christendom, of which errors they are of Co^c. Nicen. 2.
Cap. 32. Theophil. in Joan. 19 Niceph. li. 18. cap. 52. and 53.
old writers much and often noted. And this their submissio^ to the Church of
Rome, fell before the time that M. Horn now talks of, affirming but falsely
(as his manner is) that the people of Armenia, acknowleged none but only their
princes to be their supreme gournours. Neither neded you yet M. Horn to have
looked so far. For if your envious eye might have abidde^ our own late time, and
the late council of Trent, ye should have found that the Armenians sent
ambassadors to the Pope recognizing his supreamacy, and desiring the
confirmation of their patriarch of Antiochia. Ye should have found, that
Abdisa the patriarche of the Assyrians inhabiting nygh to the famous flood of
Tygris came to Rome, with no small either travel or danger of his life, to be
confirmed of Pius Quartus the last pope of blessed memory: who also promised
as well for him self, as for those that were under his spiritual government,
that he and they would faithfully and constantly keep such decrees, as
should be set forth by the said Council of Trent.

Perchance ye will the less pass for the Armenians, seeing you have on your
side, as ye say, about this time the great prince of the Aethiopians having
no less then 62. Kingdoms under his Dominion, the same country being the most
ancient part of Christendom Southwarde. And because your self have forsaken
your priesthodde, (take heed I pray you, that ye have not withal forsaken
your Christendom) ye are not contented with the Italians, and other that call
him Priest Ihon, as though he were a priest and head Bishop over those
Christian realms, having such a power with them, as the popes usurpation (as
ye term yt) has challenged here in Europe, to be an head or universal priest
or King. And ye would rather he should be called as Sabellicus tells, the
mighty Gyan So called (as ye by a mighty lying exposition of your own falsely
declare) because he is the supreme ruler and governor of all causes as well
ecclesiastical as temporal.

But here first, seeing ye pretend your self to be so good an Antiquarie, I
would gladly know, what monumentes ye have of the Aethiopical religion about
this time? It had been mete ye had laid forth your Author for your
discharge. Surely I believe ye have seen none at al of such antiquity, and I
dare boldly avouch, ye neither have nor shall see any, whereby ye may justly
gather, that the Aethiopia^s take their king for their Supreme head in all
causes Ecclesiastical and Temporal. We have to the contrary, the confession of
the Bishop, Raba Rago, his kings Ambassador, to the king of Portugale,
Domianus a Goes de Aethiopum moribus. Pontificem Romanum tanquam primum
Episcopum and pastorem ouiu^ Christi agnosco.

Nostri certe ab exordio primitiuae Ecclesiae Romans Pontifice^ vt primum Episc.
agnoueru^t, cui etiam hodierno die vt Christi Vicario paeremus. Anno. Dom.
1524. Propterea dico ego humiliter ad terram flexis genibus, quod tu pater meus
es, and ego filius tuus.

Procul dubio sanctitas vestra Dei est Vicarius.


that he made.33. years now past. saying that he does acknowledge the bishop
of Rome, as the chief bishop and pastor of Christ's sheep. We have his
confession, wherein he declares, that the Aethiopia^s, eue^ from the begi^ning
of the Church did acknowledge the B. of Rome for the first and chief Bishop:
and so at that day did obey him as Christ's Vicar. What speak I of his Orators
confession? We have the kings own confession made to the Pope, wherein he
calls hi^ Caput oi^u^ Po^tifi^u^ the head of al bisshops: he says to the
Pope, Aequu^ est, vt omnes obedientia^ tibi praestent, sicuti sancti Apostoli
praecipiu^t. It is mete that al men obey him, even as The Apostles command. He
says most humbly kneling on the ground, that the Pope is his Father, and he
his son: he says again, Your holiness without al doubt is Gods Vicar. And
think ye now, M. Horn, that ye shall like a mighty Giant, co^quer al your
Readers, and make them such bo^nd slaves to your ignorance and folly, that
because Sabellicus says, he is called Mighty Cyan, therefore ye may so
mightily lie, as to conclude thereby, for that he has the collection of the
Spiritual liuinges, that he is therefore the supreme governor in all causes?
Not so M. Horn. Sabel. ene. 10. lib. 8.
But now shall your great falsehood be discovered; and lying sprite be coniured.
For behold even immediately after the words by you alleged out of Sabellicus
that al benefices and spiritual promotions are obtained at the Kings hands, it
follows, I say immediately: Quod Romans Pontifex Regum Maiestati dederit: The
which thing the Bishop of Rome has given to the Kings Majesty. Which words
of your author you have most lewdely nipped quyte of. Such a Macaria^ you are,
and so like to M. Jewel your pewefellowe. Neither does he speak of any order
of relligion, about that age, so many hundred years paste, as ye pretend, but
of his and our late time. And so thus are you M. Horn after this your long
and fruitles journey, wherein as wayfaring men in long iorneyes are wont to
do, Mat. Par. Polychro.
ye have gathered store of wonderful lies to delight your hearers, that have
not trauayled so far, withal: welcome home again from Moscouia and Aethiopia,
into England.

M. Horn. The.121. Division. page 78. a.
In England also, King Stepha^ (.426.) The.426. untruth. Polychronico^ says
no such thing.

Mat. Par. Fabian.


reserved to him self, the inuestitures of the Prelates, as likewise after him
did Henry the second, that made Thomas Becket Archbisshop of Ca^torbury, who
thereat was sworn to the King, and to his Laws, and to his Son.

In the ninth year of his reign, this king called a Parliament at
Northampton, where he intended reformation of many privileges that the Clergy
had, amongst these, was one: that although one of the Clergy had committed
felony, murder, or treason, yet might not the King put him to death as he did
the Lay men. The which thing with many other, the king thought to redress in
the said Parliament. Thomas Becket resisted him, but he might not prevail
against the king (427). The.427. untruth. This for follows not here, but of
an other matter long after. Se^ Fabian. cap. 237.
For well near all the Bisshops of England were against him.

In the.17. year of his reign, the king made a journey into Ireland, where
with great travail, he subdued the Irishe, and after with the help of the
Primate of Armach, Fabian.
he reformed the manners of the people and dwellers in that country, and that
in three things especially: First, in ruling and ordering of the Church by the
Curates, and how they should order their divine Service, and minister the
Sacrament of matrimony as it was in England, and other Christian Regions. The
second was, how that the Lay people should behave them selves toward their
Curats, and in what wise they should pay and offer to God their tithes. The
third was, for making of their testamentes.

The.21. Chapter. Of King Stephen, King Henry the.2. and S. Thomas of
Caunterbury.
Stapleton.
Master Horn has a maruelouse grace to dwell still in such matters as nothing
relieve his cause: that is in the inuesturing of bisshoppes. the which neither
the Queen's Majesty, or her graces noble progenitors in our time have
challenged, nor yet any other prince in England these many hundred yers.
Neither is it likely that King Stephen reserved the inuestitures to him self,
as well for that his immediate predecessor King Henry, after so long stir about
them, gave them over, as that the Pope had so lately excommunicated al such
Princes. Polychronico^, which work ye cite, William of Malmesbury
says no such thing. Verily King Stephen, for a perpetual confirming of the
clergies immunites, made this solemn oath, as it is recorded in William of
Malmesbury. Ego Stephanus Dei gratia etc. I Stephen by the grace of God, by the
assent of the clergy, and of the people, chosen to be King of England, and
consecrated thereunto of William the Archbishop of Canterbury and Legate of
the Church of Rome, confirmed also afterward of Innoce^tius the bishop of Rome,
in the regard and love of God, I grant the Church of God to be free, and do
confirm the dew reverence unto her. I promise I will do nothing in the Church,
or in ecclesiastical matters by simony, neither suffer any thing to be so don.
I affirm and co^firm the Justice, the power and the orderi^g of Ecclesiastical
persons, and of al clerks, and their matters to be in the hands of the bishops.
I do enact and grant the promotio^s of the Churches with their privileges
confirmed, and the customs thereof after the old manner kept, to continue and
remayn inuiolated. And while such Churches shall be void of their proper
pastors, that both the Churches and all the possessions thereof, be i^ the hand
and custody of the Clerks or of honest me^, until such time, as a Pastor be
substituted according to the Canons. Thus far William of Malmesbury. Now that
king Henry the.2. should reserve the said inuestitures to himself: (which your
author Polichronico^ says not) and that the blessed Saint and Martyr S. Thomas
(who^ ye call Thomas Becket) was sworn to the same: this tale verily has no
manner of appara^ce or color. This was none of the articles for the which the
king and S. Thomas co^te^ded so much: the which articles appear in the life of
S. Thomas. Giraldus Cambre^sis The King keeps Councels in Ireland by the Popes
consent.

King Henry conquered Ireland by the Popes consent*


That in deed which ye recite is one of the^: but how ye may prove your new
supremacy thereby, that were hard, for the wisest man in a country to tell: Yea
much rather yt serves to the contrary, and proves the Popes supremacy, who
disallowed the said article with many other, the King also being at length fain
to yield therein. The like I say of the Kings doi^gs in Ireland whereof ye write,
which things, as eue^ by your own confession he did by the help of the primat
of Armach: so Giraldus Cambre^sis, one that writes of the kins doi^gs there,
and one that was sent thither by the king, says he kept many councils there,
but by the popes will and consent. And Polidorus says that the King obtained
the title of Irelond by the Popes authority. Guilielmus Newburgensis writes
much like of William Conqueror, Poli. li. 13. In addit. ad Neubur. M. S.
praemonstrato prius Apostolico Papae iure quod in regno Angliae habebat,
licentiaque haereditatem conquirendi impetrata, that before he invaded England,
he did intimate his right and interest to the Pope, and obtained of him license
to atchiue and conquer his inheritance. King vvillia^ the co^querour moved
his right first to the Pope ere he conquered England.
Here perchance will many of your sect marvel, why ye have either named S.
Thomas, or passed over the story so sleightlye: and will think, that ye are but
a dissembler and a traitor to their cause, or at the least a very faint
patron for the^, especially seeing M. Fox has ministered you so much good
matter, prosequuting the matter.xj. leaves and more. Your own friends will say
your allegations are but simple and cold, The doi^gs of King Henry against S.
Thomas declared by M. Fox.
and in a manner altogether extrauagante, and that ye might have found in M.
Fox, other manner of stuff, as a number of King Henry the second his
constitutions and ordinances plain derogatorie to many of the Popes Laws:
yea plain commandment, that no man should appeal to Rome, and that Peter
pence should be no more paid to the Apostolical see: or that, if any man
should be found to bring in any interdict or curse against the Realm of
England, he should be apprehended without delay for a traitor, and so
executed. And finally, that no manner decree or commandment proceeding from
the authority of the Pope should be received. You shall there find, will they
say, concerning the said Thomas his parson and doings that he was no Martyr,
but a very rebel and traitor, and that all his contention stood not upon
matters of faith, religion, true doctrine or sincere discipline, but upon
worldly things: as possessions, liberties, exemptions, superiorities and such
like.

In deed these and such other like things we find in M. Fox: but he
storieth these things with as good faith and troth, as he does all his other.
And here I would gladly for a while leave M. Horn, and take him in hand, and
shape him a full answer. But in as much as this would require a long process,
and for that this my answer already waxes long, I will forbear the diligent
and exact discussio^ of the whole: and will open so much only to the unlearned
reader, as may serve hi^ for the true knowledge of the matter, and for the
discovering of M. Foxes crafty and untrue dealing: and withal for a full
answer, to these friuolouse and false arguments producted by M. Horn.

And here first, not S. Thomas, but the Kings stoutnes and sternnesse seems to
be reprehe^ded, that would needs have an absolute answer of him, and would not
be contented with so reasonable an answer as he made, Saluo ordine meo: saving
my order. No nor afterward with this exception, Saluo honor Dei, saving the
honor of God. S. Thomas can not justly be accused of stoutnes and stubbournes.
This modification or moderation may serve to any indifferent man, that
advisedly considers the kings articles proposed to S. Thomas, such as might
excuse him from all stoutnes and stubbornes; that M. Fox and his adversaries
lay to him. I intend not now to enter into any serious or deape examination of
the said articles* but this I will say, that yt is against all the old canons of
the Church, yea and against reason to, that an Archbishop should be judged of
his suffragans, as S. Thomas was. Again to omit other articles, there is
one, that is quite contrary to the Apostolical doctrine, to the canons of
Nice, and other most ancient general councels: finally to the catholyke
doctrine of Christ's universal Church. that is, for appeals to be made from
the Archdeaco^ to the bishop, from the bishop to the Archbishop: Ca. 8. de
appellatio. Si emerserint ab Archidiacono, debe^t procedere ad episcopu^: et ad
epis. ad archie, et si Archiepis. defuerit in iustitia exhibe^da, postremo ad
rege^ est peruemendu^, vt praecepto ipsius in curia Archiepiscopi co^trouersia
terminetur, ita quod non debent vlterius procedere absque assensu regis. In
quadrilogo de vita B. Thomae. lib. 5. Vide dict quadrilogu^ lib. 5. impress.
parisijs in 4. An. 1495. in principio.

Vide foxu^ fol. 48.

Cap. 7. Nullus qui de rege teneat in capite, vel aliquis domesticoru^
ministroru^ eius ex communicetur etc. nisi prius rex etc.


and in case there be any defect of justice there, the matter to be browght to
the king, and by his commandment to be ended in the Archbishops cowrt,
without any further proceeding, without the kings consent, whereby not only the
popes supreme authority, but the authority also of al general councils, the
which are the ordinary and necessary remedies in many cases, did stand the^ in
the king of England his grace only, to be accepted, or to be rejected. M. Fox
recites the kings co^stitutio^s: but as he leaves out this and many other,
and reherseth but six of the^: so in those six he makes three manifest and open
lies. For where he says the said decrees by him recited were condemned by the
Pope, there were but three of the^ condemned, that is the.1. the.3. and the.4.
The other three the pope did suffer and tolerat. Again what a decree was this,
that none that held of the king in capite, no nor any of his servants should be
excommunicated, unless the king were first co^sulted? I trow M. Horn himself,
and his fellows, neither keep this precise order, nor will allow it. Well, M.
Fox full pretely leaves out this co^stitutio^, what cause moves him I ca^ not
tell. Think ye now M. Fox, that for those and such like, S. Thomas had not good
cause, to mollify the matter with saluo ordine meo, and saluo honor Dei, and
when that would not be accepted, to gai^say altogether, and to appeal to the
sea of Rome? Ye will say this notwithstanding, they were no matters of faith or
religion, or true doctrine, and that he is therefore far from the cause and title
of a martyr. In deed it was if not wisely, yet wilily, and like a crafty Fox
done of you to scrape hi^ out of your blessed calendar. For in good faith place
ca^ he have none there, unless all your late stinking martyrs give place, and
yield. which are the devils, and not Gods martyrs, and it were for none other
thing, but for the denial of the Popes supreamacy. The which supremacy is a
necessary doctrine, to be holde^ of every Christian man (where invincible
ignorance is not) upon pain of da^matio^, and everlasting separation from the
Catholic Church, and the members of the same. Beside this, A man may be a
martyr, though it be for no cause of faith or relligion. Niceph. li. hist.
eccles. 13. cap. 1. Telemachius the martyr. Theod. l. 5. cap. 26. Tr. l. 10. c.
2 Niceph. li. 13. cap. 4. cu^ seque^t. Sigeb. in chronic. a. 697 et 698.
Videelega^te^ disputationem an Alphegus sit martyr inter Lanfra^c. Cantur. and
Anselmum postea Cant. Archiepiscop. apud Edinerum lib. 1. de vita Anselmi. Vide
Guliel. Malmesb. de Pontif. lib. 1.
there are many taken for blessed martyrs in the Church, that died not for the
faith or for doctrine being the^ in any co^trouersy, but for justice and truth
sake, and for their virtuous deali^g: as is the good monk Telemachius, that
sei^g at Rome two swordplayers, the on of the^ ready to destroy, and kill the
other, upon a great zeal, came to the^, and thought to have parted the^, and
so was slain of the^ him self. wheruppo^ the emperor Honorius reckoned him among
the martyrs, and made a law, that there should be no more such ki^d of play
exercised in Rome. The cause also of S. John Chrisostoms troble proceeded not
directly from matter of faith or doctrine, but for reproui^g the^presse
Eudoxia. I omit S. Quillia^ and S. La^bert both taken for martyrs, and slain
for rebuki^g adultery. And to come nearer to our own country and to S. Thomas
time, S. Alphegius Archbisshop of Canterbury, a little before the Conquest,
that suffered him self to be slain of the Danes, rather then he would pille
and polle his tenauntes, to leauy an excessive sum of money, that the Danes
required for his redemption. Of whose virtue God since has given great
testimony, as well by diverse other miracles, as by preseruinge his body so
long uncorrupted. But the chief and most aunciente presidente of all in the
new testamente is S. John the Baptiste, who died for the like liberty and
fredome of speech, as S. Quillian. and S. Lamberte did. To these we may set
Esaye and the other prophets of the old testamente: Howbeyt as I said in S.
Thomas his cause, is a necessary doctrine also employed, VVat a testimony God
has given to the world for S. Thomas doyngs.
that was either directly or indirectly blemisshed, by these ordinances of the
king, concerning the Popes Supremacy. Now what madness were yt for me, or any
other to seek by words to set forth this blessed man's qualities and
Martyrdom, when that God him self, has by so wonderful and strange, yea by
so certain and notoriouse miracles, as well in the life of his servant as
afterward, given to the world such a testimony for him, as all the devils
in hell, In Quadrilogo. li. 2. c. 16. Vox de coelo elapsa sic contestata est.
In dicto quadril. li. 3. c. vlt. Na^ and in loco passio^nis eius and vbi ante
maius altar pernoctauit huma^dus, and vbi tandem sepultus est. etc.
and their disciples in earth may rather gnashe their angry teathe, and envy
at, then by any good means deny and deface yt. True shall yt be also, that S.
Thomas heard long ere he returned into England, by a celestial and heavenly
voice. O Thoma, Thoma, Ecclesia mea gloriabitur in sanguine tuo. O Thomas,
Thomas, my Church shall glory in thy blood. And true yt is, that was written
incontinently after his death, that at the place of his passion, and where he
is buried, paralitici curantur, caeci vident, surdi audiunt, loquuntur muti,
claudi ambulant, euadunt febricantes, arrepti a daemonio liberantur, and a
variis morbis sana^tur aegroti, blasphemi a demonio arrepti confunduntur: and
quod a diebus patrum nostrorum non est auditum* mortui surgunt. Palsies are
cured, the blind see, the deaffe hear, the dombe speak, the lame walk, the
agues are healed, and such as are possessed of the Devil are delivered, and
diverse diseases helped, and blasphemers being taken and possessed of the
devil confounded: and finally (as our said author, not so much an ear as an
eye wytnes, says) that which has not ben heard of, in our fathers days, dead
men are relieved again. The earl of flaunders and the French king came to
Canterbury in pilgrimage to S. Thomas In quadrilogo lib. 4. cap. 4.

Obtulit munera, vinu^ videlicet et auru^: aureu^ scilicet calice^, and vini
centu^ modios, perpetuo ad natalitium die^ martyris singulis a^nis celebra^du^
in latitia.


These and many other miracles shown as well in England as out of England,
were so notable and famous, that shortly after S. Thomas his Martyrdom, not
only the Earl of Flaunders, but the French King also came to Cantorburie in
pilgrimage, to pray at this blessed Martyrs tumbe. The king of France offered
there a chalice of gold, and his grant in writing for a certain quantitye
of wine, yearly to be delivered to the monks there to be merry withal at the
solempnitye or feast of this blessed Martyr.

But what shall we say to king Henry him self? what thowght he trow ye of
this blessed man's doings and death? This part of the story of all other is
most notable. Polidorus. in Hen 2. Quadrilogus. li. 4. cap. 5.

The ki^gs grief for S. Thomas.


The king being in Normandy, and hearing that S. Thomas was slain took the
matter so heuely, that for forty days, he kept him self solitary in great
mourning and lamentatio^, in great abstinence, setting a side all the affairs
of his great and large dominions, for grief and sorrow: And forthwith sent his
ambassadors to the Pope to purge him self of the said murder. Wheruppo^
certain Legates were sent to him, before whom upon his oath he said, that he
neither commanded, nor willed that the Archbisshop should be slain, and added
that he was never so sorry for the death of his own father or mother. Yet did
he not deny, but by unadvised words, he gave the murderers an occasion of
their foul enterprise. Penance enjoined to the king by the popes Legates.
Wherefore he submitted him self to the Legates to enjoin him penance as they
should think good. Then was yt among other things enjoined him, that he
should break and revoke the foresaid statutes and ordinances, for the which
all this troble rose: all the which conditions the king by his oath promised to
observe. This done the kings son also promised on his part, to see these
covenants kept. But yet see the just judgment of God. As this king rebelled
against his spiritual father S. Thomas, The ki^gs sons rebel to hi^ their
carnal father as he rebelled against his spiritual father, the pope and S.
Thomas.
and his spiritual mother the Church, so did his son and heir, with his
two other sons, Richard and John, rebel against him, confederating them
selves with other the kings subjects, and with the French and Scottishe
kings. The king was browghte to this distress, that he wyste not in the
world, what to say, or what to do: and being destitute of man's help ran to
Gods help, and to the help of his blessed martyr S. Thomas, at whose greater
miracles done at Canterbury all the world did wonder. Wherefore forsakinge
Normandy where he was in more saftie, sailed into England, Quadrip. histo.
vitae D. Thom. lib. 4. c. 6. cu^ seque^t.
and coming toward Canterbury, before he entered the city, puttinge of al his
princely appparell, like a new king David, being presequuted of his Absolon,
for his sins, as David went out of the city barefoted, so this new David
being barefoted, and all his body naked, 2. Re. c. 17. Josephus li. 2. c. 12.
de Antiq. Iudaeo.

His marvelous voluntary penance In dicta quadripa. and in Gul. Malmesb.


sauinge that he was covered with a poor and a vile cote upon the bare,
being now him self fearful and tremblyng, whom before so many nations
feared and trembled, with much sighinge and gronynge went to the Martyrs
tomb, where he continued all that day, and the night followinge watchful
and fasting: where he commended him self to the blessed martyrs prayers.
Neither was he deceived of his good devotion and expectation: as we shall anon
declare. Before the said tomb, he took discipline with a rod of every
monk, and for his love and devotion to the martyr, he renounced the foresaid
ill statutes and customs for ever, and only said he would keep such as were
reasonable and good. Gulielmus Neuburgensis, whom M. Fox brings in to
deface and disgrace this blessed martyr, if yt might be, and yet not daring, to
tell either of other things, written by other, or that I shall now tell you
out of the said Neuburgensis, says, that the said night, there was avoyce
that said to a good and a blessed monk at Canterbury being a sleep:
Neuburg. lib. 2. c. 34. Impr. Cap. 19. M.S. Viro reuerendissimo Rogero scilicet
Abbate Bellelandensi refere^te cognoui, quod etc.

Polidorus. in He^r. 2. Dict. lib. 4. ca. 8. in quadripart, and in Neuburg.
cap. 19. Ipsa na^que die, eade^ etiam diei hora qua missae interfuerat, rex
Scotorum captus est: etc.

A meruelouse victory that God gave the king the same hour he heard mass at
Canterbury. The king ascribes his victory to God and S Thomas.

Rex autem totu^ ascripsit Domino, and glorioso martyri Ib. cui certiss. erat
ascr


have ye not seen (says the voice) the kings great and wonderful humility?
Be thou assured, that shortly the end of his affairs shall declare how well
God lyketh the same. My author says, that he heard this from the mowthe of a
reverend Abbate, who being the same time in Kente, heard yt from a credible
and a faithful reporter. The next morninge the king heard mass, before the
tomb of the martyr, and so departed. The very same day yea the very same
hour that the king heard mass there, undoubtedly by the miraculous workinge
of God, the scottishe king without battle scattered from the rest of his
Army, and after few strokes given was taken prisoner, and afterward by little
and little all his enemies, as well beyond as by hither the seas were quieted and
pacified. All the which prosperouse fortune the king did ascribe to God, and
to his gloriouse martyr S. Thomas, to whom most certainly, it was to be
ascribed. Let M. Fox now and his fellows to, rail at this blessed man as
long as they will. Let hi^ scrape hi^ out of his kale^der, and put in for hi^
heretics, thieves, and traitors, and let hi^ now if he can for very shame, call
this man a traitor, and cause his name to be abolisshed out of the Church
boks, what a madness is it to make S. Thomas after so many hundred years a
traitor?
as yt has been of late years. Let them toss and turmoyle as long, and as
buselie as they will. They shall but show their extreme wyckednes and madness,
blasphemously to call him traitor, whom the king him self (to who^ the offense
was don, if any were don) worshipped as Gods holy martyr: they shall but strive
against the stream, or rather against God him self, that has given throwgh
out all the world such a glorious testimony for him: and for the co^firmatio^ of
the catholic doctrine of his Church, namely for the popes supreamacie. Which
answer I will also to serve against M. Horn concerning al his allegations here
touching the doings of the king with this blessed Martyr.

M. Horn. The.122. Division. page 78. b.
In Germany, succeeded unto Frederike, Henry, and next unto him Philip, both of
them (.428.) The.428. Untruth. Avouched, but unproven
inuesturing Bishops, and suffering no Legates from Rome to come into Apulia,
nor Sicilia, according to the aforesaid composition.

The.22. Chapter: Of Henry the.6. Philip, and Otho the.4. Emperors.
Ann 1230. Abb. Vrsp. in vita Henr. 5. Gul. ^irius de bell sac. li. 1. ca. 13.
Otho ^ris. li. 7. ca. 16. Radulph. Pisanus in vita Calixti. 2.
Stapleton.
THat Henry and his brother Philip did inuesture bisshops, yt is not likely,
and the matter would be better proved, then by your bare word Namely saying
that Henry the.5. made a full conclusion with Calixtus the second (as we have
before showed) that the clergy should have the election of their bisshops. By
the which agreament the contention that had continued about a fifty years for
that matter was pacified. And whereas ye refer your self to the aforesaid
composition, that they would suffer no Legates to come into Apulia and Sicilia,
the pope is much bound to you, for thereby ye prove his supremacy: As from
whom that Composition by way of dispensatio^ proceeded, Diuis. 117. Naucl.
gener. 41. pa. 287. and. 288. Nauclerus
as your self before avouched, and as in Nauclerus it well appears.

M. Horn. The.123. Division. page 78. b.
Next to vvhame succeeded Otto, surnamed of the Clergy the defendour of
Justice* for vvher as the manner of Princes was (says Abbas Vrspurgens.)
cheerfully and readily to give benefices or Churches, to those that did first
ask them, he would not so do: but he gave all the benefices that fell, as well
Ecclesiastical as Secular, to those with whom he was acquainted etc. This
Emperor came into Italy, claymed and (.429.) The.429. untruth. This Otho
recovered it not, but lost the Empire him self.
recovered all the right of the Empire, that the Pope (430.) The.430. untruth
slanderous. It was no vsurpatio^ but lavvful posession.
usurped under the name of S. Peter's Patrimony, and called a (.431.) The.431.
and.432. as shall appear.
Synod at Norinberge about this matter, and touching the (.432.) Popes
authority.

Stapleton.
Ye have not as I said won so much creditte, being so often taken in open
lies that we may trust you upon your word. Tell us therefore I pray you what
chronicler calls this Otho the defendour of justice, and then tell us, by what
good logike your for will follow. For methinke yt is but a selie slender for to
say, he was defendour of justice, for that he bestowed spiritual lyuings upon
none but such as he knew. Unless ye did prove withal that he knew none but
honest men. But will you see what Nauclerus your own Author writes hereof? He
says of this Otho: This man was praised of many religious persons and of the
clergy, for a defendour of Justice: Nauclerus gener. 41. page 273.
when yet he was altogether a dissembler. Nam omnia beneficia tam Ecclesiastica
quam secularia, familiaribus suis quos secum ex Saxonia and Anglia duxerat,
contulit. For he bestowed all promotions as well Ecclesiastical as temporal
upon his nere acquaintance such as he brought with him out of Saxony and out
of England. Platina in Inno. 3. Vide Naucler. gene. 41. p. 274.5.6. and. 7.
Conuentu^ principum suae partis celebrauit Norimbergae.
Lo M. Horn, this (For he bestowed) which you bring to prove a supreme
government, Nauclerus reports to prove a partial regiment. That he tells to
his shame, you draw it to his honor. Again what patron of Justice call you
him, that wrongfully took from the Church of Rome her old and rightful
possessions, and was therefore excommunicated and deposed, of Innoce^tius.3. and
Frederik.2. made Emperor in his place. And that, notwithstanding the diet of
Otho his faction, holden at Norimberg: which you untruly call a Synod. Neither
was it there debated of the Popes Authority in Ecclesiastical matters (which is
our present matter) but only whether the Pope might depose the Emperor: which
is not now any part of our matter in hand.

M. Horn. The.124. Division. page 78. b.
Polych. Fabian.
In England as Henry his father had done before him: so followed King Richard
in giving Ecclesiastical promotions, in calling councils, and ordering other
Ecclesiastical matters: yea* even in his absence, being in Syria, by one that
represented his person therein the B. of Ely, who called and made a council at
westminster, as the ki^gs procurator, and the Popes Legate, and (.432.) The.432.
untruth. No such words in Fabian.
spoke by the Kings power. But in this matter, king John did more then any of
his predecessors, which purchased him much hatred with the Pope and his
Monks.

The.23. Chapter: Of King Richard the first, and King John, Kings of England.
Stapleton.
NOw M. Horn is returned from Appulia, Sicilia, Germany, and Italy into
England again. And why think you? Forsooth to prove him self like a good and
faithful proctour to the Pope, that the Pope was the supreme head of the
Church of England. Else let him wisely show why he tells, that the bishop
of Elie was the Popes Legate? But chiefly why he brings in, or is not
asshamed to lay forth for his supremacy King John: and to say that he did more
in this matter, than any of his predecessors? Ye say truth M. Horn, he did
in deed, and being excommunicated of the Pope, for his misorder and outrageous
doings against the Church, and the whole land interdicted, he gave over to
the Pope, his crown and kingdom: and received it again at the Popes hands.
And because this matter should not be kept in silence (which wisdom
perchance and policy to, would have had so kept) Master Fox blaseth out
the matter at large, Acts and monumentes fol. 65.
and lays forth before all men, the copy of the letter obligatorie
concerning the yeldinge up of the crown into the Popes hands, and of certain
money yearelye to be paid. I will not, nor need not travail in the curiouse
trial, and examination of the circumstances of the cause: but this only will I
say to M. Fox and to you M. Horn, that if ye proceed on as ye begin, ye
are worthy to have a reward at the Popes hand: either for that ye are but a
dissembling counterfeyte protestante, and the Popes pryuie friend: or if ye be
angry with that, so wise and skylfull a reasoner, that ye speak ye wotte nere
what: And while ye go about to set the Popes crown on the Queen's head, ye take
her crown and set yt on the Popes head. So that it little serves you to tell
us, that King John purchased him much hatred with the Pope and the Monks. Ye
might have put in, and with all the nobilitye and commons to, yea most of all,
with God and good men to. But this is your, and your fellows trade,
especially Master Foxes, in the setting forth of this Kings story, to lie
extremely, to bring thereby the clergy into hatred and envy: as in this
story among other things he has done, A great untruth of M. Fox
co^cerni^ge the poisoning of king John.
touching the poisoning of this King by a monk of Swinstead abbey. And
perchance ye M. Horn meante some like matter, when ye speak of the monks
that hated him. But because I can not certainly lay this to you, I will let you
go for a while, and be a little in hand with M. Fox, and open unto thee (good
Reader) that thou may the better understand his substa^tial dealing and
handling of stories, and the better beware of his gay gloriouse painted lies,
what is the common consent of our best chroniclers in this point.

An other untruth, for the chronicles do not commonly say so.
First then, this is a manifest lie, that ye say M. Fox, the chroniclers most
agree in this, that he was poisoned by the monk at Swinstead. Which thing I
could easily prove, by reciting specially, what every author writes
concerning the manner of his death: But M. Fox himself has, we thank him,
provided that we neade not travail so far: for lo, he brings in Polidorus,
saying he died of sorrow and heuines of heart: M. Fox him self unawares
co^futeth his own fable of the poisoning of king John.
Radulphus Niger, saying he died, of surfeting in the night: Roger Houeden,
saying he died of a bluddie flixe: Matheus Parisiensis, saying that by heuines
of mind, he fell into a feruente agewe, at the abbey of Swinstead, which he
increased with surfeting, and nawghty diet: by eating peaches and drinkinge of
new Ciser, or sydar. Then add ye farther Master Fox that some say he died
of a cold sweat: some of eatinge apples: some of eating pears: and some of
eating plummes. So have ye here good reader, four chroniclers by name, and at
the least four other unnamed, that make no mention of any poison. Now could I
bring the Polichronicon, and Fabian which reciting the said Polychronicon,
says that the King died of the flux. Here also could I bring in, that those
that write of his poisoning, write very diversely nothing agreing with your
author in the kind of poison. And also that they rehearse it rather as a
common tale, then for any assured story or truth. Many other things could I
bring in, but what needs yt, when we have by his own tale store enough of
witnesses against him? Yet will I add one more, but such a one, as ought to be
to M. Fox in stead of a great sort: that one I say, of whom by all that I
can judge (for he has not vouchsafed ones to name him) M. Fox has taken all
his declaration, The Author of whom M. Fox takes the residue of his story
co^cerni^g King John makes against him.

Ex Chronic. Joan. Lo^dine^sis.


concerning the election of Stephen Langton, and of all the great business that
issued thereof: yea the writing obligatorie, touching the resigning of the
crown into the Popes hands. Which lies in our author word for word, as
M. Fox has translated it.

This our author shows, that as the King was going northwarde, the ground
opened and swallowed up his carts and caryage, that yt could never be
recovered. Whereupon the King fell into a great grief and heaviness, and
fetched many sighs from the very bottom of his heart. And being at Swinstead
surfeated with peaches and other fruit, and there fell sick. And so being
sick departed, and being not able to continue on horseback, came in an
horselytter to Leadforde castle: and afterward to Newemarket, where perceiuyng
him self to be paste all cure and remedy, he sent for the Abbatte of
Crokestone that was skylfull in physic. of whom he was confessed, and
received the Sacrament of the holy Eucharistia. And by and by he ends this
story of King John, saying that because this king was hated of many, partly
for the death of his nephewe Arthur, partly for his adultrie, partly for his
tyranny, partlye for the tribute, by the which he browght England into a
perpetual bondage, partly for the wars that his doings sturred up, he was
scarslie worthy to be bemoned and lamented for, of any man. Here have we now
M. Fox five authors by name, and more aunciente the^ your Caxto^, and of an
other judgment, towching this kings death, then your Caxton is: beside four
some says at the least.

M. Foxes ground of poysoninge king John stands upon a lying book having
no name of the auctour.
And now let us weighe with a word or two the creditte of this yowr own
Author. I pass over, that ye call yt the chronicle of William Caxton, he
being neither the maker, neither the translatour, saving he has adjoined out
of Polichronico^ the description of England and Irelande, of Treuisa his
translation, and added as they say, certain other things to his unknown
Author. Belyke ye thowght to win some credit to your author clothing him
with the name of this Caxton, a man of late remembrance, because he has no
name of his own. And so a mete work for you, in the dark to lurk and lie
withal, and in deed unworthy to have the name of the chronicles of England,
What a lying book this fructus te^poru^ is that M. Fox grou^deth him self
upon.
or to be called Fructus temporum: being as vnfruytful as any book that was
made many a.100. years. Unless we may call him being barre^ of al good truth
and choice of good matter, fit for a story of any credit, or fruytful, being
only fruytful and ple^tiful of wonderful untruths, and open lewd lies. I
report me (for his truth to his fable of the xxxiij. Daughters of king
Diocletia^ king of Syria, that after they had slain their husbands, stole away
by ship into our Ilela^d of Britannie which was then uninhabited and
unpeopled, and afterward being conceived by deuilles browght forth gyantes
which inhabited the land, until the coming of Brute that slew them.
Part. 1.
And that our Ilelande was called Albion of the eldest dawghter Albine: as
afterward Brita^nie by the name of the foresaid Brute. Again of king Arthure,
that being not able to keep the possession of his own realm from the Saxons,
carried an army of one hundred thousand and more into far countries, having
under his conducte a number of kings, and there slew the Emperor of Rome,
and discomfited his huge army, wherein were above.5. or.6. hundred thousand
armed men. Make now M. Fox the citezens of Rochester believe, Part. 5.
that in the old time, by the prayer of S. Augustyne, their forefathers were
borne with tails: or any wise man to believe, that king Ethelbertus joining
with his friend Elfride the king of Northumberla^d (who yet was an heathen, the
other being christened) levied an army, and set upon the Britains, because
they would not receive and obey the said S. Augustine. Make us, if you can
believe this, with the vain fabler Galfride (a sad Author with your fellow
Jewel) against the approved history of venerable Bede, Vide praefationem
Guilielm. Nevvbrigensis de Galfrid^ impress.
and of all other sense his time. Make us, I say, M. Fox, by any good or
probable demo^stratio^, believe this and an hundred such other fables, for the
which your Fructus temporum, is unfruitful to his wise and discrete reader:
and then tell us and spare not, of this mo^k of Swi^stead. Otherwise he were a
very swyneshead that would be lightly and rashly persuaded, by such swynish
fables. Paynt and picture the^ as fast and fair as ye will to make fools fayn
withal: I say not this because I will excuse him, or any other ill monk, of
their nawghty doings. I do require but convenient proof namely of you M.
Fox, and your fellows, that are so precise with the Catholics for their
proufes. And when ye have al proved, ye prove nothing to the purpose. For the
ill doings of some naughty packes, can neither deface the truth of the
Catholic doctrine, nor yet spotte the honesty of other not co^senting. And
as there is no likelihode the King to be after this sort poisoned: so is it
more incredible, that this Monk had Masses continually song for his soul:
and of all, most incredible, that it should be confirmed by their general
Chapter. No, no, M. Fox, think not to carry away the matter so. Think not
that all that read your foolish, lewd lying Martyrologe will straight ways
without further trial and examination, take all for the Gospel. And see how
God has provided against your false lying fable a good and a convenient
remedy for them that will not willingly be carried away like fools and
beasts, An other great vnvntruth. of M. Foxes: for his author has no word
of this confirmation. See this book prynted by vvinkin de word^ 2502.
for the discredit of this your fable. For seeing that your self has here
most impudently added that which is not at all in your author, that is,
concerning the confirmation of the general chapter: who will hereafter credit
you or regard your writings: or who will not think, that your unnamed and
unfruitful author has either upon to light credit set in this fable in his
unfruitful book, or by like impudency as ye have feigned the general
chapters confirmation, has fained it, or taken of some that fained it, this
whole foolish fond fable? Go now on M. Horn: plead on, as you have begone,
and bring more such examples, I pray you.

M. Horn. The.125. Division. page 79. a.
In this while The French King held a Council at Cenomannia in Turon. And
after him King Jews did celebrate a solemn Counsel at Paris, whereat was
present the Popes legates.

Stapleton.
Plead on I say M. Horn, and tell your reader that king Jews was supreme head,
because in a counsel that he kept at Paris the Popes legate was present. Whereby
it rather follows that it was kept, by the Popes supreme authority, not by
the kings.

M. Horn The.126. Division. page 79. a.
In which time was Frederike the.2. Emperor, out of doubt, says Auentinus,
an other Charles the great, and without all controversy most profitable for
the Christian common wealth: which not only held the privileges aforesaid in
Apulia and Sicilia, but in all his dominions, and about this matter, (.433.)
The.433. untruth. mere Slanderous.
tamed diverse Popes, called and kept diverse Cou^celles, as well by his Sons,
as by him self: and ordained certain (.434.) The.434. untruth. Not
ecclesiastical Laws as shall appear.
Ecclesiastical laws against diverse Heretics, co^de^ninge their heresies
and appointing how they should be ordered: ordeining likewise many privileges
for Ecclesiastical persons.

The.24. Chapter. Of Frederike the.2. Emperor of that name.
THE more and the deaper ye praise this Frederik, the more and the deaper ye
meshe and wrappe your self in your own shame and greauous co^demnatio^ And
much are we the catholics bownden to the inspeakable goodness of God, that
whereas ye and your fellows most presumptuouslye and obstinatelye, either
reiecte all such proufes and demonstrations as the catholics lay for them
against you, or most fryuolously go about to frustrat and elude the^, has now
so entangled you with yower own allegatio^, your own Emperor, by you so
highly co^me^ded, that whereas ye say, he tamed diverse Popes: we say, he never
so tamed Pope, as he was tamed him self of the Pope, and as he tameth you, and
makes you not so much a tame fool, as that so folishlye and fondlye set up
your new Papacy by his authority: but a very mad and an horrible heretic. I
pray thee now Good Reader, give a good and an attentive ear. M. Horn tells
of laws made by the Emperor how heretics should be ordered, but the order
he shows not.
Did then this Emperor, as ye say Master Horn, and therein truly, make
laws (though not truly Ecclesiastical Laws) against diverse Heretics,
condemning the heresies, and appointing how they should be ordered? If ye had
told your Reader, the names of the Heretics, or their heresies, and the
manner appointed how they should be ordered, ye might have eased me of some
labor, but to your own little ease or contentation: as proclaiming your self
by express words as ye do nevertheless covertly lurking in this your
Cacus den, an open and a notoriouse, for a number of most wretched and
damnable errors, The Heretics that Frederike condemned, were condemned
before in the great general counsel at Lions:
and a most wretched heretic. And here first though I have granted you, that
he made laws against Heretics: yet will I not grant you, that they were
(as ye term the^) Ecclesiastical laws. For such (proprely to speak) are
made of Ecclesiastical persons, in whom the Authority of allowing or
condemning for matters Ecclesiastical rests. These Laws of Frederike were
rather exequutorie of the Laws Ecclesiastical, then laws mere
Ecclesiastical. For the Heretics and heresies by Frederike condemned, were
before condemned by the Bishops and Popes, An. 1215. Platina In Innoc.
tertio. In Chronographia
especially by the great learned Bishop Innocentius the third, in the most
famous General Council kept at Lateran in Rome. At the which beside the
Pope, were present, the Patriarchs of Constantinople and Jerusalem, three
score and ten Metropolitan, and four hundred other Bishops, 12. Abbattes,
and.800. Priours conuentuals: in the whole, as your brother Pantaleo^ writes,
a thousand and.300. Prelates: with the Ambassadors of both the Emperors, Vide
Decret. Grego. tit. de heretic. c. excommunicamus. 2.
as well of the West, as of the East: Yea as also of the Kings of Jerusalem,
France, Spain, England, Cyprus and other Countries. In this Council were
condemned a number of heretics, A rascal rablement of monstrous heretics
names.
calling the^ selves Catharos, Patarenos, Pauperes de Lugduno, Passaginos,
Tossepinos, Arnoldistas, Speronistas, and with other strange names. Joan.
Gers. part. 4. Ibide^ titulo de summa Trinit. cap. 2. Reprobamus etiam and
co^demnamus peruersissimum dogmae impij Almarici, cuius me^tem pater me^dacij
sic excoecauit vt eius doctrina, no^ tam haeretica, quam insana sit censenda.

Vide epistolas Petri de vineis Cancellarij Frederic. 2. li. 1. ca. 25.26. et.
27. Et novel. Fred. insertas Cod. Iustinia^.


There was also condemned the wicked Almaricus: whose mind the Father of lies
had so blinded, that his doctrine was to be counted not heretical only, but
mad also and furious. This counsel was kept, this Fredericus being Emperor,
who in this point following The Emperors Justinian and Charles the Great (and so
far I grant it true, that ye say he was an other Charles the Great) as they
before had done, confirmed the laws Ecclesiastical, with civil and politic
ordinances. And as they condemned the heretics, first by the Church condemned:
so does Fredericus to: as Patarenos, Speronistas, Leonistas, Arrianistas,
Circu^cisos, Passaginos, Ioseppinos, Carrace^ses, Albane^ses, Franciscos,
Ba^naroles, Comistas, Walde^ses, Burgaros, Co^millos, Barrinos, Ottoleuos, and
de aqua nigra, and finally, omnes haereticos vtriusque sexus: All heretics of
both kind, as well men as women. Yet is there great difference, The difference
between the laws of Frederike and the Council.

Dict. cap. 2. de summa trinitate. Et c. excommunicamus. 1. and. 2. de haeretic.


between the foresaid Ecclesiastical, and Emperial laws. The Ecclesiastical
persons, after long and mature consideration and examination of opinions and
doctrine of the foresaid persons, do find their doctrine, a false and an
heretical doctrine, and therefore do condemn the^ as heretics: they do curse
and excommunicate them, and if they be persons Ecclesiastical, do deprive and
degrade them, and so leave them to the secular power. The said Council
ordeineth, that none shall preach without the Popes or the Bishops license,
The manner how heretics should be ordered, set forth as well out of the
foresaid Council, as out of Frederike his laws. Dict. c. 25. cu^ seque^tibus.
and that all secular officers shall take an oath to do their endeavor to
purge their country of heretics, and if need be, to be compelled thereto by
excommunication. And that all suspect persons shall purge them selves, at the
discretion of their ordinary under pain of excommunication, in the which if
they wilfully continue one year, then to be taken for heretics. These and
many other things the Council ordained in this behalf. The which decrees the
Emperor Frederike confirms by his Emperial edict, adding perpetual infamy,
exile, banishment, death, and the disheryting of their heirs: and that he shall
not be taken for any officer or Magistrate, and that al his judgments and
sentences shall be void that will not take the oath aforesaid. He commands the
houses of heretics and of their fautours and abettours to be plucked down,
never to be builded again. He declares them to be intestable: that is,
neither able to make testament of their own nor to be capable of any benefit,
out of any other man's testimony: and that to the second generation, they shall
bear no public office. And this is the manner, M. Horn, of the ordering of
Heretics, that ye speak of, appointed by your new supreme Head the Emperor
Frederike. And so ye see withal, how you and your fellows were to be ordered,
if he now lived. What? Me think ye begin, M. Horn, to wax angry and to
chaufe with me, for telling you of such a rablement of strange monstruouse
heretical names: And that ye have nothing to do with these heretics, being
such as ye never heard of, no, not so much as their names before. Well, for
the names, I will not perchance stick with you, but for the wicked opinions,
M. Horn in telling that Frederik condemned heretics, proclaims him self an
Heretic. Almaricus his heresies. In Chronolog.

Almaricus Gallus, imagines, altaria, and sanctorum inuocatione^, idololaetria^
ce^set: transubstantiatione^ altaris negat. Ide^ aliquot errores doce^s
co^buritur Parisijs. Bern. de Luxe^burg in catal. Bernard. epist. 195.


that they maintained, they are of nearer cousinage to you, then ye were ware
of, when ye wrote of Fredericus Ecclesiastical laws against heretics, Ergo,
heretics they were by your own sentence. Whereunto I adioyne: Ergo, you are
an heretic, as upholding a number of their erroneous opinions: for the which
they were condemned as well by Frederike, as by the foresaid general Council.

And first to begin with Almaricus, Did not his errors stand in the refusing
of Images, Aulters, the invocation of Saints, the transubstantiation of the
holy Eucharistia, eue^ as your brother Pantaleon writes, saying (which is
marvel) that he was burned at Paris for teaching of errors? A man may think
they were errors in deed, that Pantaleon will ones confess to be errors.
For the other aforesaid, he takes not for errors, but for true doctrine.
What errors were they then? One was, that if Adam and Eve had continued in
state of grace, they should never have had children by any carnal copulatio^,
but otherwise: Yea that there should have been no difference between the Male
and the Female kind. Secondly, he said, that the blessed Saints in heaven
do not see the essence of God. Which error he learned of Petrus Abailardus,
against whom S. Barnarde writes: and of Arnoldus Brixiensis, of whom as I
suppose, Arnoldistae, of whom we spoke of, be called. Thirdly, he said, that
the body of Christ is no otherwise in the Sacrament of the Altar, then in
other bread, and all other things. Fourthly he said, there was no hell.
Fifthly, he denied the resurrection of the flesh. And yet is this Almaricus a
worthy Bisshoppe, and an holy Martyr, in Master Foxes mad Martyrologe.
Neither can he find any matter why he was condemned, Almaricus is M. Foxes
holy Martyr.

Vide Foxu^ fol. 70.


but for teaching and holding against Images, which if it were true, as it is
false, yet were he but a stark stinking Martyr.

I will now unfold and rippe up the heresies of some other condemned by
Frederike, that Master Horn may see his own judgment, Articles of the
co^uocation offered of late to the parliament
given against him and his fellows (especially against their heretical
Articles agreed upon in their Schismatic Convocation, and now after four
years, offered to the Parliament to be confirmed and ratified) geauen, I say,
not only by the most famous General Council aforesaied, but also by his
own Supreme Head, the Emperor Frederike, and by his own words and
confession. And here it shall be sufficient to set before you, the Waldenses
only. For as a good fellow ones said, which had provided a feast furnished
with many disshes, to his friend maruailing at such plenty, but all was but
swines flesh, which he had by his iolie cokerie dressed in such diversity:
So all this rascal rablement of these huge monstrous names and sects, are in
effect nothing but the swinish sect of the Waldenses: otherwise called the
poor brethren of Lions, taking there, their original of one Waldo, their
unlearned and blind presumptuouse guide. Which had in diverse Countries
diverse names, whereof some ye have heard: and were commonly called in
England, as appears by our Acts of Parliamente and Chronicles, and in some
other Countries also, Lollardes. Will ye then know, what their Relligion and
order was in Church matters? I remitte the Latin and learned Reader to Aeneas
Syluius, and to Paulus Aemilius: and the English Reader to Master Fox him
self. Who at large to deck and beutifie his holy Canonisation sets their
errors and heresies forth to his Reader. In historiae Bohemiae ca. 35. P.
Aemil. li. 6. Hist. Franc. Fol. 42. cu^ seque^t. All our nevve Gospel
springs from the foolish fond Friar VValdo, and his sect condemned by the
foresaid Council and by Frederik. Of vvho^ the Arnoldists are called. Vide
catalogum Illirici. page 465. et in appendice page 15. impress. Argentin. 1562.
And to be short, there shall ye find, that our holy English Co^uocatio^ borrowed
their damnable Articles, whereof we have spoken, of them, and the whole order
beside, of this their gaie Gospelling Church.

Of this sect sprang among other, the Albanenses, which otherwise are called
Albigenses, of the people called Albij in the County of Tholous in France,
the which we have before rehearsed. Now the Arnoldistae can not be the
scholars and disciples of Arnoldus de Villa noua, being at this time and long
after unborn and so it seems that they are so called of Arnoldus Brixiensis,
and withal, that as well Master Horn, as his Master Illiricus (from whom he
fetched these Epistles of Arnoldus de Villa noua) are out of the way. Master
Horn for imagining this Arnoldus to have lived, about the time of King Henry
the first. And Illiricus for imagining Arnoldistas, to be named of Arnoldus de
Villa noua, and to be condemned before he was borne. Him self confessing, that
he lived about such time as we before have declared. Master Fox also as
great an Antiquarie as he is, as far as I can learn, confounds these two
Arnoldus: and makes a great stir for the auauncing of his new Ghospel of
this Arnoldus de villa noua, being a false lying Prophet* as I have before
showed you. And yt may be proved both by him and by Illyricus, that he was an
Heretic, if he mainteyned such errors as they specify: whereof nothing
does appear in the foresaied Epistles.

And therefore I suppose, if any of them both mainteyned these errors, Arnoldus
Brixensis Vide de hoc Arnoldo. Plat. in Adriane. 4. Sabel. Aenea. 8. li. 9
Bernard. epi. 195.
yt was this Arnoldus Brixiensis. Who for these errors of the Waldenses (as it
may seem) with his disciples is excommunicated by the general counsel, as I
told you before. Now for the other sect of the Albanenses or Albigenses, The
horrible errors of the Albigenses.
springinge of the loins of the holy brother Waldo, beside the common and
usual errors, of the Waldenses, they condemned matrimony, Paulus Aemilius.
li. 6. hist. Franc. Ecclesiam nostram caetum infernorum vocitabant, matrimonia
damnaba^t, promiscuo^s concubitus, eosque nefarios sanctos ducebant.
and lived like brute beasts in most filthy and beastly bytchery. Who not
withstanding multiplied in such sort, and so desperately suffered al kind of
punishment, and death to, for the maynteyning of their heresies, that they
were set upon and destroyed with an army. And yet are they preciouse martyrs
with M. Fox, though him self confess, that the chroniclers make them no
better the^ Turks and infidelles: and would feign (for the honesty of his new
gospel and his new canonisation) that men should think yt were not so, M.
Fox would fayn have us believe these Albigenses to be martyrs.

Frid. Dict. epist. 27. Patarenorum accomplices and qui vt alios a paena possint
eximere, de se velut impronidi non formidant. why these heretics called them
selves Patarenos.

Epiphanius. lib. 3. Tom. 2. Here Is. 8.


contrary to all the Chroniclers upon his own bare word, as one that does
not, nor ever shall be able to show any thing worthy of any credit, to the
contrary. The desperate rage of these wild wodde Waldenses was such, as I
have said, that they did not shu^ne, but rather couitte death, to make their
sect in the eyes of the world more commendable, (as M. Foxes holy martyrs
have of late done in England, and else where) and for this cause both the
council and the emperor calls them Patarenos. For they so called them selves,
as in the old time the Messalian heretics called them selves, for the like
cause Martyrianos, as men glorying, (...).
that for their sect and heresy had suffered martyrdomme. Now let Master fox
make an account of his holy martyrs, and see how many he can find, that
have not maynteyned the said errors, of these Albigenses, Paterans, or
Waldenses: and he shall find his holy cataloge altogether void and empted.
So that the old martyrs may take their old place in the Calendar again.

And because Master Fox does so highly esteem these men: and so lightlye
regards what so ever either the forsayde most famous and learned council, or
the late council of Trente has said or done against the doctrine of his
holy Martyrs: and will not believe the catholics, when they truly call them
furiouse and mad martyrs, let him at the least believe this Emperor
Friderike, a new great Charles, as Master Horn says, and let him in few
words, hear a rownde and a full answer to all his ugly and mad
martyrologe. Vide Petra^ de vinea Lib. 1. Epist. 26. A short answer to all M.
Foxes mad martyrolog, by the emperor frideryke M. Horns supreme head.
He then speaking of the sect of the folishe frontyke and wood Waldo says: In
exe^plum martyru^ qui pro fide catholica. etc. They call them selves (says
Fridericus) as thowghe they followed the example of the Martyrs, which died for
the catholic faith, Paterans, as men prompte and ready to suffer death:
howbeit these wretched Paterans, having no holy belief of the eternal deity,
in this their own wickedness offend three together. that is, God, their
neighbor, and them selves. God I say, whiles they do not know the faith,
that they should have in God, nor his counsel. They deceive their
neighbors, whiles under the pretense of spiritual and ghostly feadinge, they
feade them with pleasant wicked heresy.

But they are most cruel to them selves, whiles, beside the loss of their
sowles, as men making no account of life, but rashelye seeking death, The
Patera^s desperate dealinges.
take a pleasure to bring their bodies to most payneful death, the which they
might by true knowledge, and by a sownde and strong faith avoid, and which
is a most greauouse thing to be spoken, they that remain a live be nothing
afraid by their example. We can not stay and refrain our selves, but that
we must pluck owte our sword, and take worthy vengeance upon such: being
enemies to God, to them selves, and to other: persequuting them, so much the
more earnestly, by how much the more, they are judged to spread abroad and to
practice their wicked superstition nighe to Rome which is the head of all
Churches. Rome the head of all churches by Fridericus confession against the
Paterans.
Thus far Friderike the Emperor.

Let now Master Fox take this as a fytte and worthy condemnation of al his
stinking martyrs. And take you this also Master Horn, and digeste yt well:
and then tell me at your good leisure, when ye are better advised, what ye have
wo^ne by this your supreme head, or by what color, ye can make him Supreme
Head that confesses the Church of Rome to be the Head of al Churches: who also
fealt the practice of the Popes Supreamacy as well by excommunication as by
depryuation from his empire, Platina. Sabell. Naucler. and alij.
that followed the said excommunication: the electours proceeding to a new
election at the Popes commandment. As for Frideryke him self for matters
spiritual he acknowledged the Popes Supreamacy, as ye have heard, and as yt
appears in Petrus de vinea his Chau^celer, that wrote his epistles, though he
thowght the Pope did but usurp upon certain possessions, which Friderike
(notwithstanding his former oath made to the contrary) did afterward
challenge. The matter of S. Peter's patrimony, I will not meddle withal, as not
greatly necessary for our purpose: the which when the Church of Rome lacked,
yet did not the Pope lack his Supreamacie, neither should lack the said
Supreamacie, thowghe he should lack the said patrimony hereafter, or though
his Bishoppricke were not indewed with one foot of land. For it is no worldly
power or temporal preeminence, that has set up the Popes primacy, or that the
Popes primacy consists in, but it is a Supreme Authorytie over all Christ's
flock, such as to his predecessor S. Peter, Christ him self gave here on the
earth, such as by general Councels is confirmed and acknowledged, and such as
the continual practice from age to age without intermission does inuincibly
convince. And for this Supreme government over Christ's flock in Spiritual
matters neither this Friderike neither any other Christian Emperor whatsoever
(except it were Constantius the Arrian) ever striued or contended for with the
Bishops of Rome. To conclude therefore, this only for this time I say, that
your dealing with this Emperor, Master Horn, is to intolerable, thus to
misuse your readers, and not to be ashamed so confidently to allege this
Emperor, for the confirmation of your new supreamacie. Now, thinck you that
Auentinus a man of our age, and as far as I can judge a Lutheran, and most
certaynelie very much affectionated to the^perours against the Popes, is of
such credit, that because he says yt, therefore we must believe him: that
this Friderike was an other Charles the great, and most profitable for the
Christian common wealth? Howbeit let this also pass. For the praise or
dispraise of this Emperor to our principal matter, which is, whether the
Queen be supreme head and Judge of al causes ecclesiastical, is but
impertinent. And therefore we shall now proceed to the residue.

M. Horn. The.127. Division. page 79. a.
Fabian.
In which time Henry the.3. king of England held a solemn Council, in the
which both by the sentence of the King and of the Princes, not a few
priuilegies, were (.435.) The.435. Untruth. Captain and notorious. Polidore
says the clean contrary.
taken away from the order of Priesthode, at what time the Popes Legate
required a (.436.) The.436. and.437. Untruth. For it was a tenth, no tribute,
and it was granted, not denied.
tribute of all the Glergie, but it was (.437.) denied him. Robert Grosthead (
whom ye call Saint Robert) wrote unto the Pope, a sharp Epistle, because he
grieved the Church of England with taskes and paiementes against reason: of
which when he saw no redress, he with other Prelates of the la^d, complained
unto the King, of the wast of the goods and patrimony of the Church, by the
Popes near kinsemen and other alient Bisshops, whom the king avoided out of
the Realm. To whom also the Emperor Frederike vvrote, that it was a shame
for him to suffer any longer his Realm to be oppressed with the Popes
tyranny.

The.25. Chapter. Of King Henry the third.
Stapleton.
Concerning King Henry the.3.
KING Henry the.3. took away many privileges from the order of Priesthode, the
clergy denied a tribute to the Popes Legate, Roberte grostheade writes,
sharply against the Popes exactions, Frederike the Emperor writes to the
King, that he should not suffer his Realm to be oppressed with the Popes
tyrrannie. M. Horns impertinent Arguments.
Ergo, M. Feke^ham must take an oath that the Queen is Supreme Head. If these
and such like arguments conclude, Master Horn, then may you be bold to blow
your Horn, and triumphantly to rejoice like a Conqueror.

But now what if the matter of your argumentation be as ill, or worse then the
form of yt? Ye ought to prove that in this kings days the like regimente was
for matters Ecclesiastical as is now, and that the king took upon him all
supreamacy Ecclesiastical. The contrary whereof is so euidente, by all our
Chroniclers, M. Horn seeks by matters, leaui^g the principal as the
Donatistes did.
and by the authors your self allege, and otherwise in this short
declaration of king Henry the.3. ye do so friuolously trifle, and excedingly
lie, as ye have done and will do in the rest, that I must, beside all other
matters by me before rehearsed concerning the Donatists, say of you, as S.
Augustine said of them. He said of the Donatistes, that in their reasoning with
the catholykes before Marcellinus. August. co^tra Dona. post collat. cap. 34.
^om. 7. In Collat. Carth. Conc. Dicebatse mirari Donatistas habe^e inco^pore
sa^guine^, qui nunquam erubes^erent toties in manifesto mendatio deprehensi.
Nimium patienter pertulit homines per inania vagantes, and tam multa superflua
dicentes, and ad eadem toties conficta redeuntes, vt gesta ta^tis voluminibus
onerata pene omnes pigeret euoluere, etc. He suffered with over much patience,
those fellows wandering about trifles, and so full of superfluous talk, and
returning so often to the self same matters feigned and forged, that the Acts of
that co^fere^ce, were so lode^ with such huge volumes, that it would weary any
man to read the^ over, and by the reading to know, how the matter was debated.
Yea their extraordinary vagaries were so thick and so many, that Marcellinus
was fayn (as Fra^ciscus Balduinus notes) almost 600. times by his sentence
interlocutory to cut of their frivolous elusio^s. We have now nead of such an
other Marcellinus, to be styckler an arbitrer between you and M. Fekenha^.

Again the said S. Augustine said of the Donatistes (as Baldwine notes) that
he did marvel if the Donatists had any blood in their body, that being so
often taken in manifest and open lies, yet never blushed. I say then to you M.
Horn that this king was not the supreme head but the pope, who practiced his
supremacy in this kings days, as much as any pope has done in this realm in
our time, or sithen this king Henry's time. In addit. ad Neub. M. S.
Polichronic. Fabian.
Was not the Priour of Canterbury deposed by the Pope? Were not a number of the
clergy that held with the Barons against the king depryued of their
Ecclesiastical lyuinges, and feign to send to Rome for their absolution? Was
not the Archbisshop of Canterburies election annichilated and frustrated by the
pope? Polichr. et ^o Land. Polichro. In addit. ad Neub. M. S. and Polichr.
Did not the Archbishop of Canterbury Edmond go to Rome for the dispatche of
his Ecclesiastical affairs? Were not S. Hew of Lincoln and the foresaid S.
Edmonde, S. Richard bishop of Chichester, and S. Thomas of Canterbury by the
popes authority translated in this kings time? Was not the king him self with
Pandulphus the popes Legate present at the said translation at Canterbury?
wherein the pope practiced his supremacy in England in Kings He^ries time.
Polidor. lib. 16.
Did not Octobonus the popes legate make certain constitutions
ecclesiastical, which are every where to be had in prynt? Did not the king him
self procure the Popes curse upon the Barons that rebelled against him? Was
not the Pope the Judge in controversy depe^ding between the king and the
Archbisshop of Canterbury? Did not the king him self procure to be absolved
and discharged of his oath by the Pope, as supreme Judge in matters
spiritual? Did not this king send his bisshops to the great council holden
at Laterane whereof we have spoken, as well as other princes did? Did not this
king help with his money the Pope against the emperor Frederike, thowghe he
were allied unto him? And shall all this superiority quayle only for such bare
and friuolouse matter, as you lay forth? But what if yt be not only friuolouse
M. Horn, but stark false? I maruayle suerly if this king took away any
priueleges from the Clergy. Why M. Horn? What king was yt think you, that
gave the privileges for the clergy and the commo^s, yea and the nobylity to,
contained in magna charta, Magna Charta.
but this king? Who caused the bishops of this realm being arrayed in their
Pontificalibus solemly to accurse, Privileges granted to Poules Church in
London by the king.

Polidorus lib. 16. Pro sua pietate and gratia irrogauit Paulino collegio
sacerdotu^, ea omnia libertalis priuilegia, quibus ciuitas Lo^dine^s. vteretur,
frueretur, quae ne indeda^nu^ vllu^ faceret, dedit ex suo libras septe^, quas
etia^ nu^c vicecomites vrbani ex arbitrio regio, quot annis capiu^t

Polidorus lib. 16. Iam ade^at annus salutis humanae. 1226. and nonus, cu^
regnare cepit He^ricus: quo anno co^ciliu^ pri^cipu^ est habitu^: in eo
concilio de regis pariter ac pri^cipu^ sente^tia, no^ paru^ multa priuilegia
ordini sacerdotali, atque reliquo populo irrogata sunt multaeque leges, quas
reges qui sequuti sunt ita approbarunt, vt inde bona pars iuris collecta sit,
quemadmodu^ in eo extat libello qui inscribitur magna Charta, and alterae (...)


in Westmynster hall (the king him self and his nobility being present) the
infringers of the same, but this king Henry the.3? Who gave unto the Church of
Poules in London, such privileges as the city of London had, and least the
city of London should take any damage thereby, gave to the city out of his
checker an yearly rent of seven pounds ever syns usually paid, but this king
Henry?

Lo M. Horn: you hear of great privileges graciously granted and given to the
clergy. But what privileges, or when any were taken away from the^ I can not
yet find. No, says M. Horn, can ye not find it? Why, do ye not then take a
little pains, to read my author Polidor to whom I do remit my reader? Yes
M. Horn that pains have I taken, and that shall ye full well understand. I will
rehearse your own allegation in your authors own words. Now was (says he)
the.1226. year of our Lord God, and the.9. year of kings Henry's reign
come. In the which year, there was an assemble of nobility. In this assemble
by the consent of the king and the nobility many liberties and privileges
were given to the order of priesthod, and to the commons, and many ordinances
were made which the kings that followed, did so allow, that a good part of the
Law, is gathered thereof: as appears in the great Charter, and in the Charter
of the Foreste. How say you M. Horn, is there any more bludde left in your
body, A most notoriouse and captain lie, vvherin Master Horn is co^uicted
by the place him self alleges.
then was in the Donatists, of whom S. Augustine complayneth? what a Macarian
pageante have ye here played? What? Think you, as Cyrces turned Ulysses
company into hoggs, that ye may so enchaunte all your readers, by this your
supreme lying supreamacy, that they shall be so swinishe, as to believe you in
this point, or in any other being here taken with the manner, and as the
ciuilians say (...)? What colorable shifte can ye now pretend, to save your
poor honesty? Is not this the very place, that your self translate out of
Polidorus? Does yt not say the quite contrary to that, for the which ye allege
yt? The matter is so open, that I will refuse no arbitrers, no, not your own
protestante fellows.

It is beside the matter of the story wherein your own author condemns you, a
law matter: Call me therefore a quest of Lawiers. Let the^ tell you, whether Henry
the.3. in this counsel, we must call a quest of Lawyers and gra^marians for M.
Horn.
took away the Charter, or made and granted the Charter. If perchance ye will
appeal from the^ to the Grammarians, and say that irrogare priuilegia, is to
take away privileges (which in deed is your extreme miserable refuge against al
truth and the words, and meaning of your author) I am content ye chose a quest
of the^: neither therein will I use any peremptory challenge, M, Horns shameful
ignorance in the gra^mer and Latin tongue.
but am content to stand to the judgment of your nigh neighbors in the famous
schole of Wi^chester, or if ye will, of M. Cooper the dictionary maker, better
acquaynted with these matters, the^ perchance your self are. But see M. Horn
how as according to the old sayi^g: vnum malu^ non venit solum. So with you
vnum mendacium non venit solum. But that as thowgh there were a game set up for
lying, ye add for the with an other lie. Ye say there was a tribute demanded
of all the clergy by the Legate: but yt was denied him. Your author says, he
demanded the tenth of the clergy, to mainteyne war against the Saracens:
and yt was sone granted him. Your author recites also, after the mind of
some writers, that in a convocation, Ottho the Popes Legate, demanded a
certain yerelye paymente, which was denied him, but he does improve those that
so write. And so withal it is not a single but a double, or rather a treble
untruth, that ye write concerning this tribute. For this demand if yt were
made, was not made, at that time (as you say) when that Council, that ye call
the solemn Council was holde^ and wherein the great Charter was granted, and
where, as ye most falsely say, yt was disanulled, but in a convocation at an
other time. Now putting the case there were any such payment denied, does that
spoil the pope of his supremacy? By as good reason ye may conclude, if any
thing be denied the King, that he demands in the parliament, that therefore
he is no King. This former answer may serve you also for that ye allege
concerning Robert groshead: saving that I may add this withal, that he were a
very Groshead in deed, that would believe you, either when ye say to M.
Fekenham ( whom ye call S. Robert) seeing M. Fekenham speaks no word of
this Robert, no more then he does of Robyn goodfellowe: or that this story
should make against the Popes primacie, seeing that your own author Fabian
says, that this Robert being accursed of the Pope Innocentius, appealed from
his court to Christ's own cowrte. A manifest argument of the popes
supremacy. As for Frederyk the Emperors episte to King Henry: what so ever he
writes against the Pope ye would be loath I suppose, M. Horn alleges
Friderikes epistle, but little for his own ease, if it were fully executed
toward himself.
it should take place in England. For then farewell your goodly Manours, as
Waltha^, Farnha^ and such other. Neither were your ge^tleman Vssher like to
ride before you barehead, but both he and you to go a foot, or rather your
self to go barefoted al alone. Io. Land. in Chroni. Iste Fridericus in
proposito habuit ecclesiam ad supremam paupertatem redigere. Vide apud eu^dem:
partem epist, eius ad Henric. 3.


M. Horn. The.128. Division. page 79. a.
Antoninus.
Jews the French King, called S. Jews, who as Antoninus says, was so
instructed, even from his infancy, in all the wisdom of divine and good
orders, that there was not found his like, that kept the law of the high God,
etc. made a law against those that blasphemed the name of the Lord: adjoining
a penalty of a whote iron to be printed in the transgressors forehead. Append.
Math. Parisiens.
Also in the year of the Lord.1228. He made a Law against the Popes frauds,
concerning the preuentions and re^eruations of the revenues, and dignities
Ecclesiastical, complaining that the Pope had pulled from him, the collations
of all Spiritual promotions: ordeining that from hence forth the election of
Bisshops, Prelates and al other whatsoever, should be free, forcible, and
effectual to the electors Patrones and collatours of the^. Also the same year
he set forth an other Law against Simony: co^plaini^g of the bieyng and selli^g
of ecclesiastical dignities. Fabian.
He made also certain godly Laws against whoredom and Fornication. Last of
all in the year of the Lord.1268. he set forth the Law, Append. Math.
Parisiens.
commonly called Pragmatica Sanctio, wherein in amongst other Ecclesiastical
matters against the Popes pollinges he says thus: Item, in no case we will that
exactions or grievous burdens of money, being laid on the Church of our
Kingdom by the Court of Rome, whereby our Kingedome is miserably
impouerished, be levied or gathered: nor any hereafter to be laid, except
only for a reasonable, godly and most urgent cause of necessity, that can not
be avoided: and that the same be don by our express (.438.) The.438. and 439.
untruths. One in false tra^slating, the other in unfaithful nipping.
biddinge, and commandment of our own accord. (.439.)

The.26. Chapter: Of S. Lewys the French King. Of Manfred, and Charles King of
Sicilia and Apulia.
Stapleton.
Jews his Law, against those that blasphemed the name of God, makes not him
supreme head of the Church. Ye mowght have put in, Antoninus. part. 3. tit.
19. cap. 9. Nome^ domini vel Virginis gloriosae.
as your author does, those also, that blaspheme the name of his blessed
mother. But the mention of this would have greaued some of your sect that have
compared our Lady to a saffron bag, making her no better then other women.
And what if you or your confederats had lived then, that say, it is Idolatry
to pray to her, and to pray her, to pray for us to her son Jesus Christ:
should not ye have had, suppose you, great cause to fear the printe of the
hot iron, ye speak of? As for the collations of spiritual promotions, this
Lewys bestowed none such as his predecessors by especial licenses and
privileges had granted unto them from the bisshops of Rome. And that as I have
often said, proves no superiority of government in Ecclesiastical matters,
except by the same reason you will make every Patron of a benefice to be
supreme governor in all Ecclesiastical matters to his own Vicar and Curate.
The embarringe of Exactions from the Court of Rome, is nothing derogatorye
from the Spiritual power or Jurisdiction of the Church of Rome. For they are
not utterly embarred, but the excess of the^ is denied: and in any reasonable,
godly, or urgent cause of necessity they are granted, as your self allege.
But to better a little your badde cause, you have with a double untruth ended
your allegation. For where the King says, Nisi de spontaneo expresso co^sensu
nostro, not without our voluntary and express consent, you turn it, by our
express bidding and commandment, and that it might seem to ha^ge of the
Kings pleasure only, you leave out, and ipsarum Ecclesiarum regni nostri: and
of the Churches of our kingdom.

But what need we lose more time in making more ample answer, Annals de
France. Fabian. Nau^lere.
seeing it is most certain, that this King and his realm acknowleadged the
Popes Supremacye, as much then as ever since even to this day? For where was
your new great Charles Friderike the second deposed from his Empire, by Pope
Innocentius the fourth, but at Lions in France? And in whose Kings days, but
of this Lewys? Who defended many years together the Popes of Rome, Innocentius
the.4. Alexander the.4. Vrbanus the.4. and Clement the.4. against the Emperor
Frederike (who therefore by treason went about to destroy him) but this Kings
Lewys? Who warred him self in person against the Sarracens at Thunys, at
Clement the Popes request, but this Lewys? Who also before that, making his
voyage into the holy land against the Soulda^ took benediction and absolution
of Pope Innocentius the.4. lying the^ at the Abbye of Cluny in France, but
this Lewys? And did not the said Clement make by his Authority Charles this
Lewys his brother, King of Sicilia and Apulia? And will you make us now believe
M. Horn, that this King was such a Supreme Governor, as you imagine Princes
ought to be, or that in his time the Popes Supremacy was accounted a forrayne
power in France, as it is with you in England? No. No. M. Horn. Seek what
age and what Country you will, you shall never find it while you live.

M. Horn The.129. Division. page 79. b.
Conradus, Conradinus and Manfredus, (.440.) The 440. untruth. For they lost
them.
still kept the privilege of the foresaid Ecclesiastical matters in Sicilia
and Apulia. Shortly after this time Charles the King of Sicilia and Apulia, had
(.441.) The.441. untruth, as shall appear.
al or most of the doing in the elelection and making of diverse Popes, as of
Martyn.4. Celestyn.5. Boniface.8. etc.

Stapleton.
To these matters of Sicilie I have already more then ones answered, and do
now say again, Nauclerus gener. 41. page 288. Vide chronicon additum ad P.
Aemil. historia^. Plat. in Nicolao. 4. Cardinales ad co^cordia^ and electione^
pontificis adhortatus est. Ide^ in Caelestino. 5. Instante Carolo Rege, and
Latino Cardinale pontifex creatur.
that this privilege consisted only in inuesturing of bisshops granted by
Alexander the.3. and after reclaymed by Innocentius the.3. Whereby it well
appears, that this allegation makes rather with the Popes Primacy, then
against it: but most of all in this place. For Pope Alexander the.4. declared
this Manfredus the Romain Churches enemy, as he was in deed, and a traitor
also both to Conradus, his brother, and to Conradinus his nephewe, both
inheritours to that kingdom, both whom he went about to poison. By reason of
which outrages, he was as I said denounced enemy to the Church of Rome by
Alexander the.4. and shortly after, Charles King Lewys his brother, was made
King of Sicilie by Clemens the.4. paying to the Pope a tribute, and holding of
him by faith and homage. Such Supreme heads were your Conradus, Conradinus and
Manfredus.

As for Charles (who only by the Popes Authority came to that dignity, as I
have said) it is not true, that he (as you say, had all or most of the doing,
in the election, or making of diverse Popes For the Cardinals only had the
whole doing. Truth it is, that a strief and contention rising among the
Cardinals, for the election, and many of them being inclined to serve Charles
expectation, they elected those which he best liked of. But what can all this
make to prove the Prince Supreme Governor in all ecclesiastical causes? yea or
in any ecclesiastical cause at al? Naucler. gener. 42. page 313. et 314. Ide^
gener. 43.
Princes eue^ now adays find some like favor sometimes at the election of
Popes. But think you therefore they are taken of their subjects for Supreme
Governors etc? You may be ashamed M. Horn, that your reasons be no better.

Polych. Fabian. Polyd.
M. Horn. The.130. Division. page 79. b.
Edward the first, King of England, about this time made the Statute of
Northampton: So that after that time, no man should give, neither sell, nor
bequeath, neither change, neither bye title, assign lands, teneme^ts, neither
re^tes to no man of Religion, without the Ki^gs leave: which act, sense that
time, has be^ more straightly enacted and devised with many additio^s,
thereunto augme^ted or annexed. The which Law, says Polidore, he made (.442.)
The 442. untruth. Polidore says not so.
because he was Religionis studiosissimus, etc. most studiouse of Religion, and
most sharp enemy to the insolency of the Priests.

The.27. Chapter. Of King Edward the first, of England.
Stapleton.
Leave ones Master Horn to prove that, wherein no man does stand with you:
and prove us, that either King Edward by this fact was the Supreme Head of
the Church: Concerning King Edward the first.
or that the Popes Primacie, was not as well acknowledged in England in those
days, as it has been in our days. None of your marginal Authors, avouch any
such thing. Neither shall ye ever be able to prove it. Your authors, Polid.
Polychro. Fabian.
and many other, have plentiful matter to the contrary, especially the
Chronicle of Johannes Londonensis, which seems to have lived about that time:
and seems among all other, to have written of him very exactlye. Let us
see then whether King Edward took him self, or the Pope for the Supreme
Head of the Church. This King after his Fathers death returning from the holy
Land, in his journey visited Pope Gregory the tenthe, and obtained of him an
excommunication against one Guido de monte forti, for a slawghter he had
committed. Io. Land. An. 1272.
Two years after was the famous Council holden at Lions, at the which was
present the Emperor Michael Paleologus, of whom we have somewhat spoken. And
trow ye Master Horn, that at such time as the Grecians, which had long
renounced the Popes authority, returned to their old obedience again, that
the realm of England withdrewe it self from the old and accustomable
obedience? Or trow ye that the true and worthy Bisshops of England refused
that Council, as ye and your fellows, counterfeite and parliament bisshops
only, have of late refused the Council of Trente? No, no. Our author shows
by a verse commonly then used, that it was frequented of all sort. Gregorius
denus colligit omne genus.

Joan. Lo^d. An. 1272. and. 1274. Neubu. in addi. M.S. dict. anno. 1274.

Io. Land. 1278.

Ide^ Anno. 1294. and 1298.


And the additions to Newburgensis (which ends his story, as the said John
does with this King) says, that plures episcopi co^uenerunt de vniuersis
terris, de Anglia ibidem aderant archiepiscopi Cantuar. and Ebor. et caeteri
episcopi Angliae fere vniuersi, there came thither many bisshops from al
quarters: and from England the Archbisshops of Canterbury and York, and in a
manner all the other bisshops of the realm. In this Kings time, the Pope did
infringe and annichilate the election of the Kings Chauncelour being Bishop of
Bathe and Wells, chosen by the monks: and placed in the Archebisshoprike of
Caunterbury John Pecham. In this Kings time the year of our Lord.1294. the
prior of Caunterburie was cited to Rome, and in the year.1298. appeal was
made to the Pope, for a controversy towching the election of a new Bishop of
Elie. Three years after the bishop of Chester was constrained to appear
personally at Rome, and to answer to certain crimes wherewith he was charged.
Ide^ Anno 1301. and 1303.
Within two years after, was there an other appeal after the death of the
Bisshoppe of London, towching the election of the new Bisshoppe. Yea the
authority of the Pope was in high estimation, not only for spiritual, but
even for temporal matters also. Idem An. 1286.
The Kings mother professed her self a religiouse woman, whose dowry
notwithstanding was reserved unto her, and confirmed by the Pope. For the
great and weightye matters, and affairs standing in controversy and
contention between this King Edward, See in what estimation the Popes doings
were with the King and the realm even for temporal matter^. Idem An. 1298.

Idem An. 1300.

Vide Neu. in addit. M.S. anno 1291.

Ide^ Io. Lo^dinen.


and the French King, the Pope was made arbiter and vmpier, who made an
agreament and an arbitrimente: which being sent under his seal, was read in
open parliamente at Westmynster, and was well liked of all. The King and the
nobility sends in the year of our Lord. 1300. letters to the Pope sealed
with an hundred seals, declaring the right of the crown of England upon
Scotland: and they desire the Pope to defend their right, and that he would
not give a light ear to the false suggestio^s of the Scots. There are extant
at this day, the letters of John Baliole and other Scots agnising the said
superiority, sent to this King Edward. In the foresaid year.1300. the King
confirmed the great Charter, and the Charter of the Forest, and the
Archebisshoppe of Caunterburie with the other Bisshoppes pronounced a solemn
curse upon al such as would break the said liberties. This King was
encombred with diverse and long wars, as well with France as Scotland, and
therefore was feign to charge the clergy and laity with many payments. But in
as much, as Pope Bonifacius consideringe the wonderful and intolerable
exactions daily laid upon the clergy, of their princes, had ordained in the
council at Lions, Pol. li. 17. Vide 6. lib. decret. li. 3. ca. 3. de immunit.
Eccles. Ide^ Joan. an. 1296. Idem an. 1296.1297 and 1300. Idem an. 1300. Neu.
in addit. M. S. an. 1291. and 1292.

M. Horns extrauagante argument. Co^cernig Mortmaine.


that from thence forth the clergy should pay no tribute or tax, without the
knowledge and consent of the sea of Rome, Robert Archbishop of Canterbury,
being demanded a tribute for him self and his clergy, stood in the matter not
without his great business and trouble. And at the length upon appellation the
matter came to the Popes hearing. The king had afterward by the Popes
consent diverse payments of the clergy.

Many other things could I lay forth for the popes primacy practiced at this
time in England. And is now M. Horn, one only Act of Parliament, made
against Mortmaine, of such force with you, that it is able to pluck from the
Pope his triple Crown, and set yt upon the kings head? If Mortmaine had been
so straightly seen unto, some hundred years before, ye should have fownde your
revenues, I suppose, very slender and poor. But ye being as good a Lawier as
ye be, either divine, or Chronicler, think belyke your self to be out of the
go^neshotte, and that Mortmaine reaches only to men of relligion. And yt
seems, so he and his mate may be well provided for, M. Horn forces little,
how little other have, and whether they have ought or naught. Suerly M. Horn it
seems to me strange that you being a man of the Church, and knowinge that
the Clergy has upon the great trust that good me^ have had of their
vpprightnes and virtue, been endewed with great possessions (which in deed
should be and commonly have been employed upon the nedy according to the mind
of the doners) should find fault, with Mortmaine, and with that, which good and
well disposed men have voluntarily offered to the Church, to be well and
charitably bestowed. But I perceive why ye are an enemy to Mortmaine. For now
have you and your Madge live catle of your own, for the which you have more
care to provide, then for any Mortmaine for your successors in the sea.

But as I was about to tell you, ye must understand, that the statute of
Mortmaine does not reach to religious men only, The statute of mortmaine does
not touch religiouse me^ only.
but to bisshops and other spiritual men, yea to lay men also: And was made
as well for the commodity of spiritualty as temporalty: to save as well to the
one, as to the other their wards, eschetes, and other commodities that by
mortifying of Lands, are wont to follow. Well, as little understanding as
master Horn has of Mortmaine, and as far as yt is from his principal
matter, yet will he, tell us also out of Polidore a cause of this Law of
Mortmaine: And then as he is wont, he tells us a cause fantasied of him
self. Truth it is, that Polidore says, that the king made this Law to
repress the riot and excess of the Clergy, Polidor.

Prudentia summa, religionis studiosissimus, insolentiae sacerdotu^ enimicus
acerrimus, quam ex opibus tum primis proficisci putabat: qua^obrem legem ad
manum mortuam perpetuasse fertur, vt ita eoru^ luxuries coerceretur.


but Polidore was a stranger, and unskillful in the Laws of our realm: and
therefore he did not fully understand the matter, thinking (as M. Horn does)
that Mortmaine touched the clergy only: and yet he says it not precisely, but
(vt fertur) as yt is said. It is true also, that, he says this king was
most studiouse of relligion, but that he says this in respect of Mortmaine,
can not be induced, and is nothing but M. Horns vain gheasse, and lewd
untruth.

M. Horn. The.131. Division. page 80. a.
At this time Philip le Beau the French king, began his reign, brought up in
the study of divinity, under Aegidius the Romain divine, by (.423.) The 423.
untruth: he gave him no admonition to reform religion.

Anton. Naucler. Blond.


whose admonitions and also of other divines, the King being instructed in
his duty, above al other things, Pau. Aem.
endeavored him self about the reformation of Religion, and ordering of
Ecclesiastical matters. VVheruppo^ looking to the state of the Clergy, he
(.424.) The.424. untruth. He deposed him not, but deprived hi^ of his
te^poralties, and that unjustly.

Aemilius. Nauclerus.


deposed a certain Bishop for Heresy, and gave his Bishoprik to an other, and
besides, claymed the inuestiture of al other Bishops in his dominions: and
calling Councelles at home in his own Realm, would suffer none of his
Clergy to goo to the Popes (.425.) Councelles. He caused the Popes (.426.)
Bulls to be burned. He commanded the Popes (.427.) Legates to avoid his
realm. He commanded, that no money should be carried out of the Realm to the
Pope. He set forth a Law, that no man should goo to Rome out of his kingdom.
He called a Counsel at Paris, and caused to be gathered thither all the
Prelates and Barons of France: to justify his doings. He showed unto the^
why he took upon hi^ to call a Counsel. He enueighed against the Pope for
heresy, Symonie, Homicide, Pride, Ambition. etc. and that of right he ought
therefore to be deposed. He demands of the Counsel, unto whom they be
lawfully sworn, and of who^ they have received their dignities? They al
answer, that they are all the beneficiaries of hi^ alone, and that mindful of
their Faith, and the Kings estate, they would suffer death, for his glory,
power and saulfegard. Thervppo^ he sets forth a pragmaticall sanctio^ or
forceable law to diminishe the dignity of the Pope. The.425.426. and 427.
untruths. by art of multiplication, a^ shall appear.

Platina. Naucler. Antonin. Sabell. Naucler. Sabellic. Aemyl. Append. Vrspurg.
Antonin. Naucler. Antonin.


Many other Ecclesiastical Laws he made, against the Jews, against the
Te^plars, against adultery, etc. He (.428.) The.428. untruth. He made him not,
but made intercession to have him made.
made also Clement the fifth Pope, and svvor hi^ to certain co^ditio^s before
hand: by whose importune means also, the General counsel of Vie^na was
holde^. In which Counsel he labored to have Pope Boniface condemned for an
Heretic, affirminge that he would prove hi^ so. But the matter was (.429.)
The.429. untruth. It was not taken up, but decreed plain against the king.
taken up, and to satisfy the king, it was decreed, that all the processes of
Bonifacius against the king, were unjust, and the kings doings in any poi^t
against the Pope should not be prejudicial to hi^, or to his heyers.

The.28. Chapter: of Philip le Beau the French king.
Concerning Philip the French king.
Stapleton.
A man would think, that now at length M. Horn had fownde some good and
effectual matter, for his new primacy. He lays on such lode against the
Pope as well in his text, as in his ioly rank and rewe of his marginall
authors, that now at the least M. Fekenham must yield and subscribe. But yet
for all this M. Horn I must be plain with you and tell you, that if ye had
showed your reader the whole and entiere story, out of any one of all your own
authors, for all ye have so clerkly and cunningly ordered and placed them: M.
Horns ioly rank
with Paulus Aemilius, the^ with Antoninus, Nauclerus, Blondus, then with
Platina, and after this with Nauclerus, Antoninus, Sabellicus, and forwith with
Nauclerus again, with Sabellicus, with Aemilius: and after all this with
Appendix Vrspergensis, and eftsone with Antoninus, Nauclerus, and finally with
Antoninus again, the whole primacy, should (as it does in deed
notwithstanding) have remained with the Pope, and not with your Philippe le
Beau, make him as beau, and as fair as ye ca^. Your soldiers be very thick
and warlyk placed, but they stryk never a stroke for you, but that that is all
against you. Neither will I here (for it needs not) intermedle with the
justice of the cause of either side: Let the fault light, where it should light:
and let this Bonifacius be as badde as ye make him (thowghe your author Paulus
Aemilius a most worthy Chronicler, Paul. Aemilius. li. 8
by the common verdit of all learned writers) and auauncing France as high as
he may, with the saufgarde of truth and verity, thinks rather the epistles
written between the king and the Pope, wherein each one charge the other with
many faults to be counterfeite, then true and authentical. M. Horn choppeth
and pareth the ^uctour^ by him alleged. Cypria^: de simplicit Prae^a. sieve de
vnitate Ecclesiae. Corruptores euangelij atque interpretes falsi extrema ponunt
and superiora pratereunt, partim memores, and partim subdole corru^pentes: vt
ipsi ab Ecclesia scissi sunt* ita capituli vnius sententia^ scindunt.
For these matters I will not at this time towche you: but for your notable, and
yet accustomable infidelity in the wretched and miserable mangling and mayming
of your own authors I must needs say somewhat unto you. Ye do the^ in this
report of stories, as your self and your companions do, and as your au^cetours
the old heretics were wo^t to do in alleging of scripture and the Fathers:
that is, in chopping and paring of what it pleases you, and as ye are cut of
your selves from the Church: so dismembre you also your authors allegations,
even as S. Cyprian many years sythe^ce, has described and painted you fotrh.
First then is there any one of al your authors, that (as ye most wyckedly
do) goes about by this story, either to make this king Supreme Head of the
french Church, or to deface and disanul the Popes Primacie? No truly. Unless
perchance yt be the author, that added to Vrsperge^sis, I mean your own
dear brother Gaspar Hedio, his addition as well agreeing, for matters of faith,
with his first author Vrspergensis, as the legs and loins of an horse, will
agree with the head, shoulders, and upper part of a man's body. Yea, beside his
heresy, he is to young to be alleged for author authentical. To be short, the
dealing of this king, proves nothing the like regiment that now is in our
realm (which is your peculiar matter, and the only matter M. Feke^ham rests
upon) and so for all your great stir, with burning the Popes Bulls and
commau^ding the Popes Legates to avoid the realm, ye go fair and far from
the matter. For where you say, he would suffer none of his clergy to go to the
Popes councels, that was but of one only Council called against him self. Item
where you say, He caused the Popes bulls to be burned, Vide Naucler. generat.
44. page 361. P. Aemil. lib. 8. Co^memorat Bonifacij in se, Fra^ciamque noui
exempli decretum: sed eu^ po^tificem maxima^ non esse, eaque de re cognosc^nda
sacrosancta^ sede^ suo antistite tunc viduam appellare. Naucler. gener. 44.
Diuersis sententijs elegerunt Episc. Bur. rege inter cedente.
first not he, but Familiares Regis, the Kings friends and courtiars did it,
and yet it was but one bulle neither, and that of the kingss own
excommunication. Again, where you say, he commanded the Popes Legates to
avoid the realm: It was but one Legate, about that one matter that he so
commanded. With these many untruths by the Art of Multiplication, you enter
your plea. Touching the matter it self, the Kings grudge, was but a private
and a personal grudge and enmity, against Bonifacius: no lasting or perpetual
renuntiation of the whole Papal authority, as it is evident by the discourse
of al your own Authors. And therefore Bonifacius being dead, who accursed the
King, and interdited the Realm, both he and the Realm were released from
curse and interdiction by Benedictus, successor to this Bonifacius. Yea
Bonifacius yet living, this King most plainly agnised the authority of the Sea
of Rome, appealing from this Bonifacius* whom he took not for the right Pope,
but an usurper, and an intruder, to the Sea Apostolical, vacant (as he thought)
and to the next successor. Ye hear Master Horn, notwithstanding the great
enmity between the King and Pope Bonifacius, that he appealeth to the Sea of
Rome, being as he thought vacant: and that he is, as I have said* absolved from
the sentence of excommunication by Bonifacius his successor, which altogether
ye omit. But yet ye tell us of Pope Clement the fifth, made as ye say, pope by
this King. But here you ouerreache your Author, and water him with your old
lying gloss. Nauclerus neither says, nor could truly say, that the king
made him pope, but says he was made Pope by his intercession: Neither your
Author Antoninus says it. Ye say, he swore this pope to certain
conditions. Why do ye not name the^ M. Horn? Forsooth because in the naming of
the^, Antoninus in historia part. 3. ^it. 21. c. 1 M. Horns own story proves
most fully the Popes supremacy. Naucler. gener. 44. Contrariu^ declarauit
scilicet ipsum fuisse catholicu^ and indubitatu^ pontificem. Ant. par. 3. tit.
21. c. 3. Co^cilium nullo modo co^sentire voluit sed co^trariu^ declarauit,
scilicet ipsu^ f^isse catholicu^. and indubitatu^ po^tificem.
the form, state, and condition of this your new primacy in your fair
Phillip would be full ilfauoredly acrased and defourmed. Among other there
were these three: Prima est, vt me perfect reconcilies Ecclesiae sacrosanctae,
relaxando and venia^ dando de adiutorio dato in captura Bonifacij Papae
Secundum est, vt censuras excommunicationis amoueas contra me and meos sequ^ces
prolatas. Tertium est, quod mihi concedas omnes decimas regni per quinquennium
in reparationem expensarum multarum in bello inito contra Flandrenses. First,
that ye will perfectly reconcile me to the Church: and release and forgive me,
for that by my means Pope Boniface was taken prisoner. Secondly that you will
revoke the sentence of excommunication, given against me and my confederates.
Thirdly, that you will grant me for five years the tenth of al my realm, to
relieve me for the great charges and expenses, defraied in my wars against
the Flemmings. These conditions the king required the Pope to assure him of by
Oath. Then would M. Horn feign have Pope Boniface taken for an heretic, and
says that King Phillip would have had it so declared by the Council holden
at Vienna. But the matter was taken up, M. Horn says, and to satisfy the
King, it was declared, that Pope Bonifacius doings should not be prejudicial
to him and his heirs. And why have ye M. Horn either wilily omitted, the
matters for the which the pope was co^ditionated withal: or have so fondly told
us against your self, of this Council at Vienna? Why, but to confirm the
popes primacy, and to declare your self also a liar in saying the matter was
taken up, etc. For the Counsel assembled of.300. Bishops, beside other prelates,
would in no wise agree to the kings request, but declared the contrary: to wit,
that Bonifacius was a catholic, and an undoubted Bishop: as your own authors
Antoninus and Nauclerus specify. Yea Nauclere adds. Quo rex cogebatur
contentus esse. With the which determination of the Council, the king was
constrained to be contented. At the coronation of the foresaid Clement were
present, not only this Philip the French king, Ant. part. 3. tit. 21. ca. 1.
Nauclerus dict gener. 4^ Paul. Aemilius. Naucler. volum. 3. page 361. Blond.
Celebrauerat prouinciale Concilium etc. Ad sedem Apostolica^ in se mitiore^
aquioremque appellauerat. Ant. part. 3 tit. 2. c. 8. ss. 20. Naucler. gener. 44
but the king of Arragone, and as some write, the king of England also. Yet
has M. Horn one other prouf* to prove Philip head of the Church, for that he
deposed a Bishop for heresye, and for that he claymed the inuestiture of
Bishops. As for the inuestitures let them go for this time: we have said
enough, I suppose, of that matter. And as for deposing of a Bishope, he deposed
him not but under pretense of heresy (says Nauclere) he deprived him of all
his temporaltyes, and of his Bishopric. But why do ye not M. Horn recite
the whole sentence of your authors Antoninus and Nauclerus? For as for Blondus,
writing nothing of this matter, that is of of the deposing of any Bishop, or of
the claimi^g of the inuestitures, for the which you seem to allege him, ye
do but blindly allege, and may blot hi^ out again: saving that ye may truly
put in, that in the Council which king Philip called in France he appealed (as
I have told you) to th'Apostolik See of Rome. But why do ye not, as I said,
show the whole and entiere sentence of your authors, fully to adorn your
primacy withal? which is, that he took a certain Bishop, laying to his
charge that he was a Patera^ heretik, spoiling him of his Bishopryke and of al
his goods: and that he spoiled also and robbed the Bishopprykes being vacant,
and that he would have had the inuestitures of the Bishops? Now if it were
so, that king Philip deposed a Bishop for heresy, yet should you M. Horn of al
me^ take smallest relief thereby. For if Philip your supreme head were now
living, M. Horn declared ones again an heretik by his own King Phillip.
and you under his dominion, he might also deprive you and your fellows for
heresy: being as I have before showed, very Patera^s. And now you that make so
little of General councils and stay your self and your religion upon the
judgments of lay princes, have heard your co^de^nation not only from the
notable General Counsel at Lio^s, but from your new Charles the Emperor
Frederike, and from your fair King Phillip. Mark the work of God.


This, this, Good Reader, is the very handie work of God, that these men
should be cast in their own turn, and give sentence against them selves. And
as hot, as ernest, and as wily as they are, in the first enterprise of their
matters, yet in the pursuit of their ungracious purpose, to cause them to
declare to all the world their small circumspection providence, and less
faith and honesty. Many other things might be here brought, for further
aunsweare to M. Horn, as that he says that this King by the Council of
Aegidius the Roman Divine, went about the reformation (as M. Horn calls
it) of matters Ecclesiastical, and that Paulus Aemilius should be his Author
therein, which is a double untruth. For neither is it true, that Aegidius was
any counsailer or aider to refourme the Church, or rather defourme it, after
the order of M. Horns Relligion: nor Aemilius says it. Again, Sabellicus is
either twice placed in M. Horns Margent wrong, or he alleges Sabellicus
altogether wrongfully. But this may go for a small oversight.

M. Horn The.132. Division. page 80. b.
About the time of this Council at Vienna, the famous scholman Durandus sets
forth a book: vvherin as he reckeneth up diverse great enormities in Church
matters: so for the reformation of them, he alvvaies joins the King and
secular Princes, and the Prelates, and to this purpose cites the form of the
ancient Councelles and many times enueigheth against and complains upon the
usurped (.430.) The.430. untruth. For not in spiritual matters, which is now
the Question.
authority of the Roman Bishop, warning men to bevvare, how they yield
unto him: and prescribes a rule for the Princes and the Prelates to refourme
all these enormities, not by custom were it never so ancient, but by the
word of God.

Stapleton.
Answer me M. Horn directly, and precisely, whether Durandus, in any work of
his, takes the lay prince for the head of the Church. If ye say, he does
not: to what purpose do ye allege him? If ye say he does, then his books shall
sone convince you. And what book is it I pray you, that ye speak of? Why do
ye not name yt? Why do you tell us of a book, no man can tell what? The book
there is entitled de modo concilij celebra^di, which he made at the
commandment of the foresaid Clemente. Wherein thowghe he spoke many things
for the reformation of the cowrte of Rome, yet that as well in that book, as in
all his other he takes the Pope for the supreme head of the whole Church,
Vide eunde^ librum titul. 2. and 27. and alibi passim.
is so notoriouse, that a man may judge, all your care is to say something
against the Pope, without any care how or what ye say. And that ye fare much
like a mad dog that runs forth, and snatcheth at all that ever comes
nigh him.

Durandus de diuinis officijs lib. 2. cap. 1. Number. 17.
And to give you one place for all M. Horn, that you may no longer stagger in
this matter, behold what this famous Scholeman (as you call him) Durandus
says of the Popes primacie. Illius ^raelatus Papa, etc. The prelate of the
whole Church is called Papa, that is to say, the father of Fathers: universal,
because he bears the principal rule over the whole Church: Apostolical,
because he occupies the room of the Prince of the Apostles: chief Bishop,
because he is the Head of al Bishops etc. Lo M. Horn what a ioly Author you
have alleged against M. Feke^ham. Verily such an adversary were worth at al
times not only the hearing, but also the hyring. But alas what tole is there so
weak, that you poor souls in such a desperate cause, will refuse to strike
withal? You must say somewhat. It stands upon your honors: and when al is
said, it were for your honesties better unsaid.

M. Horn The.133. Division. page ^0. b.
About this time also the Emperor Henry the.7. came into Italy with great
power to reduce the Empire to the old estate and glory of the ancient
Emperors in (431.) The.431. untruth. For not in the behalf of ecclesiastical
government.
this behalf. And on the day of his coronation at Rome, according to the manner
of other Roman Emperors, he set forth a Law, or new authentic of the
most high Trinity, and the Catholic faith.

Stapleton.
What matter is this M. Horn, to enforce M. Feke^ham to deny the popes
primacy? Will you never leave your trifling and frivolous dealing? If ye will say
any thing to your purpose, ye must show, that he took not the pope, but him
self only and his successors for supreme heads of the Church, and that in all things and causes, which ye shall never be able to do while ye live, neither
in this, nor in any other Emperor, King or prince what so ever.

M. Horn. The.134. Division. page 80. b.
Next to Henry.7. was Jews.4. Emperor: who had no less but rather
greater conflictes with the Popes in his time (.432.) The.432: untruth. The
conflict was far otherwise, as shall appear.
about the reformation of abuses, tha^ any had before hi^: the Pope now
claiming for an (433) The.433. untruth, as shall appear.
Ecclesiastical matter, the confirming of the Emperor, as before the Emperors
were wont to confirm the Popes. About which question, the Emperor sent
and called many learned Clerks in (.434) The.434. untruth. Poets, not divines.
Divinity, in the Civil and Cano^ Law, from Italy, France, Germany, Paris,
and Bononia, which al ansvvered, that the (435) The.435. untruth. No such
thing in his Author.
Popes atte^pts were erroneous, and derogating from the simplicity of the
Christian religion. Whereupon the Emperor willed them to search out the
matter diligently, and to dispute upon it, and to gather into books their
minds therein, which diverse did, as Marsilius Patauinus, Ockam, Dantes,
Petrarche, etc. By whom when the Emperor understood the Popes usurpation,
he came to Rome, called a Council, and (.436.) The.436. Untruth. For he did it
De facto, not De iure.
deposed the Pope, and placed an other in his room: In which Council, the
Romans desired to have their old order in the Popes election ratified by the
Emperor, to be renewed. This Emperor called also a very great Council at
Frankeforth, where besides the Spiritual and Secular princes of Germany, the
King of (.437.) The.437. Untruth. None of his Marginal Authors say so.
England, and the King of Beam, were present, where by the greater and
sounder part, the Popes aforesaid usurpation was abolished. Which sentence
the Emperor confirmed, and published vvriting thereof, that his authority
depends not of the pope, but of God immediately, and that it is a vain thing
that is wont to be said, the pope has no superior (.438.) The.438. Untruth.
In co^cealing his Authors meaning.
The Acts of this (.439.) The.439. Untruth. Nauclere belied, and falsified, a^
shall appear.
Counsel against the Popes process were ratified by the Emperor, as
appears by his letters patentes therevppon, beginning thus. Lodouike the
fourth, by the grace of God, etc. To all patriarchs, Archebisshoppes,
Bisshops, and priest^^, etc. And ending thus. Wherefore by the Council and
consent of the prelates and princes, etc. We denounce and determine, that al
such processes be of no force or moment, and straightly charge and command to
all that live in our Empire, of what estate or condition so ever they be, that
they presume not to observe the said sentences and curses of the popes
interdiction, etc. An other Council he called afterward at the same place,
about the same matter: because Pope Clement called it heresy, To say that the
Emperor had authority to depose the pope, which heresy as principal, he
laid (.440.) The.440 Untruth. It was not the first that was laid etc.
first to the Emperors charg. Item (.441.) The 441. and.442. Vntruth^ Pope
Clement twice flatly belyed as shall appear.
that the Emperor affirmed, that Christ and his Apostles were but poor. Item,
the.3. heresy, that he made and deposed Bisshops. Item that he neglected the
Popes interdightme^t, etc. Ite^ that he (.442) joined certain in marriage in
degrees forbidden ( he means forbidden by the Popes laws) and deuorceth
them that were married in the face of the Church. Which in deed was nothing
else* but that amongst other Ecclesiastical laws that the Emperor set forth,
were some for marriages and deuorcements contrary to the Popes decrees.

The.29. Chapter. Of Lewys the.4. Emperor.
Stapleton.
WE have need Master Horn of a new Judge Marcelline, M. Horn^ impertinent
Argument^.
that may by his interlocutorie sentence, bring you, as he did the Donatistes
from your wild wide wandering, home again to your matter. Let it be (for the
time if ye will needs so have it) that the Emperors Authority does not
depend of the Pope, yea and that Pope John the.22. was also for his own
private person an Heretic. And then I beseech you add your wise conclusion.
Ergo Master Feckenham must take a corporal Oath, that the Queen is Supreme
Head of the Church of England.

Now on the other side, if we can prove against you, that even this your own
Supreme Head, Lewys, for spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters, agnised the
Popes and the General Councelles Authority, to be Superior to the Authority
of the Emperor and of all other Princes, and that they all must be obediente
and submit them selves thereunto, then shall Master Fekenham conclude with
you an other manner of Ergo, and that is, that ye and your confederates, are no
Bishops, as made contrary to the laws and ordinances of the Pope, and as
well of the late General Council at Trent, as of other General Councels: yea
that ye are no good Christians, but plain Heretics, for refusing the Pope
and the said General Councelles authority. For the proof of our assertion,
that this Emperor, albeit he stood against the Pope, auouching him self for a
true and a full Emperor, thowghe he were not confirmed by the Pope (which was
the very state of the original controversy betwixt him and the Pope) and
thowghe he procured Pope John (as much as lay in him) to be deposed, and placed
an other in his room, believed yet (this notwithstanding) that the Pope for
spiritual and faith matters was the Head of the Church (which thing is the only
matter standing in debate between you and M. Fecke^ha^) for prouf I say of this
we will not stray far of, but fetch yt, only of your own authors here
named: who confess that he appealed, to the very same Pope John, Antoninus
part.3. tit. 21. cap. 5. ff. 8.

Appellauit ad ipsum Papa^ male informatu^, been informandu^ et etia^ ad
co^ciliu^ generale. Nauclerus Gener 45. Naucler. ibidem. Platina.

Creatus itaque Pseudopontifex ac Nicolaus.5. appellatus ab imperatore and ijs
qui cu^ eo aderant, vt verus Christi vicarius co^salutatur. Naucler. ibidem.


ill informed, when he should be afterward better informed: and withal to a
general council. But what need we seek aid at Antoninus and Nauclerus hands,
when we have yt, so ready at your own hands? For your self say, that he placed
an other Pope in John's stead. Ergo he acknowledged a Pope still: and as your
author says, vt veru^ Christi vicarium, as the true vicar of Christ. Neither
did your Emperor diminishe or blemishe the Popes authority in any point,
saving that he said, he might appeal from him to the general counsel, and that
the emperor was not inferior or subject to him for temporal jurisdiction. But
with you and your ba^d, neither Pope, nor general counsel takes place. Now
the^, that ye are cast eue^ by your own emperor, we might well let go the
residewe of your superfluous talk, saving that yt is worth the marking to see
your true, honest, and wise ha^dling of it. Your first oversight and untruth
the^ is, that ye write, that the Pope claimed the co^firmatio^ of the emperor as
an ecclesiastical matter. In deed he claimed the same, and so right well he
might do: as no new thing by him inverted, but browght to him from hand to
hand, from successor, to successor, by the race and continuance of many
hundred years. And yet if we speak properly, yt is no matter ecclesiastical no
more the^ the patrimony of S. Peter, Co^cerni^g the co^firmatio^ of the^peror
by the Pope.
consisting in te^porall lands was a matter ecclesiastical and yet both dew
to the Pope. The one by the gift of diverse good princes: the other, either by
prescriptio^ of time out of mind, or by special order taken by the popes at
such time, as the pope made Charles the great, Emperor of the West: or when he
translated the^pire into Germany, and ordained.7. Princes there to have the
election of The Emperor, or for some other good reason, that if need be, may be
yet further alleged and better enforced, the^ that al your wit and co^ning
shall ever be able, well to avoid. Nay say ye, the emperor had great learned me^
on his side, expert in divinity, and in the civil and cano^ law. But when ye
come to number the^, ye find none, but the Poets Da^tes, and Petrarcha, Ocka^
the scholeman, M. Horn proves his new primacie by poets. M. Horns own
author co^de^neth his vvytnesses.

Volater. in Anthropologia.


and the great heretic, Marsilius Patauinus. And shall these men M. Horn
cou^teruayle, or ouerweighe the practice of the church ever since used to the
contrary, and confirmed by the great co^sente of the catholyke writers, and
diverse general councelles withal? Ye write as out of Antoninus, or Marius, in
a several and latin letter that the Popes attemptes were erroneous, and
derogating from the simplicity of the Christian religion. But such words I
find as yet in neither of the^, nor in any other of your authors, here named.
And your author Antoninus says, that in this point, both Da^tes and Ockam
with other do err: and that the monarchy of the Empire is subject to the
Church eue^ in matters temporal. Antoni. part. 3. titul 21. ca. 5. ss. 2.
And whereas your sect will have no mean place, for any Christians, but heaven
or hell, your Dantes (as Antoninus tells) has fownde a mean place, beside
heaven and hell, for Socrates, Aristotle, Cicero, Homere and such like. Suerly
Dantes, Bartolus in lege prima ff. de requirendis reis.

Marsilius Patauinus.

Vide Hierarchiam Pighij.

De Iurisdict. Imper. and ecclesiast.

Basil. impres. Anno 1566.

The proper haeresy of England.


for his other opinion towching the^perours subjection is counted not much
better then an heretyke. As for Marsilius Patauinus, he has been as well long
ago, as also of late, largely and learnedly answered. But as for these
writers, Marsilius Patauinus, Ockam, Dantes, and Petrarche, with diverse
others, part of whom your brethern of Basil have patched up together, in a
great volume, as they labor al to prove the Emperor above the Pope in
temporal jurisdiction and government, wherein yet they erred (as we have said)
so none of the^ al do labor to prove the Emperor supreme governor in
spiritual and ecclesiastical causes, (as you the first founders of this heresy
do say and swear to,) but do leave that to the Bishops, yea and some of them
to the Pope to. And therefore al were it true, that they wrote in the favor
of Lewys the.4. then Emperor, yet were you never the nerer of your purpose by
one jot. This is M. Horn, your own proper and singular heresy of England to
make the Prince supreme governor in causes ecclesiastical. You only are
Laicocephali, that is such as make the lay Magistrates, your heads in
spiritual matters.

Ye add then more force to your matter by a great counsel kept at Franckford,
whereat the king of Beam and of England also were present, of which with
other things is set forth by a special and a latin letter, as the precise words
of Marius, or of the addition adjoined to Vrspergensis. But neither they, nor
any other of your marginall authors speak of the king of England. And when
ye have al don, and who so ever was there, yt was but a schismatical
conuenticle, and yet much better, then your late conuocations. If the articles
of your said conuocations had comme to their hands, no dowbte, they had been
condemned, for a great part of them, for most blasphemous heresies. Well: The
Emperor says (say you) that his authority depends not of the Pope, but of
God immediately, and that it is a vain thing, that is wont to be said, the
Pope has no superior: if ye could prove this Emperor an Evangelist, or this
Counsel a lawful General Council, we would give some ear to you. And if
themperours authority depend so immediately of God, show us gods
commandment, given rather to the Germans, then to the French or English me^,
to chose an Emperor. Most of the other princes Christian in Europa hold by
succession, and not by election. And if ye ca^ show us any other cause of the
diversity, but the Popes only ordinance, then shall ye quite your self like a
clerk. If ye ca^ not show other cause, then shall ye never be able to show us
good cause, why the Pope should not claim the confirmation. Yet is yt, says
M. Horn, M. Horn leaves owte of his authors words. Vide dict. Paralip.
and Naucler. page 384. and 385. vo^lum. 3.
a vain thing to say the Pope has no superior: but yt is more vainelye and
fondlye done of you M. Horn, to the descrying of your false dealing and to the
destruction of your Primacy, to bring forth this saying. For your said council
recogniseth the Pope, as superior in all causes ecclesiastical. And where yt
says, yt has a superior, why do ye not tell us, as your authors do, who is
his superior? Is it the Emperor wene you, or any temporal Prince, as ye would
make your unlearned reader believe? No, no. Your council meante, and so both
your authors plainly declare, that it was the general council, to the which
the emperor had appealed. Where you add, the Acts of this Council were
ratified by the Emperors letters patents, and do bring in thereupon as the
Emperors letters against the Popes processes, you beguile your Reader, and
belie your Author Nauclerus. For those letters patents, this Emperor gave
forth, not as ratifiyng the Acts of that Council (as you say) but De concilio
quorunda^ fratru^ Minorum sub sigillo suo: upon the advice of certain
Minorits, under his own seal. And again: vocata solenni curia: At the keeping
of a solemn Court. Of the Acts of that Council, Nauclere speaks not in this
place, neither reports these leters patte^ts to have proceeded thereof. Thus of
Princes Courts, ye make great Councels, and of the advice of certai^ Friars,
you frame to your Reader the consent of many bishops. By such pelting
shifts, a barren cause must be relieved.

But now are ye yet again in hand with an other Council at Frankford by this
Emperor: and with certain heresies that Pope Clement laid to this Emperors
charge. It would make a wise man to wonder, to consider, to what end and
purpose this stuff is here so thrust in. Neither cause can I as yet conjecture
any, unless I should impute it, to Maistres folly, or to dame heresy, or to
both: or to the special ordinance of God, that suffers this man for the
malice he bears to the Catholic Church to wexe so blind, that he speaks,
An heap of Untruths. Naucler. vbi vt supra.

Paralip. Vrspergen.


he wotteth not what, and sees not; when he speaks most against him self,
nor the matter that he would gladly defend. For beside as many lies as be
almost lines (as that he tells of an heresy first laid to the Emperors
charge, which was not the first, as ye shall understand anon: Item, that the
Pope said he was an heretic, because he said Christ and his Apostles were
poor, wherein he does excedingly lie upon pope Clement: Item that The Emperor
set forth laws Ecclesiastical, concerning marriages and deuorceme^ts, which
his Authors say not, Naucler. gener. 45. page 390. Prima haeresis. Ipse eni^
(inquit Clemens) asseruit determinat. de pauper tate Christi et apostoloru^ per
Joan. 22. facta^, esse haeretica^: et iurauit se credere contrariu^. Item
asseruit. etc. M. Horn Emperor is an heretic. Vide extrauagante^ Io. 22. cu^
inter de verb. signif.
nor is otherwise true) beside all this he declares his Emperor to be a very
heretic, and him self also, or at the least to be but a very foolish fond man.

I will therefore for the better understanding of the matter, first rehearse you
his authors words, and then add to it some further declaration mete for the
purpose. The first heresy (says Nauclerus) was that the Emperor affirmed,
that the Decree made by Pope John the.22. touching the poverty of Christ and
his Apostles, was heretical, swearing that he believed the contrary. He
avouched moreover that it appertained to the Emperor, to make or depose Popes.
Furthermore being cited to answer in a cause of heresy, and being accursed
for his co^tumacy, he has continued almost these te^ne years in the said
curse. He retained also in his company, one John of Landenio an Archeheretik.
He makes bisshops, he breaks the interdict, and does expel the^ out of their
benefices that will not break it. He seuereth matrimonies, co^tracted in the
face of the Church: and joins persons together in the degrees forbidden. He
means perchance (says Nauclere) that he married his son Lewys to the
Cou^tes of Tyroles, her husband John, the king of Beams son, yet living:
saying that he was impote^t: and further, she was married to this Lewys being
within the degrees prohibited. Clement adds beside, that he has set up an
Idol in the Church, and an Antipope, and has de facto, deposed the Pope.
These are Nauclere, M. Horn his authors precise words: the which I pray thee
good reader to confer with M. Horns gloss, and then shall ye see the man's
honesty and fidelity in reporting his Authors.

This Emperor then was not accounted an heretik because he said Christ and his
Apostles were poor, neither is this condemned for heresy, by the foresaid John
the.22. but to say Christ and his Apostles had nothing in common or in private,
Vide histo^iam Ant. part. 3. tit. 21. c. 5. ss. 1.
which was the heresy of those that are called Fratricelli, or Pauperes de
Lugduno: most chiefly of al men set forth by a Friar called Michael de Cesena,
and our Countriman Friar Ockam, and Marsilius Patauinus, and by this your
Emperor Jews of Bauarie and by Petrus de Corbario the Antipope, that ye say
was placed in pope John's room: Is Concilio in Italia habito Io. 22. haereticu^
declarauerat, defendens Iesum eiusque discipulos adeo pauperes fuisse, vt nihil
neque in co^i, neque priuatim habuissent. Quod in Council. Anemone^si refutatu^
est. Io. Marius de schism. et Council. part. 2. c. 21
who keeping a Conuenticle in Italy, condemned pope John for an Heretic, as
your Author Marius declares: So that this faction in this wise on every side
banded, grew to a very great schism. And many so fondly and obstinately dwelt
in this opininion, that they died as obstinately and wretchedly for it. And yet
these men as I have said, are not only holy brethren, but holy Martyrs too,
with Master Fox. And now good Master Horn, tell us your judgment in the
matter. Is it Heresy, or is it no heresy, to defend this opinion
obstinatlie? If ye say it is heresy* Cardinal. Flor. in Clement. exiui. ss.
proinde de verb. signif. Mad Martyrs.
then do ye confess your new Head of the Church, with his new Idol and
Antipope, an Heretic: and do show your self a great slaunderouse liar
against pope John: and a very fond mad man, thus to fight against your
self, and your own cause. If ye do stoutelie deny this to be heresy, as
ye seem, by the order of your declaration to deny it, as well as the rest,
then show you your self no simple Schismatique, nor simple Heretic, and so
ye are at the least messhed here in four heresies.

To set some fast footing in the discussio^ of these matters, and seriouslye to
weigh and examine every thing, would ask some larger talk, the^ we may now
(unless we would be to to tediouse to our reader) well spare. But yet for the
two principal matters, seeing you make so light of Pope John and the Churches
Authority, I will convince you, and sufficientlye to, I hope: and by such a
witness as your own Emperor, of all other men in the world did most esteem
and reverence, yea and kissed his foot to. Perchance Master Horn ye long to
hear of this man? Truly he is none other, but your Emperors dearling, The
repentance of the Antipope se^te up against Pope John.
and idol the Antipope. I mean Petrus de Corbario. Who at length, (called no
doubt thereto by the special grace of God,) better aduising him self of his
doings, and weighing them better with him self, after mature and seriouse
discussing of them, in fine found him self no Pope, but a miserable and a
wretched intruder, in the sea of S. Peter: and a damnable disturber of the
peace and unity of Christ's Church, and to say all at ones, a greauouse
schismatike, and an heynouse heretic. Wherefore fynding the worm of
conscience, bytinge and gnawing his heart, he fell to great sorrow and
lamentation, and forthwith being then at a city in Italy called Pisa, before
the Archebisshoppe of the said city, and the Bisshoppe of Luke, and many
other honorable persons as well of the clergy as of the laity, voluntarily and
willinglye, showed how penitente he was for his greauouse enormities, and
before them and certain notaries, for a full testimony of his true
repentance, gave over his usurped primacie, and plainly confessed, that he
had been a schismatike and an heretic: and he did put him self into the
hands and mercy of the right Pope John the.22. And wrote unto him resident
then at Auinion in France, his most humble submission: in the which he
declares, that as him self was but an usurper of the Apostolic* See: So
your Lewys of Bauarie, was no lawful Emperor, but an usurper. He declares
further that both he and the said Jews, mainteyned diverse heresies, and namely
two of these that ye here specify, concerning the poverty of Christ, and the
making and the deposinge of the Pope. The which he does by special words
freely and voluntarily, forsake, renounce, and abjure. And promises that he
would ever after believe, Specialiter cognosco, me tenere and credere quod ad
Imperatorem non pertinet, deponere nec instituere Papa^, prout etc.
as the said John, and the holy Church of Rome believed. Will ye now see
good Reader the wonderful workinge of God, that has brought to Master Horn
his own Pope, to condemn him and his new Head of the Church Lewys, for
Arrante heretics? Yea to make a short answer to all Master Horns book,
and to call yt heresy, that Master Horn does so stowtlie defend, in saying
that the Emperor should be above the Pope, and to have authority to make or
depose the Pope? And thus ye hear, (Master Horn) that contrary to your
saying Pope John neither was deposed, nor could be deposed by your Emperor. I
marvel now seeing that it is a true and sownde doctrine by your new heads
teachinge, Vide Robertu^ Arbor^^e^sem Episcopum impressum Parisiis in 8. Anno.
15.46. Master Horns Emperor, and him self declared an heretic by his own
Antipope. All Master Horns book shortly confuted by the said Antipope.
that Christ and the Apostles had nothing of their own, that your and your
fellows consciences (who pretend that ye would have the Church that now
is, reformed to the pattern of the primityue and Apostolical Church) are so
large, that ye are nothing pinched at conscience, in keeping your godly and
great possessions.

The.30. Chapter: Of Gods Judgment upon such Emperors, as seem most to have
practiced M. Horns Primacy.
Stapleton.
BUT now M. Horn, since we are come by course of times and ages to the last
Emperor, that notoriously rebelled against the Apostolic See of Rome (for
since this Lewys the.4. they have al ben obedient Children to that See,
especially in all causes spiritual or Ecclesiastical, eue^ to the right
Catholic Emperor Maximilian that now reigns) I will put you brefely in
mind, to what ends al these disobedient Emperors came. Trusting that this
consideration of Gods judgment shall be neither to you bearing your self for a
bishop in Gods Church unpleasant, neither for me (my vocation considered)
unmeet, neither to the Christian Reader unfruitful.

To be short therefore, Ammianus Marcel. li. 22.
Co^sta^^ius the Arria^ Emperor which banished Pope Liberius, and played in
deed the part of your supreme governor, died obscurely and miserably whiles he
persecuted Iulyan his own Cosen.

Valens an other Arria^ Emperor, Ide^ lib. 31.
and playing Rex over al Catholic Bishops in the East, being overcome in field
of the Goths, was burned to ashes in a poor cotage, with diverse of his nobles
about him, which* was never read of any Christian Emperor sense, or before.

Valentinian the younger who called his bishop, Hierony. ad Heliodoru^. To. 1.
Ambr. lib. 5. epist. 32. Eutropius lib. 3.
S. Ambrose to appear before his consistory, and there to answer in matters of
faith, his end was to be killed of his own servants, and shamefully hanged.

Anastasius the Eutychian Emperor, and excommunicated of Pope Gelasius, was
stricken to death with fire from heaven, and Mauritius an unmerciful persecuter
of blessed Pope Gregory, and a busy Prince over his Bishops seeing first his
wife and children murdered before his face, was murdered at last him self of a
base Souldiare Phocas. Blondus li. 3. decad 1. Paulus Diaconus, lib. 18.
Zon^ras Tomo. 3. Zonaras Ibidem.


Constans nephewe to Heraclius, banished the most holy Pope Martinus: but seeing
him self for that and such like wicked deeds (says Zonaras) hateful to his
subjects, he left Constantinople, and lived in Sicilia, where at a bathing he
was slain. Michael, son to Theophilus, a notorious enemy to the Sea
Apostolic, namely to Nicolaus the first, going drunk to bed, was miserably
slain by his beds side, forsaken of al his friends. And thus much of the Greek
Emperors and of the East Church, only Valentinian excepted.

Nauclerus volum. 3. Generat. 37. page 171 and. 173.
The first of all the Germain Emperors that notoriously disobeyed the Sea of
Rome, and that was therefore by the Pope excommunicated openly, was Henry
the.4. whom Gregory the seventh (otherwise called Hildebra^d) excommunicated.
His end was, as it has before ben declared, that being first deposed of his
own son, after much resistance, and misery, appeali^g, but to late, to the Sea
of Rome, seeing himself forsaken almost of all the states of the Empire, in
affliction and extreme persecution died.

Idem. Generat. 40. page 251. Sabellicus Aenead. 9. lib. 5.
Friderik the first called Barbarossa, a man that many years persecu^ed the
Church of Rome, and therefore worthily excommunicated of Alexander.3. to who^
also he was forced at length to submit himself, though against his will,
afterward in Cicilia, being strong and merry, suddenly bathing him self in a
river he was lost.

Naucler. Gene. 41. page 271.
Philip an Emperor made against the consent of Pope Innoce^tius.3. and a
persecuter therefore of the Pope, in the town of Bromberge reposing him self
after diner in his pryuey chamber, was slain of the County Palatyne. Otho the
fourth deposed and excommunicated of the Pope for his enormious cruelties and
injuries committed in many places of Italy, Page 275. and 280. Sabell. Ae. 9.
lib. 6. Nauc. Genera. 42. page 309. Sab. Aen. 9. lib. 6.
was of Philipe the French king assaulted in these low countries, and put to
flight, and shortly after in Saxony died as a private man.

Frederike the second, a prince brought up in the Court of Rome, and set in the
Empire by the procureme^t of pope Innocentius the.3. became yet afterward a
most cruel and tyra^nical persecutor not only of that See, but of all the Clergy
under his dominions. This man being excommunicated of Innocentius.4. was
poisoned in Apulia as some write, or strangled, as other write, by his bastard
son Manfredus. Not only this Emperor him self, but al his stock after him
perished, by violent deaths or imprisonment. Naucler. page 313.
His son and Heyr Conradus being excommunicated also of Innocentius.4. for
the great outrages and oppressions by him committed against the Church, by the
means also of the said Manfredus, was poisoned in Apulia.

This Manfredus coming by these trayterouse means to the kingdoms of Apulia
and Sicilia, Ide^. Genesis 42. p. 32^.
and afflictinge the Church of Rome, as his father and brother had done, was
excommunicated by Alexander the.4. and after of Charles the French kings
broother, whom Vrbanus the fourth made king of Sicilia and Apulia, Sabel. Ae.
9. lib. 7. Naucler. page 323.
he was vanquished and slain in the fyeld. Conradinus son to Conradus, and
clayming after, his fathers Titles, was of this Charles also vanquished and put
to death.

Entius likewise an other son of Friderike the.2. and one that had long and
many years in his fathers wars, Naucler. page 324. dict. Genesis 42.
done great myschief to the Sea of Rome, was at length taken in battle of the
Bononyans, and committed to perpetual prison. Thus all the stock of this
Frederike the.2. who had so grievously persecuted the Church of Rome, was in few
yers utterly extinguished. Which thing al historia^s do worthily note, though
some more sharply them other: yet al herein agreing, that for their deserts
God plaged the^ so notoriously in this world.

Naucl. Gener. 45. page 379.388. et 393.
Lewys the fourth, the last Emperor by master Horn alleged, being
excommunicated twice of the Sea of Rome, first of John the.22. and after of
Clement the.6. under who^ and in whose favor those poets and orators,
Petrarcha and Dantes, Marsilius, and Ockam the scholeman wrote against the
Popes temporalties, as he was a hunting, was taken with a soden palsy, fell
from his horse, and died.

Such ends had they in this life, that most practiced the supreme government
by M. Horn here defended. And his best examples and proufes, to prove his
strange primacy, have been drawn from the doyngs of these forenamed Emperors.
And verily like as in the old law, Saul, Achab, Iora^, Ochozias, Ioas,
Amasias, Ozias, and Achas, kings of Judah and Israel died al by violent and
miserable deaths, for disobeying the prophets and priests of God, 1. Reg.
31. 3. Reg. 22 4. Reg. 9. 2. Paral. 24.25.26
Samuel, Elias, Elizeus, Micheas and Esaie, and as their such deaths were
manifest arguments of Gods indignation, and recounted for such in holy
scripture: so these forenamed Emperors, and princes in Christ's Church
Constantius, Mauritius, Vale^s, Anastasius, Constans, Michael, Henry the
fourth, Friderike Barbarossa, Philip, Otho.4. Friderike the second, Co^radus,
Conradinus, Manfredus, and Lewys the.4. having such violent and miserable
ends, upon their notorious disobedience to Christ's vicaires in earth, the
bishops of the Sea Apostolic Liberius, Gelasius, S. Gregory the first,
Martinus the first, Nicolaus the first, Gregory the.7. Alexander.3.
Innocentius the.3. and.4. Alexander the.4. John the.^2. and Clement the.6. are
unto us professing the faith of this Church, undoubted arguments of Gods just
indignation and plage in their behalfes, and may well serve for wholesome
presidentes to other Christen princes, not to attempt the like. But now to
return to M. Horn, and to tread, as he leads us, have out of Germany, into
France, an other while.

M Horn. The.135. Division. page 81. b.
In France king Charles (.443.) The.443. untruth. He granted them. Pet.
Bertran.
denied the Pope the tenthes of his Clergy. But Philip de Valois that
follovved, Aemylius.
reformed and took away many late vpstart Ecclesiastical abuses in the
Clergy, and Prelates in his Realm: of the which, diverse complaints being
made unto the king, he called a counsel at Paris, and summoned thither the
bishops, as appears by his letters wherein he complains, that they have
enchroched from him and his officers a great many of rightes: bringing in their
novelties not due, and unwonted grieves under the p^etence of Ecclesiastical
causes: whereby they have broken the concord of the Clergy and the Laity, and
therefore willing to provide so much as he can by Gods help, an healthful
remedy: He requires, and nevertheless commands them to appear before him
at Paris personally. etc. The Prelates appearing at the day assigned, before
the king in his Palayce, Archebisshoppes, Bisshoppes, and making reverence to
the kings majesty, being set down with his council, and certain Barons
assisting him, a certain knight of the kings council, spoke publykely for
the king in the presence of them al, taking for his theme this text. Give
that unto Caesar that belongs to Caesar, and that unto God that is due unto
God. etc.

The kings admonition being made, a great many complaints were put up unto
the king by his nobles and officers, against the Clergies usurpation, in
meddling with contractes of marriages, in their privileges of ^lerkes: In
citations to their Courts, in their excommunications, in vvilles, and
hereditamentes, in calling of provincial counsels, in making synodall
Decrees, and statutes, in meddling with realties, in pere^ptory writes, in
examinations of men's beleues, in enioyning of money penaunces, In shauing of
children, and unlawful persons making them Clerks, in vvhoordome and
fornication, in vvyddovves goods, in bloudshead in the Churcheyarde, in
inuentories, etc. and in a great many mo matters, which ye call Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical causes: the French king proving (.444.) The.444. untruth. For
the French king ne said ne proved no such matter.
them to be (as in deed they were no other) but temporal: nevertheless not
standinge much about the name, nor taking them al away, from their
jurisdiction, he only said, he would reform them. Nevertheless, for
certain days there was much disputing to and f^o, whether they belonged to
the king to reform or no, till the king by his foresaid procuratour gave the^
the kings determinat answer, declaring unto them, how that they ought not
to be troubled, because the kings intention was, to keep those rightes and
customs of the Church, and Prelates which were good and reasonable, but by
reason of their faults, the judgment which were good and reasonable,
apperteined not unto them to determine, but to the king. Because the Decree,
Nouit etc. says, that the king of France in matters de Facto, has not his
superior etc. Whereupon he concluded, that the king would hear all the
informatio^s: And those Customs of the which he should be fully enfourmed,
that they were good and reasonable, he would make only to be observed.

In (.445.) The.445. untruth. For this was not the Co^clusio^, as shall
appear. Aemylius
co^clusio^ the Prelates made such importune labor, that the forsaid attorney
au^swered the^ for the king, that if the Prelates the^ selves would amend
those things, that were to be amended and corrected, the king would abide till
the feast of the Nativity next to come: within the said term, he would
innouate nothing: but if within the said term, the Prelates had not amended
those things that were to be amended and corrected, that then the king would
put to such ^emedy, as should be acceptable to God and the people. Which in
conclusion the king was feign to do, by a sharp and severe (.446.) The.446
untruth. P. Aemylius mencioneth no such law* but plainly the contrary.
Law, when he savve how the Prelate^ dallied him of, with fair words,
and (.447.) The.447 untruth. Not therfo^e, P. Aemylius fovvly abused.
therefore he him self, Composuit rem sacerdotum, did set in order the matters
of the Priests.

The.31. Chapter. Of Charles the.4. and Philip de Valois sixth of that name,
kings of France.
Stapleton.
WEll fisht, and caught a frogge. All this long tale is told for Composuit rem
sacerdotum. But to touch the particulars, P. Aemilius li. 8. in Carolo
Pulchro. Carolus Rex and virtutis and clementiae laude^, fructumque ad eum die^
tulit, exin aduersourmore, quod sacri in Ludouicu^ Baeuaru^ belli noi^e decimas
de sacerdotibus Fra^cispetentipo^tific. Max. Ioha^ni cu^ primum denegasset,
pactione deinde expugnatus, concessisset vt in parte^ ipse veniret, and caet.
what wise reason is this, or what reason at al is it, to make the Queen of
England supreme head of the Church, because Charles the French king denied the
pope the tenthes of the Clergy? Verily his author says, the king did empayre
his estimation, that men had of his virtue before by this very fact of his. Yea
and yet he says withal, that afterward he did co^desce^de to the popes
request. Now what means M. Horn, to allege that for prouf of dew
gouuerneme^t, which his authors report, for prouf of vndewe regiment? Means
he that all the world should laugh him to skorne? That which follows of Peter
Bertra^d, and eftson of Paulus Aemilius, is M. Horns own: making the^, to
speak not their minds, but what likes him, telli^g us first an obscure,
dark, false tale, out of the said Bertra^d: but I trust we shall draw him out
into the fair open light, and pluck from him Petrus Bertrand and Paulus
Aemilius with whose visour, he would feign cover the ugly face of his
impudente and shameless lies. Why M. Horn? has not the Clergy to do with
matters of contracts of marriage, excommunications, wills, and with the
examination of men's beliefes, with making synodical decrees, and such like
matters? Wherefore the^ do ye not shake of from you the intermedlinge with these
matters? Well I perceive saying and doing are two things: and neither shall
Ludouicus the Emperor, though he affirmed that the Clergy should follow
Christ and his Apostles in poverty, make you to disclaim your goodly lands
and patrimony: nor Philip Valesius the French king make you to disclaim
your jurisdiction. The gain is to sweet. Perhaps ye will answer, that I
strain you to far, and that ye do not deny, Vide libellum Petri Bertrandi
episc. He du^us. and Cardinalis aduersus Pe^ru^ de Cunerijs super facto
prae^a^o^u^ ecclesiae gallis^naean. 1^29.

Hi^c l^bel. reperies adiu^ctum cum Qua d^il^g. de vita Be. Thom Paris. Anno.
1495.

A short declarati^ of the matter in hand.


but that the Clergy may use the jurisdiction of the foresaid matters, but not
as Church or ecclesiastical matters, but as plain temporal matters, for the
French king proved they were so in deed. Neither the king proved yt, nor your
author says yt, nor any other. The shameless dealinge of this man is such,
that he seems to seek nothing else, but to ouerwhelme the world with words,
little regardinge to speak, not only great and many untruths, but even such as
without further trial and strayning him no more, but with his own authors,
are incontinently opened and descried. To answer fully, and at large to all
his endless and importune babbling, as well here as otherwhere would be to to
tediouse a thing. And for this matter, in as much as Petrus Bertrand is in
prynte, I will send the learned reader, that is desirouse; to see the deapth of
this matter, to the original book: and will now touch so much only, as
shall be sufficient for the unlettered reader, to see and consider M. Horns
unfaithful and wretched dealing.

Petrus C^^erius being one of the kings privy council proponed to the Clergy
before the king, and the nobility.76. articles: and went about to prove, that
the prelates and the Clergy, for so many points had usurped upon the kings
jurisdiction. He auowched also, that temporal and spiritual things, are
divided and sondred, and that the one appertayned to the king only, the other
to the clergy only. The archbishop of Sans, answered to this Petrus, and
proved by the old and the new testament, by the cyuil and canon Law, and by
the custom of France time out of mind used, and by several graunts and
privileges, received from the kings predecessors, that spiritual and
temporal jurisdiction were not so preci^elie distincted, but that one person
might occupy both. After him the same day seven night, in the presence of the
king stood up Petrus Bertrandus a Bisshoppe of the people in France then
called Hedui, who are now Burgonions, and enforced the same matter, addinge a
full answer, as well to the decree Nouit, alleged here by M. Horn out of the
said Petrus Cunerius, as unto all his.76. articles. A great number of the
said articles, towche matters plain and mere temporal, and yet such as the
clergy did and might meddle withal, partly by Law, partly by special
privilege, and partly by custom. There were certain faults and abuses fownd
in the prelates officers, Petr. Bertrandus.
the which the prelates answered, that if they had known them before, they
would not have suffered them: and promised to forsee for the time to come, for
the earneste amendinge and redressinge of them. For the redressing whereof the
king gave them a time until Christmas folowinge. Now M. Horn would make
thee believe, good reader, that because the prelates dalied and things were not
reformed accordingly, the king by a sharp and a severe law did amend and
correct them. But this is your own Law, good master Horn, and no Law at
all of King Philippe: made by you, I say, with as good authority and truth,
as the damnable articles were made, in your late convocation. How so ever yt
be, here is nothing amended but abuses: which to be amended no good man will I
wene be angry withal. But what say you now master Horn to the whole
ecclesiastical jurisdiction that the French clergy practiced? What became of
yt? Did the king take yt away, or no? Why are ye tongue tied M. Horn to tell
the truth, that so freely and liberally, yea and lewdly to, lie against the
truth? Well: seeing that ye can not win yt at Master Horns hands good reader,
Petrus Bertrandus.
ye shall hear it otherwise. The effect and final resolution then of this
debate was, that the king made answer to the foresaid bishop of Sans,
demanding his resolute answer, in the behalf of the whole clergy: that the
prelates should fear nothing, and that they should not lose one jot in his
time: but that he would defend them in their right and customs: neither
would he give to other an example to impugn the Church. Whereupon the
Bisshoppe in the name of the whole clergy gave to the king most humble
thanks. M. Horns shameless Dealinge.
How say you good reader, has this man any more shame then has a very
Horn? And dares he to look hereafter any honest man in the face?

Yet he will say that Paulus Aemilius says, that the King was feign to make
this sharp and severe Law. Why? Ca^ Paulus Aemylius, tell better what was
done, then your other author Bertrande, being present and playing the chief
part in this play, and setting yt forth to the world, to your perpetual
ignominy, with his own pen? Well: tell us then, what Paulus says. Marie say
you, Paulus reports that composuit rem sacerdotum: he did set in order the
matters of the Priests. But who speaks of your sharp and severe Law? Will
not co^ponere rem sacerdotu^: agree with all that I have told out of Bertrand
himself? Is now co^ponere re^ sacerdotu^: to be englisshed, to make a sharp
and a severe law? Suerly this is a pretty exposition, and a try me trick of
your new gra^mer. Your Author Aemilius uses his word co^posuit, valde, apt,
and composite, very aptly and fytlie. But you M. Horn with your gaye and
fresh interpretation do nothing else, but Lectori fallacias componere,
deceive and be guyle your reader, or to speak more fytely to our purpose, ye
do nothing else but Legem Philippi nomine componere. counterfeyte a law in
Philippes name: Paulus Aemilius. Lib. 8. in Philip. 6. Valesio,
supplicationibus ac gratijs numini ac sanctis martyribus haebitis rem
sacerdotu^ composuit. Praetores regij etc. The matter truly declared out of ^.
Aemilius M. Horns author.
whereof your author Aemilius speaks nothing. For Aemilius declaring a
notable victory that this King had over his enemies, says: that the victory
obtained, and after that he had made his prayers and given thanks therefore to
God and to his blessed Martyrs, composuit rem Sacerdotum: he set in order the
Priests matters. Then does he shortly specify, that the foresaid Petrus
Cunerius complained upon the clergy for the hearing of many matters, that
appertayned to the kings secular cowrte: and that the foresaid Bertrandus made
him answer, declaring among other things, that their best Kings in
France, the most florisshing and the most notable were ever the greateste
patrons and defenders of the clergies liberties: and that the other that
impugned the same, came to a miserable and wretched end. He says further,
that the Kings answer being from day to day prolo^ged, the said Bertrandus
with a number of the prelates upon S. Thomas of Canterburies day, went to the
King, admonishi^g him that S. Thomas in the defense of the Church liberties
upon that day, spente his blood and life. The King at the length answered
that he wuld rather increase, than impair the Churches right. P. Aemilius
dict. lib. 8.

Tum Rex, iura, inquit, ecclesiaru^ auxerim potius quam imminutae veli^.
Gratias vniuersi egere, Rex Catholici nome^ promeruit.


Whereupon all rendered unto him thanks: and the King purchased himself
thereby the name of a Catholic King. Ye hear, good reader, an other manner of
exposition of ^om^osuit remsace^dotum, by theauthour him self, then is M.
Horns gaye lying gloss made in his theeuish Cacus den. And therefore with
these words, wherewith Aemilius begins his narration, M. Horn ends the
narration, to put some countenance upon his false and counterfeite Law. The
clergy then enjoyed still their liberties and jurisdiction, which ordinarilye
they had before, either by Law, or by custom and privilege, though as I said
many causes were but temporal. All the which temporal causes, the said Petrus
Cunerius, by the way of co^sultation only and reasoning, declared by some
coulorable arguments, to belong to the Kings cowrte only. But for
exco^municatio^s, synodical decrees, examinatio^s of men's beliefes, and such
like he makes the^ not as ye babble temporal matters, nor abridgeth the
clergies jurisdiction therein, but only reproves certain abuses therein
committed, forth which and for the other the clergy promised a reformation.

Let us now see your policy, and to what benefit of your cause ye do so lie?
Imagyne (if ye will) that al were true, and for ones we will take you for Philip
the French King: and your Law made in your Cacus den, to be in as good force
as if yt had been made in open parliament in France. What issue join you
thereof? M. Horns impertinent arguments.
what due and ordinate conseque^t is this: the French King makes a severe
law against the clergy, usurping his jurisdiction: Ergo the Pope is no Pope:
or, ergo the King of England, is the Pope of England? Again, if al are
temporal matters, how stands yt with your doctrine, especially of this
book, that ye and your fellows, should busy your self therewith? Neither
will yt ease you to say, that ye do yt by the Princes commission: for
Cunerius, upon whom ye ground all this your talk dryueth his reason to this
end, M. Horn look well to your co^missio^.
that spiritual men be not capable of temporal jurisdiction, and therefore
this commission will not serve you. And if ye hold by commission, take head
your commission be well and substancially made. But of this commission, we shall
have more occasion to speak hereafter.

M. Horn. The.136. Division. page 82. b. Paral. Vrsp. Fabian. Caxton. Polyd.
Nauclerus.

In England at this time many abuses about Ecclesiastical causes, were
reformed, (although the Pope and his Clergy, did earnestly (.448.) The.448.
untruth Slanderous.
maintain them) by King Edward the.3. who vvrote his (.449.) The.449.
untruth. For those letters prove the Popes Supremacy.
letters to the Pope, admonishing him to leave of his disordered doings, and
when that would not serve, he redressed them by act of parliament, and (as
Nauclerus says) he commanded that from thence forth, no body should (.450.)
The.450. untruth. Nauclere falsely reported.
bring into the Realm any kind of the Popes letters, under the pain of
drowning, and expelled al persons out of his kingdom, that were by the Pope
promoted to any benefice.

The.32. Chapter: Of Edward the.3. King of England.
Stapleton.
THis argument also is right futely to the precedent, Co^cerni^g King Edvvard^
the.3.
as resting upon the reformi^g of abuses, in matters Ecclesiastical. But I pray
you tell us no more M. Horn of reformi^g of abuses, if you will any way further
your present cause, except you tell us withal, and prove it to, that in such
reformation, the whole clergy, and the temporalty, took the King and not the
Pope to be the supreme head Governor, and directer thereof, and of al other
Ecclesiastical causes also. Verily your own authors show plainly the
contrary. And the Popes authority was at this time taken to be of such weight
and force, Polid. li. 19
that the great league made betwe^ our King and the French King was confirmed
by the Pope. Ye will perhapps reply and say, the Popes whole Authority was
abolished, a commandment being given upon pain of drowninge, no man should
bring into the realm any kind of letters from the Pope. Ye will tell us also,
of certain letters, that the King sent to the Pope admonisshing him, to leave
his disordered doings: and when that would not serve, he redressed them by
act of Parliament. Why do ye not M. Horn lay forth the tenor of those
letters, which as yet I find not in any of your marginall authors? Belyke
there lies some thing hid that ye would be loath your reader should know,
least yt bewray your weak and feeble argument, as yt does in deed. Neither
that only, but directlye proves the Popes primacy. Did this King, wene you M.
Horn, call the Pope Antichrist as ye do? Or wrote he him self supreme head of
the Church of England? Or did he abolishe the popes authority in England?
Harken then I pray you, even to the beginning of his letters. Sanctissimo in
Christo Patri Domino Clementi diuina prouidentia sacrosanctae Romanae ac
vniuersalis Ecclesiae summo pontifici, Edwardus eade^m gratia rex Francorum and
Angliae, and dux Hiberniae deuot a pedum oscula beatorum To the most holy
father in Christ the Lord Clement by Gods providence the high bishop of the
holy and universal Church of Rome, Edward by the same grace King of France
and England, and Duke of Ireland, offers devoutly to kiss his holy feet.
Pensatae etia^ deuotionis plenitudine, quam domus nostra regia and clerus ac
populus dicti regni praestiteru^t hactenus in obedientia dictae sedis.
He calls the Pope, Successorem Apostolorum Principis, the successor of the
prince of the Apostles: he desires the pope to consider the great devotion and
obedience, that the King, the Clergy, and the people had showed hitherto to
the Sea of Rome. He says, vt nos and nostri, qui personam vestra^ sanctiss.
and sanctam Romans Ecclesiam dominari cupimus, vt debemus, etc. that he and all
his, did desire even as their duty was, that his holy person and the holy
Church of Rome, might govern and rule.

Now M. Horn unless upon some sudden and new devotion ye intend to have
the pope bear rule in England again, and will also offer your self, if need
be, to kiss the Popes foot to, which thing this great and mighty Prince was not
ashamed to say, tell us no more for shame of these letters. Neither tell us of
disorders reformed now almost two hundred years ago: to make thereby an
unseasonable and fond argument to abolishe all the Popes authority in our
Days. The effect then of those letters were, to pray, and that most humbly,
the Pope, that he would not by reseruations, collations, and provisions of
Archbishoprykes, Bishoprykes, Abbeis, Priories, and other dignities and
benefices, bestow any ecclesiastical lyuinges in England upon strangers
and aliens. Anno. 25. and 38.
The which thing has been ever since straightly seen to, and there were two
Acts of parliament made in this Kings days, against the said provisions.
And yet did the popes ordinary and laufull authority in matters and causes
ecclesiastical remain whole and entiere as before. Neither do I find, nor
take it to be true, that such persons as were promoted by the Pope, were
expelled the realm. Nor did the statute take place against such, as had
taken before the enacting of the same, corporal possession. As for Nauclere, it
is no marvel if he being a stranger does not write so exactely of our
matters. And no doubt he is deceived in writing, that the king forbad any
letters to be browght from the Pope. But what say I, he is deceived? Nay, you,
that should know English matters better then he, especially such as by pen
ye set abroad into the face of the world, are deceived, and not Nauclerus. Yea
rather ye have wilfully perverted Nauclerus, and drawn his sentence, as Cacus
did Hercules oxen, backwarde into your Cacus den: and to beguile and deceive
your sim^le reader, Naucler. Gener. 46. page 397. a Omnes in regno suo per
papa^ p^omotos ad beneficia expulit, and subpena. submersionis praecepit ne
quis inibi literas Apostolicas exequeretur, quascunque etc.
and to bring him, into a fools paradise, therein fondly to rejoice with you,
as though this King abolisshed all the Popes authority and Jurisdiction. For
though Nauclerus his words be general, yet they may be well understood and
restrained to such letters as contained any such collatio^ or provision
inhibited by the statute. But you, least this should be espied, have altered
the form and order of your authors words, placing that first, that he
placed last. As before co^trariewise, ye placed in Paulus Aemilius that last,
which he placed first. Then have ye falsely translated your author to wrye
him to your wro^gful purpose. He expelled says Nauclerus) all persons
promoted to any benefice in his realm by the Pope, commaundinge under pain of
drowning, that no man should exequute there, the Popes letters what so ever
they were. Your author speaks not of bringinge letters, into the Realm:
(those are your own words falsely fathered upon him: but of exequutio^. And
therefore the general words following (what so ever) are to be restrained to
the exequution of the Popes letters, contrary to the order taken, against the
said provisions, and of none other. Which statute does no more take away the
Popes ecclesiastical and ordinary authority, Polidor. an. Edouar. 3.50. The
chronicles of England pri^ted in flete stret 1502. withowt the authors name.
The additions of Caxto^ to polichro. Cap. 4.
then this kings royal authority was taken away, because the Parliament upon
reasonable causes denied him a certain paymente that he there demanded. And
yet if I should follow your vain and humor in your new rhetoryke, I might
thereby as well infer, that the people took him for no king as you by as good
arguments infer the abolishing of the Popes authority. Now as towching
these prouisio^s, they were not altogether abolished against the Popes will.
For this matter, was long in debate between the Pope and the king, and at
length yt was agreed by the Pope, that he would not practice any more such
provisions. And on the kings part, it was agreed, that Archbishoppes and
Bishops should be chosen by the Chapter of the cathedral Church without any
interruption or impedimente of the king. Polid. The said Chronicles printed in
fleet street.
As appears as well in the said epistle sent by the king to the Pope as by
our chroniclers.

M. Horn. The.137. Division. page 82. b.
Next to Jews was Charles the.4. chosen Emperor, who held a council at
Mentze with the Prelates and Princes, in the year of the Lord 1359. wherein
he much reproved the Popes Legate for his disorders, and commanded the
Archbishop of Mentze to reform his Clergy, and the disorders amongst them,
for otherwise he would see to it him self. (.451.) The.451. untruth. For
leaving out, how he would see unto it.
The Popes Legate seeing how the Emperor took upon him, gate him to his
ship, and saylled to Colayn as one that fled away. With (.452.) The.452.
untruth. None of his Authors say so.
which doings, the Emperor became very famous, for he was a man of great
works. Who did lyghten the kingdo^me of Bohem^, both with the setting
forth of Religion, and with the discipline of Laws, and good manners.

The.33. Chapter. Of Charles the.4. Emperor. And of Nilus the Bishop of
Thessalonica.
Stapleton.
THis man runs on his race still, to prove the Emperor Charles the.4. also
the Supreme head of the Church, because he reproved the Popes Legate, and
other of the Clergy for disorders. Go ones to the matter, M. Horn, and prove
to M. Feckenham, that Charles took either him self to be head of the Church,
or the Pope not to be the Head. Was not this Charles crouned by Pope
Innocentius his Legate? Did not this Charles geaue the usual oath that
Emperors make to the Pope? And did he not at the Popes commandment void
out of Italy, straight after his coronation? If ye deny it, ye shall find it
in your own Author Gener. 46. page 401. a
Nauclerus. If ye grant it, being the principal, why do ye so trifle in other
things, that touch not the principal matter standing in variance between you
and M. Fekenham? These are but fond floorishes of your rude rhetorique. M.
Horns doings resembled to a dead snake.
And I may resemble your doings well to a dead snake: whose tail and hinder
parts, the head being cut of, and the snake slain, do notwithstanding for a
while move and stir, yea and make a resemblance of life. Even so, the head of
your serpentine and poisoned argumentatio^ against the Popes primacy, being at
al times by the true and faithful declaration of the said Primacie, against
your false arguing, as it were with a sharp sword cut of: yet make ye by
telling us of reformation, and such bie matters a countenance and resemblau^ce
of some truth, or as it were of some life in your matter ye take in hand to
prove. And truly your bie matters to, are commonly brought in very maliciously,
ignora^tly, erroneously, and foolishly, as well otherwhere, as eue^ here also.
For to leave then other things, what folly is it for you to prove by this
story the like regiment in this Emperors time, as is now in England (for if
ye prove not this, Naucler. dict. genesis 46. and paral. Vrsp. D. Legate, papa
misit vos ad Germaniam in qua magnam pecuniam corraditis sed in clero nihil
reformatis.

The popes Primacie proved by the place M: Horn alleges. Vide Naucler. p. 401
col. 1. genesis 46.

Staphil. in Apologia absoluta fol. 77. Surius in comment. breui reru^ gest.
fo. 216


ye prove nothing to the purpose) confessing your self, that the Popes Legate
was present in the Counsel with The Emperor? And well ye wot ye have no Popes
Legate in your co^uocation. But what was the disorder M. Horn, in the Popes
Legate? Because he will not tell it you, good Reader, ye shall now hear it at
my hands. Sir, says the Emperor to the Legate, the Pope has sent you into
Germany, where you gather a great mass of money, but reformation in the
Clergy ye make none. At which words the Legate being gilty to himself, went
away. Now what infer you hereof, M. Horn? Do not these words necessarily
import the Popes Primacy in Germany? And that the reformation of the Clergy was
at the Popes ordering, not at the Emperors? Is not therefore M. Feckenha^ much
bound unto you, that he has of you so tractable and gentle an Adversary?

But the Archbishop of Mentz also (you say) is commanded to reform his
Clergy. I a^swere. If ye had told the cause withal, ye had surely deformed al
your Geneuical Clergy. The occasion was, for that one Cuno a Canon of his
Church, there present, went in a cap or hood, more lay like and souldior like,
then Priestlik. What think you the^ this Emperor would have said to your
brother Smidelinus the pastor of Gepping, that preached openly before a great
assembly of the nobility in Germany, in his Masters livery girded with a
wodknife by his side? Or to the late Caluinist Ministers in Antwerp, of who^
some preached in clokes and rapiers by their sides? What liki^g would he have
had in your bretherns late book made in the defense of their Geneuical
apparel, and for the vnfoldi^g of the Popes attierment, as they call it? And
therefore the Queen's most excellent Ma. has don very well her self to see to
these disorders, as ye said the^mperor would see to it him self. He said so in
deed. But how? To do it by his authority? Naucler. g^ner. 46. page 403. Quos
cum voluntate Papae in honestos co^uertemus vsus.

The Popes Primacy yet ons again proved by M. Horns own story.

In paral. Vrsperg.

The falsehoode of Gaspar Hedio.


No. But commanding the Archbisshop to see to the reformation of his Clergy in
their apparel, their shoes, their hear, and otherwise. And withal he said,
if the disordered persons would not redress their abuses, then should they
leese the profits and issues of their benefices: the which the Emperor would
employ with the Popes consent to better uses. And so have you of your
accustomable liberality and goodness, brought to our hand one Argument more
for the Popes superiority. This has your Author Nauclerus. And as for your
brother Gaspar Hedio, though he rehearse all the residue, word by word, in a
manner, out of Nauclerus, yet these three poor words, cu^ volu^tate Papae,
weighed so heavy against your new primacy, that he could not carry the^ with
him. And you to be sure, tell us that the Emperor said he would see to it hi^
self. But how he would see to it, that would you not your Reader should see,
least he should see withal, not your Charles, but the Popes primacie. This your
dissimulation is badde enough. But when ye add, with the which doings
The Emperor became very famous: I suppose your dishonest dealing throughout all
your book practiced, will make you famous to, and yet to your no great
co^mendatio^, but to your great shame and infamy. Your Authors say not, nor can
well say, he was famous for these doings. And then come ye in as wisely, with
your, for he was a wise man, ctc. Nauclerus says in deed, he was a renouned
Emperor, not for the causes by you above rehearsed: but for some other that he
afterward recites: and nothing serving your, with the which doings, etc. The
doings that made this Charles the 4. so famous (if ye list to know, M. Horn)
were that with his great charges and bountifulnes he erected the University
of Praga in Boheme, that he founded many Monasteries, Naeucler. gener. 46.
page 403.
that he brought the body of S. Vitus to Praga, and such like: Which you had
as little lust to recite, as you have to follow. Only you say he was famous for
setting forth of Religion. A man would think that knew you, that he was a
setter forth of your religion forsooth. But if you had told us (as your Author
tells you) that he builded Monasteries, and translated Saints bodies: Every
child should have seen, that this setting forth of Religion in Charles* was no
such suprem government as you should prove to M. Fekenham, but was (to say al
in few words) a setting forth of Papistrie. See you not, M. Horn, what a fair
thread you have sponne?

M. Horn. The.138. Division. page 83. a.
At this time wrote Nilus was a Schismatik of late years, of as good
Authority as Friar Luther.
Nilus the Bishop of Thessalonica, declaring the (.453.) The.453. Untruth.
Nil^ says no such thing.
only cause of the division between the Greek and the Latin Church to be,
for that the Pope would not suffer free and General Councels to be called by
the Emperors, according to the ancient custom: and that his authority is not
by the law of God, but by the positive Laws of Princes, granted only,
because that than Rome was the greatest City in the world, and has no
prerogative of Christ or Peter, more then any other Bisshoprique.

Stapleton.
A fair pleasurely, for one Schismatique to plead upon the Authority of an
other Schismatike. As if you would say M. Horn: Ask my fellow, if I be a
thief. For both the Author Nilus, and the first setter forth thereof,
Concerni^g Nilus.
Flaccus Illyricus, are known and notorious, the one a Schismatike, the other
an Heretik. And therefore what so ever ye here bring out of Nilus books, it
weighs no more, then if you brought Illyricus him self, or Luther his
Master.

Leo Epistola 84. Sicut praedecessores mei praede cessoribus tuis, ita etiam
ego dilectioni tuae, prioru^ sequutus exemplum vice^ mei mode raminis delegaui,
vt curam quam vniuersis ecclesiis principaliter ex diuina institutione debemus
etc. adiuuares, and lo^ginquis ab Apostolica sede proui^cijs, praesentiam,
quoda^modo nostrae visitationis impe^deres.
And to say the truth, it is nothing but an heap of untruths: not only on
your Authors part, but on youres also, ouerreaching him shamefully, as I
shall anon declare. But as for your author, if he would have considered no
more but his own predecessors the Archbisshoppes of Thessalonica, he should
have found, that they almost one thousand years before, had an other and a
better judgment of the Popes authority: and were at that time the popes
Legates for the East parts: as well appears by Pope Leo his epistles, to
Anastasius Bishop there. And that the Pope had the principal charge of al
churches, by Gods own ordinance: contrary to the saying of your schismatical
author of so late years. And yet as bad as he is, he does little relieve you.
For he grau^teth the Pope to be Patriarche of the Weste Church. And so is he,
(thowgh he were not the Chief absolutelye) yet our patriarche and chief
Bishop: and therefore cheiflie to be consulted in all great and weighty
ecclesiastical affairs. Again though he be badde inoughe, yet is he the worse
for coming into your fingers. For where you make him to say, the only cause of
division between the Greek and the latin Church was, for that the Pope will
not suffer free and general Cou^celles to be called by the Emperors etc. There
is no such thing in Nilus (I have of purpose perused him over neither in the
Greek nor in the Translation of Flaccus Illiricus. It is your own Captain and
Notorious untruth.

M. Horn. The.139. Division. page 83. a.
King Richard the.2. called a Council at Westminster ( says Polydore)
wherein it was thought good to the King and the Princes for the weal of his
realm of England, if a part of the Popes authority were bounded within the
limits of the Occean sea, ( he means that it were driven out of the Isle of
Britain) (.454.) The.454 untruth. A sentence left out quite in the midst
opening the whole matter.
wherefore it was decreed, that hereafter it should be lawful to no man, to
try (.455.) The.455. untruth. False translation.
any cause before the Bishop of Rome: nor that any man be publikly pronounced
wicked or enemy of Religion, that is to wit, as the common people term it, be
excommunicate by his authority: nor that if any man have any such commandment
from him, they execute the same. The penalty ordained to those that violate
this law, was, that losing all his goods, he should be cast into perpetual
prison.

The.34. Chapter: Of Richard the second, King of England.
Stapleton.
HEre lo, M. Horn at length strayneth us very sore. For now all suytes to Rome
are quite cut of. Neither can the Pope send any excommunication into England.
What may we then say to help our selves? Shall I let the matter go, and let
yt shifte for yt self as yt may, and reason against the man and not the
matter, and tell M. Horn, least he wax to proud and want on, for this great
triumphaunte and victoriouse argume^te, that if a man that is excommunicated,
is (as he expounds yt) a wicked man, and a enemy of religion, that him self
and his fellows had neade to look well about them, being accursed, not only by
many Popes (which now M. Horn cares not a rushe for) but by many national and
general cou^celles also? Or shall I tell him that, suyte to Rome for
excommunication, is but one branch or arm of the Popes authority? And that
the residewe of his authority stood in strength and force still? And so that
he proves not the like regimente that now is, in the which, the whole papal
authority is utterly bannished? Or shall I say, that God punished the king
for his attempt and as he took away the Popes authority: so he lost all his
own very shortly after: and lost both crown and kingdom miserably? Or
shall I say this law died with the king, and was never after until our days
put in ure? Or shall I say that, thowghe all the Popes authority were
bannished by this statute out of England, M. Horns new supreamacy will not
thereof follow, but that the supreamacy in matters ecclesiastical, Vide. c.
Ite^ quia, etc. Nullus de Haeretic. in constit. proui^cial.
remained in the Bishops, especially in Thomas Arondell Archbishop of
Canterbury, who kept cou^celles and synodes: and determined matters
ecclesiastical without the kings co^sente thereunto, by whose prouincial
constitution Master Horn and his fellows are declared excommunicate parsons
and heretics for the heretical doctrine, An appeal against M. Horn to a
quest of temporal lawyers.
that he and they maynteyne contrary to the catholic faith? Or shall I yet
ones again appeal not to Rome, (least M. Horn charge me with a terrible
praemunire) but eue^ to some domestical Judge, and I greatly pass not, if yt
be to a quest, of lawyers of his best friends, to be tried by them, if they can
find any such law in the Statutes of our Realm? An other to a quest of
grammarians.
Again shall I appeal to an other Queste, even of his own nighe neighbors
in Winchester schole, to be tried by them, if I falsely accuse M. Horn, of a
most untruth and false translation? The.3. to queste of logitioners.
Or shall I appeal to his dear friends the Logitioners at Oxford or Cambridge,
and be tried by them, if I say not true, saying now and auouching to M. Horns
own face, that his own allegation out of Polidore, directly proves the Popes
Primacie, and especially the customable and ordinarye suytes to Rome? I will
then hold my self at this stay: and I will join with him for these three
points.

First then I auouche, that there is no such presidente to be showed among the
statutes of our realm: and further that never any such was made in the time
of this king. Secondly I affirm, that M. Horn has either of deape and
gross ignorance, or of cankered malice, maimed or mangled his authors
narration, and depraved and perverted his manifest meaning, by a false and
counterfeite translation. The words of Polidore are these. Poli. li. 20
Concilium habitum est ad Westmonasterium: eo in Concilio regi pariter atque
principibus visum est e republica sua Anglicana fore, si pars aliqua imperij
Romani Pontificis Oceano terminaretur, quod multi quotidie vexarentur ob causas
quas Romae non facile cognosci posse putabant. Quapropter sancitum est, vt
nulli mortalium deinceps liceret pro quauis causa agere apud Romanum
Pontificem, vt quispiam in Anglia eius authoritate, impius religionisque hostis
public declararetur, hoc est, excommunicaretur, quemadmodum vulgo dicitur:
neue exequi tale mandatum, si quod ab illo haberet. Sincerely translated thus
they stand. A Council (says he) was called at Westmynster, wherein yt was
thowght good to the king and his Princes, for their common weal in England,
if a part of the Popes authority were bounded within the lymytes of the Occean
sea: These words, because, etc.

M. Horn quite left out.


because many were daily troubled and vexed for causes, which they thowght,
could not be well heard at Rome. Wherefore yt was decreed, that yt should be
lawful for no man to sue to the Pope Pro quauis causa.
for every cause, to have any man in England by his authority publicly
pronounced a wicked man and an enemy of religion: that is (as the people
commonly term yt) to be excommunicated. And that, if any man have any such
commandment, he do not exequute yt.

The statute then does not embarre, as ye most shamefully pretend, all suites
to Rome, nor all excommunications, from the Pope: but only that it should not
be lawful to sue to Rome, and procure excommunications, indifferently as well
in temporal as in spiritual matters: as it seems many did then. And this does
nothing acrase the Popes ordinary authority. Now that this is the meaning,
your Author him self sufficiently declares. First when he speaks but of a
part of the Popes authority: then when he shows that men sued to Rome for
such causes, as were thought could not be heard there: which must needs be
temporal causes. And therefore ye ouerhipped one whole line and more, M. H^rne
omitteth a whole line that opens the whole matter against him.
in your translation, thinking by this slight so craftily to conueie into your
theeuish Cacus den, this sentence, that no man should epsy you. And for this
purpose where your Author writes, pro quauis causa agere, that is, to sue for
every cause, Ye translate, to try any cause. As though it were al one to say.
I forbid you to sue to Rome for every cause, and to say: I forbid you to
sue to Rome for any cause. And as though your Author Polidore had written: pro
quacunque causa agere, to try any cause at al. The statute therefore does not
cut of al suites, but some suites: that is, for such matters as were temporal,
or thought so to be. Wherevppo^ it will follow, that for all spiritual matters
the Popes jurisdiction remained untouched, and nothing blemished. For these
words of the statute, that men should not sue in every cause to Rome,
imploye some causes, for the which they might sue to Rome. And so for all your
gaie Grammar and ruffling Rhetorique, the Popes authority is confirmed by this
statute, which ye bring against it. And this King Richard confirmed it, and
was ready to maintain it not by words only, but by the sword also. And
therefore caused to be gathered fiftene thousand fotemen, and two thousand
horsemen, King Richardes army gathered for the defense of the Pope.

Poli. dict. lib. 20.

M. Horn^ army against the Pope.


and sent them out of the realm to defend Pope Vrbane against his ennemie and
Antipope Clement. You on the other side, in this your victoriouse book, have
brought a iolie sort of soldiers to the field, to fight against the Pope, but
when all is well seen and examined, ye do nothing but muster lies together
against the Pope, as he did men, to fight for the Pope. A far of, and upon
the sudden, an unskillful man would think, ye had a iolie and a well set
army: but let him come nigh and make a good view, and then he shall find
nothing but a sort of scar crows pricked up in man's apparel.

M. Horn The.140. Division. page 13. a.
The Church of Rome at this time was marueilouslie torn in sunder with an
horrible Schism, which continued about forty years, having at ones three
heads, calling them selves Popes, De schis. lib. 3. ca. 7
every one of them in most despitefull wise, calling the other Antichriste,
Schismatique, Heretic, tyrant, thief, traitor, the son of perdition,
sour of Cockle, the child of Beliall, etc. Diverse learned men of that time
inueighed against them all three, as Henricus de Hassia, Joan. Gerson,
Theodorych Nyem, Secretary before this, to Pope Boniface, who proves at
lardge by (.456.) The.456. Untruth. touching Theododorich Nyem, as shall
appear.

Pius Pa. 2. Platina. Sabel.


good reasons, by the word of God, and by the Popes Decrees, that the
refourmation of these horrible disorders in the Chuche, belong to the Emperor,
and the Secular Princes. Sigismunde the noble Emperor, understanding his
duty herein, amongst other his notable Acts, called a Council together at
Constantia, and brought again to unity the Church divided in three parts:
which Council (says Nauclerus) began by the Emperors commandment and
industrye, in the year.1414. To the which Council came Pope John before
the^mperors coming, thinking to have (457) The.457. Untruth. Slanderous.
outfaced the Council with his pretensed authority, till the Emperor came:
who geauing to all men in the Council free liberty to speak their minds, a
great company of horrible vices, were laid straight way to his chardge To the
which when he was not able to answer he was (.458.) The.458. Untruth, He
was deposed by the Council, not by the Emperor.
deposed, and the other two Popes also, and an other (459) The.459. Untruth He
was chosen of the Cardinals and bishops only, not by the emperor. Vide Naucler.
genesis 48. page 442. co. 2
chosen chiefly by the Emperon^s means, called Martin the fifte. After these
things finished, they entered into communication of a reformation both of the
Clergy and the Laity, to which purpose the Emperor had devised a book of
Constitutions, and also willed certain learned Fathers there, but specially
the Bisshoppe of Camera, a Cardinal there present, to devise what faults
they could find, and how they should be ^edressed, not sparing any degree,
neither of the Prelates, nor of the Princes themselves. Which the Bisshoppe
did, and compiled a little book or Libell entitled: A Libell for reformation
of the Church gathered together by Peter de Aliaco, etc. And offered to the
Church rulers, gathered together in Constaunce Council, by the commandment
of the Emperor Sigismunde. and cet. In this In this Libel the popes primacie
is clearly confessed as it shall appear.
Libell of refourmation, after he has touched the notable enormities in the
Pope, in the Court of Rome, in the Cardinals, in the Prelates, in Religious
persons, and in Priests: in exactions, in Canons, and Decretalles, in
collations of benefices, in fastings, in the Divine Service, in Pictures, in
making festival days, in making Saints, in reading their legendes in the
Church, in hallovving Temples, in vvoorshipping Relics, in calling
Councelles, in making Relligious soldiers, in refourming Universities, in
studying liberal Sciences, and knowledge of the tongues, in repairing
Libraries, and in promoting the learned: After all these things, being (.460.)
The.460 Untruth: Repairi^g of Libraries is no Ecclesiastical matter.
Ecclesiastical matters or causes, he concludes with the duties of Princes
for the looking to the reformation of these matters, or any other that needs
amendment. The sixth (says he) and the last consideration shall be of the
refourminge of the state of the Lay Christians, and chiefly the Princes, of
whose manners depends the behavior of the people, and cet. Let them see
also, that they repel all evil customs contrary to the law of God, and the
law of man in their subjects, by the Council of Divines and other wise men.
Also let them see, that they pull up by the roots, and destroy more
diligently then they have done, Magical Arts and other superstitions
condemned by the law of God, and all errors and heresies contrary to the
Faith. Item that they watch and care earnestly for the exalting of the Faith,
and the honor of Gods service, and the refourming of the Church, that they
labor and travail diligently for the reformation of althose things which are
mentioned before, or here following, or any other things profitable, and caet.
When this book was thus compiled, it was offered up to the Council (says
Orthvviuus) that the most Christian Emperor Sigismunde had called together,
not so much for the agreemente of the Church, as for hope of a general
reformation of their manners: hoping verelye, that the Prelates would put to
their helping hands, but the Roman craft beguiling the German simplicity:
the new made pope featly flouted the well meaning Emperor, saying that he
vvoulde think on this matter at laisure, and caet. Thus was Sigismunde the
Emperor misused, which otherwise might seem to have been borne to have
restored Christianity to the world again. The frustrating of this
refourmation, was on the other side, no less grieuouse unto the French
King, Naucler.
that both before the time of the Council, and in the Council while, had
greatly travailed in taking away the Popes ex^ctions, and other
Ecclesiastical abuses, vvhervvith his Realm was wonderfully oppressed: as
appears in the Oration that the French Kings Ambassadors made in this
Council, written by Nicol. de Clemangijs, and set forth in Othvvynus Gratius
fardell of notable things.

After this Council, was an other holden at Basil, vvhither came the Princes
of Spain, France, Hungary, and Germany: which dooinges of the Princes made
pope Eugenius so to fear, that he (.461.) The.461. Untruth. He translated the
Council in deed, not only thought so to do.
thought to translat the Counsel to Bononia. But the Emperor and other
princes, and the prelates which were at Basil, not only not obeyed him, but
twice or thrice admonished him to come thither. This ^^pe was in this Counsel
(.462.) The.462. Untruth. For he continued Pope after that Council, as long as
he lived.
deposed in the.34. sessio^. Of this Counsel, the Emperor Sigismo^de was the
chief, and protector, and in his absence appointed the Duke of Bauaria in his
room. He caused the Bohemes to come to this Council. And when he heard of
those matters in Religion, which were generally agreed upon, he allowed them,
and commanded them to be observed.

The.35. Chapter. Of Sigismund and Friderike the.3. Emperors.
Stapleton.
Master Horn, for gods sake remember your self, and what ye have taken in
hand, to prove to M. Fekenha^, that is, that the Queen of England owght to be
supreme head of the Church of England, and not the Pope. Remember I pray you
how weighty this is to M. Fekenham as for the which, beside this his long
imprisonment, he stands in danger of loss of life also. Go ones rowndly to
your matter and bring him some fytte and convenient proof to persuade him
withal. M. Horns to impertine^te proufes for so weighty a matter.
Ye ru^ne on a three leaves following, with the doings of the Emperors
Sigismonde, Friderike, and Maximilian, and then at length after all your busy
rufle and great turmoyle against the Pope, ye come to king Henry the.8. and
to our own days. Now how little the doings of these Emperors prove their
supreamacie in all causes ecclesiastical, Co^cerni^g the emperor Sigismundus.
every child may see. And to begin with Sigismond: we hear of you, that in
the time of the great and main schism, he called a council at Constantia,
where three Popes were deposed, and that the^ Martine the.5. was ( ^he^st^r by
the Emperors means) chosen. We hear of a book of reformation offered to
the emperor, for the abuses of some matters ecclesiastical. But in all that book
there is not one word either against the Catholic faith, or for M. Horns
heresies. Only he reherseth up certain abuses, which he would have amended.

And as for our matter now in hand, he says expressly that the Church of
Rome bears the Principalyte or chief rule in Christ's Church: derived
principally from Gods ordinance, Vide Petru^ de aliaco: impres. Basil. in 8.
an. 1551.
and secondarely from the Councils. What does this relieve you M. Horn? We
hear farther, that the emperor and other princes would not suffer the pope to
translate the Council of Basile to an other place: and finally that the pope
Eugenius was deposed in the foresaid Council at Basile. But what serves all
this for your purpose? Yea what shameless impudency is this for you, thus to
vaunte your self, M. Horn^ gospel condemned in the counsel at Co^stantia by
him alleged.

Tom. 4. Council. pa. 104. Edit. vlt.


upon the doings of these two councels, that condemn your great Apostle
Wiccliffe for an horrible heretyke, and so consequently al your Geneuical
doctrine now practiced in England? And ye must remember, that not the emperor,
but the Council deposed these popes, that is, the bishops. You do find their
sentence definityue, in the.34. Session of the Council of Basil by your self
alleged. But for the sentence definitive of the emperor, for these depositions,
or any matter of religion, ye shall not find. Ergo the bisshops were the heads,
and not the emperor. And so are ye nothing the nearer for the deposition of
Eugenius. Who yet, Co^cerni^g the prete^sed deposition of pope Eugenius.
Ievvel, in his Reply page 289. c
this depositio^ notwithstanding, continued pope still (as M. Jewel him self
witnesses against you M. Horn) and the duke of Sauoye (of whom ye make
mention in your next argument) elected in Eugenius his place, by the said
council, was feign to renounce his papacy, as your self confess. And
notwithstanding so many and so great princes, that ye name withstode the
translation of yt, yet was the council of Basil translated to Ferraria first,
and the^ to Florence: where the greek Emperor and the Grecians were reconciled
to the unity of the Church, and among other things, acknowledged the Popes
Primacy. So that ye have now lost all your goodly schismatic arguments
that ye have in this your book brought out of Nilus and otherwise for the
Grecians rebellion against the said primacy. Vide Theodorichi^ de Nyem
Norimberg. impr. An. 1532. De schis. lib. 3 ca. 7.
But what do you tell us here of Theodorike Nyem, and of his great and large
proufes, that the reformation of the Church belonged to the Emperors? In deed
prove he would such a matter. But as for him, both his manner of writing is so
course, and his proufs so weak, that you were ashamed to bring any one of the^
into the face of the open Court. And in very deed, it is but a great untruth of
yours so to report of him. Namely out of that book and Chapter which you
allege. For there he brings neither good reason, nor any part of the word of
God (both which you auouche him to bring, and that at large) but only one
sentence of a decree, and the example of king Theodorike, in the matter of pope
Symachus: which matter (as I have before proved) makes expressly for the
popes primacy. Such a discrete writer you have picked out to help forward so
badde a matter. But to let this man pass, I will now ask you whether
the emperor took pope Martinus for the head of the whole Church, Naucl. Gener.
48. page 442. Ante po^tifice^ prostratus cum summa veneratione eius pedes
osculatus est.
or no? If ye say he did, as the force of truth will compel you, then to what
end have ye so busied your self with the doings of this Emperor? If ye say he
did not, the^ will I send you to your own author Nauclerus of whom ye shall
hear, that not the emperor, but the Cardinals elected Martinus: and that
the emperor as soon as he was elected, fell flat and prostrate before him, and
with much reverence kissed his feet. Now again if as ye say, he allowed, and
commanded such things as the council agreed upon in matters of relligion to
be observed (this agreement being as it was in deed against your new religion)
what do ye, but blow your own co^demnatio^, making it as strong as may be
against your own self? How Emperors have confirmed councels, I have often
declared. M. Horn blovveth out his own co^de^nation.
This therefore I let pass, as a stale argument, according to promise.

But now let me be so bold, as ones to appose you M. Horn. Who was (I pray you)
at this time, supreme head of the Church in England? Did king Henry the.5.
take him self (trow ye) to be this head? I suppose ye dare not say it for
shame. And if ye dare, the^ dare I be so bold to tell you, it is a most
notoriouse lie: and withal that in case it were so, yet did he eue^ about the
same time that Wiccleff and his scholars were condemned in the Counsel of
Co^stantia, Anno. 2. Henr. 5. cap. 7.
condemn the^ as fast by act of parliament in England. And it was (I may say
to you) high time. For your good brethren had co^spired to adnulle, destroy,
and subvert not only the Christian faith, and the law of God, and holy Church
within the realm: but also to destroy the king, The statute made against
heresies in the time of king Henry the.5.
and al manner of estats of the realm as well spiritual as temporal: and all manner
of policy, and finally the laws of the la^d. As it is more at large comprised
in an act of parliament, made at that time. In the which it was ordained, and
established, that: first the Chauncelor, Treasorer, Justices of the one bench
and of the other, justices of peace, Sherifs, mayors baylifs of cities and
towns, and all other officers having the governance of people, or that at any
time afterward should have the said governance, should take an oath in taking
of their charge to put their whole power and diligence to put out, cease and
destroy al manner of errors and heresies, commonly then called Lollardries,
within the place where they exercised their offices. And thus neither abroad,
nor at home, can ye find any good matter, for the defense of your new
primacy, and your damnable heresies.

M. Horn. The.141. Division. page 84. b.
Nauclerus.
After the death of Sigismonde, Frederike the Emperor caused the Duke of
Sauoy, The.463. untruth. In reasoning. For this Frederike, took the Pope for
Supreme head of the Church, as his predecessor did.
that was made Pope, to renounce his Papacy, and commanded by his Decree, the
Prelates gathered at Basil, to dissolve the Council by a certain day. This
Emperor called a Counsel at Mentze, to make an end, and utterly to take away
the Schism of the Church, and to deliver it from more grievous dangers. He
vvriteth to the French King thereof, declaring how this Schism did so
oppress his mind, and ferue^tly solicit him, that as well for his love to
Religion, as for his office called of God, to be the Chief, Aduocat, Not
Supreme Governor.
chief advocate of the Church, he did not only run with diligence to
succor it, but stirred up al kings and Princes, that with a pure sincerity,
delighted in the name of Christ, to run with him in this so necessary and
healthful a work, and to this purpose, he declares how, he has appointed
to all his princes and prelates an assembly at Mentze, whereat he entendeth to
be personally present, and therefore desires the French king also to be
there in his own person, or at the least that he vvoulde send his Orators
thither, instructed distinctly with all ways and means, by the which the
Church might be quiet from the calamities ready to fall on her. Pope Eugenius
sent to the French king, to desire him to take a way his (.464.) The.464
untruth. As before For the makers of this pragmatical law acknovvleaged the
popes primacy.
pragmaticall Law. To whom the king ansvvered, that he would have it kept
inuiolatly. Then the Pope desidered the king neither to admit ^^ Basil
counsel, nor yet the counsel at Me^tze, that was called: to the which the
king ansvvered, that he would take advise.

Stapleton.
Here is small or no matter for M. Horns new Primacie, and that he here
reherseth makes rather against him, then with him. For though M. Horn said
in the last argument, that pope Eugenius was deposed, yet is he now pope
still, and the other set in his place, feign to give over: And though the princes
would not obey Eugenius, for the dissoluing of the Council of Basile: yet
now it is dissolved by the Emperor Friderike also. And what answer so ever
the French King made to Eugenius, touching the said Basile Council, the
Council is no further allowed in the Catholic Church, then Eugenius and his
successor Nicolaus did allow the same. And (as ye show your self)
the emperor Friderike says, that by his office he was called of God, to be the
chief Advocate of the Church. He says not, the chief head of the Church,
the which honor he did attribute, not to him self, but to the Pope only, of
whom he was crowned, as his predecessors were. These also are but stale
wares, and much woren. And for such I let them pass. As for the French King
and his pragmatical sanction, which Charles his predecessor had made, and
which he at the request of Pope Eugenius, would not revoke: it contained no
such matter, as you M. Horn do attribute to princes now, neither was that
government like to that which you now defend. This pragmaticall sanction
stood most about monye matters: It denied to the Court of Rome, the great
payements which went out of France, about Reseruations, collations,
expectations, and co^mendoes of bishoprics, prebendes and benefices. Great
and long contention there was between certain Kings of France, as Charles
the.vij. and the.viij. Loys.xj. and.xij. Frauncis the first, and certain
Popes, as this Eugenius, Lib. 5. c. 2. sacr. eccles. minist.
Pius.2. Sixtus.4. Innocentius.8. Alexander.6. Julius the.2. and Leo the.10. as
Duarenus a vehement writer for the French Kings advantage mencioneth.

But notwythstanding all these matters, the Popes supreme Authority in matters
of Faith and ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was not denied. For witness hereof I
bring you the words of the Court of Paris, uttered among the Articles which
they proposed to the King, about this matter, Vide Duarenum. de sacris eccles.
minist. lib. 5. cap. 12. and in append. pro libert. eccles. Ga. defens.
as Duarenus him self records them. In the number.19. thus they say. Ante
omnia protestatur Curia etc. Before all things the Court protests, that it
minds not to derogat any thing from the holiness, dignity, honor, and
Authority of the Pope and the holy Apostolic See. But rather it is ready to
show and exhibit, all honor, reverence and obedience, that every godly and
faithful person ought to show to the chief Pastor of the Church. And if any
thing fall out, worthy of amendment, it refuses not to submit them selves
to the determination of the Church, which can not err. C.A recta.24. q. 1. By
which allegatio^ they proteste to mean the Church of Rome. For so in that
place we read out of the Ancient decretal epistle of Pope Lucius.1. How the^
do you prove M. Horn by this example the like government in the Church causes,
as you now attribute to the Q. May. and as you take upon you here to prove?
Grant M. Horn to the Sea Apostolic now, as the Court of Paris granted the^,
and the^ look how and with what conscience you may take the Oath, which now
you defend, or by what reason you ca^ move M. Feke^ha^ thereunto. Par. Vrsp.
I would have you ones bring some example, that made not plain against you, and
your whole book.

M. Horn. The.142. Division. page 85. a.
Pius the second, sent his Legate the Cardinal of Cusa, into the countries of
Sigismond Duke of Austria, which Legate, when he would have ordained certain
(.465.) The.465. untruth. His Author me^cioneth no Ecclesiastical
Constitutions
Ecclesiastical constitutions according to the Popes Law: Sigismonde the
Duke, would not suffer that such a custom should come into Germany.

Aeneas Syluius, who after he was made Pope, was called Pius the second,
was of this mind before he was Pope, that secular Princes might call
councels, yea, (.466.) The 466. untruth. Aeneas Syl. never said so.
maugre the Popes head, and therefore commends that devise of Charles the
French king which ( says he) is both a saulf and a short way to still this
mischief. He means to take away the Schism and to restore unity to the
Church. Of the same (.467.) The.467. untruth. Cusanus was of a far other
mind as shall appear. Li. 3. ca. 13
mind also was ^is Cardinal de Cusa, as appears in his book, Epist. 54. ad
Ca^cel. Imperat.
De Co^cordia Catholica, saying. By that which is a foresaid, it is gathered,
that the holy Emperors always, made the Synodical co^gregations of universal
councels of the whole Chu^che: and even so I my self, having sought thoroughly
the Acts of all the universal councels, even til the eight council inclusiue,
celebrated in the time of Basil, I have found it to be true: and so also in the
same eight Synod in the fifth Act thereof, we read, that the most reverend
priest Elias and Syncellus, of the trone of Jerusalem in the hearing of al,
spoke thus: Know you that in the times past, they were the Emperors, which
gathered together Synods from out of the whole world, and they collected their
deputies, to the disposing of such manner causes: Par. Vrsp. Cu^ venisset ad
ecclesia^ sua^ Brixiensem in alpibus deque illa disponere voluisset pro veteri
pontificu^ iure, non passus est Sigismundus dux Austriae, vt ea in Germania^
tenderetur consuetudo, quod Romani Cardinales ecclesias Germania haberent in
commendis.
Whose steps therefore our Emperor following, being also a worshipper of God,
has made this universal Synod. Thus said he there, and I have also read in
the little gloss of Anastasius (the library-keper of the Apostolical sea, who
translated the same Synod out of Greek) upon the same, saying: that the
Emperors were wont to gather universal Synodes from all the world, etc.

The.36. Chapter. Of Aeneas Syluius, who was after, Pope Pius.2. and of
Cardinal Cusanus.
Stapleton.
YOu run still at riot M. Horn, bringing in your matters extraordinarely and
impertinently, and yet adjoined with one lie beside. For your author speaks not
of the ordeining of any ecclesiastical constitution, by the Popes Legate, but
that themperor would not suffer him to receive the profits of the Church he had
in commendo, neither any such custom to be brought into Germanye. Ye are then
in hand ones again that Princes may call Councelles. But when ye tell us
this owte of Aeneas Syluius, and tell us withal, that before he was pope, he
was of that mind, that secular princes might call Councelles: if he were not
also of that mind being pope, why tell you this tale against your self? Bulla
retractationu^ Pij. 2. Venetijs an. 1564. vna cum Cardilio. Louanij. an. 65.
Paris. an. eodem.
Had you read M. Horn that notable letter of Recantation, which this Aeneas
Syluius in his riper years and later days (after the example of S. Augustine
retracting in like manner diverse things) sent to the Vniuersytie of Collen,
set forth few years past in diverse editions, you would not for very shame
(if any shame be in you) ones have mentioned the testimony of this man. In that
Bulle of retractatio^ (forseing as he says him self the objection that would
be made) he retracteth and reuoketh this error which in his youth at the
Council at Basil he had learned, that the Counsel was above the Pope. In which
he declares at large by what means, by whose advise and counsel, he was
first persuaded so to think, how also he was again brought back from that
error, and among other means by the persuasion of that most learned Cardinal
Iulianus sancti Angeli, who first at Basil was for the Council against pope
Eugenius, but after (as after him all other) reconciled him self to the pope,
was his legate in the Council of Florence, (where most lernedly he confuted
the Greeks, and reduced them al (only Marcus of Ephesus excepted) to the
Catholic doctrine of the holy Ghost, and to the unity of the Romain Church)
and last of al served him in embassy against the Turk. He proves by Scripture,
by natural Reason, by Authorytie of the Doctors, that Peter and his
successors are the Supreme Vicairs of Christ, that the Church to whom Christ
gave his Pace^ mea^ do vobis, Pacem relinquo vobis.
peace, must of necessytie have that kind of regiment, by which peace may most
be mayntained and preserved, which only is the state of Monarchy, where one
Head governs the whole body, and last, by S. Hierom, and S. Bernard that the
bishop of Rome S. Peter's Successor, is that one Head. After al which he
concludes. Haec nos de Romani Pontificis Authoritate and potestate sentimus,
cui and co^gregare Concilia generalia and dissoluere datum est: qui etsi filius
est propter regenerationem, propter dignitate^ tamen pater habetur, and sicut
propter regenerationis causam venerari debet Ecclesiam tanquam Matrem, ita and
propter praelationis causam praeest ei vt pastor gregi, princeps populo, Rector
familiae. This is our Judgment of the Authority and power of the Bishop of
Rome. To whom it belongs both to summon general Councelles, and to dissolve
them. Who though he be a child of the Church for his regeneration and new
birthe therein (by baptism) yet he is for his dignity and office her Father.
And as he ought to Reverence the Church as his Mother, because he was borne of
her: so he rules the Church also, as a Pastor the flock, as a Prince his
people, and as a master his family, because he is made the Ruler of her. Again
in his very last words of that retractatio^ thus he speaks to the University
of Colle^. Haec nostra sententia est filij. Haec credimus and profitemur: haec
iam senes and in Apostolatus apice constituti pro veritate asserimus: si quae
vel vobis vel aliis conscripsimus aliquando, quae huic doctrinae repugnent,
illa tanquam erronea and iuuenilis animi parum pensata iudicia reuocamus atque
omnino respuimus. This is (my sons) our Judgment. This we believe and
profess. This we now affirm in our old age, and placed in the Apostolik top.
If at any time we have written any thing either to you or to any other, contrary
to this doctrine, al those things we now revoke and utterly repeal for
erroneous, and light opinions of youthely affection. Lo M. Horn. For your
Aeneas: we answer you with Pius: for your young, vnkilful and less advised,
we answer you by the old, Neque vnqua^ sacros imbuimus ordines, ni si post
veritate^ cognita^ Basilie^si coecitate relicta.
the more learned, and the better advised: for your private and lay man (for he
had yet taken no holy orders when he returned to the obedience of Pope
Eugenius) we answer you with the Bishop and the chief of al Bishops. You must
remember M. Horn, that always: (...).

Next to Aeneas Syluius comes the Cardin. de Cusa, one that makes as much for
M. Horn as a rope does for a thief. Have you seen M. Horn that Cardinals book,
which you allege de Co^cordia Catholica? If not, the^ beshrew your friend that
told you of hi^? If yes, the^ tell us I pray you, how like you him, and his
co^clusio^s in that work? How like you his co^clusio^ in the.2. book, Cusanus
de Concordia Cath. li. 2. Cap. 4.
proved by the clear practice of the Chalcedo^ and the Ephesin Counsel, fide^
Romanae Ecclesiae in nulla Synodo universally retractari posse? That the faith
of the Church of Rome ca^ be revoked in no universal Synod or Council general?
For the^ what wretches are you, and how contrary to the Fathers of the first
general Councils, and of the first.400. yers, which have in your pelting private
conuocations revoked and condemned in so many and weighty points the faith of
the Church of Rome? How like you, that he tells how in the old first general
Councils, not only the holy ghospels, but also lignu^ S. Crucis and aliae
reliquiae, a piece of wod of the holy Cross, Cap. 6.
and other relikes were laid forth in the middle? How like you that he says.
Cap. 9.
Ecclesiastici Canones no^ possunt nisi per ecelesiastica^ co^gregatione^ (quae
Synodus vel coetus dicitur) statui? Canons or rules touchi^g Church matters
cannot be determined but by a^ ecclesiastical asse^bly, which is called a Synod
or company, no doubt but of ecclesiastical persons? For if this be true (as
Cusanus there by the practice and Canons of the Church proves ir most true)
the^ has Cusanus utterly overthrown your new primacy, and in one line given
you an other pawn mate to your whole book. For here lo are plainly excluded al
Princes and other lay magistrates whatsoever, who are pardy no ecclesiastical
persons. How like you that he pronou^ceth assuredly and co^sta^tly, saying.
Cap. 13.
Papa^ esse rectore^ nauiculae S. Petri and vniuersalis Ecclesiae, nemo etia^
dubitat. That the Pope is the ruler of S. Peter's ship, and of the universal
Church no man verily doubts. But how say you M. Horn? doubt you, or doubt
you not? How like you again where he affirms and proves the same
substa^tially, as when he says. Cap. 15.
Et veru^ est etc. And true it is that no judgment of any Synod is available,
where the authority of the Sea Apostolik co^curreth not? where be the^ your London
conuocatio^s? But how proves he this? the reason he gives. Quia semper
appellari potest etc. Because it may always be appeled, from the Judgment of
that Synod to the Sea Apostolik. So we read (says he) of the Patriarchs of
Co^sta^tinople, Flauianus, Ignatius, and other: so of Athanasius, of Alexandria
and other we read that they appealed (from Synods of Bishops) to the Sea
Apostolik. So also Chrysostom from a Synod of the Aegyptia^ bishops appealed
to Innoce^tius the Pope. So Theodoretus from the Ephesin co^uenticle and his
own Patriarche Maximus of Antioch, appealed to Pope Leo, as I have other where
against M. Jewel declared: How like you this doctrine of Cusanus M. Horn? As
also where he says again expressly. Cap. eode^.
Fateor de co^stitutionibus fide^ ta^ge^tibus veru^ esse, quod si Sedis
Apostolicae Autoritas no^ interueniat, ratae no^ sint, imo and ipsius
Po^tificis co^sensus interuenire debet, cu^ sit princeps in episcopatu fidei. I
confess it is true of Constitutions concerning faith, that if the Authority
of the Sea Apostolic do want, they are of no valewe, yea the consent of the
Pope him self ought to concur in such case, because he bears the chief
rule, in the bishoply charge of faith. Which last words Cusanus had learned of
the Emperors Valentinian and Marcian in their letters to pope Leo, Vide
praeambulares Epistol. Co^c. Cha. Tom. 1. page 733
above a.xi. hundred yers past. How like you now M. Horn, tell me of good
fellowship, this Cardinal of Cusa, out of whom so sadly you allege such a long
process? How so ever you like it, it is of us, and of every diligent Reader,
very well to be liked, and diligently to be noted: I mean these testimonies of
Cusanus, not because he says it, but because he proves it so by the old
practice of the primitive Church. But especially it is to be noted, that this
Cusanus writing this book De Concordia Catholica, about the time of the
Council of Basil, and writing it expressly not for the pope, but against
the pope, for the Authorytie of the Council above the pope, Cardillus disput.
1. fol. 19. Decanus Sancti Florini Confluentiae. Lib. 2. ca. vltimo. Nihil de
meis conceptibus adeofirmu^ assero, qui^ peritioribus dicam potius
acquiescendum.
and for the Authoryte of the Emperor as much as he could, yet by the very
force of the truth, which in deed lernedly and paynefully he serched out, he
was constrained to say and conclude for the popes Authorytie, as we have before
recited largely and amply, though not in deed so fully and absolutely, as both
he and Aeneas Syluius afterward did, by reuokinge their former errors, in
their riper ages. For this Cusanus when he wrote this, was not yet Cardinal,
but only the deane of a Church in Couele^ce. And in all his positions where he
speaks against the Common opinion of learned me^ touching the popes primacie,
above the general Council (for otherwise he never denied it) he submits him
self to better judgment, and speaks under correction. Now to draw nerer to
your allegatio^ M. Horn, concerning the Emperors Authorytie in calling of
Councels, if you take Cusanus with his whole meaning therein, you shall find
small relief for your desperate cause. If you admit not his whole meaning,
nor will not tarry his tale out, M. Jewel will tell you M. Horn: that is no good
manner. And he will tell you of a law that says. It is against reason that
one man should in part allow the will of the dead, Ievvel in his reply. Art.
4. page 290.
(so far forth as it makes for him) and in part overthrow it, where it
seems to make against him. Let us then hear the whole meaning of Cusanus,
concerning the Authorytie that Emperors have in calling, assistinge and
confirming of Councelles, even in that book where he says all he can for the
Emperors. Verily master Horn in all that book he never calls the Emperor
supreme governor in all matters, no not in any matter Ecclesiastical. He
says the Emperor is truly called Aduocatus vniuersalis Ecclesiae, Cusanus de
Co^. Ca. lib. 3. c. 7.
the Aduocat or protector of the universal Church. And wherein, he declares
out of the.8. General Council. For, says he, as the Authoryte to define and
determine those things that belong to the right and universal faith of
Christ is committed of God to Priests: so to govern, to confirm, and to
preserve those things that are of God by the Priests ordained, it is
committed to the holy Empire. And this he grants to the Emperor only, not
to other several princes and kings, because he speaks only herein of
matters touching the universal faith of the Church. Wherein also he so far
prefers the pope before the Emperor, that he says. Si papa qui in
Episcopatu fidei principatum gerit, electum in fide errare inueniret, declarare
posset, Ibidem.
eum non esse Imperatorem. If the pope who bears the principalytie in the
bishoply charge of Faith, Chalc. Act. 3. fol. 838.
should find the Emperor elected, to err in the faith, he might pronounce
him no Emperor. In the next chapter he proves very well out of the Chalcedon
Council, the Counsels of Milleuitum and of Cabylon, that in matters properly
ecclesiastical belonging to bishops and clerckes, Chalced. Act. 3. fol. 838.

Cabilon. Co^c. ca. 6. Milleuit. cap. 19.

Cusan. l. 3. Cap. 10.


Emperors and princes ought not to intermedle. Now touching the intermedling
of Emperors and princes with Councelles, first he shows by the examples of
Riccharedus Chintillanus and Sysenandus kings of Spain in.iij. several
Councelles of Toletum (which also we have before showed) with what mekenes,
reverence and humilite princes ought to come to Counsels. And whereas in many
Synodes, matters also of the common welthe were debated, he declares by the
practice of Aunciente time, that In Synodicis congregationibus etc. Cap. 12.
In Synodall assemblyes (of particular provinces) the office of the king is to
mete there, to exhort and to strengthen to obey and to execute the
ecclesiastical co^stitutions, such as belong to faith or to the worshipping of
God. But in such co^stitutions as belong to the public state (of the common
welthe) he must together with the bishops define and determine. In all which he
overthrows clearly your position M. Horn, as you see. And here after this in
the next chapter immediately follows the place by you alleged: Lib. 3. c. 13
By that which is aforesaid it is gathered, that Emperors made always the
Synodal congregations of universal Councels of the whole world etc. For this
he speaks only of General Councels, adding immediately in the same sentence,
which sentence you quyte cut of from the end: Locales vero nunquam eos
legitur collegisse. But provincial Synodes it is never read that Emperors
called. And in the next Sentence he concludes how he called the general
Councelles. Non quod coactiue sed exhortatiue, colligere debeat. Not that the
Emperor should call or gather those Councels by the way of force or
commandment but by the way of exhortation and advise. And this he
exemplifieth very well by the Council of Aquileia whereat S. Ambrose was
present. Unto the which the bishops were so called by the Emperors Gratian,
Tom. 1. Conc. page 395.
Vale^tinian, and Theodosius (as in their epistle the Council agniseth) vt
episcopis honorificentia reseruata, nemo de esset volens, nemo cogeretur
inuitus: that dew reverence being reserved to the bishops, none was absent
that listed to come, nor none was forced that listed not to come. Now the
reason why the Emperor may call only General Councels, none provincial,
Cusanus adds. For (says he) when any general dangers of faith do occur,
or any other thing that universally troubles the Church of Christ, then ought
the Emperor him self to attend, as a preserver both of the faith and of the
peace: and the^ he ought first of all to signify to the bishop of Rome the
necessyte of a Council: and require his consent for assembling a Council in
some certain place. As the Emperors Martia^ and Valentinian did to pope Leo
for the Chalcedo^ Council. Inuita^tes atque rogantes: Inuitinge him and
desiringe him. In praea^b. Co^c. Cha. pa. 733.

In epist ad Agathone^


As Constantin the.4. did to pope Agatho for the.6. general Council at
Constantinople, writing thus unto him. Adhortamur vestram paternam
Beatitudinem, We exhort your fatherly blessedness, vsinge all words of gentle
entreaty, and none of forceable commandment as we have before largely
declared. To be short, Lib. 3. ca. 14. in fine.
Cusanus concludes all this Imperial calling of Councelles in these words.
Ista sunt and cat. These are the things that belong to the Emperor,
touching the beginning of a Council, that is, to assemble it with
exhortation, and with sauegarde, with all liberty, with good custody, all
partialytie taken away, and all necessyte of commandment.

Now if you will know, what difference there is between the calling of the
Pope, and the calling of the Emperor, to a Council, Cusanus declares that
also shortly by the practice of the first Councels thus. Papa vt primus etc.
The Pope calls a General Council (for of such he speaks) as the chief, Cap.
15.
and as having a power to command, through the principality of his priesthood
over all bisshops, touching that assembly which concerns the universal state
of the Church, in the which he bears the chief charge. By the which power
committed unto him, he may commau^d the faithful to assemble, chiefly al
priests subject unto him. But the Emperor exhorts or counsels the
Bisshops, and commands the Lay. Thus much your own Author Cusanus (M.
Horn) concerning the Emperors Authority in calling of Councels. I suppose if
you take his whole meaning, your cause will be but weakly relieved by him. And
I think you wish now, you had never alleged him.

M. Horn The.143. Division. page 85. b.
Next unto Frederike was M^ximilian Emperor, to whom the Princes of Germany
put up certain greuaunces in Ecclesiastical matters, that anoied the Empire,
in number.10. Against Bulls, Privileges, Electio^s, reseruatio^s,
expectatiues, Annates, unfit pastors, pardons, tithes, and the spiritual
courts etc. beseching hi^, to have some redress herin. Who being moved with
the admonitions, aduisementes and exhortations of the learned Clergy, and the
godly Princes, at the length called a Council at Triers and Colayn, for the
redress of these and other enormities, in the year of the Lord: 1512. which
was the fourth year of the most renoumed King of England, King Henry the
eight. Para. Vrsp.
In this Council amongst other things because there was a suspicion of a
Schism breedinge, and of greauaunces in the Church, it was necessarily
decreed, that the Emperor and Princes electours, with other Princes and
states of the Empire, should look about them, and well co^sult by what means,
these greeues might be taken away most commodiouslie, and the Schism removed,
and evil things reformed to edification. It was decreed also against
blasphemours, to pay either a sum of money limited, or to suffer death. And
that all men should know this decree, it was thought good to the Princes, and
states of the Empire, that al Preachers and persons, should at all high
feasts preach unto the people thereof faithfully. This being done. Maximilian
set forth a decree for the taking away of the foresaied Ecclesiastical
greuaunces: wherein he declares, Orth. Great.
that though of clemency he have suffered the Pope and the Clergy herein, as
did his Father Frederik: Yet not withstanding since that by his liberality, the
worship and service of God has fallen to decaie, it apperteineth unto his
duty, whom God has chosen unto the Emperial Throne of Rome, that amongst all
other most great businesses of peace and wars, that he also look about him
vigilantlie, that the Church perish not, that Regilion decaie not, that the
worship of the service of God, be not diminished etc. In confideration
whereof, he provides, that a man having in any City a Canonship or
Vicarshippe, enjoy not any prebende of an other Church in the same City, etc.
Making other decrees against suinge in the Ecclesiastical Courts for
benefices, for defense of Lay men's Patronages, for pensions against bulls, and
cloked Symonie etc.

After this, the (.468.) The 468. untruth The Emperor did not conclude to have
that co^ue^ticle
Emperor and Levvys the French King, concluded together to call a (.469) The
469. untruth. It was a private conuenticle, no general Council.
general Council at Pise: to the which also agreed a great part of the Popes
Cardinals. Many ( says (.470.) The 470. untruth. No such thing to be found in
Sabellicus.
Sabellicus) began to abhor the Popes Courts, saying, that al things were
defiled with filthy lucre, with monstrous and wicked lusts, with poisonings,
Sacrilegies, murders, and Symoniacal faiers, and that Pope Julius him self
was a Symoniake, a dronkarde, a beast, a worldling, and unworthily occupied
the place, to the destruction of Christendom, and that there was no remedy,
but a General Council to be called, to help these mischiefs, to the which his
Cardinals accordng to his oath, desired him, but they could not obtain it of
him.

Maximilian the Emperor, being the Author of it, with Jews the French King
(because the histories do bear record, that in times past the Emperors of
Rome had wont to appoint Councels) they appoint a Counsel to be holde^ at Pyse.

The.37. Chapter. Of Maximilian the Emperor: Great Granfather to Maximilian
the Emperor which now lives.
Stapleton.
THough Maximilian the Emperor redressed certain grieuaunces, that the
Churches of Germany suffered through paiements to the Roman Court, as did the
French Kings about the same time, yet did he not thereby challenge the Popes
Supremacy, but most reuere^tly obeyed the same, as did (this notwithstanding)
the French Kings also, as I have before declared. Which (to omit al other
arguments) appears well by his demeanor, at his later days, in the first
starting up of your Apostle, I should say Apostata Martin Luther: and also
by the protestation of his next successor Charles the fifth of famous memory,
protesting openly at his first diet holden in Germany at Worms, Vide
Pontanu^ lib. 2. Reru^ memorab. page 52.
that he would follow the approved Relligion of his most Noble Progenitors
of the house of Austria, of whom this Maximilian was his Graundfather. Whose
Relligion and devotion to the Sea of Rome from time to time, his nephew Charles
in that assemblye extolleth and sets forth as a most honorable and worthy
example. Which in him how great it was, if nothing else, yet your deape
silence in this place, of so noble an Emperor, under whom such importante
concurrents befell geaue us well to understand. For had there been in him the
least inkling in the world of any inclining to your factious sect, he should
not thus have escaped the famous Chronicle of this your infamouse Libell. And
yet verily as well you might have brought him, and Ferdinand his brother, yea
and our late Gratiouse Sovereign Queen Marie too, for example of gouernemente
in Ecclesiastical causes, as you have brought Maximilian his predecessor,
and a number of other Emperors before.

As for the General Council, that you say Maximilian and Lewys the French
King, called at Pyse, it was never taken for any General Council, nor
Council at all, but a schismatic assembly procured against Pope Julius by
a few Cardinals, whom he had deprived of their Ecclesiastical honor. And
it was called only by the means of the French King in despite of Pope
Julius, for making league with the Venetians, and for moving Genua to rebelle
against him. As for Maximilian, he doubted in deed a while (being for the said
league offended with the Pope) which way to take, Pietr^ Messia in vita di
Massimiliano.
but seeinge the matter grow to a Schism, he rased that Conuenticle, being
removed from Pise to Millaine, and agreed with Pope Julius. By whom also, and
by Leo the.10. his successoure, this Conuenticle was dissanulled in a General
Council holden at Laterane in Rome. To the which Council at length, as well
the Schismatic Cardinals, as all other Princes, condescended. And thus
ever, if there be any thing defectuouse or faulty, that you make much of, and
that makes for you: but if the fault be reformed, and things done orderlye,
that you will none of, for that is against you.

As for that you tell us out of Sabellicus, That many began to abhor the
Popes Courts, etc. not telling us withal, where in Sabellicus that should
appear, his works being so large, it seems to be a manifest Untruth. For
neither in his Aenead. 11. lib. 2. where by the course of time it should be
found, neither in Rebus Venetis, nor any otherwhere can I yet find it. And
therefore until you tell us, where that shameful accusation was laid in, and
by whom, we do justly answer you, that it sauoureth shrewdly of a lie.

And yet if all were true, what prove you else, but that then the Pope was an
evil man, and his Court licentiously ordered? Whereof if you infer, M.
Horn, that therefore the Prince in England must be Supreme Governor, then on
the contrary side we may reason thus. The Pope that now lives, is a man of
miraculouse holiness, of excellent learning, and no ways reprehensible: His
Court also is diligently reformed, and most godly ordered (as all that now
know Rome, can and do witness) Ergo the Queen's Majesty now, nor no other
Prince, can or ought to be supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical.

M. Horn. The.144. Division. page 86 b.
Maximilian the Emperor, Jews the French Kinke, and other Princes beyond
the seas, were not more carefully bent, and moved by their learned men to
refourme by their authority the abuses about (.471.) The 471. untruth. For not
about Church matters, but about matters of the court of Rome.
Church matters, then was King Henry the eight, at the same time King of
England, of most famous memory, who follovving the humble suits and petitions
of his learned Clergy, agreeing thereupon by vnifourme consent in their
Convocation, took upon him that authority and government in all matters or
causes Ecclesiastical, which they assured him to belong unto his estate, both
by the word of God, and by the ancient Laws of the Church: and therefore
promised, in verbo sacerdotij, by their priesthood, not to do any thing in
their Councels without his assent, etc. And this Clergy was not only of
Divines, but also of the vvisest, most expert and best learned in the Civil and
Canon Laws, that was than or has been sense, as D. Tonstall Bisshoppe of
Duresme, D. Stokesley Bishop of London, D. Gardener Bishop of VVynton. D.
Thirlebie Bisshoppe of Westminster, and after of Norwich, and your old
Master D. Bonner, who succeeded Stok^sley, in the Sea of London, and many
others: by whose advise and consent, there was at that time also a learned
book made and publisshed, De vera differentia Regiae potestatis and
Ecclesiasticae, which I doubt not, but ye have seen long sithen. Neither
was this a (.472.) The 472. untruth. It was a mere nouelty.
new devise of theirs to please the King vvithal, or their opinion only, but
it was and is the judgment of the most learned (473) The 473. untruth. No
Ciuilians nor Canonistes are of the judgment, which M. Horn here defends.
Constable. 152 23. q. ^.
Ciuilia^s and Canonists, that when the Clergy are faulty or negligent, it
appertains to The Emperor to call general councelles for the reformation of the
Church causes, as Philippus Deciu^ a famous Lawyer affirms. And the
Glossator upon this Canon Principes, affirms, that the princes have
jurisdiction in diverse sorts within the Church over the Clergy, when they be
stubbourne, ambitious, subuerters of the faith, falsaries, makers of Schisms,
contemners of excommunication: yea also wherein so ever, the Ecclesiastical
power fails or is to vveake, as in this Decree. He means where the power
of the Church by the word of doctrine prevails not, therein must the
Princes authority and jurisdiction take order, for that is the plain prouis^
in the decree. The words of the decree are as follovv. The seculer princes
have (.474.) The.474 Untruth: False translation.

Nonnunqua^ sometimes.


oftentimes within the Church the highest authority that they may fence by
that power, the Ecclesiastical discipline. But with in the Church the power
(of princes) should not be necessary, saving that, that thing which the
priests are not able to do, by the word of doctrine, the power (of the
prince) may There is diverse readinges imperet or impetret.
command, or obtain that, by the terror of discipline: The heavenly
kingdom does oftentimes prevail or go forwards by the earthly Kingdom,
that those which being within the Church, do against the faith and
discipline, may be brought under by the rigor of princes: and that the
power of the princes, may lay upon the necks of the proud, that same
discipline, which the profit of the Church is not hable to exercise: and
that he bestow the force of his authority, The Princes shall give an account
to God, for the Church, and the discipline thereof
whereby to deserve woorship. Let the Princes of the world well know, that
they of duty shall render an account to God for the Church, Which they have
taken of Christ to preserve. For weather the peace and discipline of the
Church be increased by faithful princes, or it be loosed: He does exact of
them an account, Who has delivered his Church to be committed to their
power.

The.38. Chapter. Of king Henry the.8. our late Sovereign.
Stapleton.
Co^cerni^g the doings of king Henry the.8.
WE are at length, by the course of time which M. Horn has prosequuted,
deuolued to owre own days, and to the doings of king Henry the eight for
the confirmation whereof, he has fetched from all parts of the world so long,
so many, and yet al impertinente arguments. Belyke now for his farewell, and
to make us up a plausible conclusion, he will look more narrowly, and more
substancially to the handling of his proufes, and will perhappe like a good
orator in the winding up of his matter leave in the readers hearts by some
good and effectual probation, a vehemente impressio^ and persuasion of his
surmised primacie. He has perchance reserved the best dishe to the last,
and like a good expert captain, will set his strongeste reasons and
authorities, tanquam triarios milites, The order of M. Horns proufes.
in the rearwarde. And so suerlye yt seems he will do in making up his
matters with five authorities that is, of one Divine, and four Lawyers. The
divine being a Spaniard: and of his lawyers three being strangers, two
Italians, and one french man, all being ciuillians of late time: The fourth
being our contryman and a temporal lawyer of our realm. For the Divine and
our countriman the lawyer, he sti^keth not to break his array and course of
time, the one living about.900. years, the other four hundred years
sythence. Let us then consider his proufes, and whether he does not, according
to his accustomable wont rather featly floute him, then bring his reader, any
matter to the purpose.

You will now prove to us M. Horn, that king Henry was taken and called the
Supreme Head of the Church of England, and that lawfully. And why so, I pray
you? Co^cerni^g the co^uocations promise, to make no co^stitution without the
kings consent. Fol. 95.
Mary say ye because the convocation promised him by their priesthod they
would do nothing in their councelles withowte his consent. Why M. Horn,
take you this promise to be of so great weight? Does the consideration and
estimation of priesthod weighe so deaply with you now? Ye will not be of this
mind long. For ere ye have done, ye will tell M. Fekenham, that there was none
of them al priests: and that there is but one only priest which is Christ.
Yet will ye say, a promise they made. Truth yt is: but unless ye can prove
the promise honest and lawful (which we utterly deny) then this promise will
not relieve you. And, this is but one branch of the unlawful supreamacie
that king Henry practiced: therefore thowghe this doing were tolerable and
probable to, yet unless ye went to a further proof, ye shall win little at
M. Fekenhams hands. I am content to pass over the residewe of his usurped
supreamacie for this time I demand of you then, what one thing ye have
hitherto browght for to persuade any reasonable man, for this one point: that
is, that the Bishops can determyne nothing in their synodes to be forcible,
unless the Prince agree also to yt? Suerlye no one thing. That Bishops
voluntarely desired their good and catholyke Princes to join with them, M.
Horn has not proved in all his book that such consent is necessary.
yea and submitted sometimes the iudgmente of their doings, of their great
humility, to some notable Princes, ye have showed: and withal that in some
cases yt is conueniente so to be done. But ye can full ill wind up your
conclusion upon this. Which ye forseeing, did show us a trick of your new
thetorike and fine grammar, turning conuenit into opo^tet: making yt is
conueniente, and yt must be so, all one. Ye will belyke take better handfaste
now. But will ye now see his sure handfaste good Reader? Suerly the first is
not very fast, as when he tells us out of Decius, and out of the gloss of the
Cano^ law, M. Horn^ Sampso^s post vvil fall on his own head.
that princes may call councils, and that in some cases they have jurisdiction
in Church matters: wherein we have already said inowgh. And how slenderly and
loosely this gear hangs with his assertion, yt is open to the eye. I trow he
sticks faster to his divine, the^ to his lawyer, and therefore he brings in
Isidorus extraordinary.900. years almost out of his race and course. Here,
here (as yt seems) is his anchor hold, and for this cause as well the whole
allegation is here producted, as also one peace of the same, set in the first
page of his whole book, as a sure mark to direct the reader by: and as yt were
a Sampsons post for M. Horn, to buyld his book upon. But take good head M.
Horn yt be not a true Sampsons post, and that it bring not the whole house
upon your own head, as yt does in deed. Concerning Isidorus.
Whereunto good reader, seeing M. Horn has chosen this as a notable allegation
to be eied on, setting the same in two notable places, I would wish thee also
to give a good eye thereunto, and to see, if it can any way possible make for
him.

I say then M. Horn, that this allegatio^ goes no further, then that the
Prince, by his cyuill and worldly power should assiste and maynteyne the
Church and her doctrine. And that this allegation directly and rowndly proves
the contrary of that, for the which ye do allege yt, that is, that yt
proves the ecclesiastical authority, and not the cyuill, to be chief and
principal, in causes ecclesiastical. And that in effect the whole tends to
nothing else but that, as I said, Vide destructoriu^ vttiorum impress.
Norinberg. 1496. part. 6. cap. 40. Qui eoru^ potestati suam Ecclesiam tradidit
defendendam.
the Princes should defend the Church. I will not stand here in ripping up
of words with you, or in the diversity of reading, and that some old copies
have: who has committed his Church to be defended of their power: and that
your (has delivered to be committed) seameth to stand in your translation
vnhansomly. I will say nothing, that credere and committere: is all one in
Latin. Let this go, I find no fault with you, for translation, but for ill
application. If ye had brought this authority to prove, that the prince should
defend the Church (for the which end and respect it was written) I would
say nothing to you. But when ye will bleare our eyes and make us so blind,
that we should imagine, by this saying of Isidore, 23. q. 5. c. Principes.
Principes seculi nonnunquam intra Ecclesiam potestati. adeptae culmina tenent.
that the king is Supreme Head of the Church, or that his assente is
necessary to the Synodes of Bishops and cou^celles, I will say to you, that the
contrary, will be much better gathered of this allegatio^. The very first
words wonderfully acrase your new primacy, and somewhat also your honesty,
peruersly tra^slating, no^nunqua^: which is, sometime, or now and the^, into
oftentimes. But let yt be, for nonnunquam, sepe: let them ofte^tymes have the
highest authority in the Church. Unless they have yt still, they can not be
called the Supreme Heads in all causes ecclesiastical. And so these very
words make a good argument against your primacy. Vt per eande^ potestatem
ecclesiasticam disciplina^ muniant. Cateru^ intra ecclesiam potestates
necessariae non essent nisi vt quod non preualent sacerdotes efficere per
doctrinae sermone^, potestas hoc imperet per disciplinae terrorem.

Et mox. Vt qui intra ecclesiam positi co^tra fide^ and disciplina^ agunt,
rigore principum co^^arantur.


But now M. Horn, what is the cause, why they have this high authority either
sometimes, or oftentimes? Isidore straytwayes shows the cause: that they may
(as your self translate) fence by their power the ecclesiastical discipline.
Ye hear the^ the scope, and final purpose of this allegation, for Princes
authority in matters ecclesiastical, that is to defend the Church. And
therefore as I said, yt is more sutely, to read, tradidit defendendam, then
tradidit co^mittenda^. And for this cause the Emperors call them selves not
capita Ecclesiae, not the heads of the Church, sed aduocatos Ecclesiae, but
the advocates of the Church, as your self tell of the emperor Friderike. Go we
now forth with Isidorus: But first I ask of you M. Horn, that make the
Princes to be heads of the Church, and to have so much to do, in matters
ecclesiastical, that the Bishops can decree nothing that should be auaylable
withowt their special ratification (for the setting forth of the which
doctrine ye are content, for this time that priests shall be priests, and may
swear by their priesthod, and not by their aldermanship or eldership) whether
such authority in Princes be absolutely necessary to the Church or no? If
ye say no, the^ conclud you against your self and your whole book. If ye say
yea, then conclude you against the truth, and against your author, who
says, that such authority of Princes in the Church is not necessary, but
for to punish those that contemn the word of doctrine, the faith, and
discipline of the Church. Of whom have we received M. Horn the word of
doctrine, the faith and discipline of the Church? Of the Apostles, and their
successors the Bishops, or of the Princes? I suppose ye will not say of
Princes. Then must ye grant that for these matters the primacy rests in the
clergy, of whom the Princes the^ selves, have received their faith: and to
whom in matters of faith, and for the discipline of the Church they must also
obey: and as case requires, set forth the doctrine of word with their
temporal sword. Which if they do not, but suffer throwghe their slacknes,
the faith and disciplyne of the Church to be loosed, God, M. Horn^ book in a
manner ansvvered by his own allegation.
who has committed his Church to be defended by their power will exact an
account of the^, as your author Isidore writes and your self do allege. So
that now we see even by your own allegatio^ in whom the superiority of Church
matters, remains: that is, in the clergy: And that Princes are not the heads
but the ayders, assisters, and advocates of the Church with their temporal
authority. And to this end, all that ever ye have browght in this your book
concerning the intermedling of Princes in church affairs, ca^ only be
referred. And this your own allegatio^ is as well a sufficient answer to al your
arguments hitherto laid forth for the princes supremacy, as a good
justification of the Clergies primacy.

Wherefore if you harken but to your own allegation, and will stand to the
same as you will your Readers to do, placing it (as I have said) in the fore
front of your book, you must needs stand also to the next parcel following
making clearly for the Clergies superiority in Ecclesiastical causes. These
words I mean, Isidorus.
that within the Church the power (of Princes) should not be necessary saving
that, that thing, which the Priests are not able to do by the word of doctrine,
the power (of the prince) may co^mau^d by terror of discipline. And I doubt
nothing, but that we are able well and surely to prove as well by his other
books, as by his gathering of all the Councels together, into one volume yet
exta^t, that Isidorus thought of the Popes Primacy then, as Catholics do
now. For an evident proof whereof, behold what this Ancient and learned
Bishop Isidorus writes. He says: Synodorum congregandarum authoritas
Apostolicae sedi commissa est. Isidorus in praefat. Co^cilioru^.
Neque vllam Synodu^ generalem ratam esse credimus aut legimus, quae non fuerit
eius authoritate congregata vel fulcita. Hoc Authoritas testatur Canonica, hoc
Ecclesiastica historia comprobat, hoc Sancti Patres confirmant. The Authority
of assembling Cou^celles, is committed to the Sea Apostolic. Neither do we
believe or read any General Council to be ratified, which was not either
assembled or confirmed with her Authority. This to be so, the Authority of
Canons does witness. Trip. li. 4. cap. 9. and. 19.
This the ecclesiastical history proves. This the holy Fathers confirm. Lo
you see. M. Horn, what the judgment of Isidorus was above.900. years past,
how iumpe it agrees with the assertion of Catholics now, and how directly
it overthrows yours. This therefore being so sure a Principle on our part,
and so clerelie proved: bethink your self now, M. Horn, how your new
Primacie will be proved by this allegation.

Touching that you say, This Clergy (in King Henry's days) was not only of
Divines, but also of the wisest, most expert, and best learned in the Civil and
Canon Laws, that was or has been sense, as D. Tonstal, D. Stokesley, D.
Gardener, D. Thirlbie, and D. Bonner, by the evident falsehood which you
practice in alleging these witnesses, a man may judge with what fidelity you
have handled the rest, throughout your whole book. Who is ignoraunte, that not
one of these Reverent Fathers did sincerely think that to be true, which you
here impute unto them? For whereas all upright judgment should come of a man's
own free choice, not stained or spotted either with the hope of private lucre
and honor, or with the fear of great loss, the one of those two things
which of all other, most forceably carries men away, from professing their own
conscience, did stop those men from saying and uttering that, which otherwise
they would most gladly have uttered: since as they were put in hope of al
promotion, if they agreed with the Kings will (of which they made, I judge, the
less account) so disagreeing from the same, they were certain to loose both
goods and life, and also their good name, in the show of the world, as who
should have been put to death by the name of Traitors, which is the thing
that all true subjects do chiefly abhor. Yet you know in such sort
suffered a great many, notable both for learning and virtue, as D. Fisher
Bishop of Rochester, Sir Thomas More, a great number of the Carthusians,
beside diverse other of all estates. You know also, the matter, then was not
so sifted and tried by learning, as it has been since. And we know, they were
the secret snakes of your adders brood, that induced the King to that mind,
not any of the Doctors here by you named, who all against their wills,
condescended thereunto.

How then are they brought forth for witnesses of your heresies, who for
fear of death said as you do, and that no longer then the foresaid
impedimente lay in their way? For when the state of the world was otherwise
that without fear of death they might utter their mind freely: who knows
not, that all they who lived to see those days of freedom, in all their
words and deeds, protested that the Pope, and not the King, was head of the
Church under Christ? Never heard you (M. Horn) that when your own brethren,
being arrived before D. Gardener the Bishope of Winchester, and then
Chauncelour of England, had said, they learned their disobedience unto the
Pope, D. Gardener B. of Winchester.
out of his book, De vera obedientia, etc. then he answered that if they had
been good Scholars, they would have followed their Master in his best, and not
in his worste doeinges. Again, if they had erred through his Authority, when
he was not so well learned and grounded, they should much more repent and reca^t
through his Authority, being now better learned through longer study, and
better grounded through longer experience. And this Doctor Gardener, when he
was most of your side, in this one matter, yet he was so suspected of the
King for secret conference with the Pope, by letters to be sent by a
stranger in the time of his embassye on this side of the Seas, that (as Master
Fox reports) for this very cause, Acts and monumentes. page 824. col. 1.
and 816.
King Henry in all General Pardons granted after that time, did evermore
except, all treasons committed beyond the Seas, which was meant for the
Bishops cause: This is that Doctor Gardener who at Paul's Cross, in a most
Honorable and full Audience, witnessed not only his own repentance for his
former naughty doings, but also that King Henry sought diverse times to have
reconciled him self again, to the Sea of Rome, as who knew, that he had
unlawfully departed from the unity thereof, and had made him self the Supreme
Head of the Church of England, altogether unjustly.

This is that Doctor Gardener* who lying in his deathebedde, caused the
Passion of Christ to be readen unto him, and when he heard it readen, that
Peter after the denying of his Master, went out and wept bitterly, he
causyng the Reader to stay, wept him self full bitterly, and said: Ego
exiui, sed non dum fleui amare: I have gone out, but as yet, I have not wept
bytterlie. And is now Doctor Gardener a fit witness for your secular
Supremacy M. Horn?

Marcellinus the Pope being afearde of death did sacrifice unto Idolles: And
the same Marcellinus repenting his unjust fear, Tom. 1. Council. in vita
Marcellini.
did afterward sacrifice his own body and soul for the love of Christ,
suffering Martyrdom for his sake. Will you now prove Idolles to be better then
Christ, by the fact of Marcellinus? Or shall not the last judgment stand
rather then the first? What mean you then to allege the judgments of
Doctor Gardener, Doctor Thirlbey, Doctor Tonstall, and Doctor Bonner, since
you know that all those changed their minds upon better advise? Or why
died Doctor Tonstalle, in prisonne? Or why lie the other learned godly
Bisshops yet in prisonne, if they are of your mind? But if you know that they
dissente utterly from you, and yet do pretend to bring their Authority for
you, this fact declares, that you are not only a fond wrangler, but also a
wicked falsarie: and that you know as well Saint Augustine whom you alleged
before so largelye, and all the Councels and princes with all other Authors by
you producted, are none otherwise of your mind, then are Doctor Thirlebie,
and Doctor Bonner, whom you so impudentlie make to speak as Proctours in
your cause, albeit they are ready to shed their blood against this your
opinion.

Once in manner the whole clergy of the Realm sinned most grievously, by
preferring the secular and earthly kingdom, before the Magistrates of the
heavenly kingdom. But that sin of theirs al those now abhor, and have before
abhorred, to who^ God gave grace to see the filthiness and the absurdty thereof.
And surely until the rest both of the clergy and of the layety, do heartily
repent for that most filthy and absurd deed, wherein they withdrewe the
Supremacy from S. Peter's successors, and gave it to the successors of Julius
Caesar, until I say they repent for it, and refourme that mind of theirs, as
much as lies in the^, they ca^ never be made partakers of the kingedome of
heaven: But only they shall inherit the kingdom of the earth, in whose
Supremacy they put their confidence. You Master Horn, have in deed great cause
to make much of this earthly Supremacy. For had not the clergy and temporalty
given that to king Henry.8. you and your heresies could have had no place now
in the throne of that Bishopprike, which was ordained not for Robert and his
Madge, but for chaste prelates, and such as should prefer the soul before
the body, the kingdom of heaven before the kingdom of the earth, Peter
before Nero, Christ before Antichrist. For so I doubt not to say, with the
great Clerk, and most holy Bishop Athanasius, See before. fol. ^7.
that a Christian king or Emperor, setting him self above bishops, the
officers of Christ, in matters of the faith, is a very Antichrist. Which
Antichristian fact in deed has been the first gate and entry for all those
heresies to enter* which the Prince him self then most abhorred, and against
the which both he had lately before made a learned book, and did publishe
after (but in vain) for a stay thereof, the six Articles. In vain, I say: for
the order of dew government ones taken away, the knotte of unity ones undone,
the head being cut of, how could it otherwise be, but false doctrine should
take place, a separation from the corpse of Christendom should ensewe, and our
Country a part of the body fall to decaie in such matters, as belonged to
the Head, to order, direct and refourme? This horrible sin Master Horn
would make a virtue. But all ages, all Councels, all Princes, yea the holy
Scriptures are directly against him, and do al witness for the Pope and
Bishops against the Prince and lay Magistrate, that to them not to these,
belongs by right, by reason, by practice, the Supreme and chief government
in all causes and matters mere Ecclesiastical and spiritual.

M. Horn. The.145. Division. page 87. a.
To this (.475.) The 475. untruth. For this Petrus vvriteh for the Popes
Supremacy, not for the Princes in Ecclesiastical matters.
effect also vvriteth Petrus Ferrariensis, In form. lib. quo agitur ex subst.
in verbo ex suo corpore.
a notable learned man in the Laws, saying: Thou ignorant man, thou ought
to know that the Empire ( the Emperor) ones in times past, had both the
swoordes, to wit, both the Temporal and Spiritual, in so much that the
Emperors then bestowed (.476.) The.476. untruth. Not possible, to be true.
all the ecclesiastical benefices through the (477) The.477. untruth. False
translation, as shall appear

In form. respons. con. ad verb. tanquam publ. ex com. n. 10.


whole world, and more, they did choose the Pope, as it is in C. Adrianus Did.
63. And the same Petrus in an other place, says thus: Mark after what sort
and how many ways those Clergymen, do snare the Lay, and enlarge their own
jurisdiction: but alas miserable Emperors and secular princes, which do
suffer this and other things: you both make your selves sclaues to the
Bisshoppes, and ye see the world usurped by the^ infinite ways, and yet ye
study not for remedy, because ye give no heed to wisdoms and knovveleadge.

Stapleton.
IF your law be not better the^ your divinity, we neade not much to fear our
matter: And so much the less, if that be true, that a good merry fellow, and
unto you not unknown, reading your book of late said, that he durst lay a good
wager, that if ye were upon the sudden well apposed, ye were not able to
read the quotations, by your self in the margent alleged out of this Petrus:
and withal, that ye never readde that, which ye allege out of Quintinus, M.
Horns imp^rtine^t arguments.
or if ye did, ye do not understand yt, or at the least ye do most wickedly
peruerte yt. But let this go, as merely spoken: for though ye never read the
author, nor can redely at the first (perchance) read your own quotations,
the whole matter being by some of your friends and neareste affinity brought
ripe and ready to your hand, we shall be well co^te^t from whence so ever yt
come, so it come at length to any purpose and effect, whereof I for my part
have little hope. For what if in the old time the Emperors confirmed popes?
What if the clergy usurp and intrude in many things upon the seculer
princes jurisdiction? If ye may hereof make a sequel, that either the king of
England is supreme head of the Church: or that, the unlawful promise made by
the bisshops by their priesthod (which ye esteem as much as if they had sworn
by Robin hode his bow) does bind them, Practica Ioha^nis Petri Fer. In forma
inter. fieud. cum reo, co^uento in act. reali.
as a lawful promise, I will say, ye are suddenly become a notable lawyer, and
worthy to be retained of council in great affairs. I am assured of one
thing, that how so ever ye like him in this point, yet for other points of
this his book, that you allege, you like him never adeale: As, for the
invocation of Saints: yea for the Popes Primacie, by the which he says: A
perjured man which otherwise is rejected) may be by the Popes dispensation
admitted to bear wytnes: and that a clerk irregular can not be absolved, but
by the Pope. In forma iurame^ti testium. Numer 7.
Which follows the very place by you alleged, with many such like, not
making very much to your lykinge. Now what if I should say unto you, that you
and your author to, if he says so, say untruly, Informa responsi ^ei
co^uenti ad verbu^ ta^quam public exco^municatu^ numero 11
affirminge the Emperor to have both the temporal and spiritual sword? And
what if I should say that there is no more truth in that assertion, than in the
other, that he bestowed all the benefices through the whole world? For your
chapter Adrianus, that you allege, speaks of the Emperor Charles the great
who was not Emperor of the whole world, nor of half Europa neither, and
therefore he could not bestow the benefices of the whole world. If ye will
say, Dict. cap. Adrianus did. 63.
that your author says truly, and ye have translated truly, for the text is
per singulas prouincia^: I grant you it is so: but yet is it unskillfully and
ignorantly translated: for ye should have said, through out every province,
or country subject to the Roman empire. For the Romans did call all countries,
that they had conquered (Italy excepted) provinces, and the people
Prouinciales. I say nothing now, that this chapter rather enforces then
destroys the popes primacy. For Charles had neither authority to bestow the
Ecclesiastical benefices, nor to choose the Pope: but as he being a mere
stranger before, took thempire at the popes hand, so did he take also this
special privilege and prerogatyue.

M. Horn. The.146. Division. page 87. b.
Like as Petrus Ferrariensis attributes both the swords, that is, both the
spiritual and the temporal jurisdiction to the Emperor: So (.478.) The.478.
untruth. For he reproves Ferrariensis.
Io. Quintinus Heduus a famous professor of the law in Paris, and one that
attributes so much to the Pope as may be, and much more than ought to be,
says that: In solo Principe omnis est potestas: in the Prince (.479.) The.479.
untruth. He is of a plain contrary mind.

In repetit. lect. de Christ. Ciuitatis Aristocratia.


alone is al power, and thereto (480.) The.480. untruth. He avouches not
Speculator.
avouches this saying of Speculator, De iurisdict. omnium iudicum: Quod
quicquid est in regno, id esse intelligitur de jurisdiction Regis: that
whatsoever is in a kingdom, that is understood, to be under the jurisdiction
of the king. To which (.481.) The.481. untruth. He cites not Lotharius to
that purpose
purpose he cites an ancient learned one in the Law whose name was
Lotharius, who, says he, did say: That the Prince is the fountain or
welspring of all jurisdiction and protests also him self to be of the
(.482.) The.482. untruth. Lotharius is not of the same mind.
same mind.

The.39. Chapter. Solutions to Arguments taken out of Quintinus Heduus, a
Doctor of Paris.
Stapleton.
Concerni^g Quinti^us Heduus.
LET us now take heed: for M. Horn wonderfully lassheth on, with Io.
Quintinus Heduus, and runs his race with him two full leaves together. And
yet for all this stir, and heapinge Law upon Law, we might grant him, all
that ever he brings in, without any prejudice of our cause: and would so do
in deed, saving that the handling of the matter by M. Horn is such as
requires of us a special specification. Neither can I tell, of all the
dishonest and shameful pageantes that he has hitherto played, whether there
be any comparable to this. M. Horn miserably mis^seth his render with the
alleging of Quintinus.
I can not tell whether his folly or his impudency be the greater: but that
both excede, I am right well assured. And yet I trow he owght not to bear
all the blame, but may part stake with his collectour, who has abused his
ignorance, as him self does abuse his readers ignorance. The answer would
grow long and big, if I should fully as the case requires, rippe up, and
open all things, and then at large confute them, which at this time I intend
not: but in vsinge as much breuity as I may, to lay before thee good reader,
and to discipher the fashion and manner of his dealinge. Wherein even as Medea,
fleinge from her natural father, and runninge away with a stranger, with
whom she fell in love: her father pursuing her, and she fearing to be taken,
slew her young brother scattering his limbs in the way, M. Horn for his
wretched handling of Quintinus compared to Medea.
thereby to stay, what with sorrow, and what with long seeking for his sons
body, her fathers journey: even so M. Horn running away from the catholyke
Church his mother, with dame heresy, with whose filthy love he is rauisshed,
to stay the reader that would trace him, and his heresies, for the authors he
alleges, does so miserably tear them in pieces, and dismember them, that yt
would pity any good Christian man's heart to see yt, as much as yt pitied king
Oeta father to Medea to see that miserable and lamentable sight: and very busy
will yt be for him to find out the whole corpse of the sentences, so wretchedly
cut and hewed by M. Horn: and here and there in these two leaves so
miserably dispersed. What was the opinion of Lotharius, of whom M. Horn
speaks, and how it is to be understood.
We will notwithstanding trace hi^ as we may. The^ the better to understand his
first allegatio^, ye shall understand that there is a kind of Jurisdiction which
is called of the Ciuilia^s meru^ imperiu^ that is, power of life and death:
which whether it rests in the prince only, or in other inferior magistrates,
the Lawyers do not al agree. Lotharius settled al in the prince: to that opinion
Quintinus also inclines. But then makes Quintinus an objection. Why says
he, How is yt true, that the prince only has this mere empire or
jurisdiction, saying that we affirm, Quasi Principum nomine pontifices no^
intelligantur. Did. 35 c. 4.

Nos honorum ciuilium duntaxat extrae Ecclesiam populariumque dignitatum regem
tenere fastigiu^ intelligimus etc.


the Church to have yt also? Whereunto he answers, that under the name of
Princes, are contained the high Priests: from the which our Acts of
parliament do not all disagree, calling Bisshoppes the Eduardi. 3. An. 15.
cap. 3. Clerks peers of the land.
Peers of the realm. When we say, says he, with Lotharius, that the King
is the fountain of all jurisdiction, we mean as Lotharius does, not of the
Church, but of the civil magistrates, under the King. The said Quintinus
says, Gladium pontifex vtru^que gestat, exercet alterum Rex solus, quem
pontifex etiam desertus a suis, in hosts licite stringit. The Pope has both
the swords, that is, both temporal and spiritual jurisdiction, yet the King
alone, uses the one of the^, that is the temporal: the which the Pope may
notwithstanding, if he be forsaken of his own, use also. But as I was about to
tell you out of Qui^tinus, he says: Probauimus Ecclesiam Deo militantem se
noluisse temere negotijs secularibus implicare, temporalemque iurisdictionem
principibus sponte reliquisse, Why Speculator says, all that is i^ the realm
to be of the King^ jurisdiction
tamque libenter, tamque animo prompto and facili, vt regu^ propria videatur.
Id circo scriptum est a Speculatore, quod quicquid est in regno, id esse
intelligitur de jurisdiction regis. We have proved, that the militant Church
does not but upon good cause intermedle with seculer affairs: yea rather
gives over to Princes the temporal jurisdiction so gladly and so willinglye,
that yt seems to appertain to the Princes only. Ecclesia vtru^que gladiu^
tenet, vtramque pariter habet iurisdictione^.
And therefore Speculatour writes, that what so ever is in a Kingdom, that is
understood to be of the Kings jurisdiction. And for this some were
persuaded, that the spiritual and temporal jurisdiction stood so contrary
one to the other, that one man might not exercise both. But Quintinus himself
misliketh this opinion, and says, even in the said place, Nouimus vtrumque
gladium soli Ecclesiae datum. hoc est, ecclesiae pontificem habere ius and
potestatem in spiritualia simul and in omnia temporalia, atque ex ijs decernere
and statuere ex causa posse, cuius decretis standum.

Gibere deformem. Flagitiosissimus quidam. and postea: tam infenso nebulone.


where he speaks of Speculator, that the Church only, and not the Princes
seculer, has both swords, and both jurisdictions. And upon this occasion he
does vehemently inueighe against Petrus de Cugnerio of whom we have spoken,
that did so stifflye stand against the French clergy for their te^porall
jurisdiction: and provoked the King Philip Valesius, as much as in him lay, to
pluck it away from the clergy. He calls him a misshapen parson in body, a
most wicked man, and to say al in one, a very knave. And though his name were
then terrible, and thowgh he would seem for his great wisdom to carry all the realm upon his shulders, yet was he ever after, but a lawghing stock to
me^: and because he durst not for shame after this great challe^ge, show
himself abroad, as he was wont to do, for M. Peter de Cugnerio, Quintinus
declares M. Horn to be a li^^ in the story of king Philip valesius before
rehearsed.
he was called in their tongue M. Pierre de Coyner: as a man would say, M Peter
that lurketh in corners.

But will ye now hear M. Horn this your own author Quin^inus how he
expounds co^posuit re^ sacerdotum, that is, how the King set in order the
matters of the priests? Will ye hear also, what sharp Law he made against
the^, as you avouch that he did? He says of the king. Pronu^ciauit Ecclesia^,
Meus. Sep. 1. An 1^29 ^yue st^t untruths of M. ^orn in less t^en 15 lines.
and feuda, and ^e^poralia quaeque bona propria sibi possidere posse atque in
illa iurisdictione^ habere He gave sentence and pronounced, that the Church
might possess fealtes and other temporal things, and have jurisdiction
therein. So much for our first entrau^ce into Qui^tinus. Wherein beside the
shame that ye must take, for your worshipful gloss upon co^posuit re^
sacerdotu^, first ye see, that he improueth Ferrarie^sis and such like, as
attribute to the Emperor the spiritual and temporal sword. Then that he is of
a quyte contrary mind, to that, that ye would by a sentence here and there
ill fauouredlie, and disorderly patched in, enforce upon, as thowgh he should
think, that al jurisdiction should come of the Prince. Thirdly it is untrue
that he avouches Speculatours saying: He avouches as ye have heard the
contrary. Fowrthly it is untrue, that he brings in Lotharius, to confirm
that, which Speculatour said. For he entreats of Lotharius, before he
alleges Speculator, and does not allege Lotharius for that purpose ye speak
of. Fifthly and last, Lotharius is not as ye pretend of this mind, that all
jurisdiction comes of the secular Prince. For Lotharius means not of the
clergies jurisdiction, which comes not of the Prince, but of the jurisdiction
of Lay men, which all together depends of the Prince.

M. Horn. The.147. Division. page 87. b.
And vvriting of the Kings power in Eccle. (.483.) The.483. untruth. In that
place he proves the clergies power, not the Princes in ecclesiastical matters.
matters or causes, he cites this Canon Quando vult Deus forth of the
decrees, whereupon he as it were commenteth: saying, Thus is the reason
wherefore, it is leaful for the Prince, some vvhiles to determine those things
which concern the Church, least the honesty of the mother ( he means the
Church) should in any thing be violated, or least her tranquilly should be
troubled, specially of them, to whom she is committed ( meaning the Church
Ministers).

Stapleton.
Duabus regulis co^cluda^: prior est semper in fidei and peccati materia, ius
Ecclesiasticum attendendum est, and in fore civilly, tumque cessat omne iuris
imperatorij mandatum and aboletur.
Leave ones M. Horn, this peuishe pinching and paring, this miserable mayming
and marring of your authors. Your author M. Horn, gives two rules: the
first for the authority and matters of the Church saying that, in matter of
faith and sin, the law of the Church is ever to be observed, and thereto all
princes laws must yield: which rule he proves at large. And thus you see
your own author stands against you, for one of the chief matters of your
book, wheri^ ye will, in all matters to be determined by the Church, that the
princes consent is to be had. c. Qua^do vult Deus. 23. q. 4.
The.2. rule, is touching the prince: wherein he says, that it apperteyneth to
the kings and princes of the world, to desire that the Church their mother, of
whom they are spiritually born, be in their time in rest and quietness. And
this is the reason, and so forth as your self rehearse. What can ye gather of
this, that is said, that sometime the princes may determine of things
touching the Church: seeing as ye have heard before, this determination
touches not faith or sin, nor can be used of them generally, but sometimes
for the quietness of the Church?

M. Horn. The.148. Division. page 87. b.
If there be any other thing, this chiefly is an Ecclesiastical matter, namely
to call or conuocate Councelles ( says Quintinus) But this is the opinion,
says he, of many learned men, that the Emperor may conuocate a general
Council, so often, and for any cause, when the pope and the Cardinals be
noted of any suspicio^, and do forslowe and cease, either for lack of skill:
or peradventure of some evil meaning, or of both, or else when there is any
schism. Co^sta^tinus, says he, called the first Nicene counsel, the other
Hovv^ far all this is true, it has at large ben shevved in the second book
three general Councils, Gratianus, Theodosius, and Martianus themperours
called by their edict. Iustinianus called the fifte general counsel at
Constantinople: themperor Co^sta^tine.4. did co^uocat the sixth general Counsel
against the Monothelytes. The authority of the king Theodorike commanded the
Bishops and priests forth of diverse proui^ces to assemble together at Rome,
for the purgatio^ of Pope Symachus the first. Carolus Magnus, as it is in our
histories, commanded five Councils to be celebrated for the Ecclesiastical
state, to wit, Moguntinum, Remense, Cabilonense, Arelatense, and Turonense. The
Pope calls the Bishops to Rome, or to some other place: the King does
forbid them to go, or he commands them to come to his Court or (.484.)
The.484. untruth. His Author speaks not of two Councels.
Council: The king i^ to be obeyed in (485.) Ecclesiastical causes, and not
the Pope.
the Bisshoppes must obey the kings precept, not only in this case, but in
any other matter what so ever besides sin: for he that does not observe his
bounden fidelity to the king: whether he be a Bisshoppe, The.485. untruth.
Qui^tinus avouched no such thing.
Priest, or Deacon, is to be thrown forth of his degree or place. For the
proof whereof he cites many Canons out of the decrees, and concludes thus:
to be brief, this is mine opinion: when the king calls together the
Prelates to a Council, and to reform the state of the Church, they are bound
to obey, yea although the Pope (.486.) The.486. untruth. That is meant in
feudis and regalibus: which you have quyte left, out of Quintinus.
forbid it.

Stapleton.
This is our old matter of calling of Councils by princes: wherein you see you
author makes no general or absolut rule as you do, but for certain times
and considerations: for the which I will not greatly stand with you, saying
that your author confesses that which we most stand for, and ye stand most
against: that the prince in such councils, has not the superiority, Interesse
tame^ volo reges tantu^ and non praeesse, talibus sacerdotum co^uentibus.
but the clergy. For he says: I will that princes be present at such
Councelles, but not president. And therefore Quintinus will not be aduocat, for
the bishops, that by their priesthod promised, that they would enacte nothing
in their synodes without the kings consent. Yet have ye one pretty knacke more
in Quintinus to prove the king supreme head, and not the pope. For if the
king on the one side, and the pope on the other side call the bisshops to a
Council, the Bisshoppes must obey the king, and not the pope: and not only
in this thing, but in all other things what so ever beside sin. Happy is
it, that ye have put in, beside sin: for this puts you quite beside your
cusshion, as they say, and beside your matter and purpose. For this is sin,
yea and one of the most horrible kinds of sin, that is a schism, for any
prince or any other to hold a council, contrary to the council summoned by
a lawful Pope. Such never had any good success as the ecclesiastical
stories every where report. And as Aarons rod devoured the rods of Iamnes
and Mambres, and other sorcerers in Aegipte: Number. 17.
and as his rod only among all the rods of the schismatic and
murmuringe people of Israel, did give forth young slippes, Al schismatic
councils at feign at the length to yield to the popes cou^cells.
and branches: and for a memorial was reserved in the tabernacle: Even so,
those counsels, that the pope gathered or allowed, have devoured and abolished
all other unlawful and schismatic conuenticles. They only flourish, and be
in estimation, and are and shall be for ever preserved in the tabernacle of
Christ's Catholyke Church.

I will not walk in the larg field of this matter that here lies open: The
French kings doings only, whereof ye talk, shall be a sufficient
confirmation for our side, and such stories only as your self have browght
forth for the stre^gthni^g as ye thought, of your purpose: As the counsel of
Rhemes that the king Hugo Capet assembled deposing there, as ye write, the
bishop Arnulphus. What was the issue M. Horn? Fol. 70. Io. Marius de schism.
and. council. differ. par. 2. cap. 6.
Did not Benedictus the.7. summone an other counsel eue^ in the very same city,
and restored Arnulphus again? Was not al, that your fair king Philip attempted
against the pope Bonifacius in his councils in France brought to naught by a
counsel su^moned by the Pope as we have before declared? we have also showed
how that the Latera^ council abolished the Pisane conuenticle, that Jews the
French king, and others maynteyned as your self write. Wherefore if your
author had thus written, neither his time is so ancient, nor his authority so
great, but that a man might have said, that he was wonderfully deceived. But
it is not he, but you that with your false slight and crafty co^ueiance
deceive your readers. Your author speaks not, of two counsels, the one
summoned by the pope, the other by the king: but speaks of bishops, that held
by fealty and homage lands of the king. And then says, that quoad feuda and
regalia: concerni^g these fealties and royalties, Ide^ Quintinus. Aristocrat.
fo. 135. Paris. 1552.

Quatenus ad feuda and regalia pertinet, per glosam ca. reprehensibile. 23. qu.
8.


the king is above the bisshops, as he is above all his other vassals. And
therefore if the pope on the one side, send for a bisshoppe, and the king on
the other side, send for him: concerning his fealty and homage matters, he
ought to go to the king: otherwise he should rather obey the pope the^ the
king, as appears (says Quintine) in the gloss, to the which he refers him
self. These words feuda and regalia, have ye sliely slipped over; as though
Quintinus had avouched the bishops subjection in Ecclesiastical matters. You
could not otherwise have decked your margent, with your gay and fresh lying
note: that the king is to be obeyed in Ecclesiastical causes, and not the Pope.
And so are ye now suddenly become so spiritual and so good an ecclesiastical
man, M. Horn leaves out that which serves for the opening of the whole
matter.
that feuda and regalia: are become matters ecclesiastical. Which is as true,
as ye may be rightfully called an ecclesiastical man, having a Madge of your
own to keep your back warm in the cold winter nights: and by as good reason
ye may call her an ecclesiastical woman to.

M. Horn. The.149. Division. page 88. a.
The people does amend or reform the negligence of the Pastor Can. vlt.
did. 65. Ergo, the Prince also may do the same. If the Bishop will not, or do
forslovve to hear and to decide the controversies of his Clergy: the Bishop
being slow or tarying over long, nothing does hinder or stay (says the
Canon) to ask Episcopale Iudicium, the bisshoply judgment of the Emperor. If
it happen that the Priests be not diligent about the Altar offices: if
concerning the temple, neglecting the Sacrifices, they hasten into kings
palayces* run to wrastlinge places, do profane them selves in brothelles
houses, and if they convert that which the faithful have offered, to the
pleasures of them selves, and of theirs: wherefore shall not the Princes, whom
the Catholic Faith has begotten, and taught in the bosom of the Church, call
again, and take upon the^ selves the care of this matter? and so proves at
large by many examples out of the Histories, and the Laws, that this care and
charge in Ecclesiastical (.487.) The.487. untruth. This chardge is not in
Ecclesiastical matters, but about Ecclesiastical persons in temporal matters,
as for external order to be kept, and in execution of the Church Canons,
requiringe the Princes aid etc.
matters and causes belongs to the Princes, unto the which examples, he
adds this: In our Fathers time ( says he) King Jews.11. made a
constitution, that Archebisshoppes, Bisshops, Abbottes, and who so ever had
dignities in the Church, or had the cure of other benefices, should within five
months, resort to their Churches, and should not remove any more from
the^se, diligently there laboring in divine matters, and sacrifices for the
faulfty of the king and his kingdom, and that under a great pain of losing
all their goods and lands. Here Quintinus does grievously complain of the
dissolute and most Who more corrupt, then your nevve Clergy now of handycraft
Ministers?
corrupt manners of the Clergy, vvhereto he adds, saying: Wherefore than
should not Princes compel this Iewde idle kind of men to do their duties?

Stapleton.
May the people M. Horn amend and reform the negligence of the pastor? And
that by the Popes Law to? M. Horn^ impertinent allegations.
Then belyke the headless people of Germany, and your headless brethren that
of late have made such ruffle, in these low countres here, shall find some
good defense for their doings, to save the reast from the gybet or from the
sack, which have not yet passed that way. Then may yt seem a small matter that
the lay people have by a late Act of parliamente transformed and altered the
old relligion against the mind of all the Bisshops and the whole convocation.
But your author says. Ecclesiae nihil est licentius, Democratia. There is in
the world, nothing more perniciouse to the Church of God, then is such
unbridled liberty of the people, Did. 62. Docendus.
which must be taught and not followed: as he alleges out of Pope Celestin,
and that but two distinctio^s, before that distinction, which your self
allege. And what great reformation is it M. Horn, that your distinction
speaks of? Suerly none other, but that, if it chance all the bisshops of one
contrie to die, Did. 65. Si forte.
saving one, and if he be negligent in procuring the election and substitutio^
of some other in their places, that the people may go to the bisshops of the
country next adjoining, and cause them to ordeine some new bisshops. We are
also content that if the bisshops or others be negligent, the prince may
compel them to do their dewty. But then look well to your self. For who is
more negligent about the Aultars, How handsomely M. H. pleads against him
self.
and worthy to be punished therefore, the^ they that throw down Aultars? Who
neglect the sacrifices but you that deny the sacrifice and the presence of
Christ in the Sacrament? Who be those but you and your fellows, that co^uerte
to the pleasures of the^ selves and theires, that which the faithful has
offered to Christ in laying out the Church goods upon your self, which should
have no part to the^, being become by your marriage a lay man: and in the
mainteyninge and purchasing for your unlawful wives children? Now who be they
that profane the^ selves in brothel howses, let the old constitutions of the
Church tell us. A man would little think, that ye would ever have pleaded so
against your own self. But what can you bring, (I would feign know,) that is
not against you, in so badde a cause?

M. Horn. The.150. Division. page 88. b.
If you delight in antiquites ( says he) no man does doubt, L. Quicu^que: de
Epis. et Cler.
but that in the primative Church, the Princes did judge both of the
Ecclesiastical persons and causes: and did oftentimes make good Laws for the
truth against falsehood. Arcadius and Honorius religious Princes do (.488.)
The.488. untruth. The place alleged shows of no bisshops deposed by these
Emperors.
depose a troublesome Bishop both from his Bishoprik, sea, and name. The.13.
first titles of the first book of Iustinia^s Code, collected out of the
Co^stitutio^s of diverse Emperors, do plainly entreat and judge of those
things which appertain to the Bishoply cure. For what pertains more to the
office of a Bishop, than Faith? the^ Baptism? then the high Trinity? than the
conversation of Monks? the ordeining of Clergymen and Bishops? and than many
like laws, which doubtless do concern our Religion, and Church. But the Nouel
Constitutions of the emperor Justinian are full of such Laws. And least
peradventure some man might suspect, that this was tyranny, or the oppression
of the Church, John the Pope does salute this Emperor, the most Clement Son
learned in the Ecclesiastical disciplines, and the most Christian amongst
Princes. Epist. inter claras. De summa Trin. C. Childebertus the King of
France, did (.489.) The.489. untruth. The King did not exact any thi^ng.
exact of Pelagius.2. the confession of his faith and religion: the which the
Pope both speedely and willingly did perform C. Sat agendum. 25. q. 1. When
I was in Calabria, says Quintinus, by chance I found a fragment of a certain
book in Lombardye letters, having this inscription: Capitula Caroli. Then
follows an epistle beginning thus: I Charles by the grace of God, and of his
mercy, the King and governor of the kingdom of France, a devout defendour of
Gods holy Church, and humble healper thereof.

To all the orders of the Ecclesiastical power, or the dignities of the secular
power: greeting: And so recites all those Ecclesiastical Laws and
constitutions, which I have written before in Charles the great. To al which (
says Quintinus) as it were in manner of a conclusion, are these words put to:
I will compel al men to live according to the Canons and rules of the
Fathers. Jews the Emperor, this Charles Son, kept a Synod wherein he
forbadde all Churchmen, sumptuousnes or excess in apparaile, vanities of
Jewels, and overmuch pomp. Anno Christi.830. He also set forth a book,
touching the manner and order of living for the Churchmen. I doubt not, ( says
Quinti^nus) but the Church should use, and should be bound to such laws. (
meaning, as Princes (.490.) The.490. untruth. He means not so, but such as
being made in former Canons, the Princes confirm and promulge by their laws
also.
make in Ecclesiastical matters) Pope Leo.3. ( says he) being accused by
Campulus and Paschalis, did purge himself before Charles the great, being at
Rome, and as yet not Emperor. Can. Auditu^. 2. q. 4. Leo.4. offers him self
to be reformed or amended, if he have done any thing amiss by the judgment
of Jews the French King, being Emperor. Can. Nos si incompetenter. 2. q. 7.
Menna whom Gregory the great calls most reverend brother and fellow Bishop,
being now already purged before Gregory, is (.491) The.491. untruth. For
concealinge, who commanded him, which was the Pope him self.
commanded a fresh to purge himself of the crime objected, before Bruchin^ld
the Queen of France Ca. Menna. 2. q. 4. In which question also it is red,
that Pope Sixtus.3. did purge himself before the Emperor Valentinian. Can.
Mandastis. So (.492.) The.492. untruth. This is not in Qui^tinus, printed at
Lions. An 1549.
also John.22. Bishop of Rome was compelled by means of the Divines of Paris,
to recante before the French King Philippe, The Pope an (493.) heretik
compelled to recante before the French King.

The.493. untruth Slanderous


not without triumph, the which Io. Gerson tells in a Sermon. De Pasc. The
Popes Heresy was, that he thought, the Christian Souls not to be received
into glory before the resurrection of the Bodies. Cresconius a noble man in
Sicilia, had authority or power given him of Pelagius the Pope, over the
Bishops in that Province, oppressing the Clergy with vexations. Can. Illud.
10. q. 3. The which Canon of the law, The.494: untruth. great, in false
reasoni^g. For none of al these examples do prove the popes Primacy.
the Glossar does interpret to be written to a secular Prince. in Ca. Clericu^
nullus.11. q. 3. The Abbottes, Bishops, and the Popes them selves, in some
time paste, were chosen by the Kings provision. Cap. Adrianus.63. did. And in
the same Cano^. Hinc est etiam.16. q. 1. Gregorius wrote unto the Dukes
Rodolph, and Bertulph, that they shoude in no wise receive priests defiled
with whoredom or Symony, but that they should forbid the^ from the holy
Ministeries. Verum.32. did. in which place the interpretours do note, that
Laimen sometimes may suspende Cleargymen from their office, by the Popes
commandment: yea also they may excommunicate, which is worthy of memory.
Hitherto Quintinus a learned lavvier and a great mainteinour of the Popes
jurisdiction, has declared his opinion, and that agreeable to the Popes own
Laws, that Princes may take upon them to govern in Ecclesiastical (.495.)
The.495. untruth. That has not been proved, out of Quintinus in such se^ce as
the Act attributes to the Prince: L. quicunque de Episcopis et clericis.
Quicu^que reside^^ibus sacerdotibus, fuerit episcopali loco and no mine
detrusus, si aliquid co^tra quie te^ publica^ moliri etc.
matters or causes.

Stapleton.
All this process following tends to prove, that princes have a gouernemente
in causes and matters ecclesiastical. We might perchance stand with M. Horn
for the word gouernemente, which I suppose can not be justified by any thing
he shall bring forth, but we will not. For we need not greatly stick with him
for the term, we will rather consider the thing yt self. First then ye enter M.
Horn with an untruth, or two. For properly to speak, neither were any
princes, that you here rehearse, judges in causes ecclesiastical, thowgh they
had therein a certain intermedling: neither does the law ye speak of, tell of
any Bishops deposed by the Emperors Arcadius and Honorius: but this* only
that if any Bishop be deposed by his fellow Bishops, assembled together in
council, how he shall be ordered, if he be fownde afterward to attempt any
thing against the common wealth. Concerning the doeinges of the Emperor
Justinian in matters ecclesiastical: Dicta ep. inter claras de suma
Trininitate. Vt no^ vestrae innotescat sanctitati, quia caput est omnium
sanctarum ecclesiaru^. Dict. ca. Satage^du^. 25. q. 1. Satage^du^ est, vt pro
auferendo suspicionis scandalo. Co^side^ter a nobis postulauit (vt decuit)
quatenus. etc.

Dict. c. Nos si incompetenter. 2. q. 7. and ibi in glos.


we have spoken at large alredie. And if he were, as ye term him most
Christian amongst princes, and learned in the ecclesiastical disciplines: why
do you not believe him calling Pope John, that ye here speak of, head of the
Church, and that in the very place by you alleged? What governance in
matters ecclesiastical, I pray you was it in King Childebertus, if Pope
Pelagius, to avoid slander, and suspicion, that he should not think well of
the Chalcedon Council, sent to the said King at his request the tenoure of
his faith and belief? Therefore you do abuse your Reader, and abuse also the
word, exact: which signifies to constrain or compel. And that did not the
King, but only did require or demand. Touching the Emperor Charles, it is I
suppose sufficiently answered alrerdye. And if nothing were answered, that
your self now allege may serve for a good answer. For he makes no new
rules or Constitutions in Church matters, but establissheth and renews the
old, and says: He will compel all men to live according to the rules and
Canons of the Fathers. Neither doothe he call him self head or Gouernoure of
the Church, but a devout defender, and an humble helper. But when he speaks
of his worldly kingdom, he calls him self, the governor of the kingdom
of France. We need now answer no further for Lewys the Emperor, Charles the
great his son, then we have already answered: neither touching Leo the.3. If
ye say, that the Emperor was judge in the cause of Leo the.4. I grant you,
but not by any ordinary authority, but because he submitted him self and his
cause to the Emperors judgment, as it appears by his own text and the gloss.
And it is a rule of the Civil Law, Lib. 14. Est receptum, etc. ff. de
iurisdic. omniu^ iudicum.
that if any man of higher Authority, will submit him self and his cause to his
inferior, that in such a case he may be his judge.

But now at length, it seems you have found a lay person, yea a woman, head
of the Church: and that a reverend Bishop was commanded to purge him self
before her. Why do ye not tell us also who commanded him? Causa. 2. quest 4.
cap. Mennam.
It was not Brunichildis the French Queen, but Pope Gregory that commanded
him. And when, I pray you? Reuerti illum, purgatum absolutu^que permisimus.
Surely when he had purged him self before at Rome, before Pope Gregory. And
why was he, I pray you, sent to the Queen? Surely for no great need, but for
to cause his innocence, Vide marginale^ glosam ibidem.
to be more evidently and clearly known. Here by the way, I would ask M.
Horn, what authority Gregory had to call this French Bishop to Rome? Dict.
c. mandastis. ibidem.

Quod audiens Vale^tinianus Augustus nostra authoritate Synodum congregari
iussit: and mox. Licet euadere aliter satis potuissem, suspitionem tamen
fugie^s coram omnibus me purgaui. Sed non alijs qui noluerint, aut sponte hoc
non elegerint, faciendi formam dans.


Has he not trow ye, by his own example, proved the Popes Primacy? And has
he not done the like in the matter of Pope Sixtus? Verily his text says: that
the Council which the Emperor Valentinian commanded to be holden, and before
the which the Pope Sixtus purged him self, was assembled by the said Pope
Sixtus authority, and that he neaded not to have made his purgation, but made
it voluntarilye to avoid suspicion, not binding his successors to follow
this exaumple, but to be free and at their own liberty. But this matter I
leave to be handeld more at large by Master Dorman against Master Nowell, who
makes (to his seming) gaie sport therewith.

Then follows in M. Horn the recantation of Pope John whereof his Author
Quintinus speaks never a word, and yet is it here placed in the middle of
Quintinus matters, and in a distinct letter. In exemplar. Lugdun. An. 1549. in
volum. 14.
And this patche as it discloseth the gross error of the English Apology,
and of M. Jewel in his Reply imputing to this Pope, that he denied the
immortality of sowles: so it proves nothing in the world the lay Princes
primacie, no nor any heresy in Pope John neither. For if he maintained any
such error, A gross error of M. Jewel. page 275.
it was before he was Pope. And in case he thought so after he was auaunced to
the Sea Apostolical (which can not be proved) yet he did not co^mau^d yt to be
publikly believed, by any definitive sentence or open decree. And therefore as
gaily as ye have garnished your margent: with the Pope an Heretic compelled
to recant before the French King, neither you, nor your Apology, nor M. Jewel,
shall take any great woorshippe thereby: but you must all three (if M. Jewel
and the Author of the Apology be two) recante, as well as he, and bear him
company. The Apology and M. Jewel, for slau^dering him with a wrong and a
far more grievous error, then he ever held. You, as well for reporting this
out of Quintinus (who says it not) as for your impertinent and foolish plea,
pleading thereby for your new secular primacie. Which will as well follow of
this story, as it is true that Pope John denied the immortality of souls.
The residue that follows, partly we have answered, as touching Cap.
Adrianus.63. Distinct. Partly it may be answered in few words: and that is,
that it makes al directly for the Popes Primacie as from whom the lay men
that M. Horn speaks of, had al their authority, as appears by his own
examples. If he would have proved any thing co^cludingly for his purpose, he
should have concluded, that the Pope took his authority of the lay men. Now
proving the contrary him self, he ministers good matter against him self.

M. Horn. The.151. Division. page 89 b. Braughto^ lib. 1. cap. de Papa.
Archiepiscopis and alijs praelat.

Besides these Lavviers, this was the common opinion of the chiefest vvriters
of the common Law of this realm, as appears (.496.) The 496. untruth: The
contrary appears plainly by Braughton, as it shall be declared.
by Braughton in these words: Sunt and sub rege etc. Under the King are
both freemen and bondemen, and they be subject to his power, and are all under
him, and he is a certain thing or creature that is under none but only under
God. And again in the Chapter the title whereof is this. Rex non habet
parem, etc. The King has no peer or equal in his Kingdom: The King ( says
he) in his Kingdom has no equal, for so might he lose his precepte or
authority of commanding, sith that an equal has no rule or commandment
over his equal: as for the King himself ought not to be under man, but under
God, and under the law, because the Law makes a King. Let the King therefore
attribute that unto the Law, that the Law attributes unto him, The 487.
untruth. A part of the sentence opening, and answering the whole objection
nipped quite of.
to wit, dominion and power. For he is not a King in whom will and not the law
does rule, and that he ought to be under the Law, Cum sit Dei Vicarius, since he
is the Vicare of God, it appears evidently by the likeness of Jesus Christ,
whose vicegerent he is in earth: and within a little after he concludes thus:
Igitur non debet mayor esse eo in regno suo (.497.) Therefore there ought to be
none greater then he in his kingdom.

The.40. Chapter. Concerning Braughton, Master Horns last Author.
Stapleton.
Happy is it, that M. Horn writes in English, and to English men, and not in
Latin. For surely as our Country has shut out the Popes authority, yea
and al manner of ecclesiastical authority, that it shall not pass the Ocean sea
toward it: So may al other nations much better exclude the authority of a
temporal lawyer of our realm that it pass not the said Ocean sea toward
them. But because our Christian belief (the more pity) is become of late
nothing else but a Parliament matter, and a matter of common law: and seeing we
have estraunged our self from the old common catholic faith into a late
vpstart, and into a private and national faith of our own, and yet for some
color will pretend, it was at least the aunciente faith of this realm, I will
make none exception against M. Horns plea, but will join issue, and cope with
him even with our own law, and with his own author. And that M Horn shall
not say I deal with him hardly and pinchingly, but freely and liberally: I do
here offer to be tried, not by the Pope (for fear of a praemunire) but by the
Judges of the kings benche: and by all other the Queen's May. Judges, yea by all
the lawyers of the realm to, that by the common law of the realm in
Braughtons time the king was not taken for the head of the Church, but the
Pope. And if M. Horn may prove the contrary to my assertion, by Braughton,
then dare I offerre in M. Fekenhams name, that he shall take the oath: and if he
will not, I, for my self dare promise so much, and will perform it: and shall be
conte^te withal, that M. Horn for this his high invention, shall be made
sergeant of the quo if also. Why says Master Horn, what mean you to say so?
Do not I plainly allege by Braughton his words, that the king is under none,
but only under God? That the king has no peer or equal? That there ought
to be none greater in his kingdom then the king? Yea to conclude, that he is
the Vicar of God? Are not these Braughtons words? Do I misreherse them, says
Master Horn? And what will ye have then more, will he say? Forsooth Master
Horn we look for, but three little words more, that is, that ye prove us out
of Brawghton, that the king is the greatest in his realm, and the Vicar of
all, not in matters cyuill, which we willinglye grant you, but for matters
ecclesiastical. Whereof ye have not yet owte of Braughton browght so much as
one word. And so have you for all this ioly fetch, fetched in nothing to your
purpose, but have fished all this while in Braughton all in vain. Yet is there
one thing more we look for, that is, to have an honester man, and of better,
How vvretchedlie M. Horn alleges Brauhgton.
and more vppright dealing and conscience, then ye are of, to report
Braughton. And then we have some hope, that as you can prove nothing by him,
for your new primacie: So shall we prove even by your own author, that by the
common law of the realm, the Pope was then the chief head of all Christ's
Church. And me think, thowghe in your text there is nothing but the
duskishe, dark, hornelight of an unfaithful and blind allegation, that yet
in your margent, there appears a glistering day star, and that the son is
at hand to open and disclose to the world by the bright beams and most
clear light of the catholyque faith, shyning in your own Authoure, either
your exceeding malice, or your most palpable gross, and dark ignorance.
Wherewith for your deserts and spitiful heart to the catholyke faith, God has
plagued you no less then he did the Aegiptians. Why M. Horn? Has Braughto^
the^ a Title de Papa, Archiepiscopis, and alijs prelatis: of the Pope,
Archbishops and other prelates. What? Is there nothing in him but a bare and
naked title? What says Braughton in his text? Does he say that the Pope has
nothing to do, but in his own diocese, and no more than other Bishops have?
Does he say, that he is not the head, and the superior of al other Bishopes?
Or does he say, as ye say, that all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction comes from
the King only? Or does he say, that the King is above the the Pope, and head
of the Church him self? Well. Ye have seen the star light in the margent:
Now shall ye see also, Braughto^ lib. 1.

Homines quida^ sunt excelle^tes and prelati and alijs principantur. Dominus
Papa in rebus spiritualibus, quae pertinent ad sacerdotiu^ and sub eo
archiepiscopi, Episcopi, and alij praelati inferiores. Item in te^poralibus
Imperatores, reges, etc.


to the utter destruction of your new primacie, and to your great dishonestie,
for this your detestable dealing, the bright day light. Ye tell us out of
Braughton, that al, as well freemen as bondmen, are subject to the King his
power. You tell us, the King has no Peer: what of all this? Tell me withal for
what the title of the Pope and Archebishope serves? Verily it serves to
direct us to your own confusion and shame. Ye told us even in the other page
of this leaf, that King Childebertus exacted of Pope Pelagius the confession
of his faith, which he voluntarily offered. But suerly the confession of this
matter, will not come from you freely and voluntarily, but it must be exacted
from you, and brought from you by the very violence of the most strong and
forcible truth. Let us then hear Braughtons own words. He says: There is a
difference and distinction between person and person. For some there are, that
be in excellency and prelacie, and be rulers above other. As in spiritual
matters and those that appertain to priesthood, our Lord the Pope, and under
him Archebishopes, and Bishopes, and other inferior Prelates. In temporal
matters also Emperors, Kings, and Princes, for such things as apperteine to
the kingdom: and under them Dukes, Earls, Barons and such other.

Again he writes thus in an other place: Sunt enim causae spirituales etc.
There are, says he, spiritual causes, in the which the seculer iugde has no
cognition, Eode^ libro
neither can put them to execution, because he has no punishment for them.
For in these causes, the judgment apperteyneth to the ecclesiastical judges
who has the governance and defense of priesthood. There be also Secular
causes, the knowledge and judgment whereof apperteyneth to Kings and
Princes, who defend the Kingdom, Ergo non debet mayor esse in regno suo in
exhibitioneiuris.
and with the which the Clergy should not intermedle: seeing that the
jurisdictions of them are sondred and distincted: unless yt be when one sword
must help the other. I trust by this Master Horn ye do, or may
understand, what is meante, when Braughton calls the King, the Vicar of God:
and says, there ought to be none greater then the King in his kingdom.
Which rule would have been playner, if ye had added the three words
following: In exhibitione iuris. That is, in ministering of every man right and
justice: which is altogether ministered in mere profane and civil matters
under and by the Kings Authority, and which words are by you nipped quite
of very ministerlyke. We will yet add the third Authority out of Braughton,
because it does not only make against this new vpstarte Supremacy, but
answers also as well to the old Cugnerius, as to our new Cugnerius (M.
Horn) his fond arguments against the spiritual iurisction.

Braughton then after that he has showed, Libro 4.
that there is one jurisdiction, that is called ordinary, and an other of
delegates, and holding by commission, and that as well in the temporal as
spiritual Court: and that these two jurisdictions be distincted, and that the
Judges of each sort, should take heed, that they do not intrude upon the
other: he tells us of some particularities, of matters apperteyning to the
Church Jurisdiction. First that none of the clergy may be called before a
secular judge, Matters apperteining to the spiritual jurisdiction.
for any matter towching the ecclesiastical court, or for any spiritual
matter, or such as be annexed and coherent. As when penance is to be enjoined
for any sin or trespase, wherein the ecclesiastical Judge has the cognitio^,
and not the king: for it does not apperteine to the king or to the temporal
Judge to enjoin penance. Neither can they judge of matters coherent and
annexed to spiritual things: as of tithes and such other: as, concerning
mouables bequethed in a man's testament, nor in a cause of matrimony. Nor if a
man promise money for marriage as (he says) he has before declared. For in all
these things the clerk may bring the cause from the temporal to the
ecclesiastical Judge. And so have we found M. Horn by the common law in
Braughtons time the Popes supreamacy in England, and not that only, Braughton
and Quintinus be against Petrus Cugnerius that M. Horn before alleged. Prius
fol. 82.
but also, that as well Braughton as Quintinus be hard against you and your
Petrus Cugnerius for the minishing and defacing of the spiritual jurisdiction:
and for your untruth in auowching that the meddling with contractes of marriages,
enioyning of penance, and such like, are nothing but temporal matters
perteining to the kings jurisdiction. And thus in fine, to be short, where
your proufes should be strongest, there are they most acrased and feeble: and
your four lawyers, with your Divine, prove nothing to your purpose, but al
against yt.

M. Horn. The.152. Division. page 90. a.
Thus have I sufficiently (.498.) The.498. untruth. You have proved nothing
less.
proved, that the Emperors and Kings, ought, have, and may claim, and take
upon the^ such government, in Spiritual and Ecclesiastical causes and
matters, as the Queens Majesty now doothe. In confirmation whereof I have
been more large, than otherwise I vvoulde, but that the proof hereof does
reprove, and fully aunsvveare the principal matter of your whole book: and
therefore I may use more briefnesse in that which follovveth. I have made
proof unto you, sufficient to remove (.499.) The 499. untruth. You have
proved nothing sufficient to satisfy M. Fecke^ham, or any mean man.
your ignorance, both of the matter, and the way vvherby to know, confessed
by you in your Minor Proposition. And this have I done by the selfsame means,
that you require in your issue. I have made proof of the Supreme government
in Ecclesiastical causes, to belong unto Kings and Princes, by the express
(.500.) The 500. Untruth. you have showed no such commandment.
commandment of God, where he did first describe and set forth, the duty
and office of Kings. I have made the same more plain and manifest, by the
(.501.) The 501. untruth. None of your examples have served your turn.
examples of the most holy governors amongst Gods people, as Moses,
Joshua, David, Solomon, Iosaphat, Ezechias, Josias, the King of Niniue, Darius,
and Nabugodonosor: who expreste this to be the true meaning of God his
commandment, by their practice hereof, so hyghly commended even by the holy
Ghost: whereunto I have added certain prophecies, forth of David and Esaie:
vvherby it is manifestly proved, that the holy ghost does look for, exact, and
challenge, this service and (.502.) The 502. untruth. Your prophecies have
proved no such Supreme Government.
Supreme government in church causes, at princes hands. I have declared that
the Catholic church of Christ, did accept, and repute these histories of the
old Testament, to be figures and prophecies, of the like government and
service, to be required of the Kings, in the time of the nevve Testament: I
have confirmed the same by the manifest Scriptures, of the (.503.) The 503.
vntruhe. No Scripture of the nevve Testament has proved the like government
etc.
nevve Testament: Whereunto I have adioygned the testimonies of (.504.) The
504. untruth. Your Ancient Doctors stand plain against you.
ancient Doctors, with certain examples of most godly emperors, who being
so taught by the most Catholic Fathers of Christ's church, did rightly judge,
that the vigila^t care, oversight, and ordering of church causes, was the
chiefest and best part of their ministry, and service unto the Lord. I have
shevved plainly, by the order of supreme government in church causes,
practiced, set forth, and allowed, in the greatest and best Councils, both
(.505.) The 505. untruth. The practice of all Councelles both General and
National has witnessed the popes, not the Princes Primacy.
General and National: that the same order of Government, has been claimed
and put in use by the Emperors, and allowed, and much commended by the whole
number of the Catholic Bishops. I have made plain proof hereof, by the
continual practice of the (.506.) The 506: untruth. Ye have not proved the
like government by any one king or prince.
like Ecclesiastical government, claimed and used by the kings and Princes,
even until the time that you your self did allow, confess, and preach the
same many years together: All which to your more contentation herein, I
have proved by those Hystoriographers, that vvrote not only before the time of
Martine Luther, least ye might suspecte them of partiality against you: but
also such in deed, as were for the most part (.507.) The.507. Untruth
Partial they could not be for your part, being the aduersari, was not the^
exta^t.
partial on your side, or rather wholy addicte and mancipate to your holy
Father: as Platina, Nauclerus, Abbas Vrspurgensis, Sabellicus, Aeneas Syluius,
Volateranus, Fabian, Polychronicon, Petrus Bertrandus, Benno Cardinalis,
Durandus, Paulus Aemilius, Martinus Poenitentiarius, Pontificale, Damasus,
Polydorus Virgilius, etc. all your friends, and whom you may trust. I
vvarraunt^ you, on their vvo^rde, being the Popes sworn Vassalles, his
Chapplaines, his Cardinals, his Chamberlaines, his Secretaries, his Library
keepers, his Penitentia^ies, his Legates, his Peterpence gatherers, his sworn
Monks and Abbottes, as well as you, and some of them Popes them selves,
which, your friends say, can (.508.) The.508. Untruth. No Catholic
denies, but the Pope can lie and svvear to, as bad as any other
neither lie, nor err from the truth. And besides all these, the four
points of your issue, according to your request, proved at large, for the
better reducing of you from vvilfull and malicious ignorance, to know and
acknovvlege the invincible truth hereof: I have added to your petition, a fifth
point, which you term a work of Supererogation. For, to confirm my
proufes vvithall, I have producted for vvitnesses, your best learned, although
otherwise Papishe, Ciuilian and Canon lawyers, who have deposed directly on
my (.509.) The.509. Untruth. Most impudent. They have all deposed o^ our side
clean against you, and do yet to this day, some of the^ stand against you.
side against you: Namely Doctor Tunstall, D. Stokesley. D. Gardener, D.
Bonner, D. Thirlbie, D. Decius, the Glossaries upon the Law, D. Petrus
Ferrariensis, D. Io. Quintinus: to whom I might add the Ciuilians and
Canonistes that were in or tovvard the Arches in the last end of King Henry,
and all the time of King Edward, with all the Doctors and Proctours of or
toward the Arches at (.510.) The.510. untruth. Slanderous to the learned of
the Arche^
this time. Wherefore you will now, I trust, yealde herein, and reckon your
self well satisfied, take upon you the knowledge hereof, and to be ready
to testify the same upon a book oath, for so have you promised.

The conclusion of the three books going before, with a brief recapitulatio^
of that which has been said.
Stapleton.
Now does M. Horn blow out of his iolye Horn, a gloriouse and triumphant
blaste, to signify to all the world, what a renowned co^queste he has made
upon poor M. Fekenham. He sets forth his army to the vewe of the world,
whereby he says he has obtained this famous victory: furnished with a
number of most holy governors amongst Gods people, before the coming of
Christ, as Moses, Iosue, David, the king of Niniue, Darius, and
Nabuchodonosor: furnished with the manifest scriptures of the new testamente,
and the examples of the most godly Emperors, with general and national
councelles, with the continual practice of the Church, with the Popes sworn
vassales, his chaplains, his cardinals, his chamberlaines, his secretaries,
his library kepers, his penitentiaries, his legates, his peterpence gatherers,
his sworn monks and Abbattes, yea to confirm up his proufes withal, with the
testimony of Doctor Gardener, D. Tonstal, D. Bonner, and D. Thirlbie. And
therefore he trusts that M. Fekenham will now at length, yield and reckon him
self well satisfied, and take the oath of the supremacy.

This is a Royal and a Triumphante conqueste in deed, Master Horn, if it be
as you vaunte. But yet, I would much sooner believe yt, if I heard any
indifferent man besides your self, say as much. For thowghe, as I hear say,
you could handle your clubbe, your buckler, and your waster well and cu^ningly,
when ye were in Ca^bridge, whereof ye will not stick as yt is reported, now and
the^ to talk, when ye are disposed to brag of your yowthly parts there
played, yet to say the truth, in this combat with M. Fekenham I see no such
manlines in you. Neither have ye played so closely, but that a man may easily
reach you a rappe upon the head, arms, or shoulders, and cause you there to
cratche and claw with your fingers, where it ytcheth not. Yea ye are beaten
quite out of the field, with your own proufes and weapons.

And as for M. Fekhenha^ ye have not fastened upon him as much as one blow.
What speak I of a blow? No not so much as a good phillip. And therefore whereas
ye so bravely brag, and so triumphau^tlie vaunt, that all is yours, when in
deed ye have lost al, I think good to put you in remembrance of the great
wise man that Atheneus writes of: Lib. 12.
who as often as any ship came to the haue^ with merchandise, would run
thither with all haste, and welcome the mariners with great joy and
gratulation, rejoicing excedinglie and thanking God that had sent home his
Marcha^dize, so sauflie, and so prosperously. For the poor man (such was his
wisdom) being owner of no part, thought al to be his. I say, it fares even
so with you, M. Horn. Of all the good Emperors, Kings, Fathers and Councelles
by you rehearsed, cry you as much and as long as ye will, that they are al
yours, yet there is not so much as one, yours. Ye have not brought so much as
one authority directly or indirectly co^cluding your purpose. Else show me, but
one of all the foresaid Authors that says that the Pope has no authority
either in England or in other countries out of Italy. Show me one that says
either plain words, or in equivalent, that the Prince is Supreme head in all
causes ecclesiastical. Yea show me one, that avouches the Prince to be the
Supreme governor in any one cause mere ecclesiastical. And think you now in
the folding up of your conclusion, to persuade your Readers, that ye have them
all on your side? Or blush you not to vaunte, that you have proved your
assertion, even by those that your self confess were wholly addicted and
mancipated to the Pope? And what can more evidently descrie and betraie your
exceeding folly, and passing impudency, See M. Horns marvelous Rhetorique.
then does this most strange and monstrous Paradoxe? But who would have
thought, that of all men in the world, your Rhethorique would serve you to
bring in the most Reverend Fathers in God by you named, as good motives to
persuade M. Fekenham to take this oath, which for the refusing of the very same
oath, were thrust out of their Bishoprics, and cast into prison, where yet
they remain, such as yet live? This point of rhetorical persuasion, neither
Demosthenes, nor Cicero (I trow) could ever attain unto.

Seeing then all your Rhetorike consists in lying, and your triumphant
conclusion is folded up with a brown dosen of several untruths, allowing you
thirteen to the dosen, I will assay M. Horn with more truth and simplicity,
brefely to unfold, for the Readers better remembrance, and for your comfort,
the contents of these three books, wherein you have played the Oppone^t, and
have laid forth the best euide^ces that you could, for proof of your strange
and unheard paradoxe of Princes Supreme Government in all ecclesiastical causes.
I have therefore not only disproued your proufes al along from the first to the
last, but I have also proved the contrary, that to priests, not to princes
appertains the chief government in causes Ecclesiastical. In the first
book, your scripture of the Deuteronom, Cap. 8.
commands the king to take of the priests, not only the book of the law,
but also the exposition thereof. To your examples of Moses, Cap.
9.10.11.12.13.14. and 15.
of Iosue, of David, of Salomo^, of Iosaphat, of Ezechias and of Josias, I have
so answered, that it has evidently appeared the Supreme government in
spiritual matters to have rested in the high Bishops, Priests, and Prophets:
not in them: Moses only excepted, who was a Priest also, not only a Prince of
the people. Your idle objections out of S. Augustine, and of the Donatistes
examples, have nothing relieved you, but only have been occasion to make open
your extreme folly, and to reuele your cousinage with old heretics to all the
world. Your Emanuel has utterly shamed you: and your disorderly talk of
Co^stantin has nothing furdered you. Your textes of the new Testament, have
been to to fondly and foolishly alleged, to set up that kind of government
which Christ and the Apostles never spoke word of. Last of all whereas you
blindely uttered, the state of the Question, as one that loved darkness and
shu^ned the light, where only Truth is to be found: I have opened the same
more particularly, and discovered withal your double Untruth about the tenor
of the Oath. Thus much in the first book, beside many private matters between
M. Feckenham and you: wherein you have been taken in manifest forgeryes, lies*
and slanders. Besides also a Note of your brethernes obedience to their
Supreme Governors as well in other Countres* Cap. 3. Fol. 16. b.
as in these low Cou^tres, here, and of their late good rule kept, of which I
suppose, both you and your cause shall take small relief and less honesty.

In the second book I have not only disproued all your pretensed proufes of
Princes supreme government in all causes ecclesiastical, but I have in them all
directly proved the popes primacy withal. In the four first Chapters.
I have I say showed the practice of the former.600. years, namely from
Constantin the great down to Phocas, to stand clearly for the popes primacy,
I have showed that Constantin in all his dealinges in the Nicene Counc^ll
against the Donatistes, in the matter of Athanasius, with the Arrian bishops,
and with Arrius him self, never practiced this Supreme Gouuernement, which you
so fondly uphold: but in all matters Ecclesiastical yielded the gouuernement
thereof unto Bisshops.

I have showed, Cap. 5.
that the Sons of Constantin the great practiced no Supreme government at
al in any ecclesiastical cause, much less in all causes.

Your next example Valentinian the elder, Cap. 6.
is so far from al government of the lay prince in Ecclesiastical causes,
that he decreed the plain contrary, yea and made it lawful in civil matters
to appeal to the bishoply Judgment.

Theodosius the great has been proved to be no fit example of your lay
supremacy in causes ecclesiastical: Cap. 7.
But in his example the Popes Primacy is clerly proved, namely by a
Reco^ciliation made of Flauianus the intruded patriarche of Antioche to pope
Damasus, and also by the letters of the General Council holden at
Constantinople under this Theodosius. In that place also I have showed by ten
several articles, what and how far Emperors may and have dealed in General
Councelles.

In the examples of Archadius and Honorius, Cap. 8. fo. 122. etc.
sons to this Theodosius, as their pretended Primacy is proved to be none, so
the primacy of Innocentius, the^ pope, is clerly proved, as one that for the
iniust depositio^ of John Chrisostom excommunicated themperor Archadius, the
vpholder thereof. Also of Damasus then pope, by the suyte of S. Hierom, made
unto him.

Cap. 9. fo. 127. and. se.
In the example of Theodosius the second, and the practice of the Ephesine
Counsel the third General, M. Horns purpose is overthrown, and the popes
primacy is by clear practice testified, as well by the said Counc^ll, as also
by M. Horns own Authors, Liberatus and Cyrillus.

Cap. 10.
The doings in the cause of Eutyches, brought forth, by M. Horn to prove the
princes Supreme government in all Ecclesiastical causes, do prove clearly the
popes primacy, even in the very Author and chapter by master Horn alleged.

Cap. 11.
Pope Leo strayned by M. Horn to speak somewhat for the Princes Supremacy in
matters Ecclesiastical, has spoken and done so much to prove the primacy of
the Sea of Rome, that if M. Horn will stand to his own Author, he is utterly
confounded and forced to agnise the popes primacy without all manner of doubt.

Cap. 12.
By the example also of Martian the Emperor, for calling of the Chalcedon
Council, nextly alleged, M. Horns purpose is no whit furdered, but Pope Leo
his primacy evidently proved.

Cap. 13.
By the Acts also of the said Council, the popes and the bishops Supreme
Jurisdiction in all ecclesiastical matters to be treated, examined, judged and
defined, through out the whole Council appears, and M. Horns purpose
remains utterly unproven.

Cap. 14.
I have farther out of the said Chalcedon Council, being the fourth General,
and so one of the four allowed in our Country by Act of parliament in the
reign of the Queens May. present, Elizab. An. 1.
gathered evident and sundry arguments for proof of the Popes and bishops
Supremacy in causes ecclesiastical. And here I require M. Horn, or any man's
else whatsoever to show, how it is possible without manifest contradiction,
to allow the Authorytie of this fourth General Council, and to bannishe the
Popes Authorytie, which this whole Council agnised, or to give to the Prince
Supreme Authorytie in all ecclesiastical causes, the same by this Council
resting in the bishops only, not in the Prince at all.

In has consequently ben showed against M. Horn, Cap. 15.
that his examples of Leo and Zeno Emperors have proved nothing less then his
imagined Supremacy.

His next examples of three popes Simplicius, Cap. 16.
Felix.3. and Symachus, have al proved so manifest testimonies for their own
Supremacy, even out of the books and places by M. Horn alleged, that in this
matter he seems a plain preuaricatour, and one secretly defending the cause,
which he seems openly to impugn.

Now in France M. Horn, Cap. 17.
your luck has been no better, then before in the East Church and in Italy it
was. Your arguments in this behalf have been to to pelting and miserable. But
the bishops Jurisdiction in all those matters has been as evident.

Your story of Justinius the elder (nextly by you alleged, Cap. 18.
but confusedly and out of measure mangled) being wholly laid forth, has
plainly proved the popes Supremacy, and nothing at all the princes.

Justinian your next exaample, Cap. 19.
and largely by you prosecuted, has never a whit proved your matter, but for
the Popes absolute Supremacy has diverse ways pronounced, not only in his
behauyour in the fifte General Council, but in his Edictes and Constitutions,
which you for your self so thick have alleged. Fol. 171.
In that place also I have noted by diverse examples, what evil success
Church matters have had, Fol. 174.
when Princes most intermedled. There also by the way a Council in France by
M. Horn alleged, has openly pronounced for the popes universal Supremacy.

Cap. 20.
Your last examples taken out of Spain have nothing relieved your badde cause,
but have given evident witness for the Bishops Supremacy in ecclesiastical
causes. And thus far have you waded in the first.600. years after Christ,
without any one prouf for your new Laicall Supremacy. But for the popes and
Bishops Supremacy in matters of the Church, the Continual practice of that
first age and that in all Countres has clearly pronounced, as has been at
large showed.

In the third book, as the race your run is the longer, and triple to that ye
ran in before, so is our cause the stronger, and yours the febler, or rather
the wretcheder, that in the compass of.900. years, that of so many Emperors,
kings and princes, of so many Councils both General and National, of so diverse
parts of the Christened world, all the East part, Italy, France, Spain,
Germany, and our own Country of England, yea of the Moscouites, Armenia^s and
Aethyopia^s to, of all these I say not one Prince, Council or Country makes
for you, and not one prince, Council, or Country makes against us, but all
have agnised the popes primacy, and not one in the world of so many hundred
years, have agnised or so much as heard of, much less sworen unto, the
Princes Supreme Gouuernement in all Ecclesiastical causes.

Your first proof belyeth flatly the Sea of Rome, Cap. 1.
and proves nothing by any doing of Phocas the Emperor, the Supremacy that
you would prove.

The Kings of Spain and the Toletane Councelles have made nothing for you,
Cap. 2.
but have clearly confounded you, not only in the principal matters in hand,
but also in diverse other matters by your lewd heresies denied.

Your patched proufes and swarming untruths in your next narratio^ touching
certain Popes of Rome, Cap. 3.
and of the Church of Raue^na, have discovered the miserable wekenesse of your
badde cause, and nothing relieved you: the Popes Primacy by your own examples
notwithstanding established.

Your fond surmise against the Decree of Constantin.5. Emperor, for the
prerogative of the Sea Apostolic, Cap. 4.
as it nothing furdered your matter in hand, if it had not been made, so it
showed well the misery of your cause, that to make your paradoxe to bear some
credit, you were feign to discredit all the Historia^s and writers of that
matter, calling them Papists, the Popes Parasites, and fayners of that which
they wrote.

The practice of Ecclesiastical government used in the sixth general Council,
next by you alleged, Cap. 5.
confirms both in word and deed the Popes Primacy and the Bisshops Supreme
jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical, and gives forth no manner inckling of
your imagined Supremacy. In which only matter beside twenty untruths by you
uttered there about, you are as much confounded as in any other Council or
Country before, notwithstanding your great objection of Pope Honorius, to the
which I have there sufficiently answered.

Cap. 6.
Your talk of the three Kings of Spain next ensewing, and of the three
Toletane Counsels kept in their reigns, does so little disprove the Supreme
jurisdiction of Bisshops in Ecclesiastical causes, that it makes them Supreme
judges even in civil causes. So wide you are ever from proving your purpose.

Cap. 7.
The.7. General Council by you shortly noted, does amply and abundantly confirm
the Popes Primacy, and nothing in the world helps your purpose.

Cap. 8.
Charles Martel and Carolomanus his son exercised no whit of your imagined
Supremacy, but have confessed both clearly the Popes Primacy, by their doings,
eue^ in the matters by your self treated. Your most ignorant and ridiculous
exposition made of the keys of S. Peter's Confession sent to this Charles, and
your extreme fond argument deducted thereof, has utterly shamed you, if any
shame be in you.

Cap. 9.
Your slanderous reproaches against S. Augustine our Apostle, and S. Boniface
the Apostle of Germany, and holy Martyr, have redounded to your own shame and
follye, your cause thereby nothing in the world furdered: No, if yt had been
all true, which you had reported of them.

Cap. 10.
Charlemayne for all his calling of Councelles, confirmynge of the same, and
publishinge of Church Laws, practiced not yet any like Gouuernement in
Ecclesiastical causes, as you have defended, no nor any Gouuernement at all,
but was lead and governed him self in all such things of the Fathers and
Bisshoppes then living, especially of the Sea of Rome. The whole Order also of
the Councelles by you alleged, has plainelye condemned the profane manner of
determinyng causes Ecclesiastical now used by mere lay men, at the warrant
of such as you are. But for the Popes Primacye none more clear then this
Charlemaine, both in his doings, Vide fol. 240. b. and 244. b. Ite^ fol. 48.
Cap. 11.
as in the cause of Pope Leo the.3. and in his sayings, as in the book so
much by you and your fellows alleged, and in the decrees it appears.

Lewys the first, son to this Charlemayne practiced no part of your
Supremacye, but the Popes at that time, had as full use thereof, as any Popes
before or fithens, the confirmation of the Pope, before elected and chosen,
Cap. 12.
notwithstanding, of the which matter in that place I have answered you
sufficientlye. There also you have Master Horn out of the Notable Epistle of
Nicolaus.1. to Michael the Emperor, and by the practice of the.8. General
Council at large declared unto you, both the Popes Primacye in all Spiritual
matters, and the Emperor or Princes subjection in the same, by the Confession
of the Emperor himself Basilius of Constantinople present in that Council.

Arnulphus his example has nothing helped you: Cap. 13.
The bedroll of certain evil Popes by you browght in, only declares your
malice to Gods Vicares, and furdereth nothing your badde cause. Your surmise
adjoined of the cause of the calamities at that time, has argued your great
folly, and ignorance of the stories, except we shall say, that malice made you
blind.

Otho the first showed such obedience to the Sea of Rome, Cap. 14.
yea to the naughty Pope John the.12. that he is no fit example for the like
government in Princes as you maintain, but for the like obedience to the Sea
Apostolic, as Catholic Princes and Emperors have always showed, you could
not have brought a more notable or excellent example: and that proved out of
the Authors by your self alleged.

Cap. 15.
Hugh Capet the French King, and Otho the.3. Emperor have even in the matters
by your self treated, been proved obedient and subject to the Sea Apostolic,
without any color of the like government as you would fasten upon them.

Cap. 16.
Your great matter of Henry the.4. and Pope Hildebra^d has concluded flat
against you, with a great number of your lewd untruths in that behalf
discovered and confuted. The Popes Primacy, in no matter more, abundantly and
clearly proved.

Cap. 17.
The matter of inuesturing bishops (your chief matter to prove the Princes
Supremacy in all Ecclesiastical causes) in Henry.5. Lotharius and Conradus,
Emperors, has proved your purpose no deal at al, namely Henry.5. resigning
up all such pretensed right to pope Calixtus the.2. But in all these matters,
how beastly you have belyed the stories, I have I trust, sufficiently declared.

Cap. 18.
Frederike Barbarossa speaks no word for your barbarous paradoxe: he obeyed
no less then other Emperors the Sea of Rome, yea and at the last submitted
himself to the Pope, who^ before he persecuted, not as true Pope, but as he
thought, an intruded Pope. He never made question whether he ought to obey the Sea Apostolic, or no, but only he doubted who was the true elected Pope, and
took part with the worste side. The question now in our days is far
unlike: And so are your proufes M. Horn far and extreme wide from the
purpose in hand.

Now for matters of our own Country, Cap. 19.
and for Ecclesiastical government practiced therein, you are so overtaken as
in no Country more. It has well appeared, by that I have at large said, and
proved, that long and many years before the Conqueste (at which time you only
begin your course) as well in Brytannie before the Saxons coming, as in
England (after of the^ it was so called) the Popes Primacy was clearly
confessed and practiced, even as it is at this day among the Catholics every
where. As for the government of William the Conqueror, of William Rufus his
son, and of king Henry the first, it has been proved so far unlike to
that which you pretend of right to appertain to the Crown of England, yea
to all princes whatsoever, that the Popes Supreme government in spiritual
matters, is by their examples, yea even by the testimony of your own Authors,
so expressly proved, and so strongely established, that a man may well wonder,
what wit, honesty or discretion you had, ones to touch the remembrance of
them for proof of so badde a cause. Your patched adiuncte of the kings of
Hungary, has appeared a great untruth on your part, and nothing for your
purpose: except lies can prove your purpose.

That which follows of the Armenians and of the Aethyopians, Cap. 20.
proves also most evidently the Popes Supremacy in those Countries: but
proves no whit your singular paradoxicall primacy. Verily so singular, that in
no one part of the universal world it can be found.

The doings of King Stephen and king Henry the.2. Cap. 21.
have proved the popes Supremacy in our Country, but that kind of Supremacy as
you imagine, they make no proof of in the world. The Martyrdom of.S. Thomas
by the way also is defended against your and M. Foxes lewed lying about that
matter.

Cap. 22.
Henry the.6. Philip, and Otho the.4. Emperors of Rome, have been no fit
examples for the like government now in England: and your sely arguments in
that behalf have been to to childish and feeble.

Cap. 23.
Your proufes of king Richard the first, and of king John have appeared mere
ridiculous. Only by occasion thereof, the lewed lying of M. Fox has been
partly discovered, touching king John. Your matters of France about that
time have proved the popes primacy, not the Princes.

Cap. 24.
By the discourse of Friderike the.2. his doings, as your principal cause has
taken a great foil, so a main number of other your heresies, by your own
Authors and your own Supreme head condemned, have given a great crack to al
your Religion beside.

Cap. 25.
The time of king Henry the.3. condemns altogether the primacy in your book
defended, and pronounces clearly for the Popes Supremacy, by sundry and open
practices, as Appeals to Rome, depositions of prelates by the pope, making of
Ecclesiastical laws by his Legate, and such other. And for your part in that
place, you have uttered your great ignorance even in the latin tongue.

Cap. 26.
At that time also S. Lewys the French king agnised no less the popes primacy
in France: and therefore can be no fit example of such Supreme government,
as by Oath M. Feckenham is required to swear unto. The like also appears by
the state of Apulia and Sicilia in those days.

As for king Edward the first, king of England, Cap. 27.
the Popes primacy in his time was so well agnised in the realm of England,
that even in temporal matters his Authorytie took place. Your fond surmise of
the Statute of Mortemayne, has exemplified your lewd lying, and increased the
number of your maniefolde untruths: It has not exemplified your pretended
primacy, neither any thing furdered you, for proof of your matter.

Philip le Beau, as beau and fair as he was, Cap. 28.
yet has he been nor fair nor fytte example for the Supremacy that so much ye
seek for, and can not yet find. His doings have nothing derogated from the
popes Supremacy. But he, as his progenitors, lived and dyed in the obedience
of the Sea Apostolic in all Spiritual and Ecclesiastical matters. Durandus
your own Author has clean overthrown you: and your great Council of Vienna,
yea your own fair Philippe has pronounced you an Heretyke.

Lewys of Bauary, as much as you babble of him, Cap. 29.
has nothing relieved you: Neither yet his poets Petrarche and Dantes: All
that great strife was about the popes temporal primacy, not of his
spiritual superiorytie, which never yet king Christened denied, until these
late days in our own Country, by the means of such Apostatas as you are.

You have heard also in that place M. Horn by the enumeratio^ of al such
Emperors, Cap. 30.
that notoriously have rebelled against the Sea Apostolic, what Gods Judgment
has been over them, and to what evil ends they came through Gods vengeance.

Cap. 31.
Philip of Valoys, for all your Composuit rem sacerdotum, yet makes he nothing
for your purpose, but both in your own very matter he concluded against you,
and otherwise with mere spiritual Jurisdictions, he never intermedled, nor
claymed the use thereof from the Spiritual Magistrate. Your own Authors, and
witnesses, Paulus Aemylius and Petrus Bertrandus have deposed, against you,
and your own king Philippe has condemned you.

Cap. 32. and. 34.
King Edward the.3. and Richard the.2. of England, for all that you report of
them, out of Nauclere and Polidore, have nothwithstandinge pronounced clearly
for the Popes Primacy: and declared withal both you and your fellows, to be
no true members of the Church, that they lived in, but to be plain Apostatas
and schismatikes from the same.

Cap. 33.35.36. and 38.
In like manner Charles the.4. Sigismunde, Friderike the.3. and Maximilian the
first, al most Catholic Emperors have taken great wrong at your hands,
being made to say and do, that which they never said ne did: Yea and for the
which, if they lived again, they would order you, as they did the Hussyttes,
and Wicleffistes your progenitors in their days.

Cap. 37.
Aeneas Syluius and Cusanus, your two especial Authors have so pronounced
against you, that no man I trow, except he had a face of horn, would for
very shame have brought the^ into the open Court. But (as the proverb is)
look how you have brewed, so must you bake.

But what shall I say to your last witnesses, Cap. 39. and. 40.
the Catholic Bisshoppes and Doctors of our own Country, to D. Quintinus of
Paris, and Petrus of Ferraria, last of all to Philippus Decius the lawier, and
Brawghton our Countreman? what extreme vncourtesy, I may well say impudency,
has it been on your part, so violently and desperately to draw them to the
bar, where you were right sure, to be condemned by their verdicte, but that
you thought you might frame their tales for them, and that no man would
comptrol your extreme lying, of the which in my Preface I will say more? Thus
you have it truly and shortly repeted unto you M. Horn, both what you have not
done, and what I have done. I require you before all the world (if you intend
to Replye,) to answer to every particular as I have done, and so to prove your
self an honest man.

THE FOVRTH BOOK: CONTAINING A FVL CONFVTATION OF M. Horns answers, made to
M. Fekenhams Reasons, for not taking the Oath of the Supremacye.
The.153. Division. page 91. b.
M. Fekenham.
The second point.
The second chief point is, that I must upon a book oath, not only testify,
but also declare in my conscience, that the Queens Highness, is the only
Supreme governor of this realm, as well in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
things or causes, as Temporal. But upon a book oath to make any such
declaration in conscience, it may not possible be without perjury, before that
a man's conscience be persuaded thereunto: therefore (my conscience being not as
yet persuaded thereunto) I can not presently without most plain and manifest
perjury, receive this Oath.

M. Horn.
As there is no difference in matter betwixt these two Propositions, I
Testify in conscience, and I Declare in conscience, although to seem subtle,
you (.511.) The.511. untruth. M. Fekenham makes not this difference, but a
far diverse, as shall appear.
would have the simple conceive, by way of amplification much diversity:
Even so this which ye call the Second chief point, varieth (.512.) The.512.
untruth. It varieth very much.
no vvhitte in matter from the first, and therefore my former answer serves
to them both, if ye vvil needs make two in show, of that in very deed is but
one.

The first Chapter: Containing M. Fekenhams first reason, taken out of the
Acts of the Apostles: And by the way of King Lucius.
Stapleton.
HITHERTO has M. Horn, twenty full leaves and more enlarged his proufs
touchi^g the co^firmatio^ of his new ecclesiastical superiority. Hitherto he
has assaide with all force to beat down to the ground the Popes Primacy, which
yet notwithstanding all this terrible assault stands as strong and as sure as
ever it did before. Yea I trust stronger and surer withal those, that but
indifferently have perused and waighed our two former labors. Now the^ an
other while M. Horn will play the lustly defenda^t: M. Horn now begi^neth to
play the defenda^ts part.
wherein he seems to make as light of al M. Fekenha^s arguments, and to take
the^ to be of no more strength the^ is the weight of a fether. But seeing he
has already taken so many foyles, and so many wounds, and seems with his own
weapons, to have by rash hardines well beaten himself, in setting upon his
adversary: hard will yt be for him, to bear of such blows, as his adversary
will bestow upon him. Neither think good reader, that he shall ever soil
other men's reasons that can not soundly or sothly confirm his own. Yet let us
try how he will shifte for him self. And now see, how even at the first
entrance, he plays foul play and wrangleth. For M. Fekenham does not make
difference betwixt to testify in conscience, and to declare in conscience, as
Master Horn says, he does: but betwixt to take an oath that the Queens
Majesty is supreme Head in all causes, and to declare the same in conscience,
which are two things. For a man may and many do (the more pity) take an oath
for fear love, or reward, quyte contrary to their conscience. And that we
need not to seek far for an example, even in this matter of Supremacy, which
we now are in hand withal.

Though therefore a man may be persuaded as many (the more pity) are, through
pretense of obedience, through fear of displeasure, or through the love of
worldly promotions, riches, or pleasure, to take the oath: yet to declare the
same in conscience no man can possibly (as Master Fekenham most truly
reasons) without manifest perjury, except his conscience be persuaded
thereunto. Now to persuade the conscience, requires either a soden revelation,
or miraculouse inspiration from God (which is not to be presumed without some
evident sign thereof) or else a tract of time, to be instructed, informed and
taught that which we never learned before. M. Fekenham therefore and al such as
fear God, who have learned in the gospel to forsake father and mother, wife
and children, goods and lands and all that in this world is dear, for Christ's
sake, that is, for every truth concerning Christian Religion, such I say
neither being inspired from God by soden revelation, neither by any of your
preachings, or writings being yet informed or instructed, can not possibly
though a thousand acts of parliament should command it, declare in their
conscience, declare I say in their very conscience and heart thought, that they
believe verily such supreme government in the Prince, as the act expresses and
inte^deth. Me^ may be persuaded to take the oath, which is an external fact,
by external respects of force, fear, or fraylty: but persuaded to declare the
oath in his conscience, no man can be without an internal persuasion of heart
and mind: Contrary to this internal persuasion and consent (which no power
of Princes, no force of acts, no law or statut worldly can ever make) who so
ever declares externallye by book oath, and word of mouth, that he so
thinks, he incurreth manifestly the horrible crime of perjury, and that of
double perjury: which God will never suffer vnreue^ged without hearty
repentance. To this most strong and invincible reason, M. Horn answers not a
word, but makes his Reader believe that M. Fekenham puts a difference between
testifiyng in conscience, and declaring in conscience. Which he does not, but
thus. Between testifiyng by book oath, and declaring in conscience, he puts
a true difference, as we have said largely. Now how well M. Horn has pleaded
to persuade M. Fekenhams conscience, thou see good Reader, if thou have
diligently read and co^ferred his proufes, and our confutation. I doubt not,
but many Catholic men will be persuaded (in conscience at least) never to take
the oath, which you so singularly contrary to all Christendom beside, do
defend.

M. Fekenham.
And for the persuasion of my conscience in this matter, I shall again join
this issue with your L. That if your L. or any other learned man of this whole
Realm, shall be able to prove, that our Savior Christ in his Ghospel and
Testament, did commit the supreme government of al spiritual and
ecclesiastical causes in his Church, not unto his Apostles, being Bishops and
Priests, but to Emperors and Empresses, Kings and Queen's, being for the whole
time of Christ's abode here upon the earth, Idolatours and Infideles, and so
continued for the space of.300. years after the assension of Christ:
Co^sta^tine the first Emperor that did ioign his sword to the maintenance of
God his word. Act. 2.
Constantine the Emperor being the very first Christian King, that we read
of: when your L. shall be hable to prove this, either by sentence or half
sentence, word or half word of Christ's Ghospel and last Testament: Then I
shall yield in this second point, and with most humble thanks, think my
self well satisfied in conscience. And when your L. shall be hable to prove,
that these words spoken of the Apostle Paul at Miletum, unto the Bishops
of Ephesus: Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo posuit vos Spiritus
Sanctus Episcopos regere Ecclesia^ Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine suo: Take heed
therefore unto your selves, and unto the whole flock of Christ, whereof the holy
Ghost has appoincted or made you Bishops, to govern and rule the Church of
God, which he has purchased with his blood. When your L. shall be hable to
prove, that these words do not make full and perfect declaration, that the holy
Ghost had so appoincted al spiritual government of Christ's flock unto Bishops
and Priests: But that kings, Queen's or princes may have some part of spiritual
government with them, or rather take the supremacy and chief part of spiritual
government from them: I shall then yield, and think my self in conscience well
satisfied, touching the saying of S. Paul.

M. Horn. The.154. Division. page 9 b.
That our Savior Christ has committed, the Supreme government in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes, to the Magistrates and Princes, is
already proved, by perfect words add whole (.513.) The.513. Untruth. Not
one sentence has been brought to prove that.
sentences of Christ's Gospel, and last Testament: and therefore if your stay
hitherto, has been of conscience vnpersuaded through want of knowledge,
and not of perverse opinion, maintained with the vain desire of glory and
reputation, you must needs yield, and be well satisfied in conscience. You
auouche this (.514.) The.514. Untruth. M. Feka^ha^ avouches it not for such,
as it shall appear.
Argument as invincible. The Emperors and Empresses, Kings, and Queens, were
for the whole time of Christ's aboade here upon the earth, idolatours, and
infidels, and so continued by the space of.300. years after the Assention of
Christ: Constantinus the Emperor being the very first Christian King that we
read of: Ergo, our Savior Christ did not commit the Supreme gouernemente
in Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes to Emperors, Kings, and Princes. This
Argument holds good, neither in matter, nor yet in form. There was in the
time of Christ's abode here upon earth, if we may believe Eusebius, and
Nicephorus the Ecclesiastical historians, a King in Edessa, whose name was
Agbarus. This King believed in Christ, as Eusebius reports, although as yet
vveakelie. In his Epistle which he vvrote unto Christ, he saluteth Christ, to
be Jesus the good Savior: he thinks by the miraculouse works which he
has heard done by Christ, that he is either God him self, or else Gods son:
and he offers unto Christ such fruits of thankefulnes, as so young and tender
a faith might for the time, bring forth. And Christ in his rescript unto
Agbarus, affirms that he was no infidel, or idolatour, saying: Beatus es
quod in me credidisti, cum no^ videris me: Agbare thou art blessed, because
thou have believed in me, when thou have not seen me. Besides this your own
self, have affirmed oftentimes, and so does your A Protesta^ticall slander.
Popissh tales declare, that the.iij. wise me^, that came forth of the East,
to vvorsship the newborn King of the Jews, were Kings, and lie beried in
the great doom at Collain, as the Colonists make me^ to believe, called yet
amongst the vulgar Papists, the three Kings of Collain. If there be any
creditte to be given to the narration of Eusebius and Nicephorus touching
Agbarus King of Edessa, and to the commonly received opinion of your Popissh
church, concerning the three Kings of Colain, these four, were Kings in the
time of Christ's abode here in earth, and yet not Idolatours nor infidels, all
the whole time of Christ's aboade here, but faithful vvoorsshippers of
Christ: Whereby the former part of the matter in the Antecedent of your
Argument is disproued. Neither is that true, which you put in the second
part, that the Emperors and Kings continued Idolatours for the space of.300.
years after Christ's Assentio^: For although for the most part, during that
space, they were such, yet was there in that time some Godly Princes that
were otherwise given. Li. 6. c. 34
Eusebius in his Ecclesiastical History, makes mention of one Philippus, a
most Christian Emperor, of whom, and his son also, being Emperor with
him, Abbas Vrspurgensis witnesses, that they were the first of all the
Roman Emperors, that became Christians, who also declared by their (.515.)
The 515. untruth. In dissembling what deeds and works those were. Li. 1. de
vit. Constable.
deeds and works (as Abbas says) that they had in them the fear of God,
and the most perfect Christian faith. Constantinus also the Emperor, Father to
Constantine the great, did most diligently of all others, seek after Gods
favor, as Eusebius vvriteth of him. He did provide by his government, that his
subjects did not only enjoy great peace and quietness, but also a pleasant
conversation in holiness and devotion toward God: Idolatours and dissemblers
in Religion, he banished out of his Court: and such as confessed Gods truth,
he retained and iugded most worthy to be about an Emperor, commanding such to
have the guarde, both of his person and dominion. He served and worshipped the
only true God. He condemned the multitude of Gods that the wicked had. He
fortified his house with the prayers of holy and faithful men, and he did so
consecrat his Court and Palaice, unto the service of God, that his household
company, was a congregation or Church of God within his palaice, having Gods
mynisters, and what soever is requisite for a Christian congregation. Polidorus
in his History of England, Lib. 2.
affirms also of this Emperor, that he studied above al other things to
increase the Christian Religion, who after his death was rekened in the
number of saints. To these fevve add Lucius a king of our own country, who
although he was not in might co^parable to Constantine the mighty Emperor, yet
in zeal toward God, in abolishing idolatry and false religion, in vvinning
and dravving his subjects by all means to the Christian faith, in mainteining
and defending the sincere Christianity to the uttermost of his power, he was
equal with Constantine, and in this point did excel him, that he long
before Constantine brake the Ise, gave the onsette, and shapt a pattern for
Constantine to follovv, whereby to work that in other parts, which he had
achieued within his own dominion.

This noble king, of very love to true Religion (.516.) The 516: untruth.
Polidorus text vily mangled, as shall appear.
as Polidore testified of him, Procured him self and his subjects to be
baptized, caused his nation to be the first of al other provinces, that
received the Gospel publicly, did draw his people to the knowledge of the
true God, banished at ones al manner of profane worshipping of Gods, and
commanded it to be leaft. Converted the temples of the Idolatours, to be
Churches for the Christians. And to be short, he employed and did bestow al
his service and power most willingly to the furtherau^ce and increase of the
Christian Religion, which he planted most sincerely throughout his country:
and so left it at his death, almost an hundredth years before Constantine was
Emperor: and therefore untruly said of you, that Constantine was the very
first Christian king, that joined his svvorde to the maintenance of Gods
word. Sith this king Lucius, so long before Constantine, did not only these
things, that Polidore ascribes unto him, but also did the^ of his own
authority, without any (.517) The 517. untruth. of al other most notorious,
and contrary to al historians whatsoever.
knowledge or consent of the Pope. Nor Eleutherius then Bishop of Rome, to
whom afterward king Lucius did write, to see some of Caesar's and the
Roman Laws, was any thing offended with the kings doings, but greatly
(.518.) The.518. untruth. The epistle following reports no such thing.
commending him therein, councelled him not to stand upon the Romain laws,
which, says the Pope, might be reprehended: but as he began without them,
so to go on, and dravv Laws (.519.) The.519. untruth. No such thing in the
pop^s pretensed letters.
alonely out of the Scripture, which afterward more at large, the Saxon
kings, as, (520.) The.520. untruth. King June, never drew out such laws.
June and Aluredus did.

The epistle of Pope Eleutherius to king Lucius is as follovveth, Petistis a
nobis etc. You have desired of us, that the Romayne Laws, and the Laws of
Caesar, might be sent over to you, the which ye would have used in (your)
kingdom of Brytanny. We may at al times reprove the Roman Laws, and the
Laws of Caesar, the law of God we can not. For ye have received of late (by
the divine mercy) in your kingdom of Brytany, the Law and faith of Christ.
Ye have with you in (your) kingdom, both the old and new testament: take out
of them the Law (by the grace of God) through the council of your kingdom,
and by it (through Gods sufferaunce) shall ye rule (your) kingdom of Britanie,
for you are the Vicar of God in (your) kingdom, according to the Prophet King:
The earth is the Lords, and all that therein is, the compass of the world,
and they that dwell therein. And again, according to the Prophet king: Thou
have loved righteosnes, and hated iniquity, wherefore God, even thy God, has
anointed thee with the oil of gladness above thy fellows. And again according
to the Prophet King: give the King thy judgment O God, and thy righteousness
unto the Kings Son. For it is not: give the judgment and righteousness of
Caesar, for the Christian nations and people of (your) kingdom, are the kings
sons, which dwell and consiste in your kingdom, under your protection and
peace, according to the Gospel, even as the hen gathers together her
chicke^s under her wings. The nations indede of the kingdom of Britany, and
people are yours, and whom being divided, you ought to gather together, to
concord and peace, and to the faith, and to the Law of Christ, and to the
holy Church, to revoke, cherishe, maintain protect, rule, and always defend
them, both from the injurious persons and malicious, and from his enemies. VVoe
be to the kingdom whose King is a child, and whose Princes banquet early, a
King I name not for his small and tender age, but for folly and wickedness, and
madness, according to the Prophet King: blood thirsty and deceitful men, shall
not live out half their days. By banqueting, we understand glotonie, through
glotonie riotousnes, through riotousnes al filthy and evil things, according
to King Solomon: wisdom shall not enter into a froward soul, nor dwell in
the body, that is subdued unto sin. A king is named of ruling, and not of a
kingedome, so long as thou rulest well, thou shall be king, which unless thou
do, the name of a King shall not consist in thee, and thou shall lose the
name of a King, which God forbid. Almighty God give unto you, so to rule your
kingdom of Britanie, that ye may reign with him for ever, whose Vicar ye are
in the kingdom aforesaid. Who with the Father etc.

Stapleton.
M Fekenham will now show three causes, Three causes that stay^ M. Feke^ham,
fro^^ taking the Oath.
why he can not be persuaded in conscience to take the oath. The first is, for
that Christ appointed to his Apostles and their successors being bishops
and priests, and supreamacie of spiritual gouernmente, and not to Princes,
being in Christ's time, and so continuing idolators and infidels, to the time
of Co^stantin the great. He proves his assertion by S. Paul: The first.
Attendite vobis and vniuerso gregi, in quo posuit vos spiritus sanctus
episcopos regere ecclesia^ Dei, quam acquisiuit sanguine su^.
speaking thus to the clergy. Take heed therefore unto your selves, and unto the
whole flock of Christ, whereof the holy ghost has apoi^ted or made you bishops,
to govern and rule the church of God, which he had purchased with his own
blood. Here again M. Horn wra^gleth with M. Fekenha^, and wresteth his
saying, yea and belieth him to, as though he should auouche as an invincible
argument, that which he speaks of the infidel Princes: which is not his
principal argument, but incidently browght in, the pithe of the argument
resting in the authority of S. Paul before specified. And therefore thowgh
Abgarus with the three Magi, that came to honor Christ's birth, with the
Emperor Philippus, and king Lucius were Christened, yet is M. Fekenha^s
argument framed upon the authority of S. Paul's words little acrased or
febled: M. Horn imagines that to be M. Fekenhams principal argument that is
not.
unless M. Horn ca^ prove (which he does not, nor ca^ not) that these, and
other Christian princes before Constantine had the supremacy of al causes
ecclesiastical. For the kind and manner of their government in spiritual
matters M. Horn alleges nothing: and to say the truth nothing can be
alleged. And very little also will be found for any matter ecclesiastical,
that may seem to towche their persons. And yet that little that we find in
stories makes altogether, as well against some other part of M. Horns new
relligion as against this new Supremacy. Christ's Image sent to Abgarus.
As Christ's Image printed in a lynen clothe, by Christ's own hand and sent
to this Abgarus: by the which many years afterward the City of Edessa was
miraculouslie preserved being besieged by Chosroes the king of the Persians.
Niceph. l,. 17. c. 16
Which Image also was afterward brought to Constantinople with much reverence
and honor, and thereby many great miracles wrought, as the Emperor of
Constantinople Constantine does write, Vide Metaphrast.
who was present when the Image was brought thither.

Of the first Christian Emperor. Philip.
That little also that we have recorded, in stories of the Emperor Philip and
his son, makes altogether against your new religion, and especially against
your new primacie: which is the matter that presentlye we have to deal withal.
Show your Reader, I beseech you, M. Horn, what was that wherein by their
works and deeds they declared (as you say) that they had in them the fear of
God, and the most Christian faith. How corruptly and vvretchedly M. Horn
handles the story of the emperor Philip.
Come on good M. Horn, and declare us this. Surely, good Reader, there was
never bear that came to the stake with worse will, then Master Horn will come
nigh this point. For if he come ones nigh to it, he shall forthwith declare him
self, void and empty of the Catholic faith, for the denying of the Popes and
clergies Supremacy (well to be proved even by this story) and void also of al
fear of God, for the wretched hewing and mangling of his Author, Eusebius. lib.
6. cap. 25. histor. ecclesiast. Abbas Vrspergen.
and for leaving out that, for the which they are commended, for their faith
and fear of God. The cause then, why Eusebius, and after him Vrspurgensis, so
writes, is, for that this Philip and his son, being in the Church upon
Easter eve, and minding to be present at the Sacrifice, and to communicate:
Fabian the Pope would not suffer them unless they would first confess their
faults, and stand among the penytentes. Whereunto they obeyed most gladly,
declaring (even as M. Horn writes) by their deeds and works that they had in
them the fear of God, and the most perfect Christian faith. Where is now in
you M. Horn the fear of God? Yea where is your Christian faith? Besides
confession of sins and a place of penitentes, this story has also a
testimony of the sacrifice of the Church, and of the Popes and Clergies
Supreamacie over the Prince, The cause that moved M. Horn so to handle this
story
which you so stoutly deny, making the Prince Supreme in all causes without
exception. And therefore without all faith, and fear of God, ye have stolen
away all this, and conveyed it from the sight of your Reader, into your dark
Cacus den. The like pageant, yea and excedingly much worse, play you with
the story of our most noble, and first Christian King Lucius. Beda li. 1.
eccles. hist, ca. 4. misit ad eum Lucius Brita^noru^ Rex epistolam obsecrans,
vt per eius mandatu^ efficeretur christianus. Ide^ prorsus Damasus in
Pontificali.
For here ye do not only by a sly sluttish silence dissemble the doings of
Pope Eleutherius, as ye did before of Pope Fabian, but impudentelye auouche,
that King Lucius did all those things mentioned by Polidore, of which the
Christening of his whole Nation is the chief, and so consequentlye, that he
was Christened without any knowledge or consent of Pope Eleutherius. Bring
forth, M. Horn, but one Author in Greek, Latin, or English, good or badd
new or old, Catholic or Heretic, (unless perchance you may show some one of
your late brethren, that write so, and yet after long search I can find none
such) that writes as ye write: and then am I content though this be of al
other a most evident, and a notoriouselie, to remitte it you at our next
reckoning, which yet for the better keeping of your account, I must not now let
pass vnscored. I never before readde it, no I never readde any chronicler new
or old, Galf. Monumete^s. Epistolas Eleuthe^io Papae direxi^, petens vt ab eo
christianitatem reciperet. Li. 1. ca. 4. Galfr. Monum. etc. Asse^ius Meueue^s.
in annalibus Angl.
unless yt be some of your late brethren, or such Catholics as write but
very co^pe^diously, and as yt were abridgme^tes of things, which does not
expressly write that king Lucius sent to Rome to Pope Eleutherius, that he
might be by his advice and authority Christened: but the negative thereof I
never as I say read, nor shall I trow find any so mad, and so maliciouse a
writer, as ye are, to write yt again. I refer you for our own countremen,
to Beda. Who writes, that king Lucius wrote an epistle to pope Eleutherius,
that by his comm^u^dement he might be christened. I refer you, to our
Britishe chronicler, translated by Geffrie of Monmoth: and to one other of our
own country, that wrote about.700. years since in like effect. I refer me
to Henry of Hungtingto^, to William of Malmesbury, to Alphredus Beuerlacensis,
to Johannes Londonensis, to Polychronico^, to the chronicles of England, Ce^t.
1. de script. Brit. Eluanu^ and Meduinu^ ad Eleutheriu^ To. Pontifice^ misit,
cum quibus ille suos legatos remisit Fugatiu^ ac Damianu^, qui nouis ritib. ac
sele^ni episcoporu^ dispositione ea^ formare^t Ecclesia^. Grafto^ in the
abridgeme^t of the chronicles of England. Naucler. gener. 6. Sabel. enead. 7.
li. 5. Io. Laz. in epit. hist. universe. Ado in Chro. Tom. 1. Council: page 191.
edit. vlt.
that M. Fox calls Caxtons chronicles. And to a number of other of our own
co^try, which partly I have seen, partly I have not seen. And to come to our
own time, to Bale your chief antiquary: and to Grafton writing thus. This Lucy
sent loving letters to Eleutherius the^ Bishop of Rome, desiring him to send
some devout and learned man, by whose instruction both he and his people might
be tawghte the faith and religion of Christ. It were now superfluouse, to
ouerlade my answer or the Reader, with the external and Latin writers: as
Nauclerus, Sabellicus, Platina, Johannes Laziardus, Abbas Vrspergensis, Ado,
but especially Damasus in vita Eleutherij: and a number of the like, which
agree with our own chronicles. Some perchance will think, that Master Horn
would never be so impudent, as to gainsay all these writers and chroniclers,
and that as he fetches all his narration towching Lucius owte of Polidorus: so
he has at the least for this point Polidorus on his side. If it were so,
though yt were a foolish and a fond shifte, yet were yt somewhat colorable, to
shifte from him self, so notable a lie. But Polidorus writes conformably to
all other. And as yt is true that Master Horn boroweth all the residewe of
Polidorus: so most wretchedlie he dismembreth from the residewe of Polidorus
narration, Polidorus lib. 2. Iste anno salutis humanae 182. regni vero 13.
verae religionis amore ductus cu^ Eleutherio Romano Pontifice egit, vt se ac
suos ad Christianoru^ numeru^ coelesti sonte perfusos adiungeret. Missi sunt eo
Fugatius ac Damianus viri pietate singulari hij rege^ cum tota domo populoque
vniuerso baptisarunt, sublatoque etc.
all that towcheth Pope Eleutherius. Lucius (says Polidore) in the year of
our Lord.182. and the year of his reign.13. of very true love to religion,
sent letters to Eleutherius the Pope to procure that he and his people might be
made Christians. Fugatius and Damianus men of singular virtue were sent
thither: which did baptize the king with all his court, and people. All this
has M. Horn broken and cut of from the myddle of the sentence, and thereby
has mangled and torn the same as miserably, as ever did Medea her child,
for that he well saw, yt made notablye for the Popes primacy. Which you shall
well perceive, if you do deaplye consider the cause, that moved the King to
send so far as to Rome. See good reader the sincere and honest dealing of M.
Horn.

A consideration of the cause that moved Lucius to send to Rome.




A man would at the first sight think the doings of the king very strange,
namely considering that about this time lived in France the great clearke and
Bishop Ireneus with many other famous men, whose aid he might have craved
for his necessary instruction in the Christian faith. Neither did he lack at
home, of his own subjects that could well (as yt seems) have served his
turn. And yet no doubt, this good king had a good and substantial grownde
for his doings. It is then to be considered, that anon after the death of
Christ and so ever after until Lucius time, there were among the Christians,
a number of heretics, which as they bore the name of Christians, so by their
heresies they lost the benefitte of their Christendom: as the Simonians (the
scholars of Simon Magus) Menandrians, the Saturninians, the Basilidians, the
Nicolaites, the heretics called Gnostici, for the excellent knowledge they
pretended to have above other me^: the Cherinthians, the Cerdonia^s, the
Phrygians, the Montanistes, and Marcionites with diverse other. Each sect
contending their own false faith to be the true, Niceph. li. 4. c. 19.
and the only Christian faith: yea many of them were taken for Prophets, as
Montanus and others. Many suffered death for Christ with those that were
catholic, and that with great patience. Among them was a priest called
Metrodorus a Marcionite. Idem li. 3. cap. 36.
Of the which sect even in Lucius time, a great number suffered in the
persecution raised against the Christians. Whereof the sect craked very much,
Eusebius. li. 5. cap. 16.
and made thereof a great argument, that they were in the true faith: and a
much better argume^te, then does Master Fox for his mad martyrs, that died
most wilfully for plain and open heresy. Lucius then understanding of this,
had good cause to be careful by whom he received his Christendom, least
chauncing upon some false shrew, and taking him for his instructour, he might
rather change one error, for an other, then put yt clean away: and for an
Idolatour become a false Christian. The want of this good choice of
Instructours, was the cause why Valens the Emperor became an Arrian and such
an horrible bloudsucker of the catholics. This also was the cause that the
Goths and Va^dales, were Arria^s. Who most cruelly afflicted and martyred
thowsandes of Christians. What was then the sureste way for Lucius to avoid
this danger? Dowbtles the very same that he took, that is, to send to the
Church of Rome, which never erred in faith, and which was the principal
Church, and with the which al other Churches must agree, by reason of the
chief principality of that Church, as Ireneus that blessed bishop and Martyr
wrote, even in the time of this Lucius? This principality I say has so
troubled M. Horn, that he durst not truly report his own author, yea so
amassed him, that falling suddenly in a rage, has framed us such an open and
maliciouse lie, that who so ever will hereafter trust him, is well worthy to
be beguiled.

And will ye, yet see an other as great a madness of this man? As he most
shamefully denies these doings of Lucius with Pope Eleutherius, against the
uniform co^sente of al historiographers, so has he fownde letters of Lucius,
with Eleutherius answer, Co^cerni^g Pope Eleutherius letters to king Lucius.
whereof no one of all the foresaid chroniclers makes mention, nor any other,
that I ca^ yet learn of, containinge matter altogether improbable and unlikely,
and therefore mete, after this fowrtene hundred years now at length to come
owte of Trophonius and Cacus blind den, and be set in M Horns book as a
notable matter of antiquity to furnish and beautify his new supremacy withal.
He lays us forth an epistle of Eleutherius: but out of what author he has
taken yt, or in what library we shall find yt, he will not tell us. The best
Author, I wene, that he can allege for it, will be some records of parchement
in the Guild Halle. But then M. Jewel will answer you for me, Jewel. page 86.
in his reply.
M. Horn: A Calves skin is no sufficient warrant of truth. Lies have been
written in letters of gold. Well, make the best of it, and justify it as you
may. As our cause can take no prejudice by it: So you shall take much shame by
it, if not for the matter it self, yet at the least for three or four pretty
lies that you adioyne, to company this notable Epistle. For first, there was
never any Saxon king that made any notable Laws called June. There was one
called Inas, and he in deed with king Aluredus or Alphredus, ordained many
Laws, but that they should be such Scripture laws as Master Horn says,
drawn alonely out of the Scripture, it is Master Horns vain dream. And in
case they had so great regard to scripture only, and measured and squared
their laws and doings by scripture, belike M. Horn will begin to have some
better liking of Religious men, and of the Popes Primacye also. For it was this
king Inas, that Nauclerus putat hunc fuisse Edeluulphum Alphredi patrem.
Generat. 29. page 61. Alibi vocat eum Adulphu^. Gener. 41, page 280 Henricus
Hunting Asserius Meneue^s. Pol. li. 4. Page 89.
gave the Peter pence first to Rome, and renouncing his Realm went to Rome and
professed him self a Monk. Both which things undoubtedly, by M. Horn, he must
needs find in Scripture. It is this Alphredus, that was anointed and crowned
King at Rome, as we have told before, and therefore is called the Popes son
adoptiue. Now whereas ye bring this Epistle to prove, that the king was
christened without the Popes consent, and that the Pope was nothing offended
with the ki^gs doings, but greatly commended him therein: neither the one nor
the other, can be proved by this Epistle. This is a mete and convenient gloss
for such a worthy epistle: In the which also there is no probability in the
world. For as other Countries, that were subdued by the Romans, especially such
as were reduced into a form of a Province, and had their rulers and
Lieutenau^ts from Rome (as Britain had) received the Roman and Civil Law, so
is it to be thought of Britain. Lib. 2. Dedit leges et Romana quae dam
instituta vte^dae introduxit.

Vide Cornel. tacit. in vitae Agricolae.


And Polidorus writes, that Agricola (The Emperor Vespasians deputy) gave to
the Britains certain Roman laws and orders, to be used and practiced by
them. Neither is it likely, but that before this time, there was some copy of
the Roman laws in Britain, the yo^g Noble men of the Realm being much given
to be eloque^t in the Romain tongue, wherein Agricola did prefer the^ before the
Galls or French me^, and being brought up in Rome especially Coilus, king
Lucius father spe^ding al his youth there: So that Lucius had no need to send
to Pope Eleutherius for Caesar's laws. And if he had need, it is more likely he
would have sent to some other then to Eleutherius, who with other blessed
Popes at that time, meddled (God wot) little with Caesar's Civil laws, or with
any other laws of Pagan Princes. But of al other things, Eleutherus answer is
most unlikely. For who would think him so unwise and so unskillful, that he
would appoint the old and the new Testament only as sufficient to govern and
rule a common wealth by? Which thing was never yet practiced in any Christian
country, nor ca^ possibly be practiced: the old law, being al in a manner
abolished, and the new Testament consisting of such principles of the Christian
faith as be immutable, and not variable: whereas politik laws have been, are,
and ever shall be and so must be, according to many incidents alterable and
variable.

This epistle then, be it true, or be it a counterfeit does as yet serve M.
Horn to no great purpose: but for any thing we have brought out of this
Epistle, M. Horn perchance will not him self greatly pass of it. There is an
other privy treasure hidden here, for the which, I suppose this Epistle is
chiefly brought forth, and that is to prove eue^ by the Pope Eleutherius him
self, How and wherein King Lucius was Gods Vicare.
that the King and not the Pope is the supreme head in all causes
Ecclesiastical. For Eleutherius says, that Lucius was Vicare of God in his
Kingdom. This, this is the mark that M. Horn all this while has shot at:
this is the cause, that this Epistle, that has so many hundred years lain
dead, is now revived by M. Horn. Yea for this clause, this Epistle was
solemply alleged in open parliament against the Popes Primacie. And seeing
that your new Divinity now, is nothing but English and Parliament Divinity: I
will remitte you ones again, M. Horn, to your own Braughton, who uses the
same words. Which must needs be (as by him appears) taken, that the King is
Gods Vicare in his Kingdom, that is, in the te^porall administration of
Civil, and not for Spiritual matters. And therefore, this Epistle does as well
serve M. Horn to prove the Princes Primacie by, In his Reply fol. 19. This
Epistle, be it a true or a false epistle, neither makes for M. Horn nor for
M. Ievvel
as it serves M. Jewel to prove that the service must be in the English
tongue: which is as true as that other where he says, that Lucius sent to
Rome to Eleutherius, for his advice touching the ordering of his Church.
Wherein if M. Jewel mean, that he sent to Rome before he was Christened, then
have ye one witness more against you. But if he means, as it seems he does,
by his discourse of these letters that you specify, part whereof he also
recites and among other things, that the King is Gods Vicare: then is he also
deceived. For in these letters king Lucius does not ask his advise in any
Church matters, but requires only to have Caesar's laws sent him, appears by
the tenor and purport of the said Epistle. So that I perceive, this Epistle is
an Instrument to set forth the new Ghospel many ways: but for such a Ghospel
such a proof is very mete.

We will therefore now pass forth to the residewe of your answer, where you
go about to disprove M. Fekenham, saying that Constantine the great was the
first Christian king. The force and weight of his argument (as I said) does not
stand upon this, Concerning M. Fekenha^s sayi^g that Co^sta^tin the great
was the first Christian king.
whether there were any Christian kings before Constantinus the great. This is
but a by matter, and yet ye dwell upon it, and handle the matter seriously, as
though all lay in the duste, if there were any king Christened before
Constantine. But herein ye do but trifle with M. Fekenham: who says not
simply or absolutely that Constantin was the first Christian king, but the
first that joined his sword to the maintenance of Gods word: as in making
sharp Laws against Idolatours and heretics: and in making sharp war
against Maxentius and Licinius, that persecuted the Christians, Niceph. li. 2.
cap. 7. Mihi vero oppidum quoddam est modicu^ quide^, nec admodum celebre:
vtrique tame^ nostru^ per co^modum. Tobiae. 4. Sicut beato Job, insultabant
reges.
which things are not read of any king before him. Again if there were any
other Christian princes, they were very few, and of small dominion and rule.
As Abgarus, who seameth by his own lettres to Christ, to have been lord, but of
one small and obscure town: As the.3. wise me^ that are called kings, to
auau^ce the honor of Christ's nativity, and are thought to have been either
kings or Lords in Arabia minore. which may perchance be called kings, as well
as those were called in holy scripture, which did scorn and check holy Job.
If there were any of greater renown and dominion, as king Lucius, Philip
the emperor, Constantius, Constantinus father, yet because either they did not
join their sword to the mayntenaunce of Gods word, or for that their
successors were paynims and Infidells: as it chanced to the said Lucius and
Philip, there is the less account made of the^. How so ever it be, M. Feke^ha^
ought not to be reprehe^ded in this, Solus aeuo vniuerso regenitus imperator
atque sacris initiatus est in Christo.

Lib. 4. De vita Co^st. ex transl. Joan. Portesij. Lact. de falsa relig. cap.
1. Amb. de obitu Theodosij.

Aug. ep. 50


having good authors that wrote so before him: namely Eusebius, Lactantius, and
S. Ambrose, who all call Co^stantinus the first Emperor that from the beginning
of the world was christened. Which thing belike they write, for the causes, by
us rehearsed, or some like. Yea he has S. Augustine to confess so much as he
did, as M. Horn him self will anon tell us. But yet see good reader the wise and
polityke handling of the matter by M. Horn. He goes about to disprove M.
Fekenham, for saying there were no Christian princes in Christ's time, and for
his relief, bri^geth me forth Abgarus and the three wise men, but so as he
seems to take it, but for a fable. And therefore he says, if we may believe
Eusebius and Nicephorus: again, if there be any creditte to be given to the
popish Church concerning the.3. kings: and does nothing understand, that the
more he defaceth their kingdoms, the more he defaceth his own answer, and
strengthens his adversaries argument.

M Horn. The.155. Division. page 94. b.
Thus it is made manifest, that both your argument fails in truth of
(.521.) The.521. untruth. It is true in matter, as has been proved.
matter, and you your self were beguiled through ignorance, by (.522.) The
522. untruth, mere slau^derous. Epist. 50.
want of reading. But put the case that your antecedent were true, yet is it
a faulty fallax made a dicto secundum quid, ad simpliciter, and the consequent
follovveth not, for that there is more contained in the conclusion, than the
antecedent does comprehend, which is such an evil favored form of
argument, that young students in the schools vvoulde be ashamed thereof. The
Donatistes made the like objection against the catholic fathers, whereto S.
Augustine makes answer. The state of the Apostles time, is otherwise to be
thought of, than this time, all things must be done in their time: In the
Apostles time, this prophecy was yet in fulfilli^g: Psalm. 2.
wherefore do the Heathen rage, and the people muse upon vain things? The
kings of the earth set them selves, and the Princes consult together against
the Lord and his Christ. As yet that was not in hand which is spoken a little
after in the same psalm: and now ye kings understand, be learned ye Judges on
the earth, serve the Lord in fear, and joy in him with reverence. Therefore
seeing that as yet in the Apostles time, kings served not the Lord, but still
did devise vain things against God and his Christ, that all the foresayinges
of the Prophet might be fulfilled, than truly impieties could not be
inhibited by princes Laws, but rather be mainteyned. For such was the order of
the times, that both the Jews should kill the preachers of Christ, thinking
to do God good service therein, as Christ had forspoken: and also the gentiles
should rage against the Christians, that the martyrs might win the victory
thorough patience. But after that this began to be fulfilled which is written:
Psalm. 71.
And all the kings of the earth shall woorship him, and all the nations shall
serve him: what man, unless he be not well in his wits, will say that Kings
ought not to have a special regard for the Church of Christ, and al manner
godliness amongst their subjects?

Stapleton.
We have declared, that M. Fekenham his saying of Co^stantinus the great, and
the first Christian king may be born in a right good sense, and also that he
speaks therein agreeable to most ancient and learned writers. And if he were
deceived, as ye write, by ignorance and want of reading (which is of your part
a mere slau^derous lie) the pyth yet of his argument standing upon the saying
of S. Paul, is nothing thereby blemished. M. Feke^hams argument falsely
compared with the Donatists argument.
And of al men you may worse lay ignorance to his charge, that have uttered in
this very part and parcel of your answer not only so much gross ignorance,
but so exceeding and ca^kred malice, especially in the story of king Lucius. And
here also yet ones again to compare M. Fekenham with the Donatists for framing
an argument from the use and examples of the Apostles, and of the primitive
Church: wherein beside your malice, you bewraye your own unskillfulness. For
this redoundeth altogether upon you, and your own fellows. For wherein
rests all your eloquence against the Catholic Church, but that it is not
conformable now to Christ's, and the Apostles time, and to the primitive
Church? Namely touching invocation of Saints, suffrages for the dead: touching
adoration and elevation of the blessed Eucharistia, the minglinge of water and
wine, receiving under one kind, sole receiving, and a number of the like? Yea
and before that any Prince would say or do for you, you could M. Horn with
your fellows play the Donatists in deed, and inueigh against the te^poralties
of Bishops, against their lordely train and revenues, because forsooth the
Apostles were poor, and used no such ioylyte. But now who more ioyly then M.
Horn himself, or who more lordely then your Lordships are? In his first
Reproufe. Fol. 74. b. and 75 a Mark good reader that to reason from the order
of the Apostles to our time, is now with M. Horn an ill favored form of
argui^g.
Again what is more usual with M. Nowel (a man, I trow, of a rare Spirit) then
to make this time the time of the primityue Church: that we be the Pharisees,
and they forsooth the Apostles. That now we may not prescribe with Antiquity,
Traditions, or Consent of our Elders, against them, because the Scribes and
Pharisees, prescribed so against Christ and his Apostles. What then? Is Luther
their Messiah, and Calvin their Paul? But to return to our matter: Though
already the Catholics have sufficiently answered to al these reasons, yet now
have we gotten at your hands an answer, for this and all the like: that to
argue from the Apostles time, to our time, is a fallax a dicto secundu^ quid ad
simpliciter: that it is an ill favored form of argument, that young studientes
in the schools would be asshamed of: and to be short, that it is a reason of
the Donatistes answered and confuted by S. Augustine. It is already M. Horn
sufficiently by us declared, that the Donatistes cause, and S. Augustines
answer to them has no manner affinity with M. Fekenham his reason. They
denied, that princes had any thing at al to do in matters of the Church, or
in punisshing those that break the Ecclesiastical laws. M. Fekenham denies
not, but that Princes may lawfully punish heretics by laws: He confesses
also, that Princes may well and commendably meddle as ministers, ayders, and as
assisters by their temporal sword, for the furderance and mayntenance of
Ecclesiastical matters, but not to rule and prescribe, as the chief governors
of all causes Ecclesiastical: I must tell you again M. Horn: There is great
difference between staring and stark blind. And as busy as ye are now again
with the Donatists, ye lacked a little salt of discretion in alleging of this
place of S. Augustine. For this confirms M. Fekenhams former saying, M.
Fekenhams saying confirmed by M. Horns own allegation.
that in Christ's and the Apostoles time there were no Christian Princes. In the
Apostles time, says S. Augustine, as your self report his words, Kings served
not the Lord, but did devise vain things, against God and his Christ. And
here might a man now, that would follow your vain and humor, encounter with
S. Augustine, and object unto him, King Abgarus, and the three Kings, that came
to honor Christ's nativity, and such other. But though they had been greater
Ki^gs the^ they were, and that there had been some few other lords or Kings to,
that did serve Christ: yet would no wise man for the cause by me before
rehearsed, quarrel with S. Augustine. For a general rule, is not by one
exception or two, notably blemisshed or impaired. Such kind of phrases are to
be found as well otherwhere, Vt describeretur vniuersus orbis. Luc. 1.
Murmurauit omnis congregatio filioru^ Israel. Exo. c. 16.
as in holy scripture. As where it says, that the whole world was described by
the Emperor Augustus. And yet is it well known, that he had nothing to do,
with a great part of the world. It is written also, that all the people of
Israel did murmr: and yet all did not murmr. Such kind of phrases are
verefied of the greater, or the more notable part.

M. Horn. The.156. Division. page 95. a.
You frame an other reason upon S. Paul's words unto the bisshops of Ephesus:
whereby to prove, that al government in spiritual or ecclesiastical causes,
belongs to Bisshops and Priests, and not to Princes, and Civil Magistrates,
thus you argue: The holy ghost appointed al spiritual government of Christ's
flock unto Bisshops and Priests, as the words spoken by S. Paul, do make
full and perfect declaration: Ergo, Kings, Queens, and Princes, may not claim
or take upon the^ any part of Spiritual government, much less take the
supremacy, and chief part of spiritual government from them. For answer, I
deny this argument, for it is a naughty and deceiptful (.523.) The.523.
untruth. It is a good argument, no Sophisticatio^ at al.
Sophistication, called, Fallacia aequiuocationis. There is equiuocatio^ in
this word (Priests) and so in these words to govern and rule the Church of
God. This word Priest, has diverse significatio^s which are to be observed:
least the simple readers be confirmed or brought into error thorough the
equiuocatio^ therein. The Scripture speaks of a priesthood after the order of
Aaron: after which order you vvil not confess Apostles, and the Bisshops
their successors to be Priests, an other kind of Priesthod is, after the other
of Melchisedech, Heb. 7.
and Christ only without any successor in that priesthood, was the alone
Priest of that order. The third kind is an holy and princely Priesthod, of the
which order not only the Apostles and their true successors, but also Kings,
Queens, Princes and al manner of faithful Christians are Priests. There is in
common opinion amongst the Papists, a fourth kind, which is a massinge and
sacrifici^g priesthod: after which order, Christ's Apostles, and the true
mynisters of his Church were (524.) The.524. untruth. A plain heresy.
never priests: for that order belongs only to the Apostolical Clergy of the
Romish Antichrist. If your meaning therefore be, that Christ left any kind of
government or rule of his Church to Bisshops and Priests, after this popish
order, your opinion is (.525.) The.525. untruth. It is a Catholic and and
universal opinion of the Church.
heretical, and your assertion utterly false. Therefore where I shall
afterward in my speaking call the ministers of Christ's Church, Priests, I
give you to understand, that I do therein but follovv the usual, and
accustomed kind of speech which is (.526.) The.526. untruth. Notorious, as
it shall appear out of S. Augustine.
impropre although in long use. Likewise to govern and rule the Chureh of
God: is of two kinds and sorts, the one is by the supreme authority and
power of the (.527.) The.527. untruth. The power of the svvorde ruled the
Jews Synogoge, not Christ's Church.
svvorde, to guide, care, provide, direct and aid Gods Church, to further,
maintain and setfoorth the true Religion, unity and quietness of Gods Church:
and to ouersee, visit, refourme, restrain, amend and correct all manner
persons, with al manner errors, superstitions, heresies, schisms, abuses,
offfences, contemptes and enormities in or about Gods Church. Which
government and rule apperteineth only to Kings, Queens, and Princes, and not
to the Apostles, Bisshops and Priests: whereof S. Paul speaks nothing at
al in this sentence by you alleged to the Bisshops of Ephesus. The other sort
is to feed the flock of Christ with the Spiritual food of Gods word,
which is the (.528.) The.528. untruth. Not that only, but also to correct,
to rebuke, and to refourme.
only rule and government that belongs to the Apostles, Bisshops and
Ministers of Christ's Church, and of none other manner rule speaks S. Paul
to the Bisshoppes of Ephesus, which he makes most plain, both by the
express words of the sentence avouched, and also by the whole circumstance
of the same place. The word that S. Paul uses, does proprely signify to
feed, as the sheapeherd feeds his sheep, and by a figurative speech to
guide, govern or rule: and therefore if you would have dealt (529) The.529.
untruth. He dealt plainly, and translated truly.
plainly, and have uttered S. Paul's meaning according to his propre speech,
where you say, To govern and rule, doubling the words as it were to
amplify the matter, that the truth might less appear, you ought to have
said, to feed the Church of God. for that is the Apostles (530) The 530.
untruth. For (...), the Apostles word, signifies as properly to rule as to
feed.
propre saying, and so the old translatour of Chrysostom does translate it
upon the Epistle to the Ephesians, and also expounding this same place of the
Acts of the Apostles, vt pascatis Ecclesia^, Cap. 4. Act. 24.
to feed the Church. S. Peter making the like exhortation, to this of S.
Paul, to the Bisshops dispersed, uses that self same word, saying: Pascite,
quantum in vobis est, gregem Christi: Feed so much as you may, the flock of
Christ. Christ him self also teaching Peter, and all other Bishops, what
manner of rule and government, Joan. 21.
as properly given them by Gods word, they should have in the Church, does
express it, with the self same word, saying: Pasce agnos meos, feed my
Lambs. To rule and govern the L. household faithfully and prudently, Math. 24.
Christ expounds to be nothing else in general, than to give meat unto his
family in due season. Neither did our savior Christ give (.531.) The.531.
untruth. For he gave in other places other power and Authoryte: Namely in his
last Supper, Luc. 22. and also after his Ascension by the holy Ghost
instructing them and their successors for ever. Joan. 14. and. 16.

Math. 28.


other power, authority or commission unto his Apostles, and so to all other
Bishops as properly belonging and only to the Bishoply office, then this: As
my Father sent me, so I send you, receive the holy ghost, whose sins ye
remit, they are remitted, whose sins ye retain, they are retained, goo
therefore, and teach all nations, Baptizing them in the name of the Father,
and of the Son, and of the holy Ghost: teachinge them to observe al things,
that I have commanded you. So that the Bishoply rule and government of Gods
Church, consists (.532.) The.532. untruth. It consists not in these.3.
points only, but in many more: as has been shevved.
in these three points, to feade the Church with Gods word, to minister
Christ's Sacraments, and to bind and lose: al which three parts, Christ
co^prehendeth under this one saying: to give meat to the Lords family in due
season. And S. Paul in these words, to feed the Church of God. The
circumstaunce of the sentence which you alleged forth of the Acts, does
also shevve in the example of Paul him self, who was inferior to none of
the Apostles, and Church mynisters in any point, that he claimed or took upon
him none other rule or government, than (.533.) The.533. untruth. For S.
Paul beside, excommunicated offenders, as. 1. Tim. 1. ordained bishops, as
Tite and Timothee, made orders in the Church. 1. Cor. 21. and caet.
of feedinge Gods Church with the spiritual food of the Gospel. He
sets forth the execution of his own office, and by that example moves
the Bishops of Ephesus to the like, saying: I have served the Lord with all
humblenes of mind: I have leaft nothing undone, that might be profitable to
you: but I have declared and taught you openly and privily the repentance and
faith in God, and Jesus Christ. I received an office of ministry from the
Lord Jesus, to testify the ghospel of Gods grace, and to preach the Kingdom
of God. I have hidden nothing of Gods council from you. Take heed therefore to
your selves, and to Christ's flock (as I have done) whereof the holy Ghost
has appointed you Bisshoppes (as he did me) to feed the Church of God (as you
know and see that I have done). This that you call to govern and rule, was
with Paul to A^ though humility and government could not stand together,
and agree both in one person.
serve with lowlines, to mynister with watchefulnes: to preach, teach and
testify the Ghospel, and the kingdom of God publicly and privately, and to
show, to the flock all the Council of God, touching their salvation, keepinge
nothing thereof from them. To govern the Church of God after this sort
belongs to the only office of Bishops and Church ministers, and not to
Kings, Queen's and Princes: who (.534.) The.534. untruth. for by ^ou they may
take al upon them, ergo this also.
may not, neither do, claim or take upon them, this kind of spiritual
government and rule, or any part thereof with the bisshops, neither do they
take the supremacy and chief part of this spiritual government from the Church
ministers. As contrary wise the Church ministers, ought not to claim and take
upon them the supremacy of government, as the (.535.) The.535. untruth, mere
slau^derous.
Papists of long time have done from Kings, Queens, and Princes.

Stapleton.
M. Horn has hitherto (good-reader) proceeded altogether historically, as well in
bri^gi^g forth his poor sely proufs against M. Fekenham, as in his first
answer to M. Fekenham, by the story of King Lucius and others: but now will
he show you a copy of his high diuinitye, and of his great divine knowledge,
in the soluting of theological arguments.

M. Fekenham proves by S. Paul, Concerning this word, Priest.
that they are Bisshops and Priests, and not the Princes that govern Christ's
Church. Nay says M. Horn here, this is a naughty, a duble and a deceitful
sophistication: in the word priest, and in the word to govern: and he is
angry with M. Fekenham for the term of priests, and will needs have ministers
placed for them. But how chances yt M. Horn, that ye put not in also, for
bishops, superintende^ts? Shall the inferior clergy change their papistical
name, and will you reserve to your self still the name of Bisshops, because it is
more lordelyke? It is a wonderful thing to consider the practice of these
protestants: To make a way to their new divinity, they first began to alter the
usual names, changing confession into knowledge, penance into repentance,
Church into congregation, Image into idol, with many such like. So to make a
way, to induce men to believe, that Order is no Sacrament, and that there is no
sacrifice in the Church, they could not, nor ca^ abide the name of priests.
Tyndal was much trobled in the framing of some other word for it. First he
translated for priests, seniours: but his folly being therein well espied, he
translated afterward for seniours, elders. Which word (elder) does no more
signify a priest, the^ it signifies an elderstycke. M. Horn though he be well
co^te^ted with the word elders, as ye shall hereafter understand, yet here he
will have them called Ministers: and gives us plainly to understand, that
though he use the improper term of priests, yet he means ministers, as
though every Priest be not a Minister (although every Minister be not a priest)
and so very often called in the holy scripture. Exodus 28. Ioelis. 1. Vlulate
Ministri altaris.

Hiere. 33. Sacerdotes Ministri mei.


As where it speaks of those which do sacrifice in the clergy, it calls the^
indifferently priests or ministers And therefore Moses says, of the sons
of Aaron that were priests: Qua^do appropinqua^t altari, vt ministre^t in
sanctuario. When they draw nere to the altar to minister in the sanctuary.
Joel calls the priests, ministers of the aulters. In Hieremy God says, that
priests are his ministers. S. Paul says, Omnis quide^ sacerdos praesto est
quotidie ministra^s, and easde^ semper offere^s hostias, Heb. 10.
every priest is ready daily to minister, ever offering the same hosts. And in
the new testament, where it is written, ministrantibus illis, and ieiunantibus,
as they ministered to our Lord and fasted, Act. 13. (...)
the said word, ((...)) may well be traslated, as they made sacrifice: according
to Erasmus his iudegme^t. If the^ ministers serve the altar as well as priests,
what has M. Horn gained, by the shifting of the word priests into ministers?
Suerly this is a wonderful shifting ghospel, that ca^ not stand but by
shifti^g: and that must needs shyft away this word priest, which has been
usually freque^ted and continued, not only among us in England, sythe^ce the
time we were first christened, but among other nations, as Dutchme^, high
Almaines, Fre^chme^, Italia^s, and Spaniards, as it appears unto the^ that be
skillful in these tongues. But to call the Ministers of Christ's Church, by the
name of Priests, is a kind of speech (says M. Horn) impropre, though long
in use: and for such he protests to use it, as often as he uses the word,
Priest, in that sense. The proper priesthods he avouches to be only three. Of
Aaron: of Melchisedech: and of that other Order, which is common to all
Christians, me^ and weme^. But o Lord, what a bli^d bussard has malice and
pride made you M. Horn? Think you it an opinion among the common Papists only
(as you say) to auouche a fourth kind of sacrificing priesthod? What think you
then of S. Augustine that learned Father of Christ's Church? Was he a Papist to?
Or was he one also of the Apostolical clergy of the Romish Antichrist? Harke^ I
pray you what his judgment is herein. He says, Augu lib. 20. de Ciuitate Dei
cap. 10.
that in the Apoc. 20. and in S. Peter (1. Pet. 2.) where the princely
priesthod common to al Christian me^ is spoken of: No^ vtique de solis episcopis
and presbyteris dictu^ est, qui proprie ia^ voca^tur in Ecclesia sacerdotes,
sed sicut oe^s etc. It is spoken not of Bisshops and Priests alo^ne, which now
in the Church are properly called Priests: but as we call al (the faithful)
Christians, because of the mystical ointment, so we call all the faithful
Priests, because they are the members of one Priest, that is, Christ. Here you
see M. Horn, that it is an opinion not only among the common Papists, but with
S. Augustine also that there are yet in the Church, beside that Pri^cely
Priesthod that you spoke of, bishops and priests, and that properly so called.
And dares your impudent mouth, auouche that kind of speech impropre, which
S. Augustine avouches to be properly so called, and that in the Church of
Christ to? Go M. Horn, and tell your friends this tale. For your fre^d, I
assure you, he had need to be, more then his own, which will believe you in this
most impudent and most unchristian assertion. A priesthood there is M. Horn,
and that a proper priesthod of bishops and priests in the Church of Christ,
beside that of Aaron in the old law, or of Melchisedech in Christ's only
person, or of this pri^cely priesthood common to al Christians: who are no more
properly priests, the^ they are Princes, and whose common priesthod no more
excludes the proper priesthod of Bishops and priests in the Church, the^ does
their kingdom (for kings in like manner al Christians are called in the places
of holy Scripture lastly noted) exclude the proper kingdom, of Emperors,
kings, and other Princes. To confute yet farther this Antichristian solutio^ and
to prove that this propre priesthod is a sacrifici^g priesthod, wuld require
some convenient tract of time, and more the^ we ca^ co^uenie^tly now spare for
avoiding of tediousnes. But what need we seek far, for a solutio^, or tarry
long therein, seeing as cunning as M. Horn is, himself has in his own solutio^
proved the sacrifice of the mass? For to go no farther M. Horn, then your own
chapter and allegatio^, I reason thus. Christ contineweth a priest according
to the order of Melchisedech for ever: the sacrifice of which order he showed
in his last Supper. Ergo there is and ever shall be that sacrifice of our true
Meschisedech, which he offered in his last Supper, which is the sacrifice of
the mass in the Church. Ergo it is untrue, that Christ has no ministerial
priesthood or Sacrifice in the Church. Hebr. 7.
For as Christ offered in his last supper his own body: so all priests do
offer, Oecumenius sentence of the said sacrifice. Sacerdos in aeternu^. Psalm.
19. Tu es sacerdos in aeternu^ secundu^ ordine^ Melchisedech. Consider M.
Jewels answer to the said Oecumenius.
and shall offer for ever the same body in the holy mass. And for this cause
is Christ called a priest for ever, in the chapter by you rehearsed, and in
the psalms. I bring not, M. Horn, this argument, nor frame yt, of my self:
it is Oecumenius (M. Horn) an ancient and a notable Grecia^ that so writes,
and therein utters not his own mind only, but the mind of Chrysostomus, and
other fathers, yea and of the whole Greek Church. Here perhaps M. Horn will take
some hold, and answer that M. Jewel has answered sufficiently to Oecumenius
in his Reply to M. D. Hardinge. What kind of answer it is and how
substantial, it will well appear, when the Reioynder shall come to this Article
touching the sacrifice. And yet I suppose men that be not to much and to
sinistrally wedded to their own fantasies, may see good cause, by such other
answers as are made to part of his reply, what to judge of the whole. In the
mean ceason mark good reader, what kind of answer he makes to rydde him self
from this authority of Oecumenius. I will omit al other, and touch one point
only of his answer, M. Jewels hypocritall dissimulation.
whereby thou may have a taste of the whole. First then I pray you call to
remembrance, what a scoffing and wondringe he makes at the name and authority
of Leontius, alleged by M. D. Harding with: what is this Leontius that wrote
this story? or who ever heard of his name before? with much other gay glorious
rhetorike. In his reply fo 75.
But who is it M. Jewel but Leontius that ye so hardly reason against for
adorate scabellu^ pedu^ eius, Jewel fol. 503. Vid. 2. Co^c. Nicenum, actio.
4. Non. 1. vt in Jewel. page 517.
adore ye the footstole of his feat? Now how ca^ ye make such me^uel at him,
and demand when he was, and what he was: seeing your self impugn him among
other that be alleged in the 2. Nicene Counsel? Namely seeing in the very same
leaf, wherein is contained the argument ye do impugn, it appears also, what he
was, and when he was: that is, such a notable father and learned bishop, out of
your quarrelling exception of your.600. years, that he has escaped, and is
above all your solemn and peremptory challenges. Truly good reader this is a
strange metamorphosis and a sudden rauishme^t of M. Jewel. For as much as he
wo^dreth at Leo^tius name in his Reply against private mass, as hardly, and as
stoutly as he resoneth against him in his reply against the adoration of
Saints Images: yet he is fallen into so great familiarity and lyking with him,
that in his Reply against the sacrifice, to deface Oecumenius, he is content to
authorize him for a good and a sufficient writer. And because Oecumenius
tells us, that Christ is and shall be sacrificed by the priests, Fol. 580.
Nos Christiani propemodum quid sit ara, and quid sit victima, nescimus.
and his holy body to the worlds end shall be offered up in the holy mass, M.
Jewel to avoid this, says: what sacrifice or altar means, we being
Christian people, in a manner can not tell. which are the words of the said
Leo^tius. But yet according to M. Jewels old wont falsely translated, and most
falsely and impude^tly applied to that, which the author never meant. And that
this holy handling of the matter may not lightly be espied, he alleges the.2.
Nicene council, being very long and tediouse: and neither leaf nor actio^ of
it named, neither dares ons for shame to name Leontius the author of the
sentence. Now Leo^tius does not mean of the altar that Christian men use to
the honor of God, or of the sacrifice of Christ's blessed body (which is the
matter that Oecumenius proves, and ought to be disproued by M. Jewel) but of
the aultars dedicated to the devils, Nicenae. 2. synodi Act. 4. fol. 517. col.
2. Pudore sufsundantur Iudaei qui proprios reges et alienos adora^tes, nos
Christianos ta^quam idololatras irrident. Nos au^t Christiani, oi^bus in
ciuitatib. and regionib. indies et in horas singulas co^tra idola stamus armati
co^tra idola psallimus, co^tra idola and preces fundimus. Et qua ta^dem front
Iudaei nos vocant idololatras? Vbi nunc sunt quae olim ab istis oblatae sunt
idolis bou^, ouiu^ and filiorum quoque victimae? vbi sacrificioru^ fumi? vbi
arae et perfusio^es sanguinu^? Nos vero Christiani propemodum quid sit ara,
quid sit victima ignoramus.
and of the detestable sacrifice that the infidells did make thervppon, as ye
shall understand by his own words. These Jews (says Leo^tius) may be
asshamed, that worshipping their own kings, and the kings of other people,
do scorn and skoffe at us Christians, as though we were Idolatours. For we in
every city and country every day and hour do stand armed against idols: we
sing Psalms against idols, we make our prayers against them. And then how
can they for shame call us idolatours? where are now the oxen, the sheep, yea
their own children, that the Jews were wont to offer in sacrifice to their
Idols? Where are the smoking sacrifices? where are the aulters, and the
sheding of bloudde? Suerly we Christians can not in a manner tell, what is an
altar, or what is the sacrifice (of beasts) for that is properly victima, and
of that Leontius speaks. Thus writes this aunciente learned bisshoppe about
a thousand years paste, against the Jews, that called Christian men
Idolatours, for worshippinge of images. And the like answer we catholyks may
make against these our new Jews. And so at the length Leontius, that M.
Jewel has so wondered at, has confuted with his short answer al his, and M.
Calfields, and such other their blasphemous talk against the catholyks for
worshipping of the image of Christ and his Saints: and has bewrayed M. Jewels
abominable shifte made to answer Oecumenius, under the visour of this
coulorable authority. And now may al men as much wonder at M. Jewels doings,
as he does at Leontius name: And I am deceived if ever there were any poor
owl so gased and wondered at of the birds, as men will hereafter wonder at M.
Jewel, for these wretched and miserable shifts. Thus the^ the argument of
Oecumenius (M. Horn) contrary to your Antichristian blasphemy against the
sacrifice of the mass stands untouched and unblemished, M. Horn. denying the
sacrifice, makes a plain way for Antichriste.

Daniel. 12.

Quum ablatum fuerit judge sacrificium. Aug. de ciuit. Dei. lib. 20. ca. 23.
and. 29. Prosper de diuinis pro niss. and praedict. dimid. temp. cap. 13. Hier.
in dict. cap. 12. Primas. in apoc. li. 3. cap. 11. Greg. l 32. in Job. 14. An
answer to M. Horn for M. Feke^ha^s tra^slating of the word (...) Pascere
vel regere.


for any thing that M. Jewel has or ca^ say, or any other of al your sect. The
sacrificing priesthod M. Horn for all your spite shall co^tinewe, and shall not
vttterly fail until the time of Anticrist. The^ shall it fayl in deed for three
years and an half, according to the prophecy of Daniel, and the sayings of the
fathers, namely of S. Augustine, Prosper, Primasius, S. Hiero^, and S. Gregory.
Wherefore it is not the Pope, but your self M. Horn, that with this your full
vnchristia^ doctrine, and deuelish divinity, in soluting M. Fekenhams argument,
prepares a ready way for Antichrist.

There is now an other equiuocatio^ espied by M. Horn in the word to govern
and rule: and that there are two kinds of sorts to govern and to rule the
Church of Cod, the one by the supreme authority and power of the sword,
belonging only to princes: the other by feading the flock, with the word of
God, by ministering Sacraments, and by bynding and losing, belonging only to
bisshops and Church ministers. Which kind of spiritual government, princes
may not neither do claim. And therefore M. Horn says that M. Fekenha^ did not
deal plai^ly in translating to govern and rule the Church, for that S. Paul's
word does properly signify to fead, as the shepherd feadeth his sheep: 2.
Reg. 5. T^ pasces ^opulum meu^ Israel: and iueris dux super Israeel. Cui
praecept vt pasceret populum meu^ ca. 7. Psalm. 77 pauit eos in innoce^tia
cordis sui.
neither does yt signify to govern and rule but by a figurative speech. By
this reason M. Horn might as well prove, that Agamemnon was no king, nor ruler,
whom Homer calls (...), a pastor or shepherd: or David to be no king or
ruler, whom the scripture so calls also. Thou shall, says the scripture,
feade my people of Israel, thou shall be captain over Israel. Again: whom I
have commanded to feade my people. And in an other place. He fead the^ in the
innocency of his heart, with many like phrases occurrent in the scripture. M.
Feke^ham therefore dealt plainly, when he translated to govern and rule: eue^
as Erasmus does translate it out of the Greek which has, regere, and non
pasc^re: that is, to rule, and not to feade. And your brother Edmu^de Beke that
translated the Bible, printed at London in the year.1549. though he turn
bishops into overseers, and church into congregation, yet he translateth these
words here, (...), etc. to rule the congregation. So does also the English
translation of the new testament p^i^ted at zuric^ ^n.1550. In his Reply.
page 239.
By likelihod M. Horn thi^keth, that there is no true rule or government but
where the sword bears rule: wherein he thi^keth as well, and reasons as
substa^cially, as does M. Jewel, auouching that S. Peter was not head of the
Church, because he took up his lodgi^g with a poor ta^ner. Ye think to grossly
and basely M. Horn of the Churches authority. The Church has his rule and
gouerme^t, yea his sword to, which may as well and as truly be verefied in the
Church regim^^t as in the cyuill regimente. Yea the Church regimente is
incomparably the higher, and by so much as the excellency of the soul is above
the body. Neither does this word (...), that is to feed, as the sheepherd
feadeth his sheep, derogate any thing of the Ecclesiastical dignity, but
rather does increase and amplify it. The pastoral office of the feelde
shepperd, The shepherdes office resembles most properly the Bishopes Office.
does most lively signify, set out, and express to us the office, the
greatness, and the excellency of this pastoral charge. The Ecclesiastical
pastor having as great an account to make to his Master Christ, for his
spiritual flock, that is, the souls of the people committed to him, as has
the feeld shepherde for his sheep. This is the spiritual Jacob watching
carefully day and night, both in cold and heat upon his flock, Genes. 31.
that must make good to his master what so ever by theft is imbeciled, or by
wild beasts deuowred. The shepeherd M. Horn does not only feed his sheep,
and carefully choseth owte such grownde and pastor, as is most conueniente
and wholesome for them: but besides that, sondreth the whole and sownde, from the
infected and rotten: he greaceth and tarreth them, he byndeth, he cutteth them,
he has a staf with a hook to draw the^ in when they stray: he has a staf to
beat away the wolf: he has a fold to close and shut them up saufe from the
incursio^s of the woulf, and other ravening beasts. And what does all this, but
resemble and express unto us the pastoral office of Bishops and prelates? Who
owght to tell the people what is good and bad, what is truth, what is falshod,
what is heresye, what is Catholyke faith but these pastors? Where was then
this lesson of late, when lay men only by act of parliamente took upon them
to teach the whole clergy? Did not then less men, then kings, Queen's, and
Princes (who may not, you say now, claim or take upon them this kind of
spiritual government and rule, to feed the Church with Gods word) take
upon the^ to feed all the realm with such doctrine as it pleased the
parliament to allow, the parliament I say of lay men only, not one Bishop
among them, you being neither by the law of God (which no realm ca^ alter)
neither yet by the law of the realm any Bishops at all: but only the
Queen's Commissioners, in matters of the Church? And what can be more vnseamely
and more unnatural, the^ thus the sheep to feade the sheepherd, and not the
shepherd to feed the sheep? O what times, o what ma^ners are these?

To proceed, what higher Authority can there be in the world, the^ by
baptism to make a Christian soul? the^ by pronuncing the solempe words
appointed by Christ to cause to be present the body and bloudde of Christ?
And that same to minister to the devout and well disposed people when so ever
they call for yt? What rule and regimente is comparable to the rule and
regimente of the ecclesiastical shepherde, in the taking or excluding any out
of his spiritual fold: that is, in binding and losing, Chrysostoms saiyngs
touching the spiritual government.
in forgeuing or retaininge of sins, in making owte excommunication, or in
the releasing of the same upon dew repentance* Harken, harken good M. Horn,
what that noble prelate Chrysostomus writes of this government. Etenim qui
terram incolunt. etc. There is (says Chrisostomus) a power given to them that
dwell and be co^uersante in the earth, to dispe^se and dispose heavenly
things, which power God would not give neither to angels nor archangelles.
Lib. 3. de dignitate Sac^rdotij
For yt was not spoken to them, what so ever ye bind in earth shall be bownde
in heaven: and what so ever ye lose in earth shall be losed in heaven. The
worldly Princes have also an authority to bind: but only touching the body:
but these bonds of the priests bind the soul also, and do reach even as
far as heaven. So that what so ever the priests do beneth^ (in the world)
the same God does ratify above (in heaven) and the Lord does confirm his
servants sentence. And he says anon after. If the king does honor any of his
subjects, so far, that he gives him authority to imprison, or release out
of prison whom he will, this fellow shall be counted most fortunable, and a most
happy man. But the priest, has received from God a much greater power: and by
so much the greater, as heaven excels the earth, or the soul the body.
And by and by. It is a madness (says he) to despise this principality,
without the which we can not be partakers of our salvation, or of such good
things as are promised us. For if no man can enter into the kingdom of
heaven, unless he be regenerated by water and the holy Ghost: Ibide^. li. 6.
and he that does not eat the fleashe of our Lord and drink his blood is
berefie of everlasting life: Porro illu^ ipsu^ oportet tanto oi^bs rebus illis
p^stare pro quib. intercedit, qua^to pare^ vt subditos praefectus excellat. Cu^
au^t ille and spiritum Sanctu^ inuocauerit, sacrificiu^que illud horrore ac
reuere^tia plenissimu^ perfecerit, co^muni omniu^ manibus assidue pertractato,
quaero ex te. and cat.
and all these things are not done, but by their holy hands, I say by the
hands of the Priests: How may it be, that without their help, a man may
either shun hell fire, or obtain the reward of the croune reserved in
heaven? Again he writes, that the priest is the ambassador from all the
world to desire God to be merciful, not only for the sins of the living, but
for the dead also. And anon after speaking of the sacrifice of the Mass, that
you deny, and showing what excellency in virtue the Bishope or priest ought
to have above other: he says, that he must in althings excel other for who^
he makes this intercession to God, so far as it is mete that the ruler pass
and exced the subject. For (says he) when the priest has called for the holy
Ghost, and has made the sacrifice, which we ought most to reverence, and to
tremble and fear at, handling continually our common Lord: I demand among
what states shall we place him? How great integrity shall we look for at his
hands? How great holiness and devotion? Consider what those hands ought to be,
that shall minister such things? Consider what tongue he ought to have, Locus
altari vicinus in illius honore^, q imolatur angeloru^ choris plenus est. Id
quod credere abu^de licet vel ex tanto illo sacrificio quod tu^ peragitur.
that shall speak such words? Consider finally that his soul ought to be of all
other most pure and holy, that shall receive so great, and so worthy a spirit.
At that time (he means of the co^secratio^ of the blessed sacrifice) the
angels are present with the priest, and all the orders of the heavenly powers do
make a shoute: the place that is nigh to the alter, is for the honor of him,
that is sacrificed, replenished with the companies of angels. Which a man may
well believe, by reason of so great a sacrifice as is then made.

Thus much have I showed you M. Horn out of that most learned light of the
Greek. Church, Ioannes Chrisostomus, as well to cause you to understand your
detestable heresy against the priesthod of the new testamente, as that the
priests have a dignity, and a singular excellent regimente, above secular
Princes. They have their spiritual sword, that two edged sword I say, that
cutteth both body and soul, and by excommunication (if the party repent not)
casts both into the deape dongeon of hell. And shall all this be counted no
rule nor regiment M. Horn, being in deed the chief and the principal regiment
of al other? It is, yt is M. Horn the highest government of al other, and of
greatest charge, and importance. And much better may yt be said to this
eua^gelical pastor, that was said to Agame^non.

(...) Iliad. ^.

(...).
It is not mete for him, all the night long to sleep.
that has so much people, and such a charge to keep.
Yea, ye are forced your self M. Horn to confess yt a spiritual government and
rule. Whereby of necessity follows the ouerturning and ouerthrowi^g of your
lay supremacy. For these being the chief matters or things Ecclesiastical, as
your self can not deny, and the Prince having nothing to do with them, as
you also confess, it can not be possible, that the Prince should have the
Supremacy in all causes or things Ecclesiastical. The Princes supremacy
ou^rthrowen by that that M. Horn him self grau^teth.
And so neither M. Fekenham nor any man else may take this oath for fear of
evident and open perjury. And of all madness, this is a madness, and a most open
contradiction to remove these things from the Prince, as ye do, and yet to
attribute to him without any exception the supremacy in all things or causes
Ecclesiastical: Yea and to urge men by other to confess the same. Which kind
of arguing is as wise as if a man would affirm, God to be the maker of al
things, the geuer of all things, the preserver of al things, and yet by and by
to say: God can not give the effect of grace to external Sacraments, God can
not preserve his own blessed Mother from al actual or original sin. Whereof
will follow, that God in deed is not omnipotent or almighty: those things
being taken away from him, wherein chiefly his almighty power consists.
For in such miraculous operations, surmounting far al power of men, God most
proprelie shows himself a God. As in such acts and causes Ecclesiastical
(as binding and loosing, preaching the word, ministering the Sacraments, etc.)
consists specially and most proprely the rule and government Ecclesiastical.
We need not therefore wrestle with you herein any farther, M. Horn, seeing you
can so preatily give your self a notable fall.

Yet one thing would I feign know more of you, M. Horn, if I may be so bold,
and learn, what you mean now at the length to come in with the supreme
Authority and power of the sword. What mean you, I say, to define unto us,
the one kind and sort of governing the Church of God, in these words: by
the supreme Authority and power of the sword to guide, care, provide, direct,
and aid Gods Church, etc? In all your book hitherto, of such supreme
Authority and power of the sword, you never spoke word. How chances it
then, the sword comes in now? Does the supreme government of the Church
of God consiste in the power of the sword? Then how was the Church of God
governed.300. years and more before the time of Constantine the Emperor, who
was the very first (as has been showed) that by the power of the sword, I
say, by the power of the sword, guided, cared, provided, directed and aided
Gods Church? Did the Church of Christ want a Supreme governor all those.300.
years and more? Again, do the Laws of the Church take force by the power of
the sword? You with M. Nowell, and with the Act of Parliament, do take away
from the clergy the power and Authority to make Church Laws, and
Constitutions: and you say and swear to, that no Convocation or Council of
Bishops, shall or may have force or Authority to decree any Co^stitution
Ecclesiastical, without the Princes consent, license, and supreme authority.
For this purpose also you have alleged the practice of so many Councils both
General and National, to make proof that by the supreme Authority of
Emperors and Kings, Canons and laws of the Church have been enacted and
decreed, not by the Bishops and Councels it self. Wherein how shamefully you
have misreported the whole practice of the Church, I have sufficiently showed
in the second and third Books. But in all your so long process you never yet
openly said, that by the power of the sword such Canons and Laws took
place. And come you now to say, that all this proceeded of the power of the
sword? Where is then now become the liberty of the Gospel, that your
graundsir Luther, and all your protestant progenitors of Germany do in all their
writings so much extolle, maintain, and defend against the Secular swoorde of
Civil Magistrates? Again you M. Horn, that do force the Scholars of Oxforde
to swear by book Oath, that Scripture only is sufficient to convince
every truth, and to destroy all heresies, you that will believe nothing, but
that as plain Scripture avouches unto you, tell us, I pray you, where find
you in all Scripture, that the Supreme Authority to govern the Church of
God, is by the power of the swoorde? What? Did not the Apostles govern the
Church of Christ all the time of their abode here in earth? And when or where
I pray you, used they the power of the Sword? Or because they used not that
power, were they not therefore the supre^ Governors? Had they not a power and
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical? De correptione and gratia. c. 3
Saint Augustine affirms: Doctores Ecclesiarum Apostoliomnia faciebant: and
praecipiebant quae fierent, and corripiebant si non fierent, and orabant vt
fierent. The teachers of the Churches, the Apostles did al things. They
commanded things to be done, they rebuked and used discipline if things were
not done. And they prayed, that things might be done. This declares that a
government and jurisdiction they used beside the bare preaching of the word.
But this government (says M. Horn) was not by the power of the sword, which
belongs only to Kings and Princes. Learn now then M. Horn, that the Church
of Christ has a power above the sword, and that as the Jewish Synagogue was
ruled with the sword, the transgressors of the law being punished by death,
so the Church of Christ is ruled by the Spiritual keys committed to the
Apostles and their successors, and the transgressors of the Church laws are
punished with the spiritual sword of that jurisdiction. S. Augustine says: De
fide and operibus Cap. 2.

Cum in Ecclesiae disciplina visibilis fuerat gladius cessaturus


Phinees the Priest slew the adulterers with the sword: which truly was
signified to be done in this time with degradations and excommunications, when
as in the Church discipline, the visible sword should cease. Lo, M. Horn. The
visible sword is no part of the Church discipline now. It was among the Jews
a great part of their discipline. Mark that it was no part of the Church
discipline. I do not deny, as the Donatistes did, that because in the
Apostles time, Princes used not the swoorde upon Heretics, and disobediente
Christians therefore they should not now use it. But I say the Princes sword
is no part of the Church discipline. I say with S. Augustine, this visible
sword in the Church discipline cease. If the Prince use the sword, it is no
Ecclesiastical government, nor it is not the supreme government. The Bishop
has a far superior government, De correp. and gratia Cap. 15.
and a more terrible sword to strike withal. Of the which S. Augustine
says: Ipsa quae damnatio nominatur, quam fecit episcopale Iudicium, qua poena
in Ecclesia nulla mayor est, potest. etc. That punishment which is called
condemnation, which is made by the judgment of the Bisshoppe, then the which
punishment there is in the Church no greater, may yet (if yt please God) turn
to a wholesome correption. And again of the Church discipline he says, where
by the Church (not by any Prince) the stubborn and disobedyent offender is
pronounced an Ethnicke and a publicayne, Grauius est, quan si gladio feriretur,
si stammis absumeretur, si feris subrigeretur. This is a more grievous
punishment, Con^ra ^duersur. legis and prophetarum. lib. 1. Cap. 17.
then if he were stryken with the sword, then if he were spent up in flames of
fyere, then if he were rent with wild beasts. You see then the Church has a
greater power to punish withal, then the princes sword. And to prove unto
you evidently, that the Princes sword can be no part of Ecclesiastical or
Spiritual government, I will wish you to mark but this one reason. The
Churches power, jurisdiction, and government, extends to the soul,
ouerseeth, guides, and rules the soul of man, not the body or any thing
appertaining to the body. But the Princes swoorde can not reach to the soul
of man. Ergo the Princes sword can not be any fit mean to govern as the
Church doothe, or to bear the Supreme government in Church matters. The Mayor
or first Proposition is clear and confessed not only of al Divines, but of all
Christian men that know what the Church and the soul means. The Minor is
also clear, if by nothing else, Luc. 12.
yet by this only place of the Gospel where our Savior says: Fear not
them that kill the body, and post haec non habent amplius quid faciant: and
then have no more to do. As much to say: whose swoorde can not reach to the
soul. Or as an other Evangelist writes: Which can not kill the soul. And
what is more repugnaunt to reason, Math. 10. c. 28
then to teach, that the Prince his sword which can not hurt the soul,
should be the supreme Gouernoure of the Church, all whose power is over the
soul? Whereof I reason thus. The Prince can not punnishe the soul of man:
Ergo he has no jurisdiction over it. Item he can not relieve it, or release
it, being in the bounds and distress either of infidelity, or of sin: Ergo
he can not be the supreme guider, and governor of it. Only the Bisshoppes
and Priests, do punish the soul by excommunication and binding of sins.
Only the Bisshoppes and Priests (I say Master Horn, those that are
proprelie called Priests) can release, absolve, Augustine. vt supra.
and make free the soul of man from the bounds and fetters of infidelity and
sin: Ergo they only have the true and proper government over the soul: If
over the soul, Ergo in all Spiritual or Ecclesiastical causes which al tend to
the soul health and to the only government of the same.

I grant for preservation of external quiet, unity and peace in the Church,
the Princes sword walks and punishes the body of me^ in the church. But this
is no Church discipline ( in the which as S. Austine teaches the visible sword
cease) this is no Church gouernemente, De fide and operibus Cap. 2.
described unto us in the Gospel, and practiced of the Church Ministers of
all ages and times. But this is a Civil gouernemente, aiding, not governing
the Church in times of extreme frowardenesse and obstinacy of Heretics and
missebeleuers. This does (as all other worldly things do) serve the Church
of God, as the body serves the soul, for execution of Church laws, for
repressing of schisms and seditions, and for the maintenance also of dew
obedience in those men, whose frailty or malice is such, that they more fear
the temporal swoorde, then the spiritual, and are moved more with external
damages, then with Ecclesiastical censures, briefly such as fear more the
torment of the body, then the loss of their souls.

And stands it now with your truth and honesty to say, that the supreme
government of the Church, stands in the power of the sword? But why (as I
said before) say you it now at the length, which before you never said, but
rather so extolled the princes supreme government, that you made him an
accurser of heretics, a maker of Church laws and constitutions, Act. 20. De
ciuit. Dei li. 20. cap. 10.
a principal confirmer of al Councelles, yea and a preacher of Gods words to?
And never spoke word of the sword, but covertly concealed that point until
now? Why M. Horn, but because the evidence of holy Scripture alleged by M.
Feckenham forced you thereunto? The place I say of the Acts, where S. Paul
confesses, that the Bishopes and priests ( properly so called, M Horn, as S.
Augustine tells you) were appointed of the holy Ghost to feed and to rule
the church, forced you to this plain distinction, and to grant now which you
never granted before, a certain rule and government to Bishops and
priests, which princes have nothing to do withal, plain contradictorie to
your former assertions, and to the Oath which you defend, attributyng supreme
government to the Princes in all manner causes ecclesiastical or spiritual
without exception. This also forced you to limit the Princes government with
the power of the sword, which in Church matters (as has been proved) is now
no power at all (though among the Jews it were) and which also, if it were a
power, is not yet the supreme power, seeing the Bishops and Priests have a far
greater and higher power to exercise and to practice upon the souls of men,
over which the Church properly, chiefly and only rules and governs, not over
the body, otherwise the^ the necessary co^iunctio^ of both implies the one
with the other. Gods name be blissed. The truth has forced you to open your
own falsehood, and the absurdity of your assertion, See the force of truth.
which you would so feign have concealed. The truth also has driven you to
grant that rule and government now to Bishops and Priests, which
hitherto in your book, and which also by the tenor of the Oath by you
defended, is attributed to the Prince only, and clean taken away from the
Bishops and Priests: Yea and to avouch, that Princes neither may, nor do
claim any such rule upon the^, when yet by you and by the Oath, they both may
and ought to claim no less then all together, without any exception or
limitation in the world. Wherefore (as I said before) we need to wrestle no
farther with you, seeing you can so roundly give your self so notable a fall,
and cast your self so properly in your own turn. And to avoid tediousnes, I
am driven here to break of, desirous otherwise to open diverse your other and
great absurdities in this Division. Now some of them I will note in your
margin among your manyfolde untruths, and content my self at this present,
with that which has been said.

The.157. Division. page 97. a.
M. Fekenham.
And when your L. shall be hable to prove, that these words of the Apostle
Paul, and by him written in his Epistle unto the Hebrews: Obedite praepositis
vestris, Heb. 13.
and subiacete eis: ipsi enim peruigila^t, quasi ratione^ pro animabus vestris
reddituri, vt cu^ gaudio hoc facia^t, et no^ geme^tes. Do ye obey your
spiritual governors, and submit your selves unto them, for they watch, as men
which must give account for your souls: that they may do it with joy and not
with grief. When your L. shall be hable to prove, that these words were not
written of the Apostle Paul, as well for all Christian Emperors, Kings and
Queens, as for the inferior sort of people, tha^ shall I in like manner yield
touching that text of Paul, and think my self very well satisfied.

M. Horn.
No man has or does deny, that the Church ministers has to govern the
flock by preaching, and feeding with the word, which is the rule or
government, that Paul speaks of in this place also: vvhereto all princes
are and ought to be subject and obedient. For this subjection and obedience,
to the word of the Ghospel, taught, and preached by the Bishops, sitting in
Christ's chair, which is the whole (.536.) The.536. untruth As before in the
531, 532. and 533. untruths.
rule and government they have or ought to claim, as propre to their calling,
is commanded so well to princes, as to the inferior sort of the people, as
you say truly, although your cause is no deal helped, nor my assertion any
(.537.) The 537. untruth. Your assertion is thereby utterly i^proued and
overthrown, for then the prince is not supreme governor in all causes.
whit proved thereby.

The.2. Chapter, of M. Fekenhams second reason, for not taking the Oath:
grounded upon S. Paul Heb. 13.
Stapleton.
THE second authority that M. Fekenham brings is out of S. Paul Obey your
(spiritual) governors, M. Fecke^hams.2. reason. Hebre. 13.
and submit your selves unto them, for they watch as men, that must give an
account for your souls. In which words The Apostle, as he teaches the sheep
to obey, so he techeth the pastors vigilare and clauum ac gubernacula tenere,
says Theodoretus, In Comm. Ibidem.
to watch and to rule the stern. For answer to this, M. Horn is yet ones
again revolted to his feding, and would feign feade us forth with a folishe
fly flawe, as thowghe this were meante no further, then that spiritual men
may feade the people and Prince to, with the word of God: whereunto all as well
the Princes as people are bownde to obey. And this, he says, is the whole
rule and gouernmente that they can properly claim. Nay Master Horn, not so,
let them have some more gouernemente, and at the least, so much as your self
granted them even in the last leaf before: that is, to minister Sacraments,
and to bind and lose. Will ye so sone abridge your late liberality? What if
the people Master Horn, or the Prince either will set light by the preachers
word, and will amend never a deal the more, for all his preaching, but
wexeth worse and worse, especially in open and notoriouse faults? Is there no
further remedy, but to suffer al things to run on? 1. Reg. 2.
Is the Bishop think you now excused? Why had then Ely such a greauouse
punishment for his unruly children? He told them their faults, he told them
that all the people spoke ill of them. But yet both he and his had a terrible
punishmente, quod non corripuerit eos. Because he did not rebuke the^: yet did
he rebuke the^. Vide Dionysium. 1. reg. 2.
But for that he did not rebuke them so vehemently and so earnestly as he
should have done: and as S. Hierome says, coercuit and corripuit eos, sed
lenitate seu mansuetudiue paternali, no^ seueritate and authoritate
Pontificali. He did correct and rebuke the^, but mekely and gently as fathers
are wo^te, not severely, nor with such authority as he being the bishop should
have done. Then if gentle or sharp words will not serve, the eua^gelical
pastor must take the staf in his hand, and break the obstinat and stubborn
heart with a terrible blow of excommunication, he must sequester this scabbed
sheep from the residue of the flock. For as S. Augustine says, Augustine.
epist. 50.
An no^ pertinet ad diligentia^ pastorale^, e^t illas oues quae etc. a grege
aberrauerint, si resistere voluerint, flagelloru^ terrorib. vel etia^ doloribus
reuocare?

Does it not appertain to the pastoral diligence, to call back such sheep,
as do go astraie, and if they resist, to call them back with terroure of the
rod, yea and with stripes too? 1. Cor. 4. and. 5.
And this is the rod S. Paul speaks of, and threateneth the Corinthians
withal. This is the rod with the which he beat the fornicatour there. This
rod many bishops used against Princes and Emperors. This rod Marcians
Father being a Bishop, Epiphan. haeres. 42. li. 1. tom. 3
used against his own son for deflouring a Virgin. To this spiritual
Authority the offe^der, what so ever he be, prince or other, is subject: and
therefore this proves evidently the Ecclesiastical Supremacy to rest in the
Clergy, and not in the Prince, which must obey as well as the other. And
therefore it is not true that ye say, that M. Fekenhams cause is no deal
helped by this place, nor your assertion any thing improued.

But let us step one step farther with you M. Horn, upon the ground of your
present liberalytye, lest as you have begone, you pinche us yet farther, and
take away all together from Bishops and Priests. Subjection, you say, and
obedience to the word of God taught and preached by the Bishops etc. is
commanded so well to Princes, as to the inferior sort of the people. If so M.
Horn, how did a lay parliament utterly disobey the doctrine of all their
Bishops, and enacte a new contrary to theirs? What obedience was there in
that parliament, so expressly required here by S. Paul, and so dew even of
Princes them selves, as you confess, to their Bishops? Will you say the
Bishops then preached not Gods word? And who shall judge that? Shall a lay
parliament judge it? Is that the obedience dew to Bishops? In case all the
Bishops of a realm erred, is there not a general Council to be sought unto?
Are there not other Bishops of other Countries to be cou^seled? Is not all the
Church one body? In matters of faith shall we sever our selves from our Fathers
and Brethern (the whole corpse of Christendom beside) by the virtue of an Act
passed by lay me^ only? No bishops, no Clerk admitted to speak, and say his
mind? O lamentable case. God forgive our dear Country this most haynouse
trespass. Then the which I fear our Realm committed not a more grievous
(except the first breach in King Henry's days) these many hundred years.

Yet one step farther. The Prince must obey and be fed at the Bishops
hand: you confess. What is that? Is it not, he must learn how to believe,
and how to serve God? Is it not the pastoral office, as S Augustine teaches,
Augustine. de verbis Dom. sec. Ioa^. sermon. 34.

Ezech. 34.


to open the springes that are hidden, and to give pure and sound water to the
thirsty sheep? Is not the shepeheardes office, to strenghthen that is weak, to
heal that is sick, to bind that is broken, to bring home again that is
cast away to seek that is lost, and so forth, as the Prophet Ezechiel,
describes? And what is all this, but to teach, to correct, to instruct, to
refourme and amend all such things as are amiss, either in faith or in good
life? If so, then in case the realm went a stray, should not they redress
us, which were pastors and shepherds in Christ's Church? If our own
shepherds did amiss, was there in all Christendom no true Bishops beside,
no faithful pastor, In lib. de pastoribus Cap. 10.11. and 13.
no right shepeheard? Verily S. Augustine teaches at large, that it is not
possible, that the shepherds should miss of the true doctrine. What soever
their life or manners be. But put the case so, that we may come to an issewe.
Must then the Prince feed us, alter our Religion, set up a new, stop the
shepherds mouths, play the shepherd him self. Is this, M. Horn, the
obedience that you teach Princes to show to their shepherds? God forgive them
that herein have offended, and God (in whose hands the hearts of Princes are)
inspire with his blessed grace the noble heart of our most gracious Souerain the
Queen's Majesty, that her highness may see and consider this horrible and deadly
inconvenience to the which your most wicked and blasphemouse doctrine has
induced her grace. You are the woulfe, M. Horn. And therefore no marvel if
you procure to tie the shepherd fast, and to mousell the dogs.

The.158. Division. Page 97. b.
M. Fekenham.
1. Cor. 14.
And when your L. shall be able to prove, that these words of Paul: Mulieres
in Ecclesijs taceant, etc. Let the women keep silence in the Church: for it is
not permitted unto them there to speak: but let them live under obedience,
like as the Law of God appoints the^, and if they be desirous to learn any
thing, let them ask their husbands at home, for it is a shameful and rebukeful
thing, for a woman to speak in the Church of Christ. When your L. shall be able
to prove, that these words of Paul, were not as well spoken of Queen's,
Duchesses, and of noble Women, as of the mean and inferior sort of Women:
like as these words of almighty God, spoken in the plague and punishment
first unto our mother Eve for her offense: and secondarily by her unto al women
without exception. vidz. Multiplicabo aerumnas, Genesis 3.
etc. I shall increase thy dolours, sorrows and conceiuings, and in pain and
travail, thou shall bring forth thy children, and thou shall live under the
authority and power of thy husband and he shall have the government and dominion
over thee. When your L. shall be able to prove, any exception to be made
either in these words spoken in the old law, by the mouth of God: either in
the words before spoken of the Apostle Paul in the new: than I shall in like
manner yield, and with most humble thanks, think my self very well
satisfied in conscience, not only touching all the before alleged testimonies,
but also in this second chief point.

M. Horn.
I do grant the words of the holy Scriptures in both these places to be
spoken to al states of women without exception. But what make they for your
purpose, how do they conclude and confirm your cause? Women must be
silent in the Church, and are not permitted to speak: That is, as your own
Doctor Nicolaus de Lyra expounds it, women must not teach and preach the
doctrine in the Church, neither dispute openly: Therefore our Savior Christ
did not commit to Kings, Queens, and Princes, the Authority to have and
take upon them (.538.) The.538. untruth. M Feckenham reasons not so. But
thus. Therefore women can not take upon them the Supreme government in all
causes etc.
any part of government in Ecclesiastical causes. As (.539.) The.539.
untruth, The argument is nothing like.
though a young Nouice of your Munkishe order should have argued: Nuns
must keep silence, and may not speak in the Cloysture, nor yet at Dynner,
time in the fraytrie: therefore your deceyuer the Pope did not commit
Authority to his Prouincialles, Abbottes, Priores, and Prioresses, to have and
take upon them the government under him self in Munkishe and Nunnishe causes
and matters? What man vvoulde have thought Master Fecke^ham to have had so
(.540.) The.540 untruth. This argument is made with good and great
consideration, as shall appear.
little consideration, although unlearned, as to vouche the silence of women
in the Church, for a reason to improve the Authority of Princes in Church
causes?

The.3. Chapter. Of M. Fekenhams third reason taken out of S. Paul also.1.
Cor. 14.
Stapleton.
M. Fecke^hams 3. reason. 1. Cor. 14.
Master Feckenham his third reason is, that women are not permitted to speak
in the Church, and therefore they can not be the heads of the Church. To this
M. Horn answers: first that this place of S. Paul must be understood of
teaching, preaching, and disputing: and that therefore it will not follow
thereof, that they may not take upon the^ any government in Ecclesiastical
causes. And then being merrily disposed, he says this Argument is much like, as
if a young Nouice should reason thus. Nu^nes must keep silence in the Cloisture:
therefore the Prioresses have not the government in Nu^nish causes and matters.
Concerning the first part of his answer, I say that the argument is good and
sufficient. For if teaching, preaching, and disputing in matters of religion,
be causes and matters ecclesiastical: and if women be imbarred from this, then
is there a sufficient cause, why M. Fekenham may not take this oath, that a
woman is supreme head in all causes spiritual and ecclesiastical: Namely to
erect and enact a new and proper religion throughout her realm by the virtue
of her own proper and supreme government. For to this end, M. Horn, is the oath
te^d^ed. It is to evident. It can not be dissembled. Again, the said place of
S. Paul is of the order and manner of expou^ding of scripture, as it appears
by the text. If then S. Paul forbids a woman to expound scripture: how can a
woman take upon her, to be the chief judge of al those that expound the
scripture? I mean in that very office of expou^ding Scripture, in decreei^g,
determining, and enacting, what religion, what belief, what doctrine shall take
place. And such she must needs be, if she be a supreme head. Such do you and
your fellows make her. Such authority you M. Horn, throughout all this book,
attribute to your new supreme heads, Emperors and Ki^gs by you alleged. You
make them to preach, to teach, and to prescribe to the Bishops in their
Councils, what and how they shall do in their ecclesiastical matters. If then
by you a supreme Gouerner in ecclesiastical matters, must be so qualified, as to
be present in Councels of Bishops, to prescribe rules for the Bishops to
follow, to determine what they shall do, and to confirm by royal asse^t the
decrees of bishops, yea and to make them selves, decrees and co^stitutions
ecclesiastical, but a woman by S. Paul, may not ones speak in the Church,
that is, in the Congregation or assembly of the faithful, and by you a woman
may not preach, teach, or dispute: undoubtedly both by S. Paul, and by your
own confession, a woman can not be a supreme Governor, such as the Oath
forces me^ to swear. I say, supreme governor in all ecclesiastical causes. No
nor in so many causes by a great deal, as you pretend in this your book,
other Kings and Princes to have practiced supreme government in. Consider now,
M. Horn, how it may stand with S. Paul's doctrine, that a woman may be a
supreme gouerner in all ecclesiastical causes: namely such as you in this book,
would make your Reader believe, that al Emperors, Kings and Princes hitherto
have been. Now put the case (as we saw it viij. years past) that in a doubtful
matter of doctrine and religion to be tried by scripture, the whole number of
bishops agree upon some determinate and resolute exposition with their Clergy,
and would by an Ecclesiastical law of Co^uocation or Council set forth the
same? Al their resolution and determination is not worth a rush by your Oath
and by your manner of talk in this book, if the Prince do not allow and
confirm the same. And how this will stand with S. Paul in this chapter, tell us
I pray you: presupposing (as the statute requires) that the Princes allowing
though she be a woman, is necessary. And now are ye come to th^s point, and
driven thereto by the force of this place, to say: that the place does not
prove, but a woman may have some government in ecclesiastical causes: As though
the Question were now of some government only, and not of Supreme and absolute
Government in all manner things and causes ecclesiastical. If therefore this
place do prove, that a woman has not the Supreme and absolute government in
all causes ecclesiastical, but that in some, and them the chiefest, she must
hold her peace, as yt does evidently, and ye can not deny yt: then is M.
Fekenham free from taking the oath of the supremacy, and then has S. Paul
utterly confuted that Oath, and your whole book withal.

This I say also, as by the way, that if this chapter must be taken, for
teaching, preaching and disputing, as M. Horn says and truly, that M. Jewel
went far wide from S. Paul's meaning, when he applied yt to the common service
of the Church, whereof it is no more mea^t, the^ of the common talk in
tauernes. As for M. Horns second merry mad objection, no man is so mad to make
such an argument but himself. And therefore he may as long, and as iolily as he
will, triu^ph with him self in his own folly. Yet I would wish M. Horn to
speak well of Nuns, were it but for his grandsir Luthers sake, and the
heavenly coniunctio^ of him and a Nonne together: Which unhappy conjunction of
that Vulca^ and Venus, engendered the unhappy brood of M. Horn and his fellows.
But that this folish fond argument is nothing like to M. Fekenha^s argument,
yt may easily be proceiued, by that we have already and sufficiently said.

M. Fekenham. The.159. Division. page 98. a.
The third chief point is, that I must not only swear upon the Evangelists,
that no foraine person, state or potentate, has or ought to have any power
or authority Ecclesiastical or Spiritual within this Realm: but also by
virtue of the same Oath, I must renounce all foreign power and authorities,
which for a Christian man to do, is directly against these two Articles of our
Creed: Credo sancta^ ecclesia^ Catholica^: I do believe the holy catholic
church. Credo Sanctoru^ co^munione^: I do believe the communion of saints. And
that there is a participatio^ and communion amongst all the beleuers of
Christ's Church, which of the Apostle Paul are called Saints. Adiuro vos per
Dominu^ vt legatur haec Epistola omnibus sanctis fratribus. And herin I do
join this issue with your L. that wha^ your L. shall be able to prove by
Scripture, Doctor, General Counsel, or by the continual practice of any one
Church, or part of al Christendom, that by the first Article, I believe the
holy Catholic Church, is meant only that there is a Catholic Church of Christ,
and not so that by the same article every Christian man is bound to be subject
and obedient to the Catholic Church, like as every member ought to have
obedience unto the whole mystical body of Christ. And further when you shall
be hable to prove by the second Article: I do believe the Communion of Saints,
is not so meante, that a Christian man ought to believe such atonement, such
a participation and communion, to be amongst al believers and members of
Christ's Catholic Church in doctrine, in faith, in Religion, and Sacraments,
but that it is laufull for us of this Realm therein to dissent from the
Catholic Church of Christ dispersed in all other Realms: and that by a
corporal Oath it is laufull for us to renounce, and refuse to have communion
with the Catholic Church so dispersed, because it is a forrayne authority and
power out of this Realm: when soever your L. shall be hable to prove this by
Scripture, Doctor, General Council: or yet by continual practice of any one
Church, or part of al Christendom: Than shall I in like manner, yield in this
third point, and with most humble thanks, shall think my self very well
satisfied therein.

M. Horn.
This third chief point is (.541.) The.541. untruth. It contains an
argument, that M Horn shall never assoyle.
nothing else, but a misshapened lump of words: containing first an argument
grounded upon a kind of Opposition, that no wise or learned man ever read
of, but is nevvelie forged and hammered out of your own brain: Then, an
issue, to have me prove that thing, which being rightly understood, no
Christian does doubt of, or will deny. And last of all, an huge heap of
flat and manifest (.542.) The 542. untruth. Slanderous and injurious
Lies against the whole Realm, to set a good face upon an evil favored
cause, which can find no help or ease by plain and simple truth. The
weighty burden, that you are laden with and can not bear, is that you must
by Oath renounce all foreine power and authority: the cause that makes you
fainte and feeble, is, that it is directly against two Artiles of our Creed:
So that your feeble reason is grounded after your simple skill upon the place,
ab oppositis and pugnantibus. Before I aunsvvere to the argument, I will put
the Reader in remembrance of the division which you make, chopping and
chaunginge one (.543.) The.543. untruth. For they, are 2. diverse articles, not
one.

Cleme^s in compend. de fide.


Article in tvvaine, to make some shevve of an heinous matter. Surely it were
ouermuche detestable, if you were moved to swear but against one article of
our Creed, as ye were never moved by me, either to or fro, to swear any
thing at all. There be three symboles or Creedes, which have been allowed
and received of Christ's Catholic Church. The symbol of the Apostles, of
the Nicen Council, and of Athanasius. The Apostolical is so called, because
it was collected (as some say) by the twelve Apostles, and therefore
contains (as the commonly received opinion is in Christ's Church) according
to the number of the twelve Apostles, but twelve Articles, which are called
in the usual speech of the Catholic Christians, the twelve Articles of our
Creed or belief. If this, I believe the communion of saints, be a several
Article from this, I believe the holy Catholic Church, as you do fantasy,
then there must needs be at the least thirtene Articles of the Creed,
contrary to the (.544.) The.544. untruth. The common opinion of learned me^
rekoneth more the^ 12. Articles.
universally received opinion of the Catholic Church. You were wont to
stay your self much upon the custom of the Catholic Church, and vvoulde
urge stiflie although not so truly the universally received opinion of the
Catholic Church, as a matter that might not be rejected, or denied: and
how chances it now, that you are become such a chaungeling, that clean
(.545.) The.545. untruth. As before
contrary to the use of the Catholic Church, which acknowledged but
twelve, you vvil make thirtene Articles of the Creed at the least? Besides
th^s, the Catholic Church in the time of Cyprian and Augustine, and before
also, did not reken or judge these to be two several Articles, but did
coumpte them one article, concluding these words, the communion of Saints,
in this sentence, I believe a Catholic Church of Christ, recyting the
Symbol without rehearsal or mentioning, the communion of Saints, as it is
plainly set forth by S. Cyprian and Augustine, in their expositions of the
Apostolical Creed. The matter meant by the communion of Saints, is uttered
in these words: I believe the holy Catholic Church of Christ. Whereunto
has been added sense these ancient Fathers t^mes, as it may seem by the
way of explication, communion of Saints, to express in plainness of
speech, that Christ's Catholic Church, is nothing else, but a fellowship, and
communion of faithful ones, which are saints. Now let us see how to
swear, as this third chief point of the Oath sets forth, is directly
against this article of our Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church, the
communion of Saints. All true subjects ought and must renounce and forsake
all foraine jurisdictions, powers, superioririe, prehemine^ces, and
authorities of every foraine Prince, and prelate, state, or potentat. This is
the proposition of that part of the Oath: to the which adioyne this
proposition, all true subjects ought and must believe, an holy Catholic church
of Christ, the communion of saints. Espy now what opposition is betwixt
these two propositions, that they may not both match together, and be
verified in one true and faithful subject. The one, say you, is directly
against the other. Then say I, there is a direct oppositio^ and repugnancy
betwixt them, by due examination we shall find out the oppositio^. Try the
parts of these propositio^s severally without the verb that coupleth them
together, and you shall not find any opposion, either contrary relative,
privative, or disparat: join them together with the verb that coupleth, and
being propositions, they are not one against the other contrary, subco^trary,
subalterne, nor (546.) The.546. untruth. They are plain co^tradictory one to
an other, as shall appear.
co^tradictory, and therefore untruly, and not less unskillfully babled of you,
that the one is directly against the other, when a young scholar that has red
but the rudime^ts of his Logik, could have seen and judged, that there is in
the^ no oppositio^ or repugnancy at al. To renounce and forsake (.547.)
The.547. untruth. joined with impiety. The catholic Church, that you by oath
renounce, is the Church of Christ, not of antichrist
Antichrist and his church by oath or knowledge and to believe in Christ and
rightfully by all manner of ways, stands neither directly nor in directly one
against the other, but are matched together and agrees iu^pe one with the
other. Surely your eyes were not matches, neither were your vvittes at home,
when you spied out this repugnancy, if you had not published this learned
piece of work, your friends should never have known, what an huge heap
of co^ning and knouledge, The definition of the catholic Church* imperfect
as shall appear.
is hidden in that little head of yours. The demand in your issue is easily
proved by the description or definition of Christ's true Catholic church. The
catholic Church of Christ, is a multitud, society, and communion of saints
and faithful ones, that have been, shall be, and are now one live in the earth,
how and wheresoever they be divided and dispersed in time and place, the
which multitude of saints, have a participatio^ in communion amongst
themselves of al good things, given, granted, and grovvi^g from god through
Christ, of spirit, faith, sacraments, prayer, remission of syns, and heavenly
bliss, and are united to Christ their head by faith, and fastened together
amongst themselves, as members of one body with the bo^d of love. To this
catholic Church, every Christian man is bound to be subject and obedient as
a member ought, and may be subject and obedient to the body.

And we do teach and confess in this Church such an attoneme^t,
participatio^, and communion, among all the members in doctrine, faith,
Religion, and Sacraments, that neither this, nor any other Realm, may laufully
dissent from this Church, or renounce and refuse to have communion therevvith,
as God be praised we of this realm do now shevve our selves by all Christian
means, never more at any time, to (.548.) The.548. untruth. You have no
agre^ment, consent, or unite of doctrine among your selves.
agree and consent in the unity of this Catholic Church, in necessary
doctrine, right faith, true Religion, and the right use of Christ's
Sacraments. The foul (.549.) The.549. untruth mere slanderous.
lies that you heap together, vvherevvith shamefully to defoyle your own
neast and native country, neadeth none other co^futatio^, tha^ only to make
the^ plain to be seen and judged of al me^, that the Realm may be sorry, that
ever it nestled so unnatural and filthy a bird, and your friends ashamed of
so malicious and impudent a Liar. This is a lewd (.550.) The 550. untruth. M.
Feke^ha^ said not so of the Realm.
Lie, that this Realm dissenteth from the Catholic Church in the forenamed
poi^ts. This is a (.551.) The 551. untruth. It is right true that in effect you
do so, as it shall appear.
shameful Lie, that by corporal oath or any other ways, we renounce and
refuse to have communion with the Catholic Church of Christ. And this is a
monsterous (.552.) The.552. untruth. For M. Fekenham said not, that it is so,
but that by Oath you make it so, which is true, as it shall be proved.
Lie that the catholic Church is a foraine authority and power out of this
Realm. Who was ever so mad, as ones to think, or so doltish as to speak
any thing against the Catholic Church, but specially to forsake it, and that
because it is a foraine power and authority. The Oath makes no mention in any
one word, of the Catholic Church, it speaks of (.553.) The.553. untruth.
Notorious. The Oath speaks of Every foraine Prelate, not of a foraine prelat.
You are now ashamed your self of the Oath, M. Horn,
a foraigne Prince, Prelate, and Pote^tate, and so of the foraigne Power and
authority of such a foraigne state. Whereupon M. Fekenha^ concludes as it
were by Revelation, in a Mo^kishe dream, without rhyme or reason, that
therefore the catholic Church is forsaken, as though there were no difference
betwixt a foraine Prince, or prelate and the Catholic Church: or that the
Catholic Church might be called a foreine Power, or a forine authority to a
Christian Realm. This is such a new kind of Divinity is was never heard or
read of in any writer, no not in the Lege^d of Golden Lies.

The.4. Chapter, defending M. Feckenhams third chief point, and proving
evidently, that the Oath destroys two Articles of our Creed. And by occasion,
of the protestants dissension in these low Countres he^e.
Stapleton.
The 3. chief point.
THE effect of M. Fekenhams third point, rests in this, that he cannot
vouchsafe to take the oath, for that it is against two articles of the faith: I
believe the holy cathol^ke Church and: I believe the communion of Saints. For
the which argument M. Horn sets upon him with great force both of divinity
and logike. He maruaileth, that M. Feke^ha^ contrary to th'opinio^ universally
received of all the catholic Church makes of xij. xiij. articles of the creed:
making the communion of saints an article of the faith, which was none in the
time of S. Cypria^ and S. Augustine. Then like a lusty logicioner he
avouches, that there is no way any co^tradictio^ to the catholic faith, in
taking an oath, for the renouncing of al foraine power. Last of al he sets
forth a definition of the catholic church. Suerly M. Fekenham had need beware
now least M. Horn prove him an heretic, for he can not be far from heresy,
that mainteineth an opinion contrary to the universal church. But because ye
charge him so hardly M. Horn, we must see well to the matter, and we must
consider somewhat exactly, whether there be no more articles then xij. to be
believed. And here though ye bear the countenance of a great Bishop, I must be
so bold to bring you to your cathechisme, and to sever every thing into his
own proper kind. The first article then is, I believe in God. The.2. I
believe in God the Father, The.3. that he is omnipotente: The.4. that he is the
creator of heaven and earth: The.5. I believe in Jesus Christ: The.6 I believe
he was conceived of the holy ghost The.7. That he was borne of the virgin
Marie: The.8. That he suff^ed under Pontius Pilatus: and the.9 that he
descended into hell. The.10. that he rose f^o^ death the.3. day. The.11 that he
ascended into heaven: and the.12. that he shall come to judge the quick and
the dead: Here have ye alredie twelve articles: the denial of any one of the^
being open heresy. And the^ immediately have we yet certain articles more. As:
I believe in the holy ghost, I believe the catholic church, the communion of
saints, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection of the flesh, and the life
everlasting. Deny me, In hoc co^muniter co^cordant Theologi and canonistae.

Gull. Linvvood in co^stit. prouinc. de summae trinit ca. 1.. item alij.

D. Thom. 2.2. q. 1. Arti 8. Host. and Io. And. in rub. de sum. trinitate.
Ruffinus i^ symbolo.


if ye dare M. Horn any one of these to be an article of our faith contained
by express words in the common creed. I say nothing here of many other
articles that ye are as well bound to believe as these. As that Christ is
consubstantial to the Father, that he has two natures, and two wills, and
that the holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the son, with such like.
The opinion of many learned me^ in the church is, M. Horn, that there be
fowrtene articles of the faith, wherein as well the divines as the canonistes do
commonly agree. And to omit other countries, the bishops of England in their
sinodes have determined and taken order by diverse co^stitutions prouincial,
that as well the articles of the faith according to this number, as the.10.
co^mau^deme^ts should be quarterly expounded, and declared to the people by
their curates in the vulgar tongue. Truth yt is, that they are commonly called
the.12. articles of the faith, not because they are precisely but xij. But
because yt is thowght that the Apostles before they were dispersed abroad in
the world to preach, made each one a parcel of the common creed. And for that
cause, they are usually called the.12. articles. Or for that they be reducible
to.12. principal articles, to the which some do reduce the^, or to.14. as they
are usually reduced in the Schools. In this sort the Article of the communion
of Saints, may be comprehended in the Article of the holy Catholic Church.
Under the which, as ye say, S. Cypria^ and S. Austine do comprehend it. Yet in
this point ye are deceived, that ye suppose the exposition of the Creed to be
made by S. Cyprian. For it is not his exposition, but Ruffinus or some others:
as the thing it self shows most euide^tlie. Touching the.2. point, we fear
nothing your Logike, nor your high cunning: whereby ye tell us of an oppositio^
contrary, relative, privative, and disparatiue: and of Propositions contrary,
M. Horn depraueth M. Fekenha^s argument.
subco^trary, subalterne, and co^tradictory. Less Logike might have served, M.
Horn: for ye do not soil M. Feke^hams, but your own Argument. And then is it
an easy matter for a man, framing an argument of his own, to frame also what
solution it pleases him. But let us take M. Fekenhams true argument, and we
shall find a plain contradictory (which is the extremest of al oppositio^s)
between the tenor of the Oath, and between this Article of our Creed, that M
Fekenham here touches. This is (you say your self here M. Horn) the
proposition of that part of the oath. Al true subjects ought and must forsake
al foraine iurisdictio^s, powers, superiority, praeeminences and authorities
of every foraine Prince, and Prelate, state or Potentate. The proposition of M.
Fekenha^, The oath contrary to an Article of our creed
is, that to believe the holy Catholic Church, is as much to say, as to be
subject and obedient to the Catholic Church. But the Catholic Church
co^prehe^deth all the corpse of Christe^dom, as well without the realm as within
the realm, subject and obedient to one head the Pope of Rome. And this Pope of
Rome is to you a foraine Prelate, Power and Potentate, as your self does
afterward expound it: Ergo by virtue of the oath, you force all the Queen's
subjects to renounce and forsake all the corpse of Christe^dom without the realm:
which is, as I have said, the extreme co^tradictory to this, Al true subjects
ought and must believe, obey, and be subject to the whole corpse of Christendom,
as well without the Realm as within.

You answer. The Oath makes no mention in any one word of the Catholic
Church. But I reply: In that you exclude al foraine power and authority, you
exclude also the Catholic Church, which is no less forain to you, the^ is the
Pope, to whom that Church is subject, as the body to the head.

You say, the Oath speaks of a foraine Prince, Prelate, and Potentate, and
so of the foraine power and authority of such a foraine state, but I reply:
First that you belie the Oath. For the Oath speaks, not, of a foreign
Prince, Prelate and Potentate, but of every foraine Prince, Prelate and
potentate, as but the second leaf before, your self describes this part of
the Oath. And so expressly you renounce, as al Princes so all Prelates of
Christ's Church, which is the whole Catholic Church. And so the Oath is
plain contradictory to this Article: I believe the Catholic Church.

Secondarily, I reply, that the foraine authority of such a foraine state is
(in your sense) the whole Churches authority subject to the Pope of Rome. And
so ones again, by the report of your Oath in renou^cing al forain authority, you
renounce all the Churches authority without the realm of England: as much to
say, you renounce to believe and obey the Catholic church. And as much to say,
you protest by oath, to believe and obey, only the church within the realm of
England. Consider now, good Reader, whether this third part of the oath, be not
mere co^tradictory in effect, to this article of our Creed, I believe the
Catholic Church: supposing that we must not only believe, but also obey and be
subject to the Catholic Church. Which is the Argument that M. Fekenham
proposes, and is the demand in M. Fekenhams issue. To the which M Horn
answers never a whit. But frames a another opposition such as in deed might
well become a dremer in his dreme. Again, between this Article of our Creed: An
other contradiction betvve^ the Oath, and an article of our Creed.
I believe the Communion of Saints (and your oath) I renounce al foraine
iurisdictio^s, power, superiority, praeemine^ce, of every foraine Prince and
Prelate: is a plain and extreme co^tradiction. For as to renounce every forain
Prince, bi^deth all the subjects of England, to obey only the prince of that
la^d, and no prince out of the la^d, in all temporal causes and things: which
part of the Oath no Papist in England ever refused to take (and which for my
part, M. Barlow of Chichester can bear me witness, I refused not, but
expreslie offered my self to take, at what time upon refusal of the other part,
he deprived me (as much as lay in him) of my prebend in that church) so to
renounce every forain Prelate (as the oath expressly speaks) binds all the
subjects of England to obey only the Prelates of that la^d, and not to obey any
Prelate without the land what soever he be, in any spiritual or Ecclesiastical
cause. Which is as every man may see, the extreme co^tradictory to this Article
of our Creed. I believe the Communion of Saints. Whereby is meant, as M Fekenha^
reasons (and M. Horn denies not, nor can with any shame deny) that every
Christian man ought to believe a perfect atonement, participation, and
communion to be emongst al beleuers and members of Christ's Catholic Church
in doctrine, in faith, in religion, and sacraments.

He confesses also, that it is not lauful for us of the realm of England
therein to dissent, from the Catholic Church of Christ dispersed in all other
Realms. This is a most true and invincible opposition between the Oath and the
article or part of our Creed: most truly and learnedly set forth by M. Feck.
lewdly dissembled and no whit answered by M. Horn. VVat it is to renounce the
authorite of every forrayn prelate.


Now though you and your fellows M. Horn, will seem to expound by the authority
of every foraine Prelate, the authority of the Pope only, yet who sees not,
what an heap of absurdities do follow thereof?

For first, is the Pope every forain Prelate? or if he be not, every forain
Prelate?

Secondly is every forain Prelate, the Pope? then have we

Thirdly, why should you rather mean by a forain Prelate

Fourthly, when you renounce every forain Prelat* You do plainly renounce al
Prelates whatsoever without the realm

Fifthly albeit the oath, had expressly named or intended to renounce the pope
only, yet in so doing they had renou^ced al Catholic bishops beside. And that
not only, because al Catholic bisshoppes are subject to the Pope, as to their
head (whereby renou^cing the Head, you renounce also the body under that Head)
but also, because the faith, the doctrine, and the religion of the Pope of Rome
is no other, the^ the faith doctrine and religion of al other Catholic bishops.
Neither is the faith of other Catholic bishops any other faith, the^ the Pops
faith is. Therefore who renou^ceth by oath the Pope of Rome for a forain Prelat,
and his faith and doctrine for forain, he renou^ceth also by oath, the faith
and doctrine of al other Catholic bishops without the Realm of England for
forain.

all power and Authority of every foreign Prelat, you renounce the Luthera^ and
Sacrame^tary Superinte^dents, of Geneua, of Zurich, of Basil, of Witte^berg and
of al other protestant prelates without the realm of England, no less then the
Catholic bishopes in Germany, or any other where. And so stand you post alone
in matters of religion, not to be informed, instructed, or corrected in any
doubtefull matter, or peril of schism. As though you had a warrant from the
holy Ghost, neither to fail in the faith, nor at any time to have Princes that
may fail. For all this you annex and unite to the Crown of England for ever.
Seue^thly and last in excludi^g and al power, Authority and Jurisdiction of
every forain Prelat, you exclude and renounce the whole body of the Church
without the realm, which consists most properly and most effectually of the
bishops and prelates the heads thereof. And as in temporal Jurisdiction, the oath
binds all the subjects of the Realm of England to obey the only kings and
Queen's of that Realm (which we do grant also most gladly) so that if al
princes in the world, would join together and conclude a kind of regiment,
appoint laws and enact statutes for the better ordering and directing of the
common wealth, the subjects of England by virtue of this oath are bound to
renounce al such power, except our own prince would allow the^ and co^desce^d
thereunto (which thing is reasonable enough, for all countries need not to be
governed in external matters after one sort, nor at al times a like, the state
thereof being cha^geable and mutable) eue^ so in spiritual or Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction, the oath so expressly renounceth al power and Authority of forain
prelates, that if al prelates and bishops of the world beside, would mete
together or otherwise agree i^ one truth, order, or law ecclesiastical (which
has often ben don and may always be done in general Councils) the subjects of
England are bound under pain of perjury and of a praemunire to renounce al such
orders, laws, and decrees or concluded Truths: which is shortly to say, to
renounce and forswear al obedience to the General Councels, that is, the whole
corpse of Christendom represented therein, except it shall please the prince and
prelates of our Country to agree to the same. Which is to make our prince, and
our prelates either as superiors to al other princes and Countries, or at the
lest as alienats and strangers from the whole body of Christendo^ beside, as
though we had a proper Christ, a proper Gospel, and looked for a proper
heaven, in the which other christened Nations should find no place. And what is
this else, but by book Oath flatly to renounce the Catholic Church, and the
communion of Saints, both which in our Creed we profess to believe? These be
(M. Horn) the horrible absurdities that does necessarily follow of this part of
the Oath: And whereas M. Horn says, it were over much detestable if M. Fecknam
were moved to swear, but against one article of our Creed, M. Horn must needs
confess this oath to be over much detestable, whereby not only M. Fekenham,
but many other are moved and forced to swear against an especial article of
our Creed: to wit, Against our obedience to the Catholyke Church. The effect
of the Oath, and the sense of that Article, being clean contrary one to the
other. The which, that it may to the unlearned Reader more plainly appear, in
this Table following I have opened the whole contrariety.

THE TABLE

The Article of our Creed.

I believe the Catholic Church.

Hereof arises this proposition, as M. Fekenham by a similitude sets it
forth, and M. Horn allows it. fol. 100. b.

All Englishmen being Christians ought to admit, and receive, profess, and
obey the Authority of the Catholic Church, that is, of the bishops of all
Christendom (of whom the greatest part are forayne prelates to our Realm) in
matters of faith and doctrine touching the same.

The contrary hereof is.

No Englishmen though Christians, may admit, profess or obey any Authority
of any forain prelat without the Realm of England.

The tenor of one part of the Oath, as M. Horn reports it: page 99. b.

All true subjects ought and must renounce and forsake all foreign
jurisdictions, powers, superiority, preeminences and Authorities of every
foreign prince and prelat, state or potentat.

The equivalent of this part of the Oath is.

No true subject of England (though Christian) ought or may admit and receive
any foreign Authority, power or Jurisdiction, of any forayne prelat.

Thus then, the equivalent proposition of the Oath, matcheth iumpe with the
contrary of the Article, and stands clean opposite to the equivalent of the
Article. Thus.

The equiuale^t proposition of the Article of our Creed, is. The equivalent of
the Oath, is. Al Englishmen being Christians ought to admit and receive the
authority of forain prelates, (the most part of Christendom being to us foraine)
in matters of faith and Doctrine touching the same by them authorized.
Contrary. No Englishmen though Christians ought or may admit and receive any
forayne Authority of any forayne prelat. Subalterne. CONTRADICTORY.
Subalterne. Some Englishmen being Christians ought to admit and receive the
Authority of forayne prelates etc. Subcontrary. Some Englishmen being
Christians ought not to receive and admit, but to renounce and forsake al
forayne authority of al foreign prelates etc.

By this it appears, that the equivalent of the Oath is clean contrary to
the plain sense of the Article of Our Creed, set forth by M. Fekenham in
the similitude of the members and the body: and in the same similitude
confessed of M. Horn for good. By this also it appears, that a true subject
taking the Oath (meaning as he swears, which if he do not, he forsweareth
himself) and a true Christian professing his Creed can not possibly stand
together, but are direct contrary one to the other. The one professi^g
obedience to the body of the Church (co^sisti^g for the most and chiefest part
of forayne Bisshoppes) as every member must obey the whole body: the other
renou^cing flatly all Authority of all forayne prelates, as in deed no member
of that Catholic body, but as a schismatic part cut of from the whole.
Then will it to our great confusion of us be verified which S. Augustine
says. Turpis omnis pars est, Confess. lib. 3. Cap. 8.
suo vniuerso non congruens. Filthye and shameful is that part, which agrees
not with his whole. And which is not only shameful, but most pernicious and
dangerous of all, what place shall then all General Councelles have with us?
Quorumest in Ecclesia saluberrima Authoritas: Epist. 118. ad Ianua.
whose Authority in the Church is most wholesome, says S. Augustine?

Verilye the Christen inhabitants of our Country, more then a thousand years
paste had learned an other lesson. For whereas the Pelagian heretics had
infected the Brittaynes with their pestiferous heresy, Beda. lib. 1. cap. 17.
the Brittaynes them selves being (as venerable Bede records) neither willing
to receive their lewd doctrine, neither able to refute their wyly and wicked
persuasions: devised this wholesome Council, to seek for aid of the Bisshoppes
of France, against their spiritual enemies wherevpo^ two learned bisshops of
France Germanus and Lupus were sent into Brittanie, to redress and repress
those heresies. If those Catholic Brittanies had taken such an oath, as M.
Horn here does justify: they should I trow have incurred perjury or treason,
to seek redress in matters of religion at the hands of those foraine
Bisshoppes.

Likewise when Melitus the first Bisshoppe of London travailed out of England
to Rome, Bed. lib. 2. cap. 4. Idem lib. eodem ca. 19.
to counsel Pope Boniface of matters touching the direction of the English
Church: when also the Clergy of Scotland, being troubled with the Pelagian
heresy and schismatic observation of Easter, sent to Rome for redress,
Master Horn must be driven to say, either that those Bisshoppes committed
perjury and treason against their Princes, or else that in those days no such
oath was tendered, nor no such regiment practiced on Princes parts, as this
oath commands.

Farther, if it be necessary, reasonable, or requisite, that all true subiestes
must renounce the Jurisdiction and Authority of every forain prelate: How
far was S. Augustine ouersene, which so often times, so earnestlye, and so
expressly charge the Donatistes, with the Authority, power and jurisdiction
of forain prelates beyond the seas out of Afrike? He says of them, touching
the accusation of Cecilianus their Bisshoppe, Epist. 48. ad Vincentium.

Co^t. Dona. post collatione^. ca. 4


Quem primo vtique apud collegas transmarinos conuincere debuerant. They ought
first of all to have convinced him before his fellow Bisshops beyond the seas.
He says farther, that in case Cecilian had been gyltye, they ought not
therefore to separate themselves from the Churches beyond the seas, of
Ephesus, of Smirna, of Laodicea, and of other Countries. He says, the whole
Church of Christ is but one body: And they that separate them selves from
that body, vt eorum co^munio non sit cu^ toto, quacu^que diffunditur, Lib. de
vnitat. Ecclesiae. c. 4.
sed in aliqua part separata inueniatur, manifestum est, eos non esse in
Ecclesia Catholica, so that they communicate not with the whole (body)
whersoeuer it be spread abroad, but be found to be separated in some part
thereof, it is manifest, that they be not in the Catholic Church.

I say now M. Horn: if by virtue of this oath every true subject must
renounce every foraine prelate: then did S. Augustine much wrong to the
Donatistes, to require them to convince their adversary before the Bisshops
beyond the seas, which does import an Authority of al those forain bishops over
the Africans alone: the^ was he to blame to charge them with separation from
forain prelates of Ephesus, Smirna, and Laodicea, and other Countries. Last of
all, then was he far wide to pronounce them for me^ clean out of the
Catholic Church, which severed them selves from the society of any part
thereof. Then also might the Donatist (had he learned so far forth his lesson
as you have) both easied him self of much travel out of Afrike into Italy and
France, and also might sone have stopped S. Augustines mouth, saying: What
have we to do with forain prelates beyond the seas, what need we care for
their Authority, jurisdiction, society, and communion? We are true subjects of
Afrik. We renounce al foraine power, Jurisdiction and Authority.

And truly I see no cause, but with as good reason and conscience, al subjects
of all realms may and ought to renounce by oath the power and Authority of al
forain prelates or bishops out of their land and Country, as we of England must
and ought so to do out of ours. Which if it be ones granted, enacted and
agreed upon in all other realms, as it is in ours: what end will there be of
schisms and dissension in the Church? What hope of unity can be conceived? Or
how can ever unity be long maintained? What communion, what society, what
fellowship can there be among Christen people? What Authorytie shall general
Councels have, which consiste in manner altogether in foreign prelates and
bishops, if this oath be accounted good? In the first, second, third, fourth,
fyft, sixth, Act. 4. page 304. and. 306. To. 2. Council.
seventh and eigth general Counsel of Christendom we read not of any one
Braityne or English bishop to have been present there. In the 6. general
Councels pope Agatho confessed that Theodorus the Archbishop of Caunterbury was
called thither, and long looked for. But for his great charge at home, in those
beginnings of the English Church he came not. Wilfrid of York was at Rome, but
not at Constantinople where that general Counsel was holden. What the^? shall
our Church of England renounce the Authoryte of al those general Councels as
the Authorytie of foraine prelates by virtue of this Oath? What can be more
detestable or abhomynable? But they which conceived and endyted first this
third part of the Oath, of renouncing all Authoryte of every forain prelat,
had they not (trow you M. Horn) a direct ey to general Councels, and did they
not by that clause closely disburden and discharge the whole realm of al
obedience to general Cou^celles, namely to the general Counsel of Trent that
the^ was assembled? And if they intended not so much, see you not then, how
unadvisedly, how daungerously, and to how great a prejudice that part of the
Oath was conceived and endyted? Aga^ne if so much was not intended, how comes
it to pass, that in the injunctions where the Oath is drawn (as much as may
be) to a gentle exposition, this part is not so interpreted, as it might not
seem to exclude the Authority of general Councels: then the which there is in
the Church no higher or more Supreme Authority, except the Pope him self,
that is the undoubted Head thereof.

M Fekenha^ clered.
By this that has been said appears M. Horn, how falsely and slanderously you
charge M. Fekenha^ with three several lies l^wde, shameful, and monstrous. For
first it is no lewd lie, but a foul and lewd heresy of yours, that you have
erected a new faith, a new Religion, and a new use of Sacraments, not only to
all the Church throughout the world before your days, but also from your fellow
protestants the Luthera^s, the Osia^drins and the Anabaptists. If you take this
for a slander, clear your self of your horrible heresies and schisms in the
table of Staphylus. It is no shameful lie, but a shameful and worse then a
detestable case, that by this corporal oath you have forced many a soul to
renounce and refuse in effect, though not in plain words (the devil himself
would not be so bold, at lest at the beginning) these two Articles or points
of our faith, I believe the Catholic Church, and, I believe the Communion of
Saints. It is no monstrous lie, but a most monstrous and pytiful case that, you
by oath renou^cing the power and Authority of every forain prelat in plain
English, have made the Catholic Church which consists of al forain prelates
and bisshops out of England, not of English bisshops only, in plain English
a mere foraine power and Authority out of England. For if every foraine prelat
be renounced, is not all power and Authority of the Church which depends only
of Prelates and Bisshops, accounted also forayne, and for very forayne
renounced? It is so. It is so, Master Horn. The Oath runs largely and
expressly. You can not, you may not, you shall not (God giving us his grace)
bleare our eyes with vayn talk, or make us to say we see not, that which we
see, we hear, we feel, we understand. You saw, you saw your self M. Horn,
A foul shift used by M. Horn.
that the words of the Oath being taken as they lie verbatim (as you say they
must) did expressly renounce the Catholic Church. And therefore (Mark well
gentle Reader) You M. Horn thinking and laboring to remove this opinion from
the Reader (for though you think in very deed, that nor Church nor prelat,
but only the express lively word of God must be heard and obeyed, yet you
dare not as yet for very shame to express that detestable mind of yours, the
lusty brave Challenge of Master Jewel offering to yield to any one sentence or
any one old doctor withdrawing you perhaps not a little therfro) do tell hi^ that
the Oath makes no mention in any one word of the Catholic Church, but it
speaks (say you) of a forain Prince and Prelate etc. Wherein to avoid the
manifest absurditye, you flatly belie the Oath. For the Oath speaks not (M.
Horn) of a forain Prince and Prelate etc. But the Oath expressly says, of
every forain Prince and Prelat etc. Now when it renou^ceth the power of every
forain Prelat, it renounceth the power of al Catholic Bishops without the realm
of England, which al are forain Prelates to the realm of England, whereupon in
deed M. Fekenham concludes, not as it were by revelation in a Monkishe dream
without ryme or reason (as that gross head of yours most vilely rayleth
against such a sobre and discrete prelate) but with good reason and plain
evidence, that therefore the Catholic Church is by Oath renou^ced. Not as
though there were no difference between a foraine Prince or Prelat, and the
Catholic Church (as you full peuishly make Master Fekenham to reason) but
because there is no difference between every foraine Prelate (as the Oath
speaks) and the Catholic Church.

Seeing (as I have often said) the Catholyk Church consists of every foreign
Prelate, without the realm of England, much more then of all the prelates
within the realm of England. Yea though every foraine prelate without the
realm of England, may and have in many General counsels prescribed over all the bishops of England, yet all the Bishops of England nether have or may
at any time prescribe over every foraine Prelate without the realm of England.
This oath therefore excludes plainly the Authority of the Catholic Church,
and fights directly against all good reason and order. M. Horns definition of
the Church. M. Horns Church compared to the schismatical temple of Samaria.

Josephus de bello In daico li. 7. ca. 30. and de Antiq. lib. 11. ca. vltimo.
Joan. 4. Deuteronomy. 12. and. 2. paral. 7. Josephus antiq l. 11. cap. vlt.




Now the definition or description of the catholic Church, such as ye bring, is
much like to a shoe, that serves every foot: or to a Welshmans hose, that
serves every leg. Simon Magus, Marcion, Hebion, Manicheus, Photinus, Arrius,
Nestorius, and al other sects that ever were, will grant to this your
definition, and will thereby challenge the Church to their sect only, as ye do to
yours. But herein your synagoge resembles the faulse and schismatical temple
that Onias made in Aegypte: and Sanaballites in Samaria in the mount of
Garizim, whereof the ghospel of S. John speaks, though yt does not so expressly
name it. And though God had specially appointed the temple of Jerusalem to be
his true and holy temple, and would al sacrifices to be offered there: yet the
Samaritanes took their temple to be the true and the only temple where God
would be honored in: And said that all offerings and sacrifices should be made
there, and not at Jerusalem. The Jews (says Josephus) when they had
unlawfully married, when they had transgressed and violated the Sabbot day, or
eaten meats, or don other things, contrary to the Law, fearing punishment for
the same, would fly to the Samaritanes, and to the false bishop there, and
complain to him, that they were wrongfully vexed, at Jerusalem, and so did
join with the said schismatic faction at the temple of Garizim. And, there
was (says Josephus) continual strief, and contention between the Jews and
the Samaritanes, Lib. 12. ca. 1. Ant.
each part with much stir and business, preferring and auauncing their own
temple, yea the matter went so far, and the Samaritanes waxed so hot and
fervent at the length, that they offered them selves to die in the quarrel and
defense of their hill and temple. And this controversy, Ide^ lib. 13. ca. 6.
Ant.
bursting out at Alexandria into a sedition, was tried (by the common consent
of both parties) by the king Ptolomeus Philomitor. Each of them making this
offer, that, that party should suffer death, whose proufs should be found
defectyue and insufficiente: the issewe of the whole contention was, that the
king pronounced and gave sentence for the Jews: because they proved the
continual succession of their bishops at Jerusalem from the beginning, and
that the kings of Asia had ever honored, and with great rewards enriched that
temple as Gods true temple. Whervppon the proctours of the Samaritanes were by
the kings commandment put to death, whom notwithstanding the Samaritans
took for as blessed martyrs, as M. Fox takes, any of his ragged rablement in
his new holy ma^tyrologe. This schismatical synagog is the very pattern of your
Church M. Horn. Sentence has been given against your synagoge, by many good
and catholic kings, by many general counsels. And yt is a most evident, yea
and a blasphemous lie against the Saints in heaven, to say as ye do, that all the Saints and faithful Christians, that be or has been, are of your Church.
What so ever visour ye put upon your Church, when we ones come to the chief
point, to know the Church by, and by the which the temple of Jerusalem was
justified: I mean the continual succession without any interruptio^ of
bishops in the sea of Rome, and in all other openly known to be catholic
Churches, maynteyning that faith, that ye namely in this book impugn: then it
will easily appear, what your Church is, and how vnperfytte your definition
is, that lacks one infallible mark, whereby ye may sone disseuer the false
from the true Church, to wit, the known succession of bishops from age to
age, in all places of the Christened world, al which the word, Catholic,
imports: and the which therefore you have omitted, because you are not in deed
of the Catholic Church: and because those marks, of vniuersalyte, of
Antiquite, and of a known succession do utterly want, in that you call your
Church. Else if you have those marks, and we have not, procure, I pray you M.
Horn, that some one of your brethern (I provoke them al in this matter) do
answer, if he can, to the Fortress of our first faith, by me set forth, and
annexed to the history of venerable Bede. Let any one of them al disprove the
reasons there brought, out of the Psalms, the prophets, and of the Ghospel, if
he ca^, whereby it is clerly proved, that that Church only (which you call
papistry) must be the true Church of Christ. I speak not this, upon any
confidence of my own doings, which I do sincerely acknowleadge to be very
simple and base, but upon the confidence of the cause: which I do assuredly
know in this point to be so strong, that all the heretical assaults you shall
make against it, shall never be able to shake it. Thus of that.

Now, whereas the Catholic Church requires, as M. Fek. shows a communion of
Saints, in one doctrine, one faith of Sacraments and other things: the lack of
this communion and participatio^ of this one faith does bewray what your Church
is: which sore feign would ye salve, but with how evident and how notorious a
lie, ye force not. For what passi^g and shameful impude^cy is it for you, to
vaunt your self and your new Ghospel to be at an atonement and agreement in
religion: seeing that it is so evident to all the world, that the Lutherans and
the Zuinglians be at the daggers point with their hot co^tentio^ in the
sacrame^tary matter? If the Church now of England be Catholic, then is the
Saxonicall and Germanical Church heretical. As contrariwise if Luthers Church
be catholic, then is your Church heretical. How can ye bragg as ye do, that
you now agree and consent in the unity of this Catholyk faith in necessary
doctrine at home so much, you say, as never at any time more, saying that so
late one of your own protestant bishops, in open parliament stood against your
book of articles lately set forth as agreed upon in your co^uocation? And seeing
the said book, off^ed up to be confirmed by parliament was rejected?

But what a perpetual shame is it to you M. Horn, and all your holy
brotherhood, that yet to this hour the tragedy of your horrible dissension
lasts, even in the first foundation of your ragged Gospel in these low
Countries here of Brabant and Flaundres? If you know not the case, Nevves out
of Flau^dre^ for M. Horn and his brethern.
I will shortly certify you the news. In the town of Antwerpe your brethren
the Sacramentaries of Geneua had their churches fairly built. The Lutherans
also had their churches. This was evident to the eye. Our own countremen the
merchants there can bear me witness. Is this an agreement M. Horn, that you
must each have your Churches a part, your several preachers, your parted
congregations? that one must be called the Martinistes Church (of Martin
Luther so called) the other must be called the Caluinists Church, of Calvin of
Geneua? But forth. It came to the point in Antwerpe, that the Caluinistes took
arms against their Prince, the.xiij. of March last being thursday. A worthy
monyment of their holy profession. For will you know the cause why? Forsooth
because the same day in the forenoone, certain of their brethern to the number
of 200. and upward were slain in the field beside a number drowned in the
river, and taken alive, nigh to Antwerpe by a power of the Lady Regent, which
said brethern with a great number more had made a profession (which also for
certain days they had put in practice) to range about the Country, and to
ease al Churches and Churchmen of their goods, mary yet of conscience, not
iniuring any lay man. The quick justice done upon such open robbers and
thieves, the holy brethern of your sect not abiding, foreseing that if such
pageants were long played, their parts were like to follow, moved them
immediately as I said to take arms against their Prince in Antwerpe, to require
the kays of the gates, the Churches of the Catholics to be disposed at their
pleasure, the expulsion of al religious persons and priests etc. All which
things were granted unto them by the governor of the town, upon a days
deliberation, that al things might be done quietly: And they thus for the
space of.ij. nights and one day ruled all the roste in Antwerpe. What outrages
in that small season they committed, namely upon the poor gray friars, whose
known virtues irked them most above al other orders, I let pass. The Saturday
being the.x. of March in the morning, when your brethern the Sacrame^taries M.
Horn, contynuing still in Arms, and gapi^g hourly for the satisfying of their
gredy appetite, thought presently to become Lords of so rich a town, they
saw suddenly in Arms, bravely and strongly appointed against them, not only
the Catholic marcha^ts, Italians, Spanyardes, Portugalles, Burgunyons and
Antwerpians them selves, but also they saw M. Horn to their great grief the
very Martinistes or Lutherans (between whom and you, you pretend allwaies such
agreement) in Arms also against them. And that morning lo M. Horn was the
last joyful hour that your Sacrame^tary brethern saw in that town. For
immediately finding themselves to weak, they were feign to yield up the
attillery which upon the soden two days before they had seasoned upon, and instead of their beggarly and traiterous cry of which all Antwerpe before did
ring, instead I say of Viue le Geus, to cry, full sore against their hearts:
Viue le Roy. God save the king. From that day forewarde your brethern went
backewarde. Vale^cene the first and chief rebelling town within ix. days
after was taken. The preachers within xiiij. days after that, both
Sacramentary and Lutheran have voyded the town, yea the whole country. God be
praised. But this I tell you M. Horn, that you may note, how the Lutheranes
them selves stood in Arms against the Caluinistes: Protestants against
Protestants, yea in the quarrel of protestanticall prowes.

In like manner, in the year.1561. in April, the Senate of Francford being
Luthera^s, Vide Franciscu^ Philippu^, and Surium.
banished out of their town the renegat Caluinistes of France. In the same
year, the inhabitans of Breme being Caluinistes drove out the Luthera^s.

If all this will not serve to prove a clear and plain dissensio^ in matters
of religion against you, the^ behold an other argument invincible M. Horn.
Your brethern the Sacramentaries in Antwerp have published in print a
Confession of their false faith. The Lutherans or Martinists have printed also
an other of theirs. Both are confuted by the Catholic Doctors of this
University. The first by Fra^ciscus Sonnius B. of Hartoghenbusch. The other by
Iudocus Tiletanus, a learned professor of Divinity here. The Lutherans
pretend to be called by the Magistrates of Antwerp. The Caluinists for lack of
such authority, have printed their Confession Cu^ gratia and priuilegio
Altissimi. With grace and privilege of the highest. And this lo, was I trow a
more Special Privilege, then M. Jewels was, though he pri^ted his Reply to,
With Special Privilege. But such Privileges of he highest, every rascal heretik
can pretend, no less then the Sacramentaries. And this is a high Divinity,
the publishing whereof passes al Princes Privileges, and must be set from the
highest him self. Bilike these me^ would seem to be called as S. Paul was,
Galat. 1.
No^ ab hominibus, neque per homine^, sed per Iesum Christu^, Not of men, nor
by man, but by Jesus Christ, even with a voice from heaven. O peuish pride and
most fo^d presumption. But to the matter.

The Lutherans or Martiniste Ministers of Antwerpe in their Confession have one
whole Chapter Contra errorem Sacramentariorum: Against the error of the
Sacramentar^es. It is the seuententh in number. In that Chapter they prove the
Real presence, and the Consecration of the Mysteries, and they labor to
confute the fond obiectio^s of the Sacramentaries (used also very sadly of M.
Jewel in his Reply) against the Real presence, In Co^fut. Ministrorum
Antwerp. fol. 92. and. 93,
touching the tropicall sense of Christ's words (which they deny utterly)
and touching the assension of Christ into heaven, which they prove (though by
an other error of their own, as Tiletanus at large declares) that the same
article makes nothing against the Real or Corporal presence of Christ in the
Sacrament.

Briefly the Lutherans do thus pronounce of your Brethern the Sacramentaries
Communion M. Horn, Vide Tiletani praesat. ad Senatu^ Antwerp.
which you do make so holy a matter. The Lutheran Ministers of Antwerp in
their printed Confession, say thus: Caluinistarum Leiturgia no^ vno sacrilegio
vitiata, co^taminataque est, eoque (proh dolor) passim innumeras animas aeterno
exitio inuoluit. The Communion of the Caluinists is defiled and contaminated
with diverse Sacrilegies: and therefore (alas) it enwrappeth every where infinite
numbers of souls into eternal damnation. Lo, M. Horn, what agreement in
Religion there is between you Protestaunts. Your holy Communion of England is
condemned for sacrilegious, and damnable of your own brethren the scholars of
Martin Luther, whom your Apology commends for a most excellent man, and one
sent of God to lighten his Church. All that frequente your holy Communion,
Master Horn, are damned, say the Lutherans of Antwerpe.

Brag no more, Master Horn, of your agreement. Your horrible dissension
glistereth so clear, cries so loud, and blustereth so great, that as long as
we have eyes to see, ears to hear, and hands to feel, we can not choose but
behold it in the face, we must needs hear the voice of it, and our senses must
of necessity palpablie feel it. And the sight, the voice and the sense
thereof, co^uinceth unto us with an invincible Argument, 1. Cor. 14.
that your whole Religion is a clear heresy, as proceeding from the Devil
the spirit of dissension, not from God, who is the God of unity, peace and
concord.

The.160. Division. Page 101. a.
M. Fekenham.
The fourth and last point is, that I must swear to the observation of this
oath, not only to the Queen's highness and our soueraign Lady that now is, but
also unto her heyers and successors Kings and Queens of this Realm. And
because every Christian man ought to be careful to avoid perjury therein, I
would right gladly know, that if any her highness successors should by the
refusal of the said title of Supremacy, bind her subjects by the like statute
law unto the clean contrary (experience whereof was of late made here in
this Realm, that it is yet fresh in the memories of all men) In this case I
would right gladly know, what authority is able to dispense again with this
Oath. And if there be none at all, then the subjects of this Realm in this
case are bound, and that by book Oath, to live in a continual disobedience
to the laws of their sovereign Lord or Lady, King or Queen: the case whereof
is very lamentable. And christian charity would, that it should be foreseen
and provided for. And for mine own part (being further touched herein, then I
have yet expressed) my very trust and hope is, that the charity of this our
new reformed Church here in this realm, shall not be found so cold and
short, as in providing so sharp laws and pains of death to force men to
take this oath, of the Queen's Highness Supreamacie, but that it will provide
also such means and ways, whereby the subjects may receive the same with safe
conscience, and without al perjury. And in so doing, I shall most willingly
submit my self, and receive also that part of the Oath. And shall further
thereupon set forth the Queen's highness Supremacy with all Titles and
Prerogatives, both by pen and word of mouth, and that with as desirous
heart and glad will, as any subject that is this day living in her highness
Realm. So that of the premises ye may well understand, that there is in me
no other cause of stay, touching the later part of this Oath, then very
conscience. And that I would before right gladly know (touching these forenamed
points) how I might swear unto them, and not commit perjury therein.

M. Ho^ne.
As every Christian man ought to be careful to avoid Perjury both in this
and al other matters: even so wise men may well know, what you mean by
the conditional case ye put, of the refusal by her highness Successors of
this Title: vvhereto the holy Ghost makes you this plain answer: Spes
Hypocritae peribit: The Hypocrites hope shall perish. You sprinkle this
doubtful case with a powder of late experience, ^vhiche seasoneth your matter,
De facto, non de Iure. For it is not lavvfull for any Christian prince to
refuse (.554.) The.554. untruth. It is not lauful for any Prince to take it.
this Supremacy, which is the best part of his princely Ministry, and
service unto God. Neither may be more bi^de his subjects by law to become
svvoren to the Pope and Poperye, than to the (^55.) The.555. untruth. Horible
and Protestante like.
great ^urke and turkerie. For that the Pope is a more perilous (.556.)
The.556. untruth. Extreme slanderous, as all the world knows yea M. Horn him
self,
ennemie unto Christ, than the turk: and Popery much more Idolatrous, then
turkery. And therefore there is no human Authority, that can dispense with
the violation of this lavvfull Oath, made of duty unto the Christian Princes.

This is a lamentable case I grant, that subjects should live in continual
disobedience to the laws of the prince, whether it happen for that the
laws be so ungodly, that a christian subject may not with good conscience
obey the^ (experience vvherof was of late made here in this Realm.) Or for
that the stubbornness of the subject maintained with a wicked, and yet a
vain hope. be so stiff, that vvilfully he lives in a continual disobedience
to the Godly laws of his soueragine, vvherof experience is made now at this
time in you, and a fevve others of your (.557.) The.557. untruth. The company
of catholykes is no co^spiracy.
conspiracy There is good cause, why ye should have your very trust and hope
(as you say ye have, how vngratiousely soeuerye think) assured of the charity
of our church newly reformed after the rule of gods word, vvherat ye Popish
modestia vestra (M Horn) nota sit omnibus hominibus
swine grunte and groine. For you, in your own self, have perfect
experience, that the supreme governor under Christ of this realm, following
the example of her heavenly father, does bou^tifully, of her goodness, with
much more patience, and long sufferi^g allure you to dutiful repe^ta^ce. And
has further provided sundry means and ways, vvherby to remove your willful
ignorance, and to endue you with sufficient knowledge of the truth, how ye
might with salfe conscience receive this dutiful Oath of a true subject,
without all perjury.

The.5. Chapter. Of M. Fekenhams fourth chief point.
Stapleton.
IN this Division you lie and rail blasphemously and horribly, eue^ as if
Satan had presently entered into you, and pro^pted unto you at your back, both
such ca^cred matter as your poisoned heart has conceived, and also such foul
terms, as your spritish pen has endited. M. Fekenha^ demanded of you a very
reasonable demand, that is, in case he or other should now take this new found
Oath, and that it should so chance, that any of the Princes successors should
bind his subjects by the like statute law, to the clean contrary, how they
might be dispensed withal. To this, you M. Horn, instead of some good reason,
fall to detestable railing: and ye say that the 2. oath must in no wise be given,
for that the Pope is a more perilous enemy unto Christ, then the Turk, and
Popery is more idolatrous, then Turkery. Of the which blasphemouse answer (if
yt be true) yt must by a necessary consequente follow, that not only all the
catholic princes that now live, but that all the other that either lived in
England sense it was first christened by S. Augustine our Apostle, or else
where in christendom for this.15. hundred years, with all their people, be
and have been idolatours, and worse then Turks. For by Popery M. Horn means
the Popes religion: which is none other now, the^ yt was when England was first
christened, as appears by the historye of Venerable Bede* and by the
Fortress a^nexed thereunto. Yea the^ it was 15. hundred years paste. All the
which time all Christian and catholic nations, were ever joined with the sea of
Rome in one faith and religion. A heavy and a sorrowful thing yt is to hear out
of the mowth of one that bears him self for a prelat of the sea of
Winchester, The Turk is much bovvnde to M. Horn and, to his M. Luther and
other his fellows. Art. 34. Vide Rofens.

Vide dubitantium Lindain page 322. ex Ma^lio. ^om. 3 in loc. Com. page 195.


such spitiful words for the which he may be full well a prelat of the Alcoran.
How be yt as horible as this talk is, yt is no vnwonte talk to the best of
this new gospelling generation. For eue^ the Apostle of the^ Luther makes more
account of the Turk, then of many Christian princes: and for a while he both
preached and wrote, that yt was not lawful for Christians to keep any war
with him. Namely that to war against the Turks, was to resist God, visiti^g
our iniquites by the^. It is one of his Articles that he defends against the
Church of Rome. And yt is written that the Turk hearing of these his doings,
and into what division he had brought Christe^dom, liked it very well: and
enquiring of his age, when he heard he was fifty years old, I would, quod the
Turk he were younger, the time should perhaps ones come, when Luther should
find me his good Lord: which when Luther heard of, he blessed him self and
said: God save me from such a good Lord. Yea even to this day Luther has
many scholars that dehorteth Christian me^ to resist the Turks, especially
Claudius Monerius one of the late holy martyrs of this new ghospelling
Church: who misliketh all the Christian men's defense, Vide Crispinum in
historia pseudomartyru^ lib. 5. in Claudio Monerio.
that they make to withstand the Turk, and says, that the knights of the
Rhodes are nothing but a graf that the heavenly Father never graffed, and
therefore owght to be plucked up by the root. Let no man now merueill, if the
Turks prosper so against the Christians, seeing that he has such friends at
home here among our selves. Whereof you M. Horn are not one of the least, but
a very Goliath, and much worse then he, so desperately and so arrogantlie
defying and reuiling the host of the living God, that is the whole catholic
church, much more vilanously and traitorously, than the said wicked Philistian
did. For he was a sworen and professed enemy to the people of God: and
therefore therein he did but his kind. But you professing your self not only
a friend, but also a Captain of the Christian army, (the place that you
occupy, considered), do bear thereunto, a deuelish and a Philistian heart, as
your Turkish, not Christian pen has uttered. And yet if ye had proved any
thing all this while in your answer, to the derogation of the Popes authority,
or of the religion, that he mainteineth, men's ears would less have glowed,
to hear you talk so Turkishlie. We have in deed great bravery in talk, and
horrible words, withowt any substantial proof of the matter ye take in
hand. Yea, ye are rather ouerborne and beaten down with a number of your own
allegations and authorities. As for the place of Job ye allege, that the
hypocrites hope shall perish, does no more touch M. Fekenham and his
fellows, then yt did touch the blessed man Job. Baldad did untruly charge
him with yt, and ye do as baldly, and as untruly charge now the catholics
therewith. The Catholics have almost one thousand of years quietly possessed and
enjoyed their faith in our realm that ye peuishely and prowdly call Popery.
The religion that ye profess has not as yet, continewed there under any one
Prince ten years together. Miracles ye work none, though many wonders ye
work, for your procedinges are altogether to be wondered at. Neither the life
of your sect is so virtuous, nor the learning so great, that either wise men,
and such as have the fear of God in them, may suddenly be drawn from their
aunciente Catholic faith: or that ye may so bind Princes now living and all
their successors, by such a Turkish answer to a reasonable demand, as
they may not in any wise mainteyne that faith, that notoriously and commonly
was mainteyned in England almost a thousand years, ere ye were borne. M.
Feckenha^s most reasonable demand therefore remains unanswered, and the foul
absurdyte, which he obiecteth vnauoyded, appears well (as it is in deed) by
your silence unavoidable.

^he.161. Division. page 102. a. M. Fekenham.
Here follows the Resolutions of the are foresaid Scruples, made by my L.
Bishop of Winchester.

For a resolute answer to all the said Scruples, expressed in the forenamed
poinctes, his L. said, that he did much lamente, that the right meaning of
the Oath; had not been in season opened and declared unto me, when the only
lack of the right understanding thereof, has been the cause of such stays
and distourbance of conscience. Whereas the Q. Majesty's meaning in that Oath,
is far otherwise, tha^ the express words are, as they lie verbatim, like as
it does well appear by her Highness interpretation made thereof in the
Iniunctio^s. Thereunto my objection was, that undoubtedly her Highness did fully
mean and mind to claim and take al spiritual government upon her: for besides
the expres words of the Oath, whereunto al me^ be bound to swear verbatim as
they lie, without al change and alteration making of any word or sense
thereof, her Highness (in the interpretation set forth in her Iniu^ctio^s) does
by very plain words, claim the same spiritual government here in this realm
of the Church of England, that her highness father King Henry, and her brother
king Edward did enjoy and claim before her: in the which iniunctio^s, and in
the late act of Parleame^t also her highness does claim no more spiritual
government nor no less, but so much in every point, as they had without all
exception. For answer his L. did still continue in the denial thereof, and
that her Highness meaning was not to take so much of Spiritual authority and
power upon her, as they did: with affirmation, that he did most certainly and
assuredly know her highness mind therein. Then for some issue to be had of this
matter, seeing that the meaning of the Oath, is not as the express words do
purport: And seeing that his L. did so well understand her Highness meaning
therein, and thereby the very right sense thereof, I besought him, that his L.
would take some pains for truths sake to pen the same: whereupon his L. did
pen and write the interpretation of the said Oath as hereafter follows.
I.A.B. do utterly testify and declare in my conscience, that the Q. Highness is
the only Supreme governor of this Realm, and of al other her Highness dominions
and countries, as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes, as
temporal. That is, to have the soueraingtie and rule over al manner persons,
borne within her Realms, dominions and countries, of what estate either
Ecclesiastical or temporal so ever they be. And to have authority and power to
visit the Ecclesiastical estate, and persons, to refourme, order, and correct
the same: and all manner errors, heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses,
co^temptes, and enormities. Yet nevertheless in no wise meaning, that the Kings
and Queens of this Realm, possessours of this crown, may challenge
authority or power of ministry of divine offices, as to preach the word of
God, to minister Sacraments or rytes of the Church appointed by Christ to
the office of Church ministers, to excommunicate, or to bind, or loose. Of
the which four points, three belong only to the Ecclesiastical ministers,
the fourth is common to them with the congregation, namely to excommunicate.
And that no forain Prince, Person, Prelat, State or Pote^tate, has or ought to
have any jurisdiction, Power, Superiority, pre-eminence, or authority
ecclesiastical or Spiritual, within this realm. And therefore I do utterly
renounce al foraine jurisdictions, powers, superiorities, preheminences, and
authorities: That is, as no Secular or Lay Prince, other than the King or
Queen's possessours of the Croune of this Realm, of what Title or dignity so
ever they be, has or ought to have, any Authority, sovereignty, or power,
over this Realm, over the Prince or Subjects thereof. Even so no manner of
foraine Prelate or person Ecclesiastical, of what title, name, so ever they be,
neither the Sea of Rome, neither any other See, has or ought to have, use,
enjoy, or exercise, any manner of power, jurisdiction, authority, superiority,
pre-eminence, or privilege spiritual or ecclesiastical within this realm, or
within any the Queen's highness dominions or Countries. And therefore, al such
foraine power utterly is to be renou^ced, and I do promise, etc. vt sequitur in
forma iurame^ti.

M. Horn.
These that ye term Resolutions, are none of (.558.) The.558. Untruth.
Shamful. For they are your very own as it shall appear.
mine, they are like him that forged them, false, feined, and ^alitious. They
be your own, either ye could not, or ye were ashamed to adioyne my answer
to your seely objections, and therefore ye feygned me to utter for resolutions,
your own peuissh cauillations. This report is false, that I should affirm
the Queens Majesty's meaning in that Oath to be far otherwise then the
express words are as they lie verbatim. This my constant assertion, that her
highness mind and meaning is, to take so much, and no more of spiritual
authority and power upon her, than King Henry, and king Edward enjoyed and
did justly claim, you untruly feygne to be your objection. And that I should
affirm of most certain and sure knowledge, her Majesty's mind or the very
right sense of the Oath, to be otherwise tha^ it is plainly set forth, is a
malicious sclander, vvherof I vvil fetch no better proof, then the testimony
of your mouth. Ye confess that the interpretation following, was pe^ned and
vvrite^ by me, to declare the very right sense and meaning of the Oath,
vv^erein ye have acquitted me, and condemned your self, of a manifest untruth.
For the right sense and meaning declared in the interpretation that I made, and
you have set forth, does (.559.) The.559. Untruth. your interpretation agrees
with your resolutio^s, the interpretation excepti^g certain jurisdiction in
causes Ecclesiastical from the Prince, whereof does follow, that (as the
resolutions report) the Oath must not be taken, as it lies Verbatim.
plainly shevve the clean contrary, if you mark it well, to all that you here
set forth in my name, under the title of my resolutions to your scruples.
Furthermore, in the preface to your fornamed points, ye have declared by word
and vvriting, that I did require you presently to swear and by oath to
acknovvledge her highness to be the only supreme governor in all spiritual or
ecclesiastical things or causes. If this be true that you have said, it is
manifest by your own confession, that I declared her maisties meaning in that
Oath, to be none otherwise than the express words are, as they lie verbatim.
For when I show her meaning to be, that ye should acknovvledge in her
highness, the only supremacy, I do declare plainly, that she means to exclude,
So al general cou^celles are excluded.
al other men from having any supremacy: for this exclusive only, ca^ not have
any other sense or meaning. And vvha^ I add this supremacy to be in all
spiritual causes or things, I shevve an universal co^prehension to be meant
without exception. For if ye Why the^ do ye exclude out of the Oath prechi^g.
Ministri^g of sacraments bindi^g, and losing. etc
except or take away any thing, it is not al. And you yourself took my
meaning to be thus. For ye challenge me in your second chief point, and call for
proof hereof at my hand, which ye would not do, if it were not mine
assertion and meaning. For why should I be driven to prove that which I
affirm not, or meant not. Besides these in your whole travail following, ye
labor to improve this (as you say) mine assertion, to wit, that al spiritual
jurisdiction depends upon the positive law of Princes: If this be mine
assertion, as ye affirm it is, and therefore bend al your force to improve it,
ye vvittnes with me (.560.) The.560. untruth. Not against him self. For first
you said so: but in your resolutio^s, and interpretation of the Oath you say
the contrary. And so in both places you are truly charged.
against your self, that I declared her majesty's meani^g, was to take
neither more nor less authority, and jurisdiction, unto her self, than king
He^rie and King Edward had, for they had no more tha^ al. And if her Majesty
take any less, she has not al. Touching therefore these false, feined, and
slanderous resolutions, as they are by you most untruly forged: even so,
whether this be likely, that in a years space well nigh, I would not in all
our daily conference, make (.561.) The, 561. untruth. M. Feke^ham denies it
not, in any his words above rehearsed.
one reason or argument, out of the Scriptures or other authority, in the
maintenance of mine assertion: and to resolve you in the same, I refer to
the judgment of all the Papists in the Realm, that know both me and you.
Again, though ye do deny that I so did, and therefore do report none, there
be many both worshipful and of good credit, yea and some of your own deer
friends also, that are vvitnesses of our talk, and can tell what reasons I
have made unto you, both out of the Scriptures, and other authorities and
proofs out of the Church histories, such as ye could not avoid, but were
forced to (.562.) The.562. untruth, M. Feke^ha^ never yielded to any your
proofs, reasons, or Au^horites.
yield unto. And whether I should so do^ or not, I might refer me unto the
testimony of your own mouth, both tha^ and sithe^ spoken to diverse, that
can witness the same, that ye affirmed this (although untruly) that you
never found any, that so much ouerpressed you, as I did, which your saing,
although most untrue, yet it shovveth, that somevvhat I said to confirm mine
assertion, and to confute yours.

The sixth Chapter, concerning the Resolutions that M. Horn gave to M.
Fekenham, to the.4. forenamed points.
Stapleton.
THIS process following stands upon certain resolutions of M. Horns, as M.
Feke^ha^ says. But M. Horn denies the^. And therefore being quaestio facti
as they call yt, and the doubt restinge upon private talk, that passed between
them: I ca^ give no certain judgment: but must refer yt, to the discrete
consideration of the indifferent reader. Yet so much as I know, I will say, and
that is, that I understand by such as have had at several times co^municatio^
with the said M. Fekenha^, and among other things, of this conference, heard
M. Fekenha^ say, that touching these resolutions, he has the^ of M. Daniel,
the^ secretary to M. Horn, his hand writing, ready to be showed at all times.
If yt be so, yt is likely, that M. Daniel can and will testify the truth, in
case he should be required: of whose hand writing M Fekenha^ says he has
also certain other things copied out. But yet because, the event of things to
come are uncertain, let us imagine an unlikely case, that is, that M. Daniel
will deny these forsaied writings to be of his hand: and that the^ M. Horn will
much more sharply and vehemently cry out against these resolutions, then he
does now, that they are none of his, but like to him that forged them, false,
feyned and maliciouse, with much other like matter that he lays forth for his
defense now. Suerly then though M. Fekenham were like to have therbye no great
prejudice in the principal matter, (for whether these resolutions be true or
false, the principal point is neither greatly bettered, nor much hindered by
them) yet should M. Fekenha^ perchance greatly impair his honesty and good
name thereby. Let us the^ as I said, thinck upon the worst, and whether that M.
Fekenham as he has, (as ye have heard,) much good defense for the principal
point, so he may in this distress, find any good relief, for the defending
and saving upright of his honesty. Ye will perchance good reader now thinck,
that M. Fekenha^ is in a very hard and strayt case: and that yt were a great
difficulty to find any apparent or honest help for him. And yet for all this
there is good and great help at hand. For I will be so bold my self for ones,
to take upon my self to make a sufficient proof, that these resolutions are
not M. Fekenhams, but M. Horns own. And if his secretary will not serve, I
will bring forth one other witness that shall be somewhat nerer him, and that M.
Horn can not, nor shall, for all the shifts that ever he shall make, refuse:
and that is Master Horn him self, and no worse man. For though I be not
very privy and certain what passed betwixt M. Horn and M. Feke^ham at
Waltham: yet of the contents of this his printed answer to M Fekenham I am
assured, and so consequently that these are his resolutions, confessed more
then ones or twice, by his own mowthe and pen.

Consider therefore good reader, the state of the question touching these
resolutions. Is yt any other, then that as M. Fekenham auowcheth, M. Horn
told him, for a resolute answer, that the Queen's May. meaning in the oath is
far otherwise, then the express words are in the statute, as they lie
verbatim? And that things are therefore with some gentle understanding to be
interpreted, and mollified? And therefore, that though the words of the
statute be general and precise, that she only is the supreme governor of the
realm as well in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes, as
temporal: Yet in no wise the meaning is that the kings or Queen's may
challe^ge authority or power of ministry of divine offices, as to preach the
word of God, to minister Sacraments, to excommunicate, to bind or lose? To
this effect come M. Horns resolutions in the interpretation of the Oath, made
by him at M. Feckenhams request as M. Fekenham says. But M. Horn does flatly
deny, that ever he made any such moderation or mollification, and lays
forth many reasons to persuade the Reader, that M. Fekenham has slaundered
him. He says the right sense of the oath, is none other then yt is plainly
set forth. he says: that the supremacy is only in the Queen's highness: for
this exclusive (only) ca^ not have any other sense, or meaning. He says
moreover, when I add this supreamacie to be in all spiritual causes or
things, I show an universal comprehension to be meante withowt exception, for
if ye except or take away any thing, yt is not all. Are not these your own
words M. Horn? do not then so general and peremptory words of the statute,
especially your precise exposition adjoined thereunto, expressly give unto the
Queen's May. not only a simple and parted authority, but the chiefest, the
principaleste, and a general or universal authority in all things and causes
whatsoever, as to preach, to minister the sacraments, and to lose and bind,
as well as in other matters? Is it not evident, that these are things spiritual
and ecclesiastical? Do ye not attribute without exception, as we have declared,
by your own words the supremacy to the Queen in all causes and things
spiritual? How then can it be possible, but that by a necessary consequent, ye
do also attribute, to her the supremacy in the causes Ecclesiastical before
rehearsed? And think you then M. Horn, that M. Fekenha^ and his fellows may
take the oath with sauf conscience? And think you, that though the pope had no
authority in the realm, the Queen's May. might have so large and ample
authority, the holy scripture being so plain to the contrary? Is it not likely
therefore, that in your conference with M. Fekenham, ye did forsee this
mischief, and therefore (though ye deny it here so stiffly) that ye gave him in
deed such resolutions as be here specified? Suerly it is a thing most probable.
For ye make the very same resolutions to him even in this your answer also.
For do ye not expressly say a few leaves before, Fol. 96. and. 97.
that princes neither do, nor may claim to preach the word of God, to
minister the Sacraments, or to bind and lose? Do ye not say, Fol. 107. and.
108.
that this is a spiritual government and rule, belonging only to the bishops
and Church rulers? Do ye not confess within 4. leaves followinge the like? And
that Bisshoppes have the spiritual Iurisdistion over their flock, by the
express word of God: and that thereby Princes have not all manner of spiritual
government? Is not this agreeable to the resolutio^s that M. Fekenham says he
received at your hands? Again M. Fenkenham adds, that in your said
resolutions, ye say that the authority to excommunicate is not properly
perteyning to Princes, but apperteyneth to the whole congregation as well as to
them. Fol. 105.107.
Do ye not confess, I pray you, the same twice in your answer immediately
following after this? Why say you then, that these resolutio^s are feyned by M.
Fekenham? Why should any man think that M. Feke^ham should falsely charge you
with these resolutio^s in private conference, that your self in your own book,
do so plainly and openly auouche? Why should not men think also such other
things as ye here charge M. Fekenham withal to be untrue, seeing that ye do so
falsely accuse M. Feken. for framing resolutions, in your name, that are your
own in very deed? Or why should any man trust you in these great and weighty
matters, which ye handle, that ye speak, ye ca^ not tell what, bursting out
into such open and foul contradictions, as yt would astone any wise man to
consider them: A contradiction irreco^cileable in M. Horn.
attributing to the Queen's May. the supremacy in all spiritual causes or things
without exception, and yet your self, excepting diverse things spiritual, and
giving the supremacy of them to the clergy? I would feign know of you that so
lately ruffled so freshly with your oppositio^ contrary, relatyue, privative,
and disparatyue, and with your propositions contrary, subcontrary, subalterne
and co^tradictory: if a man man may find a more foul contradiction the^ this I
now lay before you out of your own book.

You say first fol. 104. b. in fine.

When I add this supremacy to be in all spiritual causes, or things, I show
an universal comprehensio^ without exception For if ye except or take away any
thing it is not all.

Hereof, arises this universal affirmative.

Al spiritual causes without exception are under the supreme Gouuerment of
Princes.

Item you say: fol 96. b.

To feed the Church with Gods word, to minister Christ's Sacraments, and to
bind and lose (fol. 97. a.) Kings, Queens, and Princes may not, neither do
claim or take upon the^, this kind of spiritual government, and rule, or any
part thereof etc.

Hereof arises this particular negative.

Some spiritual causes are not under the Supreme Government of Princes.

Now let us consider, in what kind of opposition, these your two propositions
do repugne. Thus stand the oppositions.

All spiritual causes without exception are under the Supreme Government of
Princes. Contrary. No spiritual causes at all are under the Supreme government
of Princes. Subalterne. CONTRADICTORY. Subalterne. Some spiritual causes are
under the Supreme government of Princes. Subcontrary. Some spiritual causes are
not under the supreme government of Princes.

By this it appears, that your two propositions do stand in the extremest
kind of al oppositions: which is: Contradiction.

And though this be a poor sely, and an insufficient shifte, to make such
resolutions, yet is it the best ye may now find to qualify and mitigate the
general words of the statute. Which in deed are so general and peremptory,
that they may in no wise be borne without some qualification. Which is now so
notoriouse, that there is a qualification made in the Queen's May. injunctions,
that men should not take the general clause so largely, as to collect thereby,
that the Kings or Queen's of our realm may challe^ge authority and power of
ministry in the divine offices in the Church. Which does agree with your
resolutions: and therefore there is no cause in the world, why ye should deny
them to be yours, and say that they be falsely and slaunderouslye feigned upon
you by M. Feke^ha^: uttering his own peuish cauillatio^s, as ye say under the
name of your resolutio^s. Now though this be a necessary interpretation and
moderation, yet this does not take away the scruple that remains, staying M.
Fekenha^ and other to, in taking the said oath: for that this interpretation,
Note.
is not made by act of parliament, as the statute was. Neither does the Act
or Statute refer it self to any such Injunctions to be made, for the
qualificatio^ or restrayning of any thing in the Act or in any branch
thereof contained, no more then it does to M. Horns book. Neither has any
Iniu^ction by the law of our Realm any force to restrain, weake^ or mollify
the rigor or generality of an Act of parliament. And in case it had, yet there
remain many other as great scruples. Namely, that swearing to all causes, the
pri^cipal causes are excepted, and so he that swears forsweareth, and beside,
that al ecclesiastical authority, as well of the sea of Rome, as of al general
councils, is evidently abolisshed, by the said statut. And in as much as
general Councils, do bear and represent the parson of the whole Church, whereof
the Pope is head, no Christian man ought to receive such oath, employing the
denial of the authority of the Pope the head, and of the whole body of the
Church beside.

The.162. Division. page 104. b.
M. Fekenham.
Hereunto I did make this objection following. These words of the first part
of the oath, I.A.B. do utterly testify and declare (in my conscience) that
the Q. Highness is the only supreme governor of this Realm, as well in all
Spiritual or Ecclesiastical things or causes, as Temporal (besides the
particulars expressed in your L. interpretation made thereof) they do by
express words of the act give unto the Queens highness, al manner of
jurisdictions, privileges, and preeminences in any wise touching and
concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the Realm,
with an express debar, and flat denial made of al Spiritual jurisdiction
unto the Bisshops thereof, to be exercised over their flocks and cures, without
her highness Special commission to be granted thereunto: Act. 20. Joan. 20.
Math. 16. Act. 8.
They having by the express word of God, commission of Spiritual government
over them. Commission to lose and bind their sins. Commission to shut and
open the gates of heaven to them. Commission to give unto them the holy ghost
by the imposition of their hands. And they having by the express word of
God such a dangerous cure and charge over their souls, that God has
threatened to require the blood of such as shall perish at their hands. Heb.
13. Ezech.
Notwithstanding, these and many such other like co^missions granted unto them
for the more better discharge of their cure, and that by the mouth of God they
may not exercise any jurisdiction over the^, they may not visit the^, they may
not reform the^, they may not order nor correct them, without a further
commission from ye Q. hignes. Suerly my good L. these things are so strange
unto me, and so contrary to all that I have read, that I am not hable to
satisfy my conscience therein. Your L. answer was, that for as much as al
Spiritual jurisdiction, and authority to make Laws and to judge the people in
courts Ecclesiastical, to visit the^, to reform the^, to order and correct
the^, does depend only upon the positive Laws of Kings and Princes, and not
upon the Law of God, therefore neither did the Apostles of Christ, neither the
Bishops and their successors may exercise any jurisdiction upon the people of
God, judge the^, visit the^, refourme, order and correct them without authority
and co^missio^ of the King and Prince.

M. Horn.
It is very true, that after ye had quarelled much in sundry things touching
words and terms expressed in the Act of Parliament, and in the
interpretation of the Oath: Ye did nevertheless finally agree in the whole
matter thereof, finding only doubt in one point of mine assertion, namely
touching jurisdiction Spiritual or Ecclesiastical, al which you affirmed,
contrary to mine assertion, to be committed by Christ to Bishops and priests,
as p^oprely apperteyning to their office and calling without further
commission or authority from Princes or any other power. The distinction that
I made of Ecclesiastical jurisdiction, I vvil first repete, and than put mine
answer to your arguments. Spiritual Jurisdiction is divided into two
sorts, Joan. Antonius Delph. lib. 2.
the one is called Cohibytiue, the other not Cohibityue. That which is called
not Cohibityue, is that jurisdiction or power that is exercised and vvoorketh
in the inward and (.563.) The.563. untruth. Preachinge and Ministration of
S^craments* pertayne not to the secret Court of Conscience.
secret court of conscience: that is (.564.) The.564. untruth. Neither
preaching of the Gospel, nor ministration of the Sacrament^ is referred to
Jurisdiction not cohibitiue, by his Author alleged.
the preachinge of the Gospel, ministration of the Sacraments, and the
absoluing and reteininge of sins by the word of God in the public
mynistery. This therefore they call not Cohibityue, because in the Court of
conscience, no man is bound or lovvsed vnvvillingly or against his will. To
exercise this kind of Jurisdiction, neither Kings nor civil Magistrates,
neither any other person may challendge or take upon him, unless he be
lavvfully called thereunto. Jurisdiction Cohibityue has (.565.) The.565.
untruth. For there is no such division of the Cohibityue Jurisdiction.
two parts, the one consists in the exercise of excommunication, and
circumstaunces thereunto required by Christ's institution: the which power or
Jurisdiction belongs to the Church only, and (.566.) The.566. untruth. For
excommunication properly belongs to bisshops.
not to the Prince, Bishop or Priest: for no man has authority to
excommunicate, but only the Church, and those who receive authority
thereunto by commission from the Church. The other kind of Cohibitiue
Jurisdiction is a power or authority, that consists and is exercised, in
foro causarum, in the court of causes, and apperteineth ad externum and
publicum forum, to the external and public Court, and is defined to be,
says Antonius, an authority or power to declare the Law, give sentence and
to judge in all controversies (pertayninge to the Court) what is every man's
right, and in sum, to do those things, that justice does require
according to the Laws. Ioannes Quintinus defines Jurisdiction, to the same
effect, but opens the nature thereof more plainly, saying, Jurisdiction is an
office and authority, to declare the Law, that is, to admynister justice and
equity, and to govern the people with right and Laws. wha^ I name an office
(says he) I mean that jurisdiction has in it self a necessity to declare
the Law: for office is that which every man is bound to do: to declare the
law, is, to exercise judgments, whereupon comes jurisdiction (be means,
that jurisdiction has the name and is so called of exercising judgments)
judgments are exercised only of the^ that have jurisdiction, that is, power
to judge. Jurisdiction consists only in the contentions or debating of
matters in Court or judgments. This authority to judge does discende now
from the (.567.) The.567. untruth. Quintinus speaks there of temporal
Jurisdiction, not of Ecclesiastical.
Prince alone, in whom only is all power. By virtue of (.568.) The.568
untruth. Antonius falsified. He speaks not of this Jurisdiction, that is, of
that which comes from the prince only.
this jurisdiction (says Antonius) the Church ministers according to their
offices rightly enjoined unto them, may lawfully visit, enquire of men's
manners, punish the faulty, send forth apparitours or sommoners, cite the
sturdy and stubborn, repress their malepartnes, call and sommon meet
persons to the Synod provincial or general, confirm the matters decreed
in the Synod or Counsel (.569.) The.569. untruth. A great deal left out in
the middle* plainly confutinge M. Horns purpose,
pardone faults, change or mitigate the penance enjoined for confessed
faults, condemn Heretics and their writings, examine all men's writings
who so ever, before they be set forth or published, and after due examination,
judge whether they conteyne sound or pestilent doctrine, ordeine Decrees,
Laws, ceremonies and rytes, constitute Bisshoppes and other Church ministers,
also depose degrade, make them irreguler and unable to have holy orders,
determine illegitimation in persons for marriage, bestow Ecclesiastical
benefices, and exact tithes and annates. These and many other things may be
lavvfully done by those that have the power of this Cohybitiue Jurisdiction,
which is not (.says he.) properly signified by the name of the keys: for
although it may be named (in some respect) a Church key: yet it differs very
much from the keys of the first Court, that is, of the Court of Conscience.
For the use of those keys, that are occupied in the Court of conscience,
belongs only to the Evangelical Priests. But this Jurisdiction may
lawfully be exercised of those that are not ministers of the word and
Sacraments, and are not Priests. As the two former parts of Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction have their virtue, power, and institution of Christ immediately,
even so this third part, which is said to consist in foro causarum, with
those things which may be used or exercised by virtue thereof, does depend
upon the (.570.) The.570. untruth. Your own Author, Antonius calls this
Opinion Impiu^ errore^: a wicked error.
positive Laws of Christian Magistrates, or where, such wants, upon the
positive rules and orders of that Church, where such orders must be practiced,
and not immediately upon the Law of God.

The.7. Chapter. How M. Horn restrains the Oath to one kind of
jurisdiction, thereby to avoid M. Fekenhams invincible Argument taken out of
Gods word.
Stapleton.
Among other objections that M. Fekenham made against the supremacy in the
conference at Waltham, this was one. That Bisshops had their warrante and
commission for their exercise of their spiritual function and office by the
express word of God: therefore he could not with quiet conscience allow the
oath, that gives the Prince supremacy in all causes spiritual, with all
privileges, and preheminences in any wise touching any spiritual jurisdiction.
He misliketh, An answer to Io. Anto. Delphinus. Io. Anthonius Delde potesta.
Eccles. Venet. 1552. in. 8.
that Bisshops having such commission by Gods word, may not visit and reform
their cures without a further co^missio^ from the Queens highness. M. Horn
thinks to wipe all this away with a distinction borrowed, as he says, of one
Ioa^nes Antonius Delphinus. If any Catholic (good reader) should have brought a
testimony out of this Author against M. Horn, yt should have been with great
contempt refused and rejected by and by. But now seeing M. Horn himself has
authorized him: I trust he will allow him to be alleged for our side also. And
then shall M. Horn take small comfort of any distinction, to be found in him:
being one that avouches the popes supremacy, as much as any man, yea above al
general Councelles. Yet M. Horn thinks so to bewytche his reader, as yt
were with certain magical incantations, that he should believe this Anthony to
be of his opinion. We will therefore for the better disclosing of M. Horns
iuggling, gather so much out of Anthonius, as we must necessarily do, for the
illustratio^ of this matter. Two powers in the Church: the first of order
or of the keys: the second of jurisdiction.
This Anthonius divides (as other scholemen do) al authority Ecclesiastical,
into the power of order, and into the power of jurisdiction. The first power as
he declares, does rest in the interpreting of the sacred Scripture, in the
consecrating of the body and bloudde of Christ, in ministering of Sacraments, in
giving holy orders, and beside other things in coupling of parsons together by
marriage sacrame^tally. The power of jurisdiction he defines as M. Morn does,
and does divide it into Cohibityue, and Not Cohibityue: as M. Horn does. But
for the residewe, M. Horn plaieth the Medea, as he did before with Quintinus.
And besides makes such expositions, as neither his author has, nor otherwise
are true. And as skilful a Logician as he pretends him self: he neither
follows the order of his author, nor yet the true order and trade of the
rules of Logik: that is, first to define, and the^ to divide. But peruerteth
and confounds, as well the order as the truth of al things. Well we will walk
also a little disorderly, to trace M. Horn in his own steps. Fol. 105. a.
The iurisdistion not cohibityue (says M. Horn) is that jurisdiction or power,
that is exercised, and works in the inward and secret court of conscience,
Lib. 2. pa. 76.
that is, the preaching of the Ghospel, ministratio^ of the Sacraments, and the
absoluing or reteyning of syns by the word of God in the public ministry.
This says M. Horn, Lib. 2. pa. 36. b. and 37. a.
but not his author: who refers to the not cohibityue Jurisdiction, only
absolutio^ in the secret Court of conscience. Who says also, that preaching
and expounding of holy scripture, with the ministratio^ of sacraments is no
part of jurisdiction ecclesiastical, but belongs to the keys of order.
Neither does your author call preaching and ministering of Sacramens, the
secret cowrt of conscience, nor he ca^ justly do it: being a thing openly done,
seen, and heard: Io. Anth. Delph. lib. 2. page 76. b. Quamuis praelati
superioris voluntate quis parochiali sacerdoti subijciatur, tame^ nisi ipse
vltro subijciat seipsu^: nu^quam poterit absolui a peccatis. In secretissimo
eni^foro co^scie^tiae nemo absoluitur inuitus.
but he so calls private confession only (because it is done privately and
secretly, between the party and the confessor). And this no man does
unwillingly: for though a man may by commandment of his bishop be allotted to
a certain parish and curate: yet unless he do submit him self to his
parrochial priest, and open unto him his sins, he can never be losed by him.
To confess the which privy and secret faults he can not be forced, but by his
own conscience. And unless he confess the^, he can not be absolved. To this
confession then it appertains, that is said: no man is bownd or losed
unwillingly (which you for the tender love ye bear to private confession do
altogether dissemble) and not to preaching or ministering of Sacraments, as ye
seem to say. Which preaching and ministering of Sacraments do not appertain
to the, not cohibityue jurisdiction, as absolutio^ does, but to the power or
kaye of order, which (properly to speak) is no Jurisdiction at al. The which as
M. Horn does confound: so does he imagine of his own fantastical brain, that
the jurisdiction cohibitiue has two parts: the one standing in
excommunication, belonging neither to king, nor bishop, but to such as have
commission from the Church: the other in hearing of causes in the external and
publyke cowrte. All this is but an heap of follies and lies. For first, his
Author, does not so divide cohibityue jurisdiction: as yt does evidently
appear in him, and we shall anon more plainly open it. Again is not
excommunication given and pronounced in public and external cowrt upon the
hearing of causes there? Why do ye then sever, and dismember excommunication
from the hearing of causes ecclesiastical? Now that excommunication should
neither properly apperteine to the prince, nor to bishops, but to the whole
Church and congregation, is a fond, folish and frantyk imagination of M.
Horn, as even also his Author Antonius in this very book largely proves. M.
Horn in danger of a praemunire.
And as it is not far from heresy: so perchance it is not far from a
praemunire.

What mean you Master Horn by this Church? The whole Church can not
assemble together. And if you mean a general council, which in deed
represents the whole Church: when shall we have any man excommunicated? For
of such counsels very few, sith the Christian faith was first received, have
been assembled. And yet as few as they are, diverse of them have already
excommunicated such heresies as ye mainteyn. If ye mean of the particular
Church where the party shall be denounced excommunicate, then must we have both
men, women, and children solemply summoned to assemble when any excommunication
is made. For they be as well parts of the Church, M. Horns doctrine makes
frustrate all the exco^munications made in England these.8. years.
as the wisest and the eldest parson of the parrishe. And as every part of your
answer in this point imployeth a great folly: so the greatest of all is, to
see you after this sort to handle your matters, that ye have now by this your
wise reason frustrated and made void all the excommunications, that have been
made any day this.8. years, and more either by your self, yowre officers, or
by the arches, or any other Ecclesiastical cowrte in England. And now may
the poor honest and catholyke woman of Winchester, that upon false
excommunication (if your own doctrine be true) has been kept so many years
in the Marshalsea, go home and serve you with a write upon an action of
false inprisonment: either else show us good M. Horn your commission, to
excommunicate, that you have received from the Church or congregation.
Commission ye have none from the Queen's highness: (for as you say, she has no
such power her self) from the congregation you have none: (from the which two
you derive all cohibityue jurisdiction) and from the Pope, ye neither have, nor
will have any. From whence fetch ye then your cohibityue jurisdiction to
excommunicate? Now as I said take ye head, least to your great folly be
annexed also a daungerouse praemunire.

As for M. Fekenham, if he deny this and other Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to
depend upon the prince only, he does constantly, and agreably to him self,
and to a catholic man: but you neither agree with the catholic, nor with your
statute Law, nor with your own self. The catholics say, that this jurisdiction
comes not originally from the prince, but being in the Church, when few or no
princes were christened: the princes when they first received the faith,
finding this jurisdiction in the Church, so left yt, and did rather increase
and amplify it, the^ in any part diminish the same. The statute says, that the
prince is supreme head in all causes ecclesiastical: by the statute also all
jurisdiction ecclesiastical is united and annexed to the crown of the realm.
Ye say, An other irreco^ciliable co^tradictio^ in M. Horn.
the statute must be taken as the words lie Verbatim, without any exception.
What then in the world, may be thought more contrary or repugnante, either to
the words of the statute or your own, then when ye say. For Noma^ has
Authority to excommunicat but only the Church? Which is to say: This power of
excommunication belongs to the Church only, and not to the Prince, adding
also, as a reason: the prince has no authority to excommunicate? Is not this
also a manifest derogatio^ and impayring of the prerogative royal touching
matters Ecclesiastical, to imbarre the Prince al authority of excommunication?
May not M. Fekenham here return well upon you, your own words? What sauftie
mean ye to her person, Fol. 3. co. 2.
when ye bereue the same, of a principal part of her royal power? What
quietness s^ke you to her parson, when ye go about to bring the subjects to a
misliking of her royal power: which is a preparation of rebellion against her
parson? Now what cosonage this opinion, if ye obstinately mainteyne it, has
with heresy, the holy scripture may witness. 1. Cor. 15.
What commission had S. Paul of the Church, 1. Cor. 4.
when he excommunicated the foul fornicatour at Corinthe? What is the rod
that he threatens the Corinthians withal, 1. Tim. 1. 1. Cor. 6.
but this excommunication? By what commission of the Church did he either
excommunicate Himeneus, and Alexander, or denounce Anathema to him that loved
not our Lord Jesus Christ? What commission had S. Peter, Actoru^. 5. Nicephor.
lib. 13. cap. 34.

Ide^ lib. 12. Cap. 41.


when Ananias and Saphira by him excommunicated died forthwith? What commission
had all the Bishops sythens, namely Innocentius the Pope, that excommunicated
the emperor Arcadius? And S. Ambrose that excommunicated the Emperor Theodosius?
with a thousand other, that denounced excommunication without any such false
imagined commission?

After your division, fantastically by you framed, ye come to the definition of
Cohibitiue jurisdiction: wherein ye do not so much miss of your authors words,
as of his open meani^g, comprehending under this general definition as well
excommunication, as any other matter. Neither are you content to tell us
Delphinus definition, but of your large liberalitye, you add, an other
neadlesse out of Quintinus: but so, that after your wont, ye infarse of your
own, that all authority to judge disce^deth from the prince alone. Which thing
Quintinus says not of Ecclesiastical, but of temporal jurisdiction, as we have
declared before. And therefore, when ye infer by virtue of this jurisdiction,
says Anthonius, See how M Horn plays the Cacu^ to take away the authority
of excommunication from the Prince.
the Church ministers, etc. meani^g by the jurisdiction coming from the Prince
only, ye lewdly lie, as well upon Anthonius, as Quintinus. For neither of them
says so, but both the quite contrary. Whereof does follow, that all that, which
ye rehearse immediately as out of Quitinus nothing furthereth your pretensed
supremacy. And in case yt did, as ye have hitherto playde the peuishe and
theuishe Cacus with your authors, to blemish the Popes: Ide^ lib. 2. page 84.
Determinata in co^cilio confirmare, exco^municare, excommunicatos, cu^ vt decet
resipiscunt ecclesiae reconciliare, casus reseruare, reseruatos casus relaxare,
dare indulgentias, penas quae pro peccatis infliguntur, co^mutare.
so now play you the like pageant to blemish the Princes jurisdiction. For in
the middle of your own allegatio^, ye have pared away certain words, touching
the foresaid excommunication. In your author M. Horn after thief words, to
confirm matters determined, in the synod or council, follows, to
exco^municat, and to reconcile to the Church exco^municat parsons duly
repenting, to reserve cases, and to release cases reserved, to give pardons, to
change and mitigate, and so forth, as in your allegatio^ is contained. After
this ye say, that this cohibitiue jurisdiction may be exercised by such as are
no priests. I grant you: but what is that for your purpose? For as your
Author says so, even so he says, that at the least he must have the
clericall tonsure or crown, without the which, though he were a religiouse
professed man, he could not exercise this jurisdiction. Idem.

Quamuis potestas Ecclesiasticae spiritualisque iurisdictionis conueniat
praebeaturque non sacerdotibus: no^ tamen puris Laicis neque religiosis corona
clericali carentibus.

Page 85.


And this is a good and a sufficient argument (if you will stand to your own
Author Anthonius Delphinus) why neither you, nor your fellows may lawfully
practice any spiritual jurisdiction. Farther the very next Chapter in this
Antonius, of whom M. Horn has alleged so much, consists only in proving,
that this second Cohibytiue Jurisdiction is in the Church, by Gods
ordonaunce, not by the Commission of Emperors. And this he proves expressly
against such as M. Horn himself is. I mean against the scholars of Luther,
against the present protestants of our days: calling their opinion and M.
Horns assertion here: Impium errorem. A wicked error. And thought Master
Horn to prove by the same Antonius in the next Chapter before, that the second
Cohibytiue jurisdiction depended of Princes Commission, which in the Chapter
following he does of set purpose confute? O what is Impudency, if this be not?

M. Horn. The.163. Division. page 106.
You took upon you to prove, that this (.571.) The.571. untruth. M. Feke^hams
objection is of the first kind, not of the second ki^d.
second kind of Cohibitiue Jurisdiction with the appurtenances thereof: as I
have rehearsed, was appointed by the express word of God immediately to
Bisshoppes and Priests, without further commission of Princes or other
power, which I denied.

Now let us consider the force of your proufes, and see how they conclude
your cause. First ye say, that the words of the first part of the Oath,
do by express words of the Act, give unto the Q. highness all manner of
jurisdictions, privileges and preeminences in any wise touching and concerning
any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within the realm, with an
express debar and flat denial made of al Spiritual jurisdiction unto the
Bishops thereof to be exercised over their flocks and cures without her highness
special commission, to be granted thereunto: they having by the express word
of God, commission of spiritual government over them. Your (.572.) The.572.
untruth. Sclaunderous. M. Fekenha^ reported the effect of the Oath truly.
evil dealing with the words of the Act of the Oath, expresses an
unkindly meaning to the Prince and the state: for that either the Act or the
Oath debarreth or denies expressly or conuertly the to Bishops of this realm
to exercise over their flocks and cures, without her highness special
commission granted thereto, any spiritual jurisdiction assigned to a Bishop
by the word of God, is altogether (.573.) The.573. untruth. For that is
most true, as it shall appear.
untrue. The Statute gives, or rather restores to the Prince Jurisdiction and
Authority to enquire after what sort, the Ecclesiastical state and persons
behave them selves in their cures and chardges, to refourme and corecte the
disorders, negligencies, and enormities ^isinge amongeste them to the
hinderaunce of their Office in their cures and chardges, and in sum to order
and provide, that they do execute their Office according to their calling in
their cures and chardges. This is not to debar or deny the^ the exercise of
their office without a special license. Neither do the (.574.) The.574.
untruth. The express words of the Statute do give to the prince, power to
Authorize men to use all manner of jurisdictions, as it is here reported,
absolutely. Ergo it gives to the Prince the iurisdictio^s also
express words of the statut give to the prince al manner of iurisdictio^s in
such absolute wise, as you report, in any wise, and any spiritual jurisdiction
within the realm. For these terms, all manner, in any wise, and any spiritual
jurisdiction, which you enforce so much, are not found in the gift or
restitutition of spiritual jurisdiction made by the act unto the Prince: but
in that part where the Act gives afterward power and authority to the
Prince to execute the Jurisdiction, now Mark: If this jurisdiction be united
to the croun which the Prince in all manner does assign, name, and authorize
other to execute, why said you before, that the Statute gave not to the prince
all manner of Jurisdictions?
united and annexed to the Croune, by mete delegats, to be assigned, named* and
authorized by co^missio^ or letters patents under the great Seal of england.
If ye vvil hereof infer, that because the princes have by virtue of the act,
full power and authority to name, assign, and authorize any person whom they
shall think mete to exercise, use, occupy, and exequute under the^, al manner of
jurisdictions, privileges and preheminences in any wise, touching or
concerning any spiritual or ecclesiastical jurisdiction within their dominions
or countries: Therefore al manner jurisdiction is in the prince to be exercised,
used, occupied, and executed by them, for otherwise you vvil say, the princes
cannot give and commit to others, that which they have not received and is not
in the^ selves. Your argument is easily ansvvered in fevv words: it is a foul
(.575.) The.575. untruth. It is no sophisticatio^ at al: you prove no such
thing.
Sophisticatio^, a secundu^ quid ad simpliciter. These words of the act, al
manner, in any wise, are (.576.) The.576. untruth. For they are not restrained
in any part of the Act.
restrained and bou^ded, within the limits of the gift: where you of
purpose, to beguile the simple vvithal, do let the^ run at large, and set
them forth as mere and simple vniuersalles without any limits at al. The Act
gives or restores to the prince jurisdictions, privileges, superiorities, and
preheminencies, spiritual and ecclesiastical, but it (.577.) The.577.
untruth. This limitatio^ vve^t before, it is not added after those general
words here noted. See the Act it self. Again it is in effect no
limitation at all, as shall appear.
adds this limitation such as by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power or
authority has heretofore ben, or may laufully be exercised or used: And for
that these words (as by any spiritual or ecclesiastical power or authority
has heretofore ben, or laufully be exercised and used) may be maliciously
stretched by avvra^gling Papist, and might seem to some, that have good meaning
also, to give over large a scope, the matter or object vvherin, or where about,
those spiritual or ecclesiastical iurisdictio^s, privileges, superiorities, and
prehemine^ces, are exercised, used and do consist, is limited and added in
these (.578.) The.578. untruth. These words make no limitation of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction authorized by the prince, neither do appertain
thereunto.
express words (for the visitation of the ecclesiastical state and persons,
and for reformation, order and correction of the same, and of al manner errors,
heresies, schisms, abuses, offenses, conte^ptes, and enormities) which words
of limitatio^ in the gift, as they give not to the prince, the exercise of that
jurisdiction that consists and works in the inward and secret court of
conscience, by the preaching of the word and ministration of the Sacraments,
which belongs only and alone to the Bishops, neither do they authorize the
prince to use that jurisdiction that belongs properly to the whole church:
eue^ so do they give rightly unto the prince to exercise al manner jurisdictions
privileges, superiorities, and preeminences in any wise touching, and
concerning any spiritual or ecclesiastical jurisdiction, (.579.) The.579.
untruth. This is a false addition not expressed in the Act, but rather denied
by the generality thereof.
contained under the second kind of cohibitiue jurisdiction: for that may the
Prince laufully exercise and use, and does not belong unto the Bisshops,
otherwise then by (.580.) The.580. untruth. To say so, is imp^us error. A
wicked error, by Antonius Delphinus M. Horns Author.
commission, and authority of positive Laws. This limitatio^ of jurisdiction
set forth by express words in the Act, you know right well: ye were also at
sundry times put in mind thereof, and you were well assured, that your
alleging the words of the Act so darkly, co^fusedly, and (.581.) The.581.
untruth. Sclaunderous. The words of the Act were by M. Feke^ham plainly
and truly set forth.
untruly, could never further your cause amongst the wise: and yet would you
needs publissh them in this sort to the people, vvherby at the least, to make
both the Prince and the law odious unto the simple subjects. The Bisshops have
by the expres word of God, commission of spiritual government over their flock
that is, to feed the flock of Christ, committed to their charge, with Gods
holy word, as I have declared before. ^hey have commission to absolve the
faithfully penitent, and to retain or bind the impenite^t: that is, to (.582.)
The.582. untruth. Joined with an heresy, as shall appear.
declare and assure both the one and the other, by the word of the Ghospel, of
Gods judgment tovvard the^. What vvil ye infer hereof? VVil ye conclude
therefore, they have al manner of Spiritual government o^ ^urisdictio^ over the^?
Yo^g Logicia^s know this is an Such an euel co^seque^t you have used
throughout your book, of certain dealings co^cluding supre^ government in all
causes.
ill co^seque^t, that concludes upon one or diverse particulars affirmatively an
universal. Thus (.583.) The.583. Untruth. M Fekenham argues not so.
ye argue, Bisshops by the expres word of God, have commission to preach to
their cures, to remit or retein sins: Ergo, they have commission by the
expres word of God, to So^mon Councils, or Synods general or prouincial, to
visit: that is, iudicially sitting in judgment, to enquire of men's manners, and
forinsically to punissh or correct and to decide the controversies amongst the
people: touching contracts of matrimony, vvhordom tithes, sclaunders, etc. And
to ordeine Decrees, Laws, Ceremonies, Rites, etc. If this conclusion follovv
consequently upon your antecedent, the^ does it overthrow the doctrine of your
Romissh divinity, which grau^teth not to the Bisshops i^mediatly from God this
power, without a special commission from the Pope, in whom only, as the The^
S. Bernardis a Papist who says so Epist. 238. Solus ipse Romans Pont.
plenitudine^ habet potestatis.
Papists say, is fulness of jurisdiction and power. But if this conclusion
follovv not consequently upon the a^tecede^t, as a man more the^ half blind may
plainly see it does not: the^ have ye concluded (584) The.584. Untruth. For M.
Fek. thereby concludes that by such co^missio^ being given to bishops
immediately from God in some spiritual causes, the Princes authorizing for all
manner of spiritual causes to be used and exercised, is wrongfully given by the
Act.
nothing at al by Christ's divinity, that may further the matter ye have taken
in hand to prove. You falsely report the scriptures, in this that you say:
the Bisshops have commission by the expres word of God to give unto their
flocks and cures, the holy Ghost by imposition of their hands. For the place
which ^e quote for that purpose, expresses no such commission, neither
(.585.) The 585. untruth, joined with an heresy.
any other place of the holy scriptures. The Bishops have so dangerous a
cure and chardge over the souls committed unto them, that God will require
the blood of those that perish (thorough their negligence) at their hands:
and therefore has given them sufficient commission for the discharge of their
cures. It were therefore an Here M. Horn co^de^neth the doings in king
Edwardes days, and now also for an horrible absurdite, as shall appear.
horrible absurdity, if they might not exercise any Jurisdiction over them: if
they might not visit, refourme, order and correct them, by that commission
without a further commission from the Q. highness. But do ye not perceive,
which the most simple may see, whereof also ye often were admonished by me,
your vvarbling slight, and Sophistical quarellinge in equivocation of words
and terms? As there are two (.586.) The.586 untruth. Unproven as before.
sorts of Jurisdiction whereof the one not Cohibitiue, properly belongs to
the Bishop which he may and ought to exercise over his flock, without any
other commission than of Christ: so to visit, refourme, order and correct, are
of two sorts: the one a A new term for a new doctrine.
Scripturely visitacion, reformation and correction by the only word of God,
which the Bishops may and ought to exercise in time, and out of time, with
all possible vvatchefulnes and diligence without any further This is against
the Act. For no Jurisdiction what soever can be used, or exercised in
England without the Princes special commission.
commission. The other kind of visitation, reformation and correction, is
Forinsecall or courtly, which I comprehend under the second kind of
Cohibitiue Jurisdiction, and this the Bishop may not exercise without a
further commission from the Prince. VVerefore it is over foul an absurdity in
you to infer, that the Bisshops may not exercise any Jurisdiction,
visitacio^, reformation or correction, because they may not use this
Forinsecal, or courtly without the Princes commission.

Stapleton.
M. Horn after that he has been so bold with Delphinus, to frame his
arguments and wreste then at his own pleasure: he is as bold with M.
Fekenhams arguments also. M. Feckenham argues thus. Spiritual government is
given to Bishops by Gods special word, namely to loose and bind, to shut
up heaven gates, Act 20. Joan. 20. Math. 26. Act. 8.
and to give the holy ghost. Ergo the Prince is not the supreme governor in
all causes spiritual according to the words of the statute: Ergo all manner
spiritual jurisdiction is not to be authorized of the Prince, as the Act
expressly and most generally avouches: Ergo yt is not true, that they may
not visit or reform their flock withowt the Princes commission. This
arguments being good and sownd, M. Horn frames arguments of his own and
the^ lays the^ forth as M. Fekenha^s arguments.
M. Horn leapeth me in, and says: that M. Fekenham took upon him to prove
the second kind of cohibitiue jurisdiction to be, by the express word of God
immediately appointed to bishops and priests, without further commission of
Princes. And this argument he does more sole^ly repete again in the.2. leaf
following and goes about to soil yt, being his own, and not M. Fekenha^s
argument. For think you M. Horn, that M. Fekenham has or will allow your
first and second cohibitiue jurisdiction? His examples are of the power of
order, or of the keys: and of that, that you call the first Cohibitiue
jurisdiction. Why then do you so falsely charge him, leaving out the first two,
and the very principal parts? M. Horn takes upon him to restrayn the
general words of the statute to take away from the Prince the Authority of
excommunication.
Let us now hear what ye say further to him.

You accuse his evil dealing with the words of the act, expressi^g an
unkindly meaning to the prince and the state. Yea say, that though the statute
does give, or rather restore to the Prince, all manner of jurisdictions, or
preheminences towching any Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: yet the words must
not be taken so generally, but must be referred and limited to, and with other
words of the said statute, that is, for the visitation, reformation, and
correction of the ecclesiastical state, and of all manner of errors and
heresies.

By the which words of limitation the Prince as you infer of it, is as well
restrained from doing any thing in the public ministry, by preaching or
ministering Sacraments: as from that jurisdiction that stands in
excommunication, and has only thereby the second kind of cohibitiue
Jurisdiction. Surely here is a marueilouse and a wonderful interpretation. M.
Horn urges M. Fekenha^ to swear, that he believes in conscience, See the
absurdity of M. Horn in expou^ding the Oath.
that the Prince is Supreme Governor in all causes Ecclesiastical: He adds
as ye have heard, that those words must be taken without limitatio^ or
exception: and yet him self excepteth the chief things or causes
ecclesiastical. Whereby a man may much better conclude and swear to the
contrary: that is, that the Prince is not Supreme Governor in all Spiritual
causes. Surely to imagine, and to defend the Prince to be supreme ruler in all
causes, and yet to abridge his authority in so many causes, is much like, as
if one should say and affirm of some man, that he is a king: but yet he is
able to command no man to prison, for any offense: he is a king, but if there
be any war, he can command no man to serve him: he is a king, but yet if
there be any business, stur, or disorder in the people, he neither can punish
the^, nor make out any decree or proclamation against his rebels. Of the which
premises (they being true) it will follow, that in deed he is no king. But
surely, M. Horn me think (as I have said) that ye adventure very far and
dau^gerously, when in the other part touching jurisdiction, ye restrain and
limit the statute that gives the authorizing of al manner of jurisdiction to
the Prince, yea a^nexeth, and unites the same to the Croune: to the second
cohibitiue only. And what kind of visitatio^ or reformation shall the Prince
make by his ecclesiastical authority, if you take away the authority to
exco^municat, which al ecclesiastical visiters have, and ever had: and which
also expressly belongs to the second kind of cohibitiue jurisdiction which you
make to depend of only princes by your own author Antonius, as I have before
showed. Consider M. Horn whether M. Feke^ha^ may not justly say to you, that
you deal very ill with the words of the act, and you expres an vnki^dly meaning
to the Prince and the state: Well: if there be no remedy, but that by your
interpretation direct contrary to all reason and the manifest words of the
statute, the statute it self may be so eluded: and that ye may by your own
absolute authority spoil your supreme head of one chief point and power
ecclesiastical, yea of the very cohibitiue Jurisdiction, which you would seem
to grant him with this your pretty and newly coined distinction, which prince
like ye would have to be as yt were good and curra^t money: I mean of your two
kinds of cohibitiue jurisdiction, which I suppose shall neither be found in
any good Divine, nor in any book of the temporal law in all England, yet
would I feign hear from you of some good and convenient proof, why the
second cohibitiue, as ye call yt, remains in the prince only, more then the
first. Or why if that remain, excommunication being a part thereof remains
not in the Prince also? I would know farther when ever this jurisdiction was
taken away from the Princes, that it must now be restored again. Verily that
which they never had, could never be taken away. And much less can it be
restored the^, which by no right ever belonged to the^. For show M. Horn, if
you can with all your study and co^fere^ce with your friends but one example of
any Catholic Prince, either in England, or in all the world beside, that gave
the bishops any co^missio^, for the second cohibitiue jurisdiction: as ye call
it specified in those examples that your self rehearse out of Antonius. I will
give you one whole twelve months, Edward. 6. Dei great. etc Reverend. Thomae
Cant Archiepisc. etc. Quando quide^ omnis and iuris di^e^di authoritas, atque
etia^ iurisdictio omnimoda, ta^ illa quae Ecclesiastica dicitur, q secularis, a
regia potestate velut a supremo cap. etc. Dat. 7. die. men's. Feb. An. 1546. and
Regni nostri primo.

Ibidem.

Ad ordina^du^ igitur quoscu^que intra diocoesin tua^ Ca^tuar. ac ad omnes
etia^ sacros and presbyterari^s ordines promoue^du^ praesent atosque etiam ad
beneficia eccles. etc.

Ib^dem.

Per praesentes ad nostru^ dunt axat beneplacitu^ duraturas cu^ cuiuslibet
co^gruae and Ecclesiasticae coertionis potestate.

Per literas datas. 4. Maij. An. 1547. ad eunde^ Tho. Cantur. Per alias liter.
datas dict 4. Maii.

An. 1548.28. Iunij. Acts and Monumentes Fol. 771.


M. Horn, to bring forth but one such example. I never read, I never heard of
any such commission. Only in the late days of king Edward the sixth his time,
I find such commissions, by the which al Archbishops, Bisshops, and other
Ecclesiastical persons did then exercise all their Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. There I find, though untruly, that all jurisdiction as well
Secular as Spiritual, sprang from the King as Supreme head of all men. By the
said commission among other things the Bishops took their authority, not only
to hear Ecelesiastical causes iudicially, but even to give holy orders also:
as appears by the tenor of the same. They received also by virtue of the
commission all manner of power Ecclesiastical: and all this no longer then
during the Kings pleasure. And therefore within three months afterward, all
Bishops and Archbishops were inhibited to exercise any Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, until the visitation, appointed by the king were ended. There was
also an other inhibition made, that no Bishop nor any other Ecclesiastical
person should preach any sermon, until such time as they were specially
thereto licensed by the king. And have you not read or heard, M. Horn, that in
the second year of king Edward the.6. letters were sent from the L.
Protector to the Bishop of Winchester, D. Gardener, commanding him in the
kings behalf, and charging him by the authority of the same, to abstain in
his sermon from treating of any matter in controversy concerning the Sacrament
of the Altar, and the Mass, and only to bestow his speech in the expert
explication of the articles prescribed unto him, etc? An. 15^0. December. 15.
Acts and monumentes. Fol. 777.
Know you not, that two years after that the said Bishop being examined before
the kings Commissioners at Lambeth, the tenth article there laid against him
was, that being by the King commanded and inhibited to treat of any matter in
controversy concerning the Mass, or the Sacrament of the Altar, did contrary
to the said commandment and inhibition declare diverse his judgments and
opinions in the same? Ibidem. Fol. 867.
And that in his final pretended deprivation, made at Lambeth the 14. of
February, this (as it is there called) disobedience against the kings
commandment, is expressly laid against him? Did not the king here take upon
him the very first cohibitiue jurisdiction, as you call it? Did he not abridge
Christ's commission, given immediately to Bishopes, and limitte the exercise
thereof to his own pleasure and commandment?

Again were there not injunctions given by the said king Edward, to the
Bishope of London D. Bonner, Acts and Monumentes. Fol. 693. and 720.
with Articles thereto annexed for him to preach upon? And did not his great
examination and deprivation ensewe thereof? Look in your fellow Fox, and you
shall find the whole set out at large. If therefore by the Oath now tendered,
the Queens highness meaning is, to take upon her, Horn Fol. 103. b. and 104. a.
so much and no more of spiritual authority and power, then king Henry and king
Edward enjoyed and did justly claim, for they had no more the^ all, which you
auouche to be your constant assertion, and the true meaning of the Oath, see
you not, that by the oath even the Authority of preaching Gods word, which
Authority and commission Bishops have immediately from God, depends yet of a
further commission from the Prince, which you call an horrible absurdity? See
you not also, that the Bishopes had al manner of ecclesiastical punishment given
them by the princes commission, Fol. 108. b
without any such commission made as you imagine touching excommunication?

Thus have you taken away the very Scripturely visitation, Reformation, and
Correction, (as you call it) from the Bishops and from their commission given
to them by the word of God, and have made it to depend upon a further
commission of the Queens Hyghnes pleasure: For that by letters patentes she
may and has inhibited for a season the Bishops of her realm to preach the
word of God, as her brother king Edward before did. And this you call M.
Horn, An horrible absurdity, as it is in deed most horrible: and yet such as
you see by virtue of the Oath our Princes both may and have practiced. VVherof
the whole alteration of religion has proceeded in England.
Woe to them that induced good Godly Princes thereunto. For in deed hereof has
proceeded the whole alteration of religion in our country. And hereof it
follows, that religion in our country shall never be settled, or of long
continuance, except Princes always of one mind and Judgment do Raygne.
Hereof it follows, that we shall never join in Faith and Doctrine with
other christened Realms and with the whole universal Church except our hap
be, to have a prince so affected, as other Christen princes are. Hereof it
follows, that though our Prince be Catholic, yet this Authorytie standinge,
our Faith is not Authorysed by Gods word and the church, but by Gods word
and the Prince, that is, by Gods word so expounded and preached, as the
prince shall command and prescribe it.

Briefly hereof follows, that the faith of England is no faith at al builded
upon the authority of God and his Ministers, who have charge of our souls, but
is an obedience only of a temporal law, and an opinion chaungeable and
alterable according to the laws of the Realm.

These are in deed most horrible absurdities, and most dyrecte against the
unity of the Church, which above all things ought to be tendered, and
without the which there is no salvation. This destroys the obedience of
faith, and sets up only a philosophical persuasion of matters of
Religion. This clean defaceth all true Religion, and induces in place thereof
a civil policy. To conclude, this makes a plain and direct way to al
heresies. For if ever (which God forbid) any Prince of our land should be
affected to any heresy, as of Arrianisme, or any such like, the supreme
Authority of the prince remaining as the Oath grants, and as king Edward
practiced, should not all the Bishops either be forced to preach that heresy,
or to leese their bishopriks, other placed in their romes which to please the
Prince, and to climb to honor, would be quick enough to farther the procedings?
Any man of mean consideration may see these inconveniences, and many more then
these, which of purpose I leave to speak of. To return therefore to you, M.
Horn, whether you and your fellow Bisshops have special commission from the
Queen's Ma. for the exercise of your jurisdiction, I know not: But I am most
credibly informed ye have none. And as for exco^municatio^, ye will have none of
her: neither will ye acknowledge any such authority in her. And therefore ye had
need to look well to your self, and what answer ye will make, if ye be ones
called to an account, either for this kind of doctrine, so derogatory to the
statutes, and the Queen's M. prerogative, that ye would seem to maintain:
either for the practice of your jurisdiction without any sufficient Commission.
Remember now among other things, Take heed M Horn of perjury.
M. Horn, whether this dealing be agreeable to your Oath, by the which ye
promised, that to your power ye would assist and defend al jurisdictions,
priuilegies, preheminences, and authorities, granted or belonging to the
Queen's Highness, her heirs or successors: or united and annexed to the
imperial Crown of the realm. Ye may think upon this at your good leisure.
Remember also how you will stand to this your saying: that the express words
of the Statute do not give to the Prince all manner of jurisdictions. The Act
says so expresselie in these words. And that your Highness, etc. shall have
full power and authority by virtue of this Act, etc. to assign, name, and
authorize, when and as often as, etc. And for such and so long time as it shall
please your Highness, etc. such persons, etc. as your Majesty etc. shall think
meet to exercise, use, occupy, etc. all manner of jurisdictions, privileges,
and praeeminences, in any wise touching or concerning any Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical jurisdiction within these your Realms, etc. and to visit,
refourme, redress, order, correct, and amend all such errors, heresies,
schisms, abuses, offenses, contempts, and enormities whatsoever, which by any
manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical power, authority or jurisdiction, can or may
lawfully be reformed, ordered, redressed, etc. Here in these words you see,
M. Horn: full power and authority is given to the Prince, to authorize any man
at his or her pleasure to execute or exercise AL manner of IVRISDICTIONS: in
any wise concerning any SPIRITVAL IVRISDICTION: Item to redress and correct
all enormities whatsoever, which by any manner Spiritual or Ecclesiastical
power, AVTHORITIE or jurisdiction, can or may lawfully be redressed and
corrected. Here, M. Horn, is no exception of cohibitiue, or not cohibitiue
Jurisdiction. Dare you then to restrain the Act of Parliament, to the only
second kind of Cohibitiue Jurisdiction, a kind of Jurisdiction by your self
invented? But mark how you have confounded your self. You deny these
general terms to be found in the gift of Sp^ritual Jurisdiction made by the
Act: But, you say, it is afterward found. And where afterward? Forsooth say you,
In that part where the Act afterward gives power to the Prince to execute the
Jurisdiction, NOW UNITED and annexed to the CROWN, by mete delegates to be
assigned, etc. Mark well what you have said. You avouch the same jurisdiction
which is by the Prince to be assigned, and authorized in all manner, etc. as
before you have heard, the same so General and universal Jurisdiction, I
say, you auouche to be united and annexed to the Crown. If that, so general
Jurisdiction (as has been said) be united unto the Crown, why deny you,
that the express words of the Statute do give to the Prince all manner of
Jurisdictions. Are you not contrary to your self? The Prince has power to
execute all manner Jurisdiction by meet delegates by him assigned by your own
confession, and the plain words of the Act. The same Jurisdiction so by the
Prince to be executed, is united to the Crown, you say: Ergo all manner of
Jurisdictions are united to the Crown: you say. It is united to the Crown:
Ergo it is given to the Prince. Thus by your own words you are confounded,
and proved untruly and wrongfully to reprove M Fekenham for missereporting the
Oath in that thing, which both the Tenor of the Oath has, and your own
confession agniseth. You think this general gift may be avoided by the
limitation, that you say, is added. But you report the Oath untruly. That
limitation is not added to these general words: For it goes before these
general words in a former bra^che of this Statute. And your self confess,
that these general words are set after the gift or restitutio^ of spiritual
Jurisdiction made to the Prince, in the which that limitation as you say, is
found. And how ca^ the^, I pray you, that which went before, be a limitation
of that which came after? Who sees not your extreme folly herein, and the
miserable shifts that you are driven unto?

Now, you confessing the same general and universal Jurisdiction of which by
virtue of th'Acte, the Prince has the assigning and authorizing, to be united
to the crown, which is to be in the Prince, and reproving M. Feckenham for so
saying, do find fault also with his reason, why he should so say, and do call
his reason or argument a foul sophisticatio^. His reason, as your self
reports it, is this. Princes have not the^ selves al manner of ecclesiastical
Iurisdictio^s: ergo they can not give and commit the same to others. That they
have not al manner of Iurisdictio^s your self denies: for they have say you
only the forinsecal and Courtly Jurisdiction, or as you call it the second
cohibitiue Jurisdiction: and not any spiritual Jurisdiction touching the secret
Court of Conscience. Thus the Antecede^t you grant, being forced thereto by
the Scriptures by M. Feckenha^ alleged. Why deny you then the Co^sequent? You
pretend for your denial, a limitation to be made in the Act, of those general
words, al manner, in any wise, and any spiritual Jurisdiction: but that is now
found to be but a fable, by reason that this limitatio^ goes before in an
other branch of the Act, and these general words do follow afterward, as
your self also confess. But to make a limitatio^, before the thing to be
limited is spoken of, is against al order and course of writing, or reason. Yet
your urge this to your Reader, again and again: saying: that the matter or
object wherein or wherabout these spiritual Iurisdictio^s (to be by the Prince
assigned) are exercised, is limited and added in these express words (for the
visitation etc.) which words are not added to the general gift of assigning
and authorizing all manner etc. For they go before that general gift, neither
do or ca^ they limit that generality going (as I have often said) before it. I
desire the Reader for better trial hereof to consider and peruse the Act it
self. Thus the^ this limitatio^ that you pretend being but a mere forged and
fained matter, the argument of M. Feckenha^ stands sure: and you your self
worthy of small thank, even at their hands which devised that branch of the
Act, for restrayning and limiting the general power and Jurisdiction given to
the prince, to the only forinsecal and Courtly Jurisdiction, which you call the
second kind of cohibitiue Jurisdiction. You see by that which has been said,
the Act gives to the prince al together without exception. This shifte
therefore failing you, you frame to M. Feckna^ such an argument, as he never
made, but such as you have in deed throughout your book full many made: I mean
upon one or diverse particulars to co^clud affirmatively an universal: which you
say, is an evil consequent. For what other have al your proufes or co^clusio^s
ben through out your book hitherto, the^ these? Such a prince called a
Council: or inuestured Bishops, or deposed Bishops, or made constitutions
ecclesiastical: ergo such and such a prince were the supreme Governors in all
ecclesiastical causes: I say not, you have proved they did so, absolutely by
their own Pri^cely authority: You have missed in all your proufes as well
appears to any indifferent Reader and peruser of both our writings: But I
say, in case you had proved your Antecede^ts good, was not this allwaies your
Consequent? I say upon one or diverse particulars to conclude affirmatively an
universal? For what one Emperor or Prince among so many, so long a
succession, and in so diverse countres, have you brought forth, by whose
example by sufficient enumeration of all parts* you might logiquely and
reasonably conclude the affirmative universal, that is, the Supreme government
in all spiritual or ecclesiastical things or causes. You have not M. Horn,
brought any one such. Show but one, and I will allow you in all. And come
you now to charge M. Fekenham with this foul and evil consequent? What?
Thought you so by prevention to blame M. Fekenha^, that you might escape thereby
the blame your self? or thought you we should have forgotten to charge you
herewith, except your self by charging an other, had put us in mind thereof?
Upon this imagined Conclusion of M. Feckenhams you induce a dilemma, that
whether the Conclusion follow or not follow, yet he shall always remain in some
absurdite. But we say, that as he never made that consequent, so also that it
follows not. Then say you. If the Conclusion follow not co^seque^tly upon the
Antecedent* than have ye concluded nothing at al by Christ's divinity, that may
further the matter ye have taken in hand to prove. To the which I answer:
That M. Feckenham hereby fully concludes his principal purpose.

For, Commission of Spiritual government being given (as he reasons, and you
expressly confess) to Bishops immediately from God, by Christ him self true
God, not only in some, but even in the principal spiritual causes, as to feed
the Church with true doctrine, to preach the word, to bind and loose, to
minister the Sacraments, it follows evidently, that the Prince is not the
Supreme Governor in all Spiritual causes: And that the Act has wrongfully
given to the Prince the full authorizing for all manner of spiritual causes in any
wise concerning any Spiritual or Ecclesiastical jurisdiction to be used and
exercised by persons, when and as often, and for such and so long time, as it
shall please the Prince to authorize them: It follows, I say, that the Act
has wrongfully given all this to the Princes authorizing, seeing that God him
self has already geauen it to the Apostles and their successors, Bishops and
Priests in his Church, without any commission or authorisatio^ for any prince
of the earth whatsoever. God has (your self say, M. Horn) given to the
Bisshops sufficient commission for the discharge of their cures: It were
therefore (you say) an horrible absurdity, if they might not exercise any
jurisdiction over the^, by that co^missio^, without a further commission from
the Queen's highness. But both by the practice in king Edwardes days (at what
time by the Kings letters pate^ts, bishops had a special co^missio^ to minister
the Sacraments, and to preach the word, from the Prince, and at the Princes
pleasure, as it has before ben declared) and also by the plain Act in the
Queen's M. days now reigning, bishops can not exercise, use, or execute any
Spiritual jurisdiction, without the Authorizing, naming, and assigning of the
Prince, yea and that no oftener, nor no longer, then it shall please the Prince
to Authorize them (so that being a Bishop to day, to morrow (by the Act)
he shall be none, if it please the Prince to dissauthorise him, or discharge
him) Ergo, by Master Horns own confession and plain constante assertion,
both in King Edwardes days and now in the Act, an horrible absurdity, is
committed. You have said M. Horn a great deal more against the Act, then
ever M. Feckenham said. Bear therefore with him and us I pray you, if to
avoid such an horrible absurdity, both he and we refuse the Oath of this
act. Some reason, I perceive, M. Sampson and D. Humfrey of Oxford had, when
they refused this oath, being tendered unto them by a Commission. They saw it
was in deed a most horrible absurdity, so to weake^ Gods authority, that it
must yet not of congruite, but of necessite and by force of law be bolstered
as of it self insufficient, with the Princes authorizing and letters patents.
The saw it was a great impiety, that bishops and Pastors by Gods law
ordained to such offices, should not oftener exercise their offices, nor no
longer remain in the said offices, then it should please the Prince for the
time to Authorize them and allow them. Therefore these men them selves, no
doubt true subjects to the Queen's highness, and well willers to her May.
Person, refused yet this Oath, as is above said.

But what a conclusion is this M. Horn, how foul an absurdity is it, to take
the Oath of supreme gouernemente in all spiritual things or causes, in which
Oath also you say, nothing may be excepted: Fol. 104.
for if you except any, it is not al (these are your own words) and yet to
make now a limitatio^ and to except so many and so principal causes
ecclesiastical, in the which (as you say also) the Prince has no government
at all, but only the Bishops, as having sufficient commission herein from God
him self? Whereas if there were in deed any limitation by the Act expressed
or intended, (as there is not in deed any at all in the Authorizing of mete
persons to execute all manner of spiritual Jurisdictions) it were yet open and
manifest perjury to swear to a supreme government in all causes without
exception. What if you, and your fellows intend not, or mean not al manner
spiritual causes? Can this excuse them which swear to all, from manifest
perjury? How many have received the Oath, which never understood word of any
such limitatio^? If you mean in deed a limitatio^ M. Horn, procure the^ that
the limitation be put to the Oath expressly, that men may swear to no more then
is intended. Else if you entangle men's souls in open perjury, under a covert
limitation, assure your self, you and al other the procurers hereof shall
answer full derely to God for all the souls that hereby have perished. And
assure your self, that, Malach. 5
as the holy ghost infallibly threatens, he will come as a quick witness
against al perjured and forsworen persons. Neither yet does the limitatio^,
excuse the^ from perjury, which swear Princes to be supreme governors in some
spiritual causes, who are in deed no governors at al in such causes, nor ever
had by the law of God, any spiritual charge or Jurisdiction committed unto
them. But yet if this limitation were annexed, the perjury were the less, and
the dealing were more plain, though not therefore good. In the mean while you
which force men to swear to al ecclesiastical causes, and yet will except so
many ecclesiastical causes, how unreasonably and how absurdely do you write?
But of these your contradictory assertions I have before spoken.

If I should here ask M. Horn* what Authorite the parliament had, to give to
the Prince, all or any Jurisdiction at all in matters mere spiritual, that
parliament especially consisting only of the lay, the bishops and the whole
Convocation withstanding that gift with all their power, I believe it would
trouble him or any wise man else to give any good reason therefore, the
obedience of a Christian man to the Catholic Church (which al Christians in
their Creed do profess) presupposed. If I should farther ask M. Horn again
how he ca^ go for a bishop, and write him self (as he does in his book) the
B. of Winchester, being called to that function only by the letters patents of
the Prince, without due Consecration, 2. Tim. 1.
or imposition of hands by any Bishop or bisshops living, which impositio^ of
hands S. Paul evidently practiced upon Timothe, and the universal Church has
always used, as the only and proper means to order a bishop of the Church, I
am well assured, neither he nor al his fellows, being all unordered prelates
shall ever be able to make any sufficient or reasonable answer, (answering as
Christian Catholic me^) whereby it may appear, that they may go for right
bishops of Christ's Church: but that they must remain as they were before, or
mere lay men, or simple priests.

Last of al take you yourself in deed M. Horn for a bishop? If so, the^ may you
preach the word, minister the sacraments, bind and lose, upon the co^missio^
given you by God in holy scripture, without any further co^missio^ of the
prince. If you may so do, the^ put the case, the Q. May. that now is, or any
other king or Queen of England hereafter should forbid you to preach the word,
to minister the sacraments, or to execute any other part of the bishoply
function* and by co^mmissio^ appoint some other to that function? Will you obey,
or will you not? If yea, the^ do you forsake your duty and charge committed unto
you by God. If not, the^ by virtue of this Act, you incur the penalty thereof.
To this question answer M. Horn if you be able: and make, if you ca^, Christ's
co^missio^, the holy Scriptures and this Act to agree both together, that the
keeping of the one, import not the breach of the other. But this shall you never be
able to do while you live, standing to that, which in this your book you have
confessed. Thus you see every way, how in your own sayings you are intrapped,
ouertake^, and confounded. And so must it needs fall out with every man that
with any truth or probability, laboreth to maintain an untruth or absurdity. As
for your forged and presu^ptuous limitatio^ upon the words of The Act, and
abridgi^g of the Q. Ma. autoriti therein expressed, I leave that matter further to
be considered by the grave wisdom of the most Honorables.

Here remain yet some untruths by you avouched, that would be confuted, which
because the answer already waxes prolixe and long, I will but touch. The holy
Gospel says, whose syns ye retain shall be retained: whose syns ye lose in
earth, their syns shall be loosed in heaven. Contrary to the plain words of the
gospel you will have no actual bindi^g or losing by the priest in deed, but a
declaration and an assurance, that they are losed, or bound: contrary I say not
only to the words of the gospel, but also to the doctrine, and practice of the
universal Church: where the priest has ever said to the penitent: Ego absoluote
etc. I absolve thee: and says not, I declare and assure thee that thou art
absolved. This is a plain heresy, Vide Ambros. de Poenitent. lib. 1. c. 2.
not much unlike to the Nouatia^s, who^ S. Ambrose co^futeth: saving that their
heresy is not so large as is yours. For they, but in certain crimes denied
power of losing in the church, referring that power in such cases only to God.
You deny to be in the church any power at al, either of binding or of losing,
referring all the power to God only, and not considering how God is to be
praised, qui tale^ potestate^ dedit hoi^b. Who gave such power to men. Math. 9.
Which the common Jews had yet the grace to consider in the high Bishop and
chief priest, Christ Jesus our Savior.

An other of your heretical untruths in this place also is, that you deny
the sacrament of confirmation: and that the holy ghost is not given by the
imposition of the Bisshoppes hands. Math. 9.
We read in S Luke, that Christ at his ascension, Lucae. 24.
promised the holy ghost to them, which was performed upon whitsonday. Act. 19.
And what was that but their confirmation^? We read, that S. Paul after he
had baptized certain parsons (in the which baptism no doubt they received the
holy ghost) he put his hands upon them, and they thereby received the holy
ghost. And this was their confirmation. Act. 8.
The like is written in the place here by M. Fekenham alleged, of the Apostles
Peter and John, that put their hands upon those that before were baptized,
by Philip the Deacon, and they thervppon received the holy ghost. The which
did in the primitive Church work in the Christians with invisible grace and
visible miracles, at the time of their confirmation: as yt now works by
invisible grace only, with a strengthening and confirming of the ghostly and
spiritual gifts before received: Vide caput Spiritus sanctus, et cap. de ijs
vero etc. vt Episcopi de consecratione.
whereof the Sacrament has his name. And therefore the Bishops commission for
giving, by the imposition of their hands, the holy ghost, may be justified
as well by the former authorities of scripture, as by the authority, practice,
and doctrine of the Church, that belieueth, that the holy ghost is given for
the increase of al spiritual strength in confirmation.

The.164. Division. page 109. a.
M. Fekenham.
Whereunto I do adioyne this objection following. First for the time of the old
law, which as Paul said was a very figure of the new, Moses, Aaron,
Eleazarus, being Priests, they had by the very express word of God, this
jurisdiction over the people of God, Exodus 24.
Exodus 29.
as to sit in judgment upon them, and that not only in Ecclesiastical, Number.
27.
but also in Politic and civil matters and causes: they did visit them, they
did refourme them, they did order, correct, and punish them, so often as cause
required, and without al commission of any civil Magistrate, Governor, King
or Prince. Besides that for the whole time of the old Law, there was an
express Law made, where by all Civil Magistrates and Judges were commanded in all doubtful matters, to repair to the Bisshops and Priests, and to stay
upon their determinations and judgments, without declining on the right
hand or the left. And if that any man should disobey the determination once
given of the Priest, Morietur homo ille: like as it appears. Deuteronomy. 17.

M. Horn.
This adiu^ct vvil not serve your turn, for it is not possible to stretch it
without bursting, to ioyn with that you must conclude. You begin, to join
your work together with a saying of S. Paul, which he (.587.) The.587.
Untruth. For S. Paul says so, as shall appear.
never said, you should have noted the place where S. Paul says, that the old
Law was a very figure of the new. There is no such saying: S. Paul says to
the Heb. that the Law has the shadovv of good things to come, etc. where he
speaks not (.588.) The.588. untruth. That is spoken of S Paul generally of
the whole law.
generally of the whole Law, but of the ceremonial part and Sacrifices,
which were shadows of Christ and his Sacrifice, and not of the Bisshops
jurisdiction after Christ, under the Law of the Gospel. Thus aptly also do
your allegatio^s out of thold testament serve your purpose: for one of the
three, to wit.29 of Exodus has no word of this jurisdiction: only it shows
the manner of consecrating the Priest, and the ceremonies the^ about. In
the.24. of Exodus it is said, that when Moses went up into the Mount, he
said unto the Elders; Tarry us here until we return unto you. Lyra.
Behold Aaron and Hur, are here with you: if any man have ought to do, let
him come unto them, that is, if any matter of controversy arise in mine
absence, let Aaron and Hur, have the hearing and deciding of it, as I should
have, if I were present. By this place Aaron had no authority given unto him,
but for a time in the absence of Moses, by commission from Moses, the chief
ruler and governor of Gods people, and that not alone, but having Hur one of
the Elders, an Ancient and a wise man joined in commission with him. This
allegation makes directly (.589.) The.589. untruth. It makes not a whit
against M. Fekenhams conclusion Aaron the^ being not yet Priest at all.
against your conclusion: for it shows that Aaron had this Authority but by
commission from Moses the Prince of the people. In the third place, Number. 27.
where God shevved unto Moses, that Iosue should govern the people after him,
it is said: that Iosue should stand before Eleazar the Priest, who shall ask
Council for him by the judgment of Vrim before the Lord, and at his word they
shall go out and in, both he and the people of Israel: that is, when Iosue
stands in doubt what to do for the better government of the people, either
in the time of peace or war, he shall understand Gods vvil therein by the high
Priest, to whom the Lord vvil miraculously declare his vvil and pleasure by
the light or shining of the Vrim and Thumin, and according to Gods vvil shevved
in the Vrim, to the high priest, and by him to Iosue, he must direct and order
his goeing in and out: Ergo, say you. The Bishops and Priests now in the
time of the Gospel, have Jurisdiction by the express word of God, to keep
Courts, to call Councels, to make Laws, and forinsecallie to visit,
refourme, order, and correct their flocks and cures. The most simple can
judge of this (.590.) The.590. untruth. For the sequel is good, as it shall
appear.
sequel. After like sort it is written Deuteronomy. 17. That when hard and doubtful
cases come before the judges or inferior Magistrates, which cannot easily be
tried or found out by them: than the inferior Magistrates shall go to the
high Priest, and to the chief judge at Jerusalem for the time being, who
shall shevve what is to be done: whose sentence and judgment must not be
disobeyed, under the pain of death. Do you not aptly conclude, think you,
that the Bishopes in the time of the Gospel ought to have this Courtly
jurisdiction, because the high Priest, and the (.591.) The.591. untruth. The
word temporal lewdely added to holy scripture.
Temporal judge, did determine doubtful cases in the time of the old
Testament? For the Priest alone did not determine al causes, as you seem to
allege the texe,

The.8. Chapter: Containing a Confutation of M. Horns answer to the Objections
of M. Fekenham laid out of the old law.
Stapleton.
IF a man that has an adversary and such as he will and must fight withal, M.
Horn uses no fair play with his adversary.
may first by some pretty device find the means, that his adversary may be
cast in prison, and when he shall come to the combat, may appointe him also
his weapon, or by a slight conueye away his adversaries good weapon, and in
stead thereof, give him some feeble, weak, and rotten staff to fight with,
then may this crafty false soldier, sone be a conqueror. It seameth now to
me, that M. Horn, that pretends him self to be the prelate of the honorable
order of the Garter, does much dishonor him self, and shows to great
cowardnes, offering M. Fekenham in this combat, to much wrong: first procuring
by sinister accusations, that he was restrained of his liberty, and then
afterward in this his answer, giving M. Fekenha^ by a pretty legerdemaine as it
were a poor slender and weke weapon, for his inuasiue armure: who otherwise
had provided for himself very well: I mean of such arguments as M. Fekenham
has made, which M. Horn takes upon him to soil and confute: after what
sort ye have partly seen, and shall forthwith have further experience. M.
Fekenham then argues after this sort. In the old Law which, as S. Paul
says, is a very figure of the new, Moses, Aaron, and Eleazarus, being priests
had the chief judgment of matters Ecclesiastical without any commission from
the cyuill magistrate: Again, al as well cyuill magistrates and judges as other
were commanded upon pain of death, to obey the determination of the priest in
doubtful matters. Ergo the lay Prince is not the supreme head or judge in all
spiritual and ecclesiastical causes. Ergo, the bisshops may visit and correct
their flock without any commission of the Prince. This is good reader M.
Fekenham his good and strong inuasiue weapon. Ye shall now see, how M. Horn^
does slilie and craftily imbecile and steal away this armure from him, and
gives him as it were a bulrush in his hand, and then steppeth forth, like a
new Gohath against little David. And first, ye may note what a profounde divine
he is, that makes yt a strange thing to hear that S. Paul should take the
old Testament for a very figure of the new. And yet this is so sure, Tha thE
old testament is a figure of the new. Heb. 10.
and so sound a principle, and so easy to be proved by all the new Testament:
and so thoroughly and conformably confessed, as well of the Catholics as
protestants, that I marvel what Master Horn means thus to wrangle. Nay,
says Master Horn, yet S. Paul says not so: he says in deed, that the
law, has the shadow of good things to come: but that perteyneth only to
Christ's sacrifice, whereof the old laws sacrifices were shadows, and not to
the bisshops jurisdiction under the ghospel. Why Master Horn, is there none
other place in S. Paul, that may serve M. Fekenhams turn think you, 1. Cor.
9. Non obligabis os bo u^ tritura^ti nu^quid debobu^ cura est Deo? na^ propter
nos vtique scriptum est.
but this? You know M. Fekenham quoted not this place which you allege, nor
any other, but being a matter so known and confessed, left it vnquoted.
Therefore if S. Paul say so, either here, or otherwhere, M. Fekenha^s saying
stands for true. What say you then to S. Paul, that says, that which was
written in the old law, thou shall not mussel the mouth of the ox that
treads out the corn, to have been written for us: and thereby proves, that
^he lay men should temporally relieve their spiritual pastors? Does he not
here take the old law for a very figure of the new? Again does not S. Paul
say, that Agar and the mount of Sina did represent the old Law, Ad Galath. 4.
and Ismael the Iewishe Synogoge: as Sara and Jerusalem do represente the
gospel, and Isaac the Church of Christ? which is our mother: as Saint Paul
there says. Does not S. Paul there bid the Church of the Gentiles, that
was before Christ barren and idolatrouse to rejoice, for that she should pass
the Jews and the Synagoge in all virtue, and in number of people? And does not
he further say, that as Ismaell persequuted Isaac: so should the false Jews,
the infidelles and heretics persequute the true Church of Christ? And who is
this Ismael, if ye be not? that do not only persequute the Catholics, but
vilanouslye slander the whole Churches as Turkishe and idolatrouse, and as
void and barren of al true relligion? Does not the said S. Paul write also,
that our Fathers were all underneath a cloud, and, that all passed the sea, 1.
Cor. 10. Haec in figura facta sunt nostri, and mox. Haec oi^a co^tigerunt illis
in figura.
and that all were baptized by Moses in the cloud, and in the sea, and that
they all did eat one spiritual meat? Does not he also playnelye say, that
these things chanced to them in a figure? Here, here is the figure Master
Horn, not of the carnal sacrifices only signifying the sacrifice of Christ:
but of two of our greatest Sacraments, yea and if there be no more in number
then ye and your fellows say, of all our sacraments. Here S. Paul says
plainly, that those things that chanced to the Israelites passing the read
sea, and eating Manna, were shadows and figures for us: that is, the read sea
of our baptism: the Manna and the water that flowed out of the Rock, of our
Manna: that is, of the body and bloudde of Christ that the Christians receive
in the blessed Eucharistia. As S. Ambrose, S. Augustine and the other fathers
do most fully and amply declare. Here might I by this figure infer many
things against your detestable doctrine and blasphemy blown out against our
heavenly Manna, in the foresaid sacrament: but we will not go from our matter.
Many like places of S. Paul I do here omit, which may justify M. Fekenhams
saying, of the which it pleases you to pycke out that one, that seems to
you weakest, and yet it is as strong or stronger the^ any other. For though S.
Paul does speak in that place, of the sacrifice of Christ, that was shadowed
by the carnal sacrifices of the Jews, and goes about to prove, that by the
sacrifice of the Law sin was not taken away, but by the only sacrifice of
Christ: Ad. He. 10. Vmbra^ eni^ habens lex futuroru^ bonoru^, no^ ipsam
imaginem rerum.

Greg. Nazianz. in ^rat. De S. Pascha. Pascha legale figura figurae erat. etc.
1. Cor 13. Adhuc in aenigmate Illic facie ad faciem.


yet the reason that he lays forth for the maintenance of his assertion, can
not be restrained to the carnal sacrifices only, but is a general rule to argue
from the old Testamente to the new: that is, that the old Testamente was but
a shadow: the new testament is the very expres image of the celesticall and
heavenly things. And therefore Dionysius Areopagita, Gregory Nazianzene and
others say, that the Church of Christ, stands as it were in the middle between
the state of the sinagog of the Jews, and the state that shall be in heaven:
whervppon it will follow that as those things, that be done in the Church
presently, are a figure of those things that we shall see in heaven (as S.
Paul calling our present state ( in enigmate) teaches) so those things that
chanced in the sinagog were a figure of those things, that now are don in
Christ's Church. And as our present state, walking by faith, is yet but in
aenigmate, in a dark representation, but afterward we shall see the glory of
God facie ad faciem, face to face, as S. Paul teaches: so the state of the
old law was according to the Apostle also, Paedagogia ad Christu^, an
Introductio^ to Christ, In orat. de S. Pascha. (...).
and as Gregory Nazianzen calls it, Vallum quoddam inter Deum and idola
medium, a certain trenche or wall set indifferently between God and Idols, so
as we should pass from that to God, as from the sampler to the verity, from
the figure to the thing, and from the shadow to the body. And therefore among
other things frequented in the Church, the ecclesiastical Hierarchia, or
supreamacy, as it is a lively, and an express image of one God, in heaven,
above so many and infinite nombers of holy spirits: so no doubt, it has his
shadow in the old testament. And what other was he that M. Fekenha^ here
speaks of, but the high priest M. Horn? And was not he the supreme judge of
all matters ecclesiastical? In all which causes lay there not an appeal, from
all other priests iudegments in doubtful cases, to him keeping his residence in
Jerusalem: even as the course of all appeals, in such matters runs now
from all parts to the pope, remaining in Rome? This is evident by the place
that master Fekenham cites: where yt is written, Deuteronomy. 17. Qui aute^
superbierit nolens obedire sacerdotis imperio, ex decreto Iudicis morietur homo
ille.
that if any man stubbornelye and proudely disobeyed the priests
commandment, that he should by the commandment of the Judge be put to
death. The practice of this supreme judge in causes Ecclesiastical may be
easily justified, by many examples of the old testament, namely by the doings
of the good king Iosaphat: who in the state of the law being the figure,
renewed those things infringed and broken then by the idolatrouse and
heretical Jews, the true image whereof, so long kept and reverenced among
the Christians, is now broken by you and such as you are. This Iosaphat
placed at Jerusalem the levites and priests and the chief of the famylyes of
Israel to hear such causes 2. Par. 19.
as should be deuolued thither from all other quarters, touching any question
of the Law of God (concerning matters of belief) touching commandments
(pertaining to the precepts moral) touching ceremonies, and touching
iustifications, that is, judicial precepts, given for the keeping and
observation of Justice. In all these the Levites, and priests, and the chief of
the familyes were the Judges: Amarias au^t sacerdos and po^tifex vester in his
quae ad Deu^ pertine^t praefidebit.
Amarias the high priest being chief over them al in these and such other
matters pertaining to God and to religion. Thus lo at length ye see the shadow
and figure Master Horn, in the old law mete together, not only for the
sacrifice of Christ, but for the high and chief priest also, that should be
among the Christians above all other states spiritual or temporal in all the
world^. Neither can ye now, either deny this plain and evident figure, or
deny, that there is any good sequel of argument to be derived from the figure
of the old Law, to the new testament. And verily (to leave all other things
that may be thereto justly said) you of all men can lest disallowe this kind
of collection and arguing, which to justify your new Laical primacy have
used the said argument your self. Neither do I build so much upon the
figure, nor make so great account of yt, as I do of the drifte and force of
very reason, that must drive us to condescende to the order of the Church, and
does extorte our confession in this point. There is a greater necessity to
have one high priest among the Christians the^ the Jews had.
Which reason is, that God loves his Church, as well as he did the Jews
Synagoge, and has as lovingly, as plentifully, and as effectually provided for
the good government of the same, as he did for the synagoge. And therefore to
pacify Divisions, schisms, and heresies, he has provided us one spiritual
Cowrte, to decide, and utterly to determyn al controversies, rising upon
matters of religion, as he provided for the Jews. And so much the more, among
Christians then among the Jews, for that the Christians, being of so many and
diverse nations, tongues, wits, manners, and fasshions, many controversies for
faith and religion, and of more weight and moment, will also arise and spring
up, then ever rose among the Jews being but one only Nation. Especially
the Apostle foretellinge us, that heresies must arise. 1. Cor. 11.
And if there be not one certain judge appointed, to whom all nations must
indifferently obey, yt must neades be, that Christendom shall contynewe in a
continual broyle and ruffle of sects and heresies. Which also have in our time
so terribly and hugely increased, by nothing more, then that we give no ear
to this one judge: and that we do not, as our forefathers have done, stay our
selves, and depend upon this the highest cowrte of all Christendom. Ye see
now good reader both the figure, and the reason of the figure: what says
now M. Horn to it? M. Horn sets forth his own arguments as though they
were M. Fekenhams.
Full pretely I warrante you: and that is, that Master Fekenham does not aptly
conclude, that the bisshoppes in the time of the Gospel owght to have
jurisdiction by the express word of God, to keep cowrts, to call Counsels,
to make Laws, to visit, and to reform and caet. because the high priest,
and the temporal judge, did determyne doubtful cases, in the time of the old
testament: for the priest alone did not determyne all causes, as M. Fekenham
seameth to allege the text. Here may you playnelie see, that Master Fekenham
can not use his own armure, but such only as Master Horn will grant him.
For neither M. Fekenham speaks of the temporal judge, nor his text, be it
Latin, Greek or Hebrewe. They all speak of a judge, but nothing is there to
signify this word temporal. This word is shamefully infarsed by Master
Horn, to uphold his temporal supremacye, by this place most greauously
battered. The judge and the high Priest is al one, as does appear by the
letter, and by the doing of King Iosaphat, which was conformable to the
commandment of Moses, where as Amarias is appointed the chief for spiritual
matters, as Zabadias was for those things that perteyned to the Kings office.
Which may be well understood for the bodily punishment of those that
disobeyed the high priest, and to put them to death, if the case required,
according to the Law. And in that sense yt may be taken perchance for a
temporal Judge. This notwithstanding yt agrees well enowghe, with the high
priest to. 1. Reg. 4. 1. Match. 14
For that diverse times as well before there were any Kings as afterward, the
high priest had the chief regiment, both temporal and Ecclesiastical: but
though he had not ever the temporal, yet had he ever the Ecclesiastical
supremacy: And therefore it is written of the Prophet Malachie, Mala. 2.
that the lips of the priests shall preserve knowledge, and they shall seek
the law at his mowthe. And it is here written, Deute. 17.
who so ever disobeyeth the priest, shall die. He says not, who so ever
diosobeyeth the temporal Judge. For the high Priest is the Judge: Cypr. lib. 1.
epist. 3. Quibus honor ta^tus de Dei dignatione conceditur, vt quisquis
sacerdoti eius, and ad tempus hic iudicanti non obte^peraret, statim necaretur.
al one person, and not two. And so S. Cyprian with the other fathers takes
place. When I speak of the high priest, I exclude not other of the clergy,
with whom the Pope, in all grave and weighty causes uses to consult, and of
congruence ought so to do, and so it was in the old Law. Neither M. Fekenham,
as ye charge him, says so, but lays forth the text as it is, saying, that he
that disobeyeth the priest, shall die for it. Now the high priest being this
authorized, and Moses, Aaron, and Eleazarus being successively the high
priests, it must needs follow, that they had the chief superiority for
matters ecclesiastical, neding no further authority, then that they had by the
express word of God, for the executing of their office, whether it were in
geuinge sentence, and making decrees Ecclesiastical, or in visiting and
reforming the priests, and Levites that were underneath them: which if ye can
show they did not, nor could do, but by the civil magistrates authority, we
shall then give you some ear. But ye prove it not, nor ever shall be able to
prove this paradoxe. And therefore we pass not, whether it be true or no, that
in the.29. of Exodus, there is never a word of jurisdiction. It is
sufficient, that Master Fekenham prove Aaron to have been the high priest,
as he was in deed, and so yt appears there. Where now ye would return
against M. Fekenham the.24. of Exodus, ye have forgotten your self. For at
that time Aaron was not yet made high priest, but afterward he was so made, as
appears in the 3. chapter after: Videlicet cap. 28. Vide Exodus 24. and. 28.
And therefore he might have a commission to hear causes in Moses absence well
inowgh: Moses being then both the prince, and the high priest also, and he, as
is said, being yet no priest at al. For your answer to the.3. place by M.
Fekenha^ alleged, we might pass it, saving that by your coming in with Vrim
and Thunim you have much helped M. Fekenha^ his argument, and cut your self
with your Thunim quite over the thume. For though these outward miraculouse
signs, do not now appear in our high priest, yet the thing that was
signified by Vrim and Thunim set in the brestplate of the high priest, that is,
light and perfection, as some expound it, or as our common tra^slatio^ has,
doctrine and verity: remain now in our high priest as well as they did the^
remain in the high priest of the old Testament, yea and much more. And
therefore the true doctrine is to be fetched at the high priests or bisshops
hands, in all doubts and perplexities of religion, and consequently all laws,
decrees, and ordinances, made for the observation of his sentence and
determination, are to be observed. To what purpose were it for priests to
declare and determine the truth, if they might not by some forcible Law co^pel
men to the keeping of the same, which is now chiefly practiced in the Church by
exco^municatio^s, as appears by general, and by other Councils? The like
hereof the Jews had in thrusting the disobedient and rebellious persons out of
the Synagoge. Io. cap. 9. and. 12.
Now to imagine such an improbable and an unlikely paradoxe, that bishops
having co^missio^ from God to feed the people, to teach them, and instruct
them, and having a charge of their souls, for the which they shall make to God
an account, may not visit and reform their flock by examinations, judgments
and trialles forinsecal, also by excommunication, deprivation, or such like
ecclesiastical punishments, without a new commission from the Prince, and to
bring nor reason, nor authority, nor Scripture, nor Doctor, nor counsel, nor
example in Christ's Church at any time practiced for the co^firmatio^ of yt,
but only a decree of lay men, contrary to their own Pastors and bishops: it
is such a kind of persuasio^, as well may be forceable, to the hand and the
mouth, to extort from the^ an outward consent for fear of displeasure, but to
the heart and conscience of a Christian man professing obedience to Christ and
his dear Spouse the Church and perfourming the same, it shall never be able to
perce unto. As for the Sequel of M. Fecke^ha^s argument, whereof you say, the
most simple ca^ judge, as though it were but a simple sequel, to infer upon
the Bishops authority in the old law, the Iurisdictio^s of the bishops in the
new Testament, or upon the example of Eleazar to infer forinsecall, as you
call it, jurisdiction in bishops, it appears by that has been said, both
that the deductio^ from the old law to the new is right good and such as your
self most ple^tifully have used in the first part of your book: yea so far,
that you charge M. Fekn. (though untruly) for a Donatist, for seeming to avoid
such kind of prouf: and also it appears that a vain thing it were for bishops
now (after the example of Eleazarus) to have the directing, feeding, and
ordering of Gods people, if they had not withal power and authority to call back
such as go a stray, to punish the offenders, to visit their cures, to refourme
disorders, to make laws for order to be kept etc. in vain I say, seeing that
the one without the other neither was at any time auaylable, neither can by any
reason possibly be auailable.

M. Fekenham. The.165. Division. page 110. a.
The second, in the new Testament: like as our Savior Christ did commit
and leave the whole Spiritual government, of his people and Church unto his
Apostles, and to the Bisshoppes and Priests, and the successors of the^. So
they did practice al Spiritual government over them, they did execute and give
judgment in the Church of Christ: they did refourme, order, and correct all
disorder therein, and that without all commission, aid, or authority of any
Temporal Magistrate, King, or Prince, for the space of three hundredth years in
the primative Church of Christ, Lib. 1. hist. Tripa c. 9.
unto the time of Constantine, he being the first Christian King and Emperor,
which did join his sword to the maintenance of Gods word.

M. Horn.
Like as the Apostles had in commission power from Christ our Savior, to
whom al power was given both in heaven and in earth: so faithfully they
executed the auth^rity and charge committed unto them, not seeking their own
honor by usurpation, but the glory of Christ by the abasing them selves even
unto the death. Their commission regestred by S. Matthew appears in these
words. Go and teach all the nations, baptizing them in the name of the
father, and of the son, and of the holy ghost, teaching them to keep all
things, which I have commanded you. How faithfully they exercised this
authority according to the commission, S. Luke shows in his Chronicle,
called the Acts of the Apostles, and sets forth one notable example hereof
in Paul's oration, made to the Elders of Ephesus, called to Miletum. He takes
them to witness, that he kept nothing back from them, that might be for their
profit, but showed them all the council of God. It is much (592) The.592
untruth. No maruail at all. For all Gods Council that Paul showed, is not
expressly mentioned in the Scripture. It is a most fond collection.
maruail that Paul shevved al Gods council unto them and yet made no mention of
any Forinsecal, jurisdiction as given them by the commission of Gods word.
The godly Bisshops that succeeded the Apostles for many years after, follovved
the doctrine and examples of the Apostles, yet (.593.) The 593. untruth The
Apostles exercised such jurisdiction with out any commission, but from God.
never exercising jurisdiction Forinsecal, neither judging, reforming,
ordering, or correcting, otherwise than bye preaching, publicly or privately
without especial consent and commission of their Churches, during the time
they had no Christian Prince or Magistrate. Consta^tinus, as I have said, was
not the first Christian King: But he was the very first Emperor, as your
own vvriters do witness, that (.594.) The.594. untruth. The bishops
exercised al kind of Jurisdiction ecclesiast. before Constantine was borne.
gave Bisshops authority to judge and exercise jurisdiction over their Clergy,
and that gave to the Bishop of Rome power and (.595.) The.595. untruth.
Constantin gave to the Pope no such Authority, but furdered the execution
thereof.
authority over other Bisshops, as judges have the King over them, Did. 86.
and that gave to him power and jurisdiction over al other Churches, if that
Donation be not forged which Gratian cites. And Petrus Bertrandus a Bishop,
a Cardinal, and one of your best learned in the Canon and Civil laws, in his
treatise De origin iurisdictionum, affirms, that Theodosius and Carolus
Magnus, did (596) The.596. untruth. For this grant touched not the
ecclesiastical ordinarye jurisdiction of Bisshops.
grant unto the Church al judgments. For the proof whereof, he avouches
diverse decrees, and (.597.) The.597. untruth. Bertrandus affirms the plain
contrary.
adds, That such grauntes were afterward abrogated.

The.9. Chapter: Of Spiritual Jurisdiction exercised by bisshops without
Princes commissions, and before Constantines time.
Stapleton.
Master Fekenham brings now forth certain autorities of the new testament,
for the justifying of his purpose, as that Christ committed to his Apostles,
Act. 20.
and to their successors the whole spiritual government, and that they did
practice and exercise the same.300. years together without any manner of
commission from Princes, eue^ to the time of Co^stantin the great. M. Horn
thinks it a sufficient answer with stout asseueration void of al manner of
probation, to auouche that they had a commission, he dares not say now of
their Princes (being al, or almost al infidels) but of their Churches. Yea
well and sone said M. Horn: but if ye would withal have laid before your
reader, but one author old or new, good or badde (unless perchance ye may
bring some of your own fellows) and but one example for these.300. years, we
would the better have born with you. Now ye tell us the Apostles did preach and
baptize, and other such extraordinary matters, leaving the thing unproven,
wherein lies all the question between you and M. Feckenham. Your assertion is
altogether incredible, M. Horns asser^ion incredible.
and a very peeuishe fantastical imagination, that no man of the clergy or
Laiety these 300. years was excommunicated, for any manner of offense, no
priest was forbydde to minister the Sacraments, or deposed for his defaults, by
his bishop, but by a special commission of the prince, or whole Church. Ye
may as well pull down the tower of London M. Horn with your little finger, as ye
shall be able to prove this fond assertion. But yet before Co^stantinus the
great his time, ye think your self cock sure. Let us then see how sure ye are,
even of this your only example. Verily I suppose, that no man lyuinge, unless
he has a brazen face, would for shame of the world thus demean him self,
Vide constable. Apostol. Clementis in Tom. 1. Council vlt. editionis.
in so grave and weighty matters, and linck so many Lies together, as lines, as
you do in this your false narration that now follows. Constantine, you say,
was the very first emperor, that gave bishops authority to judge and exercise
jurisdiction over their clergy. What Emperor then, I beseech you, granted to
the Apostles authority, to make such Laws, and constitutions Ecclesiastical
as be now extante, which have in them diverse pains and penalties, as
excommunication, and deprivation against the tra^sgressours? Eus. eccle. hist.
li. 5. c. 23. lib. 7. cap. 26. and 28. lib. 6. cap. 43. Socra. lib. 2. cap. 43.
Niceph. li. 4. cap. 22.
By what Emperors or other lay man's warrant, did the bishops keep so many
Councelles, as we find they kept, before this Constantines time? Namely the.2.
Synods kept against Paulus Samosatenus in Antioche, the Council of Carthage in
Afrike under S. Cyprian, the Cou^cells of Gangra against Eustachius, of Ancyra
against the Manichees, of Neocesarea against the Archo^tici, the Councils also
under Victor the pope at Rome, under Narcissus at Jerusalem, under Palmas in
Pontus, under Ireneus in France, under Bacchylus at Corinthe, under Fabianus
also and Cornelius at Rome, and diverse other bishops in other Cou^tres, all
before the days of the first Counsel of Nice under Co^stantin, al without any
Co^missio^ from Princes of this world, al grounded upon their own supreme
government and Jurisdiction given unto the^ by th'expres word of God. Euse. li.
4. ca. 11. and li. 7. ca. 26. Chryso in orat co^tra gent. quod vnus sit Deus.

Euse. eccl. hist. li. 7. cap. 26. Eusebius. lib. 5. cap. 28. Ide^. and eode^ lib
cap. 25.


What warrant had they for the ecclesiastical decrees by the^ there ordained?
By what princes or lay man's commission, were Valentinus, Paulus Samosatenus,
and the whole rableme^t of forenamed heretics condemned and excommunicated? By
what co^missio^ did the blessed bishop of Antiochia, and martyr Babylas,
forbid the emperor, that he should not enter into the Church among the
Christians? If the bishops had nothing to do, but to preach and minister
Sacraments, and no jurisdiction in heari^g of causes, before the time of this
Constantine, what did the bishops of Alexandria with a solemn judgment seat,
appointed within the Church there for the bishops of that sea? What warrant had
Pope Victor, for th'exco^municating of the blasphemous heretic Theodotus? Yea
what authority had he to exco^municat the bishops of Asia so far from hi^? What
warrant had Fabianus the pope, of whom we have spoken to appoint the^peror as
we have said, to stand among the penite^ts as a parson excommunicated? By what
commission made the blessed Pope and martyr Antherus certain laws
ecclesiastical, Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 25. Vide decr. epist. Antheri.
and among, other touching the translations of bishops?

But here M. Jewel will help you at a pinche like a trusty friend, and with
a new shi^te will plead upon the state inficial, denying utterly the old
decretal epistles, and among other this: and will stand upon no foggy or false
ground, as he says M.D. Harding does, Ievvel in his reply. page 223.
but set his fast foting upon a sure and an infallible reason, against
Antherus epistle making mention of the bishops Felix, and Eusebius that were
not borne all the time Antherus lived. But what if they were borne before him,
where is all this your great hold then? Vide Sab. Aenead. 7. lib. 7.
If I should allege Sabellicus, though he be a very good Chronicler, and well
allowed, or any other Latin man, to make this epistle authentical, perchance
ye would cry out against him and say that he were partial, and a papist to. I
will therefore provide you a Grecian, and a late Grecian to, whom ye shall have no
cause to refuse as suspected, Niceph. li. 14. c. 39.
and that is Nicephorus, by whom it may well appear that the Grecians took this
Decree for authentical. In him also, shall ye find express mention of the said
Eusebius and Felix. Ye shall also there find a notable place of the authority
of the sea of Rome that ye impugn, that such translations must be authorized
by the popes assent and confirmation. Seeing then Nicephorus is no papist, why
ye call him one of our own writers I know not, being no Latin man, but a
Grecian, and infected also with their schism: and yet not withstanding in all
other things catholyke, and full against your new heresies. And for that
respect I am content to take him for one of our writers. And now would I see,
what vantage ye can take at his hand, for the prouf of your foul false
paradoxe. If ye will prove any thing for the relief of your paradoxe, ye must
prove, that no Christian bisshops under the Roman empire, had authority to
judge or exercise any jurisdiction over their clergy, but such as they had by
commission and grant from Co^stantinus. Let us then hear Nicephorus him self,
that every man may see, that ye can not possible stretche him without bursting,
to join with that, which you ought to conclude. Qua vero imperator
Constantinus obseruantia erga professionem fidei nostrae fuerit, Niceph li. 7.
cap. 46.
abunde illud quoque testatur, quod clericos omnes constitutione lata immunes
liberosque esse permisit: iudiciumque and iurisdictionem in eos Episcopis si
quidem ciuilium iudicum cognitione^ declinare velle^t, ma^dauit: and quod
episcopi iudicassent, id robur and authoritatem sententiae omnino habere debere
decreuit. Firma quoque and immutabilia esse voluit, quae in synodis constituta
essent, and quae ab episcopis iudicata forent, vt ea a magistratibus
rempublicam administrantibus, militarique quae sub eis essent manu exequutioni
mandarentur, atque ad rem collata perficerentur constituit. This thing also
(says Nicephorus) does abundantly testify, What manner of jurisdiction
co^stantin gave to the Bishopes.
what honor and reverence he did bear toward our faith, that he ordained by a
law of his making, that all, that were of the Clergy should be free and
exempted from paying tribute: and that in case they would refuse the judgment
of the temporal magistrates, that the Bishops should have the jurisdiction
upon them, and give sentence in the cause. And that the said episcopal
judgment should have full strength and authority. He ordained also, that those
things that were decreed in a synod of Bishopes, should stand strong and
immutable, and that the bishoply judgment, should be put in execution by his
civil magistrates, with the help of such soldiers, as they had underneath
them. Stretche this now M. Horn, to your conclusion, if ye can without
bursting.

We have here a Law of Constantine, that those that be of the Clergy, may
choose whether they will answer for any matter, what so ever it be before a
lay man. They may if they will cause the matter to be deuolued to the Bishop:
but here is never a word of Ecclesiastical matters. In such Constantine gives
the bishops no jurisdiction, for they had it before. Neither is there here any
one word, that the Bishops should neither summon Councelles, nor make
ecclesiastical Laws without the Princes consent. Here is a plain ordinance
that the lay Magistrates shall see, that the Synodical Decrees shall be put in
execution. Whereby contrary to the conclusion that ye maintain through out this
your answer, it well appears, that the Princes part is only to see, that
the Ecclesiastical decrees made by the Bishops be kept and put in ure, and not
to have any necessary consent, in the allowing, or disallowing of them.

Which appears also most evidently in Eusebius writing of this Constantine in
this sort: Eusebius. li. 4 cap. 27. De vita Constant.
Quae ab Episcopis in publicis conuentibus editae erant regulae, sua
consignabat and confirmabat authoritate: He signed and confirmed with his
Authority, such Canons or rules, as the Bisshoppes in their assemblies had
decreed. But how? As though without his royal assente, the Canons should have
been void, and of no Authority, as you would make folk believe? No, but (as
the same Eusebius writes in the same place) Ne reliquarum gentiu^ principibus
liceret, quae ab eis decreta essent, abrogate: to the intent that it should not
be lawful for Princes of other Nations, to abrogate or refuse the Bishops
Decrees. And the reason he adds immediately: Cuiusuis enim Iudicis sententiae
Sacerdotu^ Dei Iudiciu^ anteponendu^ esse. For the Emperor esteemed that the
judgment and determination of the Priests of God, was to be preferred before
the Sentence of any other what so ever Judge. What kind of jurisdiction
Theodosius a^^ Carolus Magnus gave the Bisshops.
This man therefore M. Horn (to tell you it ones again) can be no fit example
of the like government now by you maintained in the Queen's highness person, and
al other the inheritours of the Realm of England.

Now as Constantine did set the Clergy at their liberty, whether they would
answer in any secular court: So the noble Emperor Theodosius set as well all the Laity as the Clergy, at the like liberty, and ordained, Vide. c.
quicu^que etc. volumus. 11. q. Quicu^que litem habens sieve petitor fuerit
(alias sieve reus) vel d^ cursis temporum curriculis, sieve cum negotium
peroratur, sieve cum iam coeperit promi sente^tia: si iudiciu^ elegerit
sacrosanctae sedis a^tistitis, ilico sine aliqua dubitatione, etiam si pars
alia refragatur, ad episcoporum iudicium, cum sermon litigantium dirigatur.
Petrus Bertrandus in libello de jurisdiction ecclesiasticae. Sed dices quod
ista lex est abrogata vt videtur tangere glosa ibidem, sed hoc non valet, quia
licet ista lex non fuerit in corpore iuris redacta, tamen propter hoc no^ est
abrogata. imo. etc consider how ha^dsomly M, Horn alleges Bertra^dus. Vide.
Horn. fol. 82.
that the plaintiff in any cause, any time before the sentence, might break
of, from his ordinary Judge, and bring the matter whether the defenda^t would
or no, to the Episcopal audience. The which ordinance, the Great Charles
about.400. years after renewed to be inuiolably observed of all his
subjects, as well the Romans and the Frenchemen, as the Almanes, the
Bauarians, the Saxons, the Turingia^s, the Frisons, the Galls, the Britanes,
the Lombards, the Gascons, the Beneuentanes, the Goths, and the Spaniards.

As ye do with Constantinus Magnus, so do ye with Theodosius Magnus, and with
Carolus Magnus constitutions: bringing them forth out of your blind Cacus
den, to dasel and bleare the Readers withal: as though the Bishops held
their ordinary jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, by these decrees only, which do
nothing thereunto appertain, but show a marueilouse privilege given to them to
hear and determine also all te^porall matters brought before the^. And if
these graunts were afterward abrogated, yet was that no abrogatio^ to the
jurisdiction, that is proprely the ecclesiastical jurisdiction: and your author
does not say, that such grau^ts were afterward abrogated, but does reason
against them that said they were abrogated. Neither is his book entitled De
origin iurisdictionu^, but de jurisdiction Ecclesiastica. And was this Petrus
Bertrandus then as you say, a Bishop, a Cardinal and one of our best learned
men in the Canon and Civil Laws?

Suerly then may your Petrus Cugne^ius, though ye aua^ce him as a worthy
knight, go hide his head in a corner. For against him and his folishe fond
arguing against the ecclesiastical liberty is all his book written, as I have
before declared. Consider how ha^somly M. Horn alleges Bertrandus.


Wherefore all this your tale that the bishops held their jurisdiction over
their clergy by Constantine his ghifte, is as true, as your other adiuncte:
that he gave the Bishops of Rome power and authority over other Bishops and
over al churches. He might well as he did in deed, reverently agnise, Vide Horn
Fol. 82.
and by his Imperial authority confirm and corroborate the usual authority
of the Popes holiness: but that the original of this authority, as ye imagine,
came from him, is a great untruth. The Popes authority that M. Horn denies,
confessed by infidelles.
For even before his time, and after, not only the Christians, but the very
infidelles, such as were acquainted with the manners and fashions of the
Christians did well know, that the Bishop of Rome was counted the chief bishop
among them al. And for this cause Ammianus Marcellinus an heathnish cronicler
writes, that though Athanasius the good bishop were by a council of Arrian
bishops condemned, Ammian. Marc. reru^ Romans lib. 15. Eusebius. lib. 7. c. 26.
yet that notwithstanding, Consta^tius son to this Constantinus, and an
Arrian, and his plain open enemy, was earnestly in hand with Pope Liberius
also to confirm their sentence, and was by him banished, because he would not
condescende to the^perours request. Again before the time of this
Constantinus, Paulus Samosatenus bishop of Antiochia being deprived by a
council of bishops, and an other appointed by the said council in his
stead, kept still possession, nothing regarding either the sentence of
deprivation or of excommunication. The Emperor Aurelianus being certified of
this matter gave commandment, that he whom so ever the bishop of Rome,
with the bishops of Italy should acknowledge for the bishop of Antiochia,
should be taken and accepted for the true bishop. And so was Paulus by this
Emperors commandment, though he were a very infidel, thruste out, Vide
libellu^ eius adiunctu^ epistolis Leonis 1. impress. Col. in fo. cap. 13.
and an other set in. What proof have ye now, M. Horn, that the Pope has his
authority from Constantine? Surely Gentle Reader, none other but the Donation
of Constantine, which he him self does not believe to be true: and therefore
does qualify it with these words, if it be not forged.

Which being so, why does your wisdom then, Augustine. Stenchus Eugubin.
M. Horn allege it? Neither will I here, though Leo the 9. does constantly
testify, that he saw and had him self the original of this donation laid
by Consta^tinus own hand upon the body of S. Peter, though Eugubinus
answers to all Laurence Valla his objections against this donation: yea
though Balsamon a Grecian, In Nomocano^, Ph^tij. titulo. 8. Distinct. 96. c.
Constantinus. Quoniam vbi principatus Sacerdotum and Christianae religionis
caput ab imperatore coelesti constitutum est, iustum non est, vt illic
imperator terrenus habeat potestatem.
and an open ennemie to the Pope, alleges this Donation as authentical: I will
not yet, I say, resolve any thing for the one, or the other side: I will take
it as I find it, and take you withal, as I find you, and that is a plain open
liar. For howsoever the Donation be, the Pope took not his Supremacy of this
Donation, but had it before, of an higher Emperor, and that is, of Christ him
self. Which the foresaid donatio^ does also openly testify, but not in
the.86. as ye falsely quote it, but in the.96. distinction.

M. Fekenham. The.166. Division. Page 111. a.
At the first Council holden at Jerusalem, for the reformation of the
controversy that was than at Antioche, touching Circumcision, and the
observation of Moses Law, decree was made there by the Apostles and Priests,
unto the beleuers at Antioche, that they should abstain from these four
chief and necessary things, viz. ab immolatis simulachrorum, Act. 15.
a sanguine and suffocato, a fornicatione, a quib. custodie^tes vos, been
agetis. The which first council was there assembled by the Apostles of
Christ. The Decrees and Laws, were made there by the^: The co^trouersy at
Antioche, was by them reformed, ordered, and corrected without all commission
of any temporal Magistrate, King, or Prince.

M. Horn.
God be thanked, that S. Luke makes to us a sufficient report of this
council, who makes no mention of any (.598.) The.598. untruth. For the
Apostles and the Elders, named of S. Luke were priests.
Priest there present, as you untruly report, onles ye will think he meant
the order of Priests, when he named the faction of the Pharisees. Whether
the Apostles called this counsel or not: or that the Congregation being
assembled together in their ordinary sort, for prayer, preaching, and breaking
of bread, Paulus and Barnabas, with the others, sent to Jerusalem, did
declare the cause of their message before the whole Church, which is more
likely, I vvil not determine, because S. Luke makes no mention thereof. But if
it be true, that ye affirm, that the Apostles called or assembled this
Council, then was it not the authority or Act of one Apostle alone. Besides
this, if the Apostles called this council, they called the Laytie so well as
the Clergy to the council: yea, as may seem probable, mo of the Laytie than
of the Clergy. The decrees were not made by the Apostles (.599.) The.599.
untruth. M. Fecke^ha^ said not of the Apostles alone, but by the Apostles and
priests, which is true.
alone, as you falsely feyne. For S. Luke says, the decree was made by the
Apostles, Elders, and the (.600.) The.600. untruth. S. Luke says no such
thing of the whole congregation.
whole Congregation. The Apostles, I grant, as was most convenient with
the Elders had the debating, arguing and discussing of the question in
controversy. They declared out of the holy Scriptures, what was the truth:
And I doubt not but they declared to the Church, what they thought most
convenient to be determined: But the determination and decree, was by the
common consent, both of the Apostles, Elders, and (.601.) The.601. untruth.
The people had not to do with determination of it.
people. Therefore this controversy was reformed, ordered, and corrected, not
by the authority of the Apostles alone, without the Elders, neither they
together did it without the assent of the Church, and so this allegation
makes no (.602.) The.602. untruth. For it proves, Jurisdiction in the
clergy, and power to make ecclesiastical laws, without conmission from the
Prince. Act. 15. Concerning the decree of the Apostles made at Jerusalem.
deal for your purpose, but rather clean against it.

Stapleton.
There follows now an other reason out of the new testamente, browght forth
by M. Fekenham. The effect whereof is, that the Apostles and other priests,
both assembled in council, and reformed wrong opinions among the Christians,
setting abroad their decrees without any conmission of any civil magistrate:
which is quite contrary to the absurd opinion maintained by M. Horn: who is
feign therefore to wince hither and thither, and wotteth not well where to rest
him self for a resolute answer. First he quarrelleth with the word, Priests,
and to no purpose: Concerning this word priest.
the argument remaining sownde and whole, be they to be called Priests, or be
they to be called Elders. For though before the word, Ministers, did like M.
Horn well, yet the word Elders likes him here better. Priests he is assured
there were none among the Apostles, in this council, unless they were the
Pharisees. And so with his pleasante pharisaicall myrthe, he makes the
Apostles them selves Pharisees. For Priests it is certain they were, Prebstre.
Prete. Priester. Priest.
as I have declared before. Now for the word (...), (which word the Latin and
our tongue, and almost al other tongues in Europa, namely the French, the
Italian, the Spaynishe, the high and low Dutche, yea and all other as far
as I can yet learn, do express by a like word derived from the Greek)
though yt signify an elder in age, by the proper signification of the Greek
word, yet in scripture it signifies that office and dignity in a man that we
call Priesthod: that is, such an Elder as is a Priest withal. And yet not
always to be so called for his age, as appears by Timothee who was but young.
Truth it is, that this word in Greek (...), sometime signifies the inferior in
dignity, and him that is under the Bishop, and sometime the Bishop. As
sometime this word Apostolus, signifies none of the.xij. Apostles, but a
Bishop: and so is the one and the other confounded in Scripture.

Whereof Theodoretus is an undoubted witness. For thus he writes: Theodoret.
in comme^tar. in epi. 1. Tim. 3. and Phil. 2.
Eosdem olim vocabant presbyteros and Episcopos, eos autem qui nunc vocantur
Episcopi, nominabant Apostolos. Procedente autem tempore nomen quidem
Apostolorum reliquerunt ijs qui vere erant Apostoli: Episcopatus aute^
appellationem imposuerunt ijs, qui olim appellabantur Apostoli. Ita
Philippensium Apostolus erat Epaphroditus, Ita Cretensiu^ Titus, Asianorum
Timotheus. Hom. 36. in 1. cor. 4.
In the old time (he means the Primitive Church, as with the like term
Chrysosto^ does) men called Priests and Bishops all one. But those which are
now called Bishops, they called Apostles. Afterward in process of time, they
left the names of Apostles, to those which were in deed Apostles. And bishops
they called those, which in old time were called Apostles. So Epaphroditus
was the Apostle of the Philippenses, so Titus of the people of Creta, and
Timothe of the Asians. Thus then, those which were in deed Bishops, being in
the Apostles time called Priests, verily in this place also of the Acts, by
these words Priests, may very well be taken not only simple Priests, but even
those that were Bishops too. And then has M. Horn lost all the grace of his
Pharisaical jesting. But now is the man in a great muse with him self, whether
he may grant to M. Fekenham, that this Council was called by the Apostles:
though of his modesty (which is here to be wondered at, it shows it self so
seldom) he will not determine the matter. And then does he full sadly imagine,
as a thing most likely, that the Apostles Paulus and Barnabas came to
Jerusalem iump at that time, that the Apostles and the congregation were
assembled already together to common prayer. And by as good likelihood they
made post haste to present them ere the congregation brake up, least they
should have lost their iourny for lack of authority in the Apostles to call a
Counsel: or tarry at least until the next time, that they assembled for
prayer. And why, I pray you, might they not as well call a Council, as assemble
together for other causes? And why do you so fondly ground your likelinesse
upon that, which has no likelihood? And why do ye thus wrangle, seeing S.
Luke him self shows plainly the cause of their meeting? Act. 15.
Conueneruntque Apostoli and seniores videre de verbo hoc. The Apostles and the
Priests assembled together to consider of this matter. Then have we an other
snarling, that this was not the act of one Apostle alone. Neither does the
Pope alone (for that belike is the matter ye so closely shote at) make any
decree, but either by a counsel, or with the advice of his Cardinales and
others. Which in all weighty matters no doubt he does, though he after al, as
the head, give the Sentence. At length yet M. Horn taking a better heart unto
him self, goes roundlye to the matter, and resolves us, that this Decree was
made not by the Apostles only, and the priests, but by the whole Congregation
there present, as S. Luke says. Then is there good cause to believe him, M.
Horn. I hear you say, that Saint Luke says, the decree was made by the
Apostles, Elders, and the whole Congregation. But as yet I hear not S. Luke
say so, Act. 15.
nor ever shall hear him so say. S. Luke says, first, that the Apostles and
Priests gathered them selves together to consult upon the matter. He says,
that S. Peter spoke first his mind, and S. James being Bishop there* Ibide^. 14.
confirmed his sayings. S. Luke also calls these decrees, the decrees of the
Apostles and Priests, speaking no word of the whole congregation. And when the
contention for keeping Moses Law waxed hot at Antiochia, the Church there
sent Paulus and Barnabas and others to Jerusalem, but not to the whole
congregation, Ibidem. 2.
but to the Apostles and Priests. Truth it is, that it appears also in S.
Luke, that by common consent of the Apostles of the Priests, and of the whole
congregation, Judas and Barsabas were elected to accompany S. Paul and
Barnabas in their iourny to Antiochia, and to present to the Christians there*
the Decrees of the Council: but that the decree was made by the whole
congregation, that does not appear: but only that they did, as meet it was,
reverently consent, embrace, and receive it: as the Catholic Princes and al
their people that be Catholic, do allow, embrace, and reverence the late Synod
holden at Trent, where were present the Ambassadors of all the said Catholic
Princes, and yet had they there no absolute voice or consent, touching the
definition of the questions there debated and determined. Nay, not the lay men
only, but the very Priests them selves, have no necessary consent, which
stands in the Bishops only, as the whole practice of the church shows from
the Apostles time. To.1. Co^c. Act. 1. pa. 745. vel postr. edit. tom. 3. page
19. Act. 1. pa. 775. and page 47. Tom. 2. edit. postr.
Therefore in the fourth General Counsel of Chalcedo^ the Bishops cried.
Synodus Episcoporum est, non clericorum. A Synod or Council consists of
Bishops, not of the (inferior) clergy. And again in the same Council: Petrus
a priest protested no less, saying: Non est meum subscribere, Episcoporum
tantum est. It is not my part to subscribe, it belongs only to Bishops. Thus
subscriptio^, (wherein necessary consent is expressed) is confessed to pertayne
to bishops only, not to Priests. And therefore yt is very likely, that these
that you call Elders, were not single priests, but bishops also. Wherein as I
will not co^tende, so though yt were true, that the whole congregation gave
their voice, yet the supremacy in the said and other matters remained not in
them, but in the Apostles* as may well appear by this very place, to him that
will but read and consider the text of S. Luke.

M. Fekenham. The.167. Division. page 111. b.
The Apostles also hearing at Jerusalem, Act. 8.
that Samaria had received the word of God, they did send Peter and John, to
visit the^ to confirm them in faith, and that they might receive the holy
Ghost by the imposition of their hands. Paul and Barnabas did agree betwixt
them selves, to visit al those Cities and brethren, which they had converted
to the faith. Act. 15.
The words of the Scripture are these: Dixit ad Barnabam Paulus,
reuertentens, visitemus fratres per vniuersas Civitates, in quibus
praedicauimus verbum Domini, quomodo se habeant. In the which visitation, the
Apostle Paul: Electo Sila perambulabat Syriam and Ciliciam, confirmans
Ecclesias, praecipiens custodire praecepta Apostolorum and Seniorum. By the
which words it right well appears, how the Apostles and Priests at
Jerusalem, over and besides the Gospel which they taught, they did make
certain Decrees, Laws, and ordinances, the which the Apostle Paul in his
visitation, 1. Cor. 11.
gave commandment to the Syrians, and Silicia^s, to observe and keep. What
Laws and orders did the Apostle make and appoint unto the Corinthians, that
men should neither pray nor preach in the Church with their heads covered?
What reformation and order did he make and appoint unto them, for the more
honorable receiving of the Sacrament, and that partly by writing, and partly
by word of mouth, saying: Caetera, cum venero, disponam, and in his second
Epistle to the Thessalonians, he says, Fratres state, and tenete traditiones
quas didicistis, sieve per sermonem, sieve per Epistolam nostram. 1. Cor. 13.
What orders and Decrees did the Apostle Paul make, touching praiyng and
preaching unto the people in tongues unknown, and that all women should keep
silence in the Church and Congregation? These and many such other like Laws,
orders, and Decrees, were made for the reformation of the people in the Church
of Christ, by Christ's Apostles, by Bishops and priests, as the successors of
them, and that without all commission of any Temporal Magistrate, Emperor,
King, or Prince, Consta^tinus being the first Christian Emperor, like as I
have said.

M. Horn.
Your whole drifte in this part is, to prove that Bishops and Priests may
visit, give the holy Ghost, by the imposition of their hands: and make
laws orders, and decrees to their flocks and cures. Your proof consists
in the example of the Apostles, and this is your argument: The Apostles
visited, gave the holy Ghost, and made Laws, orders, and decrees, unto their
flocks and cures, Ergo, Bishops and Priests, have authority and may make
Laws, visit and give the holy Ghost to their flocks and cures. The
insufficiency of this consequent, does easily appear, to those that do
consider the state and condition of the Apostleship, and compare therewith the
office of a Bishop or Priest. The Apostles did, might, and could do, many
things that Bishops and Priests, neither may, nor can do. The matter is
more plain than that needs any proof. But as the sequel fails in form,
so let us consider the matter, whereupon ye ground the sequel, that your
frindes may see what foul shifts ye are driven to make, for the maintenau^ce
of an unjust claim. That the Apostles did visit their cures and flocks, you
prove by two places of the Acts: in the first place, ye (.603.) The.603.
untruth. For the scriptures report so much in effect.
feine the Scriptures to say, that it says not: for in the eight of the
Acts, there is no mencio^ made of any visitatio^: the other place speaks
only of a (.604.) The.604. untruth. The acts speak of no such visitatio^.
Scripturely visitatio^, and nothing at al of your Forinsecall or Canon Law
visitation. The Canon Laws visitation, is to be exercised by a great number
of such persons, as the Scripture (.605.) The.605. untruth, as it shall appear.
knovveth not. And the matter vvherabout that visitation is occupied for the
most part, is directlye (.606.) The.606. untruth, slanderous boldly
avouched, but no way proved.
against the Scriptures. The persons that may lavvfullye visit in your
Canon Law visitation, are Popes, Legates from the side: Legates sent and
borne, Legates and messengers of the Apostolik sea, Patriarchs,
Archebishoppes, Bishops, Archdeacons, Deanes, Archepriestes, Abbottes, and
other inferior persons having jurisdiction. All Archebishoppes which are
Legates borne, have authority to visit their provinces by double right, to wit,
by right Legatine, and by right Metropolitan, and so they may visit twyse in
the year. All these visitours must begin their visitation with a solemn
Mass of the holy ghost. The Bishop and every ordinary visitour, must begin
his visitation at his Cathedral Church and Chapter. He must come into the
Church where he visits, and first kneel down and pray devoutly, chiefly
directing his eyes and mind to the place wherein the honorable sacrament of
Christ's Body is hidden and kept. The matters of the Cano^ Law visitatio^
are in part these. The visitour ought to view diligently, whether the place
where the Sacrament is kept, be clean, well garnished and close, for the
Eucharist, and the holy Chrysme ought to be kept shut under lock and key. He
must see, that there be great lights of wax to give light in that place, The^
must he visit the place of the holy reliquies, and of Baptism. And search
diligently what manner of place it is, and whe^ther it be kept shut. Besides
this he must visit the Aultars and little Chappelles, and must with his eyes
view the whole Church whether it be clea^ly and clean. The^ he must visit the
vessels and Church vestymentes, whether they be clean, and kept in a
clean place, as they ought to be, and whether the vestime^tes be ouermuche
worn and broken, and in case the visitour shall find such vestime^tes
unclean, re^te, and consumed with occupying, he must burn the^ in the fire,
and cause the ashes to be buried in some place, whereby there is no passage. But
in any wise let him not suffer ( says Socius) purses or such like things to
worldly use to be made of the copes or tunicles. Last of al, let him survey the
houses and possessions belonging to the Church. The Bishop does visit also,
to bishop enfantes, and to consecrate or hallow Churches. The visitour also
shall enquire and examine, whether any man know or believe, or that the fame
is, that the Sexten, the Treasurer, or the Vesture keeper, has well and saufly
kept, the vessels, vestimentes, and other things or ornaments of the
Church, as Mass books, Grayles, Antiphoners, Legendes, and other things
appointed to divine Service, and whether any thing moveable, or immovable, be
diminished, and by whom, wherefore, when, and after what sort, whether they
be diligently present at the Dirigees for the dead. And whether the vesture
keeper or Sexten, keep warelie and cleanly the Church, the Eucharist, the
Relics, the Fount, the Churchyardes, and such other things. And he shall
examine the Priests in the country in saying of their Masses.

But let every Visitour understand ( says mine Author) that same the
greatest question or controversy which was betwixt three rural Persons or
Priests: vvherof two of them strove about the words of Consecration, the
one affirming, that the words are to be pronounced thus: Hoc est corpus meus:
the other, Hoc est corpus (I think he should have said corpum) meum. These
two chose a third Priest, who was taken to be better learned, to be
arbitour, and to decide this high question: whose answer was, that he him
self stood ever doubtful in this question: and therefore in steed of these
words of consecration, did alvvaies use to say one Pater noster. Furthermore
the Visitour must enquire, whether the laity make their confession once in the
year, and receive the Euchariste at Easter. And whether they be slovve, or
deny to pay their tithes and fruits. The Archebisshoppe must in visiting any
of his Suffraganes, exactly enquire and examine the Canons and Clerks of the
Cathedral Church, whether they know, believe, or that the fame is, that the
Bishop has covered or borne with some men's faults for money, or other
temporal commodity. Can you find in the Scriptures any one of these
Visitours, or any one of these weighty matters enquired of, by Peter, John,
Paul, Sylas, Barnabas, or by any of the Apostles in their Visitations, which
were Scripturely visitations? No surely, it is not possible: For these
Idolatrous (.607.) The.607. Untruth. sla^derous as before.
vanities, are manifestly repugnaunt to the Holy Scriptures.

Amongst all the rabble of these Canon Law visitours, ye can not find in the
Scriptures, not so much as the bare Title of (.608.) The.608. Untruth. The
titles of diverse of the^ are to be found there.
one of them, onelesse it be of a Bisshoppe: which name applied to the man,
as the Scriptures describes the man, that is called to that office, can no
(.609.) The.609. Untruth. The Bisshops of the Cano^ law, are such as the
Scripture describes.

Lib. 50. Tit. 4. De muner. and honor.


more agree with a Cannon Law Bisshoppe, then with the Civil Law
Bisshoppe, whose office was, as it is set forth in the Digestes, to have
the rule and ouersighte of all manner of victualles in the Cities, as it were
the chief Clerk of the markets. As the matter of the Apostles visitations
stands directly (.610.) The.610. Untruth. Ever repeted, but never proved.
against the greatest part of the matter vvhereabout your Popish or Canon
Law visitation is exercised: Even so the holy Scripture that you auouche, for
the giving of the holy Ghost, makes (.611.) The.611 Untruth. For it proves
an ordinary power in bisshops about the Sacrament of confirmation, which
they exercised without any commission from the Prince.
nothing at all to prove your purpose. For Saint Luke in that place speaks
(.612.) The 612. Untruth. For he speaks both of the ordinary use of that
Sacrament, and of the extraordinary gift of Miracles,
not of an ordinary power, that should remain in the ministers of the
Church for ever, but of a special gift to work miracles, and to give that
power to others, which should continue but for the time vvhiles Christ's
Church was to be erected, and the word to be sounded through the world:
And therefore Chrysostom says: That this gift pertained only to the
Apostles. For (says he) the Conuertes in Samaria had received before Peter
and John came, the spirit of Remission of Sins: But the spirit of Miracles,
that is, the gift of tongues, healing, propheciing, and such like, which are
the gifts of the holy Ghost, and therefore are called the Holy Ghost, they
had not as yet received. There were many that by the power of Gods Spirit
could work miracles, but to geaue this power to others, none could do but
the Apostles. For that was propre and only in them. Mark now the sequel
of your allegation for proof of your purpose: Thus (.613.) The 613. Untruth.
For M. Fekenham argues not so. It is your own Argument.
you argue: the Apostles gave by the imposition of their hands, to the
Samaritanes, the gifts of Healing, Prophesying, of Tongues, etc. Therefore
every Bishop and Priest has power to give the same gifts to their flocks
and cures. There was never none so blind or so ignorantly brought up in your
cures, belonging to the Abbey of Westminster, but that did well perceive, that
neither your Bisshops, Abbottes, or Priests, had or could do any such feate.
They like Apes, imitated the outvvarde sign or ceremony, but the inward
grace they vvanted.

Stapleton.
In this part M. Fekenham prosequuteth his proof out of the new Testamente,
alleging for his purpose many places thereof. As of Peter and John that went
into Samaria to visit the Christians there, to confirm them in faith, and to
give them the holy Ghost by the imposition of their hands. Of Paulus and
Barnabas that visited many contries, commanding the Christians there to keep
the commandments of the Apostles and priests: with certain orders and laws
made by S. Paul. But all this M. Horn thinks may be wiped away with one
general answer of an insufficie^t conseque^cy: for that the Apostles did and
could do many things that bishops and priests neither may, nor can do now: I
will not strive with you M. Horn what the Apostles did in other things, but if
they practiced any jurisdiction in making of Laws, in visiting, Vide fol.
105. col. ^. in princip. and fol. 110. col. 2. in fine.
in reforming without the co^missio^ of any Laicall authority: then is M.
Fekenha^s argument good and sufficient. The^ have we the practice of the
Apostles and primative Church against this your new Paradoxe. The^ has M.
Feke^ha^ wrapped you up also and meshed you in a foul contradiction, as one
that affirms the quite contrary diverse times before. Double authority in the
Apostles, ordinary and extra ordinary.


And yet because ye shall not carry and steal away the matter so, but be more
fully answered, I say there was an ordinary, and there was also an extraordinary
authority in the Apostles. The ordinary authority of the Apostles (in the which
we are now) remains at this day and shall remain for ever in the Church, in
the bishops their successors. The extraordinary authority either died with
the^, or at lest ca^ not be usually pleaded upon. The like argument as ye make
here, against the authority and jurisdiction of bishops, Luc. 221. M. Ievvel in
his reply against M. D. Harding.
M. Jewel and your fellows make against the Pope, that though S. Peter were
head of the whole Church and was assured by the promise of Christ that prayed
for him, that his faith should not fail, yet can not al his successors the
Popes challenge the same being a special prerogative graciously given to him.
But here we must understand, that Peter was priuileged for his own person, and
he was priuileged also, in respect, of the common weal of the whole Church.
And therefore if we respect S. Peter's person, the person of his successor is not
so priuileged, but he may fall and err in his own private opinion and judgment.
But if we respect the whole Church, whereof he has the rule, then we say he
can not err in any decree or order that he shall publicly make for any matter
of faith: Least by this his open error the whole Church fall also into the
same. The providence of God (which a Divine should always have an eye unto)
suffers not such an inco^uenie^ce in his Church.

Again, the Apostles had personal privileges of more ample grace, the^ their
successors have. And therefore by these words, what so ever, ye shall bind
upon the earth etc. And by those other, as my father sent me, so I send you:
they had authority each of them to preach throughout the whole world and in
whatsoever part thereof: and in this respect they were equal with S. Peter: but
their successors at Alexandria, Antiochia, and Ephesus do not succeed to the^,
nor enjoy this extraordinary power of preaching and teachi^g through out the
world, and every part thereof, but the ordinary only and usual power within
their own Diocese or Patriarchship. The said extraordinary authority remayni^g
with the popes only as the successors of S. Peter: who was head of the
Apostles (not in the Apostleship for in that all the Apostles were equal) but
in bishoply Jurisdiction. After like sort the Apostles had a certain peerlesse
authority to speak in diverse tongs, to prophecy, to revive the dead, to heal
the sick, to cast out devils, and to do many other miracles. This power does
not desce^d to al their successors ordinately, but now and the^ to some
certain, to who^ it pleases God, to dispe^ce these graciouse gifts unto. As he
has don to many a blessed bishop sith the apostles time, and to many other
even in our days, as to the blessed Fathers of the society of Jesus, in
co^uerting the new found India^s from paganism to the faith of Christ, and as
also to our holy Father the Pope that now lives (as we are most certainly
informed) God has abunda^tly given this heavenly gift of worki^g miracles. But
we are out of this case: we reason of an usual and ordinary power that the
apostles successors must needs have, and have as well as they, for the necessary
government of his Church. As to preach to the flock of Christ, to govern and
to direct the^, Matt. 28. Marc. 16. Act. 20. Math. 18. Act. 16. 2. Tim. 4. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 1. Tim. 5.
by good orders and laws, to reform the offenders, to exco^municat the
disobedient to improve, rebuke, or exhort with all long suffering, and good
doctrine, to visit the^, to correct the unquiet, to comfort the feeble mi^ded, to
forbear and receive the weak, and to have a continual patience in all me^: By
imposition of hands to give holy orders in the sacrament of co^firmatio^ (as
Peter and John the apostles did when they visited Samaria) with many other
things belonging ordinarily to all bisshops. Act. 8.
Nay says M. Horn, there is no mention made of visitatio^ in the eight of the
Acts. What shall we trifle concerning the word visitatio^, if it be not there,
in case the thing it self be there? Verily if the very word have any force with
you M. Horn, you have it plain in the next allegatio^ of M. Fekenha^ out of
the.15. of the Acts: where S. Paul said to Barnabas, Let us visit our
brethern, etc aet. But I pray you tell us, Act. 15.
why were Peter and John sent into Samaria, but to confirm the Samaritanes,
and to give the Sacrament of confirmation to those that were lately baptized?
This Sacrament of Confirmation is one of the principal things, the which the
Bisshoppes do use in their visitation. Here M. Horn runs to his old shift
yet ons again, and says here was no sacrament given, neither any holy Ghost
at al. But the spirit of miracles, as the gift of tongues, of healing,
prophesying, and such like, which are the gifts of the holy ghost, and
therefore called the holy Ghost. And then does M. Horn ieste at this sequel.
The Apostles gave these gifts. Ergo every priest and bishop may give them
now. And then he adds for his pleasure, that there was never any monk in
the Abbay of Westminster so ignorantly brought up, but knew well enough, that
the bisshops could do no such feate. Truth it is, that they received the holy
Ghost, and these outward gifts withal at their confirmation. The holy ghost
is given in confirmation.
And as the Apostles only by the imposition of hands gave these gifts, as ye
confess: so Confirmation to this day pertains to the bisshops only, that
represente the Apostles. Now that confirmation is no sacrament, or that the
holy ghost is not thereby given, Hiero. cont. Lucifer. Si hoc loco quaeras, qui
in Ecclesia baptizatus, nisi per manus episcopi non accipiat spiritum sanctum:
disce hanc obseruatione^ ex ^a authoritate descendere, quod post ascensum
Domini spiritus S. ad Apostolos des^endit, and multis in locis ide^ factitatu^
reperimus. August. Contra literas Petiliani. lib. 2. Cap. 104.
neither Chrysostomus whom ye recite, nor any other ancient author
avouches. And that those that were baptized were afterward confirmed by the
bishop, and received the holy Ghost, when there were no visible signs, S.
Hierome plainly testifies. And S. Augustine confesses, it is a Sacrament, as
Baptism is. Of this holy Ghost that is given without any outward miracles,
speaks M. Fekenham, and no one word of miracles. Wherefore this misshapen
argument that ye bring forth, is yours, and not his. To the overthrow of of
the which folishe fond argument I answer, that there was never none so
blind or ignorantly brought up in the monastery of Westminster, that could not
well perceive, that this is a very il favored kind of reasoning, and such as
was never used among the Catholics.

As for his answer to M. Feke^ham touching the second allegation, out of
the.15. of the Acts, is such as is mete for such a ghospelling prelate: that
is, to leave reasoning, and to fall to railing, and so to elude his Readers
expectation, and the argument: that he is not, nor ever shall be able to answer.
Yet like a cunning Divine and a very skillful visitour, M. Horn^ extraordinary
railing process.
he teaches us, that there are two visitations, the one a scripturely, the
other a forinsecall or a canon law visitation. Then have we a long lesson out
of one Socius, he should have said Socinus, what persons may visit, and what
matters they owght to enquire upon in their visitation. And in effect he does
nothing else in all this his extrauagant declaration, but mock, and mow: and
like the diuelles Jack anapes potteth at the good rites, customs and vsages
of the Catholic Church, and at the blessed sacrament to. And solaceth him
self pleasantly, and makes ioly sport at poor Sir John lack Latin: that
could not tell whether he should say Corpum meum, or Corpus meus. At length he
concludes full solemnly, that neither the persons that exercise the
canonical visitation, nor the matters there enquired of, can be found in
scripture, no not the bare title of any of these visitours, unless it be a
Bisshoppe. And yet these canon Law Bisshoppes, he will not have called
bisshoppes neither: unless it be, for that they may be civil Law Bisshops:
that is as much to say, Li. 50. tit. 4. de muneribus and honoribus. Act. 15.
as clerks of the market. How think you good readers? Is not Master
Fekenham his argument grounded upon the plain scriptures and doings of S.
Paul, which did visit the Christians, and commanded them to keep the Laws
and ordinances that the Apostles had made, without any laical commission, very
scripturely and prelatelyke of this great scriptured man soluted? Think you,
that this man has any reverence to God, any regard either to his matter, or to
his Reader? Or think you, that this man lacks not as much wit, as he does
virtue, learning, religion, and true devotion, that with his malice to put
out one eye of the Catholics, puts out both his own eyes? and that can
tell no fault of the Catholics, but that the same redoundeth double or treble
against him self and his affinity? Among all the rabble (as M. Horn terms
them) of the canon Law visitours, he can not find as much as the bare title
of any of them in scripture. Seeing this man is so precise and peremptory in his
terms, we will see whether we can find any of them either in express terms,
or at the least in equivalent. 2. Cor. 5. Ephesians. 6.
In deed this word Papa is not found there, but his equivalent Pater is
found there. Legates we find store, though not with such precise terms as ye
adioyne, as speaking of Legates sent and borne. The word Patriarche is often
in scripture: Bisshoppes we find, Deacons we find, priests we find.
Therefore this is but a gross and a rude Rhetorike, to find fault with the
name of Archebisshop, Archedeacon, and Archpriest, which signifies no more
then the chief of the bisshoppes, deacons or Priests. But in case you will no
better bear with Legates borne, and Archebisshops, you shall quite bear away
both the audience, and the Arches, and the Court of prerogative, and the
Archbisshoprik withal of Canterbury. As for Deanes, who are called in Latin
Decani, yea and Abbats to, for Abba and Abbas is al one, we find in scripture.
And I pray you what persons be the chief visitours now in England, but such as
bear the names, that ye say, can not be found in scripture, as Archbisshops,
Bisshops, Archdeacons, and Deanes? And you M. Horn that have been such a solemn
visitour, first for the Queen's M. and then in your own pretensed Diocese, and
in the University of Oxford, think you that a man may find your name or the
name, of your visitourship in any place of the Bible? And if we may not find it
there, then by your own rule, when ye come next in visitatio^ to Oxford, the
scholars may find some pretty exception against you. Thus you see good readers,
I am fain to play the child, with this childishe Prelate. whether their
visitations now are al scripturely.

1. Tim. 5. Habentes damnationem quiae primam fide^ irritam fecerunt. See the
injunctions


Let us now leave the names and go to the matter of your visitatio^ that ye
keep now a days. Shall we find nothing there but scripturely matters? I pray
you tell me then good M. Horn, in what scripture ye find it, I will not say,
that a monk, a nun, a priest or bishop may marie (for I am sure scripture is
against it, co^de^ning the frailest kind of women for maryi^g after their vow)
but in what scripture find you it, that (in case their marriage be lawful) the
priest or deaco^ shall not marie, without the advice or allowance had upon good
examination by the bishop of the same diocese, and two Justices of the peace
of the said shere? And that the marriages of Bisshoppes must be allowed by the
Metropolitan, and the Queens highness commissioners? Why? Are ye, that should
be the Fathers of the realm now come to this point, that for lack of your
discretion, ye must be made wards and have your gardons? They that be under
their fathers rule, by civil Law can not marrye withowt their Fathers
consent: but by the same Law a Bisshoppe is fortwith exempted and acquitted
from all jurisdiction, that his Father had before upon him. But ye contrary
wise are brought under the jurisdiction of every mean gentleman: and abridged
of that liberty of marriage, that every poor plowghman has. And yet is this
(as absurd as yt is) an Iniunction belonging to your new Laicall visitation.
It were a matter for a just volume, if I should here prosequute your other
scripturely matters, that ye have set forth in your visitations: especially
in your late visitation by your dear Chaunceler and son exercised at the
New College in Oxforde: who proposed there to be subscribed a rablemente of
blaspemouse and heretical articles, a number of them being as scripturely
matters, as this proposition, is either scripturelyke or grammarlyke: False
Lati^ in master Horns articles proposed to be subscribed in his visitation at
Oxford
Regina est vnicus and supremus gubernator regni in causis Ecclesiasticis and
temporalibus. But of this your clerkely gra^mar we have had much experience in
this your answer. Amend: Amend for shame your barbarouse Latin, and put in
vnica and suprema gubernatrix, if ye will needs maintayn the proposition: which
yet does not so much contrary the rules of grammar, as it does the rules of
Christian religion. And bear with poor Sir John, and his corpus meus, which
is as good Latin (Sir Robert) as your Reginae gubernator vnicus, and caet. And
be not so hard as ye are in your injunctions, to exclude from all cure or
spiritual function, such as of late Days were made priests otherwise
utterly unlearned as ye say, but that they could read to say mattins and
mass. For if ye be so strait laced to your ministers, ye are like to leave
but a few: and to have the most part of your cures unfurnished, and serve the
parish Churches your self. For a great part, yea and a notable number of
your ministers can not read Latin. And therefore M. Nowell, being in his last
book against M. Dorman, in the same vain that you here are M. Horn, and set
in a pelting chafe, with an invincible place out of S. Ambrose, ruffling in his
lusty rhetorike, against poor Sir John's, as you do here, durst not yet to call
the^ Sir John lack latins, Novvell fol 86. fac. 2.
but full prouidently called the^, Sir John lack lerning. Because forsothe he
saw full well, that his fellow Ministres were Sir John lack latins, as well as
poor priests. Mary yet perhaps in his conceyt, they lacked not lerninge,
because they can read in the English bible. Therefore he thought it the surest
to call ignorant priests, Sir John lack lerninge, not Sir John lack latins.
This point of wisdom you may M. Horn learn hereafter of M. Nowel, to save
the honesty of your Sir John lack latins, swarming now as thick in England
as ever they did before. Yea such preachers fill the most part of your
pulpittes, and the ears and hearts of the people with much heresy, A
ministri^g preacher that could not read his license given him to preach
and sets them at a lewd licentiouse liberty to speak what they will, and
do what they list. And here it comes to my mind, that was credibly told me
touching one of these your ministering preachers, that not many years sythens
came to a parish within the Diocese of Winchester to preach: And being
demanded his License did exhibit it, but being required before the people to
read yt, could not: whervppon the people fell into such a lawghter, that our
preacher had no great lust, to show his cunning there, but full slily shronke
away from them, and stole away with his clerkly sermon that he thought to have
made there. See what clerkly and godly curats, are now in England.
And wherein I pray you rests a great part of your new clergy, but in
butchers, Cooks, Catchpoules, and Cobblers, Diers, and Dawbers, fellons
carrying their mark in their hand in stead of a shaven crown, fissher men,
gunners, harpers, Innekepers, Merchauntes and Mariners, Netmakers, Matt. 4.
potters, potycaries, and porters of Belinsgate, pynners, pedlers, ruffling
ruffins, sadlers, sheermen, and shepherds, tanners, tilers, tinckers,
trumpeters, weauers, whery men and caet. Demand of these fresh clerks M. Horn
at your next visitation, whether it must be read corpus meum, or corpus meus,
And see, whether any of them can resolve his fellows better, then the priest,
you speak of did, that being him self doutful, used (as you say) his Pater
noster, instead of the words of consecration. Will they not trow you, make
answer, as a Minister in M. Jewels dyocese did? who in a visitatio^ being
apposed for trial of his latin tongue, what case was Decen^er, answered, that
he thanked God highly, that he had never learned that Romish and Papisticall
latin tongue? But what Latin shall a man look for at such men's hands? yea or
what honesty either? To describe the dissolut and naughty viciouse life, of
your ministers, would fill up a book of a good quantity, and the hearers ears
with to much lothsomnes. I could here rippe up a number of detestable
parts, The tru^petou^ minister at Otterborne.
and some of them playde in your pretensed Diocese: especially of William Web
the trumpetour and minister of Otterborne nighe to Winchester: who having a
Ghospelling yokemate of his own, tawghte a young maiden in the Church to
singe the holy Geneuical psalms, and as he corrupted her soul with wicked
heresy, so he defiled her body with such lewd lechery, that he was feign to
flee the parish for shame. And yet as I here say he is become at London an holy
minister again. I will forbear to lade your honest ears (good reader) with
any more such dishonest and sluttish stories, whereof we have, the more pity, to
much plenty. These and such like are the wicked king Hieroboams ministers, the
which falling from the true Church of Jerusalem into idolatry, as you and your
fellows are fallen into heresy (which is also in scripture called idolatry)
made the lowest of the people, 3. Reg. 12. Fecit prophana in excelsis, et
sacerdotes de extremis populi qui no^ era^t de filijs Leui.
and such as were not of the tribe of Levy peculiarly and only by God
appointed, his priests. Was not, I beseache you M. Horn, the disorder of these
and other, both in their lyuinge and preaching such, that the Queen's Majesty
of her graciouse goodness, caused a number of Licenses given them to preach, to
be called in again? For all that ye have so often visited, get you out ones
again in visitation M. Horn and amend your own people, and your own self
principally, according to the rules of the holy scripture, and then call your
visitation a scripturely visitation, and the other among the Catholyks nothing
but a forinsecall and a canonical visitation. Suerly yt is a meruelouse
Gospel, that ye have of late broched, which besides most detestable
heresies, imports such a breach and dissolution of all honest and virtuous
living, that your own Apostle Luther was feign to call upon the Duke of
Saxony, to make visitation upon visitation for reformation. Luth. super
postil. 1. Domin. aduentus.
And feign to cry out, that his new Ghospellinge children were worse then
ever they were under the pope: yea ten times worse then the Sodomites.
Therefore talk as holily as ye will, of your scripturely visitations, the
truth is, they are as dyrecte contrary to scripture, In what sense a man may
call their visitations in England scripturely visitations or preachi^gs
as darcknes is to light, and they are the very nurseries of all heresies and
licentiouse living. And shortly, but withal truly to conclude, how
scripturely they are, I say ye ca^ no better justify your visitations and other
your doings by scripture, the^ the devil him self could justify his
allegation: bringing forth scripture, not to the poor simple and unlettered
people as you do, Matt. 4.
but to Christ him self: willing him to cast him self down from the pinnacle of
the temple, with scriptum est enim, for it is written: says the devil. And
what is the scope of all your doings and preachinges to the people, but mitte
te deorsum? Cast thy self headlong down from the high tower of the lyghtsome
catholyke faith into the low dark Dongeon, of all deuelishe heresy? From the
high mount of a virtuous and an austere life, in to the low vale of all
licentiouse and dissolute behavior? What is all your preaching, but down,
down, down with holy bread, holy water, with all the holy ceremonies in
baptism, and in the other sacraments, with fasting, with night prayer, with
all prayer to be made for owre fathers or friends sowles, or to the blessed
Virgin Mary, and to all other Hallowes, with all Aulters, O detestable impiety.
with mass, yea and with the blessed body of Christ in the Sacrament: which
has been most vilanously defiled not only by blasphemous books and sermons,
but most wickedly taken from the altar, The error against the real presence
of Christ in the sacrament, is for any law made to the contrary to be taken
for heresy as it was wont to be.
and most horribly yea and that in our most famous University, conculced with
the wicked feet of one of your Ghospellinge preachers? And by what warrant, ye
may set forth in your so scripturely visitations this your heretical
doctrine against the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament I know
not. The plain and open words of scripture lie manifestly against you with,
hoc est corpus meum: General Counsels have determined against you: Private
councels, and amongs other our constitutions provincial, determine against
you: and remain yet in force, even by the laws of the Realm, being by no Act
of parliament taken away. But contrary wise such as irreverently speak
against it, An. ^. Ed. 6. cap 1. and An. 1. Eli. cap. 1.
are by Act of parliament adjudged to imprisonment, and to a fine to be made
at the Princes pleasure. Briefly the faith of the whole Church stands
against you. Yea M. Cheney one of your own protestant Bisshops in open
parliament of late days stood against you. Your synodicall and heretical
articles, by the which ye would have this, and other heresies confirmed, are
rejected. Yea Luther him self full solemply proclaymeth you all heretics. How
can yt the^ be, that your and your fellows visitations, in the which ye have
set forth such a false doctrine repugnant to al these, shall be yet called a
scripturely visitation? No, no M. Horn, for all your pecocks tail glistering
with goodly and scripturely talk, we perceive your filthy heresy well enough,
when we look upon your foul feet. Away, away with these painted words,
wherewith men will not always be made fools: nor will take your visitations to
be scripturely, as is this, that ye here allege, made by the blessed Apostles.
Which thing though I ca^ not, nor will deny: A man may find as good matter
against the decrees of the Apostles as Luther fyndeth against the general
Cou^cells.
yet if I should take upon me the eua^gelical person of M. Jewel, or of your
Apostle Martin Luther, or your own either, methinke the Ge^tils might as well
have found fault with the Apostles decree made and set forth by them afterward
in their visitatio^s: as your said Apostle does against the Council of Trent
and others, or as ye do against the blessed bishop and Martyr Bonifacius, for
whom we have already answered. They might have said: ye restrain our
Evangelical liberty, and yet ye bring not one word of scripture to confirm
your decree withal. For though S. James brought forth a testimony out of the
Prophet Amos, yet yt touches nothing the matter there concluded. Then might
they have said, why Syrs, what mean you, will ye have us to be Iewishe again,
in forbearing of puddings and things strangled? Why do ye forbid us to eat
of such meats, as are offered to the idolles? We do well know, that they are
no Gods, and the meat is never a whit the worse: and our Master Christ has
taught us, that it is not that, that enters by the mouth, but that, that goes
from the mouth that co^tamineth and defiles the man. This and much more out of
the principles of Luthers gospel they might have said to the Apostles: and
as truly as Luther and your fellows allege these and the like things,
against the Laws of the Church, against unwritten verities, against fasting
days, and otherwise. Or as ye allege the like to de^ace our holy virtuous
countrema^ Bonifacius and Augustinus. Prius fo. 58
But it is high time to break of our scripturely visitatis, and to set upon
other matters.

M. Horn. The.168. Division. page 114. a.
Touching the third part of your proof, whereby ye conclude, that bisshops
and Priests make Laws, orders, and decrees, to their flocks and cures,
because the Apostles so did, as you say: Although I need make none other
answer, then to deny your argument, which you can by no art (.6^4.)
The.614. untruth. The argument i^ right good, as it has in the former
division appeared.
mainteyne, the insufficiency whereof is manifest, to those that have but a
little skill, either in Logike or Divinity: Yet I vvil briefly consider the
places, whereupon you ground this misshapen sequel, that the unskillful may
see, how little they make for your purpose. After that S. Paul had founded
the Church of Corinthe, and had brought them to Christ through the preachinge
of the Gospel, there sprange up amongst them in his absence many vices and
offenses, contrary to the Doctrine he had taught, and the Godly admonitions,
that he had given unto them: wherefore being advertised thereof, he vvrote his
Epistle unto that Church, wherein he reproves their faults, partly in
general, and partly in spectal: And in the end of the tenth Chapter,
concludes with this General admonition, that All things be done without
offense, and to the Glory of God. In the.xi. Chapter, he reproves certain
faults in especial, committed by them in their public assemblies, and
Church meetinges; contrary to this general admonition, and contrary to that
he had taught them in special, touching their honest and comely behavior in
their public prayer, preaching, and communicating in Christ's Sacraments,
which of all other things ought chiefly to be so done, as thereby God may be
glorified, and al offenses es^hu^d. To this end S. Paul had taught the
Corinthes, that in these public and holy exercises, it is most seemly, that
men prophecy and pray hare headed: Co^traryvvise women, not without their
heads covered. Many observed this comeliness in prayer and propheciyng, as
Paul had taught them: Others contentiously did vvithstande and gainesay the
same, as an order that Paul had devised, and brought in of his own devise,
besides Gods word, as you also (.615.) The.615. untruth. For M. Fekenham
said not the matters done at Corinthe to have been done beside the Ghospel, but
the decrees of the Apostles so to have been done.
Imagine that Paul made this order besides the Gospel, of his own authority,
vvherevvith to bind the Corinthes. To aunsvvere both the contentious
Philosophers, than amongst the Corinthes, and the superstitious Papists,
now in (.616.) The.616. untruth. for neither the Corinthes nor the
Catholics now, obi^cted in like sort.
like sort molestinge the Christians, S. Paul proves, that this comelynes is
grounded upon Gods ordinance, and not a Law nevvely devised of his own
authority besides the Gospel. This is his proof, the man by Gods
ordinance has the superioritye, and the woman must be in subjection. God
has appointed for them both, signs and tokens of this dominion and
subjection, He has ordained, that man in token of superiority, should have
hi^ head uncovered: as contrariwise the woman, in token of subjection, to
have her head covered.

Therefore, if man lay away that sign and token of dominion which God has
ordained for him to use, and takes upon him the sign and badge of subjection,
he dishonors God his head, and breaks his ordinance. And so the vvoma^, if
she leave of the couerture of her head which God had given to her, to be
worn as a token and badge of her subjection, and takes upon her the sign of
superiority, she dishonoreth her head, and breaks Gods ordinance. S. Paul
adds an other reason, vvherby he proves, that this was no Law made by him
to the Corinthes. Nature, says he, has taught you this comely order. If this
were a Law and Decree of nature, it was not S. Paul's devise besides Gods
word. S. Ambrose upon this place says, that S. Paul spoke these words,
according to (.617.) The.617. untruth. S. Ambrose says not: of Gods law:
but secundum legem, according to the law: and he means the old law Leuit.
19. not the law of the Gospel.
Gods Law, which forbids (says he) the man to wear his hear. Chrysostom
affirms this to be an ordinance of nature. But, says he, when I speak of
nature, I mean of God, who is the author of nature. So that it is manifest by
S. Paul's own proufes in defense of that he had taught, and by the witness
of S. Ambrose and Chrysostom, that the man to be bareheaded, and the woman
covered, was (.618.) The.618. untruth. It was S. Paul's law, though Gods
law also, as shall appear.
not a Law, order and decree, made by S. Paul to the Corinthes, as you
untruly fable, but Gods ordinance, made plain, set forth, and taught by him,
that all things might be don in the Church in comely order, to Gods glory. Of
like sort was the reformation and order: whereof you speak about the more
worthy receiving the Lords Supper. The Apostle makes thereaboute no nevve
Law, order, or decree, besides (.619.) The.619. untruth. If you mean the
written gospel, as you seem to do, and as you must do, if you reason well.
the Gospel, but reproves the Corinthians, for that they did not about the
receipte thereof, observe the law of the Gospel: He blames them in general,
that their Church assemblies were not to the increase, but rather to the
decrease of virtue in the^ selves: He reproves the^ that in stead of brothlery
love, unity, and concord, there was Cont^mpte, Schism, and dissension
amongst them: He rebukes them, for that they made that Supper Private, which
the Lord him self had made, and instituted to be common: He reprehendeth them
for Drunkenness, and that with the contempt of the poor: And he sharply
shakes them up, for that they abuse the Church, contemning the right use
thereof. Is not this Christ's Law, that the people should increase in virtue?
Is not this Christ's commandment, that the Christians should live in
brotherly love, unity, and concord? Is not this Christ's Institution, that
his Supper should be common, and not Pryuat? Does not Christ's law condemn
Drunkerdes, and contempt of the poor? And is not this Gods decree, that his
house should not be profaned or abused? If these be Gods ordinances, as you
can not deny them to be, than are they (.620.) The.620. untruth. For they are
both Gods ordinances and S. Paul's to, as shall appear.
not Paul's laws, orders, or decrees, neither by vvriting or word of
mouth: otherwise than that Paul was Gods mouth and scribe, to utter, not
his own laws besides the Gospel, but Gods ordinances comprehended
within his Gospel. So that whether being present, he taught them by
word, or being absent by vvriting, he neither vvritte nor spoke, other then
he had yea by inspiratio^ of the holy Ghost. not of any written Gospel.
received of the Lord. He promised, say you, to dispose other things at his
coming. It is true, but not otherwise then he did these above mentioned. He
exhorts, say you, the Thessalonia^s, to abide in the traditions, which they
had learned by word or by vvriting. Ye say truth: but he does not thereby
bind them to this, as to a law, order, or decree, made by him besides the
Gospel: but he monisheth them, as S. Ambrose expounds his meaning. To
stand fast, continue, and persevere in the tradition of the Gospel. So that
the traditions he speaks of, are not other then the Doctrine of the (.621.)
The.621. Untruth. The Traditions that S. Paul speaks of, are other then the
written Gospel, and that you mean.
Ghospel.

I marvel not, that ye (.622.) The.622. Untruth. Missequoting is no
missereporting.
misreporte Saint Paul, saying that he made orders and decrees, touching
praying and preaching unto the people in tongues unknown, and that all women
should keep silence in the Church and congregation, for it may seem, ye
never readde the place, but took it, as you heard it reported. If you had
readde the place, you might have seen with your own eyes, that S. Paul
speaks no vvhitte of that matter in the thirteenth, as ye untruly auouche:
and in the fourtenth you should have perceived, that he in plain speech
proves you a liar: For that he (.623.) The.623. Untruth. He denies the^ not
to be his own, because they were the Lords co^maundement^. Both d^ stand well
together, as shall appear.
denies that these were his orders or decrees, affirming them to be the Lords
commandments, and so does Theophilact. Gloss. ordinar. and Lyra witness
also with Paul, testifying that these were his words and meaning. These
places thus rightly considered, it may easily appear^ unto the most
unskillful, how little (.624.) The.624. Untruth. For M. Fekenham^ purpos was so
much helped hereby, that you never durst come nigh his Argument.
your purpose is helpen by them, and that these grounds do sail you: So that
your whole shift being sifted, is found naught, both in matter and form.

M. Horn.
Three other places remain of M. Fekenha^s allegatio^. The first, but the.3.
in order, that men should pray and prophecy (that is, 2. These. 2. Concerning
certain decrees and orders made by S. Paul alleged by M. Fekenham.
preach or expound scripture) their heads uncovered: and that the women
should pray with their heads covered. The second is of such orders as the
Apostle Paul ordained touching the holy Sacrament of the Eucharistia. The
third, that he ordained many things as well by writing, as withowt writing,
and in all this seaking for no commission at any lay man's hand. To the two
first M. Horn says, that they were no laws of Paul's made by his authority
besides the ghospel to bind the Corinthians as M. Feke^ham imagines, but they
were Gods own ordinance. For God had so ordained to signify the superiority
in the man, and subjection in the woman: and yt was the very law of nature. And
for the.2. point he did ordein no new thing, but did set forth only Gods own
laws: and that is, that his supper should be common, and not private. In
condemning also according to Gods law drunckerds, and the co^tempte of the
poor and such as against Gods decree profaned or abused his house. And S.
Paul him self denies, that these were his orders or decrees, but says they
were the Lords commandments. And to the third he says, that whether S.
Paul taught by writing or by word, he taught nothing, but that he received of
the Lord: neither for any promise he made to dispose things at his ^^mming,
did he dispose any thing otherwise then he receiuid of the Lord. For all this
your solemn answer, ye have soluted M. Fekenhams argument never a whit:
which does not contend in this place, whether this ordinance may be called
properly Paul's or Gods ordinance, or whether they were beside the ghospel or
no, or what kind of traditions they were that Paul taught. The argument
rests in this, that these laws, orders, and decrees, were set forth,
published and diuulged, yea put in execution by visitatio^s, and otherwise
without any warrant of civil prince. Neither does M. Fekenha^ say, that these
ordinances were made besides the ghospel, and delivered to the Corinthians, as
ye say he imagines. Your self M. Horn do but dream this: for those words of
M. Fekenha^, of decrees made beside the gospel are referred to the laws made
by the Apostles in their synod, not to the orders appointed to the Corinthia^s.
And to those decrees of the Apostles you have answered never a word, but with a
short untrue answer, of a scripturelike and an vnscripturelyke visitation,
and a long bible babble against the order of such visitation as the Catholic
Church uses, you have trained your Reader with idle talk, M. Horn being not
able to answer M. Feke^ha^s 2. allegation, dissembleth it altogether.
nothing to the purpose. By a like craft ye make yt the third point in M.
Fekenham that, which he speaks of laws and orders made by the Apostles,
where yt was his second allegation as yet by you unanswered, but altogether
under the visour of a scripturely visitation, dissembled. For there ye saw full
well ye were so met withal, and so strained, that ye had no sterting hole,
unless ye would say, that yt was Gods law in the new testament, that
Christian me^ should eat neither puddi^gs, nor any thing stra^gled: which ye
thought belike to be a great inconvenience, and therefore full closely, and in
great hucker mucker, ye passed yt over. And yet might ye have freshely
reasoned the matter thereto, if your stomach would have served you with telling
us: visum est spiritui sancto and nobis. I^ seems to the holy Ghost and to us.
And is not this Gods law the^ also good M. Horn? This gear I perceive your
weak stomach could not well digest. For if yt could, and you withal could
digest orderly, plainly, and truly any good answer, ye should have at
length answered your self: and should have found yt as true, that the
ordinances concerning the head covered or uncovered, Act. 15. and 16.
and concerning the blessed Sacrament, be and may as well be called the
ordinances or co^maundeme^ts of S. Paul, as the other are called praecepta
Apostoloru^: the co^maundeme^ts of the Apostles. And what should we reason
long in this matter, 1. Cor. 11.
seeing that S. Paul him self calls these praecepta mea: my precepts, or
commandments? And sicut tradidi vobis, 1. Cor. 16. 1 Thessalonians. 4 Scitis quae
praeceptae dederim vobis.
as I have delivered unto you? And does not S. Paul say plainly, that he
ordained to the Churches of Galatia Collets or gatheringes of Alms to be made
every Sunday? And says he not of him self, that he gave precepts to the
Thessalonians? Which yet he writes not in his epistles, but refers the^ to
their former knowledge of delivered doctrine by word of mouth. Otherwise if ye
will so precisely urge the matter, we must now no longer call the old law, the
law of Moses: we must no longer name the prophecies of Hieremie, Iudic. 7.
gladius domini and Gedeonis. Credideru^t domino, et seruo eius Mosi. Joan. 7.
Ezechiel, or Daniel: no more the ghospel of S. Math. S. Luke, S. Mark, or S.
John we must no longer say, the sword of God and of Gedeo^: nor the people
believed God and his seruante Moses. But, God be thanked, these things will
stand together well enough with a good co^structio^, and by a diverse relation.
Neither are they more contrary, the^ when Christ said: my doctrine, is not my
doctrine: but my Fathers that sent me. If we consider the pri^cipal author of
these laws, the^ are they Gods ordinances, and not Paul's or the Apostles: by
whose graciouse inspiratio^ and suggestio^ they were made. S. Paul and the
Apostles were but ministers: A distinction to be noted, of God his laws, and
the Churches laws.
and in that respect they may be called their laws: even as the ministers by
their ministry do truly forgive and remitte sin. We must yet further
consider here two things. The first, that some laws there be of the Church,
that are properly called Gods laws: as these that the Apostles set forth in
holy scripture, which Christ him self taught the^: as concerning baptism,
the holy Eucharistia, and some other things. Some other laws there are that
the Apostles set forth, but not such as they received at Christ's own hands,
and by his mouth, but by his holy spirit after his ascension: which are for
that cause called Christ's and Gods laws: as for that the Apostles had al
their authority to make such laws of him, A difference between the Apostles
ordinances, and those that properly are called Gods ordinances.
they are called also the laws of the Apostles. Namely these that were made in
the first counsel at Jerusalem, the which M. Fekenha^ alleges for his
purpose. And betwixt these two, there is a great difference. For Christ gave by
him self few precepts, and and of those matters only that were necessary for
our salvation: And therefore they may by no human authority be infri^ged or
abolished. But the precepts of the Apostles touching the governance of the
Church, though no man ca^ by private authority break the^, yet may they, and
are, August. 118. ad Ianuar. Et ideo non praecepit quo deinceps ordine
sumeretur, vt Apostolis per quos Ecclesias dispositurus erat, seruaret hunc
honorem.
many of the^, by the authority of the Church abolished. Namely such as were
made for certain and special respects, and not to co^tinewe for ever but for a
time. As was the decree of the Apostles made at Jerusalem touching the eating
of puddinges and things strangeled. So we see the Sabbath day turned into the
sunday. So we see, that though Christ celebrated his holy maundy of the blessed
Eucharistia at night and gave yt to his disciples after supper, and in both
kinds, yet the Church uses it fasting, and for lay me^ under one kind. For
though Christ commanded us to receive, which no man can dispense withal,
yet for the manner and fashion (says S. Augustine) he commanded nothing, but
reserved that honor to the Apostles, by who^ he intended to direct the
Churches. Who therefore also took order for yt, especially S. Paul among the
Corinthians according as he promised. Ibidem. Vnde intelligi datur (quia multu^
erat, vt in epistolae totum illum agendi ordine^ insinuaret, que^ vniuersa per
orbem seruat Ecclesia) ab ipso ordinatum esse, quod nulla morum diuersitate
variatur.

M Fekenham speaks of one thing, and M H reasons against an other thing.


I will dispose other things when I come. Which is the place M. Fekenham
groundeth him self upon against you. And thereupon S. Augustine thinks, that
which is uniformly and generally used throughout Christendom, touching the
order in the administration of this Sacrament, to have been ordained by S.
Paul, which he could not so conveniently prescribe and appoint in his Epistle.
So that ye see, that though it be true, these orders and laws may be called
Gods ordinances and laws, yet they are and may also well be called, the laws
and ordinances of the Apostles. And thus M. Fekenhams Argument stands as
before, in his full force every way. And all your talk concerning the Lords
supper, is quite from the purpose. You tell us, that all was Gods Law that S.
Paul appointed in the said Epistle to the Corinthians. Which if it were so,
yet ye reason not against M. Fekenham, who speaks not of those things that he
took order for in his Epistle, but of those things that he took order for at
his coming. Whereof he said: Caetera cum venero, disponam, Other things I will
set in order when I come. Which as they were done without writing (as many
things also that he delivered by tradition to the Thessalonians, as M. Fekenham
rehearses out of S. Paul) so were they done against your fond conclusion,
that is, without any other warrant of any lay persons. Neither is the
ordinance of praying and preaching, the head uncovered, proprely Gods law: for
then had it been indispensable: And then had you and your fellows, that
preach with your cappe on your heads, need to think upon some good answer,
for the violating of Gods Law. And women come to the Church to be married with
their heads open, which might not be suffered, if it were directly against Gods
law. And though S. Paul gives this reason of superiority, and subection,
because (as it seems) it was a custom or manner proper to the Jews, yet both
among the Romans and other Gentiles, in S. Paul's time, and also throughout al
Christendom at this day, the opening and discovering of the head, is a token
of subjection, and of duetifull honor to our Magistrates and other Superiors.

Wherefore, if we consider the Scripture well we shall find, that S. Paul and
the Apostles gave many precepts in their Epistles, of which in the written
Gospel, nothing is mentioned or ordained. And so your Lutheran Conclusion will
appear stark false and dangerouse, where you say: Vide Heptacolo^. L.
Campestri co^tra Luther. Apologiam. An. 1523.
That Paul gave not his own laws beside the Ghospel, but Gods ordinances
comprehended within his Gospel. And again, That Paul whether being present,
he taught them by word, or being absent, by writing, he neither wrote nor
spoke other then he had received of the Lord. And last of al, So that the
traditions that Paul speaks of, are not other then the Doctrine of the
Gospel. This is, M. Horn (as I said) a Lutheran and a dangerous conclusion.
For by this rule you would frustrate all the laws of the Church (as Luther
your Gra^dsir did) which are not expressly comprehended in the written
Gospel. For this being put, that the very Apostles made no laws or
ordinances, but such as they found before recorded in the Gospel, then (say
you) by what authority can the Prelates of the Church at any time hereafter
take upon them to make such laws, as are not expressed in the Gospel? To mete
therefore with this wicked sequel, and to detect your lewd conclusion, I will
shortly touch a few more examples of such laws and ordinances as The Apostles
made and not recorded, made, or ordained otherwise in the Gospel. 1. Cor. 5.
First, S. Paul to the Corinthes, forbids them to eat with dro^ckards,
with robbers, with fornicatours, with the covetous, and with idolators. In the
Gospel no such restrai^t appears. Nay rather we see there Christ him self, did
eat with publicans and sinners. Lu. 5. and. 7
Again to the Galathia^s he cries out: Gal 5.
Behold I Paul say unto you: If ye be circu^cided, Christ profits you
nothing. What Gospel teaches Paul so to say? What Gospel does condemn
circumcision? Nay rather, says not Christ in the Gospel, Mat. 5. Philip. 3.
Coloss. 2. 1. Tim. 3. Tit. 2.
I came not to undo the law, but to fulfill it? And yet not here only, but to
the Philippe^ses most earnestly he charge them to cast of the yoke of the
law. The like he does to the Colossia^s, teaching the^ to make no more account
of their Neomeniae and Sabbata. Now for the precept that S. Paul gives to
Timothe, that a Bishop should be the man of one wife: What Gospel prescribes
it, or commands it? To Titus also, the laws that he gives to yo^g women,
to widows, and to old weme^? Are not al these and many more (which for
breuities sake I omit) mere co^stitutions and laws of th'Apostls, without any
word made thereof in the Gospel? And what else intended Christ, I pray you, M.
Horn, when he said to his Apostles a little before his Passion, Joan. 16. and.
14.
I have many things yet to say unto you: but you are not able to bear them
now. Howbeit when the Spirit of Truth shall come, he will teach you all
Truth, then that by the spirit of Truth, the holy Ghost, they should learn
and teach many Truths, which in the Gospel (where only the doctrine and
doings of Christ are recorded) they had not learned? And this holy Spirit he
promised should remain not with them only for their abode here in earth, but
with the Church for ever.

To give us to understand, that as they, so their Successors in the Church
from time to time should be taught of the holy ghost, and teach us again al
manner of Truth. Whereof vnuincibly follows, not only that they taught and do
teach many more things then Christ in the ghospel taught, but also that those
their doctrines and teachinges (as proceeding from the holy Ghost the Spirit of
Truth) are infallible, sound and right wholesome, and of us therefore undoubtedly
to be obeyed and believed. Whereby is overthrown M. Horn your most damnable and
wicked conclusion, affirming the Apostles to have made no laws of their own
besides the ghospel, but only such as were Gods ordinances comprehended in the
ghospel. For now we see both by examples of their doings, and by vnui^cible
reason out of the ghospel, that they made laws of their own besides the
ghospel, and might both lawfully and assuredly so do, they being always
pro^pted of the holy Ghost therein, and their laws therefore being not theirs
only, but bearing also the force and value of Gods laws, so far, as is
before declared. Farther by this it appears, that as the Apostles the^, so
their successors now and always heretofore had and have full and sufficient
authority to make ecclesiastical laws or decrees over al their flocks from
Christ himself without any jot of Commission from the lay Prince, or any
other lay Magistrate. And so your principal conclusion goes ones again flat
down to the ground.

The.169. Division. page 116. b.
M. Fekenham.
The which noble Emperor Constantinus, for the repression of the Arians
errors and heresies, he did at the request of Syluester then Bishop of Rome,
call the first Council at Nice: where he had to the Bisshops there assembled
these words? ^ibro. 10. did. Eccl. cap. 2.
Cum vos Deus Sacerdotes constituerit, potestatem tradidit iudicandi de nobis.
Et ideo nos a vobis recte iudicamur. Vos autem, cum nobis a Deo, dij dati
sitis, Lib. 7. hist. Trip. ca. 12
ab hominibus iudicari non potestis. etc. Vale^tinianus Imperator eum ille
rogatus esset ab Episcopis Hellesponti Bythiniae, vt inter esset consilio,
respondit: Mihi quidem cum vnus de populo sim, Theod. li. 5. hist. Eccles. ca.
18.
fas non est talia perserutari, verum sacerdotes quibus haec cura est, apud
semetipsos congregentur, vbi voluerit. Theodosio Imperatori Ambrosius ingressu
intra cancellos templi inter dixit, inquie^s: Interiora o Imperator
sacerdotibus solis patent. etc. Cul egit ob id gratias Imperator, asserens se
didicisse diserimen inter Imperatorem and Sacerdotem.

M. Horn.
It is manifest, that Constantin called the first Nicene Council, but very
unlikely, that he did it at the request of Syluester, because this Council was
(.625.) The.625. untruth. It was in the time of Syluester, as shall appear.

Nicep. lib. 8. ca. 14. Sozom. lib. 1. ca. 17. Lib. 2. to.2. He. 68. Lib. 1.
cap. 1.


not in the time of Syluester, but vvhiles Julius was bishop of Rome, who by
reason of his great age could not be there present in his own person, and
therefore sent in his stead Vitus and Vincentius, as the Ecclesiastical
histories report, and Epiphanius affirms, that Constantine called this
Council at the earnest suit of Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, vvhereto
Ruffinus adds, many other of the Clergy also. But if it be true as ye say,
that the emperor called the Council at the request of the Pope, than both those
Papists are (626) The.626. untruth slanderous. For both stand well together,
as shall appear.
Liars, which affirm that the Pope called this Council, and your cause by
your own confession is much hindered: for if the Emperor called the Council,
and that at the request of Syluester the Pope, as ye say, or at the earnest
suite of Alexander, and other godly Bisshops, as Epiphanius and Ruffinus
affirm: It appears plainly, that both the Pope and the other Catholic
Bisshops, did thereby acknovvledge the (.627.) The.627. untruth. As it shall
appear out of Cusanus M. Horns own Author.
supreme power and authority, to sommon and call Councels, which is a
(.628.) The.628. untruth. It is no part of ecclesiastical Iurisdistion, as the
Emperou^ does it.
principal part of your purpose, and of the Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
cohibitiue, to be in the emperor, and not in them selves: for otherwise they
might, and would have don it, by virtue of their own office, without any
suit made to the Emperor, to execute that which belonged unto them selves.
The Emperor refused to judge the quarreling accusations of the bisshops
assembled at the Nicen Council, one quarreling and accusing an other, and
referred the judgment of them to Christ. This was his modesty, Policy, and
prudent foresight, least by sifting those private quarrels, he might have
hindered the common cause, as I have said before, and is plainly to be (.629.)
The.629. untruth. No such thing can be gathered of those Authour^.
gathered of Ruffinus and Nicephorus; and (.630.) The.630. untruth. For if he
thought not so, as he said, it was no Policy, but a sin.

Lib. 1. cap. 2. Lib. 8. cap. 16. Eusebius. lib. 3. De vita Constant.


not for that he thought his authority might not stretche so far as to judge
the Priests and their matters, as ye would have it to seem: for as he him self
protests, this above all other things, to be the chief scope and end of his
Emperial authority; namely that the Catholic Church be preserved in unity of
faith, sincerity of love, concord in godly Religion, and that the diseases
therein, as Schisms, Heresies, etc. might be healed by his ministry: even so
forsook he no occasion or mean, whereby to work forth this effect of his
ministry and office, whether it were at some time by relenting and remitting
somvvhat of his authority, or by exercising the same to the utmost, in all
matters, Sozom. lib. 1. cap. 4.
and over al persons. He thought it the best for this time by (.631.) The.631.
untruth. He relented nothing but shevved his due Reverence.
relenting to bear with the weakness of those fathes, thereby the better to
encourage the^ to stand fast, and jointly against the common enemy, for the
furtherance of the truth. But aftervvad, when the Counsel or Synod was
assembled at Tire by his co^mmau^demet, and that Athanasius had made complaint
unto him of the unjust dealing of that council to deface the truth, the emperor
did exercise the full authority of his ministry, and called all the Bishops unto
hi^, to this end, that he by his (632) The 632. untruth. Facing, as has
before ben shevved in the.2. book cap. 3.
supreme authority, might examine their doi^gs, and judge of the whole
Counsel, whether they had judged uprightly, and deal^ sincerely or not. This
he did at the suite of the most godly bishop Athanas^us, who would not have
attributed this (.633.) The.633. untruth. Athanasius attributed no such
Authority, to the Emperor, but of all me^, denied it most unto him. See
before. fol. 94. and so forth.
authority to the Emperor, if it had not apperteined to his jurisdiction to
have judged the bisshops and their doings* wither would the Catholic
Fathers of that time, have suffered this and many other such like doings of
this most Christian Emperor, to have passed without some admonition or
misliking, if they had not acknowledged the authority in him to be lavvful. He
commanded the Bisshops every where, to assemble at his appointment, vvher,
and vvha^ he would. He sharply reproves Alexander Bishop of Alexandria, and
Arius, for the contention stirred up by them. He (634) The.634. untruth. The
Pope and the Bisshoppes Judged it, not the'mperor, but with their leave. See
before Fol. ^1.
judged Cecilianus Bishop of Carthage, to be lavvfully consecrated, and
ordered, and condemned the Donatistes. And these Bisshoppes assembled at the
Nicen Council by his commandment* of whom ye speak, acknowledged the
Emperor to have authority to judge them and their causes, (.635.) The 635.
untruth. this or else, follows not. Many are somtymes called to judge between
parties, who yet have no Authority over the parties.
or else they had done folishly, to offer their bills of complaint unto him,
whom they thought had no authority or might not judge and determine the^. But
in case it were true, that the Prince might not judge the Priests nor their
causes, what conclude you thereof? You can not conclude your purpose, for this
is no more a good consequent: Constantinus would not could lavvfully judge the
Priests assembled at Nicen Council: Ergo, (.636.) The.636. untruth. This
Ergo, is your own, not M. Fekenhams.
Bishops and Priests may call councels make Laws, orders, and decrees, to
their flock and cures, and exercise al manner jurisdiction cohibitiue. Then
this, York stands but.iij. miles from Pocklington, Ergo, your pocket is full
of plummes.

The.10. Chapter. Containing a defense of three examples brought forth by M.
Fekenham, touching three Emperors, Constantin the great, Valentian the first,
and Theodosius the first.
Stapleton.
ALthough that, which M. Feke^ha^ has already laid forth out of holy scripture,
be sufficient to show and prove, that the superiority in all causes
ecclesiastical, does not rest in lay princes, but in the spiritual rulers, yet
will he now add and adioyne thereunto, such a forcible argument, that shall
beat down to the ground M. Horns new Laicall supremacy. M. Horn with all
his wit and cunning goes about to auaunce his new supremacy, and to depresse
and abolish the other, as contrary to scriptures, and iniuriouse to the
Emperors, and princes. Now to stop his lyinge mouth M. Fekenham brings
forth three of the worthiest Emperors that ever were, and al three living when
Christian religion most flourished, that by plain words confess the cleargies
superiority in this behalf: that is, Constantine the great; Valentinian the
first, and Theodosius the great. Constantine acknowledges the cleargies
superiority.
This Constantine at the request of Siluester the pope called the first general
council, at Nice, where diverse bisshops being at contention for certain
matters, offered their complaints to him. To whom Constantine answered, that
where as God had made them priests, he had given them authority to judge over
him. And therefore they might well be his judges. Ex. Ruff. lib. 10. eccles.
hist. cap. 2.
But ye (says he) may be judged of no man. Good Lord, how far discrepant is
the judgment of this our noble contry man (as our Chroniclers call him) and most
worthy Emperor from the judgment of M. Horn and his fellows? He disclaimeth
flatly this new superiority: Yet you now after one thousand and almost three
hundred years, by preaching and writing, yea by praemunire, and the sword do
maintain the same. This answer presses M. Horn very sore, and therefore, he
seeks every corner to hide his head in, and yet he can find no good or quiet
resting place. And first he would fain take some hold in a by matter, which
is, that Constantin did not call the council at Siluester his request: because
the council was not in the time of Siluester, but of Julius. I deny your
argument M. Horn. For it must neades be, that the bishops, reparing to Nice
from al quarters of Christendom, should have a convenient time to come
thither: Li. ^. c. 26.
And Nicephorus writes, that the same Council dured three years and more. And
then may it well stand, that Syluester died either after the summoning, and
before the full assemble of the bishops, or at least before the end, that so
some part of it might fall in the time of Julius, notwithstanding that Marcus
came between, who sat in the Sea little more then two years. Neither does your
authors by you cited, deny that it was called at Syluesters request, nor any
other of the ancient writers, that ever I read. But I say further unto you,
that as Constantine did call it at his request, so did he him self call this
council: the one by his spiritual, the other by his temporal authority: which
in all good princes time, Li. 3. c. 15.
does ever serve the other. The one (as your own Author Cusanus teaches) by
force of Authority and commandment over al bishops, over whom he is the head:
The other by way of exhortation, Vide fo. 118
of temporal aid and succor, as I have before at large recited his words.
But to leave Cusanus, Synodus sexta i^ sermon acclamatorio ad Imperatorem.
Act. 18. fo. 403. co. 1. Arrius divisor atque partitor Trinitatis insurgebat,
and continuo Co^stantinus semper Augustus, and Siluester laudabilis, magnam
atque insigne^ in Nicea Synodum congregabant.
for proof that Syluester called this Council, I am able to bring against you,
at the least two or rather three hundred witnesses, and the worst of them shall
be a bishop, and so ancient withal, that none of the^ lived this.800. years.
Perchance ye think that I do but jest with you: No truly M. Horn, I mean
plain faith, without any figure of rhetorike, or such lying figures as ye are
well acquainted withal. Harken you the^, what the sixth general counsel (where
were present about.300. bishops) says to their Emperor Constantine being
then present there. Arrius (say they) which divided, Eusebius. in Chro^. Damas.
in Pontif. Isidorus tom. 1. Council. in praefat. Nic. Co^c. Platina in
Siluestro. Rhegino in Chron. Pantaleo^ in Chronograph. Photius Patriarch.
Co^st. de 7. Conc. Oecum. ad Michaele^ Bulg. Principem.
and sundred the Trinity, arose and by and by themperor Constantine and the
praise worthy Syluester, did assemble at Nice a great and a notable Synod. See
M. Horn. Where ye will not suffer M. Fekenha^, saying Constantine called the
council at the request of Syluester, ye must now be content to suffer him,
when he tells you, that he did call it him self also. Beside the undoubted
testimony of these so many and Ancient Fathers, we have the witness of
Chroniclers, as of Eusebius, Damasus, Isidorus, Photius, Platina, Regino,
Pantaleon, and diverse other. And so withal is your second shift, shifted away:
whereby ye would make your reader believe, that the pope and the other bishops
did acknowledge Co^stantins supremacy, in calling of Councils, being as ye say,
the principal part of jurisdiction Ecclesiastical cohibitiue. For as this is
untrue, that the bare calling of a council is any such principal part, as we
have before declared: so it is untrue also, Vide fol. 118. lib. 1.
that ye say, that the pope called not this council. These strings being very
weak, and therefore sone broken as ye see, he sets out the third, and that
is weakest and wurst of al: And all this stringe hangs upon a foolish
synnefull ciuylity and policy, that Master Horn imagines full fondly in this
worthy prince Constantine. As thowghe he spoke those words, for his modesty
only, and for a policy and a prudent forsighte: least by siftinge those
private quarells, he might have hindered the common cause: and not for that he
thought his authority might not stretche so far as to judge the priests.
And therefore though he politykely relented at this time, yet afterward at
the council at Tyrus he showed him self as supreme Judge in causes
Ecclesiastical. It is wont to be said M. Horn, Maledicta glosa quae destruit
textum.
cursed is that gloss that destroys the text. Suerly ye are very imprudently
ouersene in this your answer? For all this is but a peuishe and a wretched
policy: wherewith you dishonor this noble monarch. And ye have forgotten the
rules as well of divinity as of policy. For as it is policy, sometime to
dissemble a truth, so to tell an untruth, is at all time a sin, yea though
the truth be offensive to no man, but officiable and profitable to many. As S.
Augustine does at large discourse the matter. Aug. ad Consentiu^ de ma^datio
Tom. 4
Now if the Emperor be the priests judge: then does Constantins saying
conteyne a plain lie. Seeing that before he expressly confessed them to be his
Judges, and said farther, that they could be judged of no man. We leave this
policy therefore and prudent forsight, to your generation, as unmeet either for
Constantine, or for any other a much meaner catholyke man. The policy of our
new euangelical schole
This kind of policy a man may find in great store in M. Jewels Reply, and in
this your answer. This is the very practice of your new Evangelical schole.
You seem to be persuaded, to make no account of lying, so that your lewd cause
may be furdered. But though you be naught your selves, you must not so judge
of others. Verily Constantin spoke as he thought and the very truth. And he
confessed as plainly, that they were his judges: As you saw before in his own
words. For he said to the bishops plainly. That they could be judged of no
man. Neither is it to be gathered by Ruffinus and Nicephorus, as ye pretend,
that he thought not so as he spoke, Ruffinus. li. 1. ca. 2. Nice. li. 8. cap.
16.
or spoke those words, for that only, that the common cause should not be
hindered, which might and should have gonne forward, though he had not spoken
these words. In deed he burned their bills of complaints, and so cut away their
private quarelling, least it should have been any hinderance to the principal
matter, that was then to be discussed and debated upon. And in case the
co^plaintes had been such, as Constantin might have heard and determined, he
might have reserved them until the end of the Counsel: and then have heard
the^ without any prejudice or stay of the common matters. Now what kind of
matters these were, for the which the Bisshops did contend, it does not
appear. If they were te^porall, then whether Constantine might hear them, or
might not, yt makes nothing for his Ecclesiastical supremacy. If they were
spiritual matters, then are we sure, he might not hear, as the chief and
principal judge. Private quarrels they were as your self confess, and
therefore by all likelihood of temporal matters: wherein for all that,
themperor thought him self no mete or convenient judge, upon priests. And that
well appears to be his mind, by that we have said before, that he made a law,
whereby al priests conuented before any temporal judge, might refuse him, Cap.
4. fo. 103. et. 104.
and require the matter to be heard of the bishop. But of this matter see our
answer before in the Second book.

Ye are now busy again with the Counsel of Tyrus, with Caecilianus, and such
other matters, to prove Co^stantin the supreme head. Whereunto seeing we have
Lib. 2. cap. 2. and 3. fol. 90. and sequentib. Item. fol. 94. et seq.
already sufficiently answered, we will not encomber the Reader again with the^
in this place: And neade so much the less, that ye seem to faynte and give
over your hold, and your fond gloss against the plain text: and by putting
the case it were true, which is true in deed: seek yet an other corner to crepe
in, and say that though Co^stantin would not or could not lawfully judge the
Priests, yet it will not follow, that bishops may call Councels, make laws,
and exercise al manner of jurisdiction cohibitiue. Ye say truly M. Horn, it will
not follow in deed. Neither M. Fekenham drives any such reason. It is
sufficient, that they may exercise any cohibitiue jurisdiction without the
princes commission, which you have hitherto denied: affirming, that they can
not do it without the Princes warrant: nor the Prince him self touching the
first cohibitiue jurisdiction, as ye have divided it. But if they be judges,
the^ must it needs follow, that they have some jurisdiction cohibitiue. For as
the law says. Iurisdictio sine modica correctione nulla est. De officio eius,
cui mandata est Iurisdictio: Ma^datam.
Jurisdiction without some compulsion is no jurisdiction. Again if
Co^sta^tinus were not the supreme judge, nor could be: the^ are not other
Emperors or Princes, judges any thing more, then he was, and so has M. F. by
this justified his assertion. This argument therefore that ye mislike, is not M.
Fekenha^s, but your own. Who shall let you to like or mislike your own reasons
at your pleasure. And therefore, for answer to this your peuishe argument, I
say, yt follows no better, the^ if a man should say. York stands but three
miles from Pocklingto^: Ergo your pocket is full of plu^mes. And so have you full
wisely stopped not M.F. but your own mouth with an ha^dful of your own plu^mes.
If Priests be judges, they have not thereby al manner of jurisdiction cohitiue:
for the^ should they have al temporal jurisdiction as well as spiritual. But yet
for such causes as they be lawful judges in, they may make laws and orders
iudicially, and may have, yea and must have all ecclesiastical jurisdiction,
for the execution of their judgment.

M. Horn. The.170. Division. page 118. a.
Of the like form also are the consequents, that ye make upon the histories
of the Emperors Valentinian and Theodosius. And as you ca^ not fasten your
purpose by any good sequel upon these histories, so that history tha^ ye
allege of Valentinian, makes much (.637.) The.637. untruth. For that history
makes much for M. Feck. purpose, as shall appear. Lib. 6. cap. 7. Lib. 4.
cap. 2.
again your purpose. First it is uncertain and may be doubted, whether this
answer that ye affirm to be Valentinians, were his or Valens the Emperors
words, for as Sozomenus one of the Tripartit Ecclesiastical historians,
affirms this suite to be made by Catholic Bisshops of Hellespontus and
Bithynia, unto Valentinian, and that this was his answer to their petition.
Eue^ so Socrates an other of the same tripartit historians affirms, that this
suit was made by the Macedonians, unto Valens the Emperor, who granted the^
their petition, the rather supposing, that the matter should have been
determined in that Counsel, after the minds of Eudoxius and Acatius. And it i^
not from the purpose to note which of these Emperors caused this Counsel to
be called, for the one of t^e^, Valentinian was a Catholic Emperor, the other
Vale^s, an Arian. Secondly you do (.638.) The.638. untruth slanderous. M.
Fekenha^ reports the story truly.
falsely report the story for the Bisshops of Hellespo^tus and Bithynia, did
not make suite unto The Emperor Valentinian, that he would be present in the
counsel: but by their messenger, did humbly beseech him, that he would
commau^de all the Bisshops, as Nicephorus reports it, or that he would suffer
and give leave unto the bisshops to have a Synod or Council, which they held
after license obtained at Lampsacum, as Socrates and Sozomenus, the Tripartite
Historia^s, make relation. Thirdly, the Emperor does (.639.) The.639.
untruth. He does simply deny it, as shall appear.
not simply refuse or deny the search and diligent enquyrie of these matters,
as things nothing apperteining to his office, or not lavvfull for him to
enquire of: as ye would have it seem, but excuses him self by his earnest
business and want of leisure, saying, It is not lawful: (.640.) The.640.
untruth. He meant not so, as it plainly appears by Sozomenus, Paulus Diac. and
Cassiodore.
(meaning that his leisure, from the vvaighty matters of the common weal, and
just opportunity, vvoulde not easily now suffer him) to travail in those
causes, and therefore refers the exact sifting of those things to them,
whose offices and charge, was properlye to be occupied in those matters. That
this is the true purporte of his words in his right sense and meaning
appears plainly by the (.641.) The.641. untruth. by the Circumstances no such
thing appears.
due circumstances set forth in the storye, and also by Nicephorus an
Ecclesiastical historian, who rightly understood his meaning, and reports
it in these words: Mihi negotijs occupato, and reipcutis distento res eiusmodi
inquirere, non facile est. Lib. 11. cap. 3.
It is no light or easy matter for me, that am now occupied with businesses,
and filled so full as I may be, with the cares of the common weal, to enquire
or search such matters. Last of al, whether the Catholic Bisshops of
Helespontus and Bithynia, required the Emperors presence in the Council, as ye
affirm, or they required therewith his labor and travail in the debating or
searching the truth of matter, which may seem at the first by the bare
words of his aunsvvere: or they desired only license of him and permission
to assemble together in Synod or Council, to determine and decree with the
truth, against the Arianismes, which the most and best part of the Historians
agree unto. Their suit and humble petition, makes plainly against your
presumpteous assertion, in that they acknowledged (.642.) The.642. untruth.
They acknowledged nor thereby any such Jurisdiction, but they craved his aid
and assistance for quiet and order sake.
thereby the jurisdiction to call Councels, to be in the Emperor; and not in
Bisshops or Priests, without special leave, license, and commission from the
Prince. For if the power and jurisdiction to call Councels, had been in them
selves without the Emperors commission, what neaded them to have craved
license of the Emperor? And if it had not been lavvfull for the Emperor to
have been present in the Council, and to have dealte in the diligent search and
debating of matters in Religion, then these Catholic Bisshoppes did
wickedly, who as you (.643.) The.643. untruth. M Fekenham says not, they
required the emperor to deal in debating such matters, but only to be present.
say, moved him thereunto.

Stapleton.
A co^futation of M. Horns answer to Valentinia^s story
The next story is, of Valentinian the emperor, whom the Catholics required, that
he would vouchsauf to be present among them in their Council. Who made them
answer, that it was not lawful for him being a lay man, to search out such
matters. But ye that are priests (says he) and that have the care of these
matters, Hist. trip. li. 7. c. 12.
may at your pleasure assemble your self where ye will. To this allegation
Master Horn answers. First, that it is not certain, whether the suyte was
made to Valentinian, or to Valens his brother, which was an Arrian.

Secondly he says, that M. Fekenha^ does falsely report the story: for that
the bishops did not make suyte to him to be present, but that he would
command the bishops, Nicephor. lib. 11. c. 3.
as Nicephorus reports it, or suffer, or give leave to the bishops to have a
synod, as Socrates and Sozomenus make relation.

Thirdly that the emperor does not simply deny, that the search of these
matters apperteyne to his office, but excuses him self, by his earnest business
and want of leisure: as Nicephorus, who rightly understood his meaning,
reports. Last of all, what so ever the suyt was, they acknowledged the
jurisdiction to call Counsels to be in the Emperor: or else what neaded they
to have craved license of the Emperor?

Your first, and second solution M. Horn, though they were true, will little
relieve you. And yet as well in the one, as in the other M. Fekenham reports no
more then the very words of his Author, Trip. li. 7. cap. 12. Sozo. lib. 6.
cap. 7. Pau. Dia. in addit: ad Eutropium.

Niceph. li. 11 cap. 13. Euagrius lib. 1. ca. 5. (...).


that wrote the Tripartite history. First that the catholyks sent to
Valentinian, and not the Macedonians to Valens. This says the Tripartite
alleged by M. Fekenham: this says Sozomenus: this says Paulus Diaconus, this
says Nicephorus with others. As for Socrates, though he write otherwise, yet
his credit is the less, both for that he is known, to have missereported
other things, namely about the matters of Athanasius and Arrius, contrary to
all other writers, and also for that he is noted of ignorance by Euagrius an
other Ecclesiastical writer, about the story of the Ephesine Counsel: So little
cause you had to charge M. Fekenham of misreporting, your self forsaking the
consent of so many, to follow one against all the rest, when M. Fekenham
followed the consent of the most and the best writers.

As for the second point, the said tripartite has even as M. Fekenham does
allege it, Tripart. ca. 12. li. 7. Vt dignaretur ad dogmatis emendatione^
interesse. Paul. Diac. quatenus dignaretur ad dogmatis eme^dationem interesse.
and so has Paulus Diaconus to: that is, that yt would please him to be
present, that wrong opinions might be reformed. For the.3. point also M.
Fekenha^ swarueth nothing from the said tripartite. Nay says M. Horn, the
dew circumstance set forth in the story, and Nicephorus who rightly understood
the Emperors meaning declare, that when he said it was not Lawful for him, he
meant: it was no light or easy matter for him being occupied with business and
care of the common wealth, Paul. Diaconus. Mthi cum subiecto populo de huiusmodi
negotijs curiose agere fas no^ est. vt ergo videtur vobis sacerdotibus, facite.
to search such matters. But how prove you, that Nicephorus a very late writer
should understand his meaning better, then Paulus Diaconus that lived at least
four hundred years before Nicephorus, that writes thus? It is not lawful
for me, and my people curiously to meddle with such matters. Wherefore do ye
that priests, as ye shall think good. Why should we think, that Nicephorus
should be more privy of themperors right meaning, Tripart. lib. 7. ca. 12. Mihi
cu^ vnus de populo sim, fas non est. and caet.
then was Epiphanius the translatour of the Tripartite, writing at least.600.
years before Nicephorus was born? Yea why should we think that Nicephorus should
see more deaply the meani^g of the^peror, Sozom. li. 6. cap. 7. (...).
the^ the original author him self Sozomene, that lived about the said
Emperors time? Who writes, that the emperor Vale^tinia^ answered. It is not
lauful for me, being a lay man, to be curiouse in the searchi^g of these
matters. Let the bishops, to whose charge these matters appertain, assemble
the^ selves, at what place they list. Neither ca^ the circu^sta^ce of the story
of Vale^tinia^ as ye imagine, lead a man to your sense. Eutrop. Cui and nos
qui gubernamus imperiu^, sincere capita nostra submittamus, and eius monita du^
tanquam homines deliquerimus necessario veluti curantis medicamenta suscipiamus.

Tripart. li. 7. ca. 8. Theodor. li. 4 ca. 6. (...).

Eutropius ibidem. Gratias tibi ago D^mine, quia huic vir^ ego quide^ co^mmisi
corpora, tu autem animas.


For whether we consider this answer, or the answer he made at the election of
S. Ambrose, we shall find al to be of one sort. Chose ye, says the emperor to
the bishops, such a bishop, for Millane, to who^ we that govern the empire, may
sincerly submit our head: and whose admonitio^s we, when by any fraylty, as me^
are wont, we trespass, may of necessity recieue as of the physicians medecin.
And when the bisshops would have set over the choice and the appointment of
the new bishop to him, because he was a wise and a godly Prince: Nay says
he: This enterprise or work passes our vocation or degree. For ye that are
indewed with the grace of God, and shine brightlie with that light, may much
better make this election. The Emperor also understanding, that S. Ambrose was
chosen, said: I thank thee my Lord God, that it has pleased thee, to commit
men's sowles, to him (meaning S. Ambrose) to who^ I committed men's bodies. For
before S. Ambrose was chosen bishop of Millane, he was the governor of those
quarters under the Emperor. But to put the matter out of doubt, let us harken
to S. Ambrose, and to that, that he says of this Emperor. This Emperors
son the young Valentinian sent for S. Ambrose to come to his consistory: and
there to reason and dispute before him, and other as Judges, Ambros. lib. 5.
epistola. 32.
against the Arrian bishop Auxencius. To whom S. Ambrose answered: Sir: your
father did not only say it in words, but ordained by a law, that in matters
touching faith, or ecclesiastical order, he ought to be judge, that is neither
unequal in office, nor unlike in right. For these are the words of his rescript
or Law: that is, that priests should be judges upon priests. Yea if a priest
were otherwise accused, and that he were to be examined of his manners and
life, he would that the bisshops should be judges. Wherefore his own law may
best serve, for the interpretation of his answer made to the bisshops of
Hellespontus. And this with the other premises declare evidently, themperours
meaning, and that he thought it did not properly belong to him, but to the
bishops, to intermedle with the affairs Ecclesiastical.

Neither does Nicephorus any thing hinder our purpose. For that, that he says,
will well stand with Sozomenus. And it is probable the Emperor said both. And as
yt is in holy scripture, that one place supplieth the defect of the other: so
is it also in chroniclers. And that perchance ye saw your self, and therefore
ye run to your accustomable reason, as yt were to your Bulwork, that the
princes had authority to call councels, and not the bishops: for else (say you)
what neaded them to have craved License of the emperor? Wherein I answer, they
neaded his aid for oportunyte of time and place. And as at all times the
bishops have wrought in calling of Councels with the princes assistance, so at
this time, (the Arrians and other heretics bearing such a sway in the world)
yt was great wisdom, to attempt no council without notice given to the
prince, and his consent had thereunto. Namely considering what persequutions
the Catholics of late had suffered under the Arrian Emperor Constantius, and
that their decrees could not be effectually executed against rebelliouse
heretyks, who contemned excommunication, and al other Ecclesiastical
jurisdiction, neither they them selves could safely and quietly assemble
together, without the special aid of the Prince.

M. Horn. The.171. Division. page 119. a.
Although ye (.644.) The.644. untruth. The story is by M. Fekenham truly
reported;
untruly report the story of Theodosius the Emperor, and Ambrose the
Bisshoppe of Millaine, yet can you not by any means vvrast it, to serve your
purpose (.645.) The.645. Untruth. It serves the purpose many ways, as shall
appear.
any vvhitte at all. For if it were true, that Ambrose forbadde Theodosius the
Emperor the entrance into the Chauncellior that the Emperor had said to him,
that he had learned the difference betwixt an Emperor and a Priest, yet can
you not conclude thereof: therefore Bisshops and Priests have power and
authority to make Laws, Orders, and Decrees to their flocks and cures, and
to exercise the second kind of Cohibitiue Jurisdiction over them. Theodosius,
as the Author vvriteth, Theod. lib. 5. c. 18.
came into the Chauncell to offer his oblation, vvhereat S. Ambrose found no
fault: But when he staid there still to receive the holy Mysteries, Mark
here, Gentle Reader, how M. Horn tells only the Story, and so steals
away without any answer in the world.
S. Ambrose sent him word to go forth and abide with the other of the
Church, for that place was only for the Priests: For which monition the
Emperor was returned to Constantinople, and came on a time into the
inward place or Chauncell to offer his oblation, and went forth again so
sone as he had offered, Nectarius the Bishop demanded of him, wherefore he
tarried not still within, meaning to receive the holy mysteries: To whom the
Emperor makes answer, saying: I have scarsely learned the difference
betwixt an Emperor and a Priest.

Stapleton.
The third story is of The Emperor Theodosius the Great, A confutation of M.
Horns answer to the story of Theodosius.
whom S. Ambrose forbadde to enter into the Chauncell, saying: The inner
parts of the Church, o Emperor, lie open for Priests only, etc. whom the
Emperor thanked for this admonition, saying: that he had now learned a
difference betwixt an Emperor and a Priest. First M. Horn finds this fault
with Master Fekenham, Theod. lib. 5. c. 18.
that he untruly reports the Story of Theodosius: then in case this were a
true report, that it can not be by any means wrested to serve M. Fekenhams
purpose any whit at all. For if it were true, yet could he not conclude, that
because S. Ambrose forbad Theodosius thentrance into the Chauncel, that
Bishopes have power to make Laws and decrees, to their flocks and cure, and
to exercise the second cohibitiue jurisdiction. I now perceive, that Horace
saying is true.

Breuis esse laboro: Obscurus fio.

Whiles men seek brevity, they fall into obscurity.

So perchance M. Horn might have said, and truly to M. Fekenham. But that
he says, that M. Fekenham makes a misreporte of the story, that he says
very plainly, but as falsely. And therefore both to supply this defecte, and
shape M. Horn a plain and a full answer, I will a little more open this story.

The story of Theodosius the Emperor and S. Ambrose, opened.
The people at Thessalonica in a sedition and an uproar slew certain of the
magistrates, whereupon Theodosius, though otherwise a good and a very
temperate man in all his doings, being entered into a great rage and choler,
commanded the people of that City to be destroyed by his army: which in a
furiousnes without any consideration slew such as by chance they first
met withal: were they Citizens, strangers, or foreners, were they guilty,
Niceph. li. 12. cap. 40 and 41. Theod. lib. 5. cap. 18.
or were they unguilty. After a certain time it chanced, that this Emperor
came to Millane, and being there, after his custom repayring to the Church,
S. Ambrose met him, and forbadde him to enter: most vehemently reproving
him for the said shawghter: asking, how he could find in his conscience,
eyher to lift up his hands to God, defiled with such a foul murder, or
with the same to receive the holy body of Christ, or to receive with his
mouth the preciouse blood of Christ, by whose furiouse and ragnge
commandment so much blood had been shed? Wherefore he would, that the
Emperor should turn home again, and that he should pacientlie suffer the
bond, Of the penance of this Emperor enjoined him by S. Ambrose.
the which God had with his heavenly sentence allowed, meaning this sentence of
excommunication. The Emperor as one browght up in Gods Laws, obeyed him,
and with weapinge tears departed: where he continued eight months, and never
came all this while to the Church, nor received the sacrament of Christ's
body. The solemn feast of Christmasse being now come, he was in great
heuines and sorrow: Mihi porro non modo id tangere licet, verum etiam coelum
ipsum clausum est. Neque enim diuini illius oraculi non memini quod disertis
verbis statuit: quaecunque a sacerdotibus Dei ligata fuerint in terris, ea
etia^ in coelis certa esse ligata.
to consider that every poor beggar might go to the Church, and he only
was shut owte. And full bitterly complained and moned with him self, that
he was excluded, not only from the Church, but from heaven also. For he did
well remember, that Christ said plainly, that what so ever was bownde in
earth of Gods Priests, should be bownde also in heaven.

At length after he had sent Ruffinus a noble man, to entreat with S. Ambrose,
he went him self, neither yet would presume to enter, until S. Ambrose had
absolved him, and losed his bo^des: Te autem oro, vt vincula mea soluas.

Et mox Tuae vero, o vir divine id est operae, indicare mihi and temperare
sacrae medicinae remedia.


which he did most humbly and penitently crave at his hands, offering him
self to receive such farther penance, as S. Ambrose should enjoin him.
Whereupon S. Ambrose enjoined him (for his penance) to make a Law, that such
capital sentences and judgments as should seame to be made extraordinarilye,
and contrary to the common order and custom of themperours, should not be put
in execution, til.30. days after the sentence. That in this mean while, the
Prince might, if need were, better advise him self, either for the moderation
or the abolishing of his commandment. Which law was presently made and
subscribed with Theodosius hands, and does at this day remain to be seen in
the Code. Vide Cod. Theod. li. 9. tit. 40. lib. 13 In Cod. Justin. lib. 9. tit.
de poenis: Si vindicari.
The Emperor being at length reconciled, and suffered to enter into the
church, went up into the chauncel to offer, and there remained, willinge to
receive the Sacrament of Christ's body, as the Emperors were wont to do.
But S. Ambrose sent to him a deaco^ to warn him to depart into the body of the
church: for that the inward temple was a place for the priests only. And
thereupon he departed, and thanked S Ambrose. And coming afterward to
Constantinople, when he had done his offeringe in the chauncell, would not
tarry, but departed into the body of the Church: Niceph. li. 12. ca. 41. Vix
aliquando tande^ (inquit) quod discrime^ sit inter imperatorem and sacrorum
antistitem, cognoui: vix veritatis doctorem inueni.
though Nectarius the Patriarche there, were not content with yt and willed
him to remain still: to whom he answered. I have scarsly now at length
learned the difference betwixt an Emperor, and a priest. By this story, first
ye understand, what a cauillor, and what a quarreller M. Horn is: to charge
M. Fekenham with the untrue report of this story. For as for the first, (...).
truth yt is. S. Ambrose did not find fault, that he should enter into the
chancel, neither M. Fekenham says so. But saying, he forbadde him to enter,
and addinge no more but these words, the inward parts, be for the Priests,
and caetera this and caetera. declares, that M Fekenha^ meante not of the bare
ingresse, but of the ingresse and tarying withal, according to the story: to
the which he does refer him self with this and caetera. And therefore as
there is no cause, why he should untruly report yt, making nothing for his
purpose, nor against you: so consideringe the manner of his utterance, yt is
truly reported: and ye Master Horn show your self but a wrangler. For
the.2. point, though in deed Theodoretus says as you rehearse (...), that is,
scarsly, or hardlye: yet the leaving owte of those two syllables, is not any
way beneficial to M. Fekenham, or prejudicial to your cause, or worthy to be
noted for any untruth. For yt is very true, that Theodosius had learned a
difference betwixt the emperor and the priests, though scarslye and hardlye,
and in long time.

Now we have proved M. Fekenham an honest man, and cleared him, we give you
warninge to see to your self, and that you provide as well for your self and
your honesty, which ye shall never do. Remember I pray you, Vide supra fol.
119. b. and. 120. a.

The story of, Theodosius makes against many points of M. Horne^ doctrine.


what advantage, or what great honesty ye took before, for the alleging of
Theodosius doings. Take heed I say, least his story yet ones again put you to
as much shame. I will not tarry upon other incidente though great matters. As
that this story gives a sure record and testimony against your synagoges, or
rather Barnes (.1.) as well for the plucking down of the chauncell, and making
no difference between the Priests and the lay men's place (.2.) as also for
taking away the oblation and presence of the blessed body and bloudd of
Christ, testified by this story. In the which oblation, the chief office of
the Priest remains: and for the which, as being one principal cause, were
not barnes or cockpittes, as yours are now, but semely and orderly distincted,
with the Chauncel to the Priests only: and with the body of the Church,
peculiarly appointed to the people. This I say, I will now leave largely in ALL
causes or things ECCLESIASTICAL. Surely an untrue and an horrible proposition.
The which S. Ambrose, if he now lived, rather then he would confess, he
would be dismembered with wild horses. This is to open, and to evident an
absurdity, and though ye will not, or dare not confess it with plain words,
M. Horns starting holes, when he is pressed mere.
yet as we have declared, it may be well gathered your self do not like it.
And therefore ye craftelie wind your self from that, as much as ye may
possibly, and find many starting holes: as in the former leaf, That out of
Constantinus Story it may not be gathered, that Bisshoppes have all manner of
Cohibitiue Jurisdiction. And here: that it can not be proved by this Story of
Theodosius, that they have the second Cohibitiue Jurisdiction. But in case out
of both it may be gathered (as it is in deed necessarily gathered) that the
Prince is not supreme Head in all matters Ecclesiastical: then is Master
Fekenham free from taking the Oath, as being such, as neither he, nor any good
man may with safe conscience receive.

Now further, what if of this Story, it shall be proved most Paulinus in vita
Ambrosij.
for forging of false letters. Which excommunication wrought so wo^derously,
that he waxed mad, and was possessed of the Devil, that began al to tear him.
None other then he had, when he excommunicated also Maximus the tyra^t: Ibidem.
not without great danger of his life. Niceph. li. 12. cap. 41 Vinculum quod
Deus coelitus sub calculo comprobauit, suscipe.
None other I say, then that, that he received of God, when he was made
Bishope. This jurisdiction then did S. Ambrose exercise by his supreme
Ecclesiastical authority, upon the higest Monarche of all the world. This did
he by his episcopal office, Ambros lib. 5. epistola 28. ad ipsum Theodosium.
Ita me Deus ab omnibus tribulationibus liber^t, quia non ab homine neque per
hominem, sed aperte mihi interd^ctu^ aduerti: Dum enim essem sollicitus, ipsa
nocte qua proficisci parabam, venisse quidem visus es, sed mihi sacrificium
offerre non licuit.
and yet not without a plain celestial revelation to encourage him thereto,
and to confirm him, as him self declares. Herein his doings were agreeable
to his teachinges. For he taught with all other Catholics, that this
excommunication perteyneth to the Bishopes and not to the multitud. The Bishops
office is (says he) if it maybe to heal canckered and foystered soores, and
if that may not be, to cut the perniciouse and rotten parts quite of. It is
then a most true principle, that Bisshops need to look for none other warrant
to excommunicate any man, that deserves excommunication: no nor the Prince
neither, putting the case as ye falsely do, that he is the head of the Church.
And therefore either you must take from him this unnatural and monstrouse head,
Officiorum lib. 2 ca. 27. Sic Episcopi affectus boni est, vt optet sanare
infirmos, serpentia auferre vulnera: adurere aliqua non abscindere, postremo
quod sanari non potest, cum dolor abscindere.
by which ye set two heads upon one body, or ye must grant him
authority to excommunicat to.

Marvel it is to me, if this your preaching and teaching be so true and sure
as ye make it, that the learned men about Theodosius could not epsy it. O that
ye had been at his elbowe to have enspired him whith a little of your new
divinity: ye might have wonderfully eased his woeful heart, and perchance if
you might have proved your doctrine, have worn for your labor the Popes
triple croune by Theodosius good help, for such good service in so great
distress. What a sort of dolts had Theodosius being so mighty a Prince about
him: that none of them could tell him, that he neded not to pass a butte^ for
S. Ambroses exco^municatio^, unless he saw yt withal sealed by the whole
congregation? If Theodosius had learned this lesson he would have shifted well
enough for him felfe, nor neded not to have pined away so many months with
continual mourning and lamentatio^. But suerly if ye had told him so M. Horn,
he would have taken you as ye are, that is, for a lier, and an heretic. He was
as I have said, brought up in the knowledge of Gods law, and knew full well,
Niceph. li. 14. cap. 3. Adeo religiosus Theodosius fuit, vita^que suam
accuratissime ad diuinas leges co^posuit.
that he was laufully excommunicated, by S. Ambrose. The which he did much
fear, pronounced not by a Bishop only, that has thereto ordinary, but (such
was his devotion and his life so comfortable to Gods laws) of other that had
none authority at al. And therefore being on a time excommunicated, of a
froward mo^k, having none authority thereto: he would neither eat, nor drink
until he were assoiled of him: yea though th'Archbishop him self of
Co^sta^tinople offered to assoil him.

We will now come to the 2. cohibitiue, as ye call yt, and to the authority of
making laws and decrees, evidently to be proved by this story. For from whense
comes this order and manner to distinct the chauncell from the body of the
Church, and to place the priests in the one, and the laity in the other: but
from the Bishops, without any commission of the Prince or people? The which
order and law ye see, that S Ambrose appointed to the Prince him self: which
he ever afterward kept, though before he used the contrary. Again does not
S. Ambrose prescribe to Theodosius for his penance, a certain law and order
to be set forth by him, by his proclamation? Thirdly is it not a Law made of
the Bishops and council without any commission of Princes or people, Co^c.
Mileuit. c. 19
that a sentence ones given, or order taken in matters Ecclesiastical, none of
the Clergy should appeal upon pain of deprivation to any civil Prince? And
that we go not from the story and time of Theodosius and S. Ambrose: To^. 1.
co^c. in council. Aquil.
did not S. Ambrose with the whole Council kept at Aquileia depose Palladius,
for that he, among other things, would have had certain noble men to have been
associate to sit in judgment with the Bishops in the time of Theodosius?
Art. 4. fol. 108.
Of the which I have spoken more largely in my Return, etc. against M. Jewel.

Thus ye perceive good Reader, how aptly and fitly M. Fekenham has
accommodated to his purpose, the stories of these three Emperors, and to what
poor shifts Master Horn is driven for the maintenance of his evil cause,
that he has taken in hand to defend. Thus you see also, how to this story of
S. Ambrose and Theodosius M. Horn has answered no one word, but making a
short recital thereof, steals fair away, without any answer at all.

M. Fekenham. The.172. Division. page 119. a.
Call. Institut. cap. 8.
M. John Calvin, entreating of the Histories betwixt these Emperors
Vale^tinian, Theodosius, and S. Ambrose, after a long process wherein he makes
good prouf, that all spiritual jurisdiction does appertain unto the Church, and
not unto the Empire, he has these words following: Qui vt magistratum orne^t,
Ecclesiam spoliant hac potestate, non modo falsa interpretatione Christi
sententia^ corrumpunt, sed sanctos omnes Episcopos, qui tam multi a tempore
Apostolorum extiterunt, non leuiter damnant. Quod honorem officiu^que
Magistratus falso praetextu sibi vsurpaueri^t. Now they do spoil the Church of
that authority, thereby to adorn temporal Magistrates, not only by corrupting
Christ his appointment and meaning therein: But also they lightly condemn and
set at naught al those holy Bishops, which in so great number have continued
from the time of the Apostles hitherto, which honor and office of Spiritual
government they have (says John Calvin) usurped and taken upon them by a false
pretext and title made thereof. And again John Calvin says: Call. in. 7. ca.
Amos.
Qui in initio tantopere extulerunt Henricum regem Angliae, certe fuerunt
homines inco^siderati. Dederu^t illi summa^ omniu^ potestate^. Et hoc me semper
grauiter vulnerauit, erant enim blasphemi, cum vocarent ipsum summu^ caput
Ecclesiae sub Christo. They which in the beginning did so much extol Henry
King of England, and which did give unto him the highest authority in the
Church, they were men which lacked circumspection, and of small consideration:
which thing (says John Calvin) did at all times offend me very much, for they
did commit blasphemy, and were blasphemers, when they did call him the supreme
Head of the Church.

M. Horn.
The collectour of your common places did (.646.) The 646. Untruth, M. Fekenham
was not beguiled, but you.
beguile you, which you vvoulde have perceived, if you had readde Master
Calvin with your own eyes. He entreats (.647.) The 647. untruth. He does
entreat, a^ shall appear.
not in that place of the Histories betvvixte the Emperors Valentinianus,
Theodosius, and Saint Ambrose. He confuteth the opinion of such as think the
Jurisdiction that Christ gave unto his Church, to be but for a time, vvhilest
the Magistrates were as yet unfaithful, and proves that the Jurisdiction of
the Church, was given of Christ to remain til his second coming, and
belongs only to the Church, and not to the Prince (.648.) The.648. Untruth.
exco^municatio^ belongs to the Bisshoppe by Christ's commission without any
further co^missio^ from the Church, as it has before been declared.
Bishop, or, Priest, without special commission from the Church. The which
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, you do so in deed, but none else beside you.
I comprehended under the first kind of cohibitiue Jurisdiction. You do M.
Calvin not double, but quadruple, yea much more vvrong about the citing of his
sentence* for as ye have untruly reported the circumstance of his sentence, so
have you hackte from the beginning thereof one material word, part of it you
have obscurely tanslated, the other part falsely, and by altering his words and
sense, ye have belied him, slaundered the ancient Bisshopes, and have avouched
M. Calvin (if those were his words and meaning, which you in your
translation Father upon him) directly against your self: which you meant
not, for ye thought (as I suppose) you had so cunningly handeled him, that he
should have served your turn. If this your evil dealing with M. Calvin,
proceeded of ignorance, for that his Latin was to fine for your gross
understanding, ye are somevvhat to be borne vvithall: but if you have thus
dealt of purpose, than your malice is over great, ye shevve your self shameless
to deal so unhonestly, and that in the sight of al men. After that M. Calvin
has proved, that our savior Christ gave the discipline of excommunication
unto the Church, to be exercised continually by the same: to the censure
whereof all estates ought to submit the^ selves, for if he be an Emperor,
he is within, or under, and not above the Church, He concludes with this
sentence: Quare illi qui vt Magistratum ornent etc. Wherefore they which to
adorn the Magistrate, do spoil the Church of this power (to exercise the
discipline of exco^municatio^) do not only corrupt Christ's sentence with a
false interpretation: but do also, not lightly condemn all the holy Bisshopes,
which were so many from the Apostles time: for so much as they (all the holy
Bisshopes) have usurped to them selves the honor and office of the (civil)
Magistrate under a false pretense or color. The first word of the sentence
which knitteth the same, as a conclusion to that, that goes before, ye have
left out. How darkely ye have translated the first part of the periode, may
appear by conference of your translation with the Authors words. The last
part ye have falsely translated, tourning the Conjunction into a Pronoune
relative, and translating this word Magistratus (vvherby Calvin means the
civil Magistrate) by these words, spiritual government, and so have clean
altered both the words and (.649.) The.649. untruth. The fence is not altered.
sense of M. Calvin, and yet shame not to belie him, saying (John Calvin
says) which he says (.650.) The.650: untruth. For he says it by the way
of an objection.
not. But it is M. Fekenham that says, and so belieth Calvin, and (.651.) The
651. untruth. M. Fekenham slau^dereth not the Fathers.
slaundereth the ancient Bishopes, as though they (for to them this, they,
has relation) had taken upon them the office of the Magistrate: as they had
done in deed, if al manner correction and judgment had belonged to the
Magistrate, and none at al to the Church, by whose commission they exercised
this jurisdiction. If this were M. Caluines saying, as ye translate him, that
they (all the holy Bisshops from the Apostles time) have usurped and taken
upon them the honor and office of Spiritual government, by a false pretext
and title made thereof, then have you alleged M. Calvin against your self,
for this sentence, if it were true (.652.) The.652. untruth. It overthrows
not M. Fekenha^s purpose, but confirms it.
overthrows your purpose, nothing more.

The.11. Chapter. How John Calvin alleged by M. Fekenham, plainly condemns
M. Horns assertion.
Stapleton.
IN all this Division, M. Horn, Vide Calui institut. editas in folio. Anno
1551. li. 4. cap. 11. fol. 451.
you continue like to your self, false and untrue. For first where you tell M.
Fekenha^ that the collector of his common places beguiled him, which he should
have perceived, if he had read Calvin with his own eyes: I answer he was not
deceived by his collector, but you are deceived by your Collector. For Calvin
entreating of Jurisdiction Ecclesiastical in the same Chapter, Cap. 11. fol.
447. Sed accidit saepenumero vt sit negligentior magistratus imo no^nunqua^
forte vt sit ipsemet castigandus: quod and Theodosio Casari contigit. Cap. 12.
fol. 454. Sic Theodosius ab Ambrosio ob caedem Thassolanicae perpetrae tam iure
communionis priuatus, etc.
in which the words recited by M. Fekenha^ are contained, allegeth out of S.
Ambrose his Epistle to the Emperor Valentinian, that the foresaid Emperor
Valentinian enacted by plain Law as we have showed, that in matters of Faith,
Bishops should be Judges. And in the said Chapter, and in the next also,
Calvin shows that S. Ambrose would not suffer Theodosius to communicate with
other. True it is therefore that (as M. Fekenha^ says) Calvin in that place
entreats of these Histories betwixt S. Ambrose, and the Emperors Theodosius
and Valentinia^: and you for denying it, have increased the huge number of your
notorious untruths.

Go we now to the allegation yt self. M. Horn complains, that the first
word of the sentence which knitteth the same as a conclusion to that that
goes before, is quite lafte out by M. Fekenham. And yet when all is done, yt
is but a poor Quare, that is, wherefore: which may be left owte withowte any
prejudice of the sentence in the world: and being put in, neither helps M.
Feke^ham, nor hinders M. Horn. In the English translation. fol. 402.
Read then good reader thus: wherefore they that do spoil, and so forth. And
then make an acco^pte what is won or what is lost by addition or subtraction of
this Quare. Yet is the first part of the periode (says M. Horn) darkely
translated. In deed the first word, How, how it comes in I know not, and yt
seems to be a little oversight of the author or some fault of the scribe easy
to be remedied, and is to be translated, thus: they that do spoil. etc. and
afterward, do not only corrupt, but do also not lightly condemn, and so
forth: the sense always notwithstanding coming to one. And as for the
conjunction turned into a pronoune: if ye read damnant quod honorem etc. which
is but a small alteration: the matter is sone amended. And all this is little or
nothing prejudicial to the whole sentence. But I perceive for lack of
substancial answer, ye are driven thus to rippe up syllables and to hunte
after terms. As for the translating of the word Magistratus, (whereby ye say
Calvin means the civil magistrate) into the word spiritual gouernmente:
whereby Master Fekenham (as ye say) has altered the words and sense of
Calvin, for the words which is a matter but of small weight, I will not
greatly stick with you: but for the altering of the sense, I find little or
none alteration. For seeing that Calvin does answer the^, that maintained al
jurisdiction and punishment to appertain to the civil magistrate, and none to
the church, and brings in for an absurdity against the^, that they that so
think, must condemn all the holy Bishops, for taking upon them the office and
honor of a Magistrate, by a false pretexte and title, in as much as this
honor and office, that old Bishops took upon them, was the authority of
exco^municatio^, which is one pri^cipal power of spiritual government, there
ca^ be no notable or prejudicial alteration of the sense it self, which every
way comes to one issue. And therefore yt is true enough, that John Calvin
says as by way of an objection, that which M. Fekenha^ auowcheth him to say:
And there is no lie therein at al, as ye imagine: Neither are the Fathers
slau^dered by M. Fekenham, as ye cauil: but if any slander be in this point,
See Hosiu^. In his book, Of the expres word of God. Foll. 47. M. Calui^^
sentence alleged by M. Fekenham condemns our act of parliament.

In the english translation. Fol. 402. page 1.


Calvin is the Father of the slander, whose words or the very sense of the^ M.
Fekenham reports. And for the same cause they do nothing overthrow M.
Fekenhams purpose, being not originallye of him proposed, but out of Calvin as
an absurdity against certain, that do challe^ge al jurisdiction to the civil
Magistrate. And therefore you in attributing these words to M. Fekenha^, as his
peculiar words, play with him as your Apology does with Cardinal Hosius:
imputing to him the heresy of the Swenkefeldians, that he recites not by his
own words, but by their own words. I say the^ these words make nothing against
M. Fekenham, but plainly against the oath, that ye maintain, and against your
act of parliame^te, that unites al jurisdiction ecclesiastical to the
Croune, and against M. Horn that mainteineth the said statute. Against whom
now I make this argument borrowed of his own Apostle John Calvin. They, which
to honor the Magistrate, do spoil the Church of this power (meaning of
excommunication) do not only with false exposition corrupt the sentence of
Christ, but also do not scle^derly co^de^ne so many holy Bishops, which have been from the time of the Apostles: that they have by false pretense usurped the
honor and office of the Magistrate. But our acts of parliament give al manner
of ecclesiastical power and jurisdiction to the Prince. Ergo, our laws
condemn all the holy Fathers and bishops: and do falsely interpret Christ's
sentence. What part of this argument ca^ ye deny? Printed in London An. 1562.
The mayor is your Apostle Caluins, eue^ according to your own english
Tra^slatio^, seen and allowed according to the order appointed in the Queen's
Majesty's Injunctions so that you ca^ by no means quarrel against it. The
minor is notoriouse by the very tenor of the oath, to the which so many have
swore^, or rather forsworen. Wherefore the conclusion must needs follow.

The parliamente gives to the prince the Supreme Government in all
ecclesiastical causes, and the authorizing of al manner ecclesiastical
jurisdiction. You and your Master Calvin, do restrain this generality. For
exco^municatio^ you say, belongs neither to Prince nor Bishops, but to the
church. Now seeing you have for this your opinion no better author, then John
Calvin, one of the archeheretiks of our time, whether his authority, though it
be very large and ample with you, and your brethern, will serve for the
interpretation of the statute, in the kings benche, I refer that, to other
that have to do therein. M. Calvin and M. Horn condemn as well old holy Bishops,
as the late act of parliamente.
On the other side, sure I am yt will not serve, when ye come before the
ecclesiastical bench of Christ's catholic church, nor of the Luthera^ Church,
no nor serve your M. Calvin neither. And this his and your interpretation, does
plainly condemn the late laws of our realm, and gives M. Fekenham and all
other a good and sufficient occasion to refuse the oath appointed by the
statute, as co^de^ning so many holy Bishops for exercising that jurisdiction,
that apperteined not to the^, but to the Prince. To the Prince I say, by you M.
Horn, who do give to the Prince al manner of jurisdiction contained in the
second kind of cohibitiue jurisdiction, in the which second kind
excommunication is expressly contained by your own Author Antonius Delphinus:
though you in reciting his words, have nipped quite away from the midst the
words expressing the same, See fol..448.
to beguile thereby your Reader, and to make him believe, that Antonius was your
Author herein. It is not then M. Feke^ham, but your Master Ihon Calvin, and
your self also, that condemn all the holy bishops, yea S. Paul and the other
Apostles to, which exercised this jurisdiction and al other jurisdiction in
ecclesiastical matters, without any warrant from the Prince, or the Church.
Namely the blessed bishop S. Ambrose for excommunicating of Theodosius. And so
al your false accusations wherewith ye charge M. Feke^ha^, redou^d truly upon
yourself.

Where you say, that Caluins Latin was to fine for M. Fekenhams gross
understanding. what a sine Latin man your self are, I refer the Reader to
this your own book, Fol. 480.
and to your articles lately set forth at Oxford. The places I have before
specified, and therefore nedelesse here to be recited again.

M. Horn. The.173. Division. page 120 b.
And again John Calvin vvriting upon Amos the Prophet, is by you alleged to
(.653) The 653. untruth. For it sereuth much more for our purpose, as shall
appear.
as little purpose: For be it that they which attributed to King Henry of
famous memory, so much authority (which grieved Calvin) were me^ not well
advised in so doing, and that they were blasphemous, that called him the
supreme head of the church (ye know who they were that first gave to him
that title and authority) yet your (.654.) The.654. untruth. This is not M.
Fekenha^s conclusion
co^clusio^ follovveth not hereof. Therefore Bishops and priests have authority
to make laws, orders, a^^ decrees, etc. to their flocks and cures, no more
tha^ of his former saying. Christ gave to his Church this authority to
exco^municat, to bind and to lovvse: Therefore Bishops and Priests may make
laws, orders, and decrees, to their flocks and cures.

Stapleton.
Calvin says in plain words, It is blasphemy to call the Prince of England
supreme head of the Church. He says also. They that so much extolled King
Henry at the beginning, soothely they wanted dew consideration. This is your
second and better Apostle M. Horn, that has brought your first Apostle Luther
almost out of conceyte. This is he M. Horn, whose books the sacramentaries,
esteem as the second ghospel. This is he M. Horn, that bears such a sway in
your congregation and convocation now, that ye direct al your procedings by his
Geneuical instructions and examples. This is he, whose institutions against
Christ, and the true divine religion, are in such price with you, that there be
few of your protesta^te fellow Bisshops that will admit any man, to any cure,
that has not read them, or will not promise to read them. The Catholics deny
your new supremacy: the Lutherans also deny it: Calvin calls it blasphemous.
How can then any Catholic man persuade his conscience to take this oath?

M. Horn is not able to answer to M. Feck. touching Calvin that says it is
blasphemy to call the Prince head of the Church.
And what say you now at length to this authority M. Horn? Mary says he: I
say, that though it be true, yet it will no more follow thereof that Bishops
may make laws, orders, and decrees, then of his former saying: that Christ
gave to the Church authority to excommunicate, to bind, and to lose. In deed
ye say truth for the one, it is but a slender argument: The Civil Magistrate
is head of the Church: Ergo, Bisshoppes may make Laws: and Master Fekenham
was never yet so ill advised and so ouersene, as to frame such mad
arguments. This argument comes fresh and new hammered out of your own
forge. But for the other part, if a man would reason thus, Bishops have
power to bind and to loose: Ergo they have power to make laws, orders and
decrees etc. he should not reason amiss: seeing that by the judgment of the
learned, under the power of binding and loosing, the power of making laws is
contained. Which also very reason forces. For who have more skill to make
laws and orders for directing of men's consciences, then such whose whole study
and office consists in instructing and refourming men's consciences? But
Master Fekenham does not reason so, but thus. It is blasphemy to call the
Prince head of the Church: Ergo Master Fekenham can not with saufe conscience
take the oath of the supremacy, and that the Prince is the supreme head. Again
the Prince has no authority or jurisdiction to bind or lose, or to
excommunicate: Ergo, M. Fekenham can not be persuaded to swear to that statute
that annexeth and unites al jurisdiction to the Prince, and to swear that the
Prince is supreme governor in all causes Ecclesiastical. These be no childish
matters M. Horn. Leave of this your fond and childishe dealings, and make us
a direct answer to the arguments as M. Fekenham proposes them to you: and
soil them well and sufficiently, and then find fault with him, if ye will,
for refusing the oath. But then am I sure, ye will not be over hasty upon him,
but will give him a breathing time for this seven years at the least, and for
your life to. For as long as your name is Robert Horn ye shall never be able
to soil them. Neither think you, that in matters of such importance, wise
men and such as have the fear of God before their eyes, will be carried away
from the Catholic faith with such kind of aunsweres.

The words of John Calvin, be manifest, and ca^ not be avoided. He says. Era^t
blasphemi, cu^ vocare^t ipsum Su^mu^ caput Ecclesiae sub Christo. They were
blasphemous, when they called him (he means king Henry.8.) the Supreme head
of the Church under Christ. ^aluin in ^mos c. 7. ^ol. 292.
And who were those that Calvin calls here blasphemous? You would M. Horn
your Reader should think, that he meaned the Papists, for you refer that
matter to M. Fekenhams knowledge, saying to him, You know who they were, and
caet. as though they were of M. Fekenhams friends, that is to say, Catholics,
as he by Gods grace is. And so full wisely bableth M. Nowel in his second
Reproufe against M. Dorman. Fol. 127.
But that Calvin means herein plainly and out of all doubt the Protestants
and his own dear brethern, it is most evident by his words immediately
following, which are these. Hoc certe fuit nimiu^: sed tamen sepultum hoc
maneat, quia peccarunt inconsiderato zelo. Suerly this was to much. But let it
lie buried, for that they offended by inconsiderate zele. Tell me now of good
fellowship M. Horn, were they M. Feckenhams friends, or youres, were they
Catholics, or Protestants, that Calvin here so gently excuses, wishing the
matter to be forgotten, and attributing it rather to want of dew
consideration, and to zele, then to wilful malice, or sinful ignorance?
Evident it is he spoke of his brethern protestants of England, and for their
sakes he wishes the matter might be forgotten. With the like passion of pity,
in his commentaries upon S. Paul to the Corinthians, when he comes to there
words alleged there of the Apostle. Hoc est corpus meum: This is my body,
remembering the ioyly concent of his brethren about that matter, he says. Non
recensebo infaelices pugnas, quae de sensu istorum verborum, Calvin: in
comment. in 1. Cor. 11.
Ecclesiam nostro tempore exercuerunt. Vtinam potius liceat perpetua obliuione
eorum memoriam obruere. I will not reaken up, the unhappy combats, that have
exercised the Church in our time, about the sense of these words. I would
rather they might ones utterly be forgotten. And by and by he rejects the
opinion of Carolostadius, calling it insul^um co^mentum, a doltish devise. I
say then of Calvin: the bemoning of the matter, betrayeth his meaning. It is
not his manner perdy, to bemone the Papists. Protestants then needs must they
be, whom Calvin there calls blasphemous.

But here note good Reader what shifts these fellows have, when they are
pressed to see the truth. M. Nowell lays all the fault to false reporters,
and as Calvin pitied him and his fellows for inconsiderat zele, so he pitieth
Calvin again for inco^siderat believing of false reporters. Fol. 127.
But what a foolish pity this was, on M. Nowells part, and how vnsauerly he
soluteth this objection, I leave it to M. Dorman, who will I doubt not,
sufficiently discover his exceeding folly herein. Thus then M. Nowell. But what
shifte has M. Horn? Forsothe full wilely and closely he steals clean away,
from the matter it self, framing to M. Feckenham an argument, which the
basest Logicioner of a hundred would be ashamed lo utter. And thus with folly
on the one side, and craft on the other side, willfulnes ouercometh, heresy
contineweth, and the objection is unanswered.

Yet to press it a little more, for such as have eyes, and shut the^ not
against the light, you shall understand, that John Calvin was offended not only
with his brethern of England, but also with those of Germany, yea and of his
own neighbors about him, for attributing to Princes the spiritual government,
which M. Horn avouches, Fol. 14.
to be the principal part of the Princes royal power. In the book and leaf
before noted he says. Sed interea sunt homines inconsiderati, qui faciu^t
illos nimis spirituales. Calvin vbi supra.
Et hoc vitium passim regnat in Germania. In his etiam regionibus nimium
grassatur. Et nunc sentimus quales fructus nascantur, ex illa radice, quod
scilicet principes et quicunque potiuntur imperio, putent se ita spirituales
esse, vt nullum sit amplius Ecclesiasticum Regimen. Et hoc sacrilegium apud eos
grassatur, quia non possunt metiri suum officium certis and legitimis finibus:
sed non putant posse se regnare, nisi abolea^t omnem Ecclesiae authoritate^,
and sint summi iudices tam in doctrina, quam in toto spirituali regimine. But
in the mean while there are unadvised persons, which do make the^ (he means
Lay Princes) to spiritual. And this oversight rayneth most in Germany. In
these Countres also it proceeds overmuch. And now we feel what fruytes
spring up of that root: verily, that Princes and al such as do bear rule,
think the^ selves now so spiritual, that there is no more any Ecclesiastical
government. And this sacrilege takes place among the^, because they can not
measure their office, within certain and lawful bounds. But are persuaded,
that their kingdom is nothing, except they abolish all Authority of the
Church, and become them selves the Supreme Judges, as well in doctrine, as in all
kind of Spiritual government. Hitherto John Calvin.

If M. Feckenham or any Catholic subject of England had said or written so
much, Fol. 106. b
you would have charged him M. Horn with an unkind meaning to the Prince and to
the State, yea and say, Fol. 4. b. and. 5. a.
that he bereueth and spolyeth the Prince of the principal part of her royal
power. But now that Calvin says it, a man by you not only esteemed, but
authorized also so far as is above said, what say you to it M. Horn, or
what can you possybly devise to say? He calls yt plain sacrilege, that
princes can not measure and limit their power, but that they must become the
supreme Judges in all Ecclesiastical government. And do not you M. Horn
defend, that princes not only may, but ought also to be the Supreme
Governors in all Ecclesiastical causes? All, I say, nay you say your self,
without exception. Fol. 104. a
For if (say you) ye except or take away any thing, yt is not all.

You the^ M. Horn that avouch so sternly, that the Prince must have al supreme
government, in matters Ecclesiastical, answer to your Master, to your
Apostle, and to your Idol John Calvin of Geneua, and satisfy his complaynte,
complaining and lamenting, that Princes will be the Supreme Judges, as well in
doctrine, as in all kind of Spiritual government. Answer to the zealous
Lutherans, and the famous liars of Magdeburge: who in their preface upon the 7.
Century, complain also full bitterly, that the lay Magistrates will be heads of
the Church, will determine dostrine, In praefat. Centur. 7.
and appoynte to the Ministers of God what they shall preach and teach, and
what form of Religion they shall follow. And is not all your preaching and
teaching, and the whole form and manner of all your Religion now in England,
enacted, established and set up by act of parliament, by the lay magistrates
only, An. 1. Eliz*
the Ministers of God, all the bishops and the inferior clergy in the
Convocation house utterly, but in vain, reclayming against it?

Speak, speak Master Morn: Is not all that you do in matters of Religion,
obtruded to Priests and Ministers by force of the temporal Law? Answer
then to Caluines complaynte. Answer to your brethren of Germany. Yea,
answer to Philippe Melanchthon the pillar and ankerhold of the civil
Lutherans, who says also, that in the Interim made in Germany, Potestas
politica extrametas egressa est. Melanchtho^ in examine ordinandoru^. Luth.
contra articulos Louan. Tom. 2.
The Civil power passed her bounds: and adds. Non sunt confundendae
functiones. The functions of both Magistrates are not to be confounded. Yea
answer to Luther him self the great gra^dsir of al your pedigree. He says
plainly. Non est Regum aut Principum etiam veram doctrinam confirmare, sed ei
subijci and seruire. It belongs not to Kings or Princes, so much as to
confirm the true doctrine, but to be subject and to obey it. See you not
here, how far Luther is from giving the supreme government in all
Ecclesiastical causes to Princes? Answer then to these M. Horn. These are no
Papists. They are your own dear brethern: Or if they are not, defye them, that
we way know, of what sect and company you are. What? will you in matters of
Religion stand post alone? Will you so rent and tear a sonder the whole Coat
of Christ, the unity of his dear spouse the Church, that you alone of England,
contrary, not only to all the Catholic Church, but also contrary, to the chief
M. of Geneua John Calvin, contrary to the Chief Masters of the Zealous
Lutherans Illiricus and his fellows, contrrary to the Chief M. of the Civil
Lutherans Philip Melanchton, yea and contrary to the father of the^ al Martin
Luther, briefly contrary to al sorts and sects of Protestants, you will alone,
you only, I say, and alone, defend this most Barbarous Paradoxe, of Princes
supreme government in all Ecclesiastical causes, all, as you say without
exception? Sirs. If you list so to stand alone against all, and by Oath to hale
men to your singular Paradoxe, not only to say with you, but also to swear that
they think so in conscience, get you also a Heaven alone, get you a God
alone, get you a Paradise alone. Undoubtedly and as verily as God is God, seeing
in the eternal bliss, of all other felicities peace and love must needs be
one, either you in this world must draw to a peace and love with all other
Christians, or you must not look to have part of that bliss with other
Christians, except you alone think, you may exclude al other: and that all the
world is blind, you only seeing the light, and that all shall go to hell,
you only to heaven.

O M. Horn. These absurdites be to gross and palpable. If any Christianity be
in men, yea in your self, you and they must needs see it. If you see it, shut
not your eyes against it. Be not like the stone hearted Jews, that seeing would
not see, and hearing would not hear the Savior and light of the world.

To conclude: Mark and bear away these.ij. points only. First, that in this so
weighty a matter, to the which only

And is it not great maruail, that in the course of so many hundred years sense
that Princes have been christened, and in the compass of so many Countres,
lands, and dominions, no one Emperor, King, or Prince can be showed, to have
used, or practiced the like government by you so forceably maintained? Yea, to
touch you nerer, is it not a great wonder, that whereas a long time before the
days of King Henry the.8. there was a statute made, The Statut of
Praerogatiuae Regis.
called Praerogatiuae Regis, containing the prerogatives, privileges and
preeminences due to the Kings Royal person and to the Crown of the Realm,
that I say in that statute so especially and distinctly comprising them, no
manner word should appear of his supreme Government in all Ecclesiastical
causes, which you M. Horn do auouche to be a principal part of the Princes
Royal power? If it be as you say, a principal part of the Princes Royal power,
how chau^ceth it, that so principal a part was not so much as touched in so
special a statut of the Princes prerogatives and preemine^ces? Shall we think
for your sake that the whole Realm was at that time so injurious to the King
and the Crown, as to defraude and spoil the Prince of the principal part of
his Royal power? Or that the King himself that then was of so small courage,
that he would dissemble and wink thereat, or last of al, that none of all the
posterity sense would ones in so long a time complain thereof? Again at what
time King Henry the.8. had by Act of parliament this Title of Supreme head of
the Church granted unto him, how chances it, that none then in all the
Realm was found, to challenge by the said Statut of Praerogatiuae Regis, this
principal part (as you call it) of the Princes royal power, or at the lest, if
no plain challe^ge could be made thereof, to make yet some propable deductio^
of some parcel or branch of the said Statut, that to the King of old time
such right appertayned? Or if it never before appertayned, how can it be a
principal part of the Princes Royal power? What? wa^ted al other Princes before
our days the principal part of their royal power? And was there no absolut
Prince in the Realm of England before the days of King Henry the.8. We will not
M. Horn, be so injurious to the Noble Progenitors of the Queen's May. as to
say or think they were not absolut and most Royal Princes. They were so, and by
their Noble Acts as well abroad as at home, showed the^ selves to be so. They
wa^ted no part of their Royal power, and yet this Title or prerogative they
never had.

This has been your own devise. And why? Why the Oath was devised.
Forsothe to erect your new Religion by Authority of the Prince, which you
knew by the Churches Authority could never have been erected. And so to provide
for one particular case, you have made it M. Horn a general rule, that al
Princes ought and must be Supreme governors in all ecclesiastical causes. Which
if it be so, then why is not King Philip here, and King Charles in France
such Supreme Governors? Or if they be, with what conscience, do your
brethren the Guets here, and the Huguenots there disobey their Supreme
Gouuernours, yea and take arms against their Princes Religion?

What? Be you protestants brethern in Christ, Note the Absurdity.
and yet in Religion be you not brethren? Or if you be brethren in religion
also, how does one brother make his Prince supreme Governor in all
Ecclesiastical causes without any exception or qualificatio^ of the Princes
person, and the other brother deny his Prince to be such Supreme governor, yea
and by arms goes about to exterminat his Princes laws in matters
ecclesiastical? Solute al those doubts, and avoid al these absurdities M.
Horn, and then require us to give ear to your book, and to swear to your
Oath.

The.174. Division. fol. 121. a.
M. Fekenham
Athan. in epist. ad solitariam vitam agentes.
Hosius Episcopus Cordubensis, qui Synodo Nicenae primae interfuit, sic habet,
sicut testatur D. Athanasius aduersus Constantium Imp. Si istud est iudicium
Episcoporum, quid commune cum eo habet Imperator? Sin contra, ista minis
Caesaris conflantur, quid opus est hominibus titulo Episcopis? Quando a condito
aeuo auditum? quando iudicium Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore
accepit? aut quando vnquam pro iudicio agnitum? Plurimae antehac Synodi
fuerunt, multa iudicia Ecclesiae habita sunt. Sed neque patres istiusmodi res
principi persuadere conati sunt, nec princeps se in rebus Ecclesiasticis
curiosum praebuit: nunc autem nouum quoddam spectaculum ab Ariana heresi
editur. Conuenerunt enim Haeretici and Constantius Imperator, vt ille quidem
sub praetextu Episcoporum, sua potestate aduersus eos quos vult vtatur.

M. Horn.
As it is very true, that Hosius Bisshoppe of Corduba in Spain, was in the
first council of Nice, so is it as untrue, that these be his words, which
you have cited in his name, for they be the sayings of Athanasius, and not of
Hosius. Wherein ye have done Athanasius threefolde wrong, first to attribute
his writings to an other, then also to cause him therein to bear false
witness (.655.) The.655. untruth. Athanasius bears no witness against him
self but against you.
against him self, and thirdly, in that ye have left out the first word of
his sentence, which is a material word, and brings in this his saying,
as a reason of that which goes before. Athanasius finds him self grieved,
that both he and many other Godly Bisshops for the truth it self, suffered
much cruelty, and were wrongfully condemned, not according to the order of
the Ecclesiastical judgment, but by the cruel threats of the Emperor
Constantius being an Arrian and a fierce mainteinour of the Arianisme. Who
notvvithstanding subtly covered his ungodly dealing under the pretense of a
judgment or sentence past by Bisshops in Synod or convocation, which he
called Episcopale iudicium, a Bisshoply judgment. But says Athanasius,
Constantius can not so hide him self, seeing that there is at hand that can
plainly bewray his wilines. for if this be the judgment of Bisshoppes, what
has the Emperor to do therewith? But if on the contrary side these things be
brought to pass through Caesar's threats, what neadeth men, that have but the
name of Bisshoopes, etc. There are two things necessarily to be considered,
for to understand rightly the true meaning of Athanasius in this place by you
alleged: first what was required to that which he calls the judgment
belonging to Bisshoppes, or the Bisshoply judgment. Than what was the
dooinges of Constantius, pretending a judgment of Bis^hoppes. Liberius the
Bishop of Rome, as Athanasius reports in this same Epistle requires in a
Synod ecclesiastical, that it be free from fear, far from the palaice, where
neither the Emperor is present, neither the Earl or Captain th^usteth in
him self, nor yeat the Judge does threaten. He means, that it be free from
fear, threats, and without this, that the Emperor or Rulers, do limitte or
Mark that M. Horn misliketh now, that Emperors should prescribe to bisshops.
Yet his examples before tended most to prove they did so: and the Oath
imports, that Princes may prescribe etc.
prescribe to the Bisshops what they should judge. This appears more plainly
by S. Ambrose, who also speaks of the like matter, yea under the same
Prince, saying: Co^stantinus set forth no Laws before hand, but gave free
judgment to the Priests. The self same also did Co^stantius (in the begi^ning
of his regine) but that which he well bego^, was otherwise ended. For the
Bishops at the first had written the sincere faith, but when as certain me^
vvil judge of the faith within the Palaice, he means after the opinion of
the Courtiers and Then S. Ambrose means against you, as Athanasius did before.
prescription of the Prince, otherwise it was not unlawful to judge of
matters, concerning faith within the Princes Palaice, the Prince also being
present, for the first Nicen council was holde^ within the Emperors
Palayce, and he him self was present amongst the^: They brought this to
pass, that those judgments of the Bisshops were changed by
Circumscriptions. Then is required in a Synod (says he) that the only fear
of God, and the institutions of the Apostles, do suffice to al things. Next,
that the right faith be approved, and Heresies, with the mainteiners thereof,
be cast out of the counsel, and than to judge of the persons that are accused
of any fault. So that the Bisshoply session or judgment, must have freedom,
must judge by the only word of God, must have the Bisshops that do judge to
be of the right faith, and must first examine the Religion and faith of the
party accused, and then his faith. Constantius, who notvvithstanding that he
did prete^de a bissoply judgment used none of these obseruances, but the clean
contrary, for as Athanasius co^playneth in this Epistle, the emperor wrought
all together with treates, menassing the Bisshops, other to subscribe against
Athanasius, or to depart from their Churches: Who so gaynsaid the
subscription, received to reward, either death or exile. He without any
persuasio^ with reasons co^pelleth al me^ by force and violence, in so much as
many Bisshops afterward excused them selves, that they did not subscribe of
their own volu^tary, but were compelled by force. Whereas (says he) the
faith is not to be set forth with svvoordes or darts, or by vvarrelike
force, but by cou^sailing and persuading. He in the stead of Gods word, used
his own vvil, appointing and prescribing what should be determined, answering
the godly bisshops, who objected against his unorderly doings, the
Ecclesiastical Cano^, at quod ego volo pro Canone sit. Let my vvil stand for
the Cano^: Pretending a judgment of Bisshops, he does what so ever likes him
self. Whereas Hosius says, cyted by Athanasius in this Epistle: The Emperor
ought to learn these things of the Bisshops, and not to co^mau^d or teach
the^ what to judge in this kind of judgment, for the Prince should not shevve
him self so busy or curious in Ecclesiastical things, that his vvil and
pleasure should rule or guide the^, in stead of Gods word, and the godly
Canons of the fathers. Co^sta^tius would have no other bisshops but Aria^s,
which were no bisshops in deed, as Athanasius says, and much less apt to
judge of the matter, touchi^g a principal article of our faith, or of the
faithful bishop Athanasius: and taki^g his heresy as an undoubted truth, that
might not be called into question, he sought by all means, to have Athanasius
condemned, and al bisshops to refuse his communion, and to communicate with
the Arians. These disorderly deali^gs of the emperor, Athanasius co^de^neth, as
directly against the order of Ecclesiastical sessio^ or Synod, how so ever he
pretended under the color of the bisshoply judgment, to abuse his own power
and authority after his own lust against whom he vvoulde. You would have
it seem to the ignorant, that Athanasius mind in this place were to deny,
that Princes should (.656.) The.656. untruth. Not to meddle, but to bear the
Supreme Rule in synods:

That Athanasius denies. And that your doings do mai^tayn. Li. 2. c. 15


meddle or deal in Ecclesiastical things or causes, which is far from his
meaning: for he him self with many other godly bisshops, as I have shevved
before, did acknovvledge the Princes authority herein, and in this same epistle
he him self confesses this Emperors authority to call councils, and cites
Hosius also, who enclineth to that purpose, both of them confessing, that
Constans and Constantinus The^perours, did call all the bisshops to the council,
which he calls Sardice^se consilium: about the accusations and crimes laid
in against Athanasius. And Theodoretus affirms, that this Emperor
Co^stantius called a Synod at Millaine about such like matter, at whose
calling the faithful bishops assembled, parents regio edicto, obeying the
Kings Summons: which they would not have done, if it had been No man says,
it is unlawful to have any doings, but to have al government as, the Oath
pronou^ceth.
unlawful for him to have had any doings about councelles. But when he
abused his authority in the council, as though his power had been absolute,
without limits or bounds, vvilling them, yea compelling them, to do after
his will against good consciencience, they would not obey him. Quin etiam
palam praesentem regem coargueba^t impij and iniusti imperij, but did openly
reprove the King for his wicked and unjust rule or commandment: vvherby is
manifest, that Athanasius, speaks (.657.) The.657. untruth. Athanasius
reproves utterly the Princes Authority in Ecclesiastical causes.
not against the Princes authority in Ecclesiastical matters, but against his
tyranny, and the abusing of that authority, which God has given him,
vvhervvith to mynister unto Gods vvil, and not to rule after his own lust:
they commend the authority, but they reprove the disorderly abuse thereof.
Now let us see how this saying of Athanasius helps your cause. Constantius
the Emperor dealt unorderly and after his own lust against Athanasius and
others, pretending nevertheless the judgment of Bisshops, which Athanasius
misliketh, as is plain in this place avouched: Ergo, Bisshoppes and Priests
may make laws, decrees, orders, and exercise the second kind of Cohibitiue
Jurisdiction over their flocks and cures, without commission from the Prince
or other authority: I doubt not but ye see such fault in this sequel that
ye (.658.) The.658. untruth. It is your own sequel, not M. Fekenhams.
are, or at least ye ought, to be ashamed thereof.

The.12. Chap. Containing a Confutation of M. Horns answer, made to the
words of Athanasius.
Stapleton.
HEre is now one other allegation by M. Fekenham proposed out of Athanasius.
Hosius the Bishop of Corduba (says M. Fekenham) who was present at the first
Nicene Council, has these words, as Athanasius writing against the Emperor
Constantius does testify. Athanasius in Epist. ad solitaria^ vitam age^tes.
If this be a judgment of Bisshops, what has the Emperor to do there with?
But one the contrary part, if these things be wrought by the threats and
menaces of Emperor: what neade is there of any men besides, to bear the Bare
Title of Bisshoppes? When from the beginning of the world has it been heard
of, that the judgment of the Church took his authority of the Emperor? Or
when has this at any time been agnised for a judgment? Many synodes have been
before this time: many Councels has the Church holden: but the time is yet to
come, Athan. in epist. ad solit. vitam agentes.
that either the fathers went about to persuade the Prince any such matter, or
the Prince showed him self to be curiouse in matters of the Church. But now
we have a spectacle never seen before: browght in by Arrius heresye. The
heretics and the Emperor Constantius are assembled, that he may under the
color and title of Bisshops, use his power, against whom it pleases him. M.
Horn to this allegation answers, that M. Fekenham does Athanasius threfolde
wrong. etc.

To the first wrong I reply, that putting the case that these are not Hosius
his words, but Athanasius: M. Fekenhams matter is nothing thereby hindered, but
rather furthered: considering the excellent authority, that Athanasius has and
ever had in the Church. And Hosius has even in the said epistle of
Athanasius, and but one leaf before, a much like sentence, proceeding of a
courageous and a godly boldenes. Meddle not you Sir Emperor (says he to the
forsayed Constantius) with matters Ecclesiastical, neither command us in this
part, but rather learn these things of us. God has committed to you the
Empire, and to us those things that appertain to the Church. And therefore,
Ath. indict. epist. ad solit.
even as he that maligneth and spiteth your Empire, does contrary Gods
ordinance: so take ye head, least ye in meddling with matters of the Church, do
not run into some great offense. Whereas (for the second wrong done to
Athanasius) you say, that M. Fekenham has left one material word out of
Athanasius, ye have turned that word, to one half hundred words, with a
nedelesse declaration the space of one whole leaf at the least. And yet you
never come nigh the matter. Beside (such is your wisdom) ye allege in this
your extraordinary gloss an epistle of S. Ambrose, which does so confirm M.
Fekenhams present allegation, Qua^do audisti cleme^tiss. imperat. in causa
fidei laicos de Episcopo iudicasse? Et mox. Certe si vel scripturarum seriem
diuinarum, vel vetera tempora retractemus, quis est qui abnuat in causa fidei,
in causa inqua^ fidei, Episcopos solere de imperatoribus, non imperatores, de
Episcopis iudicare?
and is so agreeable to Athanasius, and so disagreable to the chief principle
of all this your book, that I marvel that ever ye would ones name it, unless ye
never read it your self, but trusted the collector of your common places. For
the law of Valentinian, whereof we spoke before, is in that epistle, to the
young Valentian. When ever heard you (says he) that in a cause of faith lay me^
gave judgment upon a Bishop? If we will peruse and ouerloke, either the order
of holy write, or the Ancient time: who is there that will deny, that in
matter of Faith, I say, says S. Ambrose, in matter of faieth, but that the
Bishops are wont to judge upon the Emperors, and not the Emperors upon
the Bishops? He says again afterward: If there be any conference to be had
touching the faith, Et postea. Si confere^dum est de fide, sacerdotum debet
esse ista collatio.
it must be had among the Priests. And how this doctrine of S. Ambrose which
is the doctrine of the catholic Church, and most conformable to the saying of
Athanasius, agrees either with your late act of parliament, whereby the
catholic bishops were deposed, or with the doctrine of your book, every man may
see. Yea S. Ambrose says yet farther, that the Emperor Vale^tinia^, whose
son (being enduced thereto by the Arrian bishop Auxe^tius) would needs call
the bishop before his benche, and Judge over him, made an express law, that:
In matter of faith, Ambros. lib. 5. epi. 32.

Ibidem.


or of any ecclesiastical order, he should judge, that were neither by office
unequal, neither by right unlike. That is as S. Ambrose him self expounds
it. Sacerdotes de Sacerdotibus voluit iudicare. He would have Priests to
judge over Priests. And not only in matters ecclesiastical or of faith, but
says S. Ambrose: Si alias argueretur Episcopus, and moru^ esset examinanda
causa, etia^ hanc voluit ad Episcopale iudiciu^ pertinere. If otherwise also a
Bishop were accused, and a question touching manners were to be examined, this
question also that Emperor would have to belong to the trial and Judgment
of Bishops. Here you have, that yt belongs not to Princes to be judges upon
priests either in matters of faith, either in matters touching living and
ma^ners: which does utterly destroy al your new primacy, and your late act of
Parliament, deposing the right Bishops, as I have said. And we are well
content that councelles should be free from al fear, and that Princes
should not appointe or prescribe to Bishops, how they should judge, as ye
declare out of Athanasius and S. Ambrose. Let this be as much material as ye
will to a bishoply iudgme^te. But I pray you, is there nothing else, What
material thing M. Horn has left out touching this story of the deposition
of Athanasius.
that Athanasius says is material to the same? Yes truly. One of these
material things was, that this Council was made void and annichilated, for
that Julius the Pope did not consent to yt, as the canons of the Church
require: which command, Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 8. and 17.

Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 8.10. and 11.

Trip. lib. 4. cap. 9.15 and 19.


that neither council be kept, nor Bishops condemned withowte the Authority
of the Bishop of Rome. And therefore Julius did rebuke the Arrians, that they
did not first of all require his advice, which they knew was the Custom they
should, and take their definition from Rome. Athanas. in Apolog. 2. contra
Arrianos. Oportuit secundum canonem, and non ist^ modo iudicium fieri: oportuit
scribere nobis omnibus, vt ita ab omnibus quod iustum esset decerneretur. and
mox. An ignari estis hanc consuetudinem esse vt primum nobis s^ribatur, vt hinc
quod iustum est, definiri possit? Quapropter si is it uc huiusmodi suspitio in
episcopum concepta fuerit, id huc ad nostram Ecclesiam referri oportuit.
This Pope also did restore Athanasius again to his Bishopprike, as your
author Athanasius him self declares out of the said Julius epistle to the
Arrians. See Master Horn what a material thing ye have left out, so
material I say, that it makes all your synodes, and all your deprivations of
the Catholyke Bishops void: as were the doings of the Arrians against
Athanasius. Now as you have left out these material things: so have ye
browght forth no material thing in the world to avoid Athanasius authority.
And therefore for lack of sound and sufficient answer, ye are driven to make
penish arguments of your own, and then to father them upon M. Fekenham saying
to him. I doubt not, but that ye see such fault in your fond sequel, that
ye are, or at the least wise owght to be, ashamed thereof.

But the Sequel of M. Feckenha^ is this. He says to you with Athanasius: when
was yt heard from the creation of the world, that the iudgme^te of the Church
should take his authority of the Prince? When was this agnised for a judgment?
And so forth. If the Prince be supreme head in all causes ecclesiastical, Mark
M. Feke^hams inevitable argument.
if al jurisdiction ecclesiastical, be united and annexed to the crown: if the
synodical decrees of Bishops be nothing worth withowt the kings express
consent: if catholic Bishops be deposed by the Princes commission: if lay men
only may alter the old ancient religion (al which things with other like are
now done and practiced in England) the^ does the Church judgment in England,
take his authority of the prince and lay me^. And then may we well, and full
pitifully cry out, when was there any such thing from the creation of the
world heard of before? This this, is M. Fekenhams argument M. Horn: this is
his just and godly scruple that staieth him, that he runs not headlong to
the devil, in taking an unlawful oath, against his conscience: settled upon no
light, but upon the weighty growndes, of holy scripture, of general councils,
of the holy and blessed fathers, finally of the custom and belief of the whole
catholic Church: and namely among all other of this authority brought out of
Athanasius: Athanas. apol. 2. co^tra Arri. Qua front co^uentu^ synodi
appellare aude^t, cui Comes pr^sedit?
who also in an other place says, that the Arrians assembles could not be
called synodes, wherein the Emperors deputy was president.

Wherefore it is a most open an impudent lie that ye say, that M. Feke^ham
causes Athanasius to bear false witness against him self: how prove you this,
good Sir? By this, say you, that yt is evident by Athanasius and Hosius to,
that Princes have to meddle and deal in causes or things ecclesiastical,
namely in calling of councelles, for by this Constantius and his brother
Constans the Sardicense council was summoned. A worthy solution perdy for you,
and a wonderful contradictio^ for Athanasius. Ye show us, that they called
this counsel: but that there was any thing spoken or done in that counsel by
Athanasius (who was there present) or other, that should cause Athanasius to be
contrary to him self, ye show nothing. Shall I the^ answer you, as M. Jewel
answers M. D. Harding, naming this council, In his reply Fol. 240.
but referring the Reader to the council it self? This counsel, says M. Jewel
is brought in, al in a mummery, saying nothing. And then he adds: yet
forasmuch as these men think yt good policy to huddle up their matters in
the dark, it will not be amiss, A preti^ mu^mery of M Ievvel and M. Horn
concerning the Sardice^se council.
to rippe them abroad, and bring the^ forth to light. And yet for all this
great bravery and brag, he leaves the matter of this counsel as he fownd yt,
and speaks no more of yt, one way or other. Me think M. Horn, that you
tread much after his steps. Ye name the counsel, but ye tell us not one
material word for your purpose out of it. I will therefore furnishe that, that
lacks in M. Jewel and you: especially seeing the matter is such as touches
the deposing of Athanasius, that is, our present matter, and withal, all this
your present Treatise and answer to M. Fekenham.

I say the^ first: the conditions that ye require in a Bishoplie judgment were
here exactly observed. This counsel was far and free from al fear, far
from the palace. Here were present no Cou^ties with souldiars as it was wo^t
to be in the Arria^s synodes, to extort the consent of the Bishops. Whereupon
the Arria^ bishops, who were called to this counsel, Ath. indict. epistol. ad
solit. vitam agentes.
and came thither in great number, seeing this, and seeing Athanasius present
(whom they had unjustly deposed) yea and ready to answer the^, and to disprove
their wro^gful doings, and finding their own co^sciencs withal gilty, had no
more heart to abide the trial of this free Synod, then you and your other
Protestante brethren had to appear in the Council of Trent. And therefore full
pretely shronke and stole away. Theodor. li. 2. ca. 8. Niceph. li. 9. c. 12.
Id quod Constans sic petierat Consta^tius aute^ assenserat.
The order of this Council was a very Synodicall and an Episcopal judgment.
Neither Emperor was present, nor any deputy for him, that I have yet read
of, though at the request of Constans the Catholic Emperor, and by the assent
of Constantius the Arrian, that council was assembled. Neither was there either
in the time of the council, or afterward the council being ended, any consent
or confirmation required of the Emperor: and yet were there a great number of
Bishopes excommunicated and deposed to. The sentence of Pope Julius, which, in
a council at Rome a little before, restored Athanasius and other Bishopes by the
Arrians in the East unjustly thruste out, Vide epist. Council. Sard. in
Theodor. li. 2 ca. 8. Tripart. li. 4. c. 24. Athanas. in epist. ad solit. vita^
agentes. Cano. 4.5 7.8. and 13.
was exequuted. Many laws, orders, and decrees touching matters
ecclesiastical were in this council ordained. Namely for deposing of Bishopes,
and placing others in their romes, in all which yt was decreed, that if a
Bishope deposed by his fellow Bishops at home (for Princes deposed none in
those days, though banish and expel they did) would appeal to the Bishop
of Rome, that then the Bishops who had deposed the party appealing should send
informations to the Pope, and that if he thought good, the matter should be
tried a fresh, otherwise the former judgment to take effect. For final
decision also of such appellatio^s made to Rome, it was in this general counsel
decreed, that the Pope might, either appoint co^m^ssioners to sit upon the
matter, in the Court from whence the Appeal came, or if he thought so meet*
to send legates from his own Consistory to decide the matter. In like manner it
was there decreed, that Bishopes should not haunte the Emperors palaice,
except for certain godly suites there mentioned, or invited ^hi^her of the
Emperor himself. Also of Bishopes not to be made, but such as had continewed
in the inferior orders, certain years, etc. it was in that council decreed.
All which and diverse other ecclesiastical matters that council determined,
without any superior Authority from the prince.

And so to conclude, this one Council that ye bring in, This counsel was
holden. An. 350.
but in a mummerie, your false visor being taken from your face, opens what
ye are, and answers fully all this your book: as well for the principal matter,
that the Pope is the supreme head, and that Bishopes may appeal to him from
all quarters, as that the Prince has no necessary voice in Councelles.
Again, that as well the first as the second cohibitiue jurisdiction (as you
divide them) belongs to the Bishopes.

Last of al your great principle, M. Horn and Caluins opinion confuted by
the practice of Sardice^^^ Council. Vide Ath^nas. ibide^.
that you and your M. Calvin so stronglye build upon, that no excommunication
ought to be made without the consent of the congregation, where the party
that is or shall be excommunicated dwells, is utterly destroyed For Theodorus,
Narcissus, Achatius, Stephanus, Vrsacius, Valens, Menaphontes, and Georgiu^,
Arrian Bishopes, were in this council deposed, and excommunicated, without any
consent or foreknowledge of the congregation where they dwelled. And as this
was done in this council against these men: So was the like done in other
councelles against many other heretics. Wherefore this is a most absurd
proposition of Calvin, that M. Horn his scholar so hardly maintains. The
story of this counsel is at large declared by Athanasius him self, and most
strongly confirms that his former saying, that it is no Council of Bishopes
which has his authority of the Prince. Neither can M. Horn make light of
this Council as well for the foresaid cause, as for that it was populouse and
frequented by a great number of Bishops of thyrtie and five Provinces there
present, Cano. 21. Omnis synodus dixit: vniuersa quae constituta su^t Catholica
ecclesia in vniuerso orb diffusa custodiat.
of the which our Britannia was one, and as well Catholic for faith, as
ancient for time, and such a one as their Decrees bind the whole Church.
And the whole Synod says: Let all the Catholic Church dispersed through
out the world, keep and observe all that we have ordained. And thus much
have I said, to fill up your empty box of the Sardicense Council, that you
and M. Jewel play the iolie mummers withal.

The.175. Division. page 123. a.
M. Fekenham.
Hier. 1.
Almighty God says by his Prophet Hieremie, which was both a Prophet and
a Priest. Ecce dedi verba mea in ore tuo: Ecce co^stitui te super ge^tes and
super regna, vt euellas and destruas, and disperdas, and dissipes, and
aedifices, Greg. Nazian. de Hier. dict. oratioe 18. ad subditos timore
perculsos, and imperatore^ irasentem.
and pla^tes. Gregorius Nzia^zenus sermonede dictis Hieremiae ad Iulianum
Imperatorem: putas ne patimini vt veru^ vobiscum agam, suscipitis ne libertatem
verbi, and libenter accipitis, quod lex Christi sacerdotali vos nostrae
subiecit potestati, atque justice tribunalibus subdit? Dedit enim nobis
potestatem, dedit principatum multo perfectiorem principatibus vestris, aut
nunquid iustum videtur, si cedat spiritus carni, si a terrenis coelestia
superentur, si diuinis praeferantur humana? Sed patienter quaeso accipite
libertatem nostram. Scio te ouem esse gregis mei, scio te intra sacra altaria
cum veneratione subijci manibus sacerdotis, etc.

Ezech. 34
And by this Prophet Ezechiel almighty God says: Vae Pastoribus Israel, quod
infirmu^ fuit, non consolidastis, quod aegrotu^, non sanastis: quod confractum
non alligastis: quod abiectum, non reduxistis: quod perierat, non quaesistis.
Into the which maledictions and curses, the Bishops and Priests must
needs incur, if they have no Jurisdiction over their flock, if they may
not visit them, if they may not refourme them, if they may not order and
correct them, at all times as they shall see cause.

Chrysostomus Homil. 5. de verbis Esaiae, Chrysostom. Hom. 5. de verb. Esa.
vbi Sacerdotem astruit esse medium inter Deum and Hominem, nullumque honorem
in terris illius honori posse conferri.

And therefore here to conclude this my objection unto your L. answer, I
shall here finishe the same, saying with the blessed Martyr Ignatius, S John
the Evangelists disciple. Quod nemo praeter Episcopum aliquid agat eorum quae
ad Ecclesiam pertinent. Ign. epist. 7. ad Smyrne^s.
And so to adioyne hereunto the saying of S. Augustine, who in speakinge
Contra Iulianum, ait de Doctoribus Ecclesiae: quod credunt, credo: quod tenent,
teneo: quod docent, doceo: quod praedicant, praedico: istis cede, and mihi
cedes. etc.

M. Horn
In all this part there is not (.659.) The.659 untruth. Most impudent, as
shall appear.
one sentence, that can be drawn by any force to help your cause. It
suffised you, to heap up a sort of testimonies together, to make a shevve,
allthough nothing to the purpose. Yea the words spoken to the Prophet
Hieremie makes plainly (.660.) The.660. untruth. After the same manner, as
before.
against you. For they shevve, that the ministers, in Gods Church, have
authority to pluck up by the roots, and to destroy euilles and the
kingedome of Satan, to plant good things, and to edify the Church, as the
gloss enterlined has it, or all manner wicked and false doctrine, and what so
ever the heavenly Father has not planted, as the gloss ordinary expounds it.
But the means whereby this jurisdiction and authority is exercised, is
(.661.) The.661. untruth. The Jurisdiction of church Ministers is not limited
in these words
limited and appointed in these words: Behold I have put my words in thy
mouth, says God to Hieremy. So that other jurisdiction over people and
kingdoms, than the preachinge of Gods word Hieremy had not. Hieremyes
mouth is touched, says the gloss ordinary, and the Lords words are given
(to him) that he should receive boldenes to preach. Of this boldenes to
preach the word of God, speaks Gregory Nazianzen. in the place by you
alleged. After he had comforted his hearers, he tourneth his speech to the
Princes, and such as were in authority, must we spare you (says he)
because of your power, as though we feared, or were ashamed of the liberty
given us of Christ? Christ's law has made you subject to my power, and to my
judgment seat. He speaks of a spiritual subjection by faith, and obedience
to the minister, exhortinge, comfortinge, and edifiing to eternal life by the
word of God. And he adds more expressly, what manner of rule or empire he
challenges, namely such as brings the fleashe to be subject to the spirit,
such as makes earthly things subject to Heavenly. Joan. 10.
And the subjection he requires is none other, than such as the spiritual
sheep owes to the spiritual pastor, whose rule and subjection Christ
utters in this sentence: My sheep hear my voice and follow me. I know
says Nazianzene to the Emperor, that thou art a sheep of my flock, and
thereupon he concludes that he must, boldly preach the word to the
Emperor, and that he on the other side is subject thereto and ought to obey.
And This is so in deed but not this only.
this is the propre Jurisdiction that belongs to the Bishops and Priests,
the vvh^che if they exercise with all possible diligence and faithfulness, they
shall escape the curses that the Prophet Ezechiel menasseth: As co^traryvvise
if they use never so princely your popish, or rather pompous Canon Law
jurisdiction, which consists in Be not your Co^sistories Courtly and
pompous M. Horn? Remember your self, I pray you.
Courtly consistories, and Forinsecal judgments, far disagreing from the
right jurisdiction of true and Christianlike Prelates, they shall not in the
end escape the deserved maledictio^s, and curses threatened to such by the
Prophet Ezechiel.

The.13. Chapter. Of M. Feckenhams last Authorities alleged out of holy
Scripture, and out of certain doctors, for proof of the Bishops
Jurisdiction in matters Ecclesiastical.
Stapleton.
THIS part of M. Fekenhams objection (being the very last, contains vj.
authorities: two taken out of the holy scripture, four out of the holy
Fathers, Gregory Nazianzene, Chrysostom, Ignatius and S. Augustine. But in all
this says M. Horn, there is no one sentence, that may be drawn by any force
to help M. Fekenha^ his cause. This is a short and a bold asseueration M.
Horn: let us then see by the examination and discussing of your answer,
whether that M. Fekenhams allegation be no stronger the^ ye imagine. Thus says
the^ God to the Prophet Hieremie. Hiere. c. 1.
Behold, I have put my words in thy mowth: behold this day have I set thee,
over the nations and over kingdoms to pluck up, to root out, to destroy, and
to throw down, to build, and to pla^te. And Ezechiel the prophet cries out.
Woe be unto the shepherdes of Israel. The weak have ye not strengthened, the
sick have ye not healed, neither have ye bownde up the broken, Ezech. 34.
nor brought again that which was driven away: neither have ye sowght that
which was lost. Gregory Naziangene speaks unto the Emperor in this sort. Will
ye suffer me to deal truly with you? Will ye receive the liberty of Gods word,
will ye gladly take yt, that Godds law does subject you to our priestlie
power, and to our lawful judgment seats? For certai^ly God has given unto us
a power he has given us a pri^cipality, much more perfect the^ is yours. Or
does it seem to agree with justice, that the spirit should yield to the
flesh, that earthly things should overcome heavenly things, and that worldly
things shoulbe be preferred to godly things? I know that ye are a sheep of
my flock: I know that at the holy aulters, ye do submit your self under the
Priests hands with reverence. These three authorities M. Horn would remove
out of the way with one simple solution: that neither Hieremie, nor Ezechiel,
nor Gregory Nazianzene spoke of any other jurisdiction, then of boldly
preaching Gods word, to the which the Emperor is subject and owght to obey.
And this is the proper jurisdiction that belongs to Bishops, which if they
diligently exercise, they neade not fear Ezechiel his curses.

But o Lord God, what manner of answer is this? Namely for one that takes
upon him, to be him self a pastor and a prelate of the Church? Is there no
other M. Horn but preaching prelacy in Christ's Church? It is to be wished,
that men would give so good, and so atte^tiue ear to their spiritual
pastors, that by their earnest preaching they would reform them selves. But
what if after many and ernest admonitio^s, the party be never a whit the
better, but rather endured, either to continewe his vitiouse living, or his
pestilent and ungodly teaching? Shall not the pastor proceed to
excommunication? Or if the party be a spiritual man, to deposition and
depriuatio^? Or think ye, that all men do amend by words only? Or think
ye, that the pastor is excused, if he proceed no farther? No, no M. Horn,
your doctrine is insensible, absurd and most repugnant to all the examples and
practices that we find in the Church from Christ's time to our own, that I
ever read or heard of and most evidently co^fou^ded by our prophet Hieremie.
In whose words we have a lively pattern of the bishoplie office, practiced by
S. Paul and the Apostles, by general and national councelles: and by an
infinite number of holy learned and ancient Bishops: 1. Cor. 4. and. 5.

Galath. 5. Vtina^ abscinda^tur qui vos conturbant. 2. Cor. 10.


by S. Paul in the Corinthian, and in Alexander and Himeneus, of whom we have
spoken before. I would to God, says S. Paul, they that disquiet you, were
quite cut of. Hear M. Horn, what he says of this authority. Arma militiae
nostrae non carnalia sunt, sed potentia Dei ad destructionem munitionum,
consilia destruentes, and omne^ altitudinem extollentem se aduersus scie^tiam
Dei, et in captiuitatem redigentes omnem intellectum in obsequium Christi, and
in promptu habentes vlcisci omnem inobedientia^. The weapons of our warfare
(says he) are not carnal, but mighty through God, to cast down holds,
casting down the imaginatio^s and every high thing, that is exalted against
the knowledge of God, and bringing into captivity every thowght to the
obedience of Christ: and having ready vengeance against al disobedience. You
see how conformable S. Paul's saying is to the saying of the prophet. Whose
sayings ye ca^ not by any good interpretation restrain to preaching only.
Which thing as yt is evident in S. Paul, Hierem. 1.
may also be gathered out of the words of Hieremie. For immediately after the
words alleged by M. Fekenham, these words follow. After this, the word of
the Lord came unto me, saying: Hieremie, what see thou? 1. Cor. 4. Quid
vultis? in virga veniam ad vos, an in charitate and spiritu mansue^tudinis?
And I said, I see a rod of an almond tree as Theodosio translateth, or as the
70. have I see a staf made of a nutte tree: or as our common translation has,
I see a waking rod. This is the pastoral rod or staf M. Horn, that prelates
do, and have ever used in excommunicating and deposing persons incorrigible.
This is the rod that S. Paul threatened the Corinthians withal. What? Says
he, will ye that I shall come unto you with a rod, or in love, and in the
spirit of meekenes? The bark of the almon is bitter, but the fruit is most
pleasante. So the pastoral rod, though for the time it seems paineful and
greauouse, yet to them, that thereby amend them selves, it brings afterward
great comfort. And therefore it is written: Psalm 22 Virga tua and baculus
tuus, ipsa me co^solata sunt. 1. Cor. 5. In interitu^ carnis, vt spiritus
saluus sit in die Domini nostri Jesus Christi. Hierem. 1. Ollam succe^sam ego
video.
Thy rod and thy staff have conforted me. And S. Paul says, he
excommunicated the fornicatour at Corinth, to the destruction of the flesh,
that the sprite might be saved in the day of our Lord Jesus. Which benefitte
they shall enjoy, that, by this pastoral rod, may be brought to true
penance, and to the earnest amendment of their wickedness. As contrary wise
they that by this rod will not be reformed, but remain still with Pharao wiful,
obstinat, and hard hearted, shall really feale that, that the Prophet Hieremy
saw by a vision, incontinently after he had seen the rod: that is, a sething
pot, prepared to boil them in hell, that neither by preaching, nor by pastoral
staff will fall to earnest repentance. And not they only, but such Pastors
also, as either for negligence or fear forslowe to do their dewtie: whether it
be in the exercising of the pastoral word, or else of the pastoral sword: and
such chiefly as take away from them, and deny them their pastoral sword.
Which heresy tends to the utter destruction of al ecclesticall power and
discipline: which power is (as all other things of the new testament are)
very plainly shadowed, by the old Testament: Namely by these words of God
spoken by Hieremy, representinge the parson of the Christian Pastor:
expressed, as yt were, by the office of an husbandman or gardener: or as
Ezechiell expresses his duty, by the office of a Shepherde. As the husbandman
does not only donge and fat his ground: as the gardener does not only
water his garden, but both of them rooteth out unprofitable herbs, weeds,
and roots: And as the shepherd does not only bring his flock to good and
wholesome pastors, but has his tar, to tar them, his staff to beat away
the rauenouse beasts and birds, his knyfe to lance them, and his place to
seauer and shut up the infected from the sownd and whole: Even so it is not
enough for the spiritual gardener, as it were by Gods word to water the hard
stony hearts of the sinners, and with the same as it were to fat the lean
and barren heart of man: but he must also, when the case so requires, weed out
of Christ's garden, the wilful, and the obstinat: as it were brambles, briers,
and thistles choking the good ground, and pla^te in their place other good
graffes. And must not only with his tongue, as it were with his barki^g dog, but
with his pastoral staff also drive away the wolf from the flock: partly by
excommunication, partly by deprivation. And he must in this part remember, that
Christ had his whip also, to whip and scourge the^ out of the temple that
profaned the same. The spiritual pastor has beside preaching, authority also
to bind and lose the sins of his flock: so that if he lose the^, Christ
loses them: if he binds them, Christ also binds the^. Of this and of the
like authority means Gregory Nazia^zene, and not of bare preaching. This is
the power that he speaks of, this is the lauful judgment seat of the church,
this is a pri^cipality above al worldly princes power. These so ample words go
further M. Horn, then preaching, unless men preach also, with their hands
as well as with their mouths. For Nazia^zen writes, that the Emperor with
reverence submits himself under the Priests hands at the holy alters. What?
Are aulters holy? What an holy deed have ye then and your fellows done M.
Horn, that have thrown down all aulters, which have continued even since
we were first christened? Contra gentiles quod vnus Deus.
And by having of the which Chrysostomus proves, that our Ilelande of Britanie
had received Christ and his Gospel? Whereupon it will follow, that in
taking away of them, ye have taken away Christ's faith withal: as in deed ye
have for a great part of the same: as appears by your daily doings and your
wicked articles in your Synagoge of late unlawfully agreed upon: especially
touching the real presence of Christ's body in the Sacrament. For the
vnblouddy offering of the which to our inestimable comfort the aulters do
serve in Christ's Catholic Church. To the receiuyng whereof no man can be
admitted but by the spiritual Pastor, no not the Emperor him self, whom as well
as the poorest man, he may exclude from the same, if he think it expedient. As
appears by the story of the Emperor Theodosius, by us rehearsed: which is
the thing that Nazia^zene also does here though obscurely signify: as also
absolution to be received by the hands of the spiritual Pastor. To enjoy the
which the greatest Prince in the world submits his head under the pastors
hands, as appears by our author here, Pro Amb. vide Niceph. li. 12. ca. 41.
Pro Aug. hom. 49. ex. 50. homilijs. Tom. 10.
and by other ancient Fathers, namely S. Ambrose and S. Augustine. Wherefore ye
do very fondly to make this great and high judgment seat nothing but
prechi^g. And yet if it were so, M. Feke^hams allegation takes place, and is
sufficient to acquit and discharge him from the oath. For what pri^cipality so
ever it be, that our author speaks of, assured we are it is an ecclesiastical
authority or principality. We are again as well assured, as it here appears,
and ye grant it also, that this power excels any temporal principality.
Ergo, we may infer, that the prince is not supreme head in all causes or things
ecclesiastical.

M. Horn. The.176. Division. page 124. b.
Chrysostom in the homily by you cited condemning the presumptuousnes of the
King Ozias, in enterprising to offer incense, which belonged by Gods
commandment only to the Priest, does compare the object or matter of both
their Ministeries together, affirming, that the Priestly dignity respecting
the matter vvhereabout it is exercised, which is heavenly and spiritual, does
far exceed the other, for the If the matter of the Princely Ministry is but
earthly and outvvard, as you he^e confess, how can the Prince have supreme
government in matters heavenly and spiritual, as the principal matter of his
royal power?
matter thereof is but earthly and outvvarde. His words makes his meaning
plain: The kingly thron (says he) has the administration of earthly things
and has not beyond this power, any further authority. But the throne of the
Priest is placed in heaven, and he has authority to pronounce of heavenly
businesses, who says these things? the King of heaven him self: what so
every lowse on earth, shall be lowsed in heaven also, what may be compared with
this honor? Heaven takes of the earth principal authority to judge. For the
judge sits in the earth: the Lord (Christ) follows the servant, and
what so ever this (servant) judges in the inferior (parts) that same he
(Christ) approves in Heaven. Therefore the Priest stands a mean or
mediator betwixt God and man's nature, bringing unto us the benefits that come
from thense (from Heaven) etc. These words of Chrysostom if they have not
an Why slip you so then away M. Horn, and give your self no indifferent
interpretation upon his words?
indifferent interpretour, that vvil make his words by just circumstaunce to
serve his meaning, and not to bind his meaning to his bare words, vvil make
Heaven to (.662.) The.662. untruth. For his words import no such
inconvenience, as shall appear.
receive authority of the earth: vvil prove Christ to be inferior to the
Priest, and the Priest to have the mediation betwixt God and man, by means
whereof we may receive the Graces that cummeth from Heaven, which mediation
belongs (.667.) The.667. untruth. For so much mediation belongs also to the
Priest through Christ.
only to Christ.

Stapleton.
I commend you M. Horn: This is one of the honestest parts that you have
played in all your answer. You have truly set forth Chrysostomes words and at
large for the former part: I would have wisshed that ye should have set in also
three or four lines more that immediately do follow: well I will supply the
residewe, least ye wax to proud of this little praise. Therefore the Priest,
says Chrysostomus, stands a mean or a mediator betwixt God and ma^s
nature, bringing to us the benefits that come fro^thence (from heaven) and
cayring our petitions thither, reconciling our Lord when he is angry to both
natures, and delivering us, when we offend out of his hands. And therefore God
has subjected the Kings head under the Priests hands, So S. Paul reasons
Heb. 7.
teachi^g us, that this Prince (the Priest) is greater then he. For why? that,
that is the inferior takes blessing of that which is the better. So far
Chrysostomus. As ye began liberally and freely, in supplying the former part
of the sentence of Chrysostomus: So I meruel, that ye break of so sone, and
went not through with it. But yet I have the less meruel, considering that
this was not don by chance or casualty, but of a set, and a shrewde wily
purpose. For if ye had set out at large the whole as we have don, ye had
destroyed your own pelting gloss wherewith ye glosed Gregory Nazianzene. For
Chrysostom writing how the King submits his head to the priest, even as
Gregory did, and that the priests authority is above the ki^gs authority,
means of an other matter the^ preachi^g, as it evidently appears by his
words: and so may he serve against your folish device for a good interpretour,
of Gregory Nazia^zene. Whom as I may well take for a good interpretour: So I
merueil, what he shall be, that ye will take for an indifferent intetpretor of
Chrysostomes sentence. For by your judgment an indifferent interpretor needs
must we have, to make his words and his meani^g agree: and yet your self stele
close away without any further answer, or any interpretation at all given,
different or indifferent. The sentence as Chrysostom. utters it, your weke
stomach ca^ in no wise digest. And all the world hitherto this.xi. ho^dred years
and more, God be thanked, has digested it well enough till now of late your new
Apostles Luther and Calui^, ca^ neither abide Chrysosto^, that says, and most
truly, Matt. 16.
that the priest is a mediator between God and us, nor Christ himself, who
faith to the priest: whose syns ye bind upon earth, shall be bound in heaven
also. Here we must needs have these new Apostles as indifferent interpretors,
against Chrysosto^ and Christ hi^ self: lest that Christ's office, to who^ this
mediatio^ belongs only, be taken away, by the priest, yea lest Christ be made
inferior to the priest. Suerly if there were such danger in the matter, it
were high time to look well upon Chrysostom: neither if this surmise were true,
should he be called by my judgment any more the golden mouth Chrysostom. 4. Reg.
5.
But (God be thanked) there is much more fear then neadeth. Yea all this is but
an hipocritical fear and sanctimony, such as the wicked King of Israel
pretended, when he tore and cut his apparel reading the King of Siria his
letters, that sent to him Naama^, that he might be cured of his Leprosy. But
the Prophet He liseus was never a whit offended with those letters. And as
Heliseus was a mediator betwe^ God and Naama^ for the curing of his bodily
leprosy: so is the priest a mediator betwe^ God and his people for the curi^g
of their spiritual leprosy in their soul: without any prejudice or blemish to
Christ's mediatio^. For Christ is the only mediator, as both God and man, that
is, as a meritorius and effectual mediation, valuable through it self: the
priest or prophet is mediator as man only: How Christ and how the Priest is
a mediator.
that is, as a minister and means only instrume^tal, not effectual: called and
chosen to such office by Grace especial, not of hi^ self, but through his
commission only effectual or valuable. And so is Moses, so are others also,
called in scripture mediators. I would now know of this scrupulouse
consciensed man concerning the other point, whether, in case a prince did
appoint any one man in his realm, to give out his pardon in his name to such
as were offenders, and that no man should ones look to enjoy any pardon, but
having recourse to this his deputy: I say I would know, whether by this the
prince should be counted inferior to his subject.

But what mean I, to defend that renowned ancient Father and his golden
mouth, against the foolish blast of so lewd an horners mouth? What need I
seek any defense for the words alleged by M. Fekenham, when that, M. Horn
is quite ouerblowen with his own blast: telling us by his own allegation, yea
truly, and out of the said Chrysostom, that the king has the administration
of earthly things, and beside this power has no further authority. The matter
also of his Ministry, says M. Horn, is but earthly and outward. Ergo say I
for M. Fekenham, the king is not supreme head in all causes Ecclesiastical,
or spiritual. What say I in all causes? Nay not in one cause mere spiritual or
Ecclesiastical: as having nothing to do in any such, but in worldly and
earthly causes only. And thus ye see, how well these two fathers, Gregory
Nazianzene, and John Chrysostom the two great pillars of the Greek Church,
may be easily drawn without any great force, to help M. Fekenhams cause.

Here now by the way, may be noted, that M. Horn, for all his great reading,
and for all the want of reading that he fyndeth in M. Fekenham, has
wonderfully ouershotte him self, and has by his oversight lost a ioly
triumphante matter that he might have had, to have triumphed upon M. Feke^ham.
He might have said, I pray you M. Feke^ham: was Julian the wicked Apostata a
sheep of Christ's flock, being a renegate, a panyme, and a most cruel
persequutour of the Christians? What? Did he show any reverence to the holy
aulters? Did he reverently submit his head under the priests hands? This and
much like rhetorik might M. Horn if either his readinge, or his remembrance
would have served, have here uttered against M. Fekenham. And to say the truth
M. Horn, I must yield and confess, that ye have found one companion now, yea
one Emperor I say, that neither reverenced aulters, nor the priests hands, no
more then ye do now. And therefore in deed lo, this objection, if it had come
in time, would have dressed M. Fekenham. But I trust, seeing the fault is found
and amended to your hand, that ye will find no great matter against him: neither
could greatly before, being as it seems his scribes fault, putting in
Iulianum, for Valentem.

The.177. Division. fol. 125. a.
Now since in all these objections hitherto, ye have brought forth (.668.)
The.668. untruth. most impudent, as by that has been said, well appears.
nothing at al, that either made not against your self, or that makes any
vvhitte for you, it is more then time ye dravve to Conclusion, and because no
good Conclusion, can follow of evil premises, ye were driven to conclude,
and finishe up your objection with the like patchinge, wresting and (.669.)
The.669. untruth. Slanderous.
falsifying your Authors, as ye did before: and therefore in the Conclusion,
like to him, that having no right to any, claymed all, to obtain somevvhat at
the least: Even so you, to prove that your Bisshops, and priests have al
jurisdiction Ecclesiastical, allege a piece of a sentence out of Ignatius,
which barely by it self recited, geeueth not only all that unto the
Bisshoppe, but all things belonging to the Church besides, and that no man may
do any thing, not so much as tol a bell to service or svveepe the Church, but
only the Bishop must do all (.670.) The.670. untruth. Ridiculous.
alone. Which conclusion some of your accomplices would so little allow, as
those whom ye vvuld ouerburden, and ye your self might go play you, as one
that had naught to do, in any thing perteining to the Church. But to help
the matter, and to make Ignatius words plain without absurdity, you must
take with you the residue of the sentence that follovveth, which ye leave
out, of The Sacrament of Thankesgeuing, and (.671.) The.671. untruth. False
translation.
Celebrating the Divine Service, and then it shall easily appear, that
Ignatius talks of such doi^gs of a bishop, as in deed declare his function
and office, and yet furthereth no whit the Co^clusio^ of your objection.

Stapleton.
Ignatius ad Smyrnenses.
The conclusion of M. Fekenhams objections being knitte up with a sentence of
Ignatius, that is, that no man should do any thing in matters ecclesiastical
without the bishops consent: M. Horn answereh, that he is feign to finish up
his conclusion with patching, wresting, and falsifying his Authors. He says,
that M. Fekenham is like to one, that having no right to any, claims al, to
obtain somewhat at the least. and being set in his merry mode, he returns
Ignatius sentence by the which M. Fekenham would challenge as he says al
jurisdiction to bisshops, so pretely and pleasantly upon him, that him self
might go play, as one that had nothing to do in any thing perteyning to the
Church, no not so much as to tol a bell to service, or sweep the Church, but
that the bisshoppe must do yt all alone. And then sadly falling to a grave
exposition of Ignatius, and to take away all absurdity, he byddeth M. Fekenham
to take the residew of the sentence with him, that he left out, of the
Sacrament of thanks geuinge, and celebrating the divine service: and then he
says it shall easily appear, that Ignatius furthereth nothing M. Fekenhams
conclusion. I like yt well M. Horn, that you, such a feate mynser and minisher,
such a Macarian parer and pincher of your Authors sentences, and narrations
through out your whole book, do now call for the whole sentence of Ignatius
at M. Fekenhams hands. Your request is so reasonable, that it may not be denied
you. Nay you must needs have it, and your reader to, and it were for no more,
but to show him of your good graciouse dealing: who even there, where you find
fault with M. Fekenham, for not taking the residewe of the sentence with him,
do your self fondly abuse your reader and Ignatius withal, not daringe ons to
recite the whole sentence following. For if you had, you should have stopped
therewith your own foul blasphemouse mouth, against the massing and
sacrificing priesthod, Prius f. 95
as you call it. And your reader should have seen, that you might as well call
Ignatius one of the Apostolical clergy of the Romish Antichrist, for this
point, as those that you commonly call papists. And seeing you charge (but most
untruly) M. Fekenham, for patching, wresting, and falsifying, to furnishe up
his conclusion withal, let us see how worshipfully and how sowndly you
conclude your own answer. M. Fekenham tells you of a general rule, out of
Ignatius, recitinge his words truly, though shortly. You leaving out that
which Ignatius says in deed, In the preface. fol. 5. in this book* (...).
bring us forth that which he says not. For seeing you set forth your
interpretation with a distinct letter, these words must be taken, as your
authors words, and not as your own, according to your promise made at the
beginning. Now there are no such words in the Latin translation, as you
rehearse, as the formal words of Ignatius. In deed he names Eucharistia, but
the word Sacrament he has not, neither these words celebrating the divine
service. Neither do you truly express the Greek sentence. We grant you
nevertheless, that it is a sacrament of thanks giving: but now we speak not
whether it may be so called, but whether your author so calls it. Again I
ask you, what is the thing there that is so excellent and thanks worthy, that
the whole is called (...).
a thanks geui^g? Suerly it is so called, because there is present in the said
blessed Sacrament, the real body and blood of Christ, left to his Church to be
offered for a remembrance of his death: and to be most reverently to our great
and spiritual comfort received, as often as we are thereunto godly disposed, and
worthily prepared. This is the pretiouse dishe that Christ feadeth his Church
withal.

Plutarch. in M. Antonio.
It is written, that Cleopatra the Queen of Aegyt exceded in sumptuouse feasting,
and that she put an excellent pearl, and resolved it with vinegar, and then
drank it up. There be that do value the price of the said pearl at fifty
thousand pounds of our money. But it is an other manner of dishe, and of much
higher price that Christ has left us, for this our spiritual banquet, even his
own most preciouse and blessed body: the same I say that died upon the Cross
for us. Great cause have we then to render most humbly to our graciouse good
Lord our most bounden and dewtifull thanks for such a feast. And most just
cause have we M. Horn, to curse your M. Calvin, and all your sacramentary
sect, and your late damnable articles, that like most wicked stewardes have
conveyed away this best dishe, and do feed Gods people, with a piece of bare
bread, instead of Christ's most precious body, Vide Theodoret. impatibilis
Dial. 3. Eucharistias and oblationes non admittunt, quod non confiteantur,
Eucharistian esse carnem seruatoris nostri Jesus Christi, quae pro peccati,
nostris passa est, qua^ pater sua benignitate suscitauit.
bereuing Christ's Church of this most comfortable meat. But herein ye
follow your fathers Calvin, Zwinglius, Wicleff, Berengarius, and such other
that the devil sturred up against this blessed Sacrament: yea anon after the
Apostles time, and in the time of Ignatius. For he does write of such heretics
as would not (by the report also of Theodoretus) admit, the Eucharistia, and
the sacrifice: for that they did not confess the Eucharistia to be the flesh
of our Savior Jesus Christ, the which did suffer, for our sins, and which
the father by his goodness did resuscitate. See M. Horn the cause why we may well
call this Sacrament, the Sacrament of Eucharistia, that is, of thanks giving,
because there is present the body of Christ, and offered to. The body of
Christ being really present in the sacrament, and the oblation that the Church
makes of the same, ye can not abide M. Horn. Ignatius in this place by M.
Fekenham recited, makes express mention of the mass, and of this oblation,
and as it were expounding the words by M. Fekenham rehearsed, says, that yt is
not lawful neither to offer, nor to make sacrifice, nor to celebrate mass
without the bishop. Propterea non licet sine episcopo neque offerre, neque
sacrificiu^ immolare, neque missas celebrare.
The like he speaks other where: do nothing, says he to Heron the Deacon,
without the bisshoppes, for they are priests: they do baptize, they do offerre
sacrifice, they give holy orders, they put their hands upon men, thou do
minister to them, as S. Stephen did at Jerusalem to James, and to the priests.
Ad Heronem. Nihil sine episcopis agas. Sacerdotes eni^ sunt, tu vero minister
sacerdotu^, illi baptizant, sacra faciunt, ordina^t, manus imponunt, tu vero
eis ministras, vt Hie^osolymis S. Stephanus Iacobo, and praesbyteris.
But M. Horn full truly, and full like him self, tells us a tale of the
Sacrament of thanks geuinge, and celebratinge the divine service: and then,
that this place does not one whitte further M. Fekenhams conclusion. But as we
have concluded you even by Ignatius him self a duble heretic, both for the
spoiling us of the presence of Christ's body, and of the oblation of the same:
so shall we conclude you a lier, in that you deny, that this place makes any
thing for M. Fekenham. For lo: thus he argues. M. Fekenhams argument deducted
out of Ignatius.


The priests them selves in matters Ecclesiastical, should do nothing belonging
to their office without the will and consent of the bishops. Ergo much less
the lay men or prince, which are no spiritual men, should meddle in matters
Ecclesiastical, especially they should not change the old religion, they should
not abolish the blessed Sacraments, the prince should not call him self
supreme head of the Church, the parliament should not annexe all spiritual
jurisdiction to the crown at least without the consent of the bisshops. What
say I without the consent? Nay against the full and conformable assent of all
the catholyk bishops, and the whole convocation, offering their most humble
petition, and supplication to the parliament, that there might be no such
alteration. And yet the parliament Law of one realm for the alteration of
relligion, if all the bishops had consented, were not a sufficient discharge in
conscience. When ye can well soil this argument M. Horn, then I suppose ye
shall find M. Fekenham somewhat conformable to your request, in the taking of
the oath.

Again M. Fekenha^ prays you, to take the whole sentence with you: and to
take the pains but to read vj. or vij. lines further, and to consider what
you shall find there. That is: that no man is more honorable in the Church, then
the bishop, and that we must honor him first, and the king after him. Of the
which sort of sentences his epistles are full, directly impugning your new
pretensed supremacy: And now ye neade nothing to fear that, which ye tell us
for a great inco^ueinence, that if Ignatius sentence be not well and wisely
weighed, the bishop must both toll the bell to service, and sweep the Church
al lone. This is but a poor office for a bishop, and all this high fetch
neded nothing, saving that, after this your long and paineful travail taken to
confute so clerkly, these few obiectio^s of M. Feke^. ye thought good to
refresh and quicke^ your weary sprites, with this your merry sporti^g. And yet
take ye head, that it turn not upon your self M. Horn in very good ernest.
For of this once I am assured, that if ye measure the matter by the old canons
of the au^cie^t Church, you that mainteyn so many heynouse heresies, if you may
have any office at al in the Church, you ca^ have no better, the^ to toll the
bell to service, and sweep the Church, or such like. And yet I doubt, whether
you may have as much as that office, being for these your heresies with bell,
book, and ca^del accursed, and by the Church besome, that is, by the sentence
of excommunication so clean sweeped out of the Church, that as I said, I doubt
whether by the old canons ye may meddle with the basest office of al perteyning
to the Church. And yet for any ill will I bear to your person, in case ye were a
good and a catholic man, I could for my part be content, that ye enjoyed your
bishoprike still, and that as amply as did any of the most Catholic prelates
before you.

M. Horn. The.178. Division. page 125. b.
So that your Conclusion being yet as insufficient as the rest, you are fain^
to adioyne an other piece thereunto: Wherein although ye shevve how evil
aioygner you be, to adioyne those two pieces of sentences together in one
Conclusion, that are of clean sundry matters, yet in one point ye have made
them both agree, that as ye wrested the one, so ye not only wrest, but
flatly (.672.) The.672. untruth. Flat false, as shall appear.
falsify the other, and yet neither of the^ both stand you in any stead to
help your objection, much less to conclude the same. For first, how does
this follow: S. Augustine says (say you) of the Doctors of the Church: That
they believe, I believe: that they hold, I hold: that they teach, I teach:
that they preach, I preach:yield to them, and thou shall yield to me (.673.)
The.673. untruth. This is not M Fekenhams Ergo: but your own
Ergo, Bisshoppes and Priests have power and authority to make laws,
orders, and Decrees, and to use all cohibitiue jurisdiction over their flocks
and cure. Now if your friends, that have believed hitherto as you believe,
have held, as you hold, taught as you teach, preached as you preach, and
believing the upright dealing and conscience, that you pretend, have yielded
unto you herein, do but a little examine your (.674.) The.674. untruth.
Slanderous.
false dealing vvit^ those Fathers, whom you would seem so wholy to
follow, I think they would no longer believe you, hold with you, nor
yield unto you, but suspect you as a deep dissembler, or rather abhor you,
as an open sclaunderer and belyer, not only of me, but of the ancient Fathers
themselves. For first I would learn of you, where S. Augustine has those
words, in all his six books against Julian, Istis cede, and mihi cedes, if
he have them, shevve where: if he have them not, then how ye follow S.
Augustine? How dare you impude^tly say, ye preach and teach that he did,
when ye manifestlye (.675.) The 675. untruth. Most impudent and outragiously
slau^derous, at it shall appear.
mangle, alter, pervert, and corrupt the saying that he did teach. In deed for
fashions fake ye cite a piece of S. Augustins sentence, that they believe I
believe, etc. but for that which follovveth: istis cede, and me non caedes:
yield to the^, and thou shall not strike or whippe me: you (.676.) The.676.
untruth. All copies have those words. M. Feke^ham has not put them in.
have put in these words, istis cede, and mihi non cedes, yield to them, and
thou shall yield to me: and yet this corrupting of the sentence makes it serve
no whit the more for your purpose, but utters your falsehood: that belike
vvil not spare to corrupt that which makes flat against you, that thus use to
corrupt this, which makes neither to nor fro with you, nor against me. But
as S. Augustine vvriting in the same matter against Julian, a Disciple of
Pelagius, an (.677.) The.677. untruth. Pelagius was no English Monk.
English Monk, dealing with S. Augustine, as ye have don with me, said to
Iulia^: so say, I to you. Ye feine me to say that I say not, to conclud that I
conclude not, Lib 3.
to grant that I grant not, and you conclude to your self that which I
deny, Lib. 5.
etc. In deed you have labored more to find out those reasons which ye might
better utter against your self, than against me. But in such a cause ye should
not need to take such peines, if you had any shame in you. S. Augustine in
these books against (678) The.678. and.679. untruths. For S. Augustine in the
said books is plain for the Popes Primacy, not for the Princes.
Iulia^, as in his other against the (679) Donatistes, (as I have declared
before) did attribute unto themperours and Princes, the Bisshops and Priests,
such Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction as I have don. Of the same mind that he was
herein, were also (680) The.680. untruth. None of those Fathers were of that
mind.
those Fathers, that he oyteth. Wherefore you vvil now I trust, according to
your promise, yield and relente: If not to me for stubborn heart: yeat
according to your conclusion to S. Augustine, and the ancient Fathers, to
believe herein that they believe, to hold that they hold, to teach that they
teach, to preach that they preach, and no more to vvringe, maime, slander
and belie them. And than both I and all other faithful Christians will both
better believe you, and give God thanks for you.

Stapleton.
M. Fekenham concluding his objections with Ignatius adioyneth a general
protestation of his faith taken out of blessed S. Augustine his books against
the heretic Iulianus. Thus. That they believe, I believe: that they hold, I
hold: that they teach, I teach: that they preach, I preach: yield to the^ and
thou shall yield to me. Here does M. Horn so revel against M. Fekenha^, as he
has not don the like in all his answer. First he denies, that of this place
of S. Augustine may any good sequel be gathered, that Bishops may make laws,
or use al cohibitiue jurisdiction. Then as having now M. Fekenham in such a
foul evident fault, as by no pretext may be covered, he thinks that for
this false dealing, his own friends will take him, for a deape dissembler, yea
rather will abhor him as an open slaunderer and belier of the fathers, as a
manifest mangler, alterer, peruerter, and corrupter of S. Augustine. For instead of istis cede, and me non caedes, yield to them, and thou shall strike or
whip me, he has put in: istis cede, and mihi cedes. Yield to them, and thou
shall yield to me. And then says further, that belike M. Fekenham will not
stick to corrupt that which makes flat against him, that thus uses to
corrupt that, which makes neither to nor fro, with him self, nor against him
self. After this he rolleth in S. Augustines sentences, and layth them forth
against M. Feke^ha^, for this his evil dealing with him, as S. Augustine does
against Pelagius a Brittayn monk. Finally as though now the battle were wo^ne,
and a full conquest made upon poor. M. Fekenham, he calls upon him to yield
and relente. Mary sir this is a terrible blaste in deed blown out of Master
Horns mouth for his farewell: This is such a blustering tempest sturred up by
our new Aeolus, that (as it seems) M. Fekenham must needs be ouerblowen with
the vehemence of yt. But we will yet seek out, and see the very foundation,
and the original cause of all this broyle. By all likelihodde M. Fekenham has
found some good appearance of great advantage in corrupting these words of S.
Augustine. For no man lightly is so doltish, to use such foul and sluttish
shifts, without some comfort and hope to further his matter by. According to
the old saying Cui bono. Nay says M. Horn: The corrupting of the sentence
serves no whit the more for M. Fekenha^s purpose. No does it not M. Horn? and
would M. Fekenha^ deal so fondly by open falshod to stain his honesty and for
whippe me, translate, yield to me, without any benefit of his cause? Suerly
the^ were he worthy (as well as I love him) to be twice whipped, once for
falshod, and ons more for folly. Therefore this your accusation eue^ by your
own tale, and by Cui bono, is utterly incredible.

And yet if he had so falsely and so folishly demeaned him self, seeing it
touches no part of the substance of the question that lies betwixt you and
him: you play with him if not a folish, yet to vehement an orator: and have
sauced your oratory with over much gal and egernes. And for all your blowing and
blustering, your great hill brings forth nothing, but a poor Aesops mouse.

Yet say you, this is a naughty part of him, so manifestly to ma^gle and to
corrupt S. Augustine. Perchance good reader thou do now look for an answer,
and how M. Feke^ham may save his honesty, against this mighty accusation. And
suerly what answer I may best make, I can not redely tell: but this will I tell
you in the mean season, that such as use to play their part very well
otherwise, yet sometimes at the very last cast, for some folish disorder they
are hissed and clapped out by the multitude. With what shoting the^, and
clapping ought this waynscot faced man, to be driven, as it were from this
stage, that having throughout his book played so many foul and vilanouse
parts, for his Valete and Plaudite, plaieth as evil or a worse part, then he
has played in all the residewe of his book?

There be no more examples of S. Augustins works printed, that I have seen, but
four: the first printed at Basil, the second and third at Paris, the fourth at
Lio^s: and al these have istis cede, and mihi cedes. Yield to them, An. 1528. in
fol.

An. 1541. and. 1555. in fol.

An. 1563. in 8.

Lib primo cont. Iul. Cap. 2. in medio capitis. tom. 7.


and thou shall yield to me. Only the later editio^ of Paris reads in the text
as M. F. reads, but puts in the margent, as a diverse reading, and me non
caedes, as M. Horn full peuishly and wretchedly would make folk believe it
should only be read. What detestable impudency the^ is this, for M. Horn, to
cry out upon M. F. being a poor prisoner, after this outragiouse sort, and
for the allegatio^ of this place, so sternely and fiercely to vau^t, saying:
How dare ye impude^tly say; ye preach and teach that he did, when ye
manifestly mangle, alter, peruerte, and corrupt the saying that he did teach?
And to ask of him where Saint Augustine has these words in all his six
books against Julian, istis cede, and mihi cedes? The truth is, though as I
said, all these copyes have these words in this order, yet by forgetfulness
M. Fekenham has not set in the book. And will ye see, how well the matter is
amended by M. Horn? After all this ruffling and blustering he him self, having
al copies against him, names not, either any of these six books, or any
place, where any book of S. Augustines should be printed, that should have any
such text of such tenor as he does allege. And yet does M. Horn (as ye have
heard) as though it were right true, yea and a sin against the holy Ghost,
all to revile M. Fekenham: and leaves not there: but that, which S. Augustine
most truly objected to Pelagius, does he most untruly object against M.
Fekenham: even as truly, as that the said Pelagius was an English monk, who
was dead and buried, before the Saxons entered Britanny. For Pelagius died in
the time (at the least of Theodosius the second) and the Saxons entered the
realm in the time of Marcianus, as witnesses S. Bid. And before Britanny was
commonly called England, Pelagius was dead at the lest one hundred years. Beda.
li. ^. cap. 15. Polid. li. 3.
But before it was christened, more then a hundred and a half.

But now concerning the matter yt self, whether the Councils, the fathers,
both old and now that you M. Horn have alleged, and especially S. Augustine
may not truly say to you, that he said to Pelagius: I refer it to the
indifferent reader. Suerly there is none of them al (as may easily appear to
the diligent reader) but may justly say to you. M. Horn, ye feign me to say
that, I say not: to conclude, that I conclude not: Aug. li. 3. co^tra ^ul.
to grant that I grant not: and you conclude to your self that, which, I
deny. Again. In deed ye have labored more to find out those reasons, which
ye might better utter against your self, Lib. 5.
than against me. But in such a case, ye should not need to take such pains if
you had shame in you. Whether I say truly or no in this, I refer thee, good
Reader, to my whole answer, and those that will see it co^pendiously proved, to
my preface, and to the Conclusion of the third book.

And here would I feign break of my confutation of M. Horns answer, to S.
Augustines testimony, saving that he does otherwise so excedingly belie S.
Augustine here, that I may in no wise altogether pass over this shameless
demeanure. You say then M. Horn, that S. Augustine as well in his books against
Julian, as in his books against the Donatistes, is of your mind towching the
ecclesiastical supremacy in Princes, as ye say ye have declared. And that the
Fathers whom S. Augustine cites against Iulia^, are of the same mind also.
Show me then good M. Horn, but one authority out of S. Augustine, or any one
of the Fathers, whom he reherseth, which are Cyprianus, Ireneus, Basilius,
Hilarious, Lib. 1. co^tra Iulianum.
Ambrosius, Hieronymus, and Pope Innocentius with others, either that the Pope
has not the superiority in matters Ecclesiastical, or that Princes have the
same. All that hitherto ye have browght out of S. Augustine, with whose
sayings ye have filled up some leaves, reaches no farther, the^ that Princes
may by their laws punish such, as be disobedie^te to the Church laws: for
the which thing no man does contend with you. But we would feign see you
ones draw to the question yt self, and to show some open place of S.
Augustine, either for the Princes or against the Popes supremacy: wherein seeing
ye have done nothing, Places out of S. Augustine for the popes primacy.
we will assay what we call say for the Popes primacy by S. Augustine.

To avoid tediousnes we will rehearse but a few testimonies, and such only,
as we have taken out of his books against the said Donatistes, Quis nescit,
illum Apostolatus principatum cu^li^et Episcopatui praeferendu^? De Bapt.
contra Donat. lib. 2. cap. 1. Epistola. 165.

Numerate vel ab ipsa sede Petri: ipsa est petra, quam non vincunt superbae
inferorum portae. In Psalm. contra partem Donati. Epistola. 157. ad Optatum.

Ab innocentio and Sozimo toto orb Christiano da^nati. Epistola. 90.91.92. and
93.

Dicta epistola. 91. Patres non humana sed diuina decreuere sententia, vt
quicquid de disiunctis, remotisque prouincijs ageretur, non prius ducerent
finie^dum, nisi ad huius sedis notitiam perueniret, vbi tota huius authoritate,
iusta quae fuerit pronunciatio firmaretur.


and Pelagians. Who is it then M. Horn, but S. Augustine that writing
against the Donatistes, says that the principality of S. Peter's Apostleship
is to be preferred, before any other bishoprike? Who is it but S. Augustine,
that uses to bring against the Donatistes, the authority of the sea of Rome
as a singular and a principal authority? Who is yt but S. Augustine, that
writing against the said Donatistes says, the sea of Peter, is the rock
that the proud gates of hell do not overcome? Let us now come a little to the
Pelagians.

Their capitain Pelagius, and an other archeheretike of their sect called
Caelestius, were condemned by Pope Innocentius and Sozimus, throwgh out at the
Christian world. They were also condemned in Aphrike by the bishops there. Yet
S. Augustine writes not, that they were condemned by the^ through out all the
world, as he does of the said two Popes: because the sentence of the Aphricane
Bishops bound the Aphricanes only: the Popes sentence bound the whole
world. And therefore the said Bishops, after they had condemned those
heretics, desired Pope Innocentius to confirm their sentence: which thing
Innocentius did, as appears by his answer to the foresaid Bishops, yet
extant in S. Augustines works. Which letters give a very ample testimony for
the Popes supreamacye: and shows among other things, that yt was a rule kept
throwgh out all the world, that in grave* and weighty matters ecclesiastical,
and for the determination of matters of faith, Et Epistola. 93. Diligenter ergo
et congrue Apostolico consulitis honori, ^onori inqua^, illius, quem praeter
illa quae sunt extrinseca, solicitudo manet omniu^ Ecclesiarum, super anxijs
rebus quae sit tenenda sententia, antiquae scilicet regulae formam sequuti,
quam toto semper ab orb mecu^ nostis esse seruatam.

August. contra. 2. Epist. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 1. Qua^uis ipse in eo
praeemineas celsiore fas^igio speculae pastoralis.

Haec ergo ad tuam potissimum dirigere sanctitatem nentam discenda quam
examinanda, and number forsan aliquid displicuerit emendanda constitui.

Lib. ^. Et si posterior tempore prior loco. August. dict. lib. 1.


nothing was wont to be done without the Popes consent and authority. Again S.
Augustine writing against the said Pelagia^s, sends his boks to Pope
Bonifacius, to examine and amend the^, if any thing misliked him: and says:
that the said Bonifacius had the preemine^ce in the pastoral watchtowre. S.
Augustine also in this book against Julian the Pelagian, numbering up a number
of holy and auncie^te Bishops, as Ireneus, Cyprianus, Hilarious, and others,
says: that Pope Innocentius though he were later in time, yet was he before
them, for his place and dignity. He does urge and press very much the said
Julian with the authority of the Apostolical sea and of the said Innocentius.
Yea and that for an heresy, that your Apostle Calvin, and our good new
brethren in England, both in their preachinges and teachinges do maintain:
that is, that children though they be not baptized, shall yet that
notwithstanding, enjoy the everlasting life. These testimonies do fully
declare S. Augustines mind, touching the Popes Supremacy, quite repugnante to
the doctrine of this your book. Whereby yt appears, that ye little regard,
how and after what sort, ye do allege him: and that ye do not allege
him, for any good matter ye find in him, but only to make an owtwarde show
and appearance, to the unlearned and unskillful people, to beguile them with
smothe talk, and fair words.

The.179. Division. page 126. b.
M. Fekenham.
After long expectation, and many promises, his L. final answer to the said
objections, was as hereafter follows. For as much as I do perceive, that you
are not to be resolved in this matter, I shall here stay and proceed no further
with you in the same: and like as you have been, so you shall be unto me most
heartily welcome: You shall lack nothing that is in my house to pleasure you:
And from henceforth I shall leave to have any further talk or conference with
you in these controversies of Religion. And for all such talk and writing as
has passed already between us, I shall perform this my promise, both first
and last made unto you, that you shall be well assured, not to suffer any hurt
or damage thereby.

M. Horn.
You delivered this objection unto me in writing, betwixt Easter and
VVhitsontyde, about the end of April: within two days following, when I
had read the same, I told you, that in the collection of your common places,
you were much abused, for that you had mistaken the^, and observed no just
circumstances of the authorities, whereby to have known the authors
meaning: And so we continued in debatinge and reasoning, from time to time,
about this matter of Jurisdiction, and others, until the beginning of September
following, before which time, your obstinacy grevve so much, that I was
forced, through your unorderly behavior, to restreigne you of your lice^tious
talk, and sequester you from conference with any, having so much before
abused your self, and especially in mine absence, and I was the rather moved
so to d^o, for that I perceived all that I did, was but in vain: as at diverse
times and often, I repeated that unto you, obstinately bente to the contrary,
meaning by such stoutness to recover your credit, which through your
inconstancy was so empaired amongst your friends. I said, at your first
coming, and many times after, you being sent by the Honorable Council, that
you were vvelcome, which by good proof, although utterly without any your
good deserte, ye found true. I did say, that I would leave to have any
further talk or conference with you, touching matters of Religion, or any
other: but you should have shevved the time and place, where, and when these
words were spoken: I spoke them the Sunday at after diner, when in your
gallorie, I did reprove you of your disorders, and therefore restraigned you
of such liberty, as before ye had enjoyed. The promise made unto you, not to
utter that which ye should say by way of reasoning, in prieudize of the Q.
Majesty's Laws, I have hitherto, and yet do firmly keep to you, as you
can not justly chardge me with the contrary, in any particular point, and
so you have sustained no hurt or damage therebie.

M. Fekenham.
The perfourming of his promise was as hereafter follows. First there was a
rumor spersed abroad very shortly after by his servants, that I had
subscribed to certain articles, ten in number.

Second, there was by his servants a further rumor raised, of my recantation,
time and place appointed thereof to be at the Parish Church of Waltham, where
his L. did then manure and abide.

Thirdely, his L. did at his open table, and in the praesence of many, chardge
me with the change of my Religion nine times, and being put in further
remembrance by one M. Denny who was a Sogener with him, his L. said, that I
had altered and changed my Religion, not only nine times, but nineteen
times, and that I was of no Religion.

Fourth, his L. did permit the said M. Denny at his open table to to much to
abuse me. Where the said M. Dennie did openly and before many, chardge me
with these three crimes following. First, with incontinencie of life, thus
saying: That if I had not as many children, as he, he did know, that I had
deserved to have so many. Second, with glottonie, affirming that I was an
Epicure. Third and last, with hypocrisy, and that I was a great dissembler
and an hypocrite. The said M. Dennie being a man to me wholly unknown. His L.
did show him self openly to be so well pleased with these his slaunderouse
words, that he ministered just occasion for me to think, that his L. had
procured the said M. Dennie thereunto.

Fifth, by so much the more I had good cause to think so, for that his L. did
immediately thereupon, viz. within one hour after, in fortifiyng the said
talk, command me to close imprisonment.

Sixth and last, after that he had kept me six weeks in close imprisonment,
by his L. complaint I am now at this present prisoner in the Tower, much
contrary to his promise before made.

The premises being true (like as they are all most true) being to openly
committed, and before to many witnesses to be denied: your Honor may easily
judge, with what wisdom, discretion, and charity I have hene used, I being a
poor man, the Q. Majesty's prisonner, and to his L. committed (I dare boldly
affirm) to be well used. It was very strange to me, to see such behavior
openly showed at the table of such a man. Surely for mine own part, I was
never so used, neither openly nor privately at any man's table before in my
whole life. My humble suit therefore unto your Honor is, that proof and trial
may he had of my truth herein, and what my deseruings has been for the whole
time of mine abode there. In due search and examination hereof I doubt not but
there shall fall out matter betwixt us, either of much simplicity and truth,
or else of great craft and falsehood: either of honest, virtuous and godly,
or else dishonest, vitiouse and ungodly usage* and either of much light,
learning, and knowledge, or else of very gross ignorance, and palpable
darkness: let it fall and light on the which side it shall hap, upon the
trial and examination made, I doubt not, but that your Honor shall have a
full show and a sufficient proof made, of every thing that has passed
between us. There may be denial made for a shifte and some short time: but
for any long time it may not possibly endure, every thing being so openly
committed and done, so diverse and many being of knowledge and witness
thereof.

M. Horn
To this challenge of promise breach, in these six points: Truly I know
not of any rumor spredde of you, by any of my servants, or otherwise that
ye subscribed to any Articles, no yet ever herd any thing hereof, before I
savve the same report in your book published: And if any such rumor were
spredde by any my servants or other, you should have named him, that he
might receive condign punishment therefore.

Second, as to the further rumor of your Recantation, I say likewise I
understood nothing but by your own report in your book, and therefore
referring the Author to be punished accordingly, I think the punishment ought
to light upon your self.

Thirdly, as to my chardge of your changinge in Religion.ix. times, ye.xix.
times, I said so, and that (.681.) The.681. untruth, most evident and
Slanderous.
truly upon proof of your unconstant affirming and denying, not so fevve
times, as I had good experience often in you, and can have witness in the same.

Fourthly, touching your abusing by M. Denny, ye misreporte the Gentleman, as
to any thing that ever was spoken before me. But if any such were, it was
as I herd say at my return home (for I was abroad in preachinge when
such scoffinge talk was betvvixte you) by occasion of some talk ministered
on your part to M. Denny, partly by way of merry talk betwixt you tvvaine,
and partly sturred up by your unseemly words, and yet none of all these in my
hearing. But in the last day, when I restraigned your liberty, you did so
much before me at my table provoke the said gentleman by calling him Epicure,
for that he fasted not as ye said, that I, fearing least M. Denny like a
young man should give some evil words again, willed him to say nothing,
for that I my self vvoulde answer the matter for him: Mine answer was,
that I meruailed why you would call him Epicure: for if you so thought,
because he did eat fleashe, and never fish, I said, he might (.682.)
The.682. untruth. Joined with a gross error.
so vvelfast with fleashe, as with fish: but if it were for that he used
not abstinency, I said in that M. Denny did more then you: for where you had
every day in the week your (.683.) The.683. untruth slanderous, as all that know M. Feckenha^ can witness.
three meals, fridaie and other, the gentleman was contented three days in a
week, with one meal a day, and never did eat above two. And as it is
untrue, that either M. Denny was a man to you utterly vnknovhen, being
conversant together in one house a quarter of a year before, and in famil^ar
company, yea sought many times by you to play at the bovvles, to walk in the
park, and to be merry together: so is it also untrue, that I heard you so
abused as I could or did like therein, and so untruly do you surmise, that
I should procure M. Denny, by any means to abuse you, as ye malitiousely
conceive of me.

Fiftely, as to the restrainte of your liberty, which you call close
imprisonment, to have been for these talks betwixt M. Denny and you, within
one hour after: You know right well, that your restrainte was not upon
that occasion, but upon your seemly behavior about other matters, whereof
ye make no mention, least you should have proved your self a Lier. After I
had in fevve words calmed the storm that seemed vvoulde arise betwixt M.
Dennie and you, I entered into talk with you in matters of Religion, as I was
wont to do daily before. The talk was of venial and mortal sin: you have
not forgotten the occasion, I am sure: for if you have in your remembrance the
Monkish (.684.) Iebusites, you call them Jesuits, The.648. untruth, slanderous
and Jewish.
you may remember, that a cross that came from them, gave the occasion of the
talk in that matter. I proved that no (.685.) The.685. untruth. heretical:
sin is so venial as it could be remitted by any ceremony: yea, there is no
sin but the same (.686.) The.686. untruth, in like manner plain heretical.
of it self is mortal, and yet venial to be purged by the merits of Christ
only: and that al sins, were they never so mortal, were nevertheless
venial, saving al only the sin against the holy Ghost, which is
irremissible. For this my saying, and other points which I condemned, ye sell
into such a rage, that ye not only railed against the Bishop of Sarisburie
saying; he was utterly unlearned, and that he should never be hable to
answer M. Hardinges book, but also openly called me almost in plain terms
Heretic, and said, my doctrine which I preached (yet ye would never hear
me) was erroneous, filthy, and blasphemous: so filthely your blasphemous mouth,
could rail against (.687.) The.687. untruth, Your doctrine has no affynite
with Gods truth.
Gods truth. Whereupon, I, to stay you, said alonely that those were
vnmann^rlie words to be spoken at mine own table: and therefore would as
tha^ say no more openly unto you there, but told you that after dinner I
vvoulde shevve you more of my mind, betwixt you and me. And so shortly after
dinner, I came up to you and there calling you into the Gallory of my house,
adioining to your chamber, I put you in remembrance of that which I had
before oftentimes admonished you, of your outrageous talk in mine absence,
used oftentimes openly at my table, whereof I had sondrie times given you
warning, for that the same might breed peril to your self, blame to me, and
offense to others. And because I found still the co^tinua^ce of that your
misorder: yea, to be much more vehement many times in mine absence than in my
presence: Therefore I willed you thenceforth to abstain from conferring with
any man in any wise at all, addinge that you should have to your chamber, al
things necessary, and what meat you would competently appoint for your own
diet, which ye had accordingly. And although I did restrain you from coming
to mie table, or to go so much at large as you had done: yet had you no other
keeper than you had before, which was your own man: you had a fair Gallory
adjoining to your chamber, opening to mie park, your servant a chamber by him
self, next to yours, ye had Leads fair and large, on the which ye might
walk, and have prospect both over the Parkes, Gardens, and Orchardes. And
therevvith thrice in the vveake at the least, vvhiles I lay at Waltham, with
one by me appointed, you vvalked abroad into the Parkes, Garden, and Orchard:
and this you call your close emprisonment. Sixthly, touching my complaint to
the most honorable of you, vvherby you were remitted prisoner again to the
Tovver, what the same was, their honors can well declare, if their pleasure
so be: being suer that I have not broken promise with you hitherto, in
uttering your opinion against the Laws of the Realm, as I have before said,
which ye shevved at any time in the private conference. And so ye have not
any cause to challenge me in that behalf.

To conclude, by the premises it may appear to the honorable as by a taste,
what sincerity there is in you. Again, that this your quarelling and (.688.)
The.688. untruth. M. Fekenham has in no point belyed you in his shedule
spread abroad, but vvil stand to all that is contained therein.
belying me by spreading this book, was and is chiefly, to recover your
credit with those of your faction: who as I have said, had conceived doubt
of your revolt, and to confirm them in their grounded (.689.) The.689.
untruth. The Catholic faith is no error.
error, and herevvith to bring me and other such as I am, into obloquie and
hatred. And lastly, to impugn and bark against the Q. Majesty's (.690.)
The.690. untruth slanderous. Neither M. Fekenham. Nor other Catholics do
impugn the Queen's Lavvfull Authority, but only such as is now proved to be
vnlavvfully attributed to her Hignes, by such as you are.
Lavvfull and due authority, which you and your accomplices daily labor to
subvert: which matter I refer to be further considered, by the grave
vvisdome of the most honorable.

FINIS.
The.14. Chapter, of certain private matters between M. Feke^ham and M. Horn.
And of certain especial heresies avouched by M. Horn, whereby to conclude, he
concludes himself a plain heretic.
Stapleton.
THis being the last part of all, stands most upon mutual accusations: M.
Fekenham fynding him self greaued, that he should be missused at M. Horns
table, and there to be noted of incontinencie, gluttony, and hypocrisy: that
rumors should be spread abroad by M. Horns servants of his subscription and
recantation: and finally that contrary to M. Horns promise made to him, that
he should suffer no damage or hurt for any words passed betwixt them, he was
first restrained of his liberty accustomable by M. Horn, and kept there
close prisoner vj. wekes: and afterward by his procurement remitted to the
Tower.

M. Horn on the other side denies, that ever he was privy to any such
rumor, and complayneth as fast upon M. Fekenham, and his disorder, as calling
M. Deny Epicure at his own table, and for openly calling him self almost in
plain terms heretic. He puts M. Feke^ham in remembrance of certain
talk passed between them: as that a man may fast as well with flesh, as with
fish: of mortal and deadly sin, and other matters. As for the restraynte of
his liberty, he says it came upon his own disorder: and that in co^playning
upon him to the Council, he brake no promise with him. These matters then
being such as privately passed between them, I being one that neither was then
present, nor yet sithence fully understanding any certainty of them, must leave
this to M. Fekenhams own defense, when the time shall serve. Saving that so
much, I can say, that I have been credibly informed, that M. Feke^ham does
deny, as well that he misused M. Deny, as such other things as M. Horn charge
him withal, and is ready to stand to, and to justify al such things as are
contained in this his shedule if he may be suffered. And suerly among other
things, to them that knew his order and diet, either before his coming to
prison, either in the tower, when he had the liberty of the same, whereas I am
credibly informed, he never made three meals, it can not seem credible and
likely, that he should at Waltham as M. Horn says, make three meals, as well
friday as other days.

One thing I am sure of M. Horn, he took no part of your fleshly breakfasts and
suppers, that ye have had in good store in your house upon the fridaies and
other fasting days. Which example to be showed in your house, being a man of
such vocation and countenance, against the Laws of the Church and the realm,
how it may be allowed, I leave it to the consideration of others. For I suppose
neither your self, nor Maistres Madge, with all your other fleshly company, are
fallen into such weakness, feebleness and consumption, nor are of so timerouse
and scrupulouse a conscience, that either ye neade, or will tarry for a
License: I will not say to be sought at Rome, but nearer hand, at London.

And what neade this prelate of any other License, that can so pretely license
him self to fast with flesh as well as with fish? For a man may (says he)
fast as well with flesh as with fish. Well spoken, and like a good Turk or
Jew: For at a good Christians mouth I never heard that rule, nor ever read it
before. In the primitive Church men fasted in great numbers, both from fish and
flesh: but this prelate least the generation of his spiritual children,
should be to much hindered, by eating cold fish, has found a new divinity,
whereby we may fast with a fat pigge or capon upon good fridaie, least for
fayntnes we fall under the cross as Christ did. I say, this is a new divinity.
For from the Apostles time hitherto Lent has ever been fasted, as well in our
realm, as in all Christendom beside. Whereof now almost xiij. hundred years
fithence, our most noble countreman and Emperor Constantinus, gives us a full
godly testimony, as well for our Ileland of Britany, as for Rome, all Italy,
Egypt, Eus. l. 3. de vita Co^st.
France, Lybia, all Greece, all the countries called Asiana and Po^tica Regio,
Cilicia, and for all the Churches of the East, West, South, and North: And this
lent fast was from flesh at the lest, as it appears evidently, Li. 3. Tom. 2.
haeres. 75. Laod. Can. 50. Hier. contra Iouin. Epiph. vbi supra.
both by Epiphanius above xj. hundred yers past, and by a Council of Laodicea,
holde^ about that time. Yea they were counted plain heretics, that contemned
the Lent and other fasting days: As the Aerians, Iouinians, and such other.

And now have we a subtle insoluble, that there is no sin, but that the
same of it self is mortal sin, and yet there is no mortal sin, but that
the same is venial. For he says, he proved to M. Fekenham, that there is no
sin so venial, as it could be remitted by any ceremony, yea there is no
sin, but the same of it self is mortal, and yet venial, to be purged by the
merits of Christ only: and that al sins, were they never so mortal, were
nevertheless venial, saving al only the syn against the holy Ghost, which is
irremissible. Suerly this is a notable conclusion to lap up your worthy book
withal. Wherein for all your subtelty, are as many errors and heresies, as are
lines. And would God ye would have showed as withal, what godly Father ye have
for your Author, in these your absurd and false propositionis. Well, well, as
much as ye crake, that ye proved this gere to M. Feckenham, I must tell you, M.
Horn is ashamed to shevve his doctor.

VViclef. li. 3. cap. 1. trialog. Sola^ peccatu^ finalis impoenite^tiae, quod
est peccatum in spiritum sanctum, proprie est mortale.


ye have not yet proved, nor ever shall prove yt as long as ye live. And ye dare
not for shame, show the author of your doctrine: who is no better then the
Archeheretyke Wiclef. Who says there is no sin properly to be called
mortal, but the lack of final repentance, which is the sin against the holy
Ghost. Or if ye have any better author, we would gladly see him: and would
gladly at your good leisure better understand, how ye could either rydde your
self from many foul errors, or from a foul contradiction, in these your so
few lines.

For first where you say, that no sin is so venial, as it could be remitted
by any ceremony: if you understood what venial sin were, a man of your
vocation would be ashamed so to say. And therefore I will first open your second
error upon the which this former is grounded. Which is this.

There is (you say) no sin, but the same of it self is mortal, and yet
venial, to be purged by the merits of Christ only. Is this your divinity M.
Bishop? Now forsothe a worthy divine you show your self, and more mete to be
a parish clarke in Kingy street in Winchester, then a bishop of that famous
See. For how say you M. Horn? Is every mortal sin also venial? D. Thomas
1.2. q. 72. Art. 5.
And is every sin of it self mortal? Let us then see what is mortal sin,
and what is venial. Mortal sin is committed, when we do any thing against
Gods law, or against the love we owe to him, or to our neighbor for his sake,
with an auersio^ or turning away from God him self. Mortal sin.
Which Act forsaking the everlasting goodness, and co^uerting our selves to the
unlawful use of his temporal creatures, is a deadly sin, that is such as
deserves by the law and justice of God, everlasting death. Of such mortal
sins excluding from the kingdom of God, you have in S. Paul diverse
enumerations, both to the Corinthians, 1. Cor. 6. Galat. 5.
and to the Galathians: which how they may be made venial you shall never
show: but how they may be made no sins at all that is, how they may be
utterly forgotten and forgeuen, Vide Council. Tride^t. Sess. 6. ca. 7. and
Session. 14. cap. 3.
yt is easy to show: forsothe by the merits of Christ's passion, as a
meritoribus cause: by the mercy and Justice of God, as by a formal and
efficient cause, our own repentance going before according to the sacrament of
penance with all the parts thereof, as by a necessary disposition of the
matter apt to receive this effect, which is Reconciliation with God after our
fall. Venial sin.
Venial sin is a disordinat affection or passion disordering our dew love
to God and our dew obedience to his law, either by frailty of light motions
and incitations (against the which we fight not so strongly as we should,
neither watch so warely as we ought) or by natural infirmity of the old
corrupted Adam, or by excusable ignorance of the particular factes, in all which
we forsake not God, nor our love to him and to our neighbor, but are for the
time rather let and hindered, then auerted or removed from our love and duty
to God. This sin is called venial or pardonable, for that the Act thereof
excludes us not from the kingdom of heaven, neither makes us deadly guilty
in Gods sight. And the reason is, because such motions of frailty, and such
light negligences (without the which this life is not lead) are but a smodering
heat of the old fire of original sin clean quenched in the water of
baptim: Quenched I say, for any gyltinesse thereof to remain, but not quenched
utterly for the operation and working thereof. The old Adam works still in
us, and rebelleth against the spirit (notwithstanding he was drowned in
Baptism) but the spirit of the new man in Christ resists, and fights
daily against him. In which fight and combat the best men are sometime venially
ouercomed, though not deadly, as most men are.

This is the clear doctrine of S. Augustine, and of all the learned Fathers by
him alleged in his second Book against Iulia^ the Pelagia^: Of S. Ambrose, S.
Cypria^, S. Chrysostom, S. Hierom, Gregory Nazia^zene S. Hilarie, S. Basil,
S. Ireneus, with certain other, by him, as I said, alleged against Iulia^ the
Pelagia^. And to be short with you herein M. Horn, behold one direct and clear
sentence of S. Austin, comfortable to al those holy Fathers and Doctors, in
which he shortly and clearly co^futeth your most ignorant co^fusio^ of venial
sin and of mortal: saying that every sin of it self is mortal. For after he
had alleged all the forenamed doctors, and last of al in this place S. Ambrose,
concerning the remnants of original sin in us, which by your doctrine and
Mela^chtho^s, is deadly and mortal sin, thus he concludes him self. Ecce
quanta^ nos pugna^ etc. Lib. 2. co^tra Iul. Pelag. To. 7. Fol. 213 ^. in Fol.
Paris. Anno. 55.
Behold what a great fight or co^bat, this valiau^t soldier of Christ, and
faithful doctor of his Church (he meneth S. Amb.) shows us to have with
sins already dead and slain: (he meneth original sin in baptism) for how
is (that) sin dead seeing that it works many things in us, when we strive
against it? What many things are these, but fond and hurtful desires, which
draw the consenters unto them into destruction: which yet to suffer and not to
yield unto, is a combat, a conflict and a battle? Now between whom is this
battle* but between good and evil: not between nature and nature (as the
Manichees imagined) but between nature and sin: sin, I say, already dead,
but yet to be buried, that is, whollly to be healed.

How then say we, this sin is dead in baptism (as also this man says, S.
Ambrose) and how do we yet confess, that it dwells in our members, and
works in us many desires, we striving still against it (as also this Ambrose
confesses) but because this sin in respect of the gyltynesse thereof,
wherein (before baptism) we were fast tied, is dead, and yet being dead
rebelleth, until by perfect buryal it be quite healed. And yet this sin is
not now (after baptism) in such sort called sin, as that it made us guilty
(before God) but because by the gyltinesse of Adam it was made (sin) and
because also by rebelling it draws us to sin, except the grace of God by
Jesus Christ our Lord do help us, that this dead sin do not so rebelle, that
by ouercoming us it wax again alive, and reign (in our mortal body). In this
battle fighting and toyling, as long as this life is a tentation upon the
earth, No^ ide^ sine peccato non sumus.
we are not therefore in sin, Sed in quibus ab illo rebella^te, etsi no^
laetaliter, sed venialiter, tamen vincimur, in his co^trahimus, vnde quotidie
dicamus. Dimitte nobis debita nostra.
because this which in such sort is called sin, works in our members,
contrarying the law of (our) mind, as long as we consent not unto it in the
unlawful desires and motions of it. For as touching our selves, we should
remain, always without sin (until this evil were (utterly) healed) if we
did never consent to the evil. But in such things as by the rebellion of this
evil, we are ouercomed in, though not deadly, but venially, yet ouercomed, in
such things I say, we contract or get that whereby we must daily say: Lord
forgive us our trespasses. As (for example) married folk, when for pleaesure
only they excede the measure necessary for generation. As also continent and
chaste persons, when they stay in such thoughts with some delectation, not yet
determining the wicked deed, ve^ gerentes decernentis.
or bearinge (the wicked deed) of him that does determine it, but not auerting
so diligently as they ought the intention of their mind from such thoughts,
nor yet riddinge them selves so soon from the thoughts (being ones fallen
into them) as they ought. Thus far S. Augustine. These two examples he gives
of venial sin. And for these venial sins we must say daily (says he)
Lord forgive us our Trespasses. According to this doctrine he teaches in an
other place, where he writes thus. The sons of God as long as they live in
this mortal life, In Enchi^idio cap. 64. Romans 8.
they fight with their mortalite. And though it be truly said of the^: As many
as are lead with the Spirit of God, those are the sons of God, yet they are
so stirred with the Spirit of God and do so profit to Godward as the sons of
God, that yet as the sons of me^, Sap. 9. Crimen. Peccatu^.
especially by reason of their corruptible body molesting the^, they fall
back to the^ selves ward, with certain humain motions, and therefore do sin.
There is a great difference, as we have largely said. For though every Crime
(by which term he calls mortal sin) be a sin, 1. Joan. 1.
yet every sin is not a Crime. As much to say, every venial sin is not
mortal or deadly.

Therefore we say in deed, that the life of holy men, as long as they live in
this mortalite, may be found without Crime, or deadly sin. But (venial)
sin if we say we have not, we deceive our selves (as the holy Apostle
says) and Truth is not in us. Here again S. Augustine makes a clear
difference between the crime or deadly sin, which makes us the sons of
wrath, and between the venial sin, with the which we continewe yet the sons
of God: and the which holy me^ in this life never lack. But God forbid that
holy men should never lack deadly and mortal sin: which upon M. Horns
doctrine ( that every sin of it self is mortal) must needs follow. No. No
M. Horn, your lewd spirit and the holy Spirit of the learned fathers are far
wide a sonder.

This you learned of Melanchthon, and he of Luther, the very synke of all your
filthy heresies. But how learnedly and pithely this fond and lewd doctrine
of Melanchthon, Luthers, and youres was confuted by Doctor Eckius, in the open
disputation between him and Melanchthon at Worms, you may M. Horn (for you
make no deinty, I think, to read heresye books) see and read to your great
confusion even in the very works of Melanchthon printed at Wittenberge. Tom 4.
in Actis wor maciensibus. Fol. 650* and sequent. Page 656. in fine.
Anno. 1564.

Where also you shall find a Notable place of S. Augustine corrupted first by
Luther, and then by Melanchthon, so clearly detected and pressed of Doctor
Eckius, that Melanchthon was feign in that honorable Assembly openly to
recante, and to say. Quod ad me attinet, agnosco male citatum esse. As for my
own part, I confess it was wrongfully alleged. The place was this. Where S.
Augustine wrote: That Concupiscence was taken away by baptism, non vt non fit,
sed vt non imputetur, not that yt should be no more in man after baptism, but
that after baptism it should no more be imputed unto us, if by deliberat
consent we yielded not thereto: Luther and Mela^chton mad S. Augustine to say.
That sin was taken away by baptism, not that it co^tinewed not still in man,
but that it should no more be imputed to man. By which feate and slight, by
turning Co^cupisce^ce into sin, they proved both their Imputative righteousness,
as that man was never just, good, and holy, but only was accepted for such,
though he remained still a sinner and had sin always in him, and also that the
same sin was in him a deadly and mortal sin. Which is the thing that M.
Horn here affirms, auouching that every sin of yt self is mortal.

Which (to make an end hereof shortly) is as much to say, as every sickness
infirmity or disease is of it self death. For as the body lives by the soul,
so the soul lives by God. As the body dies, when the soul is separated from
it, so the soul dies, when God is gone from it. Which matter S. Augustine most
excellently handles in his notable work de Ciuitate Dei. Lib. 13. cap. 23.
and 24. Lib. 14. Cap. 4. and 9.
As therefore not every disordered affection of the body kills it out of
hand, but the body is long and much vexed with deseases and infirmites before
it dye, yea and as long as the desease reaches not to the heart or root of
vital humor where hence the life springs, as long as that principle of life
is whole and sound, the body lives and dies not: so not every conversion of
the soul to the creatures, bredeth a separation of the soul from the
Creator: but the soul fights against the flesh, and though in that fight
it take a blow, yea and a wound to now and the^, yet the soul recouereth it
self and yeldeth not wholly to the flesh, or to any other creature, but
cleaves still to God his Creator, loves him still, keeps his law, and so
falls not deadly, neither synneth mortally, until it give over to vice, and
forsakes God. Which evil men do, without any fight or combat at al. But good
men either not at al, or very seldom and after great fight: and the^ are they
no more good men or the children of God, but are now become the children of
wrath, so to perish everlastingly, except they repent. This is a great and a
clear distinction between mortal sin and venial sin.

Now where you add, that though every sin be of yt self mortal, yet it is
also venial to be purged by the merits of Christ only, if you take venial for
pardonable or remissible, we grant, every sin be it never so mortal, is in
such a sense venial the sin against the holy Ghost, which is final
impenite^ce, alonely excepted. But if you take venial, as it is an opposite to
mortal, as M. Fekenha^ took it, when he avouched that by a godly ceremony
venial sins may be remitted, and as you must take it, if you will contrary M.
Fekenhams assertion, then are you in an other foul error. For as the venial
sin is not mortal (as I have proved) so neither is any mortal sin venial,
as long as it is mortal. This confounding of degrees in sin, to make all
mortal, is a Stoical and Barbarous paradoxe, opening the gate to al
dissoluteness and licentiousness: not only contrary to truth and lerning, but
contrary to good life and good manners. And it seems to agree iumpe with
Luthers paradoxe, wherein he taught and defended, That a good work, be it
never so well done, is according to the mercy of God a venial sin and
according to the Judgment of God a mortal sin. Roffensis co^tra Articul.
Lutheri. Art. 31. and 32. Vide and Council. Trident. Sess. 6. Can. 25.
Which strange paradoxe of that fond friar being lernedly and pithely
confuted of our learned and holy countreman the blessed Bishop of Rochester
Doctor Fysher, I remitte the learned Readers to that place: where also they
shall find this distinction of mortal and venial sin, clearly prosecuted
against the wicked doctrine of Luther there, and against the peuishe assertion
of M. Horn here.

Where you add, by the merits of Christ only, if you mean as by the
principal effect, and by the virtue whereof only all other works of men are
auaylable and meritorious, I grant you say well. But if you say mortal sin is
purged by the merits of Christ only, excluding by the word only, al
repentance, contrition of heart, confession of the mouth, and satisfaction of
our own parts to our ability, I note it for an other foul error and wicked
heresye of Luther your grandsir, whereby to extolle the merits of Christ, you
do full peuishly exclude al work of man, which yet the Scriptures expressly
require to concur with the merits of Christ, not as of the^ selves simply
auailable, but as by the merit of Christ's passion, auaylable: and as the
works of the holy Ghost, given unto us by Charity poured into our hearts, good
and meritorious. Remember M. Horn what Christ said to the Pharisees. Rom 5.
Oportebat ista facere, and illa no^ intermittere. Luca. 11.
You ought to do these things, and not to omit the other things. Put
altogether M. Horn. Christ's merits purchase heaven to mankind: It is most
true. And yet it purchases not heaven to the Infidel, to the Jew; to the
heretic, or to the wicked Christian. Galat. 5.
But only to such as have faith that works by charity, which charity
co^prehe^deth al manner of good works.

You affirm beside against M. Fekenham that no venial sin can be remitted
by any ceremony. For a short answer to this point (because largely this matter
is treated by M. Allen in his last book of the power of priesthod etc.) hear
what S. Augustine says in his Enchiridio, within few chapters after the words
lastly recited, In Euchi^idio c. 71. Delet omnino haec oration minima and
quotidia^a peccata. Cap. 72.
where he made a distinction between crimen and peccatum. Thus he says. De
quotidianis autem breuibus leuibusque peccatis, sine quibus haec vita non
ducitur, quotidiana oration fidelium satisfacit. As concerning the daily, short,
and light sins, without the which no man lives, the daily prayer of the
faithefull does satisfye. By the daily prayer he means the Pater noster, as
in the same chapter he expounds him self. Again in the next chapter he
teaches, that by all kinds of alms deeds (under alms deeds comprehending al
good works) such venial sins are forgiven: Thus he says after a long
enumeratio^ of good works. Multa itaque genera sunt eleemosynaru^, quae cu^
facimus, adiuuamur vt dimitta^tur nobis nostra peccata. There are therefore many
kinds of alms deeds, which when we do, we are helped to have our sins
forgiven unto us. Now why are the saying of our daily prayer, and the doi^g of
alms deeds, thought of this learned Father to redeem these smaller sins, but
because as such sins are not committed with a total auersio^ from God the
creator (for so were they mortal, not venial) but by a frail co^uersio^ to
the creature, so again every good motion to God ward again, expressed by some
such virtuous act, D. Thomas par. 3. q. 87. Art. 3.
redemeth in the sight of God the former declini^g from God. This Reverent
motion to Godward as it is expressed by S. Augustine here for examples fake, in
sayi^g the Pater noster, a^nd in doing of alms deeds, so by the Judgment of
the Church, which no true Christian man ought to mystrust, the same is also
expressed, in kneeling, in knocki^g the breast, in kissing of holy reliks, or in
any holy ceremony, don for the honor of God and of his Sai^ts, which
redou^deth to hi^, for whose sake they are honored. By this M. Horn you may
shortly understand, in what sense the Catholics affirm, that by a holy
ceremony venial sins may be taken away. And thus the Cross that came from the
Jesuits to M. Feken. came in a good hour. As by the occasion whereof, you have
discovered unto you some of your lurking heresies, and the Catholic faith is
somewhat opened (more perhaps the^ you would it were) to al such as have grace to
harke^ thereunto. Your farther assertion that al mortal syns are also venial,
save only the syn against the holy Ghost, is the new scoured heresy of Wiclef,
as is before touched. But see you not, that when ye say there is no mortal
sin, but the sin against the holy Ghost, how contrary you are to your
self, saying that al sins are mortal, and yet again affirming there is no
mortal sin at all, but one? Whereby ye go very nere to the Pelagians heresy,
taking away original sin. For if there be no mortal sin, but the sin
against the holy Ghost (that is, lack of repentance, as Wicleff declares)
then did not Adam commit any mortal sin: for he died penitently. Vide Aug.
co^tra Iul. per totum.
And then, if he committed no deadly sin in the transgression of Gods
commandment: he could not transfunde original sin that should kill his
posterity, which was a branch of the Pelagian heresy.

Neither will it help you to say, that there is no sin, saving lack of
repentance, but is purged by the merits of Christ. For the question is not,
when we speak of venial and mortal sin, how it may be taken away or
forgeuen, but what pain and penalty each of his own nature deserves. Venial
sin deserves no other pain, then temporal pain. Mortal sin deserves
everlasting pain.

But here is no place, exactly to discuss these matters. And I have said this
only, to show, what a sort of errors and heresies ye wrap up with the closing
of your book: and that if it were but for these only, M. Fekenham might have
called you, and that justly in plain terms (without any almost) an heretic.
As for M. Jewel, if M. Fekenham said (as ye say he said) that he should never
be able to answer M. Doctor Hardings book, he said nothing but truth: which
does well appear to any indifferent Reader, by the labors of those that have
confuted already the stronger, the greater, and the more important parts of
his Reply: and have already discried about one thousand of manifest errors and
lies in him. To what number then, think you, will they muster, if a whole
confutation of all the remnant should come forth?

Here would now somewhat be said to your answer, concerning the rumor of M.
Fekenhams subscription and recantation: and I suppose if I knew the whole
circumstance of the matter, I might easily confute al your answer therein. And
yet as strange as ye make your self to that rumor or any knowledge thereof, a
man may well gather, and go no further then your own book, that your self
ministered great occasion of such rumors: as telling him so often in your
answer, of the fear of reuolte that his friends had in him: with the which
also you end your answer. Fol. 2.
In telling of him, that he seemed to be resolved, Fol. 130.
and in a manner fully satisfied at your hands. And that ye made relation
thereof to certain honorable persons: and finally, Fol. 128.
that your self do plainly here confess, that ye said, that M. Fekenham had
changed his Religion nine times, yea nintene times. But these matters I will
leave: as also your unkind and ungentle dealing with him: and your complaints
against him, contrary to your promise: and will now only put your Reader in
remembramce, of the Jesuits, whom ye call monkishe Iebusites, and pray him
withal well to consider the order and trade of their lives, and doctrine, yea
the gloriouse issewe that has and daily does follow thereof, comparing them
with the doings and doctrine of you and your fellows. And then I doubt not,
but he will think, that this is nothing but vile and wicked railing in you, to
call them Iebusites, The Jesuits.
and that in comparison to you, and your ghospelling brethren, they may be
counted living angels. If the profession of a religiouse and a monastical life
deserve in them this contumely and reproach at your hands, then may ye call S.
Basil, S. Hierome, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, S. Gregory our Apostle, with
Ruffinus, Epiphanius, Paulinus, Cassianus, and a number of other ancient and
godly Fathers Iebusites to. And see ye not M. Horn, how this your blasphemy
does not redounde to those Fathers only, but even to our Savior Christ Jesus
him self, whose name they bear, See more of this in the Fortress annexed to
Vener. Bid. Fol. 73. and seq.
and whose steps they most diligently and most ernestly do follow, as well by
a virtuous austere life, as by paineful preaching? Which their travail our
Savior Jesus has so prospered and blessed, that your new Apostle Luther has
not brought so many Christian souls by his poisoned heresy to destruction and
damnation in Europa: as they have brought Panyms, Mores, and Turks many a
thousand mile from Europa, from Paganism to the catholic faith, from the
which we have departed and run away hedlong.

Mark the providence of God.
Neither can I either to much think upon, or to much, praise the wonderful
providence of God in this behalf. For even as a thousand years sithence, the
Christian Empire, and faith began to decay in Asia and Afrike by cursed
Mahomete, caused the decayed faith, again to spring and take root in the
west part of the world: as namely among us in England, and afterward among
the Germans, the Bulgarians, the Polonians, the Hungarians, the Danes, the
Prussians, Part. 1. Cap. 16. fol. 71. and sequen.
the Lituanians, and among a number of other nations, as I have in the
Fortress annexed to the history of Bid ^eclared: so now in the latter days
the Empire of Constantinople becoming Turkishe, and in our days a great part
of our own Europa, being (the more pity) carried away with errors and
heresies, God has of his wonderful mercy and goodness, in man's remembrance,
opened and reveled to us, as it were a new world, of the which neither by
writing nor otherwise, we ever heard any thing before. And which is a cause of
deper and more ample thanks, he has by his providence so ordained, that the
said countries beside in Asia and Aph^ica are become of plain and open
Idolatours, of Mores and Sarazens, very good Christians: and that chiefly by
the great help and travail, of these blessed and virtuous Jesuits, whom you
so lewdly call Iebusites. By whom also God has showed such wonders and
miracles, as the hearing or reading of them, were to any good Christian heart
of al things most comfortable. And suerly if a man would deaply and thoroughly
weigh and consider the greatness of this benefit, he might well doubt, whether
after the creation of the world and the redemption of mankind by the passion of
Christ, there be any one benefitte or work of God, more wonderful then this:
or whether there be any one state or vocation in Christ's Church, after the
Apostles, more worthy laud and praise then these, that you so vilanously call
Iebusites. So filthely your blasphemous mouth can rail against Gods truth. No
no, M. Horn, these be no Iebusites. The Iebusites be the cursed sede of Cham,
cursed of Noe their father for dishonouring of him. Genes. 9
Ye, ye are the Iebusites, that the celestial father with his own mouth, has
cursed for making his Spowse your mother an idolatrouse strompet and harlet.
Whom the blessed Jesuits, as good graciouse children, honor and reverence
Who worthily bear that name also, their works being correspondent to their
name, which does signify a Savior. For they, by their preaching have saved,
and brought from damnation many an hundred thousand of souls, to the
everlasting bliss of heaven, the which God of his goodness and mercy grant
unto us. Amen.

FINIS.
Laus Deo, qui dedit velle, and dedit perficere.
A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS AND PERSONS IN THIS book debated, or
otherwise contained. The figure notes the leaf.a. and.b. the first and second
side.
A.
ABgarus. 396. b. and. 401. a. Abuses reformed in Counsel, 800. years past.
237. a. The absurdity of the Act touching the Oath 424 and. 425. Item. 457. and
458. Adrianus the first, Pope. 234. a. Adrian the 4. 286. b. Aeneas Syluius.
356. and. 357. Aethyopians. 304. b. 305. a. Agapetus, Pope. 169. Agatho, Pope.
209. and. 210. Albigenses. 318 a. and. b. Alcuinus. 231. b. Alexander the 3.
287. a. and. b. 288. a. and. b. Almaricus a French heretic. 317. a. Alphegius
bishop of Canterbury. 308. a. Alteration of Religion in England. 453. b.
Aluredus or Alphredus a king of the Saxons. 292. b. Ambrose for the Clergies
Primacy in matters Ecclesiastical. 105. b. The story between S. Ambrose and
Theodosius at large. 497. b. and. 498. a. Andronicus Emperor, whom M. Horn
calls Emanuel. 77. and. 78. Anselmus a Notable bishop. 297. b. Anthymus the
heretical patriarche of Constantinople deposed by Pope Agapetus. 169.
Antvverpian Lutherans allow but thee General Councels. 220. a. In arms
against the Caluinistes, and in open writing condemninge them. 433. and. 434.
a. A notable story of the Aphricane bisshops. 91. b. Disputations of the
Aphricanes. 13. a. The Apology of England accompteth marriage of priests
heresy. 8. b. The Apology clippeth the Creed. 63. a. It falsifieth S. Hierom.
107. a.
The childish toys of the Apology. 151. b A double untruth of the Apology
about the Synod of Fra^ckford. 235. a. A foul lie of the Apology. 282. a. A
fable of the same. 287. b. Double Authority in the Apostles, ordinary and
extraordinary. 477. a. and. b. The Apostles ordinances. 487. a. Appeals to
Rome from Constantinople. 150. a. Apulia. 289. b. 310. b. and. 311. a. Arcadius
the Emperor. 122. b. Arius. 109. and. 110. Armenians. 303. b. and. 304. a.
Arnoldus Brixiensis. 303. a. 318. a. and. b. Arnoldus de villa Noua. 302. and.
303. Articles of our Creed. 423. Athanasius calls the Judgment of Princes in
matters Ecclesiastical a point of Antichrist. 97. What Appeal he made to
Constantine. 95. His Judgment touching the Princes Primacy. 94.95.96. Item.
512. b. 513. and. 514. S. Augustine for the Popes Supremacy abundantly. 529.
and. 530. S. Augustine our Apostle. 232. a. Aultars. 520. a. and. b.
B.
BAsilius the Emperor. 258.259.260. and. 261. Benedictus the second. 203. a.
Bisshops in old time made with the consent of the people. 155. b. How
princes depose bisshops. 157. Bisshops only have voice and do subscribe in
Councels. 149. b. and. 474. a. Bisshops deposed for M. Horns vvhordom. 164. a.
and. 197. a. Bisshops confirmed of the Pope in England before the Conquest.
293. a. Bisshops. See Inuesturinge. The bisshops office resembled by the
shepeheards. 409. b. Bisshops forbidden to preach, and limited what to preach,
in king Edward's the sixth his days. 452. b. 453. a. and. b. Spiritual
Jurisdiction committed to Bishops by Christ, and so practiced with out any
commission from the Prince. 467. and sequentib. Jurisdiction given to bishops
by Constantin. 469. a. By Theodosius and Carolus Magnus. 469. b. and. 470. a.
The bisshops Superiority acknovveleadged by Constantin. 491. a. and seq. By
Valentinian. 495. and seq. By Theodosius the elder. 497. and seq. The cruelty
of the Bohemheretikes. 5 a Bonifacius the third. 194. Bonifacius the Apostle of
the Germains. 230. b. 232. and seq. Braughton. 380. and sequentib.
C.
Calvin calls the Princes Supremacy, blasphemy. 22. b. His sentence
conde^neth the Oath. 504. b. 506. b. and. 507. Caluinists and Luthera^s at
mortal enemitie. 432.433.434. Carolomanus. 230. a. and. b. Catholics no
seditious subjects. 21. a. Their defense for refusinge the Oath. 83. b. A
Challenge to M. Horn. 4. b. Chalcedon Council.137. and fiftene leaves
following. The cause of Committies made in the Chalcedon Council. 145. b.
Charles Martel. 226. and seq. Charles the Great. 48.232. b. 234. b. and 13.
leaves follovving. Charles the.4. Emperor. 347. and seq. Magna Charta. 322. a.
Chrysostom touching the Spiritual government. 74 410.521. and. 522. Two
powers in the Church. 445. a Clodoueus of France. 164. Of the Clergies
yelding to king Henry the eight. 367. and. 368. Confessio S. Petri: what it
means in old vvriters: 227 b. 228. a. and. b. The Sacrament of Confirmation.
476. b. Confirmation of Popes resigned by Levvys the first, Emperor. 251. b.
and. 252. a. Granted first to Charlemaine by the Pope. 252. a. Of that
matter, see. 254. a. and b. Conon Pope. 204. Conradus Emperor. 283. b.
Constantin the Great. 68.85.86. and seq. 99. a. 401. a. 469. a. 491. and seq.
The Circumstance of Co^stantins Judgment in Cecilians cause. 90. b. Constantin
no lavvefull Judge in the same cause. 92. a. He abhors the Primacie in
ecclesiastical causes. 92. How ^onstantin refused to Judge in Bishops
matters. 103. a. and 491. a. and b. Constantin the.5. Emperor. 200. a. The
destruction of Constantinople. 80 b. Constantius the Arrian Emperor reproved.
111. b. Articles of the late Convocation. 317. b. Of the Conuocations promise
made to king Henry the eight. 364. Words used at the Coronation of Princes.
9^. b. Councelles. see Emperors. Councelles kept before Princes were
Christened. 467. b. and. 468. a. General Councels abandoned by Act of
Parliament. 54. a. and 426 a. General Councels not to be kept without the
Popes Consent. 137. b. The sixth General Council. 205. and seq. The seventh
General Council. 223. a. The eight General Council. 257. et seq. Cusanu^. 117.
and. 118. Item. 357.358. and. 359.
D.
David. 47. and. 48. Dantes a foul heretic. 334. a. and b Dioscorus
Patriarche of Alexandria deposed by Pope Leo. 150. b. Condemned in Council
without the Emperors knowledge. 153. a. The fruit of disputations with
heretics. 12. b. The ^rotestantes in diverse points resemble the Donatistes.
58 and 59. The appeals of the Donatistes. 50. a. The donation of Constantine.
471. a. Durandus. 331. b.
E.
The keeping of Easter day. 101. b. The principal questions concerning
ecclesiastical regiment. 3. b. King Edward the first. 326. and 327. King
Edward the third. 344. and seq. Pope Eleutherius the Apostle of the
Britains. 397. a and sequent. Of his letters to king Lucius. 399. a. and b. To
what end Emperors confirm the laws of the Church. 117 a. How they have
and may deal in General Councelles. 117 and. 118. Confirmation of Emperors by
the Pope 334 a. Examples of Emperors that have repined against the Sea
Apostolic. 3^8.330. and. 340. England only defends the Princes Supremacy.
3. b. 22. b. 134. b. Religion altered in England against the vvil of the
whole Clergy. 9 a. A nevve manner of election in England. 88. b. The Ephesine
Council. 12^. and sequent. Eugenius the.4. Pope. 353 a. A place of Eusebius
corrected. 87 b. Eutiches the Archeretike. 131. b. and. 132 a Excommunication
belongs to the Office of Bishops. 152. a. 447. a. and. b. 500. a. and. b. The
excommunication of Theodosius. 498. a. Ezechias. 52. b.
F.
FAsting. 535. Why M. Feckenha^ delivered his Treatise to M. Horn. 1. b. Why
he delivered the same to some of the Council. 2. a. A true defense of M
Feckenham. 27. a. The cause of his enprisonment in king Edward's days. 36. b.
Disputatio^s had with M. Fecke^ha^. 37. a. His reasons falsely compared with
the Donatistes. 403. a. M Fekenham clered. 429. b. 527. and. 528. His
Arguments inevitable 506. and. seq. Item. 515. b. Ferrariensis. 369. b. and,
370. a. Rebellion in Flaunders. 17 18 19.20.21.432. and seq. Foxes false
Martyrs. 60.61.317. b. 318. b. 326. b. Foxes lewd lies of S. Thomas of
Cau^terburie. 306. b. 307 a. and. b. Foxes falsehood. 310. a. His folly. 312.
Foxes lewd lies about the story of king John. 312. b. 314 b. Fox confuted
by his own Authors. 312. b. 313. a. His fructus temporum. 313. b. A short
answer to all Foxes martirologe by Frederike M. Horns supreme head. 319. a. A
Synod in Frankeforde against Imagebreakers. 234. b. Frederike Barbarossa. 285.
and seq. Frederike the second. 315. and sequent. Frederike the third. 355. and
seq. Rebellion of French protestants. 16. a.
G.
GAlfride of Monemouth a vain fabler. 314 a. D. Gardener Bishop of
Winchester. 367. b. The falsehood of Gaspar Hedio. 347. b. The rebellion of
German Protestants. 15. b. The electours of Germany appointed by Pope
Gregory the fifth. 271. b. Gilbie against the Supremacy of king Henry the
eight. 23. His Judgment against the nevve Religion. 24. b. Good man against
Obedience to Superiors. 25. b. The end of temporal Government. 29. a. of
spiritual Government. 29. b. The Grecians acknovvleadg the Popes Primacie. 76.
b. The worthy doings of S. Gregory. 189. and. 190. Gregory Nazianzene for
the Clergies superiority. 518. a. and. b. 520.
H.
Henry the.3. Emperor. 273. b. 274. a Henry the 4. 278. and seq. Henry the
fifth. 282. and seq. Henry the first, king of England. 298. b. 299. and. 300.
Henry the second. 306. a. His penance. 309. a. Henry the third. 321. and
seq. Henry the fifth. 354. a. Henry the eight. 364. and seq. Sedition the
peculiar fruit of heresy. 15. a. The good that heresy works to the Church.
37. b. Heresy is Idolatry. 42. a. Heresies the destructions of common
weals. 81. a. A number of old condemned heresies renewed by protestants.
57.316. a. and b Hildebrand Pope. 275. and sequent. Hildebrand had the Spirit
of Prophecy. 277. a. The form of hi^ Election. 279. b. Five gross lies in
the book of Homilies touching Images. 76. b. and. 77. a. Honorius Pope. 217.
and. 218. M. Horns idle vvandring from the purpose. 4. a. 53. b. 85. b. 289. a.
321. a. 333. a. His tale incredible. 5. a. and. 467. b. His late brag. 5. a.
The good that heresy works to the Church. 37. b. Heresy is Idolatry. 42.
a. Heresies the destructions of common weals. 81. a. A number of old
condemned heresies renewed by Protestants. 57.316. a. and. b Hildebrand Pope.
275. and seq. Hildebrand had the Spirit of Prophecy. 277. a. The form of his
Election. 279. b. Five gross lies in the book of Homilies touching Images.
76. b. and 77. a Honorius Pope. 217. and. 218. M. Horns idle vvanderinge from
the purpose. 4. a. 53. b. 85. b. 289, a. 321. a. 33^. His tale incredible. 5.
a. and 467. b. His late brag. 5. a. M. Horn no bishop at al 7. b. 9. a. and
301. a. M. Horn contrary to him self. 30.39. b. 143. b. 232. a. 247. a. and. b.
442. a. 447. a 539. a. M. Horns unskillfulness. 40. b. M. Horn confuted by the
Chapters and places that him self alleges. 41. b. 49. a. 51. b. 103. a. 123.
b. 129. b. 130. a. and b. 132. a. 140. b. 141. a. 152. a. 158. a. and. b. 259.
b. 161. b. 162. a. 164. a. 166. b. 174.282. a. and. b. 184. a. 202. b. 215. a.
221. b. 223. a. 231. a. 238. a. 273. a. 277. b. 286. b. 288. b. 294. a. 299. a.
322. b. 323. b. 330.331 b. 334. a. 337. b. 342. a. 343. b. 347. a. and b. 353.
a. 354. a. 356.357. b. 364. b. 375. b. 378 a. 403. a. 411. b. M. Horns loose
kind of reasoning. 202. b. 249. b. 325. a. and b. 327. a. 333. a. 343. b. 352.
b. 369. b. 375. a. M. Horns post have. 212. b. 213. a Two legerdemaines of M.
Horn. 218. b His great provves. 225. b His wonderful Metamorphosis of S.
Peter's Keys. 226. and sequent. His rare wisdom. 255. a. 300. a His confuse
vvriting. 268. b His inconstant dealing. 280. a His dissembling of his Authors
narration. 282. b. 315. b M. Horn plaieth Cacus part, nipping his authors.
285. a. 286. a. 288. b 329. a. 330. b. 335. a. 345. b. 350. a. 371. a. and. b.
374. b. 380. a. 396. b. 398. a. 448. a. 514. a. M. Horns Impudency. 294. b.
M. Horn builds upon the doings of evil Princes. 397. a. 311. b. 362. a. M.
Horns shameful Ignorance in gra^mer. 322. b. M. Horn declared an heretic by
his own Supreme heads. 317. a. 331. a. By his own Antipope. 337. b.
His marvelous Rhetorike. 384. a M. Horns false Latin. 480. b. M. Horn
depraueth M. Fekenhams arguments. 396. a. 402.423. b. 451. a. 461. a. 464. a.
487. b. M. Horn driven to streightes. 414. b. 415. a. 486. a. 506. a. M.
Horns foul shifte. 430. a. He makes frustrate all Excommunications in
England these 8. years. 446. b. He limiteth the Statute. 451. a. and b. His
starting holes. 499. b. M. Horns Untruths arise to the Number of six
hundred, four score and ten. Per totum. Hugh Capet the French king. 272. a.
Hungary. 300. b. 301. a.
I
The Jew of Tevvkesburie. 87. b. An after reckoning of certain of M. Jewels
untruths. 77. a* 129. b. 135. a. 244. b. 378. b. 400. b. 407. b. 468. a. and.
b M. Jewels Regester. 214. a. A Copy of M. Jewels Rhetorike. 142. b 192. b.
246. b. 399. b. M. Ievvel overthrown by his own Charles. 240. b. M. Jewels
hypocrisy. 407. a. 515. a. The Jesuits. 533. a. and. b. Ignatius for the
bisshops Superiority. 525. a. and. b. Image breakers condemned. 223. a. 234.
b. 260. b. Inuesturing of bisshops, how it came to Princes hands, and how
it was taken from them. 254. a. and. b. Given up by Henry the.5. 282. b.
Granted by the Pope. 389. b. 325. a. Given over in Hungary. 300. b. John the
Pope, a Martyr. 167. b. John the.22. Pope. 336. a. and. b. King John. 312. and
seq. Iosaphat. 50. and. 51. Josias. 53. a. Iosue. 45. b. Isacius the emperor
Heraclius his Lieutenant. 196. a. Isidorus against the Princes Supreme
Government. 365. and. seq. Justinius the elder. 166. and. 167. Justinian the
first. 169. and.14. leaves after. Justinian the second. 201. a. and. b.
K.
S. Peter's keys. 226. a. and sequentib. 242. a. Miracles done by keys. 226.
a. What the keys were, that were sent to Charles Martell. 227. a. Knokes
against the lineal succession of Princes. 25. ^
L.
LAnfrancus of Caunterburie. 295. a* Lay men in reformation of Ecclesiastical
matters may not b^ present. 131. b. 153. a. Why they are present in
Councelles. 150. a. 255. b. In what order they sit in Councelles. 237. b.
238. a. Gods laws and the Church laws. 486. b. and. 487. a. Legates, see
Pope. Leo the Great. 133. Proufes for the Popes primacie out of Leo. 134. b.
135. and. 136. Leo the.3. Pope. 240.241.242. Leo the.9. Pope. 274 a. Levvys the
first Emperor. 249. Levvys the fourth, Emperor. 333.334. and seq. S. Levvys
of France. 324. a. and. b. Liberius no Arrian. 112. a. A complainte for
defacing of Libraries. 292. a. Licinius the tyran. 297. a. Lotharius Emperor.
283. a. King Lucius of Britannie. 397. and seq. How king Lucius was Gods
vicar. 400. b. Luther condemns the Princes Supremacy in Ecclesiastical
causes. 22 a. 508. Lutherans and Caluinistes at mutual dissension.
432.433.434.
M.
The Madgeburgenses deny Princes to be heads of the Church. 22. a. Manfredus.
325 a. Marsilius Patauinu^ an heretic. 334. a. and b. Martian the Emperor.
140. b. 147. a. 251. b. 152. b. Martyrdom without any cause of faith. 308.
a. Maximilian the first. 362. How Christ and how the Priest is a Mediator.
522. a. and. b. Melanchthon vvil not have Princes to judge of doctrine. 72. b.
Sir Thomas Mores Opinion of the Popes Primacie. 38. a. Mortal sin. 536 a. The
statute of Mortmaine. 327. a. and b. Moses was a Priest* 43. b.
N.
The Nicene Council. 101. and sequentib. Called by Siluester. 491. b. and. 492.
a. Nicolaus the first Pope. 257. Nilus of Thessalonica. 384. a. and b. M.
Novvell put to his shifts by M. Dorman. 45. b. Master Novvels boyishe
Rhetorike. 46. a. M. Novvels manner of reasoning reproved of M. Horn. 402. b.
Master Novvels vvitte commended. 481. Master Novvels unsavory solution. 507.
a.
O.
OEcumenius for the Sacrifice. 407. Orders and decrees made by S. Paul beside
the vvrite^ gospel. 485. b. 486. a. 488. b. Origin cursed. 170. a. and b. The
Oath. 423. and seven leaves following. The Oath contrary to an Article of our
Creed. 423. b. 24. a. and sequent. 427. The Oath again. 451.452. and many
leaves follovving. Item fol. 509* and.510. Otho the first. 268. and sequent.
Otho the fourth. 311. a. and. b. Oxforde made an university. 292. b.
P.
PApiste Historians. 203. a. and b. The order of the Parliament about the
Conqueste. 299. b. Pastors. 409. a. and. b. 417. a. Paterani. 318. b. 319. b.
Pelagius no english Monk. 528. b. Penance enioined to Theodosius. 498. a. and
b. Peterpence paid in England. 293. a. Petrus de Corbario. 336. b. 337. a.
Petrus Cunerius. 341. b. 342. a. Petrus Bertrandus. 342. a. et b. Petrus de
Aliaco. 353. a. Philip le beau, the French King. 329. and sequent. Philip de
Valois. 341. and sequent. Philip the first Christian Emperor. 39^. b. and
sequent. Phocas. 194.195. Pilgrimage in Charlemaines time. 236. b. Pilgrimage
to S. Thomas of Caunterbury. 309. a. Prayer for the dead and to Saints in
Constantines time. 87. a* Prayer for the dead in Charlemaines time. 236. b.
Priests have Authority to expound the Scripture. 41. a. Priesthood above a
kingdom. 73. b. 74. a. Of the word Priest and Priesthood. 405. and seq. 472.
a and. b. Princes Supreme Government in Ecclesiastical causes condemned of
all sorts of Protestants out of England. 21. b. 22. a. and. b. 208. a. How
Princes do govern in cases of the first Table. 71. b. 72. a. Evil success of
Princes intermedlinge in causes ecclesiastical. 171. How Princes do
strenghthen the Laws of the Church. 176. b. 179. b. Privileges granted to
Poules Church in London. 322. a. The uneven dealing of Protestants. 4. a.
Protestants confounded about the matter of succession. 8. a. Protestants like
to Arrians. 188. a. Why Protestants can not see the Truth. 247. b. The
Protestants Church compared to the schismatic temple of Samaria. 430. b.
431. a. Polidore foulie falsified by M. Horn. 350. a. and. b. Pope. The Popes
Primacie instituted by God. 38. a. 320. a. Acknovvleadged by the late Grecians.
76. b. Confessed by the Emperor Valentinian. 81. a* By Theodosius the first.
115. b. 120. b. By the second General Council. 121. a. By S. Hierom. 125. a.
Proved out of the third General Council. 129.130. Proved out of the fourth
General Counsel. 149.150.152.153.154. a. Proved out of Synodus Romana, by M.
Horn Authorized. 158.159.162. Confessed by Justinius the Elder. 166. By
Justinian the Emperor. 175.176. Proved by the Council of Braccara in Spain,
185, a. By the sixth. General Council. 209. a. By the seventh General
Council, 223. b. By the book of Carolus that Calvin and Master Jewel
alleges. 240. b. By the true Charles. 241. a. By the eight General Council.
259. a. By Basilius the Emperor of Greece. 259. b. By Otho the first. 268. a.
and b. 273. a. By hughe Capet the French King. 272. a. By Frederike
Barbarossa, 286. b. Agnised in Britannie before the Saxons. 291. a. and. b.
397. a. and. b. In England before the conquest. 292. and. 293. By William
Conqueror. 294.306. b. By Lanfrancus. 295. By the Armenians. 303. b. 304. a.
By the Aethyopians. 304. b. 305. a. By King Steven. 306, a. By King Henry
the.2. 306.309. a. By Frederike the second. 319. b. Practiced in England in
king Henry the third his time. 321. b. In France by S. Levvys. 324. b. In
England by king Edward the first. 326. a. and b. By Philip the French King.
330 a. and b. By Dura^dus M. Horns Author. 331. b. By King Edward the
third. 344. b. 345. a. By Charles the.4. Emperor. 346. b. 347. a. and b. By
King Richard the second. 350.351. a. By Petrus de Aliaco M. Horns Author.
353. a. By Sigismunde the Emperor. 353. b. By the Court of Paris. 355. b. By
Aeneas Syluius and Cusanus M. Horns own Authors. 357.358. By Isidorus. 366.
b. By Braughto^ M. Horns lavvier. 380. b. By Infidels. 470. b. By the
Sardicense Council. 515. b. By S. Augustine abundantly. 529.530. More of Pope,
see in Councelles. A note of good Popes among some badde. 263.270. a and b.
The Popes Legates in Councelles. 129.151.178. b. 207. a. 208. a. 211. b. 212.
a. and b. 224.231. a. 232. b. 234. b. 258. a. How Emperors had to do with
the deposition of Popes. 269. Gods Judgment upon such Princes as have most
repined against the Pope. 338.339. All the Popes Authorite sent away by ship.
225. b.

Q.
An humble Request to the Quene^ Majesty 213. b. Quintinus Heduus. 371. and
sequent.
R.
The Church of Rauenna reconciled to the Sea of Rome. 199. b. 200. a. To deny
the Real presence in the B. Sacrament, heresy by the laws of the Realm as
much now, as ever before. 482. b. 483. a. Rebellion of Protestants in
Boheme. 15. a. In Germany. 25. b. In France. 16. a. In England. Ibidem. In
Scotland. Ibidem. In Flanders. 17.18.19.20.21.432. and seq. Relikes from
Rome. 228.229. A brief Recapitulation of the former three books. 384. and
sequent. M. Horns Resolutions. 440. a. and b. King Richard the second. 349.
and seq. Robert Grosthead. 323. a. Rome ever had the Primacy. 154. a. Rome Head
of al Churches. 194. a. and b. 319. a. More of Rome, see in Pope. The cause of
the Roman calamities.600. years past..264.265. Why Lucius sent to Rome for
preachers. 398. a. and b.
S.
SAcrifice denied makes a way for Antichrist. 408. b. Solomon. 49.
Sardicense Council. 515.516 Scottish protestants rebellious. 16. Seuerinus
Pope. 196. Sicilian Princes. 289. b. 310. b 325. a. Sigismunde Emperor. 353.
and seq. Siluester called the Nicene Council. 491. b. 492. a. Siluester the 2.
was no Coniurer. 280. a. and b. Socrates a missereporter in some things. 495.
a. Sozomene three times falsified in one sentence by M. Horn. 103. b. Spain.
185. and sequent. 197. and sequentib. 221. and seq. Matters appertaining to the
Spiritual Jurisdiction. 381. b. The Statute of Praerogatiuae Regis. 509. b
King Steven. 305. b. Steven the 7. and 8. Popes. 263. b. 264. b. Supreme
Government in Princes misliked of all protestants out of England. 21. b. 22.
a. and. b. 508. The definition of a Supreme Governor. 28. b. How the Prince
is Supreme head over al persons. 29. a. 32. b. The power of the Princes
svvorde. 412.413. The svvorde of the Church. 413. a. and. b.
T.
TElemachus martyr. 308. The old Testame^ta figure of the nevve. 461. b. 462.
a. Theodosius the first. 115.116. and sequen. 497. and seque. Theodosius the
second. 127.128.129.130. a. Theodorike the Arrian king of Italy. 167.
Theodorus of Rauenna. 200. b. 201. a. Theodorus of Caunterbury. 429. a.
Theodorus Exarchus. 204. a. S. Thomas of Caunterburie. 307.308.309.310. The
Toletane Councels condemn M. Horns Primacie, and diverse other his heresies.
197.198. Totilas the Tyran. 172. b. 173. a.. Traditions vnvvrite^ to be
regarged. 106. The force of Truth. 415. a. The Turk much beholding to
Protestants. 436. a. and b.
V.
Valentinian the Emperor. 113. and seq. 495. and sequent. Venial sin.
536.537.538. Visitations in England, whether they are altogether
Scripturelie. 480. a. 482. a. False Latin in M. Horns visitation at Oxforde.
480. b. The Pope universal bishop. 150. a. Vitalianus Pope. 199. a. and b.
Untruths of M. Horn six hundred four score and ten. Per totum.
W.
WAldo the heretic. 318. VVebbe of Otterborne. 481. b. Westminster
disputations. 12. a. VVhitingames preface commending Goodmans traitorous Libel.
26. a. Wilfrid of York. 4^9. a. VVillia^ Conquero^r. 293.294 295.296.
William Rufus. 297.298. VVulstanus Bishop of vvorceter. 292. b
Z.
Zacharias Pope. 230. b. 231. a. 232. b. 233. a. Zenon Emperor. 155.156.
Faults escaped in the Printing.
Leaf Side Line Fault Correction. 15. 1. In the Margent Aene. Pius Aeneas
Syluius. 32. 1. In the Margent words wards 40. 2. 1. The.9. The.8. 43. 2.
In the Margent Psalm. 98. August. in Psalm. 98. 68. 2. 25. the for the 75. 2. 2.
Emanuel Andronicus. 105. 1. 32. In the Margent put: An. 25. Hen. 8. cap. 19.
109. 2. 27. (...) (...) 149 2. 31. In the Margent. Universal Bishop. Put it
out. Specially to be corrected
152. 1. 1. yt yet 194. 1. 19. neither though 20. with diligence Yet not with
such diligence 206. 1. 24. (...), (...), The whole sentence in some Copies is
quite leaft unprinted, which is this, (...). 227 2. In the Margent. Romano
Missae Romanae. 232. 1. In the Margent Beda in martyrologio. In martyrologio
Bedae, seu in additionibus ad idem. 234. 1. In the margent. To the allegation,
set. Platina in Adriano. 1. 241. 1. 31. In the Marge^t dixerit: direxit. 246 1.
23. his this 262 1. 5. busyed being busyed 282. 2. 7. Emperors vvriters. 249
2. In the margent. Guil. Hunting. Henr. Hungtingt. 303 1. In the margent.
Epist. Epist. 195. 310 1. 31. In the Marge^t ascrib. ascribendum. 321. 1. 27.
an and. 355. 1. In the margent. c. 2. cap. 12. Ibidem In the margent. 487. 497.
429 2. 8. not contrary not. 380. 1. In the top of the page 1550. 1150. 492 2.
In the margent. mandatio. mendacio.


