THE COMMONS COMPLAINT.

WHEREIN IS CONTAINED TWO SPECIAL GRIEVANCES: The first, the general
destruction and waste of Woods in this Kingdom, with a remedy for the same:
Also how to plant Wood according to the nature of every Soil, without loss of
any Ground; and how thereby many more and better Cattle may be yearly bred,
with the charge and profit that yearly may arise thereby.

THE SECOND GRIEVANCE IS, THE EXTREME DEARTH OF VICTVALS.

FOUR REMEDIES FOR THE SAME.

1. By a general Planting of Fruit Trees, with the charge and profit. 2. By an
extraordinary breeding of Foul and Pullen in places convenient, by a Plot
herein set down for the purpose, with the charge and profit. 3. By a general
destroying of all kind of Vermin, with a near estimation what is yearly
devoured and destroyed by them, and how the most of them in short time may be
destroyed with a small charge. 4. Proving the abundance of Corn, that is
yearly devoured and destroyed by the infinite number of Pigeons, kept and
maintained in this Kingdom.
LONDON Printed by William Stansby. 1611.

To the KINGS most Excellent MAJESTY.
NEXT unto GOD, most dread Sovereign, the love and duty that I owe unto your
Majesty and Kingdom, has imboldned me to Dedicate the fruits of my old age
and travel unto your Highness, hoping that the subject thereof will no way
offend You. It is intended to the good of your Majesty and your Royal
Progeny, the general good of the Commonwealth for all posterity; and in
part tends to your Princely speech to the Parliament. What I shall herein set
down I prove by the best Schoolmaster, which is, my long experience, having
spent many years in the attaining thereunto, especially these four last
years, wherein I have employed my study and travel through some parts of most
of the Countries of this Kingdom for this purpose, often having conference with
many of the best Commonwealths-men for my better understanding; desiring by all
good means to ataine to a perfect knowledge how to Plant, preserve, and
maintain the blessings of God as well in this our destroying age as they have
been in former times, wherein was left a precedent and plenty of that which
is now in effect destroyed. All are given to take the profit present, but few
or none at all regard the posterity or future times. This exercise in all ages
has been in high account with the wisest and most worthiest, and has been
blessed by God himself, (as has appeared to the world:) and by the
approbation of your Majesty, may be so put in execution, as the branches
thereof may be spread over all your Dominions, to the disburdening of your
loving Subjects of all their grieuances present and to come. I spare to
proceed any further, since your Majesty whom God has filled with the spirit
of wisdom in understanding, by your ready apprehension understands much
more then I can speak hereof. Thus submitting my poor labors, or rather
worthless mite, to the consideration of your Royal Majesty, having nothing
else to present the same withal, but my humble prayers to the King of Kings,
to multiply the gifts of his holy Spirit more and more upon you, and that you
may Reign many happy years amongst us.

Your Highness most humble Subject, Arthur Standish.

TO THE READER.
THou have here gentle Reader, brought home unto thee the harvest of my long
experience, with little labor or cost unto thy self, wherein thou may
plainly according to the nature of every Soil, learn how to plant such
profits as naturally our Country has, and will afoord for the profit of thy
self and Country. First, how to plant Wood, and how to breed Cattle to a
greater number, yearly to thy great gain, as shall plainly be proved. Jn the
second, the profit of planting fruit trees in Hedges or Orchards, as of Apples,
Wardens and Pears; being no strange novelties, although by want of industry
they are made strange unto us, by our buying them from foraine Countries at a
dear rate, by our sloth and negligence; whereas by the blessing of God, the
very soil of our Hedges is such, as they would yield great plenty, without
hindering any other profit, and may be gained with less cost and labor, then
any other commodity in this Kingdom whatsoever, as shall herein be proved. Jn
the third, the manner how to breed Foul and Pullen, by a secure plot from
stealing, and from vermin. Lastly, how by a speedy means to destroy all kind
of Vermin, especially the feathered kind, with a near estimation what is
yearly destroyed by Vermin and Pigeons, both in Corn and other things. By
means thereof, not only Corn, but especially other victuals is brought and
does continue at too dear a rate, for the poor Artificer and Laboring man;
by which dearth, too often arises discontents, and mutinies among the common
sort, as appeared of late by a grieuance taken only of the dearth of Corn, in
Warwickeshire, Northamptonshire and other places, about which time the minds of
many were molested: whereupon J took the first occasion to employ my Study
and travel in this business, hoping by Gods help to prevent such
inconueniencies, as too often does spring out of the desperate tree of want.
Whereupon good Reader, it insueth, that by the observing of these small
directions, thou may perform some part of the cause of thy creation, by
giving glory to thy Creator, honor, pleasure, and profit to thy King,
Country, and to thy self also, by feeling and relieuing thy Christian
brothers wants, and by a charitable industry, thou may raise means to
disburthen them of all their grieuances present and to come, and in the end, by
the mercy of our good God, thou may be partaker of his loving promises in
the Gospel, Come you blessed of my Father, etc. The which J crave for Jesus
Christ his sake.

UPON THE AVTHOR AND HIS Most commendable and necessary work.
FOr me thy pains and subject to commend
(Each praising each by their dumb silence best)
Were candle light unto the Sun to lend,
Send Owls to Athens, paint the Phoenix breast;
Give Flora Garlands, Love his Myrtle bow,
Arabia odours, pearl to Thetis brow.
But Lo the Genius of fair Britain, by
Commands me speak, and give thee thy desert,
Who art so careful of posterity,
And present times vnrew'd of greater part:
Swearing by Thames she is more enritcht by Standish,
Then all the gold she got by Drake and Candish.
Henry Peacham.

THE COMMONS COMPLAINT.
We do in all humbleness complain unto your Majesty of the general
destruction and waste of wood made within this your Kingdom, more within
twenty or thirty last years then in any hundred years before. Little respect
is taken but by your Majesty, for the posterity and prosperity of your Kingdom:
to many destroyers, but few or none at al does plant or preserve: by reason
thereof there is no Timber left in this Kingdom at this instant only to
repair the buildings thereof an other age, much less to build withal:
whereby this greeuance does daily increase. The reasons are many: first the
want of fire is expected, without the which man's life cannot be preserved:
secondly, the want of Timber, Brick, Tile, Lime, Iron, Lead and Glass for the
building of habitations. Timber for the maintaining of husbandry, for
navigations, for vessels, for bruing and the keeping of drink, and all other
necessaries for housekeeping: bark for the tanning of Leather, bridges for
travel, pales for Parkes, poles for Hoppes, and salt from the Wiches. The want
of wood is, and will be a great decay to tillage, and cannot but be the
greatest cause of the dearth of corn, and hinders greatly the yearly
breeding of many cattle, by reason that much straw is yearly burned, that to
the breeding of cattle might be employed: the want of wood in many places of
this Kingdom constrains the foyll of cattle to be burned, which should be
employed to the strengthening of land, and so does the want of hurdels for the
folding of sheep, and the want of wood causes too many great losses by fire,
that comes by the burning of straw, and so it may be conceived, no wood no
Kingdom.

The remedies may be thus.
IF that all owners of land according to the nature of the soiles wherein there
lands do lie, were enjoined to plant all their hedges with wood (and not only
with thorns) so thick as conveniently trees may grow and prosper, allowing
four yardes between tree and tree: to be topped and lopped for firewood
(reserving some part of their hedges where they may think it most couenient
for their profit, to be planted with fruit trees, or to plant all with
firewood, and plant fruit trees in Orchards, according to their best liking).
And that they might be further enjoined to plant for every acre in their
several occupations, four trees more, to be preserved for Timber for so many
years before any of them should be felled, as the trees may be grown to be
good Timber, which will be near fourscore years: and that after that the
trees be grown to be Timber, that none should be felled, or at any time
before or after wasted, but so many to be planted and continued: And that all
such persons as have at this instant their grounds furnished with wood, in such
sort as is required, might be also enjoined hereafter to plant and preserve so
many trees and so much wood, as heareafter they shall fell or waste. And that
all tenants might be enjoined in like sort to plant their hedges with trees for
fire, and to have the lops to their own houses for fire, and to plant two
trees for every acre in their occupations for Timber. This being performed, no
wit can comprehend what good may in time grow thereby unto the Kingdom,
although some taste may be taken by the planting of twenty acres as follows,
with other directions for this purpose. And for the better conceiving thereof:
admit that a man have twenty acres only in his occupation of pasture ground,
wherein he yearly breeds or feeds twenty cattle, and that he should
for this purpose in close in the driest corner of that close half an acre, and
that there were no fence before about the same, but that it were to be enclosed
round with a good ditch and hedge, which would contain forty eight Rode, and
that the charge at the first should cost three pound six shillings eight
pence, and that the maintayning thereof, till the wood that is therein to be
planted should be past taking hurt by cattle, which may be ten years, should
cost two pound thirteen shillings four pence more, being in all six pound,
more by the half then it can cost. The half acre being thus enclosed, dig
therein about Christmas seven score and ten plots of a yard square, leaving
three yardes every way between the plots dug; let it lie with the grass
side down till about Midsomer, then dig it again: and again abut
Hollan-tyde, when the Mast of Oaks, Beech, or the Chates of Ash falls from
the trees: then take of the same Mast or Chates, according to the nature of the
soil, and set them half a foot a sunder, and not above a hand breadth deep,
and keep it weeded well the first two years; being sure that the spring be
not trodden on: after which time there may be in September about the midst
thereof, the sap being then in the root, all the young plants drawn up to
be planted in the hedges of the same close, only reserving two in every plot
of the best, being most likely to be trees, and after six years there may be
drawn up half the rest to be planted else where, leaving then only a hundred
and fifty: in which time the ground may be mowed between the plants, so that
thereby there is small loss: for after the three first years the ground may
be eaten with sheep, and after ten years the ground may be laid forth to the
close, as it was before with seven score and ten young trees, which within
fourscore years may well be worth so many pounds. The hedges being planted as
is set down cannot yield so little firewood as may be worth twenty shillings
a year: the twenty cattle that there is to be bred or fed cannot be less
bettered then two shillings in a beast yearly by their quiet living in the
wood thus planted: keeping there the flesh that before they lost: being before
constrained by the extreme heat of the Sun, and Flies, for want of shadow or
wormestall, to run up and down the close loosing the flesh in the heat that
they got in the cool, and so spoiling the water with running into it, as
seldom they could get their bellies full of water (the want thereof breeds
many diseases.) And further by the quiet being of the cattle in the wood,
there is grass saved yearly worth twenty shilings, which before was spoiled
by the cattels running, treading and foyling of the grass. And by this means
it appears, that after ten years the twenty acres may be improued at the
least forty shillings a year by the cattle: so that it is but three years
profit thus to improve the twenty acres. And this for the breeding and feeding
of cattle, all breeders and feeders will affirm, and that a better breed of
cattle may be raised of those grounds that wants good water for their
cattle and shadow: and for those grounds that wantes either, can never breed
good cattle, or make so much profit of their Dairies, as best may appear
between Lancashire and Lincolnshire, and al other countries where such means
of water and wood is wanting. And by the wood the twenty acres is bettered at
the least other forty shillings a year: for if it be cast it shall apeare,
that a tree growing till it be fourscore years old, being then worth twenty
shillings, it grows after three pence a year. So that so many timber trees
so many pounds besides the firewood. What loss or gain here is required, I
leave to be censured by the Reader.

OBJECTIONS.
It has been objected that it is against a man's profit to preserve his
woods, for they grow but at three shillings four pence an acre per annum, and
the ground being converted to pasture it is worth ten shillings an acre per
annum. And further it has been said by some that they have wood enough for
them and their heirs, let them plant wood that needs, either for building or
any other uses: and that it cannot be conceived how wood can be planted, in
respect of the difference of soiles, or how plants may be gotten to plant the
Kingdom withal, or that any such profit may arise, and that there is Sea
cooles enough to supply many wants,

THE ANSWER.
THe Objections are too true, as may appear to the world as touching wood, but
not in the rest, as has been proved, and might further appear if a suruay
were taken of the woods now growing in this Kingdom: for it would be found
that the fourth part is not able to maintain it self threescore years
without good maintayning and preserving. And as touching the difference of
soil, who knows not, may hereby know, that wood has and will grow in most
part of all this Kingdom, being planted and preserved, as first appears by
the peakes of Darby shiere and other stony countries, where there is yet to
be seen Ash wood growing about every town, though very rockie: as for Oak,
Beech, Elm, and Ash, it does grow in flinty or grauelly ground, as appears
by the Chilterne Country, (as it is termed in many shieres) and on the grauelly
grounds every way about London, by Elm: and for soft fennish grounds, it
appears about the towns that there is some, and has been better store of
Elm and Willow, and other such like woods, and would be if it were planted
and preserved. The manner how to plant elm and Willow, is to lop a young elm or
Willow, the lop being but of three years growth, in the latter end of March
or the beginning of April, when the sap is up in the boughs, and the buddes
ready to put forth: then cut off the boughs so lopped, cut them in lengthes
of a foot long Coult-foote wise, leaving the knot where the budde is to be
put forth in the midst; then lay these short boughs in trenches where you
would have the wood to grow, three or four fingers deep, and cover them well
with mould well trodden, leaving the knot barein moist ground for the Willow,
the Elm will grow in harder ground: If the Spring be dry then water them,
and assuredly they will grow sooner to be Trees then sets, so will the bough
of any Tree, as well of fruit trees as others, and the tallest and straightest
of the same being taken about Lammas, and as near the body of the Tree as may
be; with a Knife cut the Bark of the bough clean away of a hand breadth,
leaving not any Bark for the sap to return withal to the body, the Bark
being thus taken away, then immediately take a good quantity of Clay, and lay
thereon some good earth of the side that is to be laid next the tree: and lap
the said Claye and Earth about the bough, upon the Bark next to the place
where the Bark is taken off, a hand breadth at the least, and moss it and
bind it as a graft, so let it stand till the midst of September, then saw it
off and set it were you would have it to grow, and as near as you can with the
same side to the Sun as was before, and assuredly they will grow to be trees
for to be lopped for fire, and your fruit trees will some of them bear fruit
the first year, but the second certainly, if the year be seasonable. And so
will little young roots of Elm being taken when the sap is in them, and set as
quick sets, by which means the Fennish countries may have Elm, Timber
firewood, and wormestall or shelter for their cattle. And as for Sea-coales,
there is no assurance how long they may endure: it is apparent that Coal mines
do decay too fast in most Countries, and are too chargeable to many Countries
in respect of carriage, and in most mines are not to be got without the use of
much wood.

What further benefit may be made on sheepe-walkes, Downs or Heathes, by
planting of wood where the grounds are barren.
IF for example, that on every Sheepe-walke whereon there is or may be kept
five hundred sheep, there were plowed up about Christmas twenty acres in the
lowest bottom of the walk for this purpose, where water may be kept all the
year, as well for the breeding of Foul, as for the other profits: all which
may be maintained under one charge by the Shepherd (without fencing, for that
on such Downs little cattle comes.) Being so plowed, let it lie till
Midsomer: if then it be perceived that there will be Mast that year, then
plough it again, and then let it lie until about Hallowmas: Then take the
Mast of Oak, Beech and the Chats of Ash, bruised Crabbs, after the veriuice is
pressed out, and hawes: mingle these together to sow about the sides and ends
of the ground about a yard broad, and upon the rest sow no hawes, but some few
kernels of Crabs, then begin at a side and sow five yards of breadth, and plough
under this Mast and Chats very shallow, then leave six yardes in breadth, and
sow and plough five yardes more, and so from side to side. And be sure to
leave a yard and half at the last side The rest of the headlands to lie till
the rest of the Close be sown in March with Otes, that the cattle may not
hurt the Mast sown by treading on it.

The close being thus sown with Mast and Otes, in the mean time there would
be a house builded for the shepherd to dwell in, where he may best ouersee the
ground for his ease. The charge thereof, first, of the house five pound, the
plowing thrice and the harrowing two shillings eight pence an acre, eight pound
the Mast, and getting it ready forty shillings, for five quarters of Otes to
sow the ground fifty shillings: for the getting of Otes in harvest, and
carrying of them into the barn fifty shillings, and so the whole charge is
twenty pound, whereof the Otes will yield fifteen pound, if they increase but
six of one. Then when the spring is of two years growth, there may be drawn
up part of the spring, which may be employed for quicksets, and when the
remainder is six years of growth there may be more drawn up to be set: at
which drawing there may be got as many as will be well worth five pound,
leaving then none but forty four of either side of every row, five yards
between every one, and here and there to leave some special one that is like
to be a fine tree for Timber, and some hundred or more of the Crab-tree
stocks to graft on, and in the hedge round about to be left thick four
yardes between every tree, and so leave as there may be left at the least
three thousand five hundred besides Crab-trees. These three thousand five
hundred growing twenty years, there may be then two thousand stocked up,
which will be well worth twelve pence a piece to be sold, five hundred of the
very best to remain for Timber trees, and a thousand to be topped, which at
every ten years end may be lopped for fire wood: the tops of that thousand
trees cannot be so little worth as fifty pound: by which means at that twenty
years end there may be gained by the two thousand trees that are stocked, a
hundred pound, and five hundred trees left, that within fourscore years may
well be worth five hundred pound: the thousand trees remaining to be lopped
will grow after five pound per annum at the least, and the ground being before
barren (hardly worth twelve pence an acre) will be worth ten shillings an acre
per annum: for by the grass and weeds that will grow the first six years,
and the lodging of the sheep in the night, when the weather is such as they
cannot be folded, and the shadow of the trees, which are so to be planted
that there may be eleven yards between every tree, except in the hedges. The
ground will be made very good meddow, and will find the sheep hay enough with
good winter pasture, and warm shelter in sharp weather. And if water can be
kept, there may be bred with twenty pound cost, foul or pullen well worth
twenty nobles per annum, all charges borne,: if the plot for foul, be near
corn, then may there be best kept wild Duckes and Mallards, which do never
hurt corn in field.

If thc like planting of wood were on common Sheepe-walks, Common pastures, and
Commons where the lands are so good as they might be sown with Wheat or Rye,
with the mast, the whole charge thereof would be made in three years with
twenty pound gained at the least, by the croppe of Wheat or Rye, and a crop of
Otes after between the grounds where the Mast is sown, as before is set
down. If the like provision were made in Parkes where wood decays, and hay
is scant for Dear, it would be very beneficial to the owners, and by the
planting our Commons, common pastures, or common Sheepe-walks by the charges of
the town whereunto such grounds do belong, the charge will be inned, as
before is set down, in three years a present relief raised by foul to the
poor of the town, of six pound thirteen shillings four pence, and after ten
years, three pound six shillings eight pence at the least by fruit: after
twenty years by two thousand trees that may be stocked, one hundred pound to
remain for a stock, and five hundred trees, to be left for Timber, and one
thousand trees remaining to be lopped which may yield wood worth five pound a
year; by which means the towns where such provision may be made, may not
only be greatly eased of the charge of their poor, but also have a stock
whereby they may be always discharged of such charges as may happen either to
Church or King by the increase of the stock. And further take certain
knowledge that all barren and mossie grounds may be improued much by letting
three years grass rot on the ground, and it is the only way next unto lime
to destroy Moss.

The second grieuance, is the dearth of Victuals, with remedy for the same.
COncerning Victuals, the want thereof is very great, in regard that all kind
of Victuals is risen and grown more dear in price within these last six
years then in twenty years before: And if the dearth of Victuals shall so
happen to increase but a few years to come (as by all likelyhoode it is like
for to do) except some speedy remedy be provided, the poor man by his labors
shall not get wherewith to relieve himself and family. This dearth may be
much eased, if that every one that has a Pigeon house might be enjoined or
otherwise required to breed yearly extraordinarily a certain number of foul
or pullen, as shall seem best to their liking. The manner and fashion shall be
set down by a plot for the purpose, how they may be bred, with the charge and
profit that may yearly arise to the owners.

The reasons whereof are five: first, in regard that a plot to breed foul or
pullen in, which may be made and furnished with less charges then a Pigeon
house, yields more profit, and nothing at all offends the people; whereas
the Pigeons are a great cause of this dearth, and more chargeable then
profitable to their owners, and the loss that the Kingdom receives thereby is
infinite, as at large shall be proved.

Secondly, that it is to be supposed that every one that is able to build a
Pigeon house, is also able to make a plot for foul or pullen to breed in, and
either is or should be the Lord of the Manor, who has to his Manor some
convenient ground to make a plot on for that purpose, and to breed so many
pullen or foul yearly as he keeps Pigeons.

Thirdly, that as a Pigeon house is builded for housekeeping, so the foul and
pullen is more profitable, as also shall be proved.

Fourthly, that as the extreme dearth of victuals causes many to break up
hous-keeping, and to put away their servants, whereby many through want fall to
stealing, and thereby come to an untimely end: so an extraordinary breeding of
foul and pullen, with other means as follows, may by Gods blessing so ease
the extremity thereof, as men may, as their ancestors have in former ages,
delight in hospitality, and thereby prevent many inconveniences that the
extremity of dearth does and may procure.

Fifthly and lastly, the profit of the Foul and pullen shall be proved to be
such as no charitable Christian can deny to perform.

Now to prove the difference of the charge and profit between a Pigeon house
and a plot for foul and pullen: First, all men of experience know that an
ordinary Pigeon house of five yardes and a half square, and four yardes high
to the euesings; in which house there may be contained tweluescore pair of
Pigeons, will cost five and twenty pound at the least, and that it will be
three years before it comes to the best profit: and when it comes to
that, the best Pigeon house is seldom worth five pound per annum, except it
be within threescore miles of London, where all victuals are dearer then in
other places of the Kingdom, or a double house. I will not stand to prove the
opinion of the multitude, of the charge of a Pigeon, that she will eat (if she
have liberty) a quarter of corn in a year (although I have some reason to
believe it, for that two credible persons did affirm unto me, that they had
lately seen half a pint of corn at one time, taken out of an old Pigeons
crop, and offered to make proof thereof by witnesses of good credit:) but I
will admit of that which in common reason is not to be denied, that Pigeons
have corn at will to feed on more then half the year: and admitting that
there be tweluescore pair in a house of old Pigeons, as commonly there is,
and that every old pigeon in that time with her young ones should eat but two
bushels, which comes to six score quarters at a house: and it is generally
holden that they hinder the increase of that which would grow, and spoil as
much as they eat, from the time that corn grows ripe in the field, before
harvest be done and the seed times. And thus in reason it does appear, that
in all the seed times of the year there is at the least sixteen weeks, in
which time she gathers up much corn that is least uncovered by the harrowes,
which a shower of rain would cover, and so would grow: and naturally all
Pease and Beans if they fall not deep in sowing, and be very well covered,
they will swell out of the ground, and lie bare upon the ground: and yet not
withstanding Pease and Beans, and all other corn by nature grows with the
root first into the ground, and then spingeth upwards: so that after the seed
times be done, and the corn grows green, till it gtow so high that the
Pigeons cannot go through it, they gather up the corn growing, and break off
the blades, and eat the corn: all which will be confidently proved by all
Husbandmen and Gentlemen, especially by such as sometimes lend their minds to
understand the profit of husbandry.

This being allowed (which by no means can be disproued) it appears that
twelve score pair of Pigeons devour, destroy and hinder the increase of
twelve score quarters of corn in a year. Admit it were but half so much, and
that the corn were rated, being Wheat, Rye, Barley and Pease, but at two
shillinges and a penny the bushel, sixescore quarters comes to a hundred
pound per annum at a house. Admit further, that the sixth part thereof be the
owners of the Pigeon house (for so it is to be supposed that the Lord of the
Manor has a sixth part of the town, then it follows that his five
pounds-worth of Pigeons costeth him sixteen pound thirteen shillings and
eight pence at the least. What other charge his Pigeons are unto him, I
forbear to relate: the number of the Pigeon houses cannot be fewer then forty
thousand, with the Pigeons kept at houses. Now to the charge and profit of
foul or pullen: the plot and all things thereunto belonging will not cost
above twenty pound, to have it secure, and so as when occasion is, that some of
the wild kind is taken, the taking of some may not offend the rest that are
to remain. The plot must be especially for the wild kind of Duck and
Mallard, which are best to be kept both for profit and pleasure, in a piece of
ground where water is and may be got and kept all the year, of two and twenty
yards square, to be moted about with a mote of a rode or pole of breadth, which
will be twenty pole about; to be made six foot deep in the midst, and
something shallower toward the sides, which will cost at five shillings a
rode, five pound. The leuelling of the ground, with quickset and workmanship,
four pound, the house being five yardes square and six foot high, and having
a little chamber over it to keep Otes in to feed them: the house to be but
studded and thinly lathed, two fingers between the lathes: which house cannot
cost above eight pound, and the bridge and door twenty shillings.

The plot being made, put into it about Christmas threescore tame Duckes and
twenty Mallards, which will cost about three and fifty shillings four pence,
or at Candlemas for want of Duckes, forty Hens and ten Cocks, to remain
till wild Ducke eggs be gotten to breed on in the mean time: there are
neither the Hens nor the Duckes, but their eggs will be worth the corn,
branne, and draines that the young Ducklings must be fed withal, till they
can eat Oats. The plot being thus ready and all things else, send one with a
horse for eggs in March into Cambridge-shiere into the fennes, or into any
other nearer place, where wild duckes eggs are to be got for money,
especially in the fennes, if the people have liberty to get them (for in the
spring time when the wild duckes lay, the poor sort will go with a dog
into the fennes, where their dog will put up the foul out off their neasts, and
then if they find many eggs therein that be vnsitten, they will take most of
them away with a ladle, or by some other means; so that they neither handle
the eggs that they leave behind, nor breathe upon them; and then will mark
the place where the nest is, so as they may readily come to it, and once in a
week will fetch all the eggs that are laid in the mean time, and so make the
ducke (whose nature is to lay till her neast be full before she will sit) so
poor as they may take her (which oftentimes the hungry sort do.) The eggs
being thus got ready, when the keeper of them sees the hen or duck feather her
neast, and begins to sit, then lay in the neast twelve wild ducke eggs.
And thus in two years the whole number of the wild or tame may be bred in
such sort as they may be taken off at the owners pleasure, and a stock of
foure-score of the oldest to be left for breeding with twenty Mallards: which
four score old duckes will breed and bring up commonly every one of them
eight at the least; the whole number to be three hundred and twenty couple, to
be sold, are well worth eight pence the couple, which arises to the sum of
ten pound, and a mark for their young ones. Then the eggs that they will
yearly lay to be but worth fifty three shillings and four pence, at five a
penny; and the Fish thar may be bred in the Mote yearly, to be worth
thirteen shillings four pence: provided always that there breed no Pikes,
for they will destroy the young Foul but not the Pullen. The whole Sum is
fourteen pound, deduct out of the same five pound, to buy ten quarters of
Oats yearly, which ten quarters will allow the Fowls above a bushel and
half a week, which is more then is needful to be spent on them: for except
it be in Frost or Snow when the ground is covered, or when they sit, and the
young ones are not able to fly abroad, a very small quantity will serve to
give them every morning a few, that every one may get a dozen corns. As for
their breed, being once well haunted, they will never away in the day, if they
may be in quiet, but altogether in the night, by which means they are safe
from Vermin, and they will continue there especially in breeding time. For
experience teaches all men to know, that all thing that has life, loves best
the place wherein it was bred, finding there their best relief and rest: as
appears that all the Winter (till breeding time) there are hardly one couple
of Duckes and Mallards to be seen in the Fennes, but abundance in Summer time,
where they remain until about Michaelmas, and then they go away again. Then
further allow forty six shillings eight pence to the keepers and toward the
keeping of the Hedge, the remainder is clear (all charges defrayed) six pound
thirteen shillings and four pence. Thus is the proof made between the
Pigeons and the wild Foul.

The plot for tame will not cost so much by the charge of the house for being
tame, they may be taken at pleasure.

The Pullen will yield a greater profit: for there may be likewise kept at a
like plot, fourscore Hens, and twenty Cocks, admit every Hen to breed
yearly but eight Chickens, (though it will be granted they will breed twice
in every year, and at each time eight at the least) their number is
sixteenescore couple, whereof eightscore couple to be sold being Chickens at
sixpence the couple, make four pound. Fourscore couple of Hens at twelve
pence the couple comes to four pound, and fourscore couple of Capons at two
shillings the couple, comes to eight pound. The Eggs cannot be less worth
then eight pound at five a penny. And the fish that may be bred yearly in the
Mote will yield thirteen shillinges four pence: The total is twenty four
pound, thirteen shillings and four pence, out of which deduct thirteen
pound, to buy twenty six quarters of Oats, whereby they may be allowed one
week with another throughout the year, four bushels. Allow further yearly
four pound to the keeper of the Pullen and the maintaining of the plot,
although it be supposed, that every one that will be at the charge of any of
these Plots, keeps one that tends his Pullen that he has already, so that
the charge hereof will be so much the less. The house for Pullen will cost
about forty shillings more then a house for Foul, in respect that although
the house may be two yardes narrower, yet it must be three yardes longer, with
Poles in it for the Pullen to sit upon. As for nests they shall need none in
the house, but in borders where they will take more delight to breed in then
in a house, and be freer from diseases, by reason of the air, therefore it
shall not be greatly needeful to have a Chamber in that house, for that the
Keeper may bring the Oats at any time when he comes to them. But the reason
why a Chamber is convenient in the house, wherein the Foul must be used to
feed, is especially for the Keeper to stay privately in to take some of the
Foul at pleasure, without offending the rest. Thus all charges to the
uttermost being set down, the remainder is seven pound thirteen shillings and
four pence per andum de claro, at the least at a chepe rate. The charge of the
Plot is under three years purchase for the Pullen, and three years purchase
for Duckes and Mallards. As for the manner of breeding of Pullen and tame
Foul, it is needless to set down, only thus much: For the tame, their
charge will be as little or less then the wild, if they be bred in large
Pastures, where they may neither do hurt to Corn nor Meadow ground, which the
wild will never do. The reason is, the wild keep in the water all the day,
and feed altogether in the night, and dare not come near Corn: and their
Corn must be given them every morning a little, to draw them to their
breeding place in the day, whither they will not fail to come, being there
bred and fed. It shall not be needful to bestow much Corn upon the tame, but
only at their first being put into the Plot, where they must be kept in for
three weeks or a month, in which time being fed every Evening, they will
likewise so know their being, that thither they will come in the night, and
feed abroad all day, especially if they find that they sit quiet in the night;
such is the difference of their kinds, the one feeds by day, and the other by
night. Now it remains to know how the wild must be bred, when they have
chosen their Nestes, which shall appear in the Plot hereafter set down.

After the Foul begin to lay, once a week their Keeper may come to their
nestes when the Fowls are off, which will be toward night; and for that
purpose bring with them an Iron ladle, with a handle half a yard long at the
least, wherewith they may reach into the nests of the Foul, and from thence
take some of the eldest laid Eggs, as near as they can guess, leaving not
above or under, two or three; taking great heed that they neither handle them,
nor breath upon them, for their nature is to find that fault, and then they will
forsake their nests. Thus may the Eggs for the more profit be taken from them,
so long as in discretion shall be thought fit, which commonly will be about
some ten weeks, ere that they be perceived to feather their nest: and be sure
in the mean time to keep some Eggs, that had been neither handled nor
breached on, and if there want Eggs in any of the nests, when it is perceived
that they sit, then with the Ladle put in more, and make the number twelve at
the least. The manner how to take them is thus.

The house being made, as before is set down, the door thereof must be thus
made: A light frame of Wood as can be made, to be as broad and so long as the
Door stead is, being for the purpose a yard or thereabout, for that commonly
is the breadth of Canuis or hair Cloth. Then take (for the better lasting) so
much hair Cloth as the Door is of height, and make it fast to the frame of
wood as a Door, which must be hanged like a Shop window at the top of the
Door stead, to be drawn up by a Cord and a Pully, and so to stand. In the
mean time the foul must be used to be fed in the house, which by little and
little they will easily be brought unto, if they be usually fed there, and some
tame ones kept among them for that purpose, which for sundry causes I hold the
fitter to breed on; especially they being not able to fly, must of necessity
stay there, which will make the Duckes to resort thither for their mates. And
some do hold that the nature of the wild Mallard, is to suck the Eggs if
he find them; being thus used to have their Corn in the house, which they may
be brought unto, whereof I could give many instances, but one may serve for
breuity: One at S. James, the other at the house from whence I descended, the
last owner thereof had by a Tenant of his a dozen wild Ducke Eggs brought him,
which he caused to be set under a Hen, which brought him up twelve young
Duckes, and of them were bred many about the Mote of his house, so that there
has been threescore at a time; which although they were wild bred, yet would
they have followed from the Mote through the Court, and into the Hall for
meat, being called IN the casting of the Mote, the best carth must be cast
into the Plot, to raise it so as the House may stand three or four yards
higher then the sides to the Moteward, that the water may descend; and (...)
pleasure, there may be some kind of Quick-wood set about it, whereby it may be
kept Fort-like. The borders for pleasure may be set with Preuet, whereon many
conceits may be fashioned, seeming as though the Foul bred under them; but
for profit with Goose-berie sets, which will put forth and be green timely in
the year, to shadow the Nests. The passadges between the nests, would be a
yard broad at the least, and in the vast places about the house, some fruit
trees may be planted for profit. On the out side of the Mote for Foul, there
must be a double Quick-wood set of Whitethorne, kept thick in the botome that
the Foul may not creep through, to be kept battled if the owner please. The
Quick-wood to be set close to the side of the Bridge, and the Bridge to lie
longer forth then the Hedge, by a yard and a half, so that under either side
of the Bridge, there may be a little Door to open and shut at pleasure, to the
end the wild king after they be fourteen days old, may be let forth a nights
to feed, and to come in a mornings (whereof they will not fail.) The tame
kind must not be let forth, till they be past taking hurt by Vermin, and they
to be let forth a mornings, and to come in a Euenings. For Pullen there needs
no Fence at all on the outside: On the Bridge there must be a Door, and so
made as no Vermin may creep in, either over or by it, and a Trap continually
would be kept on the Bridge. On either side the Mote, there must be left a yard
and a half, or rather two yards in the inside for the Foul to sit on at
pleasure, and for fishing the Mote, the Mote may be brother at the owners
pleasure. In large Parkes or Pasture grounds, it were most profit to be both
Foul and Pullen, the Plats being as far asunder as may be.

Place this between Fol. 20. and 21.

The Figure of the Plot.


and but sometime used so for pleasure. And when it pleased the owner to see a
flight, they were always put out of the Mote, and then would they fly to the
river, or to some other pits of water where they were to be found, and being
fline at, as many as escaped with life, would not fail to come home. The Foul
being thus wonted to the house, the Keeper being determined to take any of
them, may go into the house and call them thither, according to his wonted
manner, the Corn being strewed in the house, the Keeper may go up a Ladder
into the Chamber, and there stay with the cord of the Door in his hand, as
privately as he can, and by degrees let the door down, and when he
perceives that most of the Foul are gone forth, then may he let the Door
close down, and so take them as quietly as may be, and no whit offend the
rest. If all Noble men and others of the better sort would put this in
execution in Forests, Chases, Parkes, great Pastures and Commons, it would not
only be very beneficial for themselves in their housekeeping, but would
likewise ease the extreme dearth of victuals, to the easing of this grieuance.

Objections against breeding of Foul.
THat such abundance of Foul by this means may be bred, that thereby Corn
may be made dear. Secondly, that they will destroy the increase of Fish.
Thirdly, that they will so foil the ground where they are bred, that the
cattle will not eat the grass.

The Answer to this Objection.
FIrst, as touching the dearth of Corn that by them may grow, that shall be
answered hereafter in place for that purpose, and how more Corn may be saved
by the tenth part then they can spend, which is yearly destroyed by Vermin.

Secondly, that they do not destroy or hinder the breed of Fish, as it does
appear, especially in the Fennes of the I Will of Ely, where there is greater
store of Fish, then there is in any place of England, except it be in such
like Fennie grounds: in which I Will there is more Foul then there is in all
England besides, especially in spawning time at which time they may do most
hurt, but at other times they can do none: For after there is life in the
Fish, no swimming Foul can hurt them. And for the better satisfaction of all
men in this point, let every man call to remembrance whether ever he saw or
heard of a Fish taken out of a wild Mallards crop.

Thirdly, as touching their foyling of the ground, an instance may be taken by
all Fennish Commons where they haunt, and by all other Commons where great
store of Geese are bred and kept, where is to be seen the foil of the Geese
to be thick on the ground (and yet the Cattle feeding among it) that in
common reason they cannot but gather some of it into their mouths: though the
foil of Geese is holden the most dangerous foil of all other Foul, yet did I
never hear any complain of any loss taken either by their foil or feathers,
although in the moulting time, the Commons will seem as it were strowed with
feathers. And it is holden by many good Husbands, that Fowls, especially
Duckes and Mallards do much good to ground and Cattle, especially to Dear and
Sheep, namely by gathering up the Worms that so sproute up the earth in the
night, which earth in grounds that are eaten bare, is beaten abroad with every
shower of Rain upon the short grass, which commonly is the sweetest, whereon
the Dear and Sheep desire most to feed; and thereby gather up the earth that
is so beaten on the Grass by the rain, which earth is holden by most skillful
men in sheep, to be the principal cause of the Rotte: which the better may
be conceived for as much as experience has manifested, that seldom either
Sheep or Dear rotte in grounds deep of Grass. Also Worms live by the fat
of the earth, and decay the strength thereof, (as all the great Gardiners do
affirm) which Foul and Pullen will destroy, especially wild Ducke and
Mallard, in respect that they altogether feed by night on the barest grounds,
and upon Worms most of all.

The second remedy for the dearth of Victuals, by planting of Fruit.
FOr as much as by the experience that is taken out of most of the Countries of
this Kingdom, especially out of some parts of Worcestershire, Glocestershire,
and Herefordshire, where it is generally affirmed that there be sundry men, that
raises to their purses yearly two hundred pounds, by Fruit trees growing there
in their hedges and fields, over and besides what he spends in his house, in
Cider and Perrie: And that there are some persons, that have thirty or forty
Hogdsheds in a year for Tithe. And further it appears, that in most Towns
of this Kingdom, there have been provident Husbands that have planted
Orchards, which in effect are now decayed, which have not only been very
beneficial to themselves, but also to the Commonwealth, and there be yet some
few that do plant, some an Acre of ground, which is yearly worth five pound at
the least in Fruit. In respect whereof and for other good considerations, if
it were provided (in regard the like profit may be yearly raised in the
greater part of this Kingdom, to the great profit of the Planters, and benefit
to the Commonwealth, which will likewise be a special means to disburden us
of the greatest part of this grieuance, for that thereby the extreme price of
Victuals will be greatly eased,) That there may be a certain number of fruit
trees planted in all the Hedges, as of Apples, Wardens and Pears, and most of
all Apples, where Whitethorne and Crab-trees do or may hereafter grow being
planted, viz. For every Acre of enclosed ground four trees, which can no way
be hurtful, or hinder any other profit whatsoever that may be raised out of
hedges. The fruit that by this means may be raised yearly, can not be less
worth then twelve hundred thousand pounds, if the fruit were sold but for six
pence a bushel.

And this I may prove two several ways, First, by experience taken from
Crabbes, it is known to all Huswiues that a bushel of Crabbes, will make two
gallons and a half of Veriuice, and so much some of the best Chandlors in
London have affirmed to me. I have also inquired of some of the better sort
inhabiting in the Countries before recited, as I have traveled through those
Countries for this purpose for my better experience, how much Cider a bushel
of Apples will yield, or a bushel of Pears of Perrie; whose answers for the
most part were, that a bushel of ordinary Apples, would at the first press
yield two gallons, and a bushel of Pears for the most part, two gallons and a
half; and by putting a gallon of fair water into the Apples so pressed, and
letting it stand some twelve hours, sometimes stirring them, and then press
them again, would yield another gallon, but not so good for long lasting as
the first.

The second is this, that in a bushel there is about ten score of the
greatest Pippins, let some of them to the number of twenty be baked in a Pot
for the purpose, or take twenty of them and roste, and that man will be holden
for a monster, that can eat so many at one meal, which may be sold for a
penny, and the surplusage being fourscore, will recompense the labor that is
taken about them. By either of these means I hope it will be allowed, that of
themselves they are worth the rate before set down, and being baked in Paste,
a good and profitable use is made of them in many men's houses, by saving other
victuals; and when it pleases God to bless those few fruit trees that are in
this Kingdom, it will something abate the extreme prices of victuals. This
present year may be an instance, and all Drouers of Cattle will affirm, that
they have felt the smart of the plenty of fruit, and the inhabitants of the
City of London will acknowledge, that the fruit that comes thither, eases
something the prices of victuals.

The greatest hinderance which may be to these good works of planting fruit,
and wood, will be confessed of most men by their experience, who have in their
times seen many men begin to plant orchards, and set quick-wood, to the end
to have hedges in many places, especially by high ways for the saving of
corn; and at the first will make some provision for the preserving of the
same, which afterward some by coveting the grass growing in the orchard,
puts some kind of cattle therein which breaks and spoileth the grafts:
others by want of maintayning the fences, whereby their expectation, cost and
labor is lost, and so in quick-wood after a great cost in planting, for a
little more cost in maintayning, all is trodden down and lost: in like sort
much good spring wood is spoiled by cattle by want of good fencing. Thus
either by covetousness, niggardliness, or negligence, many good actions are
overthrown to the loss both of the owner and commonwealth; my counsel
herein is to begin well, and to persevere therein unto the end.

Objections against planting of fruit.
FIrst, that if they be planted in hedges they will be stolen, and the hedges
broken for them.

Secondly, that such plenty of fruit would make corn ouer-cheape for the
Farmour.

Thirdly, that if the hedges were so thick planted with trees, in closes or
fields, that are not above six acres, they will be very hurtful; for that if
such closes or fields shall happen to be sown with corn or mowen for hay,
the trees will so keep off the Sun and wind that in wet haruests it will
greatly hinder the drying of hay and corn.

Fourthly, that his land is his own, and he will not be constrained to use it
otherwise then he lists, and that such as have a thousand acres or more in
occupation, may have so much fruit as he shall not know what to do with it.

The answer to these Objections.
THe first I grant in part, that fruit being planted but in particular may be
stolen, and little good may grow thereby, but being generally planted as is
required, what cause may any charitable man have to complain? or what man
complains in any of the Countries before recited (from whence example for
this purpose is taken) of stealing his fruit, where the hedges are as thick
with fruit trees and other trees as is required? For scarcity causes stealing,
but in those Countries the trees in the hedges hang as commonly full of fruit
on the high ways side as on the other, and the hedges of fields and closes in
those Countries, and in some other Countries are as thick of fruit trees and
other trees as are required, and yet notwithstanding such as have corn or hay
in little closes make shift to get it dry. Thus the first and third is
answered.

What charity is in the fourth, I refer to the censure of the indifferent
Reader. For it is in reason to be conceived that hardly half of the people of
the Kingdom has not grounds to plant on, but would buy them at the rate set
down, being cheaper then any other victuals, and by the plenty of fruit such
store of Cydar may be made and kept without loss, until it may happen that a
dear year of corn may come, which then may be spent in drink, and barley be
converted to bread corn, and by this means corn may always be sold at
reasonable prices in this land. This may be proved by the best Merchants who
will auerre that Cider will keep seven years. And by this means such store
of Corn and Cider may always be in the Realm, that much treasure may be
brought into the land for Corn, Cider, and many other commodities that may be
spared, whereby the Kingdom may be greatly enriched, and the customs
increased to the good of the King.

The second is idle: for what man of experience knows not but that the
Farmour that lives by tillage, by feeding of beefs, muttons, hogs, pullen, and
many other things that may be fed or bred by corn, may make at all times (if
he think corn too cheap in the market) by these means a sufficient price
of his corn for the buyer and seller. Moreover, much more ground may be
converted to the feeding and breeding of cattle and to dayries, all which is
(as the world now goes) very convenient, the rather for that by experience it
has been continually seen that whereas corn is dear one year in seven,
yet for other five or six years it is at a more reasonable rate then other
victuals, which yearly rise in price, and seldom or never abate. And further
if corn be very cheap it may be transported as it has been, with Pery and
Cider into other Countries, so that if the Farmours should loose something in
the prices of their corn, yet they shall gain much more in their
housekeeping and other necessaries.

And whereas it may seem distasteful to some to plant their Fruit trees in the
Hedges; admit that there should be an Acre enclosed, wherein may be planted
fourscore fruit trees, every tree may have a eleven yards room to grow on,
whereby the ground may take no hurt by Woods, which after ten years will
yield one year with another and one tree with another a bushel of fruit,
rated as before at six pence the bushel, this profit will amount to forty
shillings the Acre at that rate. Admit further, that the charge of enclosing of
this acre round about, being 8. Rode of breadth, and twenty in length, should
cost 18. pence a Rode, to have a good Ditch double or treble, set with quick
Thorns and Hedged round about on the outside of the Ditch, which Hedge will
last well three years: at the three years end toward the later end of March,
cut the quick wood upward with a knife close by the ground, and weed the
grass clear up from about the roots, the wood of the old Hedge will pay for
the labor, and then the first charge is four pound and four shilling. Then
Hedge it new again, which may cost thirty and six shillings, that Hedge will
last well till the quick wood be past taking hurt for that in those three
years after it is cut, it will grow higher then it would do in ten years
being not cut, and so thick that nothing can get through it. In the mean time
whilst the Fence is in growing, if there be strewed in a Nurserie the kernels
of a hundred Apples, or kernels of Crabbes, or set when or before the quick
wood is set, there will be more sets then that ground requires, which being
well preserved, will be big enough in three or four years to graft upon. The
charge being six pound, is but three years purchase.

The third and fourth grieuance, For destroying of Virmine.
THe greatest deuourers of Corn, of these kind are Rookes, Crows and
Sparrowes, the number whereof is infinite, and so is the quantity of Corn
which they destroy yearly. They also greatly hinder the increase of Corn,
which when they cannot find it lying above the ground, they scratch it up with
their Claws or pick it up with their Bills, Blades and Roots; and when Corn
is eared, then if it happen to be laid, both Rookes and Pigeons light upon
it, and so spoil it, that if it were worth forty shillings an Acre before, in
one week they will make it not worth ten shillings the Acre, One kind of
these Crows live much upon Chickens and Foul, and by their Eggs, and kill
young Lambs, and do much hurt besides. There are also many other flying
Vermin, that destroy Phesants, Partridges, Foul, Pullen and young Rabbets,
which are Buzards, Kites, Ring-tailes and Pyes, all which or the most part of
them may easily be destroyed in three years only, by the pulling down of
their nests, in breeding time not suffering any of them to breed, every man to
undertake for his own ground upon a penalty, to the use of the poor of the
Parish. Two other great spoylers of Foul, are the shooting in Pieces, and
water Dogs; the one galleth more then they kill and get, that are lost, so does
dogs when the Foul are young, and in moulting time. And much Lead and
Poulder might be saved, by reason that every man may have Hawks meat by his
Foul and Pullen.

OBJECTIONS.
THat true it is that is alleged, that the Vermin before mentioned are as
hurtful to the common wealth as is alleged, and that many years since by
Act of Parliament there was a special law made for the general destroying of
all kind of vermin that could be thought upon, as Foxes, Badgers, Polecats,
wild Cats, Stotes, and all other whatsoever, which was as much as then was
thought convenient.

THE ANSWER.
It appears that such an Act was made for the destroying of vermin
aforesaid, and of other vermin, but so small an allowance was made that no man
made account thereof: wherefore by allowing a good proportion for this
business, they may be soon destroyed, and the charge soon ended; and then
all vermin being destroyed and Pidgeon houses suppressed (excepting only such
as are allowed by the Common Laws of this Kingdom) it cannot be thought that
corn will ever be dear.

Of Wood.
THus it is sufficiently proved, that wood being generally planted for every
acre of this Kingdom, being at least four and twenty millions, the timber
trees growing til they be fourscore years old, cannot be less worth then
twenty shillings a tree: whereby it appears that every tree grows after the
rate of three pence per annum, and four trees being planted in every acre
comes to twelve pence an acre per annum: so that the sum arises to twelve
hundred thousand pounds per annum, by reason that the tenants are but to plant
two trees in an acre. And the trees for firewood that are required, together
with the mast that may grow thereupon, will be as much worth as the timber, and
admitting that the fourth part of the Kingdom be already replenished, yet the
gain by wood and timber of the other three parts will arise to eighteen
hundred thousand pounds. The timber and firewood that shall be planted in
pasture ground as aforesaid, will be clearly gained by the better breeding and
feeding of the number of cattle more that may be bred by the pasture and straw
that may be saved, which is now spoiled and burnt, the worth of beasts two
hundred thousand and twelve per annum at the least. All which may be effected
with less then three years purchase in pasture and meadow grounds, and the
whole charge of planting in barren ground may be recovered in less then six
years, and after ten years the soil will be improued from twelve pence an
acre per annum, to ten shillings an acre per annum at the least. The firewood
of a thousand trees being well husbanded will be worth twelve pence a tree at
every ten years end. The ground is improued ten pound per annum, and that the
five hundred timber trees remaining will be better worth then five hundred
pounds.

Of Fruit.
IT is also proved that fruit trees may be planted in twelve millions of acres
at the least in this Kingdom, which being rated at two shillings an acre, six
pence a tree, the value thereof comes to twelve hundred thousand pounds per
annum, out of which being deducted for the fruit already planted in this
Kingdom two hundred thousand pounds, yet there remains one million of pounds
gained yearly; and that the fruit trees which shall be planted in orchards
will not cost above three years purchase, and in hedge rows not one years
purchase.

Of Foul and Pullen.
AS concerning the breeding of Foul and Pullen, it is likewise proved that
there may be well bred so many as will be worth four hundred thousand pounds
per annum, in this Kingdom, after the rate of eight pence the couple one with
another, and that provision being made for the destroying of vermin, there
will be Fowls enough soon bred in this Realm: and that if every owner of
pigeons should yearlie breed so many Fowls or Pullen, as they keep old
pigeons, and every man that has grounds convenient would make plots to breed
on as is aforesaid, it would greatly ease the dearth of victuals, the charge
whereof will not be above three years purchase: for the better understanding
whereof it is to be noted that it appears by the general map of this
Kingdom that it contains nine and twenty millions five hundred sixty eight
thousand acres, out of which number deducting five millions, and the odd
thousands of acres for high ways, wild lying grounds and wastes not fit for
planting, there remains four and twenty millions, which: being rated at a
penny an acre amounts to an hundred thousand pounds.

Suppressing of Pidgeon houses, and destroying of Vermin.
ANd it is likewise proved, that by suppressing half the Pidgeon houses of
this Realm, and of Pigeons kept over Gates, Chambers, and other places for
that purpose, there may be yearly saved so much Corn as is worth two
Millions of pounds at the least, which they destroy and spoil: which may be
effected without charge: and that by the destroying of feathered Fowls, which
in like sort destroy and devour Corn, and hinder the increase of the same,
there may be saved as much Corn yearly in this Realm, as is worth three
millions of pounds. By the destroying of the before recited vermin, there may
be saved in fowls and pullen and eggs, which they destroy yearly, the worth of
five thousand pound at the least, besides young Fawnes, Lambs, Rabbets, and
many other things by them destroyed. I can make proof where there were within
this three year seven dousen couple of Rabbets found on a heap, carried
together in less time then a month by a Stote. Also by a general destroying
of Rats and Mice there may be saved yearly in bread, cheese, corn and other
things which they devour and destroy, four hundred thousand pound at the
least. All or the most part of which vermin may be destroyed with less cost
then the loss which is sustained by them in one half year, by allowing a
good proportion to every man that destroys them as well young and old, as
their eggs and neasts: which would encourage servants and poor men to be
industrious, in destroying the said vermin, and so the work would soon be
finished, and the charge ended.

Sum, nine millions, two hundred thousand pound saved and gained by this
project yearly to the performers, besides the good that may grow thereby to the
Commonwealth.

That it might be provided that no Tenants should be indamnified by their
Landlords by letting any of their Farms, whereupon they have planted wood or
fruit, before they have received sufficient profit of their labor, without
sufficient recompense for their charge.

FINIS.

