Psalms of Invocation upon God, To preserve her Majesty and the people of
this land, from the power of our enemies.

Collected and gathered together, by Christopher Style.

printer's or publisher's device

LONDON

Printed by John Wolf, dwelling in Distaffe Lane, near the sign of the
Castle.

1588.

Psalms of Invocation upon God, to preserve her Majesty and the people of
this land, from the power of their enemies.
Psalm. 3. verse. 7.
UP Lord and help us, O (our God) smite all our enemies upon the cheek bone,
and break the teeth of the ungodly.

Psalm. 5. 2.
Harken thou unto the voice of our calling, our king and our God: for unto thee
do we make our prayer.

Verse. 8.
Lead us O Lord in thy righteousness, because of our enemies: make thy way
plain before our face.

verse. 9.
For there is no faithfulness in their mouths: their inward parts are very
wickedness.

verse. 10.
Their throat is an open sepulcher: they flatter with their tongue.

verse. 11.
Destroy thou them O God, let them perish through their own imaginations: cast
them out in the multitude of their ungodliness, for they have rebelled against
thee.

Psalm. 6. v. 4.
Turn thee O Lord and deliver our souls, oh save us for thy mercies sake.

verse. 6.
Stand up O Lord, in thy wrath, and lift up thy self, because of the
indignation of our enemies: Arise up for us in thy judgment that thou have
commanded.

Psalm. 6. v. 10.
(Then) all our enemies shall be confounded, and sore vexed: they shall be turned
back and put to shame sodeinly.

Psalm. 9. v. 13.
Have mercy upon us, O Lord, consider the trouble which we suffer of them that
hate us: thou that liftest us up from the gates of death.

verse. 14.
That we may show all thy praises within the ports of the daughter of Sion: we
will rejoice in thy salvation.

verse. 15.
(Let) the Antichristian power be suncke down, in the pit that they have made:
in the same net which they hid privily, let their feet be taken.

Psalm. 9. v. 19.
Up Lord, and let not man have the upper hand: let the Heathen be judged in thy
sight.

verse. 20.
Put them in fear (O Lord) that they may know themselves to be but men.

Psalm. 17. v. 8.
Keep us as the apple of an eye: hide us under the shadow of thy wings.

verse. 9.
From the ungodly that trouble us: our enemies compass us round about, to take
away our souls.

verse. 10.
They are closed in their own fat: and their mouths speak proud things.

verse. 11.
They lie waiting in our way on every side: turning their eyes down to the
ground.

verse. 12.
Like as a Lion that is greedy of his pray: and as it were a Lions whelpe
lurking in secret places.

verse. 13.
Up Lord, disappoint them, and cast them down: deliver our souls from the
ungodly which is a sword of thine, and keep us from the pride of the bloody
Spaniardes.

Psalm. 16. 2. Psalm. 7. 1.
Preserve us O God: for in thee have we put our trust, and save us from all
them that persecute us, and deliver us.

Psalm. 132. v. 1. Psalm. 140. 1.
Lord remember our Queen Elisabeth, in all her troubles: and preserve her from
the wicked man.

verse. 4.
O keep her O Lord from the hands of the ungodly: preserve her from the
wicked men which are purposed to overthrow her goings. Glory be to the father,
and to the son, etc.

Psalm 25. verse 1.
Unto thee, O Lord, do we lift up our souls, our God, we have put our trust
in thee: O let us not be confounded, neither let our enemies, triumph over us.

verse. 5.
Call to remembrance, O Lord, thy tender mercies: and thy loving kindness which
has bin ever of old.

verse. 6.
Remember not the sins and offenses of our youth or time past: but according
to thy mercy think upon us (O Lord) for thy goodness.

verse. 15.
Turn thee unto us, and have mercy upon us: for we are desolate and in misery.

verse. 16.
The sorrows of our hearts are enlarged: O bring us out of our troubles.

verse. 17.
Look upon our adversity and misery: and forgive us all our sins.

verse. 18.
Consider our enemies how many they are: and they bear a tirannous hate
against us.

verse. 19.
O keep our souls and deliver us, let us not be confounded: for we have put
our trust in thee.

Psalm. 27. 1.
Thou Lord art our light and our salvation, whom then shall we fear: thou Lord
art the strength of our life, of whom shall we be afraid.

verse. 3.
Though an host of men were laid against us, yet shall not our hearts be
afraied: and though there rise up war against us; yet will we put our trust
in thee.

verse. 8.
Harken unto our voice, O Lord, when we cry unto thee: have mercy upon us and
here us.

Psalm. 2. v. 10.
O hide not thou thy face from us: nor cast us thy servants away in displeasure.

verse. 11.
Thou have been our succor: leave us not, neither forsake us O God of our
salvation.

verse. 12. and 14.
Teach us thy way; O Lord, and lead us in the right way because of our enemies:
and deliver us not over unto the will of our adversaries.

Psalm. 28. 2.
Hear the voice of our humble petitions when we cry unto thee: when we hold
up our hands toward the mercy seat of thy holy temple.

Reward our enemies according to their deeds: and according to the wickedness
of their own inventions.

Recompense them after the works of their own hands: pay them that they have
deserved.

Psalm. 31. 5.
Draw us out of the net that they have laid privily for us: for thou art our
strength.

Psalm. 28. 9.
The Lord is our strength: and he is the wholesome defense of his Queen.

Psalm. 33. 18.
Deliver our souls from death: and feed us in the time of dearth.

verse. 19.
Our souls have patiently tarried for the Lord: for he is our help and our
shield.

verse. 20.
Our heart shall rejoice in him: because we have hoped in his holy name.

verse 21.
Let thy merciful kindness (O Lord) be upon us: like as we do put our trust in
thee.

Psalm. 119. v. 17
O do well unto thy servant Queen Elizabeth: that she may live, and keep thy
word.

Psalm. 109. 26.
Help her, O Lord our God, oh save her according to thy mercy. Gloriebe to the
father, etc.

Psalm 35. verse 1.
PLead thou our cause, O Lord, with them that strive with us: and fight thou
against them that fight against us.

verse 2
Lay hand upon the shield and buckler: and stand up to help.

verse 3
Bring forth the spear, and stop the way against them that persecute us: say
unto our souls I am thy salvation.

verse 4.
Let them be confounded and put to shame that seek after our souls: let them
be turned back and brought to confusion, that imagine mischief for us.

verse 5.
Let them be as dust before the wind: and the Angel of the Lord scattring
them.

verse 6.
Let their way be dark and flippery: and let the Angel of the Lord persecute
them.

verse 7.
For they have privily laid their net to destroy us without a cause: yea, even
without a cause have they made a pit for our souls.

verse 8.
Let a sodeine destruction come upon them unawares, and the net that they have
laid privily catch themselves: that they may fall into their own mischief.

verse 23.
Awake and stand up to judge our quarrel: avenge thou our cause our God and
our Lord.

verse 24.
Judge us, O Lord our God, according to thy righteousness: and let them not
triumph over us thy Englishnation.

verse 25.
Let not the Antichristians say in their hearts, there, there, so would we
have it: neither let the Spaniard say, we have devoured them.

verse 26.
Let them be put to confusion and shame together that rejoice at our trouble:
let them be clothed with rebuke and dishonor that boast themselves against us.

Psalm. 39. 9.
Deliver us from all our offenses: and make us not a rebuke unto the foolish.

verse 13.
Hear our prayers, O Lord, and with thine ears consider our calling: hold not
thy peace at our tears.

Psalm. 38. 21.
Forsake us not, O Lord our God: be not thou far from us thy Englishnation,
have thee to help us: O Lord God our salvation.

Psalm. 38. 19.
For our enemies live and are mighty: and they that hate us wrongfully are many
in number.

Psalm. 40. 21.
But thou art our helper and redeemer: make no long tarrying O our God.

Psalm. 39. 16.
Let it be thy pleasure to deliver us: make have (O Lord) to help us.

Psalm. 44. 4.
Thou art our king, O God send help unto thy English Jacob.

verse 26.
Arise and help us: and deliver us for thy mercies sake.

Psalm. 53. 3.
For strangers are risen up against us: and tirants (which have not thee O God
before their eyes) seek after our souls.

verse 1.
Save us O God for thy names sake: and avenge us in thy strength.

Psalm. 59. 17. Psalm. 60. 4.
Unto thee our strength will we sing: for thou, O God, art our refuge and our
merciful God, and we will dwell in thy tabernacle for ever: and our trust shall
be under the covering of thy wings.

Psalm. 61. 6.
Grant our Queen O Lord, a long life: that her years may endure with us the
full course of nature, and with thee for ever.

Psalm. 121. 8
Preserve O Lord, her going out, and coming in: from this time forth, for
evermore.

Glory be to the Father, etc.

Psalm 119. verse 153.
Psalm. 143. 9. Psalm. 108. 12.
O Consider our adversity and deliver us O Lord: from all our enemies, for we
flee unto thee to hide us: for vain is the help of man.

Psalm. 119. verse. 15. 4. Psalm. 144. 2.
Avenge thou our cause and deliver us: quicken us according unto thy word, for
thou art our help and our fortress, our castle, and deliverer, and our
defendor, in whom we trust.

Psalm. 108. 13.
Unto thee lift we up our eyes: O thou that Psalm. 123. 1.
dwell in the heavens: through thee can we do great acts: it is thou that
shall tread down our enemies.

Psalm. 142. 7.
Hear us O Lord and that soon, for our spirit waxes faint: hide not thy face
from us thy Englishnation, lest we be like unto them that go down into the
pit.

Psalm. 123. 3.
Have mercy upon us O Lord, for our souls are filled with the scornful
reproof of the Antichristian rout: and with the despightfulnes of the proud
Spaniards.

Psalm. 140. 2.
They imagine mischief in their hearts: and stir up strife all the day long.

Psalm. 120. 6.
We have labored unto them for peace, but when we speak unto them thereof:
they make them ready to battle.

Psalm. 140. 6.
Then we said unto the Lord, thou art our God, hear the voice of our prayers
O Lord.

Psalm. 140. 7.
O Lord God, thou strength of our health: thou have covered our heads in the
day of battle.

verse 8.
Let not the ungodly have their desire O Lord: let not their mischievous
imagination prosper, lest they be too proud.

verse 9.
Let the mischief of their own lips, fall upon the heads of them: that
compass us about.

Let the hot burning coals of thy wrath fall upon them which trouble us
thine heritage: let them be cast into the fire of thy judgment, and into the
pit that they never rise up again.

Psalm. 142. 8.
Send down thine hand from above, and take us out of the waters of troubles,
and deliver us from the hands of strange children: for they are too strong for
us.

Mich. 7. 10.
So they that be our enemies shall look upon it, and be confounded, which now
say where is the Lord their God.

verse 16.
This the Heathen shall see, and be ashamed for all their combined powers: so
that they shall lay their hand upon their mouth, and stop their ears.

verse 17.
They shall lick the dust like a serpent, and as the woormes of the earth, that
tremble in their holes: they shall be afraid of thee O Lord our God, and
they shall fear thee much.

verse 18.
Who is such a God as thou, that pardonest wickedness, and forgiuest the
offenses of the remnant of thine English heritage? and keep not thy wrath
forever: for thy delight is in compassion.

verse 19.
Turn thee again, and be merciful unto thine English Sion: put away all our
wickednesses and cast all our sins into the bottom of the sea.

Psalm. 144. 10.
O Lord give still victory unto our Queen: and preserve thy servant Elizabeth
from the sword.

Psalm. 145. 12.
That thy power, thy glory, and thy mightines, by her may be known unto men: in
defending her kingdoms.

Glory be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the holy Ghost.

As it was in the beginning is now; and ever shall be world without end. Amen.

FINIS.
A GODLY PRAYER, WHEREIN is desired aid of God against his enemies,
forgiveness of sins, and to turn his plagues as well of the sword as
penury, which be due for sin, far from this land.
O Lord of hosts, thou God of Israel, which sit between the Cherubins,
that rulest all the kingdoms of the world, to whom all powers must stoop and
obey. Arise O Lord, and show forth thy self, and come forth still to help us,
pluck out thy hand out of thy bosom, and draw out thy sword, and smite down
the heathen that rise up against us, that seek to punish us, not for our
sins, but for the malice they bear against thy Gospel: for thou art God
alone, that rulest in all the kingdoms of the world, thou stillest the rage of
the seas, and make wars to hush, in all quarters thou quietest the madness
of the people, thou bring the devises of the heathen to naught, and make
the counsels of the ungodly to be of none effect, thou chastisest thy people O
Lord because of their sin, and then thou say, turn again you children of
men, and whenever any people do repent them of their sins and harken unto
thy hests, thou will put all their wickedness out of thy remembance, and wilt
receive them unto thy mercy: thou sparest all those that unfeignedly call upon
thee by true repentance, through a lively faith in thy dear son Jesus
Christ. Wherefore (O good Lord) we here thy beloved people according to our
duties assembled together before thy divine majesty, in the name of our
Savior Jesus Christ, do still humble our selves unto thee, pouring out our
prayers unto thee for our most gracious Queen, our nobles, magistrates and
governors, for our selves, and for all the people of this thy land of England:
acknowledging and confessing from the bottom of our hearts, that we have sinned,
we have committed iniquity, we have lived unjustly, we have done ungodly, in
that we have not regarded thy wholesome counsel, godly admonitions, and fatherly
warnings which thou have given us from time to time by thy servants the
ministers of thy holy word and sacraments, though that they have risen up
early and late to exhort, entreat, and beseech us in thy name to forsake our
sins and be reconsiled unto thee: still we have followed the imaginations of
our own hearts, hardening our faces as an Adamant against thee and thy word,
to provoke thy great wrath and heavy displeasure against this our native
country of England, and against our selves. If thou O Lord should mark
what is done amiss, and consider our sins and iniquities according to our
deserts, it would be to our utter overthrow and confusion, and not only cause
thee to plague us, in persecuting, troubling, and molesting us by the sword of
foreign power stirred up against us by the Romish antechrist the Pope, many and
sundry ways to our great trouble and cost, to the disquieting of our bodies,
and expense of our goods by sea and land, but also to strike us with many
plagues of sickness diseases and penury, if thou should consider our sins.
Wherefore O Lord our God, we do most humbly beseech thee to be good and
gracious unto us, and that thou will vouchsafe to turn all thy displeasure
from us and to forgive us all our sins past, and grant that we may live
better in thy obedience hereafter, then hitherto we have done. And although we
have sinned O Lord, yea grievously sinned, and our sins do witness against
us, yet we know that thou art a righteous judge, and sparest when we deserve
punishment, and in the midst of thy wrath think upon mercy: Spare us
therefore good Lord we beseech thee, and let not thy people of England thine
heritage be brought to confusion: But as thou have stood up for us and fought
our battles hitherto, so we pray thee dear Father, still be our defense and
succor against all our enemies. Thou art our merciful Father through Jesus
Christ, for whose sake we beseech thee to be merciful unto us, and forgive us
all our sins, and turn thy direful anger from us. We the people of England
are thy people O Lord, and thou art our God: we are thy flock, and thou art
our shepeheard: we are thy children, and thou art our Father. Be merciful unto
us thy children: tender us thy flock, and defend us thy Englishnation. Turn
thy wrath upon the nations that have not known thee, and that do not call
upon thy name: and turn it we pray thee upon the Antechristians host, send
forth thine angel still to scatter them, as sometime thou did in the host of
Senacherib for Judah and Hezechiah in his time. Let the blast of the trumpers
blown by our Gedeon, still strike a terror in the hearts of the Antechristian
Madianites, with their combined powers, and let be hard the sounding of thy
host in the air to the amasing of the Spanish Assyrians, that they and theirs
may be a pray for our Elizabeth, and our English host? or sink them in the sea
as thou did Pharao and his host in pursuing thy Israel, to bring them into
their servitude, that so our Elizabeth and all her faithful subjects may sing
the songs of triumph to thy divine majesty, that give victory to Kings.
And further we beseech thee dear Father, for Jesus Christ's sake, that as thou
have hitherto sent us plenty and increase upon the earth, so give us a happy
ingathering of the same, to thy glory and our comfort, and give us grace by
thy favorable punishments to amend our lives, and make us thankeful (good
Lord) for all thy goodness showed upon us from time to time, and for the
discomforting of our enemies in some measure, whereto we beseech thee rise up
on hie still to ride on, and to fight our battles by sea and by land, to the
utter overthrow of the Antechristian powers, to the shame of al those that hate
thy gospel, and to thy glory and our comfort, through Jesus Christ our
Savior, to whom with thee and the holy ghost be all glory, power, and
dominion for ever and ever. Amen.

FINIS.
C. S.


