CINTHIAS REVENGE: OR MAENANDERS ECSTASY.

-- P^rs. Ipse semipaganus
Ad sacra vatum carmen affero nostrum.
Similia (...) similes
^^bent lactucas.
LONDON, Printed for Roger Barnes, and are to be sold at his shop in
Chancery Lane, over against the Rolls. 1613.

The names of the Actors.
CINTHIA. MAENANDER. PHEVDIPPE. MALINDO. AMILCAR. LAELIO. HIRVDO. GRACCHVS.
MANTESIO. PERILLVS MAEGALENSES. MILITES. CASSIO. HYARCHVS. HIPPONAX. EVPHORBVS.
FAVORINA. LVCILLA. LESBIA. BVFO. GLADIATOR. SACERDOS. SERVI. A^CILLAE. The
Ghosts of CASSIO. MALINDO. PHEVDIPPE.

To the worshipful and his Constant friend, Mr. lo. Dickinson, the Author
dedicates this Modele of Inconstancy.
I Did (sir) in this lame, but loving dedication, make it a questionable
controuc^sie, if an Author will, without prae-acquaintance (as I have done)
respecting his duty and zeal, thrust forth a doubtful work into a wise and
well-deseruing patronage, whether the true-loue may be dispensed with, or the
confidence taxed as a presumption: Sure I am, if any indifferent Judge respect
my love, he will attribute this to loves desire, and so my presumption must
be but well-meaning: Vltra quid superest? Let the vain mercenary rout of
Bastard-poets rub an abortiue Muse with hope of honorable benefactors; and
sophisticate rich parts of Nature with most corrupting compounds of
Sycophansie, yet shall the more attractiue and pure judgments have (as they
ever had) a free election, Et prodesse, et delectare, without incurring the
name of Nice, divided Opinionists. Let therefore Rocks and Mountains rise
against me, the boisterous and arrogant ancient Writers gape wide upon me,
if you shall reap the least true delight, and satis-factio^, I may be proud
above license, and quietly repose, not watching who dares assault the Fabric;
so confident I am of your free Spirit: Sic and (...) verba Magistri: The work
(no doubt) is in it self a work (...) naked, yet never to be amended, with
beautif^ll and fair acceptance, praise and dispraise after Impression be
alike, they do neither add, not can detract from things simply considered, so
inherent is the name of Work to each cor posure; but I can truly say, your
im-par^^^l acceptance will make (...) a good work to me; Etiam si (...)
populus: Briefly then, to avoid prolixe Argument, in stead of an Epistle, I may
not enlarge my preambles with needless motives, dis-allowing the errors of all
men, and favorably conniue at my own heresies, seeming to detest lucre, etc.
which deserve a tractate rather then so compendious an Epistle which does only
salute, say Farewell, And for my self thus much: Nullus mihi expediuit suum
(...)
Nec venture docuit verba conari.


Your industrious friend, I. S.

The Authors Epistle Popular.
I Could now descant (like some sage fabulist) upon real difference betwixt
Readers, and understanding Readers; prescribe a formal limitation who should,
with my consent, sur-vey this Poem, (which, no doubt, many will term tedious;)
or could most humbly beg at the fowle-fisted paw, of each pretending Ass, each
staulking Gull, to spare his cheap detraction, or rather vnboyled carpes, till
the Authors next service, and then to choke him with ^^chewed gobbets of his
own dressing, if each particle in the Cookery were not amended; else might I
furnish out a methodicall preparatiue, assuming some depth of mystery beyond
apprehension, or assure the hood-winckt buzzards of this age, that every
syllable sauors of milkesops, does require an easy stomach, slight concoction,
simple and weak judgment, etc. ad infinitum. Thus do our pie-bald
Naturalists, depend upon poor wages, gape after the drunken harvest of forty
shillings, and shame the worthy benefactors of Hellicon: Some insinuate their
pains, some their excellence, but all inf^^-(...), my self together; yet will
I thus far engage an upright meaning, Nec famam, nec mercedem, olet hoc opus:
not (...) affectation drew forth my scribled ignorance. And with all
(...)-willing am I to play Tom-foole in Print for namesake, as I have purposly
concealedat from the Impression, so as the petty volume enioyes his fortune
Fatherless: for indeed (if publishing what (...) intended private were not so
common) this had been free for my self and familliars alone, notwithstanding
the public stamp; only to avoid the false imputed tax of idle and
haire-brained disability; not fearing what plume any garrulous foul of the
air can challenge, nor entreating, Ne moucat cornicula risum: My comfort is,
all speak their own Language, Querritat verres, tardus rudit, oncat assellus:
Who then shall blame the tongue, which cannot naturally differ from calumnious
an I malevole it scandal? or who exclude any litterall, though otherwise
illiterate babone, from his prefunctory and peevish censure? who must, nay
will, inspight of an Author, med^le with matter vendable for (...) melancholy
currish (...), for the fathers (...) themselves not know why, unless to prove
the dogged Antipathy, whereof Martial speaks -- -- Nec possum dicere quare
Hoc tantum possum dicere, non Amote.
For these, I account of them no better then cursed whelyes without strength,
and teeth, policy, or possibility, to hurt any man who shall oppose them.
Neither let any captious Reader expect by this, to win more benefit in
perusal, then he has curtesy in exposition; the wisest man may learn,
though little, out of this: if humor make them haughty, esteeming for the most
part (as many do) works of this nature (...) worthy of their full stomachs;
though much ripeness of understanding, judgment of method, and morning
study, goes to the making up of a true Poem: the wisest therefore might have a
better opinion both of the pains and value of legitimate Poet asters, not
referring labors of such consequence to the cloudy censure of a full belly; as
marshalling them aranke below cheese: surueying Scoenes, by way of Pamphlet,
and Pamphlet for digestion; contemning the cool fountain in dog-daies like
the doltish Ass; to run through flames in harvest: Farewell. And strive if
thou will needs maintain the Asse-head, to be rather Archadian, then
Acharnican.

The Argument in brief.
CINTHIA's Altars be neglected by the chief estates of Sparta; both King and
Councels adiudge her divine sacrifice, religion, vows, worship and adoration
to appertain especially, if not punctually, to the weak order of women;
because they are subject to changeable toys, which take their primitive
deriuation of Luna: She therefore inflamed with resolution to qualify this
error, as to inform how far from judgment so ir-religious opinions did
arise, does first possess the humor of exalted subjects, with manifest
ambition, breach of duty, and allegiance, libidinous concupiscence, flattery,
faithless engagements, which in themselves favor of Cinthia's large
instability. Pheudippe (on whom the Kings love reflected with more extreme
zeal) she averts from his obedience to rebellion, by the power of
pra^dominance. Manander noting a change so manifest does (by collection)
attribute Pheudippe's false-hood to her suggestion; resolved confidence begat
his rage; his rage, blasphemy; which blasphemy does again exaspcrate the
Goddess: her indignation follows, which with violence brake forth inyong
M^nanders vehement madness. A stares-man, old Euphorbus, does compassionate
his agony, and for a second purpose, counterfets an artificial ecstasy,
whilst conceited humor makes Manander follow (like Cinthia) diversity of
shapes: from Poet he falls to a Player, then to Ajax, from thence to Mercury, in
whose habit, assuming the most sacred essence of a substance incorporiall, he
enioynes Euphorbus to make some experiment hereof by his pouiard, being
persuaded he was impenetrable: Euphorbus easily induced by temptation, as
pretending to establish a new Monarch, does oppose and kill this eueryway
deluded King: A general approbation does thank his policy, which made a
final Catastrophe of madness; and so revenge is pacified.

To his friend the Author.
ONe Swallow makes no Summer, most men say,
But who disproues that Proverb, made this Play.
F. C.

To his much and worthily esteemed friend the Author.
Who takes thy volume to his virtuous hand,
Must be intended still to understand:
Who bluntly does but look upon the same,
May ask, what Author would conceal his name?
Who reads may roaue, and call the passage dark,
Yet may as blind men sometimes hit the mark.
Who reads, who roaues, who hopes to understand,
May take thy volume to his virtuous hand.
Who cannot read, but only does desire
To understand, he may at length admire.
B. I.

To his true friend the Author.
I Was unwilling to praefixe one verse;
Thy book and Poem may it self commend,
My duteous zeal does make me yet rehearse
Rimes of thy worth, none as I am thy friend.
For Ladies may, thy Poem Cannot need
An Usher to lead on, or to succeed.
G. Rogers.

To his Endeered Author.
LOng let thy Muse her wished seat enjoy,
Into whose breast she fertile store does bring,
Which makes thy pen the cause of her employ,
By pleasing style and Poems she does sing;
Amidst whose lines sweet Laurels up are sprung
Which do adorn their sole effectiue stem
As flexile branches, fittest to be wrung
Into that form, of Poets Diademme.
What shall I need then to inuoke at all?
Or wish applause from out the vulgar crew?
I leave such praise to men judicial:
They give each work that to it self is due,
Whose lauding palms, might ymp an Authors Pen,
And raise a Phoenix from a silly Wren.
THO: DANET.

CINTHIAS REVENGE: OR MAENANDERS ECSTASY.
Actus 1. Scoena 1.
CINTHIA. THe chiefest point of Kings felicity,
Some subjects do esteem Authority.
We are above, the Potentates of earth
Be unacquainted with high blood and birth.
We do transcend supremacy of Kings,
Account them (as they are) most mortal things.
Subject to putrefaction, to disease,
To folly; which no physic may appease.
Yet they do magnify themselves alone,
Their haughty stomachs do acknowledge none
Above; who may such dignity surmount:
Of power supreme as fables they account.
My Godhead may with privilege complaint
Of Sparta; whose proud factious Kings refrain
By wicked council, from due sacrifice
^At my religious Altar: they suffice
To render duty in Olimpickes once,
And rob me of an -- tique oblations:
Which we ascribe unto the base repute
They do conceive of our Divinity,
My Temples honor and supremacy.
To Matrons (Bauds and Widows) they translate
To service of weak women dedicate
My whole praedominance; they do exempt
Man's homage, and believe my power of change
Extends no further then the female sex.
This new-conceited error I Will refute,
I Will manifest how far compulsiue change
Does ouersway proud man; I Will execute
The rigor of my vengeance: dreadful awe
Gods do obtain by a correctiue law.
And thus will I restore that holiness,
Which they extinguish through bold sauciness:
Mortals contemn the Makers Diety,
Until his wrath scourge their impiety.
Act. 1. Scoen. 2.
MENANDER, HIPPONAX, EVPHORBVS, LELIO, PHEVDIPPE, HYARCHVS, PERILLVS, a Hearse.
Nature acquainted well with indigence,
Defining (in it self) our impotence,
Liable to corruption general,
Shows, nothing does endure that is natural:
Stern death no pity takes on hallowed age,
Upon the sucking babe, whose harmless twine,
Tenderly hangs about the nurses neck,
Never did old men's holy tears obtain,
Never did death from Innocents refrain.
The slave who smothers in obscurity
His hated life; who never did account
Of rising Sun, eclipse, and prodigies,
More then of customs and impertinence;
Never accounted seasons, months, and years,
Autumnall harvest, Springtide happiness,
Further then means to nourish misery,
Who never lent the busy world a smile,
But breathes out melancholy air, and groans.
This man (alike with Epicures and Kings,
Who often strive with a departing soul)
Expects upon the leisure of his fate,
So Kings and Cripples be incorporate;
Their ashes often mixed, when they repose
Two petty vrnes, their bodies often enclose.
Death, how impartial be thy wounds? how free
From all exceptions? My beloved fire,
Lusty and full of Spirit five days since,
Here humbled lies, once royal prop of Greece.
EV. Laments are idle, neither can recall
Your fathers soul back from Elysium.

MEN. But grief informs the world he once did live
Worthy, and well respected, like a Prince,
W^om people pray for, and whose happy reign
True subjects crave to be perpetual.

HYP. But sorrow in excess (dread soue^^igne)
Begets a weak distraction of the brain.
Breeds a contempt of mundane diligence,
Neglects profession, violates the law
Of solace, and abhorres congruity,
Gives careless reigns to sick security,
Turns nature to a living lethargy.

MEN. True Hypponax, and therefore temperance
Limits with reason our compulsiue woe:
For men of pure discretion (you may find)
Bear all extremes with a most aequall mind.
Repeat Perillus (the last sign of love)
A poem to express the Obsequie,
With tears concluding his Catastrophe.

PER. Fear to offend his far divulged name,
Which (who may mention without righteous fame)
Being ever busied in effecting laws,
Commended still with popular applause,
Retaining orders of Antiquity,
Forbids me to repeat his Elegy:
Each clamorous echo and all forrest-noise
Engendered by the Sylvan Dryades,
Be henceforth silent; never may such tunes
Afford free mirth to Poets fantasy;
Who, may surcease to sing their sacred lays,
Viewing the vnaccustom'd change of time:
Till future ages do reviue the loss
Of our dejected worthy in his son,
Whose true external image does retain,
The living luster of our wonted king,
May whose dear genius dwell thy gifts among,
And us provoke to leave his funeral song.

MAENAN. Enough; and in that final word, Enough,
Our lamentations fail: remove the hearse,
His body sleeps: who may the soul reverse?
(My Council) stay, assist me; and because
From the succession of new Kings, new laws
Take their original, I do intend
Enormities of custom to amend,
Matters (though in themselves erroneous)
Amended, may prove meritorious,
Had but impartial Fate five longer weeks,
Allotted to my^^fe progenitor.
He, by advise of your sage gravity,
Had finished (ere this) what you begun,
Which (through default) I must remember done.
The people of our continent, each sex
Both masculine and female, do adore
A Goddess, whose essential part is change,
(Proper to widows, virgins wild, and wives)
Antiquity does call her CINTHIA;
The honor, sacrifice and Hecatombes,
Spent in the solemn, superficial awe
Of her accounted-sanctimonious law,
Are (without aequall number) infinite.
We, knowing her supremacy extends
No further then weak women, will abridge
That annual expense, and will confine
Such customare devotion to the sect
Of Priest-hoods foeminine; their simple sex
Shall by iniunction worship CINTHIA,
To whom indeed they be subordinate.
So, this decree of privilege exempts
Men from oblations: Let an Officer
Inform the people thus.

OMN. We all subscribe.

MAEN. Your dutiful acceptance (noble friends)
Of this propounded policy, does urge
My secret nature to disclose the love
Which was inflamed when iuniority
Of years and judgment (my associates)
Gave me advice, which a more grounded age
Does entertain, with equal permanence:
With selfsame feruor and integrity
Of true entire affection, as before.

HYP. What Spartan Lady will oppose the King?

EVPH. What Spartan Lady does Maenander love?

MAEN. Nay friends allow the marriage of your King,
A matter lawful first in general
And thence refute the scruple so precise,
Which boulsters up a life Monastical.

OMN. That scruple we as error do account.

MEN. Then I Will advertise in especial,
You sapient hearers of that beauteous dame,
Who, vnredeem'd Maenander, captiuate
Does hold in fetters, though a freeborn King,
The daughter of Hyarchus do I love.

H^. My daughter? unexpected happiness!
Give me then leave, sweet rauishment, to see
Her glad espousall celebrated once,
By which, but some conjecture may arise,
To see the royal issue of her womb;
And I Will go lodge in my forefathers tomb.

MAEN. Do all agree with this old or'e-ioyd man?

HIP. EVP. True subjects will commend Maenanders choice.

MEN. Nothing does more prevent a Princes fate,
Then wise directing Counselors of State.

Act. 1. Scoen. 3.
MALINDO, HIRVDO. Gross indignation! manifest repulse!
Am I neglected? O disdainful Prince!
May we observe thy peevish altitude,
Like a contemptiue groom or Sycophant,
Without your glaunce and poor espyall? Judge,
O judge my quarrel some ingenious man,
Witness my righteous challenge of his pride;
Resolve me some indifferent arbiter,
How to digest this ignomious pill.
My love and duty both rejected thus?
My dignity esteemed so little worth?
My salutations frustrate? Some poor doult,
Who pays a courtesy and supple cringe
For every dram of air he suckes in,
Cannot be used with less humanity.
We, bending, stooped before his Majesty,
He, with a crabbed countenance, clean auers'd,
Goes on like some dull statue; never stoopes,
Nor smiles, but with a frowning arrogance,
Just like a molded picture, like the frame
Of a supported Image, does move on,
As by some artificial new device,
Puppets are seen to make a solemn dance.
He now attended with a barball size
Of sober Statesmen, does reject my love,
As if I were not in full aequipage
Of his own years: nay almost of degree,
Excepting his high place of Sovereign.
O pride of Princes! o how forceable
Be scornful frowns from an offended King?
This argues guilt, and makes me culpable,
Without a conscious crime; without pretense
Of any thing committed: In defense
I therefore well may plead pure ignorance.
What new suggestion should exasperate
The Kings displeasure? doubtless, he of late,
And his big title, was more affable,
More gent and courteous: but the crown perhap
Is heavy, and requires the cunning help
Of those gray dotards (who indeed possess
Our most deluded Monarch) to support
A thing so massy, and immence; proceed,
Soon may my wrathful curses overtake
The proudest vein of their advanced souls:
May the vaste concaue of Olympus crack
And give a signal to our Gods decree
Of dissolution ready to approach,
Of earth and heaven their latest period,
When I repent my curse, or do abstain
From an effectual means, which may procure
Destruction, though delai'd; yet deadly sure.
Am I not noble? bred of aequall stem
With Sparta's chief and best Magnificoes?
My Ancestors (removed but nine degrees)
Knew never man below the blood of Kings
Worth aemulation, as a rival fit
For them, admitting mighty Emperors,
None as above, but as competitors:
From those heroicke monuments of Greece,
From those Hyrudo you can testify,
Our self deriues a lineall descent:
And by the law of Heralds dignity,
A supported by antiquity)
I am (...) amid the chiefest rank
Of Duke^s, which govern this Peninsula:
Yet shall I ^rauerse so obsequiously,
Within the glaunce of his huge altitude,
Like some dejected melancholy Ass,
Which feeds on thistles.
HY. Death! you are abusde,
Were I the man appointed to sustain,
So undeserved a signal of disgrace,
The proudest King in Europe should perceive,
I Would not digest an injury so base.
You being the subject of such high abuse,
You should with faction terrify the King,
Amaze the Court, and make your opposites
Tremble again like babes, who shaking stand,
Doubtful of mercy from the Tutors hand.
Were I the man whom dignity of place
Entitled to such vaste prerogative
As you enjoy, no scandal, no disgrace,
Should touch my honor without full revenge:
The King himself should not escape my spleen,
(Upon so just a quarrel) I Would affront
His ample greatness: nay expostulate
On equal terms, why without open cause
He should reject my service with a frown,
I Would tax him of vngouern'd appetite,
Selfe-humour, peevish ignorance of state,
And charge him to amend infirmities:
If like a tyrant he but durst reply,
Rating the license of audacity,
Then would I menace torture; I would tear,
The big voluminous Title he does wear
Pined on his back by parasites and knaves,
Who though they want, yet can bestow much grace,
Kings when they leave to be upright, are base.

MAL. Make me acknowledge this thy love sincere,
Bring thy magnanimous courage into act;
O be my agent, reconcile the doubts
Which do possess my intellectual sense.
The Statesmen are my sole Antigonists,
They do seduce and steal away the King.
Keep his heroicke bounty for themselves;
They do detain his nature punctually,
Make him (deluded) parsimonious,
Erect who pleases their magnificence,
Who them displease, the king must frown upon:
They do entombe the silly wretch alive,
Make him as dead, to eminent designs,
Which they approve not; then revive his will,
To adventure such, as none approve but they*
In brief, they lead him like a Lions whelpe,
Tame, and yet fierce; if so the keeper please,
To wurry with advantage: then beware,
Those who offended have the keepers will;
By which, the tame-taught Lyon's governed still.

HY. Beleeu't my Lord, a homebred naturalist,
Whose resolution never was confirmed
By art, example, or experience;
Who never knew a faith historical,
(That low step to a warrant rational)
His anger would be ready for attempt;
Nay finish all with very good success,
Whilst you revolue a tedious advice,
Of which, too long delay does spoil the prize.

MAL. But sir, the high opponents, who traduce
My honor, and good name, be numerous,
Men of no dunghill breeding (not advanced
By some especial Madame of the Court,
For a concealment of her secrecy,
In case, where witness, bawdy hand, or seal,
To broken Titles be restoratiue)
But matchless in their eminence of birth,
Not sprung from petty page, or foot-boyes race,
(Only removed, to fill up vacant place,
And rob judicial statesmen of deserts,
To whom by Nations law, all same reverts)
No, my assailants be both rich and wise,
(Two qualities scarce analogicall,
Yet my oppugnant enemies have both)
Rich, wise, and nobly borne; nay favorites,
Men of an aequall judgment with my self,
Ingenious they be (though Flatterers)
Who with calumnious faction do deprave
My potent fortunes, making birth a slave.
My foes be great, therefore I am dismayed,
And to encounter great ones am afraid.

HY. What huge Antaus may of conquest brag,
Who euercomes a Pigmey? or insults
Over a simple wrecth condemned to chains?
May loves own Eagle stoop at stinking flies?
And suffer Owls to penetrate the skies?
Well did that mighty Indian dog deserve,
Whom neither Bucke, mad Bull, nor threatening Boar,
Could from the kennell make to rise, before
A stout courageous Lion, king of strength,
Irefull enough, with vengeance in his jaws,
Prepared for single combat; boldly then
Like a resolved Champion forth he flew,
And the Maiesticke Lion fiercely slew.
Give me a man, whom neither multitude,
Nor means to work revenge, can terrify;
Who, though encompassed with corriuall foes,
Immured with adverse competitors,
Left even amidst the circumuenting Jaws,
Of greedy hounds, and hunters policy;
Can, like a whirle-winde, in despite of those,
Who with unequal faction dare oppose,
Fly through the thickest, make their big-swolne mawes,
Level with stinking lakes, and ditches deep,
Like a Colossus though they stood before.
Who may esteem it an inglorious act,
Rather who thinks the valor not divine,
Which through a banded troop of enemies,
Does, like some bolt of thunder fly apace,
And force withstanding objects to give place?
Men of your size being urged with insolence.
Of peevish statists aemulating pride,
(A humor most unnecessary ill)
Should, like the murdering Chain-shot, drive downe-hill
Castles and rocks, although impregnable,
Make mountains stoop before you, rend up Oaks,
Buffet large Atlas with incessant strokes,
(Though the supporter of Olympus frame)
Till heaven and earth beg rescue for the same.
Yet shallow great-men, they must wisemen seem,
For noble births do live by peoples breath;
Nor may the privilege of birth redeem
Our aestimation, subject still to death;
Be theerfore wise (wisdom who dares condeme?)
If not by nature, then by stratagem.

MA. Thou'art young ( Hirudo) resolute and wise,
A plyant apprehension soon will rise;
Remember now thy natural good parts,
Think if they serve to reconcile the doubt
Of my ensuing mischief; prithee think,
If thou dar'ft venture boldly to remove
My foes from bounty of Maenanders love:
Which, till the blinded King do abrogate,
Each fool may from my fortunes derogate.
Combine thy powers, and ingenious parts
To salve the wound of my disgrace, which smarts.
And be my creature; meditate withal
Our now-declining joys to re-install:
And be my creature; satisfy the King
By some corrupted means, or anything:
And be my creature; may some new devise,
Purchased by Magic Art, and hellish prise,
Wholly avert the puny Kings belief
From our opponents tales, which do in chief
Poison my merits; o abolish those,
And be my creature, or indeed dear slave
I will be thine; do but employ some care
To best advantage of thy agent-skill;
Remember then, thou art my creature still.

HY. Know then I love thee Duke, and must prefer
Thy fortunes, though I do confiscate all,
Whom Gods will not releive, invention shall.

Act. 1. Scoen. 4.
LVCILLA, HYRVDO, LES^IA. The King my brother? No, my brother clown,
Malicious coxcombe, peevish Spartan-foole;
Death brided? o my torments!
LES. Madam know,
He is contract already.

LV. To a whore?
The strumpet Fa^^rina?

HY. Hark just heaven!
She railes upon a virgin, whose pure soul
Might give example of true chestity
To her own spotted, leprous infamy.

LES. Now old Hyarchus laughes.

LV. Her father: yes:
A rotten Magistrate, who may thank warm clothes,
Caudels and physic for each rising Sun,
Which he poor man is made partaker of,
His daughter must be married to the King:
So, I, degraded must acknowledge one
Above us in our female properties,
Be boundless my exclaimes, and terrible;
(Curses) assemble your offensive rage,
And help a woman's fury to disgorge
The poison of her stomach, in the face
Of a most spightfull brother, whose design
Is unto me a purge so laxatiue,
As my unable body will be spent
With bitter execrations; o I feel
The storm of vengeance wrestle in my blood,
Tempting my soul to be more great then good.
O may the horror of some fatal knife,
Finish the blessings of my brothers wife.
May she live loathed, or never may she live,
Till heavens unto my happiness shall give
A freedom, to insult and tyrannize,
Upon that impious whore, that Cockatrize.
O may new mischief tread upon the heels
Of terror, to affront the joy she feels.
Let some infernal Negromanticke charm,
Change their expected happiness to harm.
Let many clouds salute their nuptial morn,
With omenons affrights in way of scorn.
The height of mischife makes my sorrow sound,
As Op^-balsum does a bleeding wound.

HY. O the rude license of a woman's rage,
Who her malignant disco^ds can presage?
So, let her vanish, and her gall unmask,
Till we accomplish our appointed task.

Act. 1. Scoen. 5.
HYRVDO, MENANDER, FAVORINA, HYARCHVS, PHEVDIPPE, MALINDO, EVPHORBVS, HIPPONAX,
LICTOR. My sorry conscience does recoyle (old men)
Worthy Mali^d^ did enforce my vow
To prove delinquent, rather then oppose
My dreaded sovereigns life (an impious act,
Urged by the cunning of more impious age.)
O then submit, with poenitentiall tears
Confess, your age offends the King through fears,
Omn. Magi^r. Our age offend the King? we urge this act?

HY. Of murder: yes, you love (...).

Om. Mag. Subtle distraction!.

LIC. Silence.

ME. Hippo^ax.
Hyarchus we disclaim your subtilties.

FAVO. My father so rejected?

MEN. Queen forbear,
Malindo is our faithful favorite.

MA. In thy protection let our kingdom live.

MEN. Welcome brave Duke; be ever mine, beloved;
Accounted in the chiefest scarlet rank
Of understanding Iudices; we thank
Your noble and magnaminous resolve,
Your charitable undertaking; be advanced
And ever in my bosom: you are loyal.

MAL. Daigne mighty Monarch but experience,

ME. Your love already has in ample sort,
Given testimonial enough: be graced
And ever happy in our high account:
Another subject Officer I have,
Phe^dippe called; on whom the graces smile:
A man so absolute in my approofe,
That Nature has reserved small dignity
Which he enioyes not. Welcome friend approach,
Forsake the City, ever dwell in Court;
Nay nearer, in my bosom: we observe
Your manifest endeavor, diligence,
And all industrious faculties that lodge
Themselves in thee with a true correspondence,
We note your proiects, and esteem them highly.

PHE. I servile groom put forth small industry,
Excepting what I owe in subjects duty.

MEN. My father, in the latest fillable
Of his weak vt'trance, did inculcate often,
Thy unrewarded loyalty: be big
In honor, and outshine the radiant gloss
Of bearded politicians: kneel before us.
And in vprising swell with a new name:
No more Phe^dippe, but all-potent Duke
Of wide illiri^^; (noble friend) arise,
We diue into the bottom of thy soul,
Which does engender a sweet sympathy.
Live long and happy in a Monarchs love:
Malind^, you provide some Theater,
Some regal show, wherewith we mutually
May solace and disport our heaviness.
Hyrud^ live: May treason ever find
The biting tortures of a troubled mind.
You magistrates imagine it a curse,
And punishment beyond all punishment.
(If you attainted are with any guilt
Of so enorme designs) think it a curse
To suck up the salubrious air, and live,
Fame will infect you, though I pardon give:

OMN. So prosper we as we are innocent.

Act. 1. Scoen. 6.
MALINDO, HYRVDO. Good slave I thank thee, thou have reconciled
The Kings distasteful and ambiguous frown,
I must enroule thee in the Catalogue
Of my professed favorites: contemn
The servile clog of stooping courtesy:
Enjoy what ever in the bounds of freedom.
Be idle, and securely frivolous,
Wanton or any thing that appertains
Unto a noble personage of worth.
Or if thou wishest a contented life,
Free from the cauils incident to worth,
Be only idle, ever gazing ou^
Of public windows, and observe the pride
Of such a man, fair mounted on his cloth
And gelding dapple gray, accounting all
His footmen, till the coltish bayard stumble.
Be whom thou please, whom thou do suppose
A blessed man is, absolutely rich.
HY. All this demands a furtherance, my Lord.

MA. Yes, and that furtherance will I bestow:
But the most noble have their enemies,
Their opposites, antigonists; nay some
Of ragged base repute do still survive,
Who (notwithstanding) dare malign the state
Of us, though splendour to the Commonweal.
These vomit forth each scandal, each contempt,
Malice and gall together: poison choke them;
I feel their aspicke venom here involu'd,
They wound worse then a raging Basyliske.
How bitter is the taste of contumele!
Some patience I entreat thee (heaven) bestow
Upon our scandalized name: Reproach,
That common adversary of us all,
Who are in a good way to purchase fame,
Does dog us to our latest winding sheet,
Even to the womb of our great grandmother,
That never satisfied womb of earth.
Blame not my zealous anger, I am hot,
And carried with true valor, to the pitch
Of an exclaim so requisite: o slaves,
And prodigies of nature, that will taint
Pure sanctity; nay, even the Gods above,
And their incomprehended holiness;
Their sacred essence, with like blasphemy;
If but enraged awhile, as they do mine.

HY. Who? or what man is he that dares do thus?
God's Death I will not endure the sight of him.

MA. How? speak that again, do you remember well?

HY. God's Death I will not endure the sight of him.

MA. No? why thou ungrateful man; must I advance,
Must I search out a lodging for thy soul,
And make room for thy friendship in our bosom?
Can ever hope to be incorporate
With my own essence? the same man almost,
And not endure the presence, nay the sight
Of our malicious foe? recall your thought:
Each timorous fellow, that abhorres the name
Of absolute revenge, could say no more:
What? run away from our contemned foe?

HY. I Will not endure the presence; nay the sight
Of such a slave, yet never turn my ^eeles:
No, I Would embowell the base rogue at first,
Contriue a quick dispatch: the villains heart
Would I expose upon a mountains top,
Or offer it upon my faulchions point,
Fresh bleeding to some wrath^ull Deity,
Of vnappeas'd revenge, in sacrifice:
I Would mix my urine with his reeking blood,
And piss upon the carcass in despite,
Disseuer joints and flesh, till all were done,
Then toast his marrow in the melting Sun:
I Would not endure the sight of him alive.

MA. Courageous resolution! I commend
Such vehemence in valor: this does urge
And animate my purpose to be quick,
Royal, and open-breasted to a man
Of such full undertaking every way.
Let us employ this youthful vehemence
Betimes: a quick blood calls for action.
Imagine this the pauement where my foe
Has fixed (upon the quarrel) his firm foot;
For know that such a villain does survive,
Whom I will scourge in thee my favorite,
Briefly you must disgrace and murder him
Whose name is hitherto concealed; but you
(After instruction for the stratagem)
Shall know the varlet, whom you must imagine
(Merely for apprehension) is your self.
I like a ruffaine (which remember well,
You must hereafter practice) though for instance
I will now undertake it, unawares
I fetch away your not misdoubting heels
From of the trampled earth, even thus: then swear
Some oath of high importance, that the air
Shall never be infected with a slave,
Who breathes out poisoned blasphemy on earth.
Swear then that neither shining light of day
No interchanged seasons shall afford
One minute more of blessing, that himself
Shall not enjoy one article of breath
Beside, to ask forgiveness of the world:
Swear that no planet, no supernall star,
No Hercules, no Gigant^a^ arm
Shall rescue villains from appointed harm:
Then spit him through the center of his heart,
Even thus, Hir^ds.

HY. But you jest Im'e sure.
God's Death I am slain; forbear, ingratitude!
I perish without expectation: O.

MA. May my suspected agents perish ever.

Act. 1. Scoen. 7.
MALINDO, MESSENGER, PERILLVS. There sleep (unthought of) in a vaulted tomb:
Thus great men must be jealous of their fame,
Prevent all blemish in a noble name.
Now King and kingdom both are almost mine,
Lights be obscured when the greater shine.
The King reputes me loyal and submisse,
(Transparent color to deceive a Prince)
(But hell bear record) I am bent to ruin,
To purchase kingdoms, or impeach my state,
Who never ventured, never knew his fate.
In Epires rule now lives my noble friend,
Thither will we address our false complaint,
Pretending I am hated here at Court,
Threatened to death, not likely to escape,
Withal insinuate our appointed joy,
Which five days hence the King does celebrate*
Inform I may, that then both Prince and Peers,
Will be assembled in the Theater:
And being so, how safely he may send
A manadg'd Army to destroy them all.
(Dissembling still the means to rescue me
When I am safe aduaunc'd) but meaning most
To further my advancement: for which cause
I framed this little motive: Hoe within,
Fly to the confines of Epir^ts rule,
Deliver unto Cassius my friend,
The Governor, this caution here enclosed,
Urge him upon allegiance ever due,
From one friend to another, to make haste.
Speak this, and speak no more, neither to any
Open the passage doors of utterance,
But to my friend, my dear, my best beloved,
MES. Imagine me a block, a Niobe,
Conceive my mouth to be deuoid of tongue,
Till with content I do accomplish all.

MA. Be secret as calm silence, or the night.
My care must follow to frame Theaters,
Warning the Megalenses, our Comaedians
To act some pithy and applauded Scoene,
Wherewith to shadow my pretensiue zeal.
But well-incountred (Poet) ^pray approach.
And let us parley of an Interlude.

PER. Patron of Poets, much esteemed Duke,
Leaving the Muses, and my pleasant cares
Regarding yours more then my own affairs,
Poor Poet I Will attend your conference,
Command me ever, most ingenious Lord.

MA. Command Per^llus? no, entreat thee rather,
Each high-borne Title must advance the worth
Of holy rapture: pray inform the Actors
Of some true Moral, of some Tragedy
Or else some subject more ridiculous,
Which may with new devised conceits stir up
The dull and solemn audience.

PER. Believe
I Will stretch the scant^esse of my Mother-wit,
Rather then fail for to accomplish it.
The God of Kings protect thee: so adieu.

MAL. Attempts of great men speak in silver tones,
Thus gilded tombs ore-shadow dead men's bones.

Act. 1. Scoen. 8.
CASSIVS, SOVLDIER, MESSENGER. SOV. A speedy foot-poast here atttends your
honor.

CAS. His message?

SOV. Out of Greece, and more precisely
From Sparta.

CAS. Then admit the messenger.
Now friend, your business?

MES. Open sir the Casket.
Somewhat's within contained, that will instruct you.

CAS. Arm if thou love me noble CASSIVS,
And help thy brother with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: against Ianus-festiuall,
Address thy courage to assault our King,
Both King and Statesmen kill, for fit occasion
Will be afforded, while they sleep: secure
Busied with joy, and jesting Cordials.
Arm if thou love me noble Cassius?
Yes, arm I will, and in despite of spite
Rescue thy valor from the blackest night,
Which envy, or malignant wrath can yield,
To darken thy resplendant fortitude.
Carry the letter (friend) from whence you brought it,
Let nothing hinder quick delivery:
Nothing excels a wise dexterity.

Act. 1. Scoen. 9.
PERILLVS, 2 MEGALENSES, MESSENGER. You ( Titio) shall act Mandragona,
But you ( Eulal^o) stout Bellephoron,
Each has his part appointed, as in plays,
And this our active Scoene, so in the world
All have their parts allotted to begin
At seasons known after nativity,
But our evasion out of misery,
What cunning Sophist may denominate?
As for the Prologue in my sportiue Scoene,
There needs no Actor it to amplify;
The festival approches, let us give
Direction to your fellows:
MESSENGER LOSES THE LETTER. Look Eulalio,
Unloose that Paper, or peruse the Title:
No superscription? rend the seal, and read.
TI. Arm if thou love me noble Cassius,
And help Malindo with a royal rescue,
I am in prison, prithee make great haste,
Or I am dead: at I^nus Festival. etc.
Words of amazement, and exceeding strange.

PER. I smell a treason hypocritical.

TI. A just construction; correspondent sure,
To this intent.

PE. And therefore Titio,
You (much disguised) may safe anihilate
Both his, and our proceedings: Let Us be wise,
I Will pen a part shall dash the enterprise.

Act. 1. Scoen. 10.
MENANDER, PHEVDIPPE, MALINDO, AMILCAR, LELIO, HIPPONAX, HYARCHVS, EVPHORBVS,
FAVORINA, LESBIA, TITIO, Milites. Jove, or what-else supernall Deity,
The Gods and Goddesses who govern Kings,
Who arbitrate the schism of month and years,
Whose sacred essence heaven and earth adore,
To whom the greatest potentates below,
Do sacrifice their Greekish Hecatombes,
These are accustomed to dispense with joy,
And in remembrance of their holy acts,
(As now) we often solemnize the day,
Recorded long from all antiquity,
And civil joy perhibite without fear;
Mirth may refresh not difanull my care.
Pheudippe (friend) sit here; all do agree,
That each man's place should answer dignity.
So, call for this appointed melody.
TI. A quiet calm foretells tempestious wind,
And faire-plum'd swans sing sweetest when they dye.
Gesture does often conceal a traitors mind,
And many golden dreams do prove a lie,
Sent and inspired by heavens high thundering Jove,
I bid you arm, desist from iollity,
Those who pretend, show colorable, love,
What ere avoids the test, is flattery
Gliding a far from out the Thracian soil,
I could espy Malindo's friend in arms,
Swiftly addressing his battalions,
Here to entrap and fully ruinate
You ancient Magistrates, thee matchless King.

MAL. Sovereign the ^ellow is lunaticke,
Remove the mad man sirs; away with him.

TI. Not mad Malindo, thou a traitor art,
Take witness from that paper, his own part,

ME. L^lio, Lord General, give speedy battle.

LE. Arm soldiers, arm, cry conquest and approach.

ME. Make ready forces to repel the foe.

MAL. Arise from foggy Ler^a some foul smoke.
Each living creature without mercy choke.
Be ever clouded Phoebus, may thy light,
Turn in a moment to aeternall night:
Return oblivion, or the antique age;
Forgotten Chaos, and the pilgrimage
Of undefiled man's first innocence,
That I all torment may escape on earth,
And be accounted guiltless (as at birth)
O for enchantments, for a potent charm,
A magic spell that may con-iure the clouds,
To cover me with darkness at noonday!
For such a charm would I expose the wealth
Of Tagus, or the Ocean (were it mine)
Help, o assist me some infernal aid,
Now be propitious (Hell) I am betrayed.
Fortune, o strumpet! I Will advance the dark
And fearful habitation of the dead,
I Will worship witches, and extol the praise
Of Pluto, I Will prefer impiety,
Canonize all before thy Deity.
The blood of Nessus never did enforce
A Hercules to half such vehemence.

ME. Was It you Malind^, that through mischiefs bait
Composed this ensign of a hollow heart?
Alas I loved thee well, why did devise
Such fatal Scoenes, fashioned of blood and death?
The paper mourned when thou thy mind had writ,
Yes, mourned in black merely to think on it:
But you persist in deep obdurasie.
I mourn my self, yet am deuoid of pity,
Because thy error is ambitious pride.

MAL. The man whom fate has from aeternity,
From since the words beginning, has enrol'd
Amidst misfortunes mournful Catalogue,
Whose downfall frowning planets have conspired,
Who never was the bounded favorite
Of way-ward rumor; whom adversity
Hoth wholly seized, whom heavens appointed awe
Prepares as fatal object of disdain
To level her inuenom'd aim against.
O let him ever dwell in mothers womb,
Or let that Infants cradle be his tomb.

ME. Conduct him Soldiers to the car^ifex,
E^phorbus, you attend the final gasp,
Then give to Cassius the decouped scull.

MAL. Ambition leads us to the fountains brinke,
But then affoord's destruction 'stead of drink.

Act. 1. Scoen. 11.
LELIO, SOVLDIERS, AMILCAR, LVCILLA, SACERDOS. etc. ME. We read large conquest
in our Captains face,
Stand forth some sober nuntius, relate
The manner of this notable de-signe,

AMIL. Brontes, nor did Pyragmon ever shake
The Anuile of that Iron-munger God
V^lcan, with blows so unsupportable,
In hammering the thunderbolts of Jove,
As did the courage of our General
(By animating soldiers to attempt)
Shatter the weak array of Cassius.
He faint (for faintness ever does attend
On such designs) being faint before the time
Of onset, he withdrew so speedily,
As, that retinue of his rebell-slaues,
Begged noble mercy of the Conqueror.
But we, like some fierce Giant given to spoil,
Enraged with a remembrance of their act,
Their too contemptuous vp-rore; did reply,
With anger vnappeas'd in bloody phrase,
That no compassion should redeem their lives
From famine of our faulchions: for indeed,
Rebellion must be scourged until it bleed.
Then flew the common Soldier with such speed,
To enterprise in rigor the new spoil,
As never did a hungry Woolfe insult*
With more unsatisfied revenge, then they.
Grim Slaughter in a Chariot of dead sculs,
Rode up and down triumphing, till dark night
Shook off the fetlocke from her sleepy i^des,
And gave way for retrait; each man before
Troad in contempt upon the scattred foe,
Until my fortune, rather then exploit,
Slew the once owner of this* vn-ioyn'd scull,
Then every man gave back, with blood being full.

ME. Magnanimous Amilcar, I account
Thy courage beyond apprehension; swell,
Swell my Phendippe with abundant joy,
Rejoice in thy coragious son, like me,
Who vaunt the rather, even because thy son
Does so be have himself, thou being my friend,
Whom I esteem above all earthly good.
Stand forth Phe^dippe, honor does attend
To cast a gracious smile upon thee, friend;
And thee Amilcar, let us magnify.
Malindo sleeps ( A^ilcar) I advance
Thee through the ruin of his dignity,
Possess both place and goods.

A^i. Without desert
As hitherto; but I will endeavor.

ME. We have a sister, where is she? L^^illa?
Let some attendant urge her company:
Bring hither likewise an appointed Priest,
(Be not amazed my sober Magistrates)
Pheudippe, you shall be espoused to her:
Her I Will bestow, and without prejudice
On thee alone, my noble Bedfellow.

PHEV. Pardon (dear Liege) least worthy I of all
To be a Monarchs kinsman, less, to be called
The brother of a Greekish King, your self.

ME. Do not refuse, for (noble friend) my love
Only admits thee as a friend and brother,
And for a witness that I make this league
Of love and friendship; let us embrace each other.

PHE. Ever obeisance to your Majesty.

ME. My sister does approach, let grooms make way
For beauty able to obscure the day.
Sister, behold thy husband; friend, thy wife,
Marriage does breed, but sooner banish strife.
You (Priest) the Hy^^^^all rites may offer:
Acceptance is experienced by proffer.

SACE. Let Hymen triumph, and unite your souls.

ME. Now live in peace, and brother ask a boon:
Ask what you list, for grant I will what-euer,
Which henceforth may commemorate the time
Of an espousall so remarkable.

PHE. Your divine Majesty accumulates
Honor, above the trite capacity
Of all contemptuous age; that ancestors
(Before thy hallowed birthday) did approve:
(Great King) I have a kinsman, though obscure,
Yet wealthy, whom (because obscure) I beg
A small part of your high magnificence,
But to enroule amid the Catalogue
Of those you least remember: Kings be wise,
Their bounty will provoke a slave to rise.

ME. To deific the worth of whom we love,
Advancement I Will impouerish, compel
Honor to hug thy kinsman, till a warmth
Quicken his humble blood without control.
Envy, (the scourge of Kings) be henceforth dumb,
Thus will I treason evermore entombe.
And thus exault our love beyond all merit,
Birth may do much, love makes the low inherit.

Finis Actus primi.
Act. 2. Scoen. 1.
PHIVDIPPE. A Midst my slumber, circumvolu'd with doubt,
In this thick midnight darkness, now all sense
Securely lies inchain'd; now potent dreams,
With unresisted awe, rule the dead lump
Of man's poor fabric; now all humane flesh,
Kings, and the sterne-brow'd Tyrants do submit
Their majesty to Sleeps Imperial feet.
Now, not long since I dreamed, and could with ease,
Utter the subject, how a misshapen hag,
His hair full horrid black, huge were his eyes,
Big, like a bowl encompassed with bone,
Thrice did the Impe appear, did vanish thrice,
Three massy Crowns, of worth inaestimate,
(Had they enjoyed a worth substantial:)
Thrice did he show, and thrice again withdraw
The hallowed objects, then a pace proclaim
Quod libet, li^et, and away departs.
I then awak't, struck with extreme amazem^nt,
And nimbly leaping from a secure couch,
Came to expel this ominous affright.
Reading, or whatsoever can avail
The vigor of temptation, to withstand,
We should perhibite (though against our will.)
Here Is an aspiring Poet, whose proud touch,
May eleuate some brain above the flight
Of nimble apprehension; I Will unclasp
Thy sacred volume, Lucan: I Will content
My rouing fancy with full argument.
He writes of witherd sculs, of mutiny,
Ominous apparitions of the dead,
Of Caesar, Pompei, and Imperial state,
Of combats foreign, of domesticke broils,
Of dire invasion, of ambitious war,
(What-euer makes us noble) fortitude,
Of expert undertaking, of event:
O he is a fellow able to inflame
The frosty stomach of a staru'ling youth,
Who wholly feeds on rheumish winter-plums.
An Author of commanding Altitude,
And such a man give me; a man of worth,
Who makes the reader rub his paled brow,
Makes idle nature melt away in fume,
Gives breath and courage to out-puffe the Cannon:
Such Authors you may feel at fingers end,
They gallop in your blood, provoke each vein,
To give them passage without violence,
Bellaper aemathios plusquam ciuili^ campos
Insque datum scelert canimus populumque potent^m:
N^e quenquamnu^c far potest, Caesar-ve priorem
Pompei^s-ve parem: quis i^stus induit arma
Scire nefas: magno se i^dice quisque tu^tur.
Ah Pomp^, Pompei, if thy hallowed acts,
Once more might flourish, I would aemulate
Those bold incounters; o most happy men,
Whom Fate enroules to be victorious:
They conquer, spoil, subvert, and aedifie
Turn Dukes, nay Kings to common Parafites,
And make the proudest flatter to win life:
Yet Kings are mighty: yes and aequall too;
(Though weak, although base cowards by the law
Of natural indowment) yet the name
Does yield them aequall; nay above the fame
Which often does enrich a conqueror.
What may we hence collect? a principle,
A maxim of no vulgar consequence:
Subjects are base, and to acknowledge one
Superior, does note seruility:
O what a most perpetual slave is man,
If not the chiefest in praedominance?
Let obscure politicians be content
As chief in Parish; or some petty Town,
I Would make Dominions tremble with a frown:
Make every subject, high and low observe
The heavy danger of our discontent,
Or make a precious forfeit of each life.
Woe to that King where subjects be inflamed
With greater zeal of eminence then he:
There must invasion triumph, timelesse death,
Rapes, murder, all iniquity of age:
By gulfes; by rocks, even by the laws of hell.
We swim who would obtain the gates of heaven.
O what a large deuinity's involu'd
About the awful phrase of Emperor.
The name, the name of King, how it awakes
Our caitife blood, quickens our faculty!
Ambition be my judge, if I were sick,
Wounded with pistols, out of hope to live,
Forsaken by all Art and physic law,
Lay speechless in my chamber, lost my sense
Of man or voice making no difference
Yet through the magic of this powerful sound,
You are a King, (if hallowed in my ear)
I should again recover, should recoyle
Skip forty fadome from the couch, and sing,
Dance without shame, though naked, without noise
Trample amid the pauement, touch my roof,
Run giddy with glad passion, rub my veins,
Like one revived anew, esteem all base
Under bloud-royall, be a rank mad man,
Till joy and rapture both were clean digested.
How readily man's temper is traduced?
How forceable temptation does oppose
The supernatural act of doing well?
We are like windemils on ambitious mounts,
Open to every tempest, which will turn
Our sails without resistance: like the waves
Wurried from shores to rocks; from rocks to shelfe;
Man is not man till he deny himself.
Yet on our state's imposed a slavish curse,
To see things good, though we conniue at worse.
Act. 2. Scoen. 2.
PHEVDIPPE, LVCILLA. LVC. Ah husband, husband, what excessive care
Invaded me with violence? shot far
Into my shaking bosom, when I saw
Your sudden absence? heavy sleep alas
No sooner left mine eyelids, gave me leave
To ask, how does the comfort of my soul?
How does my silent love? my dear Phe^dippe?
But with familiar lip, and flexile arm,
I seized upon the pillow 'stead of thee.
Think how intruding iealously began
To blurre whateuer I could wisdom call,
Within me, or without me; which alas,
All know's extremely dwa^ffish in out sex.

PH. Jealous the first night wife?

Lv. O-then or never
An honest, loving wife is jealous ever.
Jealous at home, least husbands ouer-vex
A painful heart with meditation,
Of matters which concern his family.
Jealous when husbands be enforced to travel;
Danger exceeds the objects they do mee^,
Whether by sea, or in the public street.
I (peevish fool) perceiving you were gone,
Thus in my choler did expostulate*
Does he for some dislike abhor my sheets?
Neglect what others love? the maiden sweets
Of mutual embracement? may men's taste
Loose their accustomed relish* and refuse
The mellow joys of ripe virginity?
Will he contemn the sportiue dallia^ce
That married couples may engrosse with leave?
Will he this midnight show himself no man?
The first night of our meeting be disgraced?
Or will he by disaster end all strife?
Perish? and so prevent a formal tax
That may impeach his manhood? Thus, even thus
Poor foolish I did thus praevaricate;
Thus (for indeed we women struggle much
Until delivered of opinion) thus
Did loving zeal praeiudicate amiss.
You are offended (love) I do suspect
See how his colour's changed, astonishment!
Prithee what pensive thoughts oppress thy soul?
I read the humor of a malecontent
Written between your eyebrows; recollect
The common sparks of scattered Majesty.
Speak gentle sir.

PHE. Women, women, women.

LV. What of women?

PHE. Most women love to talk,
To scatter tales, and yet swear silence too,
To breed sedition, to deceive all those
Who in simplicity are confident,
Of honest meaning: o they do^ insult
With a tyrannicke boldness over one
Who through bewithch'd opinion, does impart
The substance of included secrecy.
O they will dare the soul of such a man,
Make him so subject to their base command,
As if they had his heart strings in their hand.

LV. Rail at our sex? why husband, though perhap
Such women do survive, what will you hence
Conclude within their guilt, my innocence?

PHE. 'Cry mercy wise, 'good faith I did imagine
Their wicked conversation, general,
(All in good time be otherwise:) But wise,
The painters of our age be culpable
Of high abuse committed; they portraict.
Each mental vice in habit of a whore,
A Hagge, a Witch, or Woman, at the least.

LV. Virtue (although the others opposite)
Is painted with the like habiliment,
Therefore conclude, if tender woman-hood
Take any full impression of deceit,
Virtue, or vice, of either strong belief.
Or colorable incredulity;
To change her mind will ask another age.
You may convert belief, you may revoke
Errors of wisemen, by a deep dispute,
But women settled, nothing will confute.
For painters do imply this consequent
By emblem; that our sex is permanent.

PHEV. Are you so philosophical In Faith?
Well do thou argue, for they sex and self.
She has a ripe conceit, and I approve
Her subtle apprehension, out of love.
I relish her deep judgment; for indeed,
My railing labored only to obtain
Of wits reply the due experience,
That in our wisdom of credulity.
We may impart a proud conspirasie.
women shoot fair sometimes, though seldom true
Like whetstones they give edge to tricks a new.
Brave Catiline for this cause did account
Young Orestilla worthy to partake
Of his attempt (though far above the brain
Of woman to accomplish) he approved
The talkatiue Sempronia: Thus will I
Induce my wife through cunning circumstance,
To give directions for a raw conceit:
Though man is rather blessed, who may withold
His closet counsel from a woman's ear;
Yet am I of such spungy clay compact,
As till I am dis-burthen'd of my care,
Nothing yields comfort: o I must unclasp
A volume, which may prejudice my life;
Happy's the man who dares believe his wife.

LV. What magic may this motion ocular
Of lips, without all utterance portend?

PHE. For men to pause at a poor style of Dukes,
Most frequent Lords, and yet more common knights
Proclaims them base and triuiall; if means
Of more advantage may be thought upon:
Thy father was a King L^cilla.

LV. Just.

PHE. And shall the Chronicles of age report
Lucilla was no Queen? Were I a woman --

LV. The Madam Fauorina does usurp
My due respect.

PHE. Shall (...) live?
Shall she outshine the beauty whom I love?
Nature, nay Gods deny a double Moon,
They both are ominous; they do import
A prodigy of vprores and of death.

LV. O man assist our weakness, we will enforce
The potent succor of religious fate;
Con-iure by solemn oath, deep secresy
So crown the vigor of conspiracy.

PHE. Now spoke dame resolution: I adore
Such credible engagement; and embrace
Faction above all true faelicity.
I can discover yet a childish vice
Within my nature, named cowardice:
I feel a fearful and familiar stamp
That shows I am a coward: I recoyle
In thought of high atchieuements; I dissolve
With repetition of a sound so brave
As conquest, and impartial victory;
Yet would subdue Dominions; would enthrall
The vast Horizon of our universe:
But I abhor the sound of enemies;
Of proud resistance: Ambiguities
(With cowards) are begotten of each tale
Of each phantasticke rumor; idle care:
A new suggestion will beget new fear.
If notwithstanding women will be stout
Women (the badge of damorous affrights)
This would encourage slaves to victory,
And shall encourage me; my wife is valiant,
No creature living must ( Lucilla) dare
When twice two Moons have made a change in Greece;
Dare to accost thy super-eminence
Nor with like privilege (as now) affront
My then sublimed authority: be judge
Thou happy time, when that more haughty phrase
Long live, shall be pronounced, with (...) twice
We Will then disclaim acquaintance; live re-cluse;
Then if we are disposed to imitate
Some lively gesture of disdainefull grace,
And peep into the public air awhile,
The thronging City will be crowded up
In a poor handful, to ex-patiate
With rolling eyes our vnaccustom'd face.

LV. I am inflamed already: O ambition
Be but auspicious; mount my nymble breath
And win the Gods good liking to command
Of earth and heaven a hopeful furtherance:
Swell heart, and with it swell my brauest blood,
Sug-gest new motives dear necessity,
Resolve now for a lucky plot betimes.

PHE. Nay first resolve of some associates:
Three to a banquet, four beget a braule
Says our instructiue adage; but in faith
Five to a bloody banquet makes all square:
A banquet (wise) a banquet, shall enthrone
Our happy wishes and our hopeful joy:
The King shall dye.

LV. Yes, and the new Queen perish.

PHE. The Captain of his Guard will I corrupt
With forceable engagement, and fair shows:
(Chief architects in a design so rare,
Sole agents for the great men of our age)
Him if I do seduce; the Soldiers apt
For innovation will obey betimes:
My son A^il^ar (by iniunction bound)
Must then remove thy opposite, the Queen:
My faithful steward, sage M^^esie
He (by commandment) shall engrosse the corn
Which harvest has afforded; and procure
The famishment of those who may resist
By insurrection our new seated bliss.
New barnes I Will build, erect new granaries,
Which (open to their wants,) may well remove
Cripled allegiance, and procure much love.

LV. The banquet shall obey my providence.

PHE. We who work jointly, may ingeminate
An others loss makes many fortunate.

Act. 2. Scoen. 3.
THE GHOST OF MALINBO. Pheudippe false? and shall the king exclaim?
Wrest vengeance from the rage of Cinthia?
Distraction talked of in the lower Dis?
O I am ravished with extremity
Of hellish laughter, of loud harmony:
Balm to my torture, music to my soul!
How sweet this clamorous echo: all revenge;
Crackes in the jaws of repercussiue air:
Awake thou damned troop of high-borne youth
Angels of darkness my dear friends awake,
Howl forth some ditty, that vast hell may ring
With charms all potent; earth a-sleepe to bring.
We who be barred from happiness by fate;
Who be confin'de within the fiery gulf,
The kingdom of perdition; who exempt
From full enjoying of supernall good,
We do but laugh when our colleagues are damned.
We triumph in their multitude, we dance
Our dismal rounds; our changes double over
Whilst pur-blind owls with night-rauens do consort,
And still together sing though Caesar's dance:
I a mere caltife in the prime of youth.
Nourished an itching appetite to rule
The sudden rigor of which new disease
Crept in my dearest blood; until at length
As maggots do engender by the warmth
Of violent reflection; so attempt
Was all encouraged by desire, both which
Creating base ambition; bred my fall:
Thus do praedominant affects consume
All hope; and turn the substance into sum:
Yet seeing our fate is vn-auoide-able
What may we answer saving welcome fate?
For, happiness we exiles never knew,
Nor any joy does holiness afford
To us the outcasts of Eliz^^m,
But only this: to yawne aloud below
With lofty shouts; when foes may ranged be
Amongst our hellish troops for company:
Thus though my obscure shadow much compeld
Pays due allegiance to King Pl^to's Court
Yet by the fatal wisdom being informed
Of dire events, of Cinthia's revenge,
Revenge though future; yet in equity
Hereafter to be cast upon the Prince
Manander (he my downfall did approve
Doomed execution, him do I abhor)
Will triumph in his mad Catastrophe:
And do awake to haunt his company:
My shadowed spirit walks invisible
Can work it self into a Tennis-ball,
Shoot through the Center, search into the Sea;
Slide through the Cauernes, penetrate stone-wals:
VVatch by the pillow of a sleeping man
Without all notice taken, without noise;
Has liberty to play the Incubus;
Haunt whom I please with apparitions,
By privilege assumed from Pluto's fordge:
Thus do I haunt Phe^dippe; I suggest
Visions of air, of nocturnall sum,
Forceable to buzxe falshoood in his brain:
Falsehood in whom the King so dear accounts
Will breed a rigor in the Kings exclaimes;
Till he impeach adored deuinity,
His anger will expostulate the cause
Of change so sudden, of a breach, in love
So manifest; improper, then Distrust
Will answer chang's derived from Cinthia
His passion will approve the pedigree
And after ful-stuff'd oaths crown blasphemy:
Then bloody ^aw'd revenge will trot apace
Upon his winged curtall; to attache
Maenander of high treason: O my Ghost
Shall quaffe down, Lethe; tumble in the Wash
The rainbow colored waves of A^heron:
I, like some Seafish, frolic with fair shine,
Will toffe about the billows of our flood;
Then through the flames (in leiu of triumph) scudd;
Till then, implore some wrinkled witch, some hag,
Which may provoke Maenanders patience:
To torment brave companions yield much ease
In sickness our associates help disease.
Act. 2. Scoen. 4.
THE GHOST OF MALINDO, AND THE GHOST OF CASSIVS. MAL. What shadow void of
substance hither comes?
What incorporeall essence does approach?
What vapors painted like my self with fume?
(Who steal existence from united fogge)
What substance insubstantiall? what Ghost
Walks in the clouded element of air?
Aread thou dumb associate of dark
And theeuish midnights; now aread thy name.

CAS. Recital serves to tortuose, yet know
I am the ghost of slaughterd Cassio,
Slain for the zeal I nourished to a friend;
Unfaithful usage wrought my timelesse end.

MAL. My true borne Cassius? well incountred; see
The soul and image of thy zealous friend.

CAS. What echo bred of impudence, what air,
Eiaculates the name without a blush?
Avaunt, o vanish (thou vild caitise) run,
Least with a repetition of old tort,
I make thee vanish by the full report.
Stay thou abortiue image, who assum'st
The title of a traitor, whom I loved,
Stay thou ignoble wretch, I will inform
How falsehood has deluded innocence.
Tremble, o tremble (earth) when I repeat
The black disaster of my fatal end.
Tremble; for know, this ignominious man,
Whose wicked mischief did enthrall my days,
He was produced from out the loins of earth;
Yes (damned politician) thy proud aim
Thought by invasion to surprise thy prince,
Under praetext of high abuses done,
Of wrongful censure, of imprisonment.
Thus did your oyled speech infinuate,
Thus move a simple meaning friend, my self
To train forth Soldiers; o impiety!
Pretending rescue still to undertake
Rescue of thee, whose finger did not ache.
Seated in triumph, sole competitor,
With Princes of high courage, thou did rule:
Envy, the common traitor to estate
Stood far enough from thee: imprisonment,
No way impeached thy luster: yet as winds
Crowded within the re-cluse cauernes, swell,
That dreadful earthquake is engendered thence,
So did thy turbulent faction ouer-boyle
The brim of due obedience; poor I
(Incited to rebellion by fair gloss,
Which colorable smoothness had put on)
Perished in battle, through thy peevish train,
Imprisonment proved false, and rescue vain.

MAL. I vanish where thy Ghost shall never see
My shadowed substance of impiety.

CAS. Run thou remorslesse Image to the womb
Of hell, thy heavy mansion: let all sex
Believe that man to lethargy condemned,
Who takes a politician for his friend.

Act. 2. Scoen. 5.
GRACCHVS EVNVC^VS. Gape greedy Lerna, thou most impious gulf,
Stretch thy unhallowed gums, belch poison forth;
Send some infectious plague into my blood,
Into my blood and bosom, send a curse
More biting then the breath of Scorpions:
Be boundless my swollen ou^rage; o blaspheme
That irreligious deity of chance;
My good estate's consumed with idle game:
What-euer this inconstant age terms Wealth,
What-euer I did call Peculiar,
My own poor substance, styled with proper name:
What with much travail, and extorting means,
I scraped (laborious to enrich my 'state)
All, in five hours, has foolish game destroyed:
Large expectation does impoverish
The wisest politician: we are cousen'd
With our opinionate luck; delusiue hope:
Amongst all creatures (upon aequall terms)
Man is most foolish, most improvident;
Confirmed in a belief, that happiness
Will make an everlasting harmony
When mischief lurkes within our elbow-roome.
I feel the sharp disease of beggary
Begin eeu'n with a threadbare impudence,
To seize upon our nothing-valued life.
All that is Courtier in me, who contemned
To'acknowledge one above me (but my maker)
To sue for friendship; cogge for patronage,
Who was enfranchised by the Kings dcreee,
Had no revenues but a morning bribe,
(Which now of late are precious things, all men
Have so inclined themselves to subtilty,
As they conceive a Courtiers gullery)
But I was well provided for, before
A foul disaster of such consequence,
As peevish gamesters luck oppressed my soul.
All that is Courtier in me, now compeld
Must vanish into smooth-tongu'd flattery.
With oyled gums, and with a supple arm,
I must salute my patron (though a fool)
Insinuate how many blessed years
He will enjoy, to bless my indigence:
Tell him how plumpe, how lusty, latter time
And my young mistress make him, though his face
More full of wrinckles then a practiced witch
With pitiful hoofe-shoulders do consort:
So, like a fawning Spaniell must I wagge
At every costiue wind-fall of a crumme;
Bid farewell to my Courtiership, and live,
Like an arch-foole, a Sycophant: fly hence
These childish terrors to my pained soul,
The chiefest Courtiers will my kinsmen be,
My fellows in profession, my colleagues,
Nay aemulate my worth, if I excel,
In the most ample trade of glosing well.
O Gracchus! Gracchus! but a free-borne-life
Rather alludes unto foelicity,
If our estate has no dependant cause,
If we possess without another claim,
Revenues (clear from tenancy at will)
Regardlesse of observance; do despise
Payment of homage to a foot-cloth-sir,
And may revile the best of Tradesmans coat,
If he insult (sans praeiudiciall fear
Of a compulsiue debt, or Officers,
Who follow satisfaction:) for indeed
Revenues I account, although possessed,
Yet if infected with a name of Debt,
Nothing as mine which answers to the name;
Possessions be what others cannot claim.
If without scruple therefore we can boast,
In so complete a fashion as before
I did inculcate; then Rusticity,
To Gods and Monarchs may well answer free*
Thus does improuidence of hare-braine mates,
Buy little wisdom at excessive rates:
It Is indeed better to be wise at last,
Then gallop headlong till our hopes be past.
Though latter wisdom do import withal
An insufficience in points natural.
Act. 2. Scoen. 6.
AMILCAR, MANTESIO, GRACCHVS. What melancholique caitife yonder walks?
MAN. Gracchus (my Lord) the gallant Eunuch.

AMI. So,
What malecontented humor does oppress
The image of unspotted honesty,
With him so frequenr? I adore and love
The civil carriage that I do observe
In his Employment: if a Courtier has
(Courtiers of common out-side-silkes) if they
Have dear acquaintance with dame Honesty
(Famished in exile to the frozen pole)
Gracchus I dare avow may parallel
The best of their acquaintance: ( Gracchus) hoe?

GRA. My gracious Lord?

AMI. What peril imminent,
Does so oppose thy noble splendour? which
(without mere base descention to col-logue)
I must inform thee is re^ulgent.

GRA. o,
My good and gracious Lord; but poverty,
Is able to oppress maturity
Of diligence, of judgment, of designs,
Each liberal Art and Science does submit
Their ends and occupations to obtain
The true terrestrial Saint, the sacred gloss,
Of all-effecting riches; every man
Will hazard his damnation to adore
A thing so blessed, so licentious:
The weake-brain'd gallant in extremity,
Will change Religion, will aequivocate
With mental reservation, rack the joints
Of his benumbed conscience, will provoke
A lethargy of sharp distinction: will out-puffe
The Cardinal four winds, when they oppose
Each other all at once (and procrea^e
A whirle-winde) these will he out-puffe alone,
With some insuffe'rable oath, which far exceeds
The three dimensions, dares ploclaime himself
A perjured villain, to appropriate
Sixpence, upon triuiall mistake.
Arts-maisters will transgress the rule of Art;
Nay our precisest schoolmen will forsake
The principles which they have authorized,
In cases that concern selfe-avarice,
And greedy lucre: knowledge is enforced
To follow by constraint, abuse of time,
Wit mis-imploy'd gapes at improper ends:
Strong men are impotent without rich friends.

AMI. What cloudy passion, wrapped in ample phrase
May such a railing vehemence portend?
What means thy sharp invecti^e? what is involu'd?

MAN. He does (my Lord) inveigh at poverty,
And shows how force-able a Saint Wealth is,
How potent the command of money is,
The dreadful awe of dame (...).

GRA. And whilst I do re-volue the misery
Which happens by constraint of beggary,
Then I remember what my plague must be.

AMIL. Vn-shell thy riddle: most miraculous!

GRA. Your gaming fool is most ridiculous:
O Fortune, Fortune has infringed the web
Which I with painful diligence did weaue,
Whereto the pillar of my state was pinned:
Some little store I had (not looking higher)
A household smoke our-warmes my neighbors fire.

AMI. Have you lost all?

GR. Some fifty hundred crowns.

AMI. O the uncertain lot of idle game!
I long have known thee.

GR. And have known me honest.

AMI. Honest is now a metamorphis'd name:
He that can swear, blaspheme, be riotous,
Roar till the midnight echo, or beginne'
Some vn-appeased fray, who dares commence
A drunken skirmish in a bawdy house,
Fight for his hackney whore, and hazard all,
In honor of his damned associates:
Dares combat with a public officer,
Be (out of gunshot) most irregular,
Drunk in good earnest, be^te five Constables,
Cousen a flock of geese compendiously:
Yet after all put a smooth visage on,
Seem sober, be indulgent of his same,
Though a most practiced knave, remembering still,
To make the mid-nights all participate
Of such enormous acts: o ^ees the man
Reputed sociable in our age: o he
Is reckoned for the honest gentleman:
Who plays the spend-thrift, the voluptuous fool,
Exceeds the Turk in sensualty,
Is a true midnight Epic^^e, can hide
His lewd impostures from discovery,
He shall be most vn-touch'd with (...);
He (amongst youthful bloods) shall win (...) wreath
Purchase the name of Loyal honest friend;
But (as our adage says) observe his end.
But ( Gracchus) I am rather confident
Then scrupulous of thy square honesty,
Gracchus, I love thee, therefore will bestow
An annual pension of fix hundred pounds,
And must withal employ thee.

GRA. In a task
That may require my soul then I beseech thee;
May stretch sincerity with tenters: o
Impose an ample burden; o some task
That will survey the depth of love indeed:
Favor beyond man's merit, does exact
A most vn-quenched seruor; not his vow,
But sinews active, and a sweating brow.
My life lies prostrate to praedominance,
Of your commanding voice: I will bestow
My reeking blood in recompense of love
Ready, without all first or second cause:
I wish some Doctor in extremity
Of vn-knowne sickness, which may seize upon
Your most respective honor; would prescribe
The marrow of a man, medicinal;
You should not be indebted to the bones
Of a forsaken caitife, new condemned,
Whose pocky pith might be infectiue: No,
My supple fingers should unloose a joint
From off this flexile carcass. I would bruise
A luculent and lushious mari-bone,
(The best I can style proper) to appease
The sharp divulsions of such new disease.

AMI. Gracchus, who gives not credence to a zeal
Of thy profession, we account him base:
Be chief among my chiefest followers,
They shall receive directions from thy self.
Withdraw, and punish th^s^ (...)
Which my famelie (...) with;
And which abusiue ages do afford^
A zeal sincere the Gods cannot reprove
And we ere-long will manifest out loves
Let us inculcate now my fathers charge,
Remember what with vehemence was-vrgd,
Nay was enjoined you (...)
By our most watchful father.

MAN. I exspect
Upon deliue^^ of his closet keys.

AMIL. Take them, and prosper; pray be vigilant;
Reuolue I pray on how large consequence,
The bare event and ^^quell of our hopes
Jointly consist; who jointly have embarked
The doubtful hazard of our dearest lives
Upon a small miscarriage: only five
Participate of our designs; my self,
But first my father, then my step-d^me next
You (Steward) and the Captain of the Guard
Whose happy full consent is scarce obtained:
We severally have instructions learned
Of each particular function; have agreed
How each conspirator shall be employed.
Time calls for speedy action; the square plot
Does now transcend a shapelesse Embrio
And will expect upon delivery:
You have engaged a wise dexterity,
And travail; to procure the famishment,
To puruey, to collect aestiuall corn,
Which Harvest will enrich the Rusticks with:
My task intends surprisall of the Queen:
Be careful, take the keys, expend the weal^^
Which long has been vp-hoorded: traitors all
Like cunning Statuaries, must avoid
Blemish and eye-sores; you conceive me sir:
Successiue business needs no roweld spur:
Treason like some insculpture spacious
On a smooth touchstone will demand men wise
A diligent perusal, most precise;
With an elaborate artificer
Who may direct; for it is infallible
That errors in a beauteous frame (though small
And at another time though venial)
Yet if committed in a curious piece
Where blemish might (by sufferance) ensue
The total is condemned and carved a new:
Be white, or black; not (party-coulour'd) gray;
So follow your commission, poast away.
Now my contentious brain re-uolue the tax
Imposed (upon thy blessing) to surprise,
And spoil the ruddy blossom of our age;
Fair Fauourina that Angel-like dame
A Equal for beauty, for unmatched fame;
With Saint-like Venus (by Appelles drawn)
This Queens espousals have I undertook
To dis-vniite, by a most impious act
Of murder; but alas I am enthralled
With true libidinous feruor; am enforced
By lustful hot invasions to decline;
Which punctually tempt me to a-uoide
The colorable death of whom I love,
Our sweet Cycnaean Goddess; the fair Queen;
Whose body I Will enjoy with privilege,
(I will enjoy with hazard of my death)
Whilst every man imagine she is dead.
Gracchus the Eunuch did I entertain
Commodiously fore-casting an exploit
Wherewith to muffle up the serpent-eyes
Of probable suspicion: Like the Fuller
Who cannot live by cloth must live by color.
But see, observe the beautiful approach
Of my commanding object: bless me fate.

Act. 2. Scoen. 7.
AMICAR, FAVOINA, A^CILLA^. FAV. What makes Amilcar so obesequiou^?
Damsels depart.

AMIL. Yes, rather, so, then maids.

FAV. Amilcar.

AMI. Madam.

FA. Thy grave countenance
Trussed up in such a formal cognizance,
With front composed; so perpendicular
Directing steady aim at open gaze,
Your longing silence does detect; as if
The business should concer^e my audience:
In-faith, in-faith, you are dis-consolate.

AMI. Yes, but my meaning is emaculate
Like the forgotten primitive attempts,
When all things were accounted innocence.
O might the wrath-full arrogance of some
(Who by a peeuish-tutor'd vehemence,
Conspire in habit of corriuallship
Against one pious beauty) be so far
From prejudicial meaning as my self
The age and Kingdom both might live secure:
Madam, I can discose a prodigee
That appertains to you.

FV. Delluer it.

AMI. Have you then female fortitude enough,
A most resolved courage, to conceive,
To apprehend a passion that will wound
Nay penetrate, the fabric of the soul?
Shoot through the center of thy trembling blood?
Infuse five shaking palfies mutual
Before I finish the first period?

FA. Give then a quick release; I am resolved:
Torment me not with idle circumstance,
Begin this tale of prodigy.

AMI. Hark hea'un;
How careless she accounts of accident,
Grief, and this woman be familiar
I think, and well acquainted.

FAV. When begins
The prodigy you spoke of?

AMIL. 'Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and covet misery,
You shall no longer be withheld: then thus:
But I beseech thee Queen remember well
These admonitions that exemplefy
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you do ingurgitate
My poisoned soppes the beauty of your sense
Of your ingenious parts (all donatiues
Of Natures bounty, and the Gods above)
Imagine they will be changed with violence
With unresisted lunacy; so long,
Until each spirit leave her function:
Till with a surfeit you sur-sease to live
Neglecting mundane solace; be trans-form'd
Into a liuelesse image, all thy veins
And vital arteries being stopped with fear:
Thus much remember Queen I do prae-mise.

FA. Amplifications yet? begin, begin:

AMI. With all remember, you (right noble Queen)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.

FA. And whether will your prolixe Lord-ship amble?
To the worlds end I think in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.

AMI. No (my compendious Lady) here is an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a perverse disciple with.

FA. Are you enraged jolly sir in faith?
O be appeasd, leave ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)

AMI. Worthy Madam no,
Your supple phrase shall not again recover
One vowell of narration.

FAV. O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may unbind
Your costiue silence, know, I will recover
The whole narration; if deuulsiue rackes
Have not forsook the Kingdom; if the King
Will hearken to my spacious complaint;
Or yield with exoration of his Queen.

AMIL. Your spacious? o then Arithmeticke
Has taught you to augment and multiply:
(Dear Madam) speak within the bounds of truth.

FA. (Cheap Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.

AMI. O bitter!

FA. Thy dumb silence be enforced
To witness, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealment.

AMI. O pernicious.

FA. You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.

AMI. Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With natures gifts, nor seek they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heavens decree
Respecting beauty less then the command,
Of Gods above; be not these prodigies?
They honor husbands, hallow chastity
Reject all midnight offers, live within:
Abhor the name of lustful visitants,
Take little relish in a homebred fool;
And less delight in Physic, or the knaves
Who practice that purloyning office well.
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak;
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of deuinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish five Iubiles
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish untamed pleasure; which they use
To practice without intermission: speak:
Be not these prodigies dee^e Madame? speak
When Ladies, and light-women be estranged
From Para-kitos, Munkies, island-curres
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking novelties;
From waspish aemulation, to exceed
Some elevated Madame in her gown;
Some luy-bush attire; to engrosse
The knowledge of a fucus, deutifrice,
Vnguentum, plaster (for in-faith sometimes
Diverse scab'd sheep do perish for defect
Of these restoratiues) o then resolve
When Madames do estrange their faculty
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldred ashes that have slept
So many thousand years, again revive?
Will not the crazy ioints of earth dissolve?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The final extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak.

FA. Wisdom does urge me to entreat him fair
Least he indeed dissemble, or conceal
Business of high importance, that may touch
My most particular advantage: (sir
So-well-accomplish'd, meritorious count.)
I must importune your dexterity,
To re-collect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withal confess
My peevish error.

AMI. This does mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offered, derogate
From the large sequel; either thy belief
Or my unfeigned meaning (noble Queen)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speak;
And shall observe the same inuiolate,
Without base mental reservation.

FA. We will engage our female Majesty
Thy strictest of injunctions to prefer
Above all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falsehood to infringe the same:
Swear by this image of Paladium,
(Reckoned amongst our Sacramental oaths)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voice
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Upon malicious, or well meaning terms,
To manifest, diuulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By process of relation.

FA. I do swear
And will submit my life to thy advise.

AMIL. With privilege, then Madam, I Will express
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud step-dame, does abhor,
Sole repetition of thy harmless name:
She does repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am obliged
Upon surprise to kill thee.

FA. Subtle whore?
So young, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causeless wrath?
Envy how feeble are thy foming jaws?
With undefined rancor they attempt,
But seldom are obnoxious to any,
Who have acquaintance with integrity;
For envy (upon spite) assailes the henge
Of our success: but wrong enflames revenge:
And therefore did high Jove's omnipotence,
Envy; unto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how ( Amilcar) may we recompense
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.

AMI. I Will instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meet
With her abusiue malice; and exempt
Your self from the suspicion of revenge.
And yet revenge will be conspicuous:
I think, and well acquainted.

FAV. When begins
The prodigy you spoke of?

AMIL. 'Twill amaze
The organs of attention Madam: yet
Seeing you enforce and cover misery,
You shall no longer be with-held^ then thus:
But I beseech thee Queen remember well
These admonitions that exemplefy
The horror of my following discourse.
Imagine whilst you do ingurgitate
My poisoned soppes the beauty of your sense
Of your ingenious parts (all donatiues
Of Natures bounty, and the Gods above)
Imagine they will be changed with violence
With unresisted lunacy; so long,
Until each spirit leave her function:
Till with a surfeit you sur-sease to live
Neglecting mu^dan: solace; be trans-form'd
Into a liuelesse image, all thy veins
And vital arteries being stopped with fear:
Thus much remember Queen I do prae-mise.

FA. Amplifications yet? begin, begin:

AMI. With all remember, you (right noble Queen)
Who may attend my tale, are but a woman.

FA. And whether will your prolix^ Lord-ship amble?
To the worlds end I think in preamble:
That (after all) you may anew begin.

AMI. No (my compendious Lady) here is an end:
Obstinate silence is the safest whip
To punish a perverse disciple with.

FA. Are you enraged jolly sir i'saith?
O be appeasd, leave ambiguities;
Finish thy tale (man.)

AMI. Worthy Madam no,
Your s^pple phrase shall not again recover
One vo^ell of narration.

FAV. O abrupt!
Yes (my blunt youth) if torment may unbind
Your (...) silence, know, I will recover
The whole narration; if d^uulsiue rackes
Have not forsook the Kingdom; if the King
Will hearken to my spacious complaint;
Or yield with exoration of his Queen.

AMIL. Your spacious? o then Arithmeticke
Has taught you to augment and multiply:
(Dear Madam) speak within the bounds of truth.

FA. (Cheap Lord) thy impudence shall smart for this.

AMI. Obitter!

FA. Thy dumb silence be enforced
To witness, nay reiterate the depth
Of your concealment.

AMI. O pernicious.

FA. You shall rehearse, nay shall expound, this tale
Of prodigies.

AMI. Without your wide complaint
Without all torment to enforce the same
I will expound them straight; and therefore thus:
Ladies by birth of late are satisfied
With natures gifts, nor seek they to resist
Impediments of age, or stinking breaths,
But well are guided by the heavens decree
Respecting beauty less then the command,
Of Gods above; be not these prodigies?
They honor husbands, hallow chastity
Reject all midnight offers, live within:
Abhor the name of lustful visitants,
Take little relish in a homebred fool;
And less delight in Physic, or the knaves
Who practice that purloyning office well.
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak*
When Ladies do bestow their idle time
In scrutination of deuinity
Not seeking to beguile the abused Art
Of painting; or to wish five Iubiles
Might be allotted to their tumbling tricks
And coltish untamed pleasure; which they use
To practice without intermission; speak:
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak
When Ladies, and light-women be estranged
From Para-kitos, Munkies, island-curres
Coaches, and Coach-mares, masking novelties;
From waspish aemulation, to exceed
Some elevated Madame in her gown;
Some luy-bush attire; to engrosse
The knowledge of a f^cus, dentifrice,
Vnguentum, plaster (for in-faith sometimes
Diverse scab'd sheep do perish for defect
Of these restoratiues) o then resolve
When Madames do estrange their faculty
From inquisition, from delight in these;
Will not the mouldred ashes that have slept
So many thousand years, again revive?
Will not the crazy ioints of earth dissolve?
And rotten fathers be resuscitate?
The final extirpation of each dame
Both light and sober may this tale portend
Be not these prodigies dear Madame? speak.

FA. Wisdom does urge me to entreat him fair
Least he indeed dissemble, or conceal
Business of high importance, that may touch
My most particular advantage: (sir
So-well-accomplish'd, meritorious Count)
I must importune your dexterity,
To re-collect the now-forgotten tale
Of prodigies indeed; withal confess
My peevish error.

AMI. This does mollify,
Nor may redemption of abuse, though late;
Although abruptly offered, derogate
From the large sequel; either thy belief
Or my unfeigned meaning (noble Queen)
But Madam you shall seriously admit
A most impugned caution, ere I speak;
And shall observe the same inuiolate,
Without base mental reservation.

FA. We will engage our female Majesty
Thy strictest of injunctions to prefer
Above all temporary baits, which may
Allure smooth falsehood to infringe the same:
Swear by this image of Paladium,
(Reckoned amongst our Sacramental oaths)
Neither by subtle tokens nor by voice
By second causes, by secure complaint,
Upon malicious, or well meaning terms,
To manifest, diuulge, communicate,
Nor any way disclose the future plot
Whereof you shall anon participate
By process of relation.

FA. I do swear
And will submit my life to thy advise.

AMIL. With privilege, then Madam, I Will express
The wicked meaning of your enemies:
Lucilla my proud step-dame, does abhor,
Sole repetition of thy harmless name:
She does repose her chiefest confidence
In my audacious act, who am obliged
Upon surprise to kill thee.

FA. Subtle whore^
So young, and yet so full of impudence?
So full of indignation, causeless wrath?
Envy how feeble are thy foming jaws?
With undefined rancor they attempt,
But seldom are obnoxious to any,
Who have acquaintance with integrity;
For envy (upon spite) assailes the henge
Of our success: but wrong enflames revenge:
And therefore did high Io^es omnipotence,
En^y; unto the female sex impart:
Woman's a witch by Malice, man by Art.
How, how ( A^ilcar) may we recompense
The new disease of her indignity
Which would entice, and so corrupt thy youth
By fraudulent commotions.

AMI. I Will instruct
How opportunely, Madam, you may meet
With her abusiue malice; and exempt
Your self from the suspicion of revenge.
And yet revenge will be conspicuous:
For all complaints and public remedy
The primitive in^unction does deny;
You therefore shall admit my new devise,
When Summer makes each field, each meadow fair;
When pleasant springtide music is in tune,
You may retire into this thicker-groue
Loosely attended, with one maid, no more:
Whilst, like a common soldier in disguise
I suddenly rush forth, and do surprise
You not misdoubting, whom I will convey
Into my lodging near the City walls
After all inquisition cease: till then,
We may re-past in some poor Country Town.

FA. The manner I allow; speak for event.

AMI. (All men amazed with such a sudden chance)
I will subborne a simple idiot
(Being first obliged by bounty) to confess
That he through wicked instigation
Of my most infamous step-dame, did attempt,
Nay finish the supposed murder; then
That mere compunction did enforce the tale;
To mittigate, his wound of conscience.

FA. So he may hazard life being innocent.

AMI. No, he may craftily insert a boon
Which will avoid the danger of his life.
He shall beseech his death may be deferred
Till my unlawful mother by the Law
Taste execution, or he will profess
Obstinate silence; so conceal the place
Of your pretended burial; the King
Nor any man alive may this deny;
But I Will instruct him when he does espy
Occasion; this to manifest aloud
The Queen does live, though I were tempted often
By that malicious woman, now deprived
Of natural bad parts, by righteous death,
(Meaning my mother who shall then be dead)
To slay whom I preserved, this hopeful Queens.

FA. The plot prouokes me to esteem revenge
Above all earthly blessing; and embrace
The subtle virtue of a painted face.

AMI. Subtle indeed, for my pretense implies
Nothing but foggy mift to blind her eyes;
When fair temptaion's weak; surprisall must
Give satisfaction to my flaming lust.

F^^is Actus secundi.
Act. 3. Scoen. 1.
PHEVDIPPE, LAELIO DVX MILITVM, MILITES. LAE. Most opportunely did you
prae-acquaint
My place with a design so requisite.

PHE. Captain, you have well easd my anxious fear
But bounty shall remunerate thy care:
The title Vize-roy (Captain) does attend
To counteruaile thy meritorious act:
The famine does already tyranize.

LAE. What policy procures the famishment?

PHE. All insurrection do I disappoint,
Subdue resistance, mollify the fierce
And peevish ouer-looking multitude
By a substraction of their usual food
Which will discourage appetite to war:
But unexpected liberality,
And satis-faction of their empty mawes
With rich abundance after penury,
It will enchaine the base to loyalty.

LAE. A project most ir-reprehensible.

PHE. The chiefest onset does belong to you:
Do you conceive a full advertisement
For each proceeding? punctually relate
How your conceit does apprehend me sir.

LAE. To supper you will inuit the honest King --

PHE. Honest?

LAE. I; simple, indiscreet, bloud-raw,
Of small experience to beguile, suspect,
Frown, laugh, kill, flatter with a tyrant's face;
A King too-open-breasted for this age;
And so the world does honest men account
By way of high reproach.

PHE. Smooth Orator,
Ingeniously well worded is thy speech:
May not the sequel perish, now proceed.

LAE. To supper you will inuit this honest King;
He (not mis-doubting homebred violence)
With a select strong millitary troop
I, and the Guard together, will invade
Murder (a-midst the cups and Magistrates)
Him; who shall surfeit of each fatal wound;
Shall rather dye then see Pheudippe crowned.

PHE. Captain, thy apprehension is acute
Thus bounty will oblige men resolute:
Withdraw, your several reward is future;
A pregnant Pupil thriues without his Tutor.

Act. 3. Scoen. 2.
MENANDER, PHEVDIPPE, HYARCHVS, HIPPONAX, EVPHO^BVS. HY. The popular inuectiue
does exclaim
Upon Pheudippe; swear with open voice
He bred this famine.

PHE. Am I then betrayed?
Will my sage Steward turn delinquent? ha?

MEN. Can my Pheudippe prove disloyal? no,
Does he intend subversion of my state?

EV. We may consult of warlike discipline
Amidst our height of solace; (though secure)
Although at league with every Potentate
Who sits enthroned upon the spacious Orb.
So may we well advise your Majesty
To have a watchful ouer-looking spy
Upon your haughty Duke; (though innocent;
Though in himsefe obsequiously bent)
Learning advanced may prove judicious;
But (if mis-ledde) extremely vicious.

ME. Tell me my proper Genius may prove false,
My blood become a traitor to my life;
The issue of my loins degenerate;
Say; this right hand conspires against my head;
Tell me; the Gods whom I adore, neglect
Religion, do forbid all sacrifice;
And I believe you: but the villains lie,
Who dare imagine my Pheudippe false.
In-faith I am afraid you do abuse
My honest friends integrity, too much;
Pheudippe false? my bosome-counsellour?
The earth will shake at such a prodigy:
Some Phaeton shall mount the Chariot
Of our vp-rising Phoebus, and inflame
The world again; each widow shall conceive
Without man's aid five dragons at a birth,
All threatening this impossible event,
Ere I do entertain a syllable
Of your sug-gestion: though the Gods descend
Though they admonish my credulity
(In special) to beware of whom we speak
And call him traitor; o I should reply
Within the bounds (I fear) of blasphemy.
See how he walks perplexed with agony;
My anger shall im-proue his patience.
Pheudippe.

PHE. Does my dread Sovereign call?

MEN. What does my demi-selfe Pheudippe do?

PHE. Beshrew my melancholique dumps I do;
Which preter-mit Menanders Majesty
Without obeisance; whilst I walk secure
In a blind corner thus extrauagant.

ME. His aro-maticke breath perfumes the air:
The spicy fields where gossa-moure does grow
Have not one vapor half so redolent:
I must for fashion chide him fatherly.
Friend, friend, you are ambitous of rule,
Report exclaimes upon your dignity;
All attribute the times calamity
Of dearth, to you the Author; who ingrosse
Heaps of provision without real cause;
I must not wink at fraudulent abuse
Done to my Subjects; rather abuse me:
Thou might enjoy full many blessed years,
Live in an aeqnall happiness with me,
Rather then thus neglect my sincere love,
And loose the hope of our munificence*
Do not (I pray) deserve that infamy
With which our scandalizing age condemns
Thy whole endeavors; o redeem the loss
Of Loyalty; a thing so precious.
Reject those machinations infinite
With which the people charge thee; I conceal
The horror of a rage so violent
As some censorious Critticks have adiug'd
To dwell within thy bosom: prithee think
Whether I do deserve thy impious hand
To thrust me from a lineall descent
Or (being down) deserve thy helping hand,
To rescue and uphold my primacy.

PHE. Some better Angel be auspicious
Unto my naked answer; (mighty King)
Your deep discretion may with ease collect;
(Though I were dumb and did through silence purge
This weighty accusation) that per-force
To public censure all authority
Is often subject: so ir-regular
Be sudden apprehensions; as upright
And politic proceedings are condemned;
The Prudent ^am'd for ignominious
M^d Authors, of sick innovation;
(Though not resolved how this language means:)
I do in ample, and with open terms
Confess the crime supposed, not culpable,
Though burdened with ambition) I confess
A dutious love unto the Commonweal,
Has bred my damage; O^er-diligence
May summon active zeal to a defense,
Which does appear in my ill-tun'd event,
As you perceive, or call me insolent.
The famous Art of Mathe-maticke Rules,
(Wherein my ignorance will never boast
A singularity of knowledge, or conceit)
Did by infallible demonstrations
Fore-signifie this famine: o resolve
Whether then by the law of Nations
I be accomp^able unto the Gods
For this pretended accusation;
Seeing to the safety of our Commonweal,
A providence coniecturall has urged,
My whole endeavor? If unto the Gods
I am excused; what impudence will dare
With false-hood to accuse my innocence?
For those designs which Gods allow, never can
Be in themselves offensive unto man.
Know therefore (upon hopeful prae-science)
I did engage a new dexterity*
To counteruaile the famishment fore-knowne,
I did ingrosse provision, did expend
Twelue-months revenew to accomplish corn:
Ill be my pains acquitted, worse my love;
Which, labors in the common cause may prove.
Thus imputations are too usual,
And bad constructions are authentical.
Some Kings, (to manifest praedominance)
Accumulate on subjects, heavy wealth,
Honor above de-merit, offices,
Popular Cities, and in-franchif'd Towns;
Nay whole dominions, Dukedomes they will bestow,
And raise a simple Mushrom to the height
Of any monarch's due magnificence;
Till by excess of labor, sweat of brains,
He has enriched his beggarly estate;
Then (like a full-ripe Orange; or indeed,
Like a deceitful sponge, whose empty pores
The owner does replenish) he must look
To ^eele a sudden crush, a nip will squease
Him; who pretends he may be rich and please:
If then my Title (o iuditious King)
My now desertlesse wealth, or eminence,
Which (by especial favor I enjoy,
Which freely were bestowed long since), if these
Shall be accounted error and offense,
Or be imputed to my sauciness,
I do submit, and will my crime con^esse;
If your vn-reprehended sapience
Think it a policy expedient,
I Will run to exile, dye in banishment,
Live like a scritch-owle in some secret cave,
Turn errant caitife, and so dye a slave:
If you suppose it be availe-able
Or to diminish, or annihilate
To dis-anull, or to abbreviate
My large allowance; if you do account
The base degrading of a loyal peer
Will give advantage and security
To your successiue regiment; (may which
Continue to the worlds aeternity:)
If thus you do imagine (dreaded Liege)
Lo, I will prostrate fall, and ask a boon,
Beg that the heads-mans Axe may ouer-take,
May with a bloody sentence, me salute,
With willing voice, and a more willing arm,
Would I the messenger of death re-greet;
Till then, most lowly kiss your graces feet:

ME. Arise my faithful honourer, arise:
Good honest soul, thy language would enforce
The Cannibals to turn compassionate:
I will trans-mit thee into Scythia,
To Pontus, to the fierce vn-tamed Getes,
Till with a fluent phrase, thou do compel
Their savage superstition to submit,
And me acknowledge, as their lawful King:
Thus thou like Orpheus could (I Am sure) enthrall
The rude Arabian, or the rugged Ga^le,
And captivate their longing audience
With an aeternity of eloquence.
Thus could thou re-inlarge my sovereign awe,
Thus multiply each province, thus augment
The bounds of our dominion, or de-duce
Appointed troops of Colony; with voice:
But (my alone beloved) never think
I will exchange thy noble company
For temporal possession: though the Gods
Would all resign Olympus, and elect
Me as co-heire in-dub^ta^e to Jove,
Upon Proviso to forsake this friend,
I rather would refuse deuinity,
Live like a drudge in dark obscurity,
Then leave so loyal, so complete a friend:
And yet this man deserves a watchful eye;
Speak you censorious rank of Magistrates,
Does he deserve suspicion? who replies?

EVPH. Reports and rumor did deserve advise.

ME. Who guided by report so far does blame
Another, as to argue his ill-name,
Insisting much on some particular,
Detects himself, an Ass auricular.

PHEV. This vn-expected fume to pacify
Let your good grace vouchsa^e to dignifie
A Summer banquet, and I shall entreat
You the Patricians to accept my love.
R^her then bounty; whom I will invite
And ^east with my beloved Liege to night.

M^ With temptiue cups we will was^ away conceit,
And so ^enew each health in sober height.

Act. 3. Scoen. 3.
PHEVDIPPE. May then my cauterised soul forsake
The rules of nature? sanctimonious law?
Religion' or distinct humanity?
The common spark of times morality?
M^st lethargy now seize upon my soul?
Shall my infectious humor so control
Judgment? so much prefer fantastic joy?
Give license to dis-loyall treachery?
Atheisme' Rebellion? black deformity?
O most vn-gouern'd appetite of man!
We may fore see what few escape, e're can.
Resolve me, Sophist, or Philosopher,
Some cunning moral disputant resolve,
I^ ^is the people do maintain) Gods live,
Gods, who revenge our close iniquity*
And search the re-cluse corners of each soul;
Why do the Gods forbear to punish me?
Who am as ^icked as a man may be:
Why does Olympus, or the Gods who dwell
Within that fabric suffer smo^ky hell,
Horror, (...) prodigies, and death,
Ve^^ea^ce, delay; to stop a villains breath?
Can such (...) slave as I
(...) minutes longer? (...) protract
A peace-able success, without heavens crack?
Can omenous (...) be now asleep,
Whilst I am waking? do the Angels keep
No watch for Kings? then Jupiter awake,
And give the world some notice that you take
Especial care o^ P^inces: o me thinks
Morphe^ the God of sleep, who daily winkes,
Should leave his drunken catalogue of dreams,
And start with repetition of extremes,
Wherewith I am infected; seas should burn,
Bears, woolues, and Lions peace-able should turn
Into their antique affability,
And argue men of much impiety.
Now should thy thunder ( Iou^) ass^ile the the fort
Of my ambitious hope, by way of sport,
Blast me with lightning* brand me full of spots;
Who have entrenched a garrison of plots
Against my second maker, against my King.
So credulous, so element, so sincere,
So flexible, and gracious to me,
As I without him never had my name;
He has endeer'd my dangerous attempt,
Is both indulgent of each true surmise,
And zealous of each tale that may arise,
Or to detect, ^r to oppugn my pride,
My most perfidious dealing; does deride
All true suggestion of his Counselors,
Who would exasperate his amity,
Whilst I^^chant his ears with flattery,
With mere dissimulation (Physic Art)
My gilded dagger stabs him to the heart.
Can my obstreperous passion echo forth
A sound so dismal ir-religious,
Without some sudden earthquake omenous?
Without a clap of thunder to be-numme
M^ trembling ^oynts, and make my language dumb?
Then I Will infer the mas^y frame of earth,
Man universal; peasant, patriarch,
Grocers and great men, Kings and Copper-smiths,
Be governed by the Gods, no more then sheep,
Or I Will depose, the Gods be all a-sleepe:
Scruple in actions does augment the vice,
Which courage has surnamed Cowardice.
Soon may a statesman savor of the Fool,
Who leaves his torrent for a standing-poole;
Who does neglect his high prae-eminence
For safety of a quiet conscience.
All senior Sophists, and each puisne elfe
Account him wise, who is wisest for himself.
Yet for conceited disputation sake,
A long discourse of Honesty I Will make,
Of times corruption will I saterize,
And with each cunning nature temporize.
Thus does a serpent, which will satisfy
His common thirst, and Summer heat allay,
After he is approached unto the bank
Of pleasant Nilus, without much delay,
Instinct does teach him to dis-gorge the bag
Of poison, kept in his pernicious iaw,
Till he has tasted the resulting wave;
Then readily lickes up the viscous gall
Which he by nature did e-vacuate,
And so remains his body temperate,
His poison (though suspended) virulent.
So when we crafty ^ellowes (for attempt)
By sudden motives do remember ways
Which men more honest, name Legitimate,
Or by converse, if we shall tempted be,
To show the bent of our affections, we
Do like the thirsty snake, renounce our Saint,
(Accounted sin) which reassume we will;
So re-assumption makes the Serpent still;
If my designs incur discovery,
I then adm^^, the King is merciful,
And he a milke-^^pis, (we may resolve)
Can fear, if Kings be ready to absolve:
Noble attempts beget experience,
Re-publiques purchase mundane policy
Through observation; my success will bring
Plenty of knowledge: errors difficult
Daily in-gender rational discuss,
Which by events do sweep away the sink
Or muddy oppilation of our sense,
Original of knowledge is offense:
I therefore thus imbarqu'd for enterprise,
May win a double stake, learn wit, and rise.
Act. 3. Scoen. 4.
LVCILLA, PHEVDIPPE, MANTESIO. This frolic evening, full of silent air,
Speaks a success to thy atchieuements, fair:
Both time an opportunity's, benign;
The Sun at his departure, seems to smile,
My banquet is prepared, which must beguile:
No apparitions, no refulgent star,
No threatening Comet can our act oppose,
No new trans-figur'd met^or disclose
Our most heroicke humor, and annoy
The glad conception of all future joy.
PHEV. Nay, if a plot so well-contriu'd, so square,
So formal, so judicious, should prove
Ill-^eatur'd, and abortiue, I Would forswear
All crafty dealing; never would I move,
Compassion with repentance; to obtain
Most absolute forgiveness, though the King
Do then release my criminal attempt,
I Would not en-deere his donatiue, except
With resolution to escape the law,
And wreake more ample vengeance on my self,
With my own proper hands, through violence.
If a design so mature, so concealed,
So rich in expectation, so obliged,
May now mis-carry, and repugnant prove;
I Will sure prevent the heads-man, hang my self
With expedition, hire a mounte-banke,
Some noted empr'icke, to anatomize
My politician corpse, dissect my scull,
Boil tongue and heart together in my blood,
Effuse them into broth made of my brains,
In which, my unctuous kidney-lease dissolved
With my more lushious marrow, may compose
A poultice, which will speedily contriue
The downe-fall of erected favorites,
Inflame desire-then disanull the ends
Which that affection gapes for: I resolve
Thus to be queath my members, to the sect
Of those, who narrow inquisition make
After each mysticke virtue, physical;
If our attempts prove ^ot effectual.

LV. Then prae-suppose your project well do thrive,
What recompense may (...) expect,
Chie^e captain of the guard; whose instant blow
Gives an advantage so peculiar?

PHE. That my officious Captain of his guard
The cunning woolfe has taught me to reward

LV. Resolve the manner, be emphaticall.

PH. The famished woolfe (whom hunger often endues
With belly courage to be valiant)
If by adventure his extremity
Meets with a beast of more validity.
Though less ^yrannicke rapi^e then himself,
He (practis^d in such skill perniti^us)
(...) make his body ponderous;
(...) by a^t to aequall natures strength,
Till he de^^^sse, and overcome at length.
By which (...)* his boo^y once obtained,
An easy (...) natural does purge
His lumpish maw of that despised earth;
Which (after conquest) he thinks little worth:
Eeu'n thus the Captain I Will re-munerate,
And with contempt, I Will re-capitulate
His humble service; so casheere the hope
Of due re-quitall, with a good excuse,
We entertain those agents but forvse.
Here comes my faithful steward; speak what news?

MAN. The Captain with his military troop,
I have appointed to their ambush; they
Expect upon my signal (gracious Duke)
The Kings vaunt-curriers do each testify
His glad approach; give ^are to Majesty.

Act. 3. Scoen. 5.
PHEVDIPPE, MENANDER LVCILLA, HIPPONAX, EVPHORBVS, HYARCHVS, LELIO, MILITES,
LESBIA. The most of subjects welcome, to my Liege,
Accept our weak endeavor, I beseech;
Si^ (gracious King) the Cates contain our love.
ME. We do accept, and will de^erue (my decre)
This thy extended free munificence:
This plentiful provision I may call,
(With license of our Ethickes) Liberal.

PHE No (my most mindful and more sapient Prince)
I am your vassaile, drudge, obsequious,
Not bountiful; for it is impossible
That a dependant caiti^e who does owe
His whole endeavor, and essential part,
His poor existence, spirits animal,
His function, his each power vegetall,
To a supreme efficient, should obtain
(After a free expense, to gratulate
His all-respectiue patron, God, or Saint)
One shred or title of Munificent,
Of Bountiful, or Liberal, because
Duty and love exact such obsequies
For lawful Kings, in stead of sacrifice.

M^. What means thy mad irruption L^lio?

PH. The ambush, the ambush; strike fellow, strike.

LAE. Strike this ignoble traitor, Cockatrice,
The subtle vermin base Pheudippe, strike,
Strike fellows, strike, as does your General,
Who has withstood temptation actual.

HIP. If dear temptation, if inticement smile,

Happy is he who can himself beguile.
M^. Amazement be my death; dear captain hold:

LAE. Hold from the rescue of my royal King?

No: We were tempted to thy causeless death.

M^. Permit the the traitor to enjoy some breath.

PH. My wounds are many, I degenerate,
Lived villain-like, and dye a reprobate.

LV. My husband, my dear husband is betrayed,
Another death makes guilty men afraid.

M^. Infamous change of dignity! dear friend,

Loyal repentance might again restore,
(Could thou reviue) thy simple innocence.
Captain, you have abused our Majesty,
And thy audacious act will we revenge.
LAE. Revenge a traitors ignominious death?

M^. Traitor? thou lie, admit his active blood,
His nimble brain, acute sincerity,
Conceived some sober means to ratify,
Or to confirm opinionate belief,
With trial of our vn-attempted love;
May this deserve a stab? what insolence
May term this loyal project an offense?
I Will over-vexe with artificial fire,
Thee (slave) who did Pheudippe's death conspire.

LAE, May tretchery be then accounted zeal?
To his perswasiue lines I do appeal.
Read them, they do contain Apostasy,
Foul matter of sedition: I avouch
The guard to witness, I implore the Gods
In their omnipotence, to testify
The zeal of my affection; to resolve
Whether this kingdom had not suffered woe,
Thy Majesty been trampled under foot,
Thy sinews cracked, thy bones vn-buried,
Sparta been battered with intestine war,
If through dis-loyall humor, through neglect
Of homage, we had hearkened to the false,
But honey-mouth of this rebellious man.

ME. Insolent sit, suppose my friend were false,
(Which I can scarce imagine) or suppose
Confident faith made him erroneous:
Will you abridge the trial of our law?
Prevent my absolution? I appeal
Unto the blessed Theater of Saints,
Let holiness, or let humanity,
Your zeal, how much defective, testify:
For though the three dimensions did concur
In his offense, yet I had mercy left.
Pheudippe, simple man, thy false designs
Never knew a height in mischief so extreme,
A breadth, or depth in solly so profound,
So villainous, but our compassion knew
A means to mitigate thy error; See
My Concubine comes fraught with sober news;
Begin, resolve, and so ex-aggerate
Our heavy loss, we will intoxicate
Our soul with im-bibition of more change:
Begin, depose an accident so strange,
As repetition of two syllables
May strike us with a sudden lethargy,
And so conclude a Kings Catastr^phe.

LES. The queene^

ME. There make thy period; we know
Mischief (like mighty waves) never comes alone.
The Queene's delivered of a hideous son
Some winged Dragon; is she so? or dead?

LES. Privately walking in the forrest-groue
A ruffaine seized her, slew thy hopeful Queen,
Trussed up the carcass on a speedy nagge,
Which by instruction (as my judgment gives)
Flew fast away, like Pegasus: poor I
(Never-enough contented with a chance
Of so secure amazement) stupid wretch,
I looking stood immoue-able with fear,
Whilst he upon his palf^ey cut the air;
Whilst every mountain echoed with laments,
The hollow rocks, and every bush repents
Their weak vn-able powers to resist
And stop the caitifes passage* o desist
From a pursuit of such high consequence
Not a small minute longer; captain fly,
A bold careere may st^p loves desti^^.

LAE. We Will fly with expedition; follow friends.

ME. Discharge a bullet in my naked breast;
Be charitable some auspicious arm.

HYAR. My daughter, o my daughter, she is dead.

ME. Fair Favort^a's dead, thy love, my Queen,
My dear Pheudippe's dead our joys be go^e

EV^ Mirror of change^ the plagues of Cinthia
Are manifest, revenge is palpable,
O tha^ assembly (sir) who by command
Of your in-iunction did restrain the vow
Which masculines a^ like with females owe
To Cinthia, great Goddess of the air,
Was without qu^stion all-erronious,

HIP. Your edict which pronounced her deity,
Sole-potent over foeminine degrees,
Which did confine her awe celestial:
To that unable sex, seems trivial:
These accidents do cancel your design,
They dis-allow your obstinate decree,
They do advance forgotten Majesty:
O now reform delusion: terror speaks,
Cinthia is Goddess over humane sex.

ME. Cinthia's a female wether-cocke, a whore,
Does she afflict our happiness? resolve
Speak (friends) deliver what you think.

HIP. Abstain
(Distressed King) from blasphemy; beware
Judgments more strict may follow; these but scare.

ME. O could I compass with a sudden leap,
The verge of big Olympus, or assault
With Swallowes-wings, the orb of Cinthia!
O my revenge, my sweet revenge, more bold
Then bloody-iaw'd Bucyris, then the Boar
Which slew dame Venus-ioy, should wrathful vex
Her opposite exce^se deuinity.
With rage would I blaspheame, though angry Jove
Makes ready thunder to praecipitate
My daring voice: I will ingeminate
With deep derision, her distasteful name,
Enforcing others to abuse the same.
Do thou not hear me Cinthia? dissolve
The melancholy clouds which mask thy brow,
And let compunction mollify thee (witch)
Forth from thy cloudy palace ( Luna) peep
And with incessant soft contrition, weep:
Reduce the antique deluge with thy tears,
Turn thy rejoicing into pale-faced fears.
Cinthia, remember my abuse, and blush,
Blush thou immodest harlot, be ashamed
To look upon the shadowed universe.
Catch me some whirlwind with a sweeping blast,
And carry me aloft, I Will vex the Moon
For she (ungracious Goddess) does afflict
Us, and our dignity: she did suggest
Rebell-temptations to my beauteous friend,
Whose innocence I ever shall commend.

HIP. Manifest proof ( Menander) does detect
His viperous-reproachfull perfidy,
Composed of pregnant infidelity:
To mischief his endeauour's daily bent,
I ever thought he was male-volent:
Of crimes detected (blame us if thou will)
Despairing apprehensions, argue guilt:
He did alike despair: which proceeds
From the confusion of abortiue deeds:
I do enforce, that Cinthia has done well,
She gives good warning to prevent a hell:
These weaker medicines do but search the wound,
Least rotten members perish; to confound
An vlcerous limb, is worse then scarifie;
But rather then loose all: what remedy?
To Cinthia's, revenge o this apply:

M^. Touching her name I Will prove a renegate,
My sudden scourge what soul can tolerate?

Act. 3. Scoen. 6.
CINTHIA. Error of man which over-tops the sky,
And with quick wastage does for vengeance fly;
Cal's down Gods judgment (mischief to amend)
Nay, often does enforce the Gods descend:
Horror, more ugly then the jaws of hell,
Horror, that apprehension does excel,
Startles my Godhead to imagine how
I further may avenge the Spartans vow:
Shall we (great empress of Imperious night,
Heavens wonder, and wide Corinths blessed Saint)
Thus be, ^ thus compelled, presumptuous King,
To spit our vn-appeas'd flames in thy face?
O the sharp edge of bitter blasphemy!
How deep incision does attend on it?
Flesh cannot brook one trivial abus^,
And shall the Gods (being injured) take truce?
No; I Will inflict a terror to offense,
And will (without compassion) scourge thy sense:
For like some snow-ball tossed upon hot coals,
Thy wit shall vanish, and thy se^ce consume:
A madness must ensue, but mad alike,
Never was any; those that see shall shake
And tremble at our vengeance; but because
Thy vn-aduised rashness railes upon
Our monthly change, vp-braiding holiness,
With a false friends mis-carriage, I Will impose
A change vn-parralel'd, which never shall cease,
Till thy distracted body sleep in peace:
The most magnificent may learn of thee,
Kings from a dreadful vengeance are not free:
Kings may like petty-gods, insult below,
But of a deere-deepe reckoning they must know:
Fame, freedom, fates, and all that may conspire
To make man happy, shall not make thee man:
For Fates do rescue neither life nor fame,
If Gods high justice do inthrall the same:
Nor may the strict evasion of mis-hap,
Hurt who secured lie in Virtues lap.
But if destruction be above decreed,
Means stop in justice, sew by means are freed.
Fall then the horror of blaspheaming fears,
Not wiped away with poenitentiall tears;
Till by his death my vengeance be appeased,
And wrathful famine absolutely pleased.
Act. 3. Scoen. 7.
AMILCAR, GRACCHVS. What you already with good cause condemn,
I must (though need not) urge thee to contemn
With all extremity of noble hate,
Vice which emboldens man to be ingrate.
To prove unthankful if occasion speaks,
The joyful head of freeborn bounty breaks:
GR Do but employ your bond-slaue (mighty Lord)
If Kings command not, how can slaves accord?
The blessings of my body, breath and soul,
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
No^ one redeemer amongst all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to me) except your self:
You have replenished my poor empty veins,
Have lent new spirits to despairing hope
Nay have bestowed a whole creations work
Upon me off all-caitife, who adore
Impression of your footsteps; that is all:
Expecting hourly on the happy time
When you shall dare command what I dare do:
When with advantage you will but pronounce
O Gracchus, give me of thy blood an ounce:
An ounce? take fifty pottles Id'e reply,
Open your self a passage to my soul,
To take a lawful debt who dares control?
Nor do impute this love to lack of wit,
Or some dis-ioynted weakness of the brain;
For if I argue as the thing demands,
Unless my life, what with your honor stands?
Let me profess, unto the Saints and you
I do desire employment, will be proud
Of death or life, being by your self allowed.

AMI. Life we allow, but never wish thy death,
For we expect upon true diligence,
And must improve the nature of thy zeal;
Eunuchs, forbidden actions do conceal;
Thou art an Eunuch, listen to my shame,
Then give advise, and secrefie, though blame:
I love; no, rather lust and love the Queen,
Whom (all-supposing dead) by stratagem
And strong delusion of her silly sense,
I did surprise, being blinded with pretense;
Nor did she seem repugnant to such ruth
My Rhetoric was clad in robes of truth:
Affirming she might thus revenge the spleen,
Of proud Lucilla (who malign's her state)
Giving no color of reuengefull hate;
As to subborne a subtle wretch I vowed
Who with abundant knowledge being endowed
Most caitife-like should counterfeit, no less,
(For paenitent compunction) heaviness;
And so diuulge he slew the Noble Queen,
There-to induced by poor Lucilla's spleen:
Then should Lucilla live no longer day
But loose each vital benefit for aye:
Thus did the hope of vain revenge entice
Woman to prove more valiant then wise:
Whom I (as captive) do retain, till she
Shall manu-mit my self, (her bond-slaue) free*

GRA. Here in the Village does your Goddess live?

AMI. Here; and thy self though sprung of humane ^eed
As Iaylor to my Goddess I areed.
Faithfully wise we do account thy love;
And managing of this design will prove
Thy elegant enforcements, touching me,
Which (happily per-chaunce) may set both free.
O now my blood and reason be at war
With apparition of this fatal star:
Fatal to me, because enchanted beams
Shoot from her eyelids into loue-sicke streams:
See where she comes with excellence enough
For fifty thousand of the female sex,
Beauties which bless the owner, neighbors vex.

Act. 3. Scoen. 8.
FAVOVRINA, GRACCHVS, AMILCAR. Are you my Lords attendant?
GRA. (Madam) no,

But a poor bond-slaue, who can easily owe
The hazard of a soul in sacrifice
To his good Honors health, and pay the debt
Without compulsion, or a double threate.
AMI. Madame he is the blessing of my fate
Borne to my fortunes, and my whole estate.

FA. So^ then resolve what news.

AM. All fear is fled:
The worst of woman's fear, Lucilla's dead:

FA. Most welcome tidings speak, I pray, and stuff
Your happy speech with circumstance enough.

AMI. Titan roused up from darkness by the day
Shrunk with amazement of the fatal morn,
(Remembering what a mischief should befall)
For cloudy night-caps he again did call,
When my suborned vassaile gave consent
To swim (for satisfaction of our sake)
Through deep damnations gulf, so, through the lake
Of vn-digested horror, to accuse
My step-dame, young Lucilla, of your death:
He, a dissembling caitife, deeply read
In ir-religious acts; with doubtful face
More doubted voice, and miserable groan
Salutes the foote-step of Maenanders throne;
Then weeping* said, the Worm of Conscience
(...) in my blood; tortures my broken soul;
Haunted I am with terror whilst ^ live
Who to my life a period will give?
A final period: for I live too long
Let vila^^^ fortune be my fatal song,
With which the so^^y King was somewhat moved,
And (after silence) did exact his name
Proceeding to the circumstantiall cause;
My rude impostor did prevent the clause,
And seeming to afflict his pensive heart,
Back from the royal foote-steps does he start:
Help, o defend me from her hateful frowns,
See where Medusa-like she comes, (he cried)
Clad all in torch-light like the Queen of hell
Her sealpe's en-circled with a Crown of flames:
Much leane-iaw'd horror hangs about her eyes;
The gaping wound for greedy vengeance cries.
What madness now affrights thee, quoth our king?
Fair Fauourina's shadow he replies,
For throvgh entisements of Lucilla's spleen
I slew the gallant Bride, and Sparta's Queen:
Lucilla, by consent, was doomed to death
And my Impostor also, whom I taught
For life's own safeguard to beseech the King,
That his vprighteous judgment of grim death
Might fail of execution, just so long
As the condemned Lucilla did survive
Thinking by this, then to discover all
And say he did preserve whom she conspired to kill.
The King, enraged with sorrow, did re-pell
This poor petition of my totur'd slave:
Who then despairing to escape from death
Drew forth a dagger, gave one fatal stab
Into the Kings own bosom, with which wound
He like a lofty Turret, nodding low,
Clape his victorious palms above his head,
And swo^e a mighty oath, MENANDER'S DEAD.

FA (...) dead? My King and Husband dead?

AMI. My slave torn peece-meale did enjoy his fate,
Lucilla bur^t a before the Palace gate.

FA. Menander dead?

AMI. Yes, but Pheudippe's King.

FA. Pheudippe King?

AM. Yes; but MENANDER'S DEAD.

FA. Oppressed with sorrow, I lament his death:
But am appeased by proud Lucilla's breath.

GRA. What is a woman's love? when to revenge
And empty out the poison of her gall
Against some Lady her malignant foe
She does forget compassion, does refuse
Friendship to neighbors, duty to her Spouse,
Respect of parents, piety to blood:
Nay, above these; abhore celestial good.

AMI. Now quickly (Madam) to disclose you live
Were dangerous, and prejudicial I doubt:
Therefore expect on opportunity,
Least you infringe the league of unity;
Till I advise, live (as you do) sec^re:
Safety's no less accepted of obscure
And Country Pezants, then of Courted Kings:
Place cannot change the nature of good things.

Finis Actus tertij.
Act. 4. Scoen. 1.
MENANDER, LAELIO, MILITES. THe Mountain echoes they shall catch his name
And every nooke re-^terate the same;
For I will teach the night-rauen to repeat
His pe^siue sound, the sleepy owl shall sing
And happy news of lost Pheudippe bring:
Awake dumb Ghost, Pheudippe, friend awake
And now repair thy old mansion-place;
Return Pheudippe but a while return
And truly answer to my just demand
I will resign a Kingdom to thy hand.
Hea^ke you mad furies of eternal night:
Boats-man of Stix, by burning Phlegeton
Secluded Angels, and superior aid
I do con-iure you to direct his soul
Back to the bosom of that slaughtered Hearse
Ah Charon, Charon, prithee Boats-man bring
His errant shadow to the pl^ce of rest,
And Charon I will Canonize thy name
Give thee a Queen to sleep in thy cold arms,
To kindle moisture in thy rugged limbs
And make thy wastage easy with her hymns:
Bring but the soul of that ignoble man
To ask forgiuensse, and I will forgive.
A foolish hope! (heaven knows) for he indeed
He has a haughty stomach full of rage
Swolne-big with pride, begot of too much love,
And my familiar usage makes him think
(The more fault's mine) he should not now submit.
LAE. O sir the final stab of mischiefs end
Has struck him dead; he cannot now amend.

ME. No! it is a language difficult to learn
Though rules be frequent in our mother tongue.
O that a lesson of one word; not two,
Should ask a life to learn, an age to do?
Yes; though Pheudippes age had been deferred
Till a consumption of the Universe
In hope of his amendment, I believe
He would have purchased immortality
Through vice and vicious acts.

LAE. Damnation claps,

Gaping for custom at man's new relaps.
ME. Right: Can the earth yield such a faithles man
As false Pheudidippe?

LAE. O damnation laughs

And winged mischeife claps her dusky plumes,
If proud ambition great men's hope consumes.
M^. What a continual clapping is there then?
For daily hope consumes the greatest men:
I do appeal to dead Pheudippes shame
Thou terror to my sense, a prodigy
Of all remembrance never to be matched
With any Ghost or man except thy self:
Who through abortiue hope did match thy self:
A man most worthy of all impious fame,
Who D^n Pheudippe cleaped was by name.
Know (gallant sir) I did repose my life
Upon the friend-ship of that foolish man;
He kept my soul between his Tyrant's arms
Nay (let me add) the value of my Crown,
(For which some Kings would even exchange their soul)
He kept both Soul and Crown betwixt his arms,
Ye^ both lay open to excessive harms:
O if I had election to dispend
My favor upon such a Rogue as he
But once, once more; I Would lock my counsel up
And keep my bosom secrets to my self.

LAE. Kings may indeed deprive their Senate House
Of some pretense, and may (let others prate)
Conceal affairs belonging to the State.

ME. If hell affoorded such a menstruous ragge
I Would re-conclile the error of my sense;
But, now may reckon up some woe-full verse
For solid passion Poets best rehearse.

LAE. A Poets rapture Kings have wished to feel
Which some despise because incapable.

ME. The Muses make my brain their banquet-house,
And thus with Lucan will we frame our song
Of dreaded horror, whose in-human rage
Blew dire-full tempest through the Tharsall plain
Of laws neglected, and a stubborn age
Whose blood and black-deeds did their country stain
Of civil discord, and a hapless breach
In Kingdoms covenant, which did sore impeach
The worlds whole Confines, and their Publicke-weale
We sing, and sternely treat how every deal
Standards met Standards, Ensigns were a-like,
Bows threatened Bows, and nimble spears the Pike.
( Romans) what madness may we term this strife?
Be your own blades let loose, against your life?
That Nations far remote should see and smile
At your wide gaping wounds, and (...) revile?
And must your hot encounters carlesse boil,
When Babylon should perish in the spoil
Of her victorious Trophies? when the Ghost
Of unrevenged Crassius here stood tossed
Above ground? then must warlike humors breath
Which wanting triumph, want a worthy wreath.
O and alas! what Kingdoms, what renown
This blood might have obtained? some temptiue Crown,
Where beauteous Titan sleeps, and heavy night
Exempts the joyful harbengers of light:
Else where the sweltring noonday scalds with heat,
Else where continual Winter takes her seat:
Where Scythicke Po^tus pierced with c^^zy cold
Lies bed-red on a cripple corner-moul'd,
Ceres might conquered been, Araxes yoked
Had not domesticke war such broiles prouok'd.
If ( Rome) thy battles thou esteem such bliss
Subdue all Kings, then were it not amiss
To combat with thy self; mean while break of,
For multitude of foes may freely scoff.

OM. Our King has tasted juice of Helicon.

ME. Tasted? no fool, the Muses do entraunse
My dear imagination, I will swim
Through each sweet stream of ravished eloquence
Of Passion, Satyr, Aeglogue, Epigram
Of Sonets, Imprecations, Epitaphes,
And by them all admonish Mighty Kings
To keep their bosom locked; for friendship stings.

Act. 4. Scoen. 2.
MENANDER, HYPPONAX, LA^LIO, EVPHORBVS, HYARCHVS. Go fetch a Garland from the
(...)-grove
For I will sit amongst the Sheep-heard Swains
Upon some pretty tust or pleasant hill
Hung (in my honor) with fresh hallowed baies,
And echo forth an Alphabet of lays:
My Queen, poor Queen, berest of beauties pride
Shall in our fancy sit and touch our side,
HY. Grieve not, she was my daughter (gracious King)

ME. Gracious, and King, be words not known to me;
I am no King, nor will be gracious
But an impartial Poet of this age
Who must inueigh at Kings and Kingly grace:
I must a multitude of woes rehearse
And stab my audience with I-ambicke verse:
Rail at the peevish humor of a slave
Whose rude examples be notorious.
Attend my whole narration (royal Dukes)
Remember how I did the Forest rule,
How I amongst the troop of Elephants,
Foxes, and Tigers, Apes, and Leopards,
Was, by appointment of my fathers will
Left as an heir legitimate, to live
And re-establish my true parents blood:
Remember and imagine I did rule
Like an audacious Lion of the lawnes,
Who by misfortune have caught a prick
Which does distemper his presuming paw
M^etes with a heart-lesse Pilgrim, does salute
His coward fancy with a peale of fears
Then does submit (some ceremonies done)
His royal stoutnesse to the trembling man
Puts forth his pained member, shows the wound
Till the distracted traveler con-ceiues
A remedy to succor that which grieves:
The Ly^a thus allured with seeming love
Protect^ the Pilgrim by his noble force
Does not for-sake him, fawnes upon the wretch
Whose poor compulsiue cowardice did urge
That tribut at allegiance (not his love)
Least life should answer what his will denied:
Thus did they live till the most faithless man
Grew so familiar he was not afear'd
To shake the sleeping Lion by the beard:
Thus he pretended still to be above
So slew the Lion for his Kingly love.
And thus, o thus! did my Pheudippe deal:
For from the dust and dunghill did I raise
The needy fortunes of that naked man
Without all merit, save hypocrisy
Which was my thank for all his dignity:
The Gods and you bear witness (noble friends)
I took that fellow for the truest man
That woman e're was blessed with; did believe
His birth and education both Divine,
Who was indeed a devil; for whose death
My brainelesse fury did blaspheme the Gods:
O if I had election to for-sake
The substance of my souls eternity,
If soul and body did together die
If deaths corruption could corrupt the soul,
(So make it vanish, and avoid control,)
No speedy torment should escape, no death
Be vn-attempted, till my life and breath
Were as my soul is now, invisible:
O I would climb Acro-serannian rocks,
Run to the top of Aet^a, or the Alps
And rush down headlong like a desperate slave;
Or like an Ajax, greedy of revenge,
I would in-counter Woules, and Unicorns,
Tempting the savage worthies to assail
My careless life, and so in-counter me.

EV. But sir, the soul of man is precious,
Made of immortal essence, cannot die.

ME. So, I Am oppressed with immortality,
And though my rotten Carcass soon decay
Yet must my soul account for blasphemy:
For Blasphemy, which I in zealous love
To a false lewd impostor did augment
With sharp invectiues eeu'n to vex the Gods.

HIP. Your love to that dissembler was extreme
And all extremes beget extremities.

ME. To that dissembler, to that devil, say;
To that Magitian, true-borne Impe of hell,
Speak thus; and let me thank your eloquence;
For had he been produced of earthly race
His charms and witchcraft could not so deceive
My narrow apprehension, o a^tend!
And I will make you weep before I end.
Pheud ppe like a frozen viper was
Whom, I (delighted with a formal show)
By chance took up, and warmth and life bestowed
Upon this piteous creature; till at length
He crept and crawled into my bosom; I
Did suffer still, through plain simplicity,
The se^pent to become familar;
My table and my Trencher gave him food,
Still did I suffer, still he slept and fed
Upon my trembling bosom; he did kiss
And lick my tenderveines, as I did his:
Still did I suffer, though my soundest friends
Bad me beware of such a subtle Guest,
Giving fair cautions to embrace the best;
Still did I suffer, and did scourge advice,
With sharp rebukes, not valewing the price.
So long I suffered, he so long did sleep,
So long he licked me, and so long time crept,
So long I loved him, he so long time wept
With false affection, as he did confirm
My not mis-doubting friend-ship, which was firm,
But after all my love, and all his tears,
After my patience, and his creeping smiles,
My long, long sufferance, and his thankful vows;
After all these o God, my bosom groans
To think, that after all such boundless good
He wished to suck upon my royal blood.

EVP. The subtle wretch, in mischief, did rejoice,
And was corrupted by the peoples voice.

HYA. True, they corrupt, whom they still hope to please
The peoples physic, does inflame disease.

MEN. Foul vengeance choke the people, and their love,
They do deiect whom they advance above:
The peoples suffrage, to a rising youth
Is like their folly at a public Stage,
Striving to purchase a dumb audience
By multitude of clamor; they suppose
Peace is engendered by still crying peace,
As if confusion did by murmr cease:
So they imagine, by their open mouth,
To make a Giant, though but scarce a man:
They speak him virtuous, bountiful, and wise
Hoping polluted breath, might Canonize
Whom they (with durty palms) do seem to raise,
And bind his Temples with their stinking baies:
No, they but make him dizzy, deaf, and mad,
Whom they desire to make a demi-god;
Their multitudes of clamor do beget
A most vn-cured swimming of the head;
For so the rules of ringing do agree,
Confusion ever spoils a harmony.
What Cox-combe now dares call Menander mad^
Do not (I pray) abuse me (noble boys)
Although I be a Poet; all men know
I never writ of Cupids whirligig,
Of amorous conceits, nor daliance,
And just so long as Poets will abstain
From foolish love and Cupids Diety.
The Poets Art is counted Piety.
But if the tenor of a loue-sicke Theme
Stuff rotten Volumnes then the Author's mad,
Or Moone-sicke, some judicious booke-men, say,
Though others, amid' earnest, allow play.

EVP. (Alas good King) what sudden ouer-throw
Distracts poor weakness by a little woe?

ME. Who talks of woe' did you sweet passenger?
Open thy case if it be parallel,
Let Us live copartners in some ugly shade
Where none but melancholy night-rauens keep
There let us complain, but (breath being silent) weep.
Not far from hence, low in a humble Cave,
My little cottage stands deuoide of care
Finely en-compass'd with a pleasant wave
Dressed up with D^isies, Cow-slips, Hyacinths
And many thousand pretty, pretty things
Which Nature lends me while the blackbird sings:
Four Goats I have which browze upon the twigs,
Two did relinquish me, for I had six,
One seemed a Lamb which was indeed a Wolf,
Him did my dog discover, kill, and eat --

EV. We do discover all thy weakness King
To help is hard, to weep an easy thing.

ME. Dares then thy blistredtongue (audacious fool)
Forget all duty and disturb a Duke?
(Impudent Ass) I do degrade thy ears
And thee, from all employment; be an Ass
At large, and carry loaves, like Lucius
Deserve a Cudgel and a biting spur,
Be dull and sluggish in extremities
Till I bestow a Rose or any thing
To make thy sudden metamorphosis.

EV. It Is made already (King) and I will kiss
Your dainty plame, then laugh, and Poetize
Cast of my robe and act old Lucius,
Or Messala Coruino; dance I will,
And after sixty Summers will I doat
So, change my garment for a mimickes coat:
Captives repine at their compulsiue thrall
Who then (sweet Mistress) may me Captive call?
Though conquered I confess
Yet void of heaviness:
For-bearance makes my freedom^
At length to be more welcome.
When with compassion thou shall pity
Me; or approve my harmless Ditty:
If ransom you require
Tell me thy chief desire;
What is it I would not give thee?
Make trial and beleeu^ me.
Ransom though you refuse
Or at the least excuse
Yet to the latest of a thousand lives
I will rejoice in love, triumph in gives.

OM. Age is become a young in-amorate.

ME. Laugh, laugh, infernal furies leap for joy;
Make me a flaming Chariot, I will ride
Upon the wings of potent Lucifer,
And style, like lightning, through the amazed Orb.
Thunder shall be my Page, and Aeolus
Lead up my Coach-horse to big Titans Hall,
Where in that fair Assembly of the Gods,
Glistering with golden robes Pontifical:
I must a volume of large thanks recite,
And a petition to dame Luna write:
All, for thy sweet acquaintance Messala
Whom I adore, and much will dignify
Those who partake in ravished lunasy.

EV. So, then we are companions (lusty ladde.)

ME. Till daring Jove dissolve the Universe,
Till the last revolution of this Orb.

EV. Till Citizens accounted civil knaves,
To chea^ing custom be no longer slaves.

ME. Till sige authentickes of vn-spotted lives
Leave baudy Panderisme to their willing wives.

EV. Then, faith til Courtiers too, with satin sleeves
Renownce all begging and be arrant thieves.

ME. Till Tailors like-wise made of shreds and shelues
Enrich the debtor to vn-doe themselves.

EVP. Till the most gallant Ladies of the Court
Esteem devotion there abused sport.

ME. Then 'faith till Players, Poets, (Ape and Ass)
Spend all they get from June to Michaelmas.

EVP. So then for ever shall we live like friends,
Thou must forgive though Messala offends.

HIP: What can exceed these miracles of age,
Whose actions might again revive the stage?
A Common council must protect the State,
Till mad Menander have atton'd his fate:
Till Cinthia her punishment release
And give Manander leave to rule in peace.

Act. 4. Scoen. 3.
MANTESIO, MENANDER, EVPHORBVS, LAELIO, PERILLVS. Whither, o whither, and to
what extremes
Do the most waking Gods drive guilty men?
MAN. Who lives to know, obtaines a blessed age,
But he a curse, who knowledge does abuse;
Subtle temptation must not make men err
With judgment, though approvall may confer
Kingdoms of wealth, which is impossible
(So gotten) to continue, if well paid.
O since I knew the folly to advise
And nourish up the rude infirmities
Of each voluptuous Epicure in state
Striving to take dependence from the smile
Of an imperious favorite, weak shame
Never (...) now oppressed me; and I swear
Did not (...) sword of justice now strike home
I wou^d ^^^counter sh^me with fortitude,
But a discarded woe (the common plague
Of servile age eeu'n dead with misery)
Has after long for-bearance seized on me:
Pheudippes death was fatal to my life
Because neglected by his living wife.

ME. Have I then caught thy vn-appeased soul?
Tell me, come tell me, wicked wretch declare,
Why have thou broken holy friend-ships vow?
Speak (damned vermin) each true accent tell
For we will vn-rip thy bosom spite of hell;
Speak thou contemptuous varlet, do not strive
And shake thy limbs with vn-expressed fear,
For (trembling slave) my hand shall catch thy hair,
Hold thee perforce, with chains of adamant,
Till thy audacious shadow quaking sees,
If hands be weary I can hold by teeth.

MAN. But o Judicious --

ME. Villain I abhor
The hateful sound of thy be-witching voice,
Keep in thy clamorous echo (coniurer)
And cease with Magic to enchant our sense
Or I will si^dge thy beard off with my breath:
O you damned fawning Rascal, can thou shake
And tremble after all thy infamy?
Thou thanklesse, rotten-hearted-slaue, thou snake
Did I deserve suppression? tell me (Fox)
You temporising Courtier, that is enough,
He needs not call thee knave, nor Sycophant,
And it-religious Jew, that calls thee so,
For thou did study these; thinking to prove
A learned Politician, that is a devil,
A most abortiue monster, strangely made
With long huge horns a crafty Foxes head
A Lions posture and extended ears
With eighty souls and hearts, like little eggs;
But with a Camels back, and Tigers legs;
Wanting a breast bone, like the savage Bear,
So climb he does and curry up the rocks,
Mounting the tops of straight Pyramides
But when he tumbles, like a smitten Tower,
Declining softly to an omenous dearth,
First will his head salute the shaking earth.
The black remembrance of thy fatal end
Makes my assertion true, thee a false-friend:

MA. O pacifye great King. --

ME. -- Your yawning voice
With a full concord of my furious palm
If you produce another syllable
You most notorious caitife, you mad curre,
Thou Politicians d^g, did I advance
Thy ragged fortunes to degrade my self,
Make thee a partner of my Kingdoms joy
Give thee my Kingdoms pleasure, wealth, and wives,
When I (made foolish) to make thee as King
Took the bare title and a glorious heap
Of golden sorrow requisite for Kings,
Keeping the best (by privilege) for thee
Without a second rival? thus I did,
Nay, did I thus and yet thou prove unkind?
I call my faith in question to demand
Such need-lesse truth, for thou did prove unkind,
Contriuing the subucision of my rule
Which gave a perfect essence to thy soul,
Submit, submit for shame, and say forgive:
Say but forgive and I am gracious.

MAN. I am not (sacred King) as you suppuse
The tortured Ghost of that in-glorious man
Pheudippe, sunk below the verge of hell.
But old Mantesio is my servile name,
Once did I serve whom you so much did love,
The murdered honor of that haughty Duke.

MEN. Thou Spirit of delusion, (...) affirm
This doubtful figment; once again deny
A soul of reason to thy Sovereign.

MAN. My flesh does witness for me I do live.

MEN. Am I then mad Mantesio? agree
Your are no Ghost and make the consequence.

EVPH. But brother, who is mad now? not Messala.

ME. Deride us then, and be ridiculous.
Tell me Mantesio, why did talk of curse,
Discarded woe, and vexing misery?

MAN. Of all I tasted in extremity.

ME. Lives there that soul upon the spacious globe,
Which does uprightly think it can deserve
Extremity of sorrow, heaps of woe
As did Pheudippe? it is impossible:
No (good old man) though thy large multitude
Of capital offenses do exceed,
The wandering stars, I may account thee clean,
Like a religious innocent, or babe,
As a bright Angel, to Pheudippe's shame.

MAN. Yet am I poor, and will partake in woe:

ME. Can be distracted? melancholicke? mad?
Swear by the beauty of the burning Zone?
Look like a dead-mans scull, most scirvily?
Laugh, weep, rail, swear, and hang thy self at once?
Rend off thy pleated hair, be lunaticke?
Live naked in a tempting wilderness?
Call me Don. Ajax? live by roots and herbs?
Be a true malcontent? be ever sad?
Cloudy, like Christmas? be dis-consolate?
And (above all) renounce society?
If thus thou can observe a dogged change,
If gloomy sorrow (made excessive strange)
Stab thy distracted senses to the life,
We may dispatch all sense without a knife.
But who comes here?

LAE. A Poet (precious sir)

ME. Thy name?

PE. Perillus.

ME. O advance thy tune,
Provoke thy sharp Melpomene to sing
The story of a beggar and the King.
Can command Poems vn-praemedite?

PER. I have a little smacke of poesy,
Can smell the amber-breath that rapture brings,
Upon receipt of which my consort sings.

ME. But I have bedded the fair Muses nine,
Slept in the bosom of Melpomene,
Have rid upon the wings of Pegasus,
Drunk down a flood of sparkling Hyppocren,
Keep a perpetual moisture in my head,
Hating such dilatory sloth of men,
From whose weak brains the rotten papers shed,
Like leaves in autumn; I account him quick
Who is by nature so; with small intent
Such (as my self) may be proficient:
I could now turn conceited stagerite,
And represent I will, with feeling strains,
The Ghost of Crassus, or crack all my veins:
Suppose me then the Ghost of that old man,
That sorry man, my ribs trans-fix'd with steel,
Or with a tempest of the Scythian darts,
My wounded carcass black with bloody gore,
Long sleep'd in frosty stupor, to arise,
With squallid raiment from the waves of bell,
And unto Pompei apparitions tell:
Will you great Pompei, patron of my cause,
Who did by solemn oath, vowfull revenge?
Will you, the comfort of my funerals,
Tomb to my ashes, and my naked bones?
Will you, will Pompei prove delinquent? he,
Who has in love to Crassus, threatened stabs,
Death and destruction till deep wounds increase,
Can he love Crassus foe, and seek for peace?
Bleed then my gaping and forgotten wounds
Bleed even afresh, or let my frozen blood,
Like a congealed sirrop, now dissolve,
After such cloudy seasons of the year,
Such heavy sorrow, and such doubtful fear:
After so many dismal nights and days,
So many tempests of the Stygian Bark,
And prophecy, things fatal, true, but dark:
Calamity made famous by extremes
Erected in a marble monument,
Shall by her often meeting vex thy mind,
Else by opposed number make thee blind:
Horror and ruin ( Pompei) shall affront
Thy shameless fortunes, thy foul negligence,
Cities at thy sub-uersion shall rejoice
The sculs and trophies of thy captains loss
The victor shall upon his ^aueling toss;
Where swift Euphrates, sent such worthy names
To black oblivion, and the tumbling waves
Of big-swolne Tygris, cast my carcass dead
Upon the margent of that muddy shore,
And gave to earth what Neptune could not keep,
Having once cast my wounded limbs asleep:
There shall thy woe approach, and Pompei know
If quick avoidance be not difficult,
Thou then more easily might atone the strife
Which thy proud factious Nephew has begun,
Raging amid the heart of Thessaly.
Think but a while upon the Roman orb,
Think of thy friends at home, think who they are,
And those few friends with watchful foes compare:
Think yet of Egypt, her seuen-headed gulf,
Join with Egyptian Ptolomei, and thrive,
His high tuition appertains to thee,
Tender his nonage, aim at Aegypts throne,
Whose King has but the shadow of a name,
Because a childish infant, lacking fame,
And fear, (the substance of a Diadem)
Nor think the old allegiance to their kings,
Can so estrange the peoples love to thee,
But know the state of kingdoms be most mild,
If, or, the King is new, or is a child:
Both do concur to crown thy happiness,
Set sail for Egypt, make thy covenant there,
Oppose the Parthi, and depopulate
The fields, where Crassus did enjoy his fate:
Say, from the cinders of a slaughered man,
You took advice to turn Egyptian.

PE. Most lively acted, and like Roseius,

LAE. He does pronounce with volubility.

MAN. For a pure copious linguist he does well,
But for ingenious action does excel.

EVP The King for a Comaedian In Faith;
But I will strive to act above thee (King)
And out of brim-stone rocks may virtue split,
I am a cold, and must go dig for wit.

ME. Go dig for wit whilst I am Ioviall,
And laugh and leap among my flatterers,
Come dance Lavolioes my familiar knaves,
Do you commend this mirth?

OM. Most happily.

PER. Mirth may expel distraction, if secure.

ME. But o my friend, I am not as I seem,
Merry indeed, but only seeming so;
Vn-rip my bosom, and with lines of blood
Deeply ingrau'd upon my trembling heart,
You may discern attractiue Epitaphs,
The shameful curse of a contemptuous King,
A loue-knot double broken; and by whom
Friendship rewarded with extreme abuse;
False-hood, without a color, and excuse.

PE. What flinty flesh could now abstain from tears?

ME. Do then thy stranger thoughts compassionate,
And weep at our in-humane destiny.
If thy relenting heart true passion feel,
Then let thy moist'ned love some drops distill;
Weep on (my friend) I cannot I control
The copious fountain; for a silent tear
Does apprehend the quick; but never howl:
Forsake me now, and leave me desolate,
I would revolue the lessons of my state.

Act. 4. Scoen. 4.
THE GHOST OF PHEVDIPPE, MENANDER. Up from earths lodging, and those rotten
sculs,
Buried in embers till the earth awake,
Wrapped in my funerall-ashes, safe reserved,
I do arise from rude antiquity,
To beg but pardon as a mid-nights alms,
Feeling the horror of my fault immence,
Which does exceed in nature all offense.
I come ( Maenander.)
ME. Who Menander cal's?
What hidden Devil dares molest my muse?

PHE. Denounce thy judgment with a milder tune,
I come ( Maenander.)

ME. Death to my soul! what comes?
Who comes? or how do come? invisible?

PH. I come with meekness.

ME. Why, or whence do come?
Damnation overtake thee, what is thy name?
Shadow of Stygian horror! what is thy name?
(Intruder) know thy distance, keep aloof,
Come not within six yards, upon the price
And peril of an vn-avoided charm:
By which, and thousand other potent spells,
The magic Herball, ointments, numbers odd,
By trans-mutations, mid-nights, Iucubus,
Squint-eyed Ericthon, soul of Hecate,
I do con-iure thee, tell, and not mistake,
How fares Pheudippe of the Stygian lake?

PHE. O I am he, a spirit of despair,
Compact (by loves decree) of cloudy air.
I am the wretch, who was in life, a span;
But in excess of crime, a crooked man.

ME. Bless the good stars above, thou guilty thief
Which do in-close thee with a robe of clouds,
Spite of protection else, and coats of steel,
The tempest of my passion thou should feel;
Thunder and lightning should not dare with-stand
To take due vengeance from my fatal hand.

PHE. My tortures be above thy humane guess,
The torment of my soul who may express?
My comforts now be multitudes of pain,
Viewing a number infinite of souls,
Which stuste the dampish pit with piercing howles,
Restless they tumble, hoping to get ease,
And, more they move, outrage does more increase,
We rail at our conception, curse the sky,
And in the face of heaven spit blasphemy.
We all enjoy a most impatient curse,
Yet all suppose our own pain shall the worse;
Motion does vex us, sitting still does vex,
Torment, no age escapes, no sumptuous sex:

ME. Did thy ambitious height incur all this?

PHE. My falsehood, slattery, and a Courtiers life,
(The fountai^es to all sorrow) did infect
My ^ou^e with a disease vn-curable.

ME. I do indeed forgive thee, therefore tell
Compassion to the Purseuant of ^ell;
Say I forgive thee, and on that dis-charge,
Command the crabbed Iaylor to in-large
Thy long and low^ie thraldom; often say
I do forgive thee (false ungracious man)
O oftentimes repeat, the Kingforgiues,
Often repeat, as an exemplar thing,
Thou have obtained forgiveness of a King,
For a tall grant-error, an offense
Made monstrous big by circumstance; contempt
In a degree above comparison;
Yet I forgive those capital crimes done:
If thou attainted be with some offense,
Equal in nature to this high contempt,
Go then ^^curs'd, till I redeem thee, go
Accounted worthy of damnations woe:
But, because officers do sting like bees,
Say I forgive thee, and will pay thy fees.
Few plaintifes, or appellants do the like,
Though I without a judgment will release
Errors escaped from youth, soliue in peace.

PHE. But I am past repentance (royal sir)
And so thy pardon is like bounty given
To beggars dead, or medicines ill-bestow'd
On separated members, like vain life
Purchased by seals and writings after death,
And execution of a guilty thief;
There Is no capacity for dead relief.
Kings, clad with numerous titles, cannot give
Promethean fire, to make a dead man live:
Pardon of Kings no benefit may deal,
Except it pass by a superior seal:
Surfets and rupture, to be dumb, and blind,
Acknowledge Art; but surfets of the mind
And rupture in affections forcing ill,
Know none above, but a free governed will:
Which if it prove re-misse, man's powerful fate
Carries him headlong to my damned estate;
The ship-wrack'd Pilot may discern a shelfe,
But every fool vn-cheated, cheats himself:
Advance thy pale desires, look fresh and big,
Think on revenge, clear thy contracted brow,
Be sensible of wrong, and (worthy) know
My false copartners live, who did conspire,
And frame the bellows of ambitious fire:
Amilcar lives (my some) Lucilla lives
(Thy subtle sister) old Mantesio lives:
All my adhaerents, all competitors
In mischief, most well-knowne conspirators;
Yet all survive in safety, traitors live:
Think on revenge, I do advise thee well;
Sleep not upon thy proiects, if thou want
Opinion of a friend, hear me a supplicant:
Level invention with a speedy aim,
Till thou the cunning of such knaves reclaim.

ME. My sister false? Amilcar such a knave?
Who indeed is, but is affections slave?

PH. And none but him, judgments encounter can,
Although aspersions touch the honest man.
Remember these my motives, morning peepes,
The day no dilatory time does give,
To echo forth at large, thy Queen does live.

ME. Does Fauorina live? dear shadow stay,

PHE. My absence is enforced through rising day.

ME. Split then in pieces thou pernicious toade,
My plagues deminish to augment thy load.
My Queen sur-viue! ioynt-cause of all my woe!
Of all my anger, blasphemy and rage!
Is she reserved? does Fauorina live?
Whose absence made me rail at Cinthia?
O I have swallowed poison* which tor^ents
All my distracted veins with agony,
A grief continuing without all re-lease,
Consumption of my pain breeds pains increase.
Now for ob-noxious compounds to possess
The soul with everlasting lethargy,
Ransom of thousand Kings would I exchange,
Or like a beast, humanity estrange.
O for enchanted Peppei, or the juice
Of drunken Hemlocke, to lay souls asleep,
I Would like a Serpent on our belly creep,
Licking each humble shrub, and careless feed
Upon the stubble of each stinking weed.
Shreike o the midnight- mandrakes voice aloud,
So may the horror of that piercing sound,
Turn soul and body both alike to ground:
Pel-mel together my affections fight,
Each conquer each, some scudd away by flight.

Act. 4. Scoen. 5.
AMILCAR. Coyn^s and Lust, arch-enemies to love,
Combat apace within my youthful blood;
Fear to attempt my vn-experienc'd wish,
Tells me with what a coy and constant face
The Queen will start in motives of my lust;
(For I no better Title can bestow
On our audacious meaning) lust abounds,
Free from all apprehension of that love
Which simple-meaning youths do still protest
And vow to virgin-chastity; but I,
Who am inflamed with ambiguity
Will not imbarque a faithless vow so far
As evaporate promise, which infects
Beyond fierce natures lust, and stabs my fame:
Because rich Nature, although covetous,
Loath to confer a full satiety
Of goodness, upon me her suppliant,
Has yet imposed one virtue above all,
In promise ever to disdain the breach,
Though strict observance do my weal impeach:
Yes, I prefer the violent attache
Of maidenhead, before false promises;
For (all can witness) rape's a thing in act,
So there is an end; We never do dissemble,
Nor do extinguish sparks of sanctity
With fraud, with vn-supported perjury,
(Joining rank false-hood to concupiscence)
Protesting marriage to enjoy a smacke,
And so deceive the long desirous womb
Of hoped fruition: A hot rauisher
Gives what the womb would otherwise demand:
Yet will I not enrage my lust so far,
As violence to wrong the beauteous Queen,
If she (as women will) prove pliable,
Nor will engage on oath to assevetre
What I disdain, yoak'd-marriage; for indeed,
Women be clogs which hang about the neck
Of man, so heavy till it sometimes break:
A well-couch'd theme of love shall therefore try
If without promise I may mount on high:
The bonds of marriage I abhor to choose,
And rather would upon such points refuse
The noble Queen (if to accomplish it
Were possible) then happily enjoy:
Seeing nature does demand variety,
Admitting which, with full saciety,
Health is impeached, and many men made poor,
Who having honest wives will hug a whore.
Act. 4. Scoen. 6.
AMILCAR, GRACCHVS. Speak, is she made of wax (solicitor?)
GR. Of mil-stones (my good Lord) for lime and chalk
Cannot express the full comparison:
Cold Images of Ice, and frozen snow,
Had been dissolved with my summer speech
Piercing unto the quick, but constant she,
Like to some Aegle on a Cedars top,
Disdaining idle nets, will perch above,
In spite of Cupid, and his potent love.

AMI. I burn the rather, and by rape will quench
My lastfull famine, were she loves own wench,

GRA. O do not offer headstrong violence;
Delay makes modest women more propense.

AM. Death and damnations plague to boot! how long
Must I abstain (you smooth-tongu'd flatterer)
Till doomes-day? do not urge my flaming wrath,
Least you provoke a Lion to the spoil.
By Cupids Sacraments of lust and love,
I will no more delay (thou lazy dog)
Do trifle? speak forbearance, and delay?
I do begin to be suspicious
Of thy proceedings: tell us of delay?
No, as the Faulcon does a Phesant seize,
I will both seize upon her (prating daw)
And trusse her up in my Imperious claw.
(Sirrah) rememer, I did give you meat,
Clothes, coin, and such good poor commodities,
When you were quite blown up with gamesters luck,
Rags and foul linen, scabbes and sciruy lice,
The quick associates of all cheating dice,
Did honestly begin to set up house
In your old single suit, pray do not make
Me a disseisor of francke-tenements,
By tortious dealing with your freeholders,
Who had a better Title then my self
If you do prove vn-thankfull; so consider.

GRA. Am I vp-braided? noble sir I thank
The bounteous alms you lent my bare estate,
And I as freely do desclaime desert,
As you did freely give them; yet in-faith
I was not lousy (Lord) consider well,
Though Lords be lousy too sometimes; if hell
Heaven, earth, and men, be not so gracious,
As to conceal infirmities of state.

AM. Say I am lousy sir.

GRA. Can pox forbid?
But I must give him better language now:
No (my respected sir) I dare not tax
Especial favorites, of lice or pox,
Amongst whom you are the chief, but milky skin
That has fair outsides, may be foul within.
And I again do in despite aver,
'Voidance of lice from our nativity.
Reclaim then that aspersion (Lord) and know
I was not lousy, but like midnight snow,
Pure, when thy self (now seeking to supplant)
Took'st me to rescue from the jaws of want:
I was not lousy (Lord) look big and burst,
I will maintain my credit, though accursed.

AMI. You were not lousy (knave) not ragged, no
Nor sick, I condescend; yet sirrah know
The plagues of Egypt all began to march
Full-mouth upon thee (like devou^ing dogs
Ready enough to rend a breathless Fox)
When I with noble pity being oppressed,
Flew forth like lightning to thy rescued life,
Which is indeed my proper donatiue.
Do not reply thou true insulting toade,
Squint-eyed caitife, you pernicious rat,
You gelded rascal, you most lousy rogue:
Do not reply, mad masti^e, do not swell,
And think (because you can discover well
My tricks of youth) to stop the fervent rage
Of our vn-tam'd affections; future age
Must, and shall, witness my fierce violence,
If thou discover but one syllable;
Nay, if thou entertain a piece of thought,
Which by vn-masking me does hope revenge:
Swear, swear (you thick-lip'd rascal) kindly swear
Without compulsion, or base-minded fear,
To be like midnight, as a sepulcher,
Dumb as a Turkish executioner,
Nay, as a marble statue, void of signs
Touching the substance of my secrecy.
Swear (slave) and think my soul a fury mad,
Able to force wide rupture through the face
Of threatening Horror to endamage thee;
As to demand account of perjury.
Do not seem loath, expecting new delay;
For I can stab you (capon) to the quick,
Cut off your Eunuch-nose, then laugh and kick
Your lousy stinking neats-iowle to the dogs.

GRA. Without collusion I do strictly swear.

AM. And think withal, I who have coin bestowed,
Clothes, and fair countenance, with store of meat,
Can also give sharp sauce, which will procure
Digestion to the stomach, else (proud sir)
You will dis-gorge the vomit in my face;
If kindness do recoyle, let fear take place:

GRA. I am your footstool, tread upon my teeth,
And so charm silence if you do mis-doubt.

AMI. No, but remember if you shall bewray
My dark designments, or use cheating play
In prosecution of my private cause,
(Hoping for payment from the Spartan laws)
Remember that thy life, and interest
Of being rich, both owe a special rent
With homage, and knight-seruice unto me,
Remember you do hold in Capite.

GRA. Cut then my servile tongue out of my head,
Slit my suspected organs, make me dumb,
Handlesse and sighlesse if you think me false,
For I must otherwise be false indeed:
Men that admonish to avoid some vice,
Must not inculcate motives more then thrice;
Pupils much tutored with Identity
Of reprehension, prove but spur-gall Iades;
Because they think the vicious estate
Of things habitual, do argue fate,
Which to resist, they think impiety,
Exclude me therefore from society
Of human habitants, or leave to vex,
Which is a torment to all human sex.

AMI. I leave addition, but consider well,
You are as deep engaged almost as I;
Which depth, of both engagements, reach to hell,
If any (but our selves) the depth espy.

GRA. Sir, I have broke the Ice to Appetite,
And with a studied phrase did I begin,
Hoping to thaw the coldest frosty North
By representing multitude of fears.

AM. And did she melt?

GR. Yes melted into tears,
But was a stranger to my wanton tales:
She comes whom your hot love so close empales.

Act. 4. Scoen. 7.
AMILCAR, FAVORINA, GRACCHVS. Wonder of women, pomp and pride of earth,
Whose woeful absence might make beauties dearth,
Goddess of loue-sick souls, thou glorious Nymph
Who might attract the Angels eyes to sin:
O thou beyond Amilcars county love,
(Because indeed a concubine for Jove),
Rob not the treasure of my souls delight,
Which lies imprisoned in aeternall night.
FA. Did you for this (most lying impious man)
Pull me from refuge and protection safe?
Give me advice, in hope of due revenge,
To follow thee, forsake the Title Queen
Of Sparia, to become a Queen of Lust?
For this did you solicit (beastly Lord?)
And labor by this talking Eunuch-bawd,
To conquer chastity through faithless fraud?
For this did you obtest high oaths above
My poor conceit, to show dissembling love?

AMI. Let me again obtest the waking Gods,
Or (beyond them) your beauteous diety,
(Which to abuse, were vild impiety)
Thy glad fr^^ition were a ransomed soul,
Or kingdoms conquest in my rich account
Of gloriou^ beauty; giving more content
Then soul imagine, or great kingdoms may.
We call to ^^^nesse thy imperious hate,
And do appeal to virtue of thy love,
(If hate and love may both together lodge)
Thy love surmounts my value, does infuse
A sudden rapture to my longing soul,
Does change dull nature, quicken up my brain,
Put a persume into my sordid breath,
And is indeed restoratiue to death.

FA. If you intend a true religious love,
Profess it sir, without offense to Jove,
And so remember blessed nuptials;
For he enjoyes his fate and funerals,
Who sometime was Maenander, and my spouse;
Your self did seal his death by constant vows.
Speak then, and let thy answer be direct,
Or I shall think, religion you neglect.

GRA. O she has given his fury a full stab,
My sweet-mouth'd Courtier swallows down a crab.
The Eele is in a sand-bagge, some good man
See how the mimicke scrues an Alphabet
Of hungry faces, how the maggot crawles
To feed upon the kernel.

FA. Who replies?

GRA. Again, again (for loves sake) spur the Jade:
Give him another pill, provoke the slave,
And make him spue his heart with madness; melt
His larded veins with striving to extend
A lousy answer; but the Idol speaks.

FA. What makes Amilcar dumb with my request?
What makes thy trembling blood so pale and wanne,
Most like the color of a dying man?

AM. The sad remembrance of my foolish vow,
Vexes meek apprehension; yielding forth
In stead of answer, ambiguities.

GRA. Look for a subtle rare-compacted lie.

AMI. Madam, the vow mayes me monastical,
I have protested a true single life,
Which did engender a Dilemma, long,
But religious indeed.

GRA. Ridiculous,
Indeed you are a Goat libidinous.

AMI. I never will be yoked, by consequence
No drawing beast, no big laborious ox,
I must not marry madame.

FAV. Must you then
(Because not marry, to avoid the ox)
Live like a noted and eggregious Ass?
Or like a Cammell, fierce with flaming lust?
Would you seduce my weaker innocence?
Seek to entrap my credulous conceit?
You must not marry; would you then defile
The modest thoughts of virgin-chastity?
Would you take license from a single life,
To make each maid a whore, not being a wife?
I blush to view such vild affinity,
Betwixt a Goatish beard, and bearded men.

AMI. But be familiar (Madam) and re-call
I was a target once to thee condemned,
Both by Lucilla, and Pheudippe's doom;
Remember Madam, I did turn the edge
Of quick Lucilla's wrath upon her self,
Took thy confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent sub-version, drew thee out
As from a gulf which gaping, ready stood
To swallow down thy honor, sing thy hurt,
So change thy golden dignity to dirt.
I did (remember Madam) banish hate,
For I did wrestle with vp-rising fate.

FAV. You did infranchise my condemned life,
You did return Lucilla's point of spleen
Upon her wicked bosom; whence it came;
You (sir) did manage my neglected cause,
Took my confiscate beauty from the snare
Of imminent sub-version; you did this;
You, you have been my target, you alone
D^ew my forgotten safety from the teeth
Of tugging^singers; you alone did this;
And did you this to amplify abuse?
Did you reserve my innocence for this?
For this did you protect my ignorance?
You kept my carcass from a rampant Woolfe,
To feed your tame, but hungry, Lions whelpe:
You did prevent a near captivity,
To make my thraldom be notorious;
You, from a guiltless danger, did redeem
My maiden thoughts, to make the danger, guilt;
Thou gave new being ('bout too fail before)
After which being, must I be thy whore?
'Faith you have done a deed of charity,
Took me by rescue, from death past the chin,
To rip my pregnant womb, and flea my skin.
But know ( Amilcar) I am so resolved
Upon the spot-lesse love of chastity,
As I with proper violence will rend
My womb in pieces, tear my tempting face
And go beyond a woman's forritude,
Rather then (like a Strumpet) prostitute.

AMI. (Queen) I contemn your points of chastity,
Laugh at such idle tricks to color sin:
You are a captive in my custody,
Consider well the law of time and place
Be at my proper nod; if naked lust
Bribe me to some in-iustice, do not blame
A smooth acceptance; for the frugall age
Wherein I live, does bark aloud for fees
Which in themselves be bribes; if to the knees,
Or neck, some rascal knave be drenched in blood,
The scarlet can absolve a scarlet sin
And call deep slaughter a correctiue deed.
Then blame the bribes which did in-iustice feed,
Blame not the man (I pray;) so blame our lust
Not met Amilcar, if enjoy we must.

FA. Have you decreed some rauisher's attempt?
Will you determine to be violent?
A dead pale horror does possess thy cheek
With repetition of the simple sound;
Thou violate a virgins chastity?
Can thou commit an odious rape, a sin
Of such high outrage; yet look pale and de^d
Upon recital of the sin it self?

AMIL. N^p me (good Gracchus) how? look pale and dead?
Fetch Aquafortis (Gracchus) stab my arm,
A shaking palsy does oppress my heart;
How? pale, and dead?

GRA. (Wise woman) I adore
The quick invention, and if Gods agree
Will in despite of false-hood set her free.

FA. O what damned terror to a wicked man
Be guilty thoughts, considering offense
(Fitly compared to prodigal expense:)
Nor may the valiant'st sinful youth alive
With resolution so in-wal'd appear
But his high heart will be below his fear.
Can you commit lewd rape ( Amilcar?) no:
Ma^^s, and chaste women need no more defense
For hot invasion except innocence,
Earnest resistance, by but one true maid,
Will make the fierest rauisher afraid:
For if a virgin violate you see
She did in part deny, in part agree:
(...) resolution of a maidens hand,
Tall Gyant-letchers, cannot half with-stand.

AMI. Take her (good Gracchus) to your custody
Be thou my bawd, and purge Phlebotomy.

Act. 4. Scoen. 8.
MENANDER, EVPHORBVS, LAELIO, PERILLVS BVFO, LVCILLA, MANTESIO. Our (...); the
most valiant scule
(...) Champion, truly does possess
My (...) square limbs; then (subjects) call,
(...) brave Ajax that renowned Peer
Aequall to Agamemnon, ^ee presume
By our Tragoedians Art to Deify:
Lalio must Act Ulysses.
LAE. I agree.

MEN. Mantesio and Lucilla must like mutes
Expect upon my rage all counterfeit,
As did the savage throng that Ajax slew;
Robes shall not make a metamorphosis;
We may suppose you whom the Scoene requires
Some savage couple fit for Ajax wrath.

AM. You may command us.

ME. but brave Messala
Acts Agamemnon.

EV. Brother I am glad
To thank your aestimation of my parts
And I will strive to please you sir, though mad.

ME. Bufo, Perillus, both be Chiefe-taines too,
Attentive to decide the argument
Of our contention, striving to deserve
The honor of Achilles after death.

AM. We both be vassailes to your celsitude.

ME. Each take his part and study to rehearse
(...) may stumble at an easy verse.

BV^. Manander is a Delphicke Oracle.

MEN. Be silent, leave this big Hyperbole,
And show thy breeding modest.

BVF. Sir I am
A Gallant, thanks to Tailors, and good clothes,
Yet keep no crafty Page to pick a purse:
Nor do I often play the Sodomite,
Will, with a lively posture personate
The Scoene of Ajax, and enjoy our fate,

MEN. Enough, the solemn festival of joy
Which does ensue, exacts your diligence,
To give some testimonial indeed
Of (...) deseruings: think me bountiful
If any Action in my troop excel.
Fortun. I do contemn thee; sirs advance
And in despite of death, use vigilance.

Finis Actus quarti.
Act. 5. Scoen. I.
GRACCHVS, FAVORINA, GLADIATOR. MAdam, all chaste desires be laudable,
But if you tempt a mischief merciless,
Such certain truths be doubtful to avoid;
And I prefer the public safety still
(Which wants you as a chief and moving wheel)
Before my simple damage, though the curse,
Railings, and wrath of my contemptuous Lord
Fall last upon me, like so many shaftes
Shot from heavens fabric by offended Jove:
Come therefore death, destruction, stabs or steel,
Come outrage, madness, fierce amazing oaths,
Terror, and tortures come, what can betide,
You shall, unknown, by our advice escape
Least long exspectance do incur the rape.
FAV. I much commend your zealous charity,
Yet I believe Amilcar cannot wrong
The harmel^sse meaning of our innocence:
Suppose I do exspect upon the rage
And lustful fury of that impious man,
Yet I presume the Gods will govern lust
And give such valor to a virtuous maid
As she may well in-counter Canibals.
Why should Amilcar seem to conquer me?
Or why assault my noble chastity?
Secured hope, and heaven can witness too
I have no biting bosome-snake which gnawes
With greedy vulture-teeth and stinging jaws
Upon the precious comfort of my soul;
No second In-mate ready to control
Our quiet actions; no loud fearful sin
To stab me in the midst of honest mirth
And ouer-looke the music of my mind,
To make me start and rob me of content
No, no (good Gracchus) I am innocent,
And therefore not excluded from the help
Of heavens tuition; know I dare affront
Amilcar in the fury of his flames,
Rail at the stubborn youth, and make him melt
Eeu'n like a leaden statue, or indeed
Like some obdurate image carved of Ice,
Which through one blast of lightning do despair
And from tall statues vanish into air:
I feel within me such true noble signs
Of earnest courage, as no female thought
Can (except pure and pious) well compare:
I am not valiant, like a drunken whore,
Ramping by virtue of abused wine;
Not is my resolution desperate,
I am not fearelesse, to see fear abound
But innocence is resolutions ground.

GRA. Will you neglect my counsel to escape?
Will your deluded love to innocence
Not reckon means ordained for innocence?
Protection does imply our vigilance,
Else virtue is reputed arrogance;
Honest and simple hearts alone deserve
That in extremity pure holiness
Should make means thrive, not without good means, bless.
(Madam) I swear they lack humanity
Who will teach men to tempt their destiny;
Believe it (Fauorina) I should fear
The doubtful mercy of a hungry Bear:
They who desire to feel the Lions paw
May live in compass of the Lions Cave;
I know good means, neglected, make a slave.

FA. (Gracchus) I once again commend your zeal
Thank, and admit your love, which labors well
To win the height of our capacity:
But ( Gracchus) tell me now, suppose I stay,
Suppose Amilcar do continue still,
Like a wild Satyr, most libidinous;
Admit he shall extend so far as rape
And by the ruin of our modest grace
Erect a shameful Priapus in place?
Tell me (good Gracchus) what rich victory
Can the fool boast of? what egregious act
Can he ascribe to conquest of our sex?
We are alas like walls vn-fortified,
Or like a Castle made of March-pane walls
Easily subdued, without fierce rauishment.
Women were made to make rash men repent.
Shame to my fortunes, I did seek revenge
And sure the Gods will turn revenge on me;
Lucilla's death, the Kings Catastrophe
Might have been both avoided, if revenge
And malice had not been so force-able
To banish pity from our spightfull breast,
The want of which procured a funeral chest
To keep the cinders of a sleeping pair;
Which loss, no time can prove, no age repair:
Lucilla's death had my malicious doom
As Epitaph to dead Mananders Tomb;
The plaintiffs lie which proved Lucilla's death
Did like-wise rob Manander of his breath.

GRA. (Madam) you are deluded; I can give
A testimonial that both do live.

FA. Maenander live? and does Lucilla live?
Speak it again, proclaim the news aloud
Let heaven and earth be witness to thy tale:
Speak it again (good Gracchus) give the Gods
Notice again of my certificate
Which makes me in a glorious estate:
Dance my dejected soul, sing merrily
Leap all my organs, I am innocent,
Gracchus will witness, I am innocent,
I did not kill Maenander, not accuse
My rival young Lucilla, no (good heaven)
Gracchus will witness I am innocent:
Lucilla lives, my best MENANDER lives,
Speak it again (good Gracchus.)

GR. both do live.

FA. Bear witness now; hark heaven, he said they live
Take special notice of his name and words
For he is prompt enough to justify
Our depositions, neither will he lie:
No, he is an honest, very honest man
Is called Gracchus so inscribe his name;
And set his certain testimonial
Upon record: Lucilla does survive
And my Maenander he is yet alive:
So says good Gracchus, so inscribe the same.
Joy has no passage through my ravished soul:
I did before put on a painted face
Forging false color to my innocence
But now indeed am truly innocent:
Thou Gracchus be my judge, and heaven be judge
I am not now defiled with bloody thoughts
And fearful agues; thou be like-wise judge
That false Amilcar is a menstruous ragge,
A youth ranke-rotten, before mellow-ripe:
Flye-blowne already as a carcass hot
Which has no shelter from the dog-day Sun:
Beyond all virtues cunning to reclaim:
Goodness and reformation be to him
Monsters in nature; and detested more,
Then of a Hermit is the common-whore.
Vices, like Maggots, creep on him so thick,
As who destroies the one, he must not stick
To follow the sub-version of them both:
Of lewd Am^^ar and his lustful growth.

GRA. Who can escape the lime-twigs which are set
By loose affections to ensnare himself?
Man does about him carry watchful foes
And must be careful to in-counter those;
For all without him, though by troops they come
Cannot offend, who is in peace at home:
Amilcar (Madam) is now riding post
Upon exact employments; his return
Is doubtful, therefore to avoid delay,
The love and duty of my zeal obey.
A friend in whom I claim full interest
Does give attendance to accompany
Your Grace, till I can trusse a fardell up
And follow.

FA. What Is thy friend'

GR. A Fencer.

GLA. I am engaged upon fidelity
And must preserve you from hostility,
Eeu'n to the latest of a mortal life,
I will defend thee widow, maid, or wife.

FA. My new redemption is a doubtful task,
You both do promise more then I will ask:
And though my squint-ei'd fortune look ascaunce
Yet heaven will succor my deliverance:
Which being once purchased, proud Amilcars lust
Shall vanish into Salamanders dust.

GRA. Put on the wings of speed; fly fast away
I follow (Madam) before peeping day.

Act. 5. Scoen. 2.
GRACCHVS, AMILCAR, SERVI. Success attend her, till I soon dispatch
And speedily escape Amilcars rage:
Saddle my horse, and fetch my Caskets, hoe,
Servants make ready I must ride to Athens.
All men desirous to prevent quick fate
Scorn (above all things) to procrastinate:
Watch there without, like busy sentinels
And (...) Lords return, see some fore-tels. --
SER. He is returned already; does approach,
Says you may travail in his new Caroch.

GRA. Yes, to the devil; death! is he returned?
I am undone, I am undone; (good genius)
Help me; (good Angels) be auspicious,
Or I shall perish past recovery:
Senge me some lightning, though in-visible;
O burn my bleeding heart; consume, consume!
Fly from my nosthrils an infectious fume!
Stop all my organs, o commisserate
The bad misfortune of a poor estate:
He comes, he comes --

AM. ( Gracchus my dear) how do?
What answer makes my Goddess? does she melt?
Does she recant and ask my pardon? speak.

GRA. No: I am troubled with a falling rhume.

AMI. Fetch forth Pigmalious Image, I will doat,
And so become Cupids Idolater:
Stay Gracchus, we will both accompany
Her sacred passage to the public air:
What shaking palsy does detain thy steps?
Where is the Queen? speak (trembling coward) speak.

GRA. She ouer-came me with incessant tears;
To those I yielded, o forgive my fears.

A^. Yielded? (base caitife) be our hopes all dead?
My labor, lies, delusion, studied care,
All turned to smoke through yielding of a drudge?
All our engagements, my benevolence,
My proiects, aims, and large gratuities,
All come to this? the center of my thoughts,
My double tricks, and cunny-catching-slights,
All come to this? the rich faelicity
Whereon my faith was grounded, come to this?
Come ghastly horror to consummate all,
Add ruin like-wise to my wit-lesse fall.
O my loud curse! delusion was my bait
And I am now deluded; learning fails;
No new invented stratageme auailes;
And virtue I am not accquainted with.
O you damned rogue, it is holliday at home,
You hope the Queen (sir) will advance you high,
And hope so still, but (very, very knave)
I will dis-ioint your elevated hopes;
And make you (sir) an Alcibiades:
The Queen departed?

GRA. Pity did prevail,
For she did weep, nor did of passion fail:
Her eyes (good Lady!) did with weeping smart,
Which made me give her license to depart.

AMI. I am undone (you fragment) I Am undone,
I am detected, whither shall I run?
The harvest of my long laborious toil,
Now I have swom through death and swallowed fire.
Given doubtful fury a most brave repulse
Put back suspense, and all approaching fears
Almost concluded things impossible;
Made smooth my way, and tilted in the face
Of frowning mischief ready to take place;
Now, now is all sub-verted; I am lost
In a large Wood, a winding laborinth:
I am excluded from all native power,
Am like the rubbish of a ruined Tower;
I am abused, I am to death betrayed,
By thee a doctor villain; not afrai'd
To swear me homage, and vn-lace my heart:
The blessings of your body, breath, and soul
Be so engaged, as their existence knows
Not one redeemer among all the Gods,
(Fabulous things to you) except my self;
Thus did you swear, and swore I gave thee life,
Nay did bestow a whole creations work
Upon thee offal-caitiffe, who adored
Impression of my foote-steps that was all
Exspecting hourly on the happy time
When I should dare command what you durst do,
When with advantage, I would but pronounce
O Gracchus give me of thy blood an ounce:
Thus did you swear, you dog-day-villaine, thus;
And yet your actions be malicious:
Teach me, some devil, to torment the rogue,
Else take the righteous rigor of his fault
In^^ the depth of hels extremity;
Rescue, o rescue this offending wretch
(Some powers above) from my most fatall-wrath,
For to afflict thee as the crime deserves
Would loose a double part in Paradise:
Yet must I punish thee (thou Spiders-gall) --

SER. The to ade and spider cannot choose but brawle.

AM. -- I must (you creeping cur) and would refuse
Rather to be a God, then to forgive
A thing so capital; and thou escape;
But an arch-diuell would I ever be
A fiend of horror beneath all degree,
Eat flames and brimstone to beget me fierce
That with astonished fury I might pierce
And split each sinew; fear thy plumpest vain,
So rack thy feeling with perpetual pain.

GRA. O feel compassion, for I do repent.

AMI. Repent? compassion? I would rather whip
My weakened carcass with a Scorpions tail;
Dwell in a nest of Adders, make them sting
Till patience could endure; then wash my wounds
With burning pitch and lamp-oile, bath in lead,
Or make a poultice of some swelling toad,
Rather then take one cruel thought from 'load.

GRA. Your meanace and commotion do torment
Above all suffering; o I will repent
Six thousand times a day; devour my flesh,
Feed upon frogs, or quaffe down aconite,
Kiss and embrace, a fearful Succubus,
If you but leave to terrify me thus.

AM. No (theeuish tumbler) leave thy cheating tricks
And swear allegiance to some puny Lord,
Make those believe that lack intelligence,
For I am lasht with true experience:
Though on thy bosom thou would therefore crawle,
And, like a Serpent, live upon the dust:
Though by continual creeping thou did wear
Thy breast and belly, (so become submisse
In a most new degree) did lick paths clean
Where I should walk, and scrape away the filth:
Employ each servile sinew to my ends,
Yet you and I must never more be friends.
Fill flat upon thy face (thou paracide)
Fall down as ready (captive) to abide
Our indignation, which in childbirth lies,
Big with a thousand swelling lunacies:
Expecting all to be delivered out,
And by vexation of thy falling strength,
To be an orb in breadth, an age in length:
Fall (thou condemned Shismaticke) and charm
The killing rage of my advanced arm;
For I shall prove so desperately mad
And full of rigor, in my sharp revenge;
As to reuoule the terror of my doom
Phanfy does tremble, but my rage makes room:
(Falie wretch) I must forget humanity,
And fall acquainted with some forest Woolfe;
He, and such bloody Tutors shall instruct
The shameless Art of savage cruelty,
To kill thee, and become exorbitant;
I will a^ato ^ife thy limbs alive;
Will (...) small gobbets of thy quaking flesh
And ^eed my Hawks, while life continues fresh
Within the bloody morsel; make the sluice
To qu^uer when they swallow down the juice:
The Turk shall teach me to extend some plague
Of most vn-suffering nature: till the day,
And thy blaspheming breath do both decay.
But (...) ^orrow seize me) what auailes
This villains torture to my living woe?
For I (except I quickly be trans-form'd
Into a Rat, a Hedgehog, Lowfe, or To^de,
Some base and obscure animal) must feel
Torments more tedious then tongues may express,
A Equal to which is doubtful heaviness:
Nay. our attempts and high abuses done
Be of such horrid shape, such ample strain;
As to absolve them would require a Saint
With special pardon from almighty Jove:
Yes, though I should obtain that idle wish
Of transmigration; yet the shameful troop
Of sins which we are my scarlet livery
Would follow fast, and (as Actions dogs)
Tear me to pieces, not remembering, once,
That I was master of the family:
If, to become a new conformitant,
Implied a venial act; each virtuous thought
Should be my fellow: it is the fault of all,
We do despair to stand, because we fall.
One maxim I retain by privilege;
Such secrets, they do seldom thrive, nor can,
Where we depend upon the breath of man:
O had my drudge, my Vassaile been but true,
And faithful to the forecast of my hopes,
I had been brave confederate of Kings,
Nay, might have called some Kings my feodars.
(O devil) had thou been to my desires
A sudden knave and dutiful enough:
But for a time had thou continued so
Until some limitation did expire
With such observance as rank devils use
Upon the precious morgage of a soul
I had been ready to depart with all;
With pleasures, titles, all things, to enrich
Thy budding fortunes; all did I reserve
Till death determined my approaching fate,
Only to thee, then all, was consecrate,
By due surrender; but (young prodigal)
Your hopes and life (poor slave) be pawned to me
Whom no sworne-diuels Broker shall exceed
In scuruy usage, though my heart strings bleed.

GRA. If no true mercy then may mittigate
Thy dull and stupid deafness. I do dare
The vt-most of your frantic violence,
Cast all thy Adder-stings upon my heart;
Be thy conceited cramps more exquisite
Then is a terrible tormenting Bull;
Break forth ( Hyaena) get some peevish dwarf
To hacke me down at leisure; till I stand
Like a Colossus, like a Cedar tall
And yet immovable with smarting wounds:
Stab me now (tyrant) or inflict full pain
Upon each noble joint and glorious vein,
Virtue shall keep me with a sacred charm
Against the strength of a stipendious arm:
The challenge of my cause being heard at large
All (to thy damage) would my griefs discharge:
Mock babes and children (sir) with rods in piss,
I did approve no true defense like this,
That I have done uprightly; knit your brow,
Swell with a crabbed face conformable,
Let your offended garbidge fry in steakes,
Truth will auerre, and honest dealing speaks
That I have done uprightly; be ashamed
Of thy unjust revenge, and murder named.

AMI. Dare you then buzze (you beetle) and advance
Your voice to contradict superiors?
Proud slave come nearer; he may live among rats,
Who will be daunted with a swarm of gnats,
Much less with one poor mushrump; petty sir
Pray leave to grumble, (you mad factious curre)
Torments shall mittigate and make you tame
Pains wo^s^ then death, shall make thee deadly lame.

GRA. Do I deserve such pains? no fiery youth
I have done most uprightly, will discharge
A good officious part, if you proceed,
I will vn-maske your shameful tricks indeed.

AM. A squib, a squib, crack, flash, and spit apace,
Break (my oxe-bladder) vanish into breath,
A scritch-owle bids thee sing before thy death,
Squeake our rare bag-pipe; flesh-flye buzze again,
Seem to insult with voice, (thou very sound)
Take thy last leave, bequeath short life to ground.

GRA. Hark how the monstrous whale does roar alowd.

AM. Presaging tempests (Pilot) in the straights.

GRA. No huge sea-wonder) I a sword-fish am,
Who will by virtue most upright and plain,
Sting thee, and thresh thee, till thou rore with pain:
Proud man, remember what thou well deseru'st,
Think who has tempted royal chastity;
Who like a cheating thief did steal the Queen,
With lying vows, and studied shameless oaths,
Did play the Iuggler; left the Kings highway,
And went about to break enclosures: think
Who did excel in mischief, who did strive
To worship Devils, who did seek by Just,
And means new molded, most in-ordinate,
To make a Heavenly Saint a Sodomite,
Compel pure thoughts to worship Priapus.
Think who protended to defile the Queen,
And did (above pretense) affirm the death
Of mad Maenander, the deluded King,
And vow Lucilla's death: observe young sir
The suitable description to the end;
And tell us if it be significant:
Or if the language be too blunt; observe;
Tell your opinion of the congruence,
And spew a whetstone up er'e I proceed:
Think if I use (sir) an affected style,
Think also of the strange absurdities,
Think who is the subject of my railing theme,
And when thou do consider heavily
It is thy wicked self whereof I speak
And all uprightly spoken; you will perceive
You want much leisure (friend) to punish me
For mischiefs nearer hand-doe threaten thee:
Except thou do despair and hang thy self.

AMI. Impudent devil, did not hear the voice
Of threatening tortures; like so many toads,
Night-rauens, or scritch owls which together sing
Thy deaths decree, as a (...) funeral dirge?
Repent, repent (slave) and consider well,
Who is now sailing to the gates of hell.
(Servants) come apprehend this Eunuch; hoe,
Reserve him till the rigor of my doom
Demands sharp execution; tie the wretch
With loading manacles, and crucify
This false condemned railer fifty times,
Till with excess of pain the Traitor dies.

GRA. I cannot now with-stand hostility,
But follow death with such alacrity
As one resolved upon religious war,
Such deaths do purchase a triumphal carre.

Act. 5. Scoen. 3.
EVPHOREVS, BVEO, MENANDER, LAELIO, LVCILLA, MANTESIO, PERILLVS. Unfold your
Ensigns, beat your silent Drums,
Exchange (I say) their sable cognizance,
Adding a limitation to the fears
Of this great Captains death: exhaustad tears
May m^ttigate compunction, not despair
A loss vnmatch'd well worthy of repair.
Weeping should show our zeal, not once repine
At Providence above, which is Divine.
BV. But (Agamemnon) now the funeral rites
Be finished; new horror, new despights
Speak with a bloody accent: Ajax roares,
And like a tempest, or the Giants race,
Which lay encamped against the God-like face
Of great Olimpus, does he bellow forth
Bumbast exclaimes, and eals upon desert;
Give me (says he) that armor which is due,
And (as a trophey of eternal fame)
May stout Achilles, that most valiant man,
Survive in me: O thou vn-thankfull Greece,
(Helmets and lances be my Orators)
Thou art indebted to my brave designs
Past restitution; let some Soldier speak,
And call thee Bankrout; for I am abused:
Will you admit a rival then says he
In my magnanimous aims to conquer me?
Will you admit Ulysses?

LAE. They approach.

ME. Shall every coward be competitor
With Princes of such potent fortitude,
Such high descent, such saintish pedigree
As Greece can tell I Ajax do enjoy?
For Jove and all the Gods acknowledge me,
My arm has whole share in the dust of Troy.

PER. True ( Ajax) true, take double share in dust,
But for Achilles now contend we must.

ME. Contend with me? (thou creeping snaile) with me?
Whom wrathful Hector on his Elephant,
Mounted like Neptune on the cursed waves,
Loath to encounter, did forsake the field;
Through his fair absence did the Trojans yield.

PE. But ( Ajax) wise men know selfe-arrogance
Is still instructed sir to amplify.

ME. Fie (prating coxcombe) what a senseless fool
A stupid wretch, and suffering Ass am I
To enter-change the air, and empty voice
With such a sheeps-head, a poor Ithacan?

PER. (Ajax) Your Giant bragges lack policy,
Strength wanting wisdom, argues ecstasy.

ME. Give us our lance and he^met, I consume
Till I have turned this coward into fume:
Fetch some offensive swords, and scimitars,
Iauelings and Curtaxe, I will crush this Ape,
And as a trophey wear his captive skin;
(The doubtful terror of my certain spoil
Which may affright, and make our foes recoile.)

PER. What high renown or fame is to be had
By fighting with a Soldier who is mad?

ME. O my forgotten fury swell apace,
And spit forth lightning in the cowards face,
Who has no title to his bold pretense,
But a most a poor vn-tutor'd eloquence.

EV. Ajax --

BV. Be silent, Agamemnon speaks,

EV. Hang taming fetters on your lofty frowns,
Compel thy wrath which is praedominant,
Force wild affections (Ajax:) I profess.
Arax (...) are too violent; leave rage,
And by appointment of my poor advice,
You (in this great assembly) shall recount
Your noble acts; which if they do amount
Beyond Ulysses memorable deeds,
The armor of Achilles then succeeds
To thee alone, made happy through desert,
Else to Ulysses shall the arms reuert.

ME. Then let me challenge some prerogative
From this forgotten place: laugh Jupiter,
And blame the stupid brains of this rude throng,
Which with unthankful eyes can here behold
The ships, the sands, the tattred sails and shore,
(All rescued vassailes of my ventrous arm)
Yet make us dead, and vain Ulysses warm;
Warm with the bounty which the frozen snake
Will but abuse (my Lords) and you mistake.
What man was he took danger by the jaws?
Gave an assault of battry to the ribs
Of rampant Horror? hewed a passage out
From spoil and ruin, to reap victory?
Wrestled, and rescued Nauies from the fire?
And did (for safety) senge his beard with flames?
Gave to triumphant Hector the repulse?
Quenched a combustion aequall in extremes
To burning Phaeton, and the torrid Zone?
What man was he? No talking verbalist;
But I, eeu'n Ajax, with but half a fist:
Where was my smooth-tongu'd adversary then?
What hope had weak Ulysses to supply
A Captains part with schoole-boyes eloquence?
No (poor Ulysses) if thou apprehend'st
My vn-resisted victories aright;
If you conceive your disabilities,
Your inclinations natural, and raw,
Your lame, and halting courage in exploit;
Remembering sir with whom you do contend,
With me, with Ajax, whom no fears offend,
Then magnify your self, and think it praise,
Above thy merits, to confess, by drum,
By harp and sacke-but, that (though overcome)
Thou did yet strive with Ajax, and renounce
Each other title, which may well denounce
Thee indiscreet, and thy assumption proud;
Help me (dear Wisdom) to refrain, for I
Shall be transported into agony
By virtue of a sight so omenous,
So full of brazen impudence and fear,
As that proud linguist, my competitor.
Advance, advance, your melancholy brow,
Bend your attentive politicians ear
To that which heaven and I will asseucre,
You have been taught to dance, and turn the heel,
To run away betimes, and to forsake
Thy friend, nay soul, upon extremity.
Nestor, Tydides, both can well auerre,
You lack the rules of doctrine militant;
All rescue is accounted heresy:
Which rule (if pity and compassion both
Were not my maxims friend) had cost your life.
I saw death's Sergeant ready to arrest
Thy pensive soul, when tumbling down to earth,
I threw my target on thy pallid hearse,
Drove back thy foes, and did thy soul reuerse.
Will you (sir) walk unto the place again?
Go faigne some foes approach, put fear enough,
And wounds on, for a shift, shrink up again,
And like the Tortorse vnder-creepe your shell;
So sir contend I pray, and stammer well:
Be wise (you mighty Captains) and collect
How Hector did the Trojan troops renew,
Amazing vaunt-guards with-a multitude
Of heathen Gods giving a bloody cause
Of quick despair to my Antagonist;
Nay to the valiant and provincial Dukes:
This dreadful man, this Hector (tossing souls
Like Gnats and Ants-egges down to Erebus)
I beat him groueling, laid his limbs asleep;
And like a mountain from the firmament,
Down fell great Hector from his Elephant:
Let then a wreath of Oak empale my head,
And let Ulysses share with Diomed.
Mars be my aequall judge! what simple man
(Except in league with sottish ignorance)
Would (upon forfeit of his patrimony,
And stock of wisdom to debility)
Admit Ulysses my competitor
To strive in jest with Ajax? if desert
Shall in the vp-shot be praedominant,
Look on our outsides, on our helmets look;
View each man's Beuer, Breast Plate, Sword and Lance,
Look on our outsides hoe! consider well
And pawse upon each target; give me leave,
To show the tokens of a Soldiers claim,
And to uncase a cowards infamy.
Mark but the difference betwixt our shields:
Mine (a true target) has sustained whole groves
Of artificial timber, topt with steel,
I stood like Mars among my Trojan foes,
When all forsook me but my faithful targe,
It still continued, and did nobly keep,
My limbs exposed to danger of the field;
A Crocodile I think may covert sleep
Within the large wounds of my open shield:
Cast (I beseech) now half a pur-blinde look
Upon that theeuish varlet; and his shield,
Observe how smooth and fair his night-caps be,
His helmets (Lords) I mean, observe his shield,
His Beuer trimmed twice twenty times a day;
His gauntlets, gorgets, and his gilded Arms,
All of a sweet complexion, sanguine sap,
As to encounter some fine Ladies lap:
Meaning to be a Champion of the smockes,
A gallant spruce young warrior indeed,
War shall press wives; for Soldiers do not bleed.
Account my phrase no ambiguity,
Ulysses sloth my words will verify:
I laugh most freely to imagine how
Effoeminate Ulysses will support
The massy fabric of Achiles arms,
If my deseruings shall be robbed and loose
That which I honor, and affection wooes.

EV. (Ajax) enough; Ulysses now begin:

PER. Desire (alas) being not effectual
To raise from Cinders dead mortality,
And make a living heir indubitate,
Heaven says, he shall remain ambiguous,
Till you (great Judges) do decide the strife,
And so restore Achilles unto life:
Which, because doubtful, I do challenge grace
Of you my patrons, and this public place.
The bragging fellow Ajax does derive
A long forgotten age from Telamon,
Striving to fetch a foolish argument
Of his renowned acts, from high descent,
If which dead picture of Kings pedigree,
Could but infuce a fortune competent,
And make that piercing wisdom of the soul
A thing entitled to inheritance,
I could produce a genealogy,
From sacred Jove, and subtle Mercury;
But, may the best of all my stratagems,
Which to thy sole advantage (happy Greece)
I have invented; may they perish all
When I assume the virtue of my sire,
As agent for my hope, and chief desire.
(...) brave Achilles to the siege
When he (^^tain'd with fear of destiny)
Was eeu'n excluded in a female robe?
When he forgot to be pontifical,
And was a true virago? did refuse
Both weapons, and each little sound of war?
I had a feeling of my countries cause,
And drew Achilles to the Trojan wars;
That mighty Captain of the Mermedons
I drew to battle, made him disobey
His mother-goddesse, to advance the state
Of weary toil, and trouble Pergamus:
I put his armor on; gave weapons too;
For what I gave (great Lords) I humbly woo.
Speak, did not I encounter Telephon?
Turn Thebes to ashes? conquer Tenedos?
Chryses, and Cylla, Syron, Hector, Troy,
All do acknowledge me; my valiant arm,
My notable advice; all attribute
The shameless ruin of subverted Troy
To me, as author sole, and absolute
Of such a safety to the commonweal;
Which, notwithstanding (fathers) I renounce,
And must acknowledge you the principals
Of an atchieuement so perspicuous:
And whatsouer the vain peoples voice,
Captains report, and painful Soldiers love,
Does by mis-guided error give to me,
I render back with all humility.
To urge my own directions, and advice
In Architecture of that happy horse,
That fatal fabric (being so fresh in thought)
Were to condemn you (mindful countrymen)
Of that which wisdom loathes, Ingratitude.
To reckon up Minerua's image, bought
With hazard of my breath, and precious limbs,
When wedging bars flew from the Iron gates,
And gave access unto that sacred spell,
Might argue a most false oblivion
In your quick wisdoms with strange impudence
In my most bold surmise. But (Mighties all)
May stupid Ajax his reproachful terms,
(Without each scruple to your judging ears)
Be twice retorted in his rotten teeth;
So he may swallow down such base Rebukes,
And make amends to me: for let him know,
My suffering shoulders could sustain the load
Not of Achilles armor, but his lump
Of solid, brawny flesh, both legs and arms,
Nay the whole massy trunk trussed up in steel:
I ( Ajax) I, that carcass once be-stridde,
Upon my shoulders took his heavy trunk
When death stood there, and in the midst of all
Carried Achilles to his funeral.
When after thousand sharp calamities
Of war, of winter, famine, pestilence,
Of parching dog-daies, long and taedious,
Of tempest, thunder, much mortality,
After all these, and ten years doubtful siege,
When you forsook the Camp, did so recoile,
As almost scorning a recovery;
^ charmed the topmast, haled you back to shore,
Converted all to conquest, which before
Did seem above my dull inuentiue brain,
Give me a ^eed for ten years toil and pain.

OM. Succ^^d Ulysses, take thy rich desire.

ME. Depth to my fortunes! shall Ulysses rob
My long d^s^ruings of so rich a claim?
I will increase the bargain, stay a while
Take my memento.

OM. Sir, avoid his rage.

ME. Do fly from vengeance? whither can you fly?

Whither (thou shifting coward) to escape
The indignation of my doubtless wrath?
See how the lurking caitife there does hide
His Cuckow-bill; what fury could abstain?
LVC. MAN. Angels protect us; help, we both are slain?

LAE. PE. Defend it (fiction.)

ME. Help it forward (faith)
And give some fee to Justice: (gallants) know,
Mischief to high extremes this pair did woo,

AM. With false Pheudippe did conspire we two.

ME. Hark they confess what wonder did reveal,
Give your applause, and make a merry peale:
Call me not Ajax now, but Mercury,
Who could vn-tye a Tragic riddle thus;
Worthy to be esteemed miraculous.

Act. 5. Scoen. 4.
FAVORINA, GLADIATOR Cannot you (sir) espy the honest man
(That noble Eunuch, my deliverer)
Good Gracchus coming yet?
GLA. (Dear Madame) no.

FAV. Indeed my fancy does suggest new fear,
Seeming to tell me Gracchus is detained
By his Lords rage, who did (I doubt) return
Sooner then he exspected; which despite
If I could well conjecture to be true,
With wings of lightning I Would again go back
And bring my Eunuch from captivity.

GLA. Take then some officers to apprehend
The lustful traitor.

FA. Such delay is long,
And my dear Eunuch may be dead alas
With tortures and extremity of pain,
Er'e such late rescue does advantage give,
To qualify his torment; he, good man,
(Little affected with ensuing harm)
Bestowed upon me a deliverance,
Which is repaid (I fear), with bloody stripes:
Stay not my purpose; but give charity
A gentle freedom to deliver one
Who is my comfort; (friend) I will return:
And (let no living soul participate
Of what I say, except my self and air)
^aside^ I will, through color of a pious end,
Enjoy Amilcar, whom I did refuse:
For, to set free my Eunuch, will afford
A fine praetext, though I do prostitute;
Which I did eeu'n defire, exspecting still
Upon each little sign of violence,
(The modest shadow of a secret whore)
So will I win what was half lost before.

GLA. Madam, you do protract the precious time,

FA. Leave me, I will return.

GLA. The way's not far;
Walk on whilst I assemble Officers.

FA. A needless caution, be content I pray
To take no care, save what I shall command;
Be not so dutiful above thy hire,
Bring me no water when I call for fire.

GLA. A riddle: so in safeties name walk on:
Yet seeing the woman will be obstinate,
I (to avoid suspicion) will go home,
Fetch neighbors, and incompasse round the walls,
If Lords like out-lawes live, the kingdom falls.

Act. 5. Scoen. 5.
HYARCHVS, HIPPONAX, LAELIO. When, when (o Goddess) will thy anger leave
To punish nature, and afflict poor man,
Who was created to offensive sin?
The Soldiers awe, and common peoples rage,
Make civil customs be licentious;
Rapine, rude contracts, discord, enmity,
All take their essence from one ecstasy:
HIP. Maenander lives, the lucklesse cause of all;
His life alone procures the kingdoms fall:

LAE. The longer life, the loss more eminent:
Know (Lords) I am a witness ocular,
And may with privilege inform you both
Of a most new and fatal accident:
The King, Maenander, did produce a Scoene,
A Scoene of Ai^x, that unhappy play
(Pretending sport) became a Tragedy
For blood, and breath's efluxion: five deep wounds
(wearing Maenanders badge) at once deprived
The sister Royal, next allied, by law
Of birth, and native consanguinity,
From hope of all succession to the chair.

AMB. Lucilla dead?

LAE. With her Mantesio sleeps:
Each life was tributary to the rage
Of our mad King; but each accused it self
As privy, to that arch-conspiracy
So long forgotten; to Pheudippe's crime.

HY. Concealed so long?

HIP. Who did discover it?

LAE. A question doubtful; but Maenander says
An apparition did reveal the truth.

HIP. Shadows may walk indeed.

HY. Impossible!
I am resolved against all argument;
I am incredulous; dead never walk.

LAE. Never the same, yet the similitude,

HY. Who says again so, weel'e aver the lie;
What be no things of nature, I account
Fables.

HIP. You are not Metaphysicall.

HY. No sir: I think the age is giddy; death!
Can we from ashes raise a second life?
The age is drunken sure.

LAE. A doting age.

HY. The times are dizzy.

LAE. No man does deny
A theme so irrepugnable and true:
Reasons own self will be our advocate
In proving what you speak; for punies know
The world's lame reuoluti'on has been long,
And all partake of mundane giddiness:
The turning round of earth has touched our brain;
The longer age, the more absurd and vain.

HIP. Age must decline, life's comfort will decay.
Though all things perish; let religion stay.

Act. 5. Scoene. 6.
AMILCAR, FAVORINA, GRACCHVS, GLADIATOR, SERVI: STIPATORE^. I have a thousand
plagues in readiness,
Strappadoes, and empalements, pitch, and oise,
A Rack of Bow-strings, a tormenting Bull.
Hogs-heads with nails inuerted; furies whips,
And artificial pricks of Adders bone,
Which to behold, in practice on my slave,
Your Lady-ship is welcome; and approach
Most opportunely (Madam:) after all
When grief has feared your eyesight up; you shall
Then be dis-burthn'd of that chastity
Which is a trouble to your conscience:
I (Madam) will remove the dear suspense
Of question; whither you may prostitute,
And so resolve you a whore absolute:
(Se^uants) come cast my drudge upon the wheel;
Stand vp-right (rascal) stand sir, do not reele,
Take your last ^eaue of standings say adieu
To ease; and as you leave pain, look for new.
FAV. O save my Eunuch, and I will submit
My whole revenue, life, and chastity
To your disposal.

AMI. President of shame!
Shoot (hell) a bon-fire of unbounded flame,
And may each heavenly star augment his light
To make this woman famous; may each night
Change foggy darkness to prodigious day,
And (by some sign) a subtle whore display
To be the miracle of monstrous age
Worthy of judgments quill, and natures stage.
Are you the vestall? that religious Nun,
Who speak no syllable but Innocence,
Sacred devotion, Virgin chastity?
Rail at our fleshly sins, concupisence,
Temptations actual, and yet embrace,
Nay, hug hels bosom? creep into the vice
(Which you would seem so lively to abhor)
Gaping at small occasion? (Madam) know
Affection is my servant, Will my slave,
Passion my drudge, Temptation is my page
And I more easily can command them all,
Then may a Turk his tugging Gally-slaue:
Know, I contemn that courteous venery
Which is affoorded scot-free; such nice dames
Would seem to cover when they covet flames.
Of puddle-water no sick patient drinks;
A precious odor, cheapely valued, stinkes.
And, that you may conceive how I esteem
Your beauty; thus will I deforme --

FA. O help.

GLA. Hark (neighbors) follow, force down locks and bars,
Attach the Traitor,

AMI. Am I then betrayed?

GLA. Take up the Queen.

FA. My wound's not mortal; stay
Release that Eunuch.

STI. Keep the Traitor safe.

FA. Con-vey him as an Idiot, or Drudge;
My Wrong may be accuser, Clearke, and Judge.

Act. 5. Scoen. 7.
MENANDER, EVPHORBVS, BV^O, LAELIO. Tilt in my face ( Euphorbus) and reclaim
The slight opinion of our Deity.
Tilt in our face (I say) and thence collect
If I be Hermes; make some steady thrust,
And call me Sacred, Matchblesse, Mercury:
Believe it (youth) I will dis-ioine thy neck
And shoulders, if thou do again deny
That I am Hermes, Jove's Ambassador,
A winged, and im-penetrable God:
Tilt therefore in my face, tilt speedily;
Be thou con-iur'd by laws of sanctity.
EVP. The fiend (sir) does oppress my feeble arm.

MEN. (Caitife) provoke not my offensive rage
Least I deprive thee of all future age.

EVP. Then I must kill thee (King.)

ME. I am a God;
Translated by the voice of Parliament
Which sits above this cloudy firmament:
I am a God Euphorbus; am no King;
The Tawny-more, and Ethiop shall bring
Unto my Altars pleasant sacrifice,
Fresh Op^-balsum; Fawnes of paradise;
Roe-buckes and balm to please our Deity.
Stab us (thou Athiest) stab us, and believe
That I am perfect shadow, am a God;
Thrust thy vn-willing Poniard through my ribs;
And thence perceive our full Deuinity;
Avoid my wrath (I say) it is dangerous,
If you refuse, I am unmerciful.

EV. Stand to thy fortune (God) my dagger comes:

ME. Deep enough dig then: o my small wound smarts
My breath is stopped, my God-like soul departs.

EVP. So: I now assume the intellectual robe
Of Reason; and re-linquish Lunacy
Which idle scare brought me acquainted with:
And (as I hope) the understanding heads,
Which rule this Commonwealths society;
Will construe this an act of Piety.

LAE. Where is the King? I carry news of joy --

BV. Where is the King? dead Fauorina lives.

EV. Here lies the King who did enforce a death
Upon the peril of his Authors life,
If he refused to execute his will.

AMBO. Euphorbus then recouer'd?

EV. Yes; for I
Did counterfeit a couz'ning lunacy.

AM. Sparta behoues to'acknowledge thee her friend.

LAE. The sentence of Amilcar let us attend.

Act. 5. Scoen. 8.
HYARCHVS, EVPHOREVS, HIPPONAX, LAELIO, AMILCAR, FAVORINA, BVFO, GRACCHVS,
GLADIATOR, LESBIA, MILITES, STIPATORES. OM. Long live the Queen.

HIP. Draw the damned villain forth,
And let him swallow sulphur; flaming pitch,
Or else be roasted pitiless alive.

AMI. O give me oil of Mandrakes, Poppey juice
Or poison of infected Helleber.

HY. Flea him, and make a trophey of his skin.

FAV. Cut off his members; bind and broile the slave.

HIP. Let him be quarterd.

AMI. To deceive all these
Were policy above the rules of Art:
I have concluded to prevent the shapes
Of torture; death by death alone escapes.

OM. Save, save the Traitor, save him.

GLA: He is dead.

HIP. May then the Traitor sleep in tortures bed.

EVP. But may Maenanders dying soul ascend;
Whom for the safety of this Commonwealth,
I did restore to happiness and health.

HIP. HY. Amazement of our age! wonder of time!

EVP. Touched with a feeling of my Countries good
I dipped my dagger in his royal blood,
By his own chief desire; so leave mad care,
Which my suspicion did assume through fear.

OM. The Queen shall Crown thee.

EVP. So I leave the school
Of madness, to become mad fortunes fool.

FAV. Remove the Carcass of that slaught'red King.

EVP. We once obeyed him: after ecstasy
Let Us therefore follow his dead obsequy.
(Nature) stand speech-lesse, for above thy part
With man preuailes both Lunacy and Art.

Act. 5. Scoen. 9.
CINTHIA. Horror, affrightments, death, and anger fly,
Fly to the bottom of hels dark Abyss,
That heaven may smile upon the clouded earth
And all take notice we are pacified:
Grim death triumphant, whose empaled brow
Can terrefy the factious Kings below,
(Who when we were incensed through blasphemy
Sent forth revenge to please our Deity)
Shall now enchaine that mischief merciless,
And qualify reuengefull greediness:
Discloud thy luster (my new borrowed shine)
Scatter thy foggy damps which do debar
My bounteous lamp of universal light:
Let exhalations give my honor place,
All stars attendant look earth in the face.
Gods cannot dwell in rage; though slimy man
If but en-nobled by permissiue law,
Dares prosecute his vengeance to the death
Till he extirpe a whole posterity:
We though immortal, though above best brains
To comprehend; though sole efficients,
Though every thing in essence, though divine,
Though Gods; (in which one syllable, the sum
Of every thing's inuolu'd) though Gods we are,
Yet in compassion we do still accept
Those that profane our sacred holiness.
For; should the anger of Omnipotence
Punish mankind so often, or so long
As their insatiate folly does deserve,
Jove would be weary and the Gods above
Turn boiling wrath into abundant love.
FINIS.

