FUNERAL ELEGIES, UPON THE MOST UNTIMELY DEATH OF the Honorable and most
hopeful, Mr. JOHN STANHOPE, Son and Heir to the Right Honorable PHILIP
Lord STANHOPE, Baron of Shelford:

WHO DECEASED IN Christ-church at OXFORD, the 18. of July, 1623.



London printed for Ralph Mab. MDCXXIV.

Ad Lectorem.
OFficiosus Amor lachrimas effudit ab vrna
Quam raptim ingestas Musa latere velit,
Melpomenen moerore suo ne creed superbam;
Fastum o quid nescit, si modo luctus habet?
Tu solum expendas, quanta est huic causa dolori,
Cum sapiat, quasi nunc prompta, Querela vetus.
IN AMICISSIMVM MEVM.
GEmma domus nostrae, Musarum dulers ocelle
Flos Parnasstaci, deliciaeque chori,
Defunctum sequor obsequijs, complector and vinbram,
Heu quot corporibus dignior vmbra tua est?
Non est fictus amor, non est vmbratilis ardor,
Vmbra places, videar corporis vmbra tui.
Henricus Percy,
Comitis Northumbriae Filius.
ANd have thou left us then (Dear Soul?) must we
Comfort our eyes, no more beholding thee?
^^uldst thou be so much a proficient here,
(...) dye so soon in thy first year?
(...) ^^ill thou be thus a Graduate, to shine
(...) already, and there turn Divine?
(...) ^^gree, whose luster quite defaces
(...) ^^^e Hoods, and Academicke graces.
(...) ^^^h mistook thee; measuring thee a man
By thy Souls Elle, not by thy bodies Span.
Had thou been duller, thou perchance might have
Gone but a slow and foot-pace to thy grave:
The ^^ch of Fate had not bin stirred: the Skies
Would not so greedy snatch so mean a prize:
Thy quicknes killed thee, ripenes was thy death,
Running to goodness, thou ranst out of breath.
How did thou pitch beyond thy years! how sage,
How wise, how staid, how elder than thy age!
W^^t manly gravity was known to house,
(...) in thy smooth then others wrinckled brows?
(...) different from the common Nobler sort,
(...) here for fashion only come and sport,
(...) wear a gaudy Gown! and then with ease
(...) the Streets, and learn the Colleges,
^ape some few ends of Jests, wherewith hereafter:
To branch discourse, and entertain a laughter!
That nere reach further than the mystical
Science of Tennis, and (their Sphere) the Ball;
Or else to weild some Fencers wooden tool,
Or sweat a Nightcap in the Dancing-schoole.
To crack a Lute-string, and such worthy Arts,
In others, Complements, in great men, parts.
Thy Studies were more serious as thy looks,
While others Bandyed thou wast tossing Books,
Busied in Paper, and collecting there,
Gemmes to stick in thy mind, not in thine ear.
Me thinks I see thee yet close by thy self,
Reaching some choice Book from thy furnished shelfe,
Loose the silk strings, and with a willing pain,
To read, and think, and write, and read again.
Thus did thou spend thy life's short day, till night,
Deaths night oretooke thee, and put out thy light.
This sable Curtain was too soon orespred,
Thy day-taske done, to bring thee to thy bed.
Yet happy soul, whose first night did begin
In Death, vndarkned with the night of sin.
E. R.

VT nova subsiliunt acciso germinae trunco,
Et reficit pennae damna cadentis olor;
Sic vbi Matris honor cecidit Stanhopia proles,
Sarcina mox orbam non sinit esse nova.
Primitias vteri, quae coelo debita sors est,
Soluisti Matter, quid potes inde queri?
At Calum excambit foetum, similemque reponit,
Number potes hoc damnum dicere? munus erat.
Qui sic interijt, non interijsse videtur
Natalem fato, sed reparasse suo.
Ier. Thorp. Art Mag. ex Aede Christi.

A Funeral Elegy.
AS for a teadious famine, or a siege
Threatening us al, our country and our Liege:
So do we grieve for thee, each neighbor
Weeps to the indangering of an eye;
As if the loss were his, or he had sold by
His Patrimony, and had spent the gold.
Spanish Currantoes, Brunswicke, and the fate
And Massacres of the Palatinate,
In this spring tide, and flood of grief are lost,
As rain drops in a stream, that in the vast
Ocean, this has so filled our hearts, eyes, ears,
That we want sense of other cares then these.
If in a drowth this accident had been,
Thou had not, Fate, committed such a sin.
he peoples tribute had repaired the loss
Of the mad dog-starres fury, and this cross;
For with their tears the parched earth had been,
As after plent'ous rain, fruitful and green.
By should heavens drops now longer mix with ours,
But these united conduits, doubled showers,
Trent would unruly grow, and his proud waves
Would make our habitations then our graves.
As the sun snow: so grief melts us, and you,
Wherese're we go, may tract us by our dew.
The State-men of this loss such notice take,
They Will not do business, 'till they'ue wept for's sake.
With these Inferiors join, from the Collyers eye
You may take ink to write an Elegy,
And in their fields of hay the Contrymen
Do weep, as if they would have it grow again.
Our sin has bred this cross: so Adams vice
Did disinherite him of Paradise.
His death of ours, nay unborn Babes will miss,
And feel his absence. who had brought a bliss
To them, to all of them. For as we see
A goodly, spreading, large, and well-limbd tree
Does guard the underwood, and does immure
The houses near, which by it are secure;
So from all tempest, from all rage of wind
He would have fenced his neighbors, and have shined
Like Lights in Watch-towres, which are set to save
Passengers from Rocks, and fury of the Wave.
This may coniectur'd be, from what we saw,
His youth did bear, and promise. For if by
The foot of Hercules with Geometry
His true proportion was collected, may
Not we on the same grounds proceed, and say
On sight of the foundation, this had been
As fair an edifice as e're was seen,
If It had gone on? it is profane to say,
The Builder wanted skill, and stuff to lay
A perfect roof on what he had began,
And could not end this Masterpiece of Man,
And therefore dashed it out, We all do know
We were unworthy of so great a flow,
And stream of goodness, that his innocence
Long since deserved to be removed hence:
Wherefore true Justice placed Him near the Throne
In heaven of one in three, of three in one.
His life was spotless: as his sickness grew,
So did his zeal and calmness: all is true
In him, which Poets by hyperboly
Give their choice friends to make their memory.
Immortal. Like a thankful stream he ran
To pay his debt unto the Ocean.
His Monuments of Learning were bestowed
Where he had his. He paid what ere he owed;
Obedience to his Parents, Love to all,
Repentance, death for's sins in general.
Vere lugentis Pietas.
QVae Fata quondam cecinit Henrici, tibi
Modo Musa, magne luuenis, exequias parat.
Documenta mors maiora nunquam virium
Dedit suarum, simile non potest malum,
Ruina similis, Carolo superstite
Saluoque rege, and integro cultu Dei,
Accidere nobis: lector istorum been est
Si conualescat: deficit mihi spiritus.
G. I.

Read o Depositum Patri petenti,
Read o Depositum diserta seeds;
Tanti non emo Literas, nec Antrum,
Et Phoebi Tripodas, Deumque totum.
Illum sub dubij tepore sensus,
Et fusca biuij trementis hora
Luctantem, toties Lare in Paterno
Emersisse, semel nec inde nostro?
Illum tendiculas manumque Fati
Prensantis toties cauere posse,
Vt damni mora foeneraret ingens
Huic aurae scelus, inuidumque nomen
Seruaret miseris ruina Musis?
Nunc iras veteres palam fatentur,
Musis ah nimis asperae sorores,
Musis, irrita quod Sepulchra reddunt,
Et fallunt tenebras silentis Vrnae.
I am fato cecidit Triumphus ingens,
Non vulgar epulum rogum saginat,
Sed Praenobile, quodque delicato
Reddat iam proceres sapore vermes.
Cymbam nunc inopem rosis and alga
Nauclerus Stygiae paludis ornat,
Ornat sollicitus; magisque sudat,
Quam si nunc reduci foros pararet
Aeneae, Dominaeque nauiganti.
Illo quot Veneres, Facetiasque
Vernantes licuit videre vultu?
Quot pexo mulierculas in Ore,
Et quantos animo viros adulto?
Vno non potuit iacere telo
Virtus tam numerosa; sed tenello
Centum pectore condidit sagittas
Fati certa lues: Character irae
Dum vestigia vulnerum fatetur
(Seu morbus fuerat, Pudorue Morbi,)
Crebris morsibus hinc and hinc rubescit.
Absumptum est iaculis repent pectus,
Et posses pharetram vocare metam;
Non sic foemina spinulis refertum
Puluillum iugulat, veneficaeque
Humanas fodiunt acu figuras:
Non tot vulnera, tot per omne corpus
Caesar sustinuit, quot ille solo
Sensit cord puer, Puerque spreuit
Ingens pectore, iamque vulnerato:
Qui quamuis puer, ausus est minantes
Non pallere Deas, ferociamque
Ostentare viri, tuamque Caesar,
Dum stratis operit pudicus ora
Obnubitque sinum! ferox, and acer!
Quem vinci puduit iubente Fato!
Gulielmus Strode Art. Bac.

Sleep, sweetest youth, in thy still grave,
Whom birth nor virtue could not save,
Nor loveliness nor youth could free,
From this doom of mortality.
Could we with tears thy life redeem,
Our eyes should be a living stream:
Or else what would we not contriue
To give, so heaven would thee repriue
To older years, and would thee save
Till old, thou might become a grave?
Thou might depart then without wonder,
When soul and body fall asunder.
But thou wast lovely, young, and wise,
The comfort of our hopes and eyes;
Could Death discern thy parts, or see;
He had enamored been on thee:
Thy beauty would force him forbear
His churlish dart, and shead a tear;
To see so fair an object stand,
That love and pity could command;
And force compassion in each one,
That had or sense, or passion.
But thou wast ripe for heaven, and we
Are left behind, to grieve for thee:
Nor are we angry with that doom.
Could we weep Amber, and entombe
Those lovely Relics, which might bless
Our sorrow in thy happiness;
That so our tears might thee embrace,
And shrine thee in a lovely place,
So they unto eternity
Might both enbalme, and bury thee:
Could we thus bless our grief, and thee,
We should weep a glad Elegy.
Had we such comfort in our tears,
We'd weep the remnant of our years,
To half redeem thee, could we save
Thy ashes in so rich a grave.
Though this is but a wished gift,
Yet grief can make a loving shift,
And know our love can make a room,
As everlasting as this Tomb.
In spite of death, we will thee save,
Both from the fate of death, and grave:
Thy love shall find, though life's thus spent,
In each man's heart a Monument.
Thus we will preserve thee, and contriue,
Though dead, thou still shall be alive.
INuidia Fati, prima surrepta iuuenta,
Hic iacet Oxonij gloria, delitiae.
Hunc populo indignum Musae rapuere benigno
Amplexu, and gremio deposuere suo.
Formam tota cohors Musarum deperit, ambit:
Aeternumque aiunt, Hoc requiesce sinu.
Annorum spondent faciles per saecula lapsus
Dum rapit audaci mors inopina manu.
Inuidiam hanc rident Musae, tumuloque reponunt
Carmineo, inuita and viuere morte iubent.
Sic quem mortalem Parcae inuidere Cmamaenis
Aeternum in nostro carmine tutus erit.
Gulielmus Pickering, Art. Bac.

De morbo quo fratres vtrique laborabant.
Corpora tam similes vestesque habuere colores,
Corpora nescires, an tunicata vides.
Tam similes vtrique dedit morbusque figuras,
Fratres vel morbo noueris esse duos.
Sic morbi obseruant habitus; conformia Fata
Si fuerant, fratres viuere vtrosque velint.
Ioh. Euans Genesis Art. Bac.

QVam fueras fratris morbo praeposterus haeres,
Vt viuat titulis posthumus ille tuis?
Iam nimius fueras Haeres, natura Parensis
Haeredem, fratris te tua Fata volunt,
Credibile est mortem tum lasciuisse pharetra,
Dum sic alternas vibrat vtrisque minas.
Non errare potest dubiae manus impia mortis,
Dum pro fratre mori gestit vterque prior.
Dum sic Bacchatur, Fatum est crudelius, alter
Fratri morbus erat te perijsse suo.
Petr. Aspley in Art. Bac. Equitis Aur. and Turris Londini prefect.
primogenitus.

It Is indeed, it is Stanhopes heir,
Whose corpse lie muffled on this Beer:
(Which a pure love, before it went,
Ennobled more then his descent)
But count his virtues, not his years,
Or guess him by his Fathers tears,
And then no Son or Heir's desired,
But the whole Name and Race expired.
Nor does his death cause this our woe,
(Death's our nature, not our foe)
But that his life so soon being gone,
Made him a ghest, and not a son;
That he snatched in's minority
Did rather loose his life, then die.
And now, his years being understood
To be so short, and yet so good,
We may divide our passions so,
That we may grieve, yet wonder too.
His wit so ripe in youth so green,
Made him ancient at fifteen;
And now you see his face no more,
You would date him at threescore.
But if you would memorials keep
Of this fair body lies asleep,
That, looking on the toys you wear,
Though he be gone, you would think him here:
First know, you do this soul no grace,
To catch his Ribbands, or his Lace,
Or (as the Jews did heretofore)
To keep his Earerings to adore:
If for his memory you care,
Wear his manners, not his hair.
Think on him in his latest rest,
When death had spawnd upon his breast,
And hurled those deadly Atoms on,
Enameled with corruption,
How still that harmless soul remaind
Among so many spots, unstained.
O why was Fate so soon severe,
T'enchase those ugly Rubies there?
Nor will we mitigate the name,
And call them Measels; for the same
Were on the brothers body tried,
Nor yet complain we that he died;
Or how could Pin-dust, cast on's skin,
Cause his death to enter in?
Nor would then his Physicians skill
Suffer such Fleabites for to kill.
No, this was fatal, it was his lot
That from every little spot,
Should be drawn a line athwart
To the Center of his heart.
Or else God from some higher place,
Seeded Manna on his face;
And sure it is so, or else he would never
Have put him in this Omer here.
Then let us now no more lament
The dead, (whose life so well was spent,
That now for land, he heaven does share,
By his death a greater Heir)
But our selves: for sure it is worse,
To be the Mourner then the Coarse.
Thomas Lockey, Art. Bac.

ERgone non auidos Musarum expalluit haustus
Ille puer, salso strenuus ore loqui?
Ergone non imas puduit redolere lucernas,
Vt damno afficeret mox grauiore Patrem?
Siccine selegit mors illum ex omnibus vnum?
Illum, delitiae qui modo Patris erat?
Dissimulare Pater iam discas, vaetibi, Fata
Inuida si norint, quis tibi charus erit.
Look on his body chequered over with spots,
Look on his soul untainted with such blots.
His purer part is frighted at each sore,
Two Twins were never so unlike before.
What wonder if a sudden parting be,
Where thus the soul and body disagree?
Edwardus Croke, Art. Bac.

ANd is our grief so large? cannot be confined
To Place, to Time, but shown to all mankind?
Must we remove his Corpse, and so convey
Our Thames to Trent, and wear another way
With tears? to dally with our grief, and bear
About our loss, as if we played with fear?
Where does this iourny after life's iourny tend,
This travail after death, this endless end?
Resting he moves, and dead he still does roll,
As if his body went to seek his soul:
'Twas not because we partners seek of grief,
The greatest sorrows seldom crave relief.
Let Us then divide our woes, and let each care
Enjoy that want, and in such sorrow share.
It Is fit (though here he died) that countries womb
That gave him life, should likewise be his Tomb:
To die, and to be buried in one place,
Beseemes common mortality, his race
Merits no captive rites, then let our loss
Be as diffusiue as his goodness was.
What though he trace mortality, and dye?
Death's a Refiner of Nobility:
And in a fresher mould, and purer fire,
Blazons him in a fairer Character.
This were an honest comfort, if being dead,
Our grief could have their object buried:
If we only with our memory did bear,
And with those eyes alone to think him here.
But lo, here is part of him, which does extend
His life beyond his life, nor does death end
Himself, though half himself, for now in this
We both do view, although one whole we miss.
Nor do we here retain a Light so clear,
As when two Suns paced in one Hemispheare,
Nor do Tyndarides divided shine
So bright, as when they both their Lights combine:
When two are linked and parted, then we may
An obscure twilight call it, and no day.
Memorials of the good, and Pictures do
Restore our grief, and make us love our woe.
So when we see his Brothers shape, these lips,
These eyes of his, these cheeks, that face, it strips
Us of our sense, and forthwith makes us frame,
That it is no Brother, Picture, but the same:
And writes his Name afresh, lest grief should dye:
Each limb of his speaks his mortality.
This is our joy, our grief, that we request
Almost of that love to be dispossessed.
His years I need not computate, since Fate
His riper virtues, not his years does date,
Which who so dares to number, must confess
He slanders, by commending happiness.
But's richer soul we must admire, not praise
That groser Heraldry despaires to blaze.
Adored Saint, or more, if more there be
Of thy blessed Relics only known to thee;
We do confess thou art gone, and yet our loss
If told, is undervalued, so gross,
So young are our complaints, that we lament
In petty Notions, sorrows rudiment:
Our infant tears yet knows not all our woe,
Because we knew not all that was to grow
In him, a graft all hope, but riper years
Shall teach us how to parallel our tears,
And so improoue we may, (as he did grow
In virtue) daily thriuing in our woe.
Can then that River which by thee does slide,
Be so unmindful, not to be full Tide,
And not ore-flow his bounds? O be so good
To save a wonder, lest we force a flood;
Swell thou (Meander streams) let flow thy tears,
Better proportioned to our fruitful fears;
Or let that Dog-starre cause thee to be spent,
As t did his life, our eyes shall weep a Trent,
And make his Tomb an Island, thou shall be
(Shelford) more famous for mortality.
And thou the Wel-spring, which with Arts did flow,
(Bereaved Oxford) be a well of woe.
Let Future times this first note learn of thee.
Here dyed a Stanhope. Thus thou learned may be.
We do not here examine why
His Tutor suffered him to die,
As if his watchfulness had slept:
For sure he was by Argos kept,
And had he not a Stanhope been,
He might his Natures Tutor seem:
But we question that which forced
God and man to be diuorc't.
That first Question, that Where, that Why,
That sentenced first our souls to dye.
If fruit now have that power of death,
As in the childhood of the earth,
Which Fruit to cloak we Leaves put on,
Clothed with our own transgression.
No, know his soul so pure, so good,
And how corruption it withstood;
That needed almost had his skin
Rather to be baptized then sin.
Though Cherries sown in such a place,
That what he ate, he wore in's face,
Yet every twinkling spot did lie
Like Stars, but in a fairer Sky;
Such beauty might the Moon remove,
Sooner then Endymions love.
And from his kiss her light to come,
Rather then from that common Sun.
If then Measels spangled thus,
Imbroidered his face no worse;
If his disease so modest be,
And blush at it is own cruelty;
Then what may his beauty claim,
Whom his sickness thus became;
And in the twilight of his days,
Chequ'red his countenance with Rays,
Presaging like a rubyed night,
The Sun awak't to shine more bright?
If then our grief be not at height,
Behold his Fathers sorrows weight,
Whose heavy journey winged with fears,
Caused his body sweat with tears,
And each officious limb turned eye,
Claiming their duty for to cry:
And well I think all eye was he,
That in a double night did see,
Nor will I ever that approve,
When thus it sees that blind is love:
For fatherly affection may,
Though it be night, create a day.
Now with an honest heresy,
I could renounce Philosophy,
That seeing thus their passions knit,
His Father did his soul beget,
And if it were not so, then why
Did's Fathers Fate teach him to dye,
And by his Propheticke death,
Make him's Heir in's loss of breath:
So that alone, which had the might
To part them, did them co-vnite?
Nor does goodness cease with breath,
See liberality after death,
Gilding each Parish as they fall,
(For each place claims his Funeral)
Where he raines a silver shower,
Making each Town like Danaes Tower.
Or as a snaile which never more
Returns the way sh'ath gone before,
Christals the path where she does pass,
To signify there her way was.
Nor any other Tomb she will have
But her shell, her house her grave:
So will Stanhope no where lie,
But where he had's nativity.
Though Egypt claims he died in her,
Yet Canaan must his bones interre.
Richardus Chaworth, Art. Bac.

IS Stanhope dead? and are our eyes yet dry?
Can we outface our grief so constantly?
Does not hard-hearted Athens yet lament,
That is deprived of such an Ornament,
A Son and a Mecaenas? Can she find
One that deserved so well that is left behind?
Mourn then sad Athens, and in memory
Of such ahopefull Son, weep out an eye:
Do something, that posterity may know,
So great a loss cannot be smothered so.
And you sad Brothers, whose yet weeping eyes
Threaten a flood of tears, whose memories
Are yet fresh-gauld with sorrow, whose hearts weep
Channels of blood for tears, whose checkes yet keep
The furrowed gutters where their sorrow flows,
Whose foreheads are the ensigns of their woes,
Make him a verse or two, let him not dye,
And perish quite from the worlds memory;
Hurl something into feet, and let it run
Madding abroad, to tell what Death has done.
Had he this entertainment when he came
To honor Athens? might not Stanhopes Name
Have priuiledg'd him from death? could Shelford give
Him to himself? and send him here to live?
And must we give him death? must Athens prove
A Stepmother, and quite forget to love?
Yet thus much let us honor him, though dead,
Let him be honorably buried;
Yet that is not all; we must not leave him thus,
Our sorrow must be more ingenious.
One that deserved to live so long as he,
Must not be hastened to his destiny.
Thus far his death has brought him: let us strive
To reinfomre him, that he may revive,
And thus much cross the Fates, that thus much durst
To make him live, when they have done their worst.
Let us record his virtues, which deserved
To be engraven in gold, or be reserved
In trusty Caedar, which when we are dead,
Among our childrens children may be read;
Where some may joy to hear them told, and some
May lispe them out as they were taught at home.
They need not fear mis-reckoning, he had all,
And all he thought a number too too small.
He was an heaven on earth, in whom combined
His virtues like a Constellation shined:
In which each star pricked with a jealous fear,
Did strive to be the glory of his Sphere:
His Noble birth shined like a Ruby set
To be the grace of a rich Cabbinet;
His education shaddowing it over,
So well becom'd it, that it shined the more.
His pretty and ingenuous face did look
Like the good Title of an honest Book:
His comely shape, which did become him best,
Looked like the Sanctuary of the rest:
As if the pattern were some Deity,
Which Nature coppied his perfections by.
Virtues amazed with a fond delight,
Gazing and doting at so sweet a sight:
At length with full embraces did oppress
This Microcosme, or world of happiness.
Where with an emulating industry,
Each showing an obsequious Piety,
Labored to better Nature, and go on
With that rare work which nature had begun.
His affable and willing Courtesy
Claimed upper hand of his Nobility,
He was right Noble, borne of Stanhopes blood,
But was thrice Noble, being borne so good.
His courteous salutings seemed to be
Notable Emblemes of humility:
His heart was like his eyes, which towr'd so high,
They stoopt not to the lure of vanity.
Do ye not wonder yet? then stay and see
His learning balanced with his infancy;
Mark but how young he was, how ripe in wit,
His learning him, and he had honored it:
He needs not Arms to show his Ancestry,
That was so Noble by's own Heraldry:
Neither need Logic prove he was a man,
When he could prove as much as logic can.
Could he be idle, that with easy pains
Summoned each Coast, and called them by their names?
Wanted he knowledge, whose Minority
Durst be acquainted with Philosophy?
Speak, art thou yet so stupid, to deny
That he was too good for Mortality?
He was grown old in goodness, and could see
The way to heaven, even in his Infancy.
Henricus Humberston, Art. Bac.

Upon the custom to pay to every Parish, through which the dead Corpse is
carried.
WHy is it you stop our rites, as though a Dearth
Of Pence had made new ferry-me^ on earth?
And is it such charges for to dye, that we
By Water and by Land too pay a Fee?
Why with such strictness, do you ask your pay,
As though you bargained for the Kings Highway?
I thought at least our Carcass might have bin
Quiet in Death, in that our latest Inn.
Or that naild Coffins, or vnwrapped Lead,
From all vexation safe had kept the dead.
Let him in peace walk to his silent Cave,
To the long solemn progress of his grave:
Trouble not his Procession: for ye
Him this way wandering never more shall see.
He comes not to possess your grounds or lands,
Or ^n your Tenements to seize his hands;
He is no Court-messenger, to take in
Lodgings or house-roome for the State or King:
He Is but's own Harbinger to provide room,
E'ne for a little earth, six foot of Tomb:
Then let him pass, untroubled with those fears,
And we will follow after with our tears.
O let us wrap one tear up, to show his Hearse,
He cannot be so soon forgot: a Verse,
Well spent, Embalmes him richer then the cost
Of precious ointment on his body lost:
Which only for the Worms perfumes his flesh,
And makes it but more handsome rottenness:
But this does quicken Fame, and this does raise
A volume of sorrow for after-dayes,
That men, ten Ages hence, may weep to see
Such hopeful Plants, such thriuing grafts as he,
So young, and yet so full of age, so good,
To feel untimely blasting in the bud.
As though 'twere Natures pride to deal with us,
As Mothers with their froward Infants use,
Who bribe them quiet with a costly Iemme,
But being still, do steal't away again.
The world was peevish, froward, till to light
Was brought this rich, this high-priz'd Margarite;
Which being seen, gazed on, and wondered at,
Was reconuai'd to Heaven, its proper seat,
Where Angels ware it, any blessed powers it set
In their own truely-glorious Cabinet.
No sooner had we seen this Iemme, but see
The want thereof, such happiness have we,
So blessed are we; O what greater ill,
To have had good, and not to have it still?
How we renew our grief? how prone we be
To shead new tears, as often as we see
Thy Fellow-Brother sadly walk alone,
Without a like-clad Brother, too well known?
What pity it is to part the Turtle Dove
From his Matter to part two Twins? for in love
None elder was, one soul the storehouse was
Of both affections, and though they pass
For two, yet trust me, I did then descry
As the same soul in a seuer'd body.
He that suruiues, takes vantage by thy fall,
To show his last love to thy Funeral;
To thy memory his best grief to give,
And to thy Shrine a Votary to live,
To offer sighs and sobs, complaints and feaers,
And sweetly weep forth Elegiacke tears,
To blame thy Physic, and to vex their skill,
Which is profoundly mystical to kill.
And then with passion to excuse their part,
And say the Cherries killed thee, not their Art:
And truly wish that guilty cursed fruit,
May with the Apples curse, and figtrees suite.
That their Sodom increase black ashes be
Which more become a coffin, then a tree:
That they never come to ripenes, but be snatched
Away as green, as thou from him art caught.
Thus his divided soul, with grief and love
Strives still for new, his first thoughts to remove:
So to thy fortunes although he be Heir,
His heart and blacks alike sad Emblemes are.
But mourn no more, his soul was due long since,
And now vnbody'd for the Angels Prince:
The first borne Gods Heir is, rejoice he is gone,
For 'twas his justice to make him his own.
T. Triplet, Art. Bac.

WE that empty on thy Hearse,
Our passions in tears or verse,
Will not blame thy hasty Fate,
Nor say thou did not fill thy date
Of a just age, lest we deny
Thy virtue, her nativity:
And so by the untimely Lays,
Not Fate, but we abridge thy days.
If we search thy life's account,
It Is not to what thy years amount;
Nor calculated by thy youth,
But by thy virtues riper growth;
We judge a Circles excellence,
Not by the large Circumference,
But as the compass it does grace,
With an vndistorted pace.
No less of thy short race we say,
It Is drawn home the nearer way,
Passing until it met thy Fate
With an vnperuerted gate.
For carried with thy gravity,
What error could it drive awry?
No wonder it is, that often we know,
A new prepost'rous childhood grow
In such, as under that age shake,
Which their selves a burden make:
Let us wonder now we see
In Childhood, ages constancy:
And think he not untimely dyed,
In whom we saw this wonder tried;
We Will spare our passions, and our tears:
This has made up thy failing years.
VT possit cineri tanto par vrna parari,
Et mole inducta nobilis vrna premi,
Hic Dirces opus est, feretro succumbat alumnus,
Cuius non semel est sylua secuta chelyni.
Cantilletque melos, ad saxa cienda, canorum
Vnde tibi sterni forma supina potest.
Nullus populeo, lachrymata cortice, myrrha.
Subtili coelo marmora ficta linet,
Vrceolis nostris lachrymas fundemus, and inde
Coementum accipiet flebilis vrna suum.
Thomas Fowler, Art. Bac.

MAiori succumbit Atlas iam pondere coeli,
Et queritur sensisse nimis, miserique lacerti
Ceu tonitrus crepitant, illos dum turba tuarum
Virtutum concreta premit, dum mente Gygantem
Sustentant, and naturae compendia nostrae;
Hic habuit solus, quicquid possedimus omnes.
En quantum Eloquium frontis, ridentis ocelli
Blanditiae quantae, toto via lactea vultu
Spirauit. Non est e vino lacte papillae,
Linea coelestis, candore notabilis ipso,
His radijs facta est. Quam prodigiosa tumentis
Luxuria ingenij, stupefactos efficit omnes,
Incestatque fidem. Studio fallente laborem
Furtiue fruitur, semper tantum artis honesta
Arsit auaritia, and quaerenti haec defuit illi.
Diuinos artus macula dum fata profanant,
Ecce Medusaeo festinat praepete tristis
Sollicitusque Pater. Numen tibi nocte diurna
Indulget, dictatque vias. Quas vertis in vndas,
Diluuiem meditans, Jove iam nolente, secundam.
Contendit pro morte Pater, sibi vendicat aeuo:
O quam magnus amor, si haec sit discordia sola
Discordes habuisse metus: hic illius, ille
Huius Fata timet: Quaedam est victoria Patris,
Saepeque praemoritur: quaesi sollicitare petebat
Christum etiam in coelis, vt saluum redderet illum
Prodigio, sic sic istum valuisse deceret.
Io. Dawson, Art. Bac.

De variolis, quibus infestus obijt, and in morbum relapsu.
CVm Puer, hosce lues premeret vibicibus Artus,
Placatisque fores Stellio numinibus,
Non tulit illa suae natura pericula sortis,
Et repulit morbi versicoloris opus.
Conatus libuit modicos contemnere, donec
Constitit, heu, nimios delituisse dolos.
Parthica fraus morbi (nimis heu tibi Barbarus hostis)
Tela retro misit, plus nocuitque fuga.
Sic vitae strategema tuae tua Fata pararant:
(Te visae est Fatis vita parasse tuis)
Foelices animae, quarum consortia coelum
Ambit, vt haud pigeat composuisse dolos.
Conticet Ideaum iam tandem fabula raptum,
Repperit Achetypum cum Ganymedis amor.
Geo. Griffith, in Art. Bac.

I Cannot weep for grief, in men we prove
Tears to be Embleames but of childrens love:
Nor is it but bastard sorrow which we show,
When we on Funerals Cakes and Wine bestow
More thoughts, than on the buried, then alone,
When we not plumpe for tears, we truly moan.
So truly moan I thee, who, ere thou died,
At once were Natures, and thy Fathers pride.
Kings, Queens, and Princes of their Comets have
As Tragical forerunners of their grave:
The Sun it self, as in the West it stood
Vshring thy face, looked like a globe of blood,
Not two hours ere thou dyedst; and they say,
His frighted Orb would feign have run away,
Were not hedged in with Planets, three and three,
On either side, for feare't should be too free:
O that thy soul, like the Sun in his own Sphere,
Had still remained; then friends, without a tear,
Might both have seen, and hugged thee, then yet might
Oxford and Shelford have enjoyed their light.
But Fate preuents my wishes, and now see
Jove's Royal Bird, the souls first resedy,
Not naturally to heaven ascending,
But by Arts feigned miracle, pretending
A better flight: think how the other three,
Allied in Name and Consanguinity,
All Heirs deceased, do gratulate this one,
In making there a Constellation,
Like to Deltoton, which before might be
The Unhappy Dog-starre, 'cause there was but three.
But as from Phoenix ashes springs another,
So out of thine an Heir, a younger Brother.
But what is the comfort, when each Chair and Board,
Like breathing Ghosts, cry out their former Lord?
If that for freer Air, he chance to walk
Amongst the curled wood, trees seem to stalk.
Each thing renewes his brothers memory,
Or seems his brother: If the streams thereby
Whisper, he thinks they call him, straightway fears
And strives to make a greater flood with tears:
Perhaps the harmless flowers do kiss his feet,
He thinks they mock him, goes to the open street,
Where as he walks, believes each tongue and eye
To speak and look his Brothers destiny.
A Lethargie's on me, nor can I write
What Is Poet-like, while I conceive this spite
Of unjust Fortune, yet I cease to brawle:
A Satyr ill becomes a Funeral.
If ever it did thine, the Poets brain
Could never invent such a malignant strain
As fortune acts on thee, while thou prevent
The Dog-dayes Physic in deaths punishment:
Thy face may rebeget in the Mothers Womb,
A Monster framed of grief, whose living Tomb
Shall be the hearts of all that do lament
To see this Coffin, this Heirs Tenement.
I dare not cease, lest judged by my own fears,
To be as thrifty of my lines as tears;
Yet who respects them, stones do sweat and weep
Other men's sorrows, but when those that sleep,
Awake and know neglect of friends, they then
Will gratify more Marble stones then men.
But fear not thou, he that shall ever see
Thy Brothers shadow, sure will think it thee:
Thou live in him though dead, and as thou dyed,
Thou seem to dye in jest, so sweetly lied
Each color in his own place, feared to part
Thinking thou imitat'st a Players Art.
But now they are vanished, yet thou art not far,
A Planet here, above a fixed Star.
Thou, though an Heir, were but an earthly clod,
Yet Death has made thee more; an Heir with God.
Thomas Motershead, Art. Bac.

TErra, and sepulchrum, funus, and lachrymaebreues,
Et complementum quodque plebeiae necis
Procul recedant; fortis et doctus dolor
Emanet oculis, spiret and musam nisi
Totus virilis, plenus and dignus Deo.
Aeternitati, noster, atque vmbraepiae,
Litet Poeta, carminis vires sui
Hinc mutuetur hinc, quibus vitam dedit
Ipsum cadauer (melius ah daret sibi)
Sumus argumento docti, at and nobis tamen
Hoc istud aufers; victor at quare procul
Frater recedit? Mors in hunc vires suas
Experta, victa est, igitur in fratrem ruens
Pudore rubuit, and verecundo dolo
Intus recedens, occupat cordis sinum,
Et se fateri metuit; hinc audax for as
Egressus ipse est, addit and morbo suo
Cerasi ruborem, (cuius insidias ADAM
Non ipse fugeret) mortis and miro modo
Rubore nimto pallet ah tandem nimis.
Et ipse palles, spiritus tanquam duos
Animaret vnus, incipis primum mori,
Docesque natum, qui patrizauit nimis,
Nimiumque monstrat indolem promptam suam,
Leto vel ipso, gaudet and discens mori.
Campana magna sonuit and nato, and tibi,
Ambosque gemuit ipsa secreto tamen,
Horamque Nonam facta iam fallax boat,
Mortemque pariter, timuit hanc palam loqui.
Dormite tandem, non Magistratus opus
Autoritate est, ambulat tantum dolor;
Turgensque factus quisque iam lachrymis suis
Inebriatur, gemitus Epicuros facit.
Solare iam te, fortiter tandem gemas,
Solare coniugem, ecce qui vicit necem;
Spes germinantes, and reuiuentes duos
Vno videbis, corpore and mentem gerens
Geminatam in vno, fiet Henricus tibi
Fraterque and ipse, cerasa tam fratri mala
Labris in ipsis gestat, atque eius potest
Imago mortis esse, qui vitae volet.
Epitaphium.
HOc situs in tumulo est, pro quo lapis insitus illo
Marmoris in lachrymas quisque solutus erit.
Canus doctrina est, annis quam paruus! at istos
Quos natura negat tradidit ipse sibi.
Nobilitans stirpem virtutum soenore, and haeres
Patris opum merito, qui pietatis erat,
Occidit Oxonij, iacet hic; terrae ista gemiscit
Ereptum, quem sic haec habuisse dolet.
Debuit at luctus tam publicus esse, iacere
Vno non poterat tanta querela loco.
Posuit officij ergo Geor. Aglionby, Art. Bac.

Upon the untimely death of the Right Noble Gentleman, Master John Stanhope,
Son and Heir to the Right Honorable Philip Lord Stanhope, Baron of Shelford.
SO great, so good, and yet so soon to dye?
Sure, there was Godhead in's mortality,
Of which the greedy heavens, envying the earth,
Snatched to themselves, leaving to us a dearth
Of goodness, of virtue a mere penury;
Blasting the hope of an unstained family:
Unstained, and free from such grand villainies
Which poison Honor, he knew none of these
Hereditary evils, and crimes which some
As 'twere essential bring, even from their womb:
But like to Demigods, all his Progeny
Were good, and honest, innocent as he:
He, whose refined soul goodness alone
Ingrost, clayming each virtue as his own:
Who with his other-selfe did still appear,
Like to the Twins in heaven, and shone as clear;
No cloudy vice did e're eclipse their light,
They shone by day as the other do by night;
And as they were, so did they Brothers prove,
But not so much by Nature, as by Love.
Whose sharpest anger never did move their blood;
The strife was only which should be most good:
Thus curious Nature strove to show her Art
In these, giving two bodies, but one heart.
And such an heart which each would sacrifice,
To dry the tears flowing from eithers eyes.
Me thinks I see when one diseased lay,
The others love steal the disease away;
And when his sickness broke forth of the skin,
With what resolved love he struck it in,
To free his Brother, and to be sure at last
Rather then fail, he would perish by the taste
Of fruit enuy'ng his cheeks, seeming to be
The unhappy fruit of a forbidden tree.
By which perceiving death to hasten on,
He breathed out prayers with such devotion,
That his religious Father doubtful stood,
If he should live, or die, he died so good.
Whose blessed departure proved him thus to be,
Full ripe for heaven in his infancy.
Row. Crosbey, Art. Bac.

TO tell our loss, so well to each man known,
Were to lament our selves, not him that is gone:
That were to cry out help to those that lie
By the same grief dead to eternity.
Alas! that men may fully understand
Whom it is they lose, requires thy brain, thy hand.
But since the art gone, and we cannot relate
Thy worth so lively, yet let us imitate
Thy life, by one that is left us, for no other
So perfect is, as thou art in thy Brother.
For what thing was it, thou enioyd'st alive,
That thou did not impart or wholly give
Unto thy Brother, he again as true
Thought himself then most blessed, when most like you.
And of this love there ever was such show,
As it was thought they would have both died too.
Perchance he ate the Cherries, for to make
Himself red-colour'd for his brothers sake.
But O unhappy trial! they did prove
Too crafty far, for his well-meaning love.
Did we not lose enough when Adam fell
By thee, cursed Fruit? but thou must longer still
Produce our miseries, and when we are best,
By tempting one must murder all the rest.
Was he too good for Earth, and did heaven call
To have him there, so that he needs must fall?
If so, it is well; for it was equity,
Mankind and he by the same Fate should dye.
But though the art dead, thy memory suruiues,
And thy good deeds shall out-last others lives.
Guliel. Buckner, Art. Bac.

DEpositum (Stanhope) tuum (memorande) supremum,
Ipse pater patria concumulauit humo.
Nec licuit feretro nobis suspendere Carmen,
Nec Trentae lachrymas annumerare tuo.
Nostra tamen similes lacrymarum Nympha lacunas
Hauriet, and Trenta non minor Isis erit.
Weep, weep, your sorrows are well paid,
It Is a Stanhope here is laid,
You that see this Monument,
And cannot at this sight lament,
The conscious Marble will you show,
How to discharge your comely woe.
Either you may the occasion sit,
By melting into tears like it:
Or if you punish nor your eye,
By weeping, cause it fatally
Behold his Tomb, then may you moan,
By standing stupid, like the stone.
Yet both these sorrows are well paid,
It Is a Stanhope here is laid.
Guli. Treshans, Equitis Aurat. Filius.

IMmitis properare necem Libitina, potir^
Dum tanto exoptat coniuge, fata iubet.
Spiritus, ingenium, genius, decor oris, and ortus
Stemmata quem celebrant, aemula fatae prema ^^.
Indole maturum flos indolis abstulit, illum,
Dum numeraet lauds, quis negat esse senem?
Non aeui breuitate fuit fraudata tropaeis
Gloria, cum fuerit copia nulla nouis.
Laud viget, cuius fraterna videtur imago
Accipere and parili reddere fata vice.
In Canem coelestem: eo quod circa initium dierum Canicularium mortuus sit.

LEge nimis dura funebria iusta refer
Icarij cogis feruida stella canis.
Icaria peiora precor tibi fata ruina,
Dum tua sic lachrymas sorbet anhela sitis.
Betrus Tryon, Armig. Fill. not. max.

In Variolarum luem qua interijt.
HOc Iuuemem placido decus immortale Sepulchro
Aspice, qui viuens immaculatus erat.
Dixissem si non fera Mors, morbique perosi
Polluerant, moriens immaculatus erat.
Ah Laethi crudele genus, cum tetrica vultus
Abstulit, and tenero saeuit in ore lues!
Dulcia deformes ederunt oscula morbi,
Nec data sunt auido pura labella rogo.
Tam celeri si saeua gradu ventura fuissent,
Nonne alia poterant fata venire via?
Sed Mors saeua decus properauit perdere vultus,
Ne posset duras flectere forma Deas.
It Is not Nobility that is of force,
To stop the Progress of this Tyrants course;
Nor mortal can unto himself assume
A spark of time, when Fate has past her doom.
So frail are all Earths momentary things;
That Death a Tribute claims of greatest Kings:
But Death has had her pay, and he his Crown,
Where neither Death can strike, nor Fate can frown.
Gul. Pennyman Armig. filius natu max. Ex Aede Christi.

Were not that daily spectacles deny
A difference between Nobility
And other Pigmy Mortals, good and bad,
The old and young, we just occasion had,
Of admiration, when we do behold
Thee so good, young, and noble, under mould.
But when the Graves and Sepulchers we view,
We turn our admiration from you,
Not wondering that a life so short you led,
But that our selves have spun so large a thread
Of our Mortality, when all places see
Some dye continually; so that we
Need draw our neuer-discontinued tears
Unto the Period of our latest years.
Here one falls sick, and dies, and there another;
Grief for whose death, kills, perhaps, his Brother,
Father, or Mother: so it fared with thee:
For not thou only, but a Family
Did seem in thee to die, for lo, thy Father,
Secure of any worse mishap, had rather
Suffer himself some peril, than that death
Before his coming, should cloze up thy breath.
He comes, and iourneying thrice with humble knee
Falls to the Earth, yet being utterly
Insensible of this, through the great fire,
Kindled by Love, obtains his desire.
Thy Mother, fearing that thy hour was come,
Strives to bring forth another in thy room;
And so with motherly compassion, loath
To lose the one, endangereth you both.
Thy Brother of thy Fortune aemulous,
Strives to prevent thee, whose ingenuous
Love and good will to thee did then appear,
When thy last hour did show he held thee dear.
He feign to heaven would thy forerunner be,
And there provide place for himself and thee.
Wherefore he often offers willingly,
Ransom to pay for thy delivery;
And on condition thou may here remain,
Dies often, but denied, reuiues again
To his great grief; at last, when naught would do,
Cries out, and says, Shall we be parted too?
It Is true, you must a while, yet weep no more,
Since all your tears will not his life restore:
Then since your weeping cannot recall him gone,
Wail not his death, seek to prevent your own.
Ad defuncti fratrem.
DEfunctus foret ipse sibi tantae indolis haeres.
Si possent iustae flectere fata preces.
Sed Natura negat: cui munera tanta relinquet,
Cum nuda Elysios vmbra pererret agros?
Deuouet haec fratri: hunc haeredem ex ass reliquit,
Quem socium tantae Nobilitatis habet.
Viue tibi and fratri, duplicem sortitus honorem
Sisque haeres illi moribus ingenio.
Thomas Ballowe, Alumnus.

AN Heir, and dead? must some erected Tomb
Cloze in the bowels of an earthly womb,
Stanhopes great Heir? must it a Trophy be
Of his decease? boast we in misery?
Are these the Lands that he was borne unto?
To lie dead in some Ephrons Field of woe?
O tell me, Death, why is he turned to dust?
Will thou plead Fates decree, and cry, He must?
Is thy best reason a necessity,
Or grounded Maxim in Philosophy?
He was not old, for age he did not dye,
Nor was the only cause Mortality:
This was the chiefest reason he deceast,
Thy hunger was ingenuous, and to feast
Was thy desire, thou't not pick the bone
Of some Anatomy or Skeleton:
As for a Carcass hanging in the Air,
Half eaten up by Time, thou do not care.
The Worms are Epicures, whose envious strife,
Deuoures that Carcass that had given them life;
Nor can I blame them that they so do eat,
Though he is a Course, yet is he dainty meat.
Eduard. Price, Alumnus.

I Think it is a policy in Death,
To take the young, and spare the aged breath.
Nature's the bane of old men; Times decree
Sends them a packing; Death, they need not Thee;
Thou only seru'st to crop our tender years,
To draw from Parents eyes abortiue tears;
Thou letst them live, their children take away,
Knowing that sorrow will be their decay;
But Death, pale, envious Death! how could thou find
Out the sweet picture of so pure a mind?
Me thinks, although thy bloody Dart were steeled
With thy sad purpose; yet it must needs yield,
To see the Father melting into tears,
His sad acquaintance, and his Brothers fears;
Who sent as many sighs unto the Pole,
As might have made, or else excused a soul.
The Room mournd where he lay, the weeping stones
Joined with his friends in their relenting mones.
Death migt have well mistaken, being sent
For one, to see so many that ways bent;
The Father three times offered to have paid
Himself for his Sons ransom; had Death stayed
His hasty hand, he had found many more
That had bin fitter to have paid this score.
Alas, he was but in the blossom yet
Of tender years, though aged for his wit:
He had some insight into every Art,
That to Nobility might add a part:
His Parents reapt as much joy from his spring,
As many childrens Harvest home does bring.
But he is fled away to pass the time
He owed to us, in a far better Clime:
There shall his Summer and his Harvest be,
Where he shall never any Winter see.
Then, Parents, grieve no more; for he is in joy;
Doubt not; wipe yours; his tears are wiped away.
Death tells me, he was old enough to die,
And young enough to live eternally.
Geruase Warmstrey, Alumnus.

WHat fatal book is this, which does declare,
That Noble Stanhop's house has lost her heir?
A Sermon preached at Shelford! ah, tisso,
Stanhope is laid in Earth, these lines of woe,
Demonstrate he is dead: yet stay, were he,
Oxford would put on sorrows livery,
Each College mourn in ashes, every Hall
Look like the Emblem of a Funeral.
Christ-church would sink in ruin, were he gone,
On whom she built her hopes foundation.
Dullness has seaz'd upon me: can I read
That virtue's slain, yet judge not Stanhope dead?
Between which two there was such league, that o^
Could not subsist, the other being gone.
In Churches why should Death triumph, and be
Hanging up Banners of her victory?
What siege of Honor has she won? Is It all,
That she has paid to Fate one Funeral?
And that of feeble youth? young Stanhope dies,
'Cause else she knows not where to tyrannize.
It had been Justice, if some hoary head
Had felt this deadly dart and perished.
To be unjust, is Death's just attribute:
For she did murder him, not execute.
But why should we her murders thus relate?
Death's but the Executioner of Fate.
Fate was to blame, whose too too greedy hand
Did break his thread of life, as loath to stand
The leisure for to cut it with her sheeres,
And so at once robbed him of many years.
This is not all: his theft's far greater yet,
In robbing him, Fate robbed us all of wit.
For Stanhope might have lived a work to raise,
Which might from Sydney's Temples pluck the Bays,
At least have equaled him: such hopes his brain
Did promise to the world to bring again.
But we have lost him: strangers which but hear
How good he was, are forced to shead a tear;
Well may his Father say, he is undone,
He only knew the worth of such a Son:
Let others think it strange that grief should be,
As bold as death to work a Tragedy;
Thrice did his Father sound, as if his Ghost
Would take a Farewell of his son that is lost;
Yet where is your wonder here? at such a sight
I would not think it strange to die outright.
So would he, but one Death cannot suffice
TO express his grief, therefore he after dies,
And could his sorrow quit his son from Death,
He Would never leave to grieve, whilst he had breath.
Will. Hemmings, Alumnus.

TRiste onus Hexaphori, moestaeque Epicedi^ turbae,
Inuitant lachrymas ore madente pias;
Occidit alma Hebe, patris spes, gloria fratrum,
Qui partu primus, funere primus erat:
Vendicat hanc Natura, hanc moesta Academia prolem,
Arsque suam petit hanc, Nobilitasque suam,
Laurea cum moesca certat numerosa Cupresso,
Charta istos cineres, et leuis vrna petunt:
Sed de virgineo ne sit discordia vultu,
Mors citius praedam vendicat atra suam:
Igne crepent gemmae, Domini noctescit ocellus,
Huic gemmae nusquam gemma superstes erit
Pingues, quos tantum capiti modo sparsit, odores
Iam caput, et plantas, corpus, et omne linant,
Sed tamen vnguento meliori funera lauit,
Dum soluit nimijs imbribus ora parens,
At toti lachrymae non suffecere dolori;
Pars erat in vultu; plus tamen intus erat,
Quid miserande Pater langues, animoque liquescis?
Cur fugit exanimis, membra supina cruor?
Siste Pater gemitus, et vitae parce ruenti,
Vitam non satis est huic tribuisse semel?
Pace tua valiant manes, permit quietem,
Et praeter famam, murmura nulla sonent;
Manibus Augustis non pandit Cerberus aulam,
Iam canis aethereus regnat, and astra parat.
In Eundem.
HIc and splendidius decus Parentu^,
Orta and stemmate nobili propago,
Funestum posuit cito cadauer,
Et compagine spiritus soluta,
Languentis male corporis fauillae
Extincta est. Lachrymas mouent sorores
Et moestae Tragico sonant boatu,
Dum Parcea indociles fauore flecti
Primae stamina dissecant iuuentae:
Quis non exequijs liquescat istis
Et fati scelus improbet seueri?
Sed fundant Tetricae minas sorores,
Non condet Libitina saeua Famam;
Vita perfruitur beatiori,
Extentoque diu superstes aeuo,
Vitam artis trahit, and sepulchra ridet.
O pectus iuuenis Vale quietum:
Solennes feretri rogos superbi,
Dum plaudit famulante musa cantu,
Et coetus iuuenum modestiorum.
O sit terra tibi leuis. (Precamur)
Terrae tam leuis ante, qui fuisti.
Franciscus Minne, Alumnus.

ANne ego te Iuuenem (Stanhope) putabo Senemue?
Cuius verna dies, gloria cana fuit!
Cuius and in decima vix quinta aestate senectus
Imperat, and puerum non puerum esse sinit?
Sic non iustus eras, non fortis, doctus ad Annos:
Sed potuit virtus praecipitare dies;
Non data longa tibi est, facta est longissima vita:
Nec viuendo breuis, sed moriendo fuit.
Johannes Done, Alumnus.

NObilis atque sagax, properae virtutis alumnus;
Et patris, and patriae gloria prima suae,
Occidit impubis; raptus trieteride quinta;
Eheu, quam Parcas iam rapuisse pudet!
Videre vt multa canum virtute sorores,
Crediderant, viridis qui fuit, esse senem.
DEATH; alas, could none but he
Suffice thy greedy Tyranny?
Well thou know that thousands more
Long have run upon thy score;
And with all humility,
Yield themselves as due a fee.
Thy subtle cruelty is spide,
Whilst in one a thousand died:
Had thou taken Achilles Dart,
Struck, and then released that smart;
Thou had done well: Once or twice
It was thy sport to let him rise
Out of his Bed: Now he strayed
Too far with thee, now he stayed.
So Apollo slew his friend
Hyacinthe against his mind,
Whilst the Quoit that he had thrown,
Smote his gentle Play-mate down.
Grieve not then for him that is gone,
See; Death's sorry for what is done:
Let no cries oppress your ears,
Dry, O dry distilling tears;
What though honor, virtue, grace,
Though Nobilty of race,
By the fatal Dart does lie
Subject to Mortality?
Let it not torment your mind
See the Picture's left behind:
His Brother, modest, mild, as he,
Does in virtue most agree.
Ask not for them both together,
This alone may pass for either.
Martinus Tynley, Alumnus.

Here, though his spotless span-long life be spent,
Are silent steps to show where goodness went.
Nature did in such rare compleatnesse make him,
To show her Art, and so away did take him.
For he was only to us wretches lent
For a short time, to be our President.
Goods we inherit daily, and Possession,
O that in goodness were the same succession.
For then before his soul to Heaven he breathed,
He had to each of us a part bequeathed
Of his true wealth: and closing thus his eyes,
Would have enriched his Sex with legacies.
Sebastian Smith, Alumnus.

ANd is he dead? Immortal creature! thou
Whom the proud heavens sport to immantle now!
Was Death ambitious? must he seize on thee
In the Alphabet of thy mortality?
Did he overtake thy life? and wast thou got
In ripeness to be man, when thou wast not?
A steadfast conscience well might shake to see
Virtue at such a pitch, as'twas in thee,
Untimely cropped. Thy predecessors lie
In marble, not to teach thee Heraldry:
Virtue gave thee thy name, and made thee be
Unto thine own self, thine own pedigree.
When thou did live, thou well did purify
The dross of sin with pious Alchymy;
And in thy time, no Latinist was he,
That declined Virtue by the name of She.
Sorrow and tears now fit a blubberd eye,
'Twas grief, to think that thou should ever die.
Eclipse thy self, O thou Diaphanous Light,
Let sable darkness canopied in Night,
Baptize thee thoroughly: draw and suck up here
Such Sublunarie moisture to thy Sphere,
That, with a pious prodigy, thy beams
May transubstantiate themselves to streams,
And bear a part in Sorrow: should thou shine,
We should have an Eclipse, although not thine:
Until his Constellation appears,
And dries the fertile moisture of our tears:
It Is this we thirst for: thirst still ravish us,
We will not grieve to be Hydropique thus.
Vitam relinquis, frueris antequam plena:
An ideo tantum veneras, vt exires?
Thomas Brown, Com.

HVnc quod surripuit mortis lex saeua, Deosne
Creditis iratos? fuit hoc sapientia, amorque;
Numen tam sacrum superi inuidere nefandis,
Tantus inest animis coelestibus ardor amoris.
Vt te mors perdat (numen mortale) rogauit
Matris opem, tantum haud potuit deuincere sola:
En ipsam mortem inualidam, viresque petentem
Alterius, mortis non sufficit vna potestas.
Sed victus tandem es, dudum statione peracta,
Excepit gaudente polo te regia coeli.
Viue illic igitur, subiectaque sydera calca,
Dulce onus Atlanti, tam grato pondere presso
Inuidisse iuuat, luctus haec vna voluptas.
Non satis in paruas tibi mors saeuire tabernas?
Nobilium turres ambitiosa petis?
Improba, coniunctosne iuuat seiungere fratres,
Quos solum possis corpore, mente nequis.
Te nimis angustam nostrae sensere querelae,
Tu sola in nostram non satis inuidiam.
Heu quid iam superest? fatis nolentibus ipsis,
Nitemur nomen deripuisse rogis:
In chartis ipsis accrescet gloria, quodque
Dij nollent, ipsi carmina nostra dabunt.
Nil opus est tumulo, hunc erexit propria virtus,
Illi cuiusuis pectus erit tumulus.
Eduardus Cluues, Commensalis.

OVtinam possent imitari carmina luctus
Fraternos, feretro vt sint ea digna tuo:
Non illo melius quisquam lugere, tuoue
Quis poterat fato nobiliore frui.
Inuidiosa alijs haec gloria mortis, eritque
Talis abhinc luctus ambitiosus honor.
Euan. Seys, Commensalis.

Is It the reward of virtue to become,
The subject of untimely Martyrdom?
No sooner can we put on honesty,
But grimme death darts at our mortality.
Did not death lately act this tragic part,
In butchering the innocentest heart,
That he ere hit? who being truly good,
Thought virtue made him nobler then his blood.
TO was but the wit of death to kill him now
In's infancy, when like a tender bough,
He might him this or that way bend at pleasure;
Had he prorogued his end, and lent him leisure,
To nurse his freeborn virtues, sturdy death
Had not with ease sucked out his vital breath.
Though young in years he was, yet old in good,
To show, that goodness not in old age stood:
His age and body told us he was young,
His courage, proved him old, and witty tongue.
TO was not one combat with our enemy,
(Which like grass mowes down our mortality)
That could subdue his courage, he had two,
To show, that more then mortals he could do.
When it was supposed from us he was departed,
He straight revived (and so seemed double hearted)
And strongly set on death: but after sent
His forward soul to the heavenly regiment.
Yet his Ghost walks, his heir of what was good,
His living Sepulcher, by whose hot blood
Our tears dry up: in this rejoice we may,
That partial death took not them both away.
Et moritur virtus? hoc viuida Musa negauit.
Hic iacet ille suis qui vidit saecula cunis,
Grandeuusque puer: quem sat vixisse Sorores
Senserunt, cum vix tentasset uiuere; tantis
Noster abundauit virtutibus alter Apollo.
Sacratos cuius cineres licet haec breuis vrna
Contineat, vix terra animam, caeliue tenerent.
Non rabidae mortis tormentum hebetaret amorem,
Qui castam effundens animam, sic voce locutus,
Viue tuo, frater, nostro quoque tempore viue.
Henry Pastilew, Alumnus.

Upon the Measels.
WHy did our Ancestors in former time,
Account it for a grand detected crime,
To feed on Swines-flesh? What great work might be
The cause of that so strange Antipathie?
Could that commanding Miracle you know
Amongst the Gadarens, amaze them so?
Would that same stiffe-neck'd race, for such a sight,
Torture their stomach and their Appetite?
'Twas not the Beast they loathed, her durty hair
Could not pollute her flesh, nor did they care
Where she did wallow last, but surely these
Abhorred them first for that corrupt disease
They still inherit; and this cause alone,
May well excuse their superstition.
Sure, were thy sickness and disease but known,
And how thou diedst of their infection,
They would be cursed even now, and wished the fate
That those two thousand had; nay men would hate
Their very name; And this unhappy news
It were enough to make us all turn Jews.
JOHN STANHOPE Anagrama. NO HOPE IN HAVE.
Haste spoileth hope whilst after hope he flies,
Haste gives the fall, and here on ground he lies.
Will. Kitchen, Commen.

De tempore Comitiorum OXONIENSIVM in quibus mortuus est.
FAllax vita hominis, nimisque fallax;
Quidni fabula? quae breuis, minuta est,
Quae toto tenet, occupatque cursu
Actus quinque sed OPTIMIS negatos.
Quaenam istud noua crimen execrandum
Parcis addita Parca perpetrauit?
Aut quo? quo properas Amor Parentum
Phoebo pulchrior and sorore Phoebi?
Eheu! fabula, quae breuis, minuta,
Festinata tibi est: tibi merenti
Cornicis vetulae quater senectam;
Interrupta tibi est; and in * secundo
Actu (non rediturus) exijsti.
Hen. Elsynge, Armig. Fill. natu max. Commensalis.

STanopum prima rapuit mors atra iuventa,
Delicias vestri (turba novena) chorj.
Si quem forte mori vetuerunt carmina Musae,
Nunc venam and vires Castalis vnda probet.
Qui desunt vitae numerentur laudibus anni
Sic fiet manes, and sine morte cimis.
Dic quibus in terris coelum capit vrna? Stanopi
Hac qua part iacet mersa fauilla. sapis.
Quid parios lapides and marmora sacra paratis?
Quem nemo deflet, Pyramid ista decet,
Stillant Heliades, stillant Electra Camaenae,
Vt tegat exanimem succina gemma cutem.
Sic decuit clarum tumnlo lucere Stanopum
Qui vixit nostrae Sydus honosque togae.
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Io. Wall, Sa. The. Dr. ex Aed. Chapter

Of the transportation of his Corpse from Oxford to Shelford in a Coach.
HEre Charon Coachman, gently waft from Thames
To Trent, this Body: iog him not; he dreams
Now of Eliah's Chariot, and a Pair
Of Angels drawing him along the Air,
In stead of Horse. Innocence may not feel
The Justice of a Purgatory wheel.
I prithee use him gently: I resign
Into ^hy hands a thing, that whilst 'twas mine,
Deserved the curt'sie, if thou had pau'd the way
(...) boughs or rushes; as the Jews, the day
(...) he Passion, did entertain
(...) ^erusalem, for him home again.
(...)n, go before, let us divide
(...) ranks, and I will ride
(...)rd; now or never we go
Unto ou^ (...) Pi^grimage of woe:
For we do(...) all: He that shall ask
Me who is dea^, does put me to a Task
I cannot answer well; yet, if we know
Effect by Cause, and demonstration show
A necessary Consequence; I guess,
The King, not's Father, had the loss, no less,
(If the Nativity be cast of's breeding)
Honor can follow so direct Proceeding.
Were I not tongue-tide, or some reference
Muzled my Pen from telling of the sense
Of this young Mystery, I could read who
Remembered God in's youth, and never knew
How to run out in Oxford, nor the expense
Of Sin or Money, 'les 'twere to dispense
Unto the Poor. You that dispute the Case
Of Man's Salvation, thinking it a grace
To use a neat distinction, learn to do
Of him, that learned the Theorie of you.
Hark, the Bells ring, away, peace doleful sound,
Let us enjoy our woes, do not confound
Still Passions with loud Music: yet ring on,
Help to make up solemn Procession,
Now is Rogation week. Here Oxford ends:
And here Northamptonshire: Lester extends
It self unto this Bridge, and then we be
Riding along in Notingham: A Tree,
Though young, yet withered, did distinguish one;
Another was distinguished by a Stone,
Fit for an Epitaph. Here I sowed a Tear,
Which I will reap again when I come there.
Thus every thing's an Enblem that we see,
To represent to us our misery.
The poor o'th Parishes accompany
Us in our Progress, and as loud do cry
Unto, as for the dead: and some in love
Drown their Religion, calling God above,
(As if the dead their Prayers did avail)
To bless the Burden that we go withal.
Thus we found pity, though we found no ease;
And Traveling will seldom bring release.
For Care will be a Horseman. Now I Have grieved
Threescore and ten, to Shelford, and have lived
The date of Man in Miles; the surplusage,
Like David's, is a trouble, not an Age.
I. Hodsdon.
FINIS.

