THE HAVEN-FINDING ART, Or THE WAY TO FIND any Haven or place at sea, by the
Latitude and variation. Lately published in the Dutch, French, and Latin
tongues, by commandment of the right honorable Count Mauritz of Nassau, Lord
high Admiral of the united Provinces of the Low countries, enioyning all Seamen
that take charge of ships under his jurisdiction, to make diligent observation,
in all their voyages, according to the directions prescribed herein: And now
translated into English, for the common benefit of the Seamen of England.

Imprinted at London by G. B. R. N. and R. B. 1599.

TO THE RIGHT Honorable Charles Earl of Notingham, Baron Howard of Effingham,
knight of the noble Order of the Garter, Lord high Admiral of England, Ireland,
Wales, etc. And her Majesty's Lieutenant, and Captain general over all her
subjects, levied in the South parts of this Realm, etc.
RIght Honorable, being informed by my learned friend and most earnest and
effectual furtherer of Navigations for the common good of his country M.
Richard Hackluit, upon the dedication of his first volume of discoueries unto
your Lor. about a year since, of the singular affection your Lor. bears
toward the advancement of knowledge and skill among our seamen in marine
causes; so far forth that to the end they might be the more stirred up and
helped this way, your Lor. would not only be a mean unto her Majesty for the
establishing of an ordinary Lecture to be read for their instruction, but also
rather then so good a purpose should fall to the ground would be at some
charges your self for the bringing of it to effect: I conceived no small
comfort upon this report, considering that now of late, the right honorable
Count Maurice of Nassaw, L. high Admiral of the united Provinces of the low
countries has showed himself wholly to be of your Lor. mind, thinking it a
most principal point for the welfare of their estate to have their mariners now
entering into long voyages to be better informed in matters concerning their
faculty, the^ heretofore they have been. To which end he has lately caused a
certain exhortatory iniunction to be published, and has also given
commandment that the same should be diligently observed by all masters of
ships and their companies within the same Provinces. By observation whereof they
may have a more certain and compendious way, whereby they may guide themselves
to come to any place they shall desire at sea, with a streighter course, and in
shorter time then has bin commonly accustomed: Which way is to be found by
knowledge of the latitude and variation of the place whereto they purpose to go.
For seeing one and the same place has always the same latitude and variation,
whereof the one shows what situation the place has between North and South,
the other between East and West, it cannot be but that the master of the ship
bringing himself to the latitude and variation of the place to which he
purposes to go, must needs bring himself to the same place also.

Considering therefore how great profit might hereby redound to seamen if the
variations of all places were truly known, the said Count Maurice has given
commandment to all that shall take charge of ships, that before they set
forth, they should provide themselves meet instruments for that purpose, that
into what place soever they shall come, they may diligently search out the
declination of the magneticall needle from the true North (which they commonly
call the variation of the Compass) and that after their return into their own
country they should give a true certificate of those observations to the rest
of their colleagues and companies of the Admiralty, that by them they may be
brought into some good order and method, and so be published for their common
good. Desiring also as it may appear to stir up other nations to the same
care and diligence in observing the variation, he has caused the said
iniunction to be published, not only in his own native tongue, but in the
French and Latin also: intending (as it may seem hereby) to make not only it,
but also his honorable desire in furthering this observation commonly known to
all Christendom. Desiring therefore, according to the measure of my small
ability, to be a furtherer of so good a purpose of so famous a personage, I
have done mine endeavor to make the same known to all English mariners, by
publishing the foresaid Iniunction in their mother tongue: nothing doubting,
but as they have not been inferior to any nation, either for excellency of
skill, or felicity in performance of their most wonderful Nauigations, and
that principally in this most happy time of your Lor. enjoying your most
honorable office of high Admiralty: So, if it might please your Lor. to give
them to understand that your Lor. would be very loath that English mariners
(whom I have known to have had the skill, to find out places at sea by the
latitude and variation, after the same manner that is prescribed in this book,
more then ten years since) should now (either for too much sparingnes in not
preparing, or for want of diligence in heedful using meet instruments for that
purpose) cast themselves behind the Netherlanders; there may assured hope be
conceived, that they will not only not come behind, but far exceed, and go
beyond them, or any other nation. And so much the rather there is reason to
induce us to be of this opinion, because there has been a secret of the
magneticall needle first revealed by our countriman M. Rob. Norman, whereof
other nations as yet seem to be ignorant, I mean the falling of the North end
of the needle touched with the loadstone under the horizon. Of which newfound
property if there shall be diligent and continual observation made, especially
in long voyages, there may in all likelihood no less profit arise thereby then
by the variation.

Considering therefore how greatly your Lor. authority, yea inclination or beck
only might prevail to move the minds of all English mariners to the
diligent, heedfull, and continual observation of these so rare and wonderful
properties of the magneticall needle, at all places wheresoever they shall
come, whereby so great profit may assuredly redound not only to seamen, but
even to the whole body of the Christian commonwealth: I was imboldened,
recounting with my self your Lor. exceeding clemency conjoined with so high
authority to bring before your most honorable presence this Dutch Pilot (as it
were, for so I may not unfitly call this book) whom since his arrival here I
have only taught to speak English that so he might be the more serviceable
unto your Lor. and to all English seame^ in that he professes, which is to
bring them to any place in the main Ocean, by a shorter course, then has been
accustomed. Wherein because the renowned Count Maurice his master has given
him so great credit, as to command him to be employed by all that take charge of
ships under his office of admiralty, may it therefore please your L. to afford
him the favor as to commend him to all English masters to be thoroughly
examined by due trial of exact observation in all places at sea; to the end
that if he shall be found indeed to perform so much as he promises (whereof
there is given exceeding great hope by proof already made by some of our
skilfullest English nauigators) he may for ever after be received with
enterteinme^t worthy so notable service.

Thus nothing doubting that this Dutch Pilot so highly commended by so worthy a
personage, shall find such favorable acceptance at your L. hands, as in your
Lor. high wisdom to him duly appertains: I most humbly beseech the Lord of
all Lords to increase your Lor. with all true honor in this life, and with
endless bliss in that life which shall last for ever. 23. Aug. 1599.

Your Lordships most humble to be commanded. E. Wright.

TO THE Worshipful M. Richard Poulter the Master, and brotherhood of Trinity
house, and to all English Mariners and seamen in general that love the
perfection of their own profession, health and happiness.
Having dedicated this little Book to the Right Hon. the Lord high Admiral of
England, to whom the government of sea causes next under her Majesty chiefly
appertains (with whom also it has found such favorable acceptance as of so
honorable a personage might be justly expected) I thought it meet in the next
place to commend the same to your Worcester. society also, as to them who have best
occasion in your so manifold nauigations to make most plentiful and sufficient
trial thereof, and to whom it may assuredly do most necessary and profitable
service. But least you should stand in doubt of this my commendation, the Right
Honorable Count Maurice, Lord high Admiral of the united Provinces of the Low
Countries, has not only commended the same to all Masters of ships and their
companies (or brotherhoods as we may call them) that are under his
jurisdiction; but has also commanded them to make diligent and continual
observation in all their voyages, according to the directions prescribed
herein. He also, as not content that the fruit which may spring here of should
be contained within the narrow bounds and compass of the Low Countries, has
caused this book to be translated into the French and Latin tongues:
endeavoring as it may seem hereby to make the same known to all nations in
Christendom. Amongst whom as the Latin translatour M. Hugo de Groot has
chosen the Venctians for their excellency in Navigations (as he conceiueth) to
whom he might especially dedicate this small Volume together with his own
labor in translating the same: So I thought it meet to make choice of your
worshipful society, whom I take to be nothing at all inferior to the
Venetians either for excellency of skill, or for use and experience in that
faculty: and to whom I may more justly commend this little Book, even almost
with the same words which Hugo de Groot uses to the Venetians as follows.

Therefore that we may enter a little more deeply into the matter, Aristotle
the wittiest of all philosophers and the most famous Lawyers do witness that
all arts were found, out of the necessity of man's nature, that what is
wanting in one, might be supplied by that which is abounding in another: and
that because every country yields not all things, there might be a mutual
exchange of one thing for another by way of merchandise. But now because
diverse countries are very far distant each from other, that there can be no
carriage of any wares or merchandise from the one to the other, either on
beasts backs or in carts: the art of Navigations was therefore invented, that
the sea might supply the want of dry land. Yet surely skillful nature has done
all this in vain, if a certain way how to sail cannot in some sort be found,
but that mariners must be constrained to make their voyages doubtfully not
knowing what course to keep. Therefore the ancient nauigators (thinking not
without cause that there was great affinity between Astronomy and
Navigations) directed all their course by the stars, the Sidonians by the
lesser bear which is the certainer, the Grecians by the greater which is the
clearer. But because neither star truly showed the North part of the world,
they were oftentimes deceived in their conjectures: and because the night is
not always so clear that those stars may be seen, if the sky were at any
time ouercast they had no means whereby they might know which way they ought to
guide themselves. Hereof it comes that in ancient authors oftentimes, and in
many places we see the mariners complaining of the darkness of the nights, and
that the greatest and most famous nauies have been dispersed and discomfited,
by reason of the uncertainty of these things.

But assuredly it seems to be so ordained by nature, that all things should
not be brought to light at one time: but that after a long continuance of times
the certainty of things should be known. There is a stone which for the
exceeding great strength thereof is called Herculeus, that is the stone of
Hercules, and because it draws iron unto it, is by the Grecians called (...),
commonly it is called by the name of him that first found it, Magnes, that is
the Magnete or Lodestone. For it appears out of Nicander and Pliny, that
one Magnes found it sticking to a sharp pointed piece of iron. After a great
number of years a new property of that stone was reueiled, that being rubbed
upon iron, or rather upon steel, it would make the same point to the North.
Therefore when by this marvelous pointing the mariners knew the North, and
over against it the South, and making account by the elevation of the pole they
learned also the latitude: then they had (as it was thought) means sufficient
of infallible direction how to guide themselves at all times. But neither did
this joy (as many times it comes to pass) continue long. For when they
sailed from the East westwards, the Loadstone was found by little and little to
decline from the North; which thing struck no small doubtfulnesse and
uncertainty into the mariners minds. Yet now at the length, by long
observation of the declinations of the loadstone that have been diligently
sought out in diverse places and times, the matter is brought to that issue,
that they which are most skillful in the Mathematics, and amongst them the
said Count Maurice of Nassau, have supposed that this declination of the
Loadstone happens not by chance, but is caused by some certain reason in
nature, that according to the variety of places the pointing of the needle
should also vary.

Wherefore the said Count Maurice sent this exhortatorie iniunction (for so I
may call this little book written by his Mathematician Steuinius) to them that
take charge of ships, that if these things were not found in all points to be
so as his observation imports, they should do so much as in them lay, that
out of diverse experiments some certain reason and rule of the variation might
be gathered: which if it may by diligent observation be obtained, then there
shall not only be a more certain way to know the course from place to place
by the instrument made to find the variation (of which way more shall be
spoken in the book it self) but the longitude also, or rather the effect of
the longitude shall be given by the variation; which thing also shall be showed
more at large in the Treatise it self following. Because therefore it is
certain that this knowledge cannot otherwise be found but by the experiments
of diverse men compared together, and that by diverse observations a more easy
way may be prepared for science (which from the particulars arises up unto the
universal) I thought good to present unto you this iniunction of the worthy
Count Maurice, that if you (which are most expert in Navigations) be of opinion
that there may be so great profit of this matter as we (which think it to
appertain to the principal state of the commonwealth) you might do your
best endeavor unto what place soever you shall come (taking with you needful
instruments for that purpose) to observe diligently the variation of the
magneticall needle, that at length we may come to that certainty, that they
which take charge of ships may know in their nauigations to what latitude and
to what variation (which shall serve in stead of the longitude not yet found)
they ought to bring themselves, that by this means they may assuredly find
what place soever they will in the midst of the maine Ocean sea. And although
this be the end for which principally this Book was made, notwithstanding we
make no doubt that there may many more be found no less profitable then this;
of which sort is that which we of late have found, which may also be of very
great profit unto us: To wit, that when any navy (for which cause our
commonwealth has obtained exceeding great renown) is prepared against the
enemy, a certain place may be appointed in the midst of the sea, into which
(if perchance too great a force should come upon them unlooked for) all the
ships after a certain time might assemble themselves. Whereto I may also
adioyne a third use of the variation, that is, the reforming of many errors
which must needs be in the ordinary sea-charts, because the coasts of all
countries and the courses from place to place, have been set down in them by
direction of the varying compass, without abateme^t or allowance answerable to
the variation; whereof there must needs follow much deformity and confusion in
many parts of the chart, especially where the variation is great, as it is upon
the coast of Newfoundland; where the variation being two whole points of the
compass (as it is reported) there must needs be so much error also in laying
out all the sea coast of that country, and in the courses of all places near
adjoining in the ordinary sea charts. All which errors may be amended, if the
variations be first truly observed, and then abated from, or allowed to the
courses of all places, as need shall require.

But the variation cannot serve to so great use as otherwise it might, except
other errors also as well in the chart, as in other instruments and means of
navigations be also avoided. For the chart as it has been hitherto generally
made with right-lined rumbes and degrees of latitude every where equal, must
needs be very erroneous, especially in the Northern parts thereof, that
although all the foresaid errors arising by the variation were corrected, yet
for this cause only you may be deceived one, two, yea three whole points of
the compass, in the courses of many places: and in measuring the distance you
may err one half, yea three quarters and more sometimes, accounting the same
to be twice, yea thrice greater then indeed it is, especially in far
Northerly nauigations. If therefore these so notorious errors be not also
amended, the correction of the errors arising by the variation, cannot be to so
great purpose as otherwise it might.

Neither can that be so fully performed which in the Treatise following is
chiefly intended (that is, to find any place at sea by the variation and
latitude) except the means that have been used for finding the latitude be
also amended. For in observing the height of the sun and stars, with the
small crosse-staues which are most usual for that purpose, there may be error
of half a degree, and more sometimes by neglect of the parallax or
eccentricity of the obseruers eye. The Regiments or Tables of declination of
the sun that have been most commonly used by English mariners do err often
times ten, eleven, or twelve minutes. The rule of allowances and abatements to
be added to, or subtracted from the height of the pole-starre for finding the
height of the pole (being grounded upon a false position, to wit, that the
pole-starre is three degrees and an half distant from the pole, when indeed
it is almost 40 minutes less) must needs be false many times more then half
a degree.

The declinations of the principal fixed stars as they are set down in the
books of Navigations, that have been heretofore published, are for the most
part erroneous; many of them differing from truth above half a degree, and
some of them an whole degree, yea two whole degrees and more. All which
imperfections of so excellent an art, I have since the time of my first
employment at sea (now more then ten years since) by diligent search with no
small labor discovered and amended, not only by ten whole months
experience at sea, but also by often and diligent observation on land, as it
may more at large appear in my book of errors in Navigations (which at mine
own charges is also published for the common good of you all) wherein the way
is showed how your charts and crossestaues may be freed from the errors
aforesaid; and the declinations of the sun and fixed stars are set forth
unto you, agreeably to the truth of the heavens found out by often and exact
observations, whereby the latitudes of places may be found much more truly
then has been accustomed. This Book therefore, because it may afford
needful aid for accomplishing the said renowned Count Maurice his desire in
finding the latitude more exactly, and may also deliver you from much
inconvenience and danger, which may necessarily be expected to follow out of
so many and notable errors as hitherto have been in the usual means of
Navigations already mentioned: I commend the same together with this small
Treatise now following unto you all, to be daily tried and examined by the
touchstone of your long and skillful experience at sea: nothing doubting but as
they have endured the more exquisite trial of exact observation, and
Geometrical demonstration both by seamen and landmen on shore, so they shall
be found agreeable to the heedefull experiments of all skillful Nauigators at
sea. And so with my whole heart commending you all to him whose word both seas
and winds obey, I end.

Edw. Wright.

The hauen-finding Art, Or The way to find any Haven or place appointed at sea.
THere is no man, I suppose, that knows not with how great diligence now of
a long time (especially since men leaving no part of the world unattempted,
have sailed into America, and to the utmost Indies) the searchers out of
excellent things have sought some certain way, whereby they which take charge
of ships might know assuredly the situation and longitude of what place soever
they would go unto, and so come to any Haven or place appointed at sea. But I
know not how it has comne to pass, that there could not hitherto any certain
knowledge of that matter be attained unto. For some when they endeavored to
find this thing by the magneticall needle gave the Lodestone it self a Pole,
which of the Lodestone (called also the Magnete) they named the magnetical
Pole, or Pole of the Loadstone. But that this is otherwise, the thing it self
has taught us, because the variation of the needle is found not to follow the
rule of that Pole. Yet in the mean time this continual searching gave
occasion of another mean whereby a ship might certainly direct her course unto
any haven or place at sea whereto you would desire to go, although the true
Longitude both of the place wherein the ship is, as also of the place where the
haven is, were both unknown. Which that it may in some sort be rudely showed,
and that the circumstances hereof may more clearly be set forth before your
eyes, whereby there may ensue a more certain and general use of the same,
first of all it must be known that we are taught by daily experience, that
the magnetical needle touched with the Loadstone or Magnete (which therefore we
call the magneticall needle) does not always point out the same part of the
world, but without any respect of that magnetical Pole, (whereof we made
mention before) sometimes indeed it shows the true place of the North: but
for the most part it declineth either toward the East or West: which
variation, yea even in a small distance of places, has most manifestly
appeared to them which have directed their course from the eastern parts
toward the West: For examples sake at Amsterdam the variation is 9 degrees and
30 min. toward the East. In the foreland of England 11 degrees. At London 11 degrees.
30 min. Near Tinmouth in the sea 12 degrees 40 min and so forth.

How any Haven or place at sea may be found, the latitude and variation of the
same place only being known.
THe variation of the magnetical needle, and the latitude of the place being
known, the same place may be found, although the longitude be unknown and that
daily experience plentifully teaches. For (that we may make this matter plain
by examples especially) if the mariner know that the latitude of the city of
Amsterdam is 52 degrees. and 20 min. and that the variation of the compass in the
same place is 9 degrees. and 30 min. he must needs not be ignorant, that when he
has brought himself to that latitude and variation he is not far from
Amsterdam, what lo^gitude soever that city have. But some man may object, that
there are many places which have the same latitude and variation that the city
of Amsterdam has: whereto we may readily answer that indeed there be such
places: but yet very far distant from thence, and such as may easily be
known by other circumstances, whereof we shall speak hereafter. And although
the mariners may find Amsterdam otherwise, as by the places near adioining, by
conjectures, by the soundings, by the sands, and many other signs without any
regard of the variation: yet I thought good to propound a known place for
example, that the universality of the same rule might be known in long
nauigations, wherein no land appears. As for example if the master of a ship
desire to sail from hence to Cape S. Augustine in Brasile, and know that the
variatio^ there (as it is reported) is 3 degrees. and 10 min. and the latitude 8
degrees. 30 min. toward the South, when in going thitherwards he shall come to
that latitude, and variation, he shall then know that he is come to the Cape of
S. Augustine: and although he think otherwise by his conjecture, and
reckoning, yet not regarding that conjecture he shall confess himself either
to have gessed ill, or else to have been deceived with some eastern, or
western currents: For reason will not suffer us to think that that variation
which before was found at the Cape of S. Augustine is changed, that he should
need to yield himself to that opinion. So also who will not esteem it to be
absurd, and altogether against reason, that he which knows very well that he
finds at sea another variation then that which is at Cape S. Augustine, of 3.
degr. 10 min. should notwithstanding, neglecting the experience of the
variation, and resting upon conjecture only, affirm that he is near the Cape
S. Augustine? Because he speaks contrary things, when he says that the
variation there is 3 degrees 10 minutes, and again avouches that it is not.

Neither is this unworthy the marking, which has often happened, that he which
should have sailed to the Isle of S Helena, when he was come to the latitude of
the same Island, and saw not there the Island, and was also ignorant whether he
were to the eastwards or westward from the same, by conjectures sought that
place toward the East, which indeed lay from him toward the west, and so the
further he sailed the further always he went from that Island. Now I leave it
to thy consideration, if he (whosoever he were that was master of that ship,
which diligently sought that Island for the space of certain weeks, tacking
about also diverse times before he could find any place to abide in) if he I say
had not been ignorant what the variation of the compass was at S. Helens
Island, and what the use of the variation is at sea, and how to find it out: I
leave it, I say, to thy consideration, whether he would willingly have floated
doubtfully to and fro following a greater variation, knowing assuredly that the
variation there was lesser.

Hereby it may easily be conceived how great use there is of the variation,
when they especially which in sailing follow the lines showing the courses
(which lines because now they have found this name among the Portugales we call
Rumbs, the ignorance of which (lines) can hardly be permitted in them which
attempt long voiages upon the huge ocean) ought every where to know certainly
the place of the true North, which is commonly found by the knowledge of the
variation.

If any man likewise consider the uncertain situation of those places which
are set into Globes or sea Charts by the mariners relation, which uncertainty
takes his beginning from hence, because every man thinks that to be the true
place of the North which is showed by the Flower de luce (as they call it) of
the compass which they brought with them from home, (which thing also brings
no less doutfulnes to the mariners themselves) he will think (and that not
without cause) that the observation of the variation is a very needful thing
even for this cause also: Because it is an easy matter to place the Flower de
luce in such sort that it shall not miss any thing in showing the true North
part of the world, to wit, if one move the magneticall needle, or points of the
wires in the Compass from the Flower de luce so much as need shall require.

These things therefore having been observed and granted, and this especially
that the variation alters according to the variety of countries, (as by the
common testimony of al men it is proved) it is in some sort manifest that they
which deny this varying property to be of very great use for navigations, are
either wiser then the common sort, and have some hidden secrets which are not
reueiled to every man, or else are notable fools and mad men.

Therefore when the most excellent Prince Maurice, having thoroughly considered
hereof, thought that it might assuredly be brought to that pass that mariners
might receive great profit by this means; he (the high Admiral) gave
commandment to all the companies of the Admiralty (adioining also thereto a
certain introduction) that they should do their best endeavor, that all
masters of ships should provide themselves for this purpose: that is to say,
that to what place soever they should come, they should seek out the
declination of the magneticall needle from the North, or the variation of the
Compass, not lightly, running over the matter as it were by the way, and for
fashions sake only; but with great carefulnes and diligence, taking with them
meet and needful instruments for that purpose: and that after their return
into their country they should truly and faithfully certify their companies
or bortherhoods of the Admiralty, of that matter: that the self same
experiments being by them brought into good order, might be published for the
common good.

But that every man may more perfectly learn the circumstances of this matter,
I thought it meet here to set down certain principles of this thing, which
is yet notwithstanding to be further searched into by more experiments, in
which shall be showed a general view or table of those places, whose
variations have already been observed by the learned Geographer Petrus
Plancius, with continual labor, and not without great charges, from diverse
corners of the earth near and far off: whom for honors sake I therefore
name, that as well they that shall hereafter find out places or havens after
this manner, as also they that have already found, may know that they are bound
to give thanks to Plancius alone, as to him that is the chief cause of this
observation. But that table or general view of variations, whereof there
shall hereafter follow a plainer declaration is this.

A Table or View of Variation.
Northeasting. Latitude. Longitude. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. The
Northeasting, or the East variation of the firstpart or space toward the North
Increasing. In the Flemish Island Coruo 0 0 N 37 0 0 0 In the Flemish Island
Saint Mary 3 20 N 37 0 8 20 Near the Island Maio 4 55 N 15 0 11 20 At Palma one
of the Canarie Islands 6 10 N 28 30 16 20 At the Rock near Lisbon 10 0 N 38 55
24 30 In the Westermost part of Ireland 11 0 N 52 8 24 12 In the West part of
England 12 40 N 50 21 28 0 Decreasing. About one mile Eastward from Plimmouth
13 24 N 50 18 30 0 By Tinmouth in the Sea 12 40 N 55 0 33 0 At London in
England 11 30 N 51 24 34 6 In the foreland of England 11 0 N 51 8 35 40 In
Amsterdam 9 30 N 52 20 39 30 Northwesting The Northwesting, or the West
variation of the second part or space toward the North Increasing. At
Helmshade to the Westward from the North Cape of Finmarke 0 0 60 0 At the North
Cape of Finmarke 0 55 N 71 25 61 30 At Norquinda 2 0 N 71 10 63 30 At S.
Michael or Archangel in Russia 12 30 N 64 54 83 30 In the South straight of
Vaigatz 24 30 N 69 30 103 0 At Langenes in Noua Zembla 25 0 N 73 20 100 30
Decreasing. In Williams Island In Noua Zembla 33 0 N 75 35 110 0 At Yshouck In
Noua Zembla 27 0 N 77 12 120 30 At Winterhouse In Noua Zembla 26 0 N 76 0 120
30 Northeasting. Latitude. Longitude. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. Degrees. Mi. The
Northeasting of the first part or space toward the South. Increasing. 105
Spanish leagues Westwards from Cape S. Augustine in Brasile 0 0 S 0 0 At Cape
S. Augustine in Brasile 3 10 S 8 30 5 0 North and South with Cape das Almas in
Guinea 12 15 S 0 0 29 0 Toward the Northwest Northerly from the Islands of
Tristan da Cuncha 19 0 S 31 30 30 0 Decreasing. Toward the Northwest, Westerly
from the same Islands 15 0 S 31 30 36 0 North and South with the Cape of Good
Hope 2 30 S 35 30 57 0 Northwesting. The Northwesting of the second part or
space toward the South, except Goa, Cochin, and Cantan. Increasing. 17 Germane
miles from Cape das Aguillas Eastwards 0 0 S 60 0 5 miles in the Sea from Terra
de Natal 4 30 S 33 0 66 0 At the shoulds of Indie 11 0 S 22 0 79 30 In
Mosambique 11 0 S 14 50 81 40 In the Baie of S. Augustine in Madagascar 13 0 S
23 30 83 0 Southwards from Cape S. Roman 16 0 S 28 0 86 20 In Anthony Gills
Baie in Madagascar 15 0 S 16 20 91 0 Decreasing. 34 Germane miles Southeast
from Brandaon 22 0 S 19 20 110 0 In Goa a famous Mart town in Indie 15 10 N 15
30 120 0 In Cochin 15 0 N 9 45 120 0 25 Germane miles West. a little Northerly
from the Southwest corner of Sumatra 6 0 S 5 28 147 0 In Bantam a Mart town of
Iaua 4 45 S 6 0 150 0 In the Island Lubocqua 2 25 S 6 10 155 0 In the Southwest
corner from the I Will of Balij 1 30 S 8 40 157 0 In the mouth of the river Cantan
in China 0 0 N 23 0 160 0 In Bunam 46 Dutch miles Eastwards from the East part
of Iaua 0 0 S 160 0

A declaration of the former Table or view of variations.
BEfore we come to the declaration of this Table, this first of al we would not
have unknown, namely, that if perchance hereafter by more diligent and more
exact experience, any other variation, longitude, or latitude of places can be
found, then that which is set down in this Table, so as it should be needful
to change the definitions and expositions of some things and words here set
down: yet we ought not therefore to be scarred from this purpose; but much
rather ought we to strive with all our strength to attain thereto, that by little
and little we may come to a more certain knowledge of things, building upon
these as upon foundations: we therefore following this opinion will prosecute
that as true, which at this time is most like to be true; that if others also
do the same when occasion is given, we may always come nearer to that which
is most true in the nature of things.

Which things being omitted, that we may come to the declaration of the former
Table, first of all we say, that the first of the three columns which thou
see in the table, shows the variation of the place, the second, the
latitude, to which the third is adjoined containing the longitudes, as we could
by conjecture attain unto them, that the places might so much the more easily
be found in the globe, and the manner of the variations might more plainly be
showed in that which follows hereafter. The mark of the letter N in the
second colume, signifies North latitude, and S South.

Then, because in them mention is made of the variation, of the Northeasting,
of the Northwesting increasing or decreasing, all which (as proper words of
Art) have need of their several definitions: first of all we must know that
the Magnetical needle in one and the same place, does always show the same
part of heaven, but not the same part in all places: for in some places it
points due North, in other places it declineth more or less to the East or
West. Therefore in manner of a definition, we will say thus:

The first definition.
THE declination of the Magneticall needle from the North toward the East, is
called the Northeasting, toward the West, Northwesting; and with a general
name it is called the variation: but the variation and the Northpointing of the
needle (that is the pointing of the needle due North) may by a general name
be called the needlepointing, or pointing of the needle.

As concerning those words of increasing and decreasing, as also of the first
and second part or space, before we come to the definitions of them, they have
need of some precedent declaration. It may be seen in the Table of
variations, that in Coruo the Magneticall needle points due North: but after
that, the more a man shall go toward the East, so much the more also shall he
see the needle vary toward the East, till he come one mile to the Eastward
from Plymouth, where the variation coming to the greatest is 13 degr. 24 min.
From hence the Northeasting begins to decrease, til you come to Helmshude
(which place is Westwards from the North Cape of Finmark) where again the
needle points due North. Now the longitude from Coruo to Helmshude is 60
degr. Which things being well weighed, it appears that the greatest variation
13 degr. 24. minutes at Plimmouth (the longitude whereof is 30 degr.) is in the
midst between the places where the needle points due North. For 30 degrees
is the midst between the beginning and 60 degrees. And what is here said of
the North part, experience teaches that the same takes place in the south
part also, for 105 Spanish miles from Cape S. Augustine at the beginning of
longitude, again it points due North, as it does 17 German miles from Cape
das Aguillas (as it appears by the table of variations) which place is in the
longitude of 60 degrees, and in the midst betwixt both at 30 degr. (as in the
North part) again there is the greatest Northeasting; of which place there was
this mention made in the Table or view of variations: toward the Northwest
northerly from the Islands of Tristan da Cuncha, where the variation is 19
degrees.

Out of these we may conclude, that the Magnetical needle does point due North
in every place situate in two meridian halfe-circles drawn from the one pole
to the other by Coruo and Helmshude. And that the greatest Northeasting is in
all places situate in the meridian semicircle drawn by that place, which we
said was distant one mile from Plimmouth toward the East. So as that part of
the earth which is contained between two Meridian semicircles, distant each
from other 60. degrees in longitude, is the space wherein the Magneticall
needle, always declineth from the North toward the East. And the half of
that part, that is, that portion of the earth which is included between two
Meridian semicircles, the first of which is drawn by the beginning, the other
by the 30 degr. of longitude, is every where the place of the Northeasting
increasing: but the other half is the place of the Northeasting decreasing, to
wit, when one goes from the West Eastwards, following the order of the degrees
of longitude.

By this that has been spoken of the first Segment, with the Northeasting and
his parts (in one of which parts the Northeasting is increasing, in the other
decreasing) it may easily be understood what the manner of the second Segment
is with the Northwesting, and what is the manner of the parts thereof, whereof
one is the part of the Northwesting increasing, the other is the part of the
Northwesting decreasing, for in the mouth of the river Cantan in China, at the
longitude of 160 degrees distant from Coruo, the needle points due North the
third time: there therefore drawing the third Meridian semicircle, the portion
of the earth between the foresaid second Meridian semicircle, and this third
(distant each from other 100 degrees in longitude) shall be the space wherein the
Magneticall needle declineth from the North toward the West: and in the middle
of both in the Meridian semicircle 50 degrees distant from the second, and as
much from the third, (or otherwise 110 degrees removed from the first Meridian
drawn by Coruo) shall be the greatest variation of the Magneticall needle, as
it appears out of the Table of variations in two places, whereof one is in
Williams Island at Noua Zembla, where the greatest Northwesting is found to be
33 degrees. The other is distant 34 dutch miles to the Southeast from Brandaon,
where the greatest variation is found to be 22 degrees, and the longitude of
each of those places is 110 degrees. So as in the half of the second space
(which portion of the earth is contained between the Meridian semicircles of
60 degrees longitude, and of 110 degr.) the Northwesting is every where
increasing; in the other half decreasing.

Of these 160 degrees of Longitude (which arch wants but 20 degrees of half
the compass of the earth) Plancius has attained to the knowledge of the
variation, in such sort as now we have showed. As concerning the other parts of
the world, distant either toward the West from Coruo, or toward the East from
Cantan, the experiments which hitherto he has gotten from the Spaniards, the
Englishmen, and our countriemen (the Netherlanders) do not well agree. Neither
is it any marvel, seeing they had neither perfect knowledge, nor needful
instruments for that purpose: yet he expects other experiments from the ships
which have now been abroad 14 months and more. In the mean time we will
bring forth that to public view, which a man may without absurdity imagine.

If so be that the property of pointing due North, take place not only in the
three foresaid Semicircles (which we conjecture to be Meridian semicircles
drawn from the one pole to the other) but in the whole circles also; there
should then be six such semicircles upon the earth, containing also between
them six parts or spaces of the upper face of the earth.

The first with the Northeasting 60 degrees long. The second with the
Northwesting 100 degr. long. The third with the Northeasting 20 degr. long. The
fourth with the Northwesting 60 degr. long. The fifth with the Northeasting 100
degr. long. The sixth with the Northwesting 20 degr. long.
That those things which have been spoken may by certain geometrical figures
be more clearly conceived, let A B C D E F G H I K L M, be the aequinoctiall
of the earth: let N be the pole: then let N A be the half of the first
Meridian semicircle drawn by Coruo: N C, half of the second semicircle: N E,
of the third: N G, of the fourth: N I, of the fifth: N L, of the sixth. So as
the arch A C, may make 60 degrees: C E, 100 degr. and so A E, 160 degr. E G, 20
degr. and so A G, 180 degr. G I, 60 degr. and so A I, 240. I L, 100 degrees,
and so A L, 340 degr. L A, 20 degr. and so the whole circle 360 degrees. Then
let the six points B D F H K M be the middles between A C, C E, E G, G I, I
L, L A. Which being supposed,

A N C shall signify the first space with the Northeasting.
A N B the Northeasting of the first space increasing.
B N C the Northeasting of the first space decreasing.
C N E the second space with the Northwesting.
C N D the Northwesting of the second space increasing.
D N E the Northwesting of the second space decreasing.
E N G the third space with the Northeasting.
E N F the Northeasting of the third space increasing.
F N G the Northeasting of the third space decreasing.
G N I the fourth space with the Northwesting.
G N H the Northwesting of the 4 space increasing.
H N I the Northwesting of the 4 space decreasing.
INL the fifth space with the Northeasting.
INK the Northeasting of the fifth space increasing.
KNL the Northeasting of the fifth space decreasing.
LNA the sixth space with the Northwesting.
LNM the Northwesting of the 6 space increasing.
MNA the Northwesting of the 6 space decreasing.
Note. Though a man may not without cause stand in doubt that the three last
semicircles shall not be found in the same sort, which the former conjecture
has imagined, but peradventure in a quantity either greater or lesser, and in
another form: nevertheless, here the manner is rudely showed how the whole
world may be divided into certain portions by such semicircles as shall
hereafter be found by observation. Moreover, by that which has been spoken,
it may easily be understood what be the Northeastings or northwestings
increasing or decreasing, what is the first and second Meridian semicircle,
together with the parts or spaces. Which, that we may comprehend in form of
definitions, I thought good in few words thus to pronounce.

The second definition.
The Northeasting or Northwesting increasing is that whereby the variation
increases, the Magneticall needle being carried from the West Eastwards: and
the Northeasting or the Northwesting decreasing is that whereby it decreaseth.

The third definition.
The Semicircles of the Meridian, in which the needle points due North, we
call the first and second Meridian Semicircles, and so forwards according to
the order of the degrees of longitude, how many soever such Semicircles there
shall be, beginning at the Semicircle drawn by Coruo.

The fourth definition.
The portion of the Sphaericall superficies, or round vpperface of the earth
contained by the first and second Meridian Semicircles, is called the first
part or space, and the rest in order, the second, the third, and so forth unto
the end.

Having thus set down the manner of the variation, it remains that we show by
examples (that which before we promised) that although in diverse places having
the same latitude there be the same variation also, yet nevertheless the master
of the ship may know in what part of the world, and in what place he is. Let us
therefore again suppose that a ship had appointed to go from Amsterdam to
Cape S. Augustine, in Brasile, the latitude whereof in the table of variations
is set down to be 8 degrees 30 minutes, and the variation northeasting
increasing of the first space 3 degr. 10 minutes. The same ship sailing along
by the coast of England, the variation shall be found to northeast or vary
toward the East daily more and more until you come to Plimmouth, where it
comes to the greatest, and is 13 degrees. 24 min. Therefore the master of the
ship shall know assuredly that hitherto he has sailed in the Northeasting of
the first space decreasing, and that after this he shall have the northeasting
increasing, which when he shall find to be 10 degrees in the latitude of 38
degrees. 55 min. then he may assure himself that he is come to the Rock near
Lisbone. Going forwards again from thence as it were toward the Southwest, he
shall daily find the latitude to be diminished, and the magneticall needle
declining toward the North. Or otherwise if the magneticall needle recline not
toward the North, but either stand still, or else decline more toward the East,
then he may assure himself that he is carried Eastwards by some secret current
not perceived: which notwithstanding he may remedy, if he go so much the more
toward the West, until the magneticall needle recover his due variation. But
if he should come to the northeasting of 3 degrees 10 minutes, before he have
his Southerly latitude to be 8 degrees. 30 min. he shall then endeavor as much as
in him lies to keep that variation, and so sail on toward the South part of
the world guiding the ship so much the more toward the West or East as
occasion shall require. And although he may deem otherwise by conjecture, yet
he shall not follow that conjecture, for the reasons before showed: for so
coming to the southerly latitude of 8 degrees. 30 min. with the northeasting in
creasing 3 degrees. 10 min. he may assuredly persuade himself that he is near
Cape S. Augustine, whereas otherwise trusting to conjectures he may very easily
miss an hundredth leagues of the place to which he had appointed to go, not
knowing in the mean time, whether he be to the eastwards, or to the westwards
from thence; which experience it self has also taught too much in such
nauigations. And therefore the latitude and variation in all places of the
earth being observed, and the knowledge thereof published, there shall be a
much more easy way of sailing about the world, then ever has been heretofore.

Hitherto we have described the kinds of the variatio^, which are afterward
declared out of those things which were set down in the table of variations.
If the mistress of things (experience) shall hereafter teach that any thing is
otherwise, that thing may also out of the same experience be otherwise defined,
that the masters of ships in their nauigations may follow that only which shall
be best and most profitable.

How the North point, and the variation may be found.
ALthough the finding of the variation, (whereof hitherto often mention has
been made) is known to very many: yet we will in few words show this thing to
them which as yet peradventure know not the manner thereof For here is a
question or demand how to find the declination of the magnetical needle. First
therefore the north point must be sought out, that the pointing of the needle
may be compared therewith. The finding thereof in a moveable ship has no
small affinity with the finding of the north point or meridian line on land,
and may thus be shortly dispatched. In the Instrument which some call the
sea-directorie, some the nauticall box, and we for avoiding ambiguity name the
sea-compasse, in that instrument I say, the Flower de luce ought to agree with
the north point of the needle, or wires lying underneath: or (that which is
far more commodious) in stead of the Flower de luce the magneticall needle
may be fastened above upon the paper or pastboord, and the limb or
circumference of the pastboord must be divided into 360 degrees, beginning at
the north point of the needle as you may see hereafter in the circle A. B. C.
D, wherein the magneticall needle is signified by A. C. which is fastened above
upon the paper or pasteboord. E is the center. The use thereof is this. As the
master of the ship in seeking the latitude is wont to tarry for the
noone-tide, that is to say, until the shadow of the perpendicular style, or of
the plumbline agree with the meridian line in his instrument: so all things
also do here proceed, but that he begins three or four hours before noone,
marking diligently into which degree of the compass, or into what division,
the shadow of the perpe^dicular style, or plumbline falls. Let us suppose
therefore that he find it in the 40 degrees. which we have noted with the letter F.
so as G. E. F. may signify the whole shadow: then he shall seek the height of
the sun, which for examples sake admit he find to be 25 degrees: which
together with the 40 degrees above named, he shall note down for helping his
memory: After this he shall attend till the sun descending after no one come
to the same height of 25 degrees, and he shall then also diligently mark what
place the shadow of the perpendicular style poynteth in the paper, which again
let us take to be 40 degrees. to wit, the other way as at the letter H, so as now
I E H may represent the whole shadow. Which being done, the midst of the arch
F H (that is A) is the north point: and because the magneticall needle directly
points the same, it has no variation in that place, because it shows due
north. But if in the same experiment after no one the shadow had not showed the
40 degr. on the other side beyond A, but (for examples sake) the 20 degr. only
unto K, in that case the arc F K making 60 degr. ought by imagination to be
divided into two parts at L, so as L F and L K may make either of them 30
degrees and the variation sought for may be from L to A eastwardes 10 degrees.

But if in the same after no one experiment, the shadow of the perpendicular
style L had showed 30 degr. from F, the arc F L (containing 30 degrees.) must by
imagination be divided at M, so as M F, M L may either of them contain 15
degrees; which being thus performed, M shall be the North point and A the point
of variation sought for, northeasting from M to A 25 degr. and so in the rest.

But if the needle only were turned about and not fastened to the paper or
pastborde (as before) and the degrees were marked in the margin or limb of
the box, or case of the instrument as is sometimes used, there is the same
manner of using it, that was before rehearsed: saving that in the beginning of
the observation, the box must be turned about so far till the Magneticall
needle show the beginning of the degrees.

Others take an Azimuthal or vertical quadrant, whose Horizontall plain
(whereupon it stands upright) without any impediment received from the motion
of the ship always remains parallel to the Horizon in such manner as we
shall show. Thus the height of the sun is found, together with the azimuth.

The fashion of this instrument may be described after this manner, A B C
signifies a quadrant of a circle standing at right angles. Upon the circle B D
C E divided into 360 degrees, whereby the plain of the Horizon is signified.
The center thereof is F upon which the quadrant may be turned about: and that
it may always remain at right angles upon the circle B D C E it is
vnder-propped on both sides from G to D and E, and those props are fastened to
the same quadrant, that they may be turned about together with it. Moreover in
the circle B D C E there is a glass, and under the glass a magneticall
needle, which must be so long as the box may suffer it. And the box or case
has within it 360. degrees, which the magneticall needle may precisely point
unto, which likewise do agree with as many other degrees inscribed into the
horizontall plain.

This instrument was made according to the invention of Reginaldus Petraeus,
hanging upon two axtrees like the sea-compasse that so the circle B D C E
notwithstanding the motion of the ship may always be equally distant from the
Horizon. And that this may be done with the greater security, the weight
marked with the letter H is adjoined underneath, containing 25. or 30. pounds,
or so many as the greatness of the instrument shall require. But this also is
worthy to be noted, to wit, that the quadrant perpendicularly erect in his
place is of the same weight on both sides of the center: that is to say, the
side from F to C counterpoyseth the side from F to B which may be known if a
man taking up the quadrant, hang it with G downwards, the thread being fastened
in the midst of B C at F and then cut off so much of the heavier part, as may
suffice, that the line B C may hang level. But because some man may object
that the ruler or index which the Barbarians call the Alhidada, may bring a
great variety in the weight as it shall be turned higher or lower: we must
know that any such thing need not to be greatly feared, because of the great
weight H and the lightness of the ruler.

The use of this instrument in finding the North point and variation is this:
you must begin to observe (as in the former kind) certain hours before noone,
and the instrument must be turned until the magneticall needle point to the
beginning of the circle: then the quadrant must be turned this way or that way,
and the sight-ruler of the quadrant must be lifted up, or put down till the
sun shine through the sight. All which being done, suppose it be found (for
examples sake) that the utmost margin or index of the quadrant show in the
Horizontal plain 40. degr. and admit the height of the sun be also found to
be 25. degrees, which together with the 40. degrees he shall for memory sake
have need to note. And when he has expected after no one till the sun
descending by the same instrument be found placed in the same 25. degr. of
altitude, then the box it self must again be turned this way or that way,
until (the sun again shining through the sights) the magneticall needle do
point to the beginning of the circle. Which things being thus dispatched, the
middle point of the arch in the horizontall plain between the first and
second experiment is the North point, and how much the needle declineth from
that point, so much is the variation sought for, as before we have showed in
the first example more at large.

Whatsoever we have affirmed to be available in the day time, in these
experiments of the sun, the same may be understood and done in like manner
in the night, by any of the fixed stars, whereof there is the same use in
this matter that there is of the sun. But there is not the same reason of the
moon, as well because of the swiftness of her proper motion; as also because
of the greatness of her parallax (as they call it) which the overmuch
neerenesse of the moon to the globe of the earth brings forth. But this also
is to be noted that two, three, or four, yea and more observations may be made
in the fore-noone. As for example let the first be when the sun is 10.
degrees above the horizon, the second when it is 15. degr. the third when it is
20. degr. and if any man will make trial as often after noone, he shall see
how every experiment agrees with other: and when at every moment the same
North point is found, that thing shall give the master of the ship no small
courage, and more certain confidence of his work.

But notwithstanding, when the mariner sayleth from the East Westwards, or
contrariwise from the West Eastwards, it may be that in the space of 10 or 12
hours between the first and second experiment, there may be difference of one
degree or more in the variation, whereof may follow that the North point found
by the first forenoone observation, and the last in the afternoon, shall not
agree with that which was found by the first in the afternoon and the last in
the forenoone: when notwithstanding the mariner has not erred in observing.

Which if it shall happen often, the skillful mariner may judge thereby what
difference of variation is answerable to any determinate time of sailing, and
so find a way whereby the North point may be found with more certainty and
security: which thing may thus also be done, if a man diligently compare the
variation found in the former days with the variation which he presently sees.

FINIS.

