Hereafter ensues the ancient several customs, of the several Manors of
Stebbunhuth, and Hackney, Stebbunhuth, Hackney.
within the County of Middlesex, which were perused, viewed and approved, by
the Lord of the said Manors, and by all the Copieholde Tenants of the said
several Manors, many years past, and which customs be now again newly
and fully considered off, ratified, allowed, and approved, by the right
Honorable, Henry L. Wentworth, Lord of the said several Manors, and all the
Copieholde Tenantes of the said Manors, as in the several Articles and
agreements hereafter following are expressed, the x. day of November. 1587. And
in the 29. year of the reign of our Sovereign Lady Elizabeth, by the grace
of God, Queen of England, France and Ireland, defender of the faith.
INprimis, by the customs of the said Mannours, all the Copieholde Lands and
Tenementes of the said Mannours, and of every of them, be, and always have
been ancient copieholdes of inheritance in Feesimple, according to the
several customs of the said Mannours, and of every of them, of which the
same been severally holden, except suth parts and parcells of the said
Mannours, or of either of them, being of the demeasne lands, and of the wastes
of the said mannours, and of either of them, which have not been granted out
by the Lord or Lords of the same, to hold by coppie of Court roll, but
since the beginning of the reign of the queens Majesty that now is, which
parts and parcells so granted to hold by coppie of court roll. are and be
excepted, and are meant to be excepted out of these Articles, ratification and
agreement, and also all other the lands, tenements, and hereditamentes,
mentioned and specified in the second sedule to these presents annexed, which
are and shall be of no other validity and force then they should have been of,
if these articles and agreements had never been made. And all coppies have
been time out of mind, and be made to hold of the Lord by the rod,
according to the custom of the said mannours, by the rents, customs, suts
and services, therefore due and accustomed.

2 Item, the rentes of all the tenements, both freeholders, and coppieholders,
which hold any meswages, cotages, lands, tenements, or hereditaments of the
said mannours, or of any of them is yeerelie payable at the feast of saint
Michaell Tharchangell, to the Lord and his heirs, the same to be collected by
Reeues of the said manors, to be yeerelie chosen, as hereafter is expressed,
and all and every the coppieholde Tenants, shall hereafter pay so much rent as
any of them have paid within two years last past for their several
coppieholds, and that if any one of the said coppieholds, for the which any
entire quitrent is now paid, shall come into several hands, the said rent
shall be apporcioned by thomage.

3 Item, all the coppieholde Tenants, which now be, or hereafter for the time
being shall be, ought to appear yeerelie at two general Courts holden for the
said manors, or for either of them. And also so many of them at al other set
or appointed Courts, set, appointed, or kept, or to be set, appointed, or kept,
for the said manors, or for either of them, or for the Lord or Lords of the
said manors, or of either of them as shall be warned thereunto by the Reeue or
his sufficient deputy for the time being, and they to do their suits and
services according to their tenures, except they be essoyned, lycenced, or have
some other lawful excuse, upon the pain hereafter following, which general
courts have been commonly kept, and are to be kept yeerelie the one of them the
Tuesdaie next after Low Sundaye, and the other about the feast of Saint Andrewe
the apostle, upon reasonable warning.

4 Item, if any of the customarie or copieholde tenants of the said Manors,
or of either of them, do or shall make default in their appearaunce at any of
the said two general courts to which their suits shall be due, or if such
copieholde tenants as shallbe especially warned to appear at any of the
said set Courts in form aforesaid, yeerelie to be holden, do make
default, to which the said suit is or shall be due, and warning openly given in
the parish churches within the said Mannours, of the day and place of the
holdyng of the same general courts, and upon special warning to be given for
the said several set Courts, that then they that shall so make default, except
they be essoyned, or have some other lawful or reasonable excuse, shall be
amersed by the homage of the said Court or any of them, which amerciement
shall be taxed by two Afferrours of the said Court. That is to say, by two
Tenants of the homage, whereof the Steward of the said Mannours, or of either
of them for the time being, has always used to choose, and shall choose one
for the Lord, and the residue of the homage then present, have chosen, and
heareafter shall choose the other.

5 Item, if any Tenant be Summoned to appear at any set Court or Courts to
be holden within the said Manors, or in any of them, and does appear upon
the said Sommons, he ought, and is to have for his pains iiij. d. and his
dinner, or viij. d. and no dinner, which ought and is by the said custom to
be paid by such person or persons who shall be the cause that any such
Tenants do appear for his or their matter, so it be not for any matter or
cause that concerns an inquiry or presentment to be made concerning the Lord
for the time being, his heirs or assigns.

6 Item, the Copieholde Tenants of the said Mannours, and of either of them,
ought to have every of them like allowaunce upon every view by them to be
made, and upon every partition by them to be made, or upon other Summons to
appear betwixt Tenant and Tenant, when they be appointed thereunto by precept
from the Steward of the said manors, or of either of them for the time being,
or by his sufficient deputy.

7 Item, the homage of the Court of the said Mannours, or of any of them, may
appoint six or seven Tenants upon aanie complaint to them made by any person
or persons being Tenantes of the said mannours, or of either of them in open
Court, that he or they be wronged by any incrochme^t, or any other annoyaunce,
which Tenauntes shall after the said Court, view the same incrochment,
annoyance, and impediment, or place whereof any such complaint shall be made,
and thereupon to present or notify the same by a day to the Steward, or to
the homage at the next general Court, that there may be set a pain or
amerciement, or both, for the same, by the homage at the said next Court,
according to the quality of the offense.

8 Item, the homage of every of the said Mannours, are to make presentment at
every general Court to be holden for the said Mannours, or for either of them,
of all the customarie or coppieholde Tenauntes, that they shall know shall
have died, after the Court then last past, or at any time before the said
court, whose deaths were not then found and presented, which shall have holden
any customarie or coppieholde Lands or Tenementes of the said Mannours, or of
either of them. And also as near as they can, present what Lands they dyed
seized of, and also of what estate, and when he died, and who is the next heir
or heirs to the same person or persons so dying seized, and of what age or
ages the said heir or heirs shall then be off as near as they can.

9 Item, likewise the homage ought to present the deaths of freeholders, and
when they dyed, and who be their next heirs, and the ages of their heirs
which held any Lands or Tenements of the said mannours, or of either of
them, and the nature of their tenures, so near as they can, to the intent the
Lord may have his relief, which is but the value of one years quitrent of
the Tenement holden of the said mannours, or of either of them by Socage
tenure.

10 Item, if the homage at any of the said Courts of either of the said
mannours, shall not know who is next heir or heirs to any of the said
customarye Tenauntes so dying seized, when they shall make their presentiments,
that then they shall make their presentment so accordingly, and then upon the
said presentment, at the next general Court after the Steward of the said
manors or of either of them, or his deputy for the time being, within which
the said presentment shall so be made, shall cause a Proclamation to be made
in open court, to the intent every such heir or heirs may have knowledge to
come and take up the Lands and tenements of his or their ancestors, and so
the Steward or his deputy, shall cause a Proclamation to be made from
general Court to general Court, until three open and public Proclamations
be made in full Court, at three several general courts, which general
Courts, by the said custom are used to be holden commonly one half year
after another or there abouts, so that from the first Proclamation to the last,
is full near one year and a half, which is about full two years from the
presentment made by the said Homage of the dying seized, of the said last
Tenant, unto the last Proclamation, and if there shall come no heir to the
said Lands or Tenements, before the end of the said three Proclamations, to
make his claim, and prove himself to the Homage of the said Court, in such
sort as they shall allow off, to be the next heir of the whole blood, to the
said Tenaunte deceased, or to have title to the Land and tenements, nor to
show and prove as aforesaid, who is or ought to be the next heir of the
whole blood to the said Tenant deceased, or next heir expectant upon any
estate determined, then the Lord of the said Mannours, or of either of them
for the time being, shall and may after the said three Proclamations so to be
made, seize the Lands and Tenements, which was the said persons so dying
seized, whose next heir or such as shall have title thereunto cannot be
found, or shall not come and make his or their claim and proof as
aforesaid, and then to take the issues and profits thereof unto his own use,
until such person or persons come that shall prove him or them next heir or
heirs to the said person or persons so dying seized, and if none shall come
within three years next after the third and last proclamation to be made as
aforesaid, that shall and can conueigh and prove him or them to be next heir
or heirs of the whole blood, or show and prove who is or ought to be next
heir, or to have title, as next in remaynder or reuertion as aforesaid. That
then the said Lands and Tenementes be forfayted, or shall escheate unto the
Lord of the said Manor or Mannours, for the time being, except that if the
said Lands and tenements, shall or ought immediately to descend, remain,
reuert, or come to any woman covert, or infant, within the age of xxi. years,
or to any person or persons not of Sane memoriae, or that shall not be within
the Realm, at the time of the death of the said last Tenant dying so seized,
that then the Lord for the time being, shall have but the profits of the
said Lands and Tenementes, until such persons or their heirs, shall come
and make their claim as aforesaid, so the said claim be made within five
years by the said woman or her heirs next after the death of her said
husband, or by such person being within age, or his heirs within five years
next after he shall or should accomplish his full age of twenty one years,
and by the heir of such person of Non sane memoriae, within five years after
the death of his said auncestour, or by the said person or his heirs that
shall so be out of the Realm within five years after he shall return, or if
he shall not return within five years after his death.

11 Item, women are to have no dowers of any customarie Lands or Tenements
within the Mannours aforesaid, nor in any of them, nor men to have any
estate as Tenantes by the courtesy of England.

12 Item, if a man or woman shall be seized of any customarie Lands or
Tenementes holden of the said Mannours, or of either of them, of an estate of
inheritance, and shall have issue two Sons or three Sons, or more, or
having no Sons, shall have diverse Daughters, or having neither Sons nor
Daughters, shall have diverse collateral heirs, they shall be all coheyres to
their said Father, Mother, or other Auncestour touching the said customarie
Lands and tenements, according to the custom of Gauelkinde.

13 Item, if a man or woman die seized as aforesaid, of any customarie Lands
or Tenementes of any estate of inheritance holden of the said Mannours, or
of any of them, and shall have issue two or three sons or more, whereof one
or two or more of them shall be married, and shall have issue in the life of
their father or mother, and shall die before his or their said Father or
Mother, or having no sons, shall have diverse daughters, whereof one or more
shall be married, and have issue, and die in the life of the father or mother.
That then the said issue shall inherit, and be coheire with the said son
or sons, or daughter, that shall survive his or her said father or mother
that so shall die seized, as is aforesaid, whether the said issue be Male or
Female, according to the custom of Gauelkinde.

14 Item, if any person or persons, dye seized as aforesaid, and shall leave
behind him neither son nor daughter, then the next of his or their kin
being of whole blood, shall be heir or heirs to the said person or persons so
dying seized, that is to say, his or their brother, or brothers children, or
childers children, according to the custom of Gauelkinde and so forth, as
long as any of that issue shall be on live, being of the whole blood, and in
default of such issue, the Sisters and Sisters children, according to the
custom of Gauelkind, and so forth as long as any issue shall be on live, and
being of the whole blood, and for lack of such issue, the Uncles and their
issues, being of the whole blood so long as any issue shall be living. And no
default of such issue, the Aunts and their children, so long as any shall be
living of the whole blood, and for lack of such issue, the next of kin of
the whole blood, according to the custom of Gauelkinde.

15 Item, If any person so dying seized as aforesaid, without issue of his
body, and having diverse brothers of the whole blood, whereof the one or some
of them shall have been married, and shall have issue, and after issue had,
shall die before the said brother dying seized, as aforesaid. That then the
issues of the said brother or brothers so dying before him that died seized,
as aforesaid, shall join and be coheyre with the brother that suruiueth the
brother that so died seized as aforesaid, whether the said issue be Males or
Females. But Males and Females of one venture, can not join to be coheires
together, so that the course of discentes is to be observed by the said
custom, according to the custom and nature of lands in Gauelkinde.

16 Item, likewise shall the issue of the daughter that shall die in the life
of the Father or Mother, be coheire with the Aunt that lives, being of the
whole blood.

17 Item, likewise shall the Uncles, and the Uncles brothers children, being
of the whole blood, be coheires together as aforesaid.

18 Item, likewise shall the Aunts, and the Aunts sisters children, join and
be coheires as aforesaid, and so forth of all further degrees of all
collateral heirs, being of the whole blood, which may conueigh themselves to
be any Cosins and heirs of the whole blood to any person or persons dying
seized, of any of the foresaid customarie Lands or Tenements, according to
the custom of Gauelkind.

19 Item, by the customs of the said several Mannours, every coppieholder
of inheritance in fee simple, may surrender his said coppieholde Lands and
Tenements, or any part or parcel thereof unto any person or persons, and to
his or their heirs for ever, or to his or their heirs, of his or their
bodies, or any other ways intaile, or for life or lives, or years, or to any
person or persons, and to their heirs, to the intent the said coppieholde
Tenante may declare his last Will and Testament upon the same Lands and
Tenements, or to any other use or uses, unless it be to any corporation or
corporations, or bodies politic or corporate. And every coppieholder
intayle, for life, lives or years, of any of the said Mannours, may in like
manner by the customs of the said Manuours, and of every of them, surrender
their coppieholde Lands, or any part thereof, according to the nature of
their estates, so the same surrender be made according to the custom
concerning surrenders, as hereafter ensues. And all the same persons to whose
use every such surrender shall be made, are to have their copies made to hold of
the Lord by the Rod, according to the Custom of the said Manours, whereof
they been severally holden, by the rentes, customs, suits, and services
therefore due and accustomed, upon every of which surre^ders, the fine and
fines for the same hereafter expressed is by the said customs to be paid.

20 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of every of them, every
surrender taken out of the Court by the Headborow or Reeue, or his deputy, and
in the presence of six customarie Tenaunts of the said Mannours, of which the
said Lands or Tenements surrendered shall be percell, witnessing the same
surrender of any person or persons of his or their customarie Lands or
Tenements holden of the said Mannours, or of either of them, and being of the
full age of one and twenty years or vpwardes, except women coouert barron,
and such as are not of perfect mind, to the use of any person or persons,
shall be as good as if it were taken in open court by the said Steward of the
said Mannours, or of any of them, so that such surrenders be by Thomage
presented as haereafter follows.

21 Item, By the said custom, no woman being covert barron, can make any good
surrender of her Lands and Tenementes holden of the said Manors, or of
either of them, either by the hands of the Reeue or his deputy, or by the
hands of the Headeborow, in the presence of the said six Tenaunts, saving in
time of extremity of sickness or death, in either of which cases, she may by
the said Custom together with her husband, surrender her said Lands and
Tenements, holden of the said Mannours, or of either of them, by the hands of
the Reeue or Headeborowe, and six Tenaunts, and if any such woman covert
barron so surrendering, do after that recover her health, and do not at the
next general Court then following, ratify and confirm the same before the
Steward or his deputy, in the presence of the Homage, that then the same
surrender is to be void. And all surrenders made by any woman covert barron
otherwise then in extremity of sickness or death, as is aforesaid be void,
except such women covert barron, be soly examined before the Steward of the
said Mannours, or of any of them, or his sufficient deputy, as hereafter
follows.

22 Item, That all surrenders taken either by the Reeue or his deputy, or by
the Headborowe, for the time being, and in the presence of six customarie
tenants, ought to be by the Homage presented at the general Court holden for
the said Mannours, after the taking thereof, or within one year and a day
next after the taking of the same, if any such general Court be holden
within the year and the day after the same surrender so taken, or else if no
such general Court be holden within the year and the day, then to be by
the same Homage presented at the next general Court to be holden after the
same year and day, and then to be as good a surrender, as any surrender
taken in open Court, or else all surrenders taken by the said Reeue or his
deputy, or by the said Headborow, and in the presence of six Tenauntes, and
not presented by the said homage, in manner and form aforesaid to be void.

23. Item, The homage by the said custom, must write Billa vera upon every
surrender by them presented, when they find the same surrenders agreeable to
the custom, and also upon every other of their presentmentes they shall make
Billa vera, when they be agreeable to the said custom, or else if the said
homage receive any surrender, or other bills to them exhibited, which be
repugnaunt to the custom of the said Mannours, or of either of them, they
shall make upon every such surrender or bill, Ignoramus, or the like
superscription, to the intent it may be known to be naught, or else return such
naughty surrenders or bills back again to the parties that exhibited the
same.

24 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of every of them, every
woman being covert barron, of the age of one and twenty years or vpwardes,
having any customarie Lands or Tenementes to her or her heirs, or for life,
lives, or years, and holden of the said Mannours, or of either of them, may
together with her husband, by the hands of the said Steward, or of his
sufficient deputy, surrender al her said Lands and Tenementes, interest, or
term of years, to the use of her said husband, or to any other person or
persons, at their will and pleasure, so as she be solie and secretly examined
before the Steward or his sufficient deputy, according to the ancient
custom used in that case.

25 Item, That all surrenders taken out of the court by the Steward of the said
Mannours, or of any of them, or by his sufficient deputy, of any person or
persons, being of the full age of one and twenty years or more, of any of
their customarie Lands and Tenementes holden of the said Mannours, or of
either of them, be good by the custom of the said Mannours, and of either of
them, and the same to be published and notified to the homage at the next
general Court.

26 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of every of them, all
surrenders at any time heretofore taken, or hereafter to be taken by the
steward of the said Mannours, or of either of them, or by his sufficient
deputy, out of the Court of any customarie Lands or Tenementes holden of
the said Mannours, or of either of them, of any person or persons, being of
full age of xxi years as aforesaid, being entered into the Court rolls, of the
Court next going before the taking of the same surrenders, although such
surrenders were taken diverse days, weeks, or months after the same Court,
are and shall be good and of force, by the custom of the said Mannours, and of
every of them.

27. Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of every of them, the
Lord or Lords of the said Manors, or of either of them, ought to have at
every admission of any one person, or more, upon a descent, and at every
admission, and of any one person, only upon a surrender, or alienation to
be made of every acre of Land or ground, being Coppieholde, xvi. d. for a
fine, and so after that rate, and no more, and if any more then one be
admitted upon a surrender, then to pay for every one so admitted, more then
one half a fine, and also to have in like sort for a single fine for a meswage
being Copiehold, xiii. S. iiii. d. and for a Tenement being Coppiehold, x. s.
and for a Cotage being coppieholde, which shall not be letten for above iii.
li. by the year, xx. d. and for a Cotage being worth above iii. li. by the
year to be letten, to pay fine as before for a Tenement, and these fines to
be set down in their several coppies, and if any question arise about the
decerning which be messwage, and which be Tenements, the same, by the same
custom is to be tried by the presentment of the homage, and that the Lord of
the said Manors, and of either of them, shall allow of every surrender made
by any Coppieholder, according to these articles, not having made or committed
any cause of forfaiture, contrary to the customs contained in these
articles, and shall for the fine aforesaid, grant the said coppie, holds,
according to the said surrender, and admit such persons to whom the same
surrender shall so be made, or to whom these Lands or Tenementes shall so
discende accordingly, and if the said Lord shall refuse so to admit, yet the
said persons to whom the said surrenders shall be made, or to whom the said
Land and Tenementes of right ought to discende, remain, or come, paying their
fine, or tendering the same as aforesaid, shall quietly hold and enjoy the
said Coppie hold in like sort, as if he or they were lawfully admitted unto
the same, and not otherwise.

28 Item, By the custom, if any manne make a surrender, only to the intent
to make his wife a Ioynter, and to none other purpose, then the fine of the
same is but half so much as it is upon other surrenders, alienations, or upon
a dying seized as aforesaid. And the like custom is to be observed, where the
husband and wife make a surrender of the Lands of the wife, to the end
only to make an estate thereof to the husband jointly with his wife, and
likewise by the said custom for every Tenant that shall be admitted in
reuercion or remainder expectant, upon the estate of any particular tenant for
life, in tail, or for years, granted by copy, the same is but half so much
as it is upon other admittaunces upon alienacions, surrenders, or dying
seized, as aforesaid.

29 Item, Every person that exhibiteth or delivers any surrender or bill to
the homage, ought to give and pay to the same homage for every such surrender
or bill iiii. d. And by the said custom every of the said six tenants and
also the headborough or Reave which shall be at the taking of any surre^ders as
aforesaid, ought to have iiii. d. a piece, being taken within the said Mannours
or in either of them. But if they go out of the said manors or either of them
for the taking of the same, the^ to have viii. d. a piece, and their charges,
if they shall go farther of: and the party that procures the said surrender,
ought to give to the said Tenaunts iiii. d. besides the said fees, which iiii.
d. is delivered with the said surrender, or else he that brings in the said
surrender without the said iiii. d. shall pay it of his own pursse to the
homage.

30 Item, if it chance at any time upon the death of any copiholder or
customarie tenant, there is an heir or heirs found and presented by thomage,
and which after are admitted to the lands and tenements of the said
copieholder, at which time no other heirs were known, and after it chances
yt one or other comes and claims to be coheire with the said heir, which
is admitted, then the homage ought thereof to enquire, and if they find his
claim true, they ought to present the same, and then he shall be likewise
admitted, and pay his fine, and have his part of the premises,
notwithstanding the former admission.

31 Item, if any man be admitted to any possession, or to any reuercion or
remainder of any lands or tenemte^s, whether they be to him descended, as it is
supposed, or to him surre^dred by any other person, and after yt comes
another person or persons, who pretends a title to ye whole premises, or to
any part thereof, and wills yt homage to enquire thereof, in this case ye said
homage is not bound thereof to enquire, but he or they are driven to his or
their suit or plaint whether his or their title be right or wrong, yet if he or
they require ye homage to find whether he or they were the son or sons of such a
one or not, and the homage knowing ye truth yt he or they were ye son or sons
of such a one, ye thing the homage ought to present, but not to present whether
he or they ought to have the premises or any part thereof, to yt which another
person is already admitted, but in such case he or they shall be driven to his or
their suit or plaint as aforesaid, for ye recovery of their said right, if any
right they have.

32 Item, after ye death of every person being a customary tenant of ye said
manors, or of either of the^, the next heir ought to come and take up ye lands
and teneme^ts where of his ancestors so shall dye seized, of what age soever
he be of, and if he be of the age of xiiii. years or upwards, he is to be
admitted in his own person within a conueme^t time after he is presented, or
else if he be under the age of xiiii. years, then to come and take it up by his
Garden, until he be of thage of xiiii. years as aforesaid, and to pay for his
fine according to the rates aforesaid, and the garden to pay but iii. s. iiii.
d at the most, for his fine for ye gardenship, or less, at ye discretion of
the Steward.

33 Item, likewise every person to whose use any of the said lands or tenements
be surrendered, ought also to come within a convenient time after ye same be
presented, and take up the same by himself, if he be of age, and to be
admitted, as aforesaid, and to pay his fine, or else buy his Garden, as
aforesaid, and to take out his copy.

34 Item, if any of the said heirs, alienees, or gardens, do not pay their
fines within one month after the same fines be extracted, and the extracts
delivered to the Reeue or his deputy, for the gathering thereof, and by them or
either of them demanded, then it shall be lawful for the L. or Lords of the
said manor or mannours for the time being, or his or their officers, to
distraine and auowe as for rents, and for want of distress, to seize the
lands and tenements, for the which the said fine or fines are to be paid, and
to enjoy the same to his or their own use, until he or they shall be fully
satisfied and paid the said fine or fines, to be paid by him or them that so
ought to pay ye same.

35 Item, if any customary or copiholde tenant of the said Mannours, or of
either of them, shall not pay his rents for his copiehold, for which the same
is due, and demanded by the said Reeue, or his deputy, then it shall be lawful
for the lord or lords of the said Manor or Mannours for the time being, or
his or their officers, to distraine and auowe, and for want of distress, to
seize the lands and tenements, out of the which the same ought to be paid, and
to take and to enjoy the rents, issues and profits, of the same, to his or
their own use, until he or they shall be fully satisfied and paid the same
rents, by him or them that so ought to pay ye same.

36 Item, that when any Tenant dies, leaving his heir under thage of xiiii.
years, the custom is, that the next of the kin to whom the land and
tenements can not descend, shall have if he shall require it, the custody of
the heir, and of his lands and tenements committed unto him, until he come to
thage of xiiii. years, and then he to choose his own garden.

37 Item, if any person or persons be disposed to let his customarie Lands or
tenements, to any other person or persons, and to their executors and assigns
for term of xxxi. years or less, the same person shall by the same custom
of the said Mannours, upon request at a court holden, or to the Steward out of
court, have a license by him or them granted, paying for a fine to the lord
after the rate of iiii. d. for every year so unto him granted, and no more,
for so many years as he the same requires, not exceeding xxxi. years.
Nevertheless, by the said custom, it shall be lawful for any person or
persons to let his customarie lands and tenements to any person and persons,
and to their executors or assigns, for the term of three years, or less, by
writing, or by word, without license to him to be granted, and without paying
any fine to the Lord, or incurring any forfaiture or seizure for the same, so
the same lease do not exceed three years, from the date and making thereof.

38 Item, The customs of the said Mannours is, to give to the Lord upon the
change of every Lord, ten pounds, that is to say, out of each Manor
five pound, for the recognition, and acknowledging of the services.

39 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours and of either of them, the
Homage of every of the said Mannours, do use yeerelie at the general Court
to be holden next after Michelmas, to elect and choose several Reeues, for
every of the said Mannours, that is to say, to elect and choose two
customarie Tenauntes to bear the office of the Reeue, for each of the said
Mannours, namely, he that was before in election, and one other to him, to the
intent the Lord of the said Mannours or of either of them, or his Steward, may
appoint the one of them so elected, for one whole year, for each of the said
Mannours, so he be appointed within that Manor, of which he is a Tenant, and
for the which he shall be so chosen, which Reeue so being appointed, ought by
the custom of the said Mannours, to take upon him the said Office, for one
whole year then next ensuing, to execute the same by him self, or his
Deputy, for whom he shall answer, and to be subject to account and
answer for the same, as heretofore they have been accustomed to do. And if a
copieholder shall be chosen to be the lords Reelie, according to his turn, and
refuse to serve the said office by himself, or by his deputy, being appointed
thereunto, as aforesaid, every such person so refusing, within the said Manor
of Hackney, shall pay for a fine vi. li. xiii. s. iiii. d. and every such
person so refusing, within the said Manor of Stebbunhuth, shall pay for a
fine x. li. to the Lord of the said Mannours, and the homage of either
Mannours shall be charged from time to time to choose an other Reeue, in place of
him that so refuses, until such time that one be chosen that shall and will
serve the said office. And every copieholder that shall be chosen to the said
office as his turn shall come about and refuse, shall pay the fines aforesaid,
for his refusal. And if any copieholder that shall execute the said office
and does refuse to satisfy and say to the Lord such rentes, fines, and
amerciaments, wherewith he shall be lawfully charged, or shall refuse to account
with the Lord within two months next yearly after Michaehnas, having had the
extracts for that year, by the space of two months, every such Reeues Lands
and Tenementes, that shall refuse to account and to pay the said rents, fines,
amercements and issues as aforesaid, shall be seized into the Lords hands, and
the lord shall and may take to his own use, the issues and profits of his
said lands and tenements, until he shall pay unto the Lord the said
rentes, issues, fines and profits, and till he have also satisfied and paid
the Lord for his said offense: Viz. being Reeue of Hackney, vi. li. xiii. s.
iiii. d and being Reeue of Stebbunhuth. x. li.

40 Item, That every customarie Tenant whose customarie lands or tenements
holden of the said Mannours, or of either of them be worth to be sold so much
money as one years rent of assise, with the profits and proquisits of the
Courts of either of the said Mannours, within the which he shall be chosen that
year, that he shall be chosen Reeue of the said Mannours, or of either of them
shall amount unto, by the estimation of the homage, shall bear the office of
the Reeue for one whole year, when his time and course does come.

41 Item, The Reeue of Stebbunhuth is bound by custom yearly to find and
make to the Lords Steward and his counseill three dinners, that is to say, one
upon the Leete day, and the other two upon the said two general Court
days.

42 Item, Every of the said Reeues is to be allowed of the said Lord for the
exercising of the said office for one year, as follows: Viz. The Reeue of
Stebbunhuth three pound, six shillings, eight pence, and the Reeue of Hackney
liii. s. iiii. d. and either of them a coat cloth and all other commodities
due and incident to the said office.

43 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours and of either of the^ Reeues of
the said Mannours and of either of them, shall at the next general court
after his year of service expired, deliver the Rentall, by which he made his
account, to the Reeue that shall next succeed him, upon pain to be amerced or
fined by the homage, if he shall not so do.

44 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of either of them, all the
customary tenaunts of the said Mannours, and of every of them, may break and
dig their copiehold grounds holden of the said Mannours and of every of
them, at their pleasure, and fell and cut down their timber and wooddes
growing, or that shall grow upon the same, and convert it to their best use
and profit, and may also suffer their copiehold tenements and howses to decay,
without incurring any seizure or forfaiture of their estates therefore, and
may take and pull down their said Tenements, and erect or set them up again,
either where they stood before, or upon any other lands holden by coppie of
court roll of the said Mannours, or of either of them.

But they may not nor shall not take or pull them down to set them or any
part of them upon their own free holds, or upon the free holds of aanie
other, or sell or convert them or any part of them to their own use,
otherwise then is before limited.

45 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours, and of either of them, every of
the Lords Tenaunts may lop and shred all such trees as grow before their howses
or tenements, upon the wast ground, and the same convert to their own use,
without any offense, so the said trees stand for the defense of their houses,
yards, or gardens, and also may dig gravel, sand, and lome, upon the said
wast ground, to build or repair any of their copiehold tenements within the
said Mannours, or in either of them, without any license.

46 Item, if any person or persons being Tenant customarie, shall without
license by Indenture or other writing, or otherwise, let his said customarie
lands or Tenementes for term of above three years from the making thereof, it
is a forfaiture of his estate, by the custom of the said Mannours, and of
either of them, being found by the homage, or else otherwise lawfully and
sufficiently proved.

47 Item, For treason or felony whatsoever, that shall be committed by any
copieholder of the said Mannours, or of any of them, for which he shall be
lawfully attainted, he shall forfaite his copieholde lands and tenements, and
for all other offense or offenses, act or acts whatsoever, for which a
freeholder ought by law to forfaite his freeholde lands and tenements, there a
copieholder of the said Mannours or of either of them, shall forfaite as a
freeholder ought to forfaite in the like case his free hold. And if a
copieholder make a feoffament of his copiehold, gift in tail, or lease for
life or lives by deed or without deed, and livery and seisin thereupon, or
shall suffer a recovery at the common law, leuey a fine or wilfully refuse
and deny to pay, do or perform his rentes, fines, suits, customs, or
services at any time hereafter due to the lord or lords of the said Mannours,
or of either of them for their said copieholds, the same wilful refusal being
presented to the homage, by the oaths of three customarie Tenaunts, with the
Reeue or his deputy, (the said tenaunts nor Reeue, nor his deputy being none
of the Lords servants,) And being found by the homage, ye same to be a
forfaiture of his estate, whatsoever he shall have at the time of any such act
committed or done, insomuch of his or their copiehold land and tenements, as
he shall have made, committed, or done, any such act, and only for so much
of his said Lands and Tenementes, out of the which the said quitrent and
other duties is demanded, and shall be due, and wilfully denied by the said
Tenant or Tenaunts, as aforesaid. Or if any copieholder shall in the Lords
Court or else where, in any court of Record, disclaim to hold his said
copieholde lands and tenements of the Lord, or by pleading in the Lords court,
or other court of record, claim their copieholdes to be free holds, or
plead in any Real Accion at the Common Law in chief, as a free hold
Tenant, or shall do any other act or thing which shall be a disseisin or
disenheritance of the Lord or Lords of the said Mannours, or of either of
them, their heirs or assigns, (other then such acts as in these articles are
especially dispensed withal.)

That then he shall forfayre the same lands and tenementes so disclaiming to
hold, or claiming to be free hold, or for which he shall plead in Chief, or
do any such other act or thing as is aforesaid. Finally, the Lord of the
said Mannours or of either of them, shall have all such other forfaitures,
issues, profits and aduauntages of the said copiholdes that shall grow due to
him by any Statute laws of this realm, being not against and contrary to
these articles and customs here expressly set down.

48 Item, If any person or persons having any estate of any copiehold lands or
tenements holden of the said Manors or of either of them, for term of life
or lives, or for term of years, or in the right of their wives of any estate,
although he or they shall do any act or acts during the time aforesaid, in
or upon the said copieholde lands or tenementes which might or should be
contrary to the custom of the said Mannours, or of either of them, the same
Act or Acts so beeinge done, shall not prejudice or be hurtefull unto the
next person or persons to whom the said customarie lands or tenementes
should or ought to remain, reuert, or come, nor to the said wife or her
heirs, not being party, or consenting to the said act or forfaiture, nor
that the Lord of the said Manors or of either of them, shall take any longer
advantage, issues or profits of the same copiehold lands or tenements, then
during the time of such estates as is aforesaid, of the party committing,
doing, or consenting to such act or acts, so that after his or their decease
or states determined, the said lands and tenements shall remain, reuert, or
come to the next person or persons, or to such person or persons to whom ye
same should have commen or remained, or reuerted immediately after such estate
or estates ended or determined, as though there had been no such act or acts
done coutrarie to the said custom, by any such person or persons.

49 Item, By the custom of the said Mannours and of either of them, the
particular or private act or acts of any customarie tenant or tenaunts of
any of the said Mannours which shall happen to be done wilfully, by or
between them, or any of them and the Lord of the said Mannours, and his Reeue
or of either of them, contrary to the custom of the said Mannours, neither
does nor shall extend to be construed to be a breach of ye ancient customs of
the said Mannours or of either of them, to the hurt or prejudice of the rest of
the customarie tenaunts, but of themselves only, doing the said particular
act.

50 Item, that if any tenant for term of life or lives only, or for term of
years of customary lands, shall make any wast, that then he shall be fined by the
homage, the third part of which fine shall be to the Lord, and the other two
parts shall come to him in the reuercion or remainder of the said copihold.

51 Item, The Lord for non payment of amerciaments, may distraine his said
Tenaunts, and auow for the same as for rents, but he can not seize any of his
or their lands or tenements for non payment thereof, until he be paid.

52 Item, upon the admission of any coheires, joint Tenaunts, or Tenaunts in
common, if they cannot agree to occupy their Lands and Tenements together, or
to make particion among them selves, then he or they that be grieved may by the
custom of every of the said mannours have a precept from the Steward
directed to seven customarie Tenaunts or more of the said Mannours, within
which the said Lands and Tenements do lie, and they shall make particion
thereof, and the same return to the Steward of the said Mannours again to be
inroled in the Court Roles of the said Mannours, whereof the said Lands or
Tenements be holden, whervppon the said heirs shall go to the Steward of the
said Mannours within which the said Lands or Teneme^ts, shall lie, and then
elcte and choose their parts in form following. That is to say, the youngest
son to choose first, then he that is next to the youngest to choose next, and
so after that rate unto the eldest, how many so ever, which eldest shall
choose last, and likewise the same order is to be observed amongst daughters,
if there be no sons. And amongst all other degrees of heirs touching the
customarie Lands and Tenements holden of the said Mannours or either of them,
and upon every such particion, they shall pay for a fine to the Lord, ii. s.
vi. d. or less, at the discretion of the Steward, according to the quantity
of the Lands or Tenements so parted, between Tenaunts in common, and ioynte
Tenaunts, for the like fine, the said division to be by the said Tenaunts
without election of the parties themselves, but by casting of Lottes, if they
cannot otherwise agree.

53 Item, if any customarie or free tenaunts cattle, or the cattels of their
farmours be brought to the Lords pound, the said Tenant or his farmour shall
pay for all his Cattle if they be a hundred heddes or upwards, or under, for
the poundage thereof but one penny, and he that is no tenant shall pay for every
distres of cattle so pounded four pence.

54 Item, if any cattle be impounded with in ye lords pound by any person or
persons being a customary tenant or tenaunts of the said Mannours or of
either of them for any trespass committed or done within the said Mannours, or
in either of them, upon their coppiholds, that all such Cattle being so
impownded, may by two of the customary tenaunts of the said Mannours or of
either of the^ wherein the said Trespass shall be committed, which will answer for
all such damags and costs as shall be recovered in the said Court against the
owners of the same Cattle, for the said Trespass, be delivered out of the
said pownd unto the owner of the said Cattle, by the custom of the same
mannours, and of either of the^.

55 Item, by the custom of ye said manors and of either of the^, no customary
tenant shall sue, vex, or trouble any other customarie Tenant, for any title
of Lands or Tenements lying and being within the said Mannours or in either
of them, being Coppihold Lands or tenements of the said Mannours or of either
of them, out of the Lords Court, without the special license first had and
obtained of the Lord of the said Mannours, or of either of them, or of his
Steward for the time being, if any person do the contrary, he shall have his
Lands or tenementes seized into the Lords hands, until he pay a fine to the
Lord for the same offense, such fine as shall be sessed by thomage at the next
general Court of the said Manor or Mannours.

56 Item, that no customary Tenant of the said Mannours or of either of them
for any offense to be done by any man's Cattle within the said Mannours,
or in either of them, shall drive the same Cattle to any foreign pounds, but
to the lords pound, being within the said Mannours, or in either of them, if
any man do the contrary, to be amerced at the next general court by the
homage.

57 Item, that no tenant or any other person shall set any stake, mark or
meare, between tenant and tenant, or between Tenant and any other person
that lies next unto him, without the parties do thereunto agree, unless an
order be appointed by the Homage, that it may be first viewed by twelve tenants
of the said Mannours, or of either of them, where the stake or meare is to be
set, and there to set the stake or mark, indifferently between both the
said parties, and so to continue it upon pain of amerciament by the homage.

58 Item, by the custom, the homage do yeerelie use at the general Court
holden after Low Sunday, to elect and choose out of the hamlets within euirie
of the said Mannours, certain customary Tenaunts to be driuers and viewers of
the wastes and commons of the said Mannours or of either of them for one whole
year, which have authority by the said Custom to drive the commons at any
time when they find it surcharged, and to impound the Cattle by them so
taken, and no other so to drive the said common, then the persons so chosen as
aforesaid.

59 Item, if by their driving the Surcharging cannot be remedied, then they
ought to inform the Homage thereof at the next Court, that they may amerce
thoffenders, whether the said offenders be Tenaunts or no Tenaunts, and also
to put a pain or an amerciame^t upon their heads, that they shall not
likewise offend.

60 Item, if the said driuers receive by the said poundages any more money then
they spend in their travel, the rest shall be employed to the Scowring of the
common sewers, which be upon the said wast grounds and commons, and laying of
bridges over the said common sewers, and shall make their account in that
behalf to ye homage at the general court, when ye year for which they were
chosen shall expire.

61 Item, by ye custom of the said Manors and of either of them, the
coppieholde and customary tenaunts have used to make byelawes at their general
courts when ned have so required, which custom shall be continued and the said
bylawes so by the^ made, shall bind all the Coppiehold Tetauns of the said
Mannours or of either of them, so the same be not contrary to the true
meaning of these Articles.

62 Item, by the custom of the said manors and of either of the^, tenaunts in
tail of customarie Lands and tenements may suffer common recoueries within ye
said several Manors, with single or double vouchers, or by agreement forfait
the said Lands and Tenements into the Lords hand for the cutting of the estate
tail, which custom by these Articles shall hauc still continuance, and that
such recoueries and forfaitures are and shall be good by the said custom to
bar the said intaile.

Sealed and delivered in the presence of Edmond Poley, John Lany, Thomas
Wakelin, Thomas Kent, William Onslow, John Iermy.

