A Curse become a Blessing: OR, A SERMON PREACHED IN the Parish Church of S.
John the Baptist, in the I Will of Thannet, in the County of KENT, at the Funeral
of that virtuous and worthy Gentleman Mr. PAVL CLEYBROOKE Esquire.

By WILLIAM STONE Preacher of Gods Word: on Tuesday, September 17. 1622.

REVEL. 14.13. Blessed are the dead which die in the Lord, from henceforth,
yea, says the Spirit, that they may rest from their labors, and their works
do follow them.

LONDON, Printed by John Haviland for William Sheffard, and are to be sold at
his shop at the entering in of Pope's Head Alley out of Lombard street. 1623.

TO THE WORSHIPFVLL AND VIRTUOUS GENTLEWOman Mistress MARY CLEYBROOKE: Grace and
Peace.
WEre there nothing else to prove that the death of the righteous, that is, of
every believing and repentant sinner, is a most excellent blessing of God, even
this were sufficient, that it is precious in Gods sight. For what can befall to
the dear children of God, which is an excellent blessing of his unto them, if
that for one be not such a blessing, of which he says, that it is precious in
his sight? Of all terrible things, death seems most terrible, but it is not so
indeed to them that be in Christ, to whom many things happen more bitter and
heavy than death it self.

This Sermon, being a little enlarged, beyond that which was delivered, in the
latter points of the text, I present unto you, to whom of right it belongs. It
is all that I am able to offer unto you, in token of my thankfulness for the
love and kindnesses both of the dead, and of the living. Accept it, I beseech
you, and read it at your leisure; and I pray God to bless this little mite,
that it may both further your present comfort, and the salvation of your soul.

Your Worships in the Lord, WILLIAM STONE.

TO THE READER.
CHristian Reader, thou have here in few words, the definitive sentence of the
Holy Ghost, touching the death of the Saints, that Precious in the sight of the
Lord is the death of his Saints. From which, after the exposition and division
of the Text, is observed; first, that there be Saints upon earth: Secondly,
that these same Saints be liable to bodily death: Thirdly, that they be the
Lords, and that after a special manner: And fourthly, that their death is
precious: which being further confirmed by the judgment of the Lord, is both
comfortable to them that mourn, and directs every one how to judge aright of
all things and events. Pray, read, meditate, and practice, and the Lord give
the increase.

December 5. 1622. Farewell. W. S.

A FUNERAL SERMON.
PSALM 116.15. Precious in the sight of the Lord, is the death of his Saints.


BEfore I say any thing of the occasion of this our meeting, let us first
consider this present Text, and the instructions thereof: Precious in the sight
of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

It is a matter of great consequence, and a ground of no small comfort, to
understand aright, what to hold of the death of the Saints. For to the ungodly
it seems a very jest and a laughing sport. They are glad to see the death of
the best men, and most zealous, because then they think that all things shall
go presently as they desire to have it. And to the godly themselves, it seems
fearful and miserable for the present time.

Now touching this matter, the sentence of the Holy Ghost is propounded unto
us, in the words which ye have heard, to this effect: That it is precious in
Gods sight. Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

In handling this Text, both for help of memory, and plainness sake, I will
observe this method; first, declare the meaning of the words. Secondly, show
the parts thereof. And lastly, handle the several instructions from thence
arising.

In giving the meaning of the words, I will follow the order of the Text, first
declaring them severally, as they lie in the Text, and then gather into one
sum that which has been said, both plainly and briefly.

Precious. Precious.
] The original word is (...) jakar, which the Septuagint translate most
commonly (...) n="a" 1 Samuel 3.1. 2 Samuel 12.30. 1 King. 5.17. and 7.9, 10, 11.
and (...) n="b" Job 28.10. Psalm. 72.14. Prou. 20.15. Isai. 43.4.
, which signify precious; once (...) n="c" Zach. 11.13.
, approved; once (...) n="d" Ezekiel. 28.13.
, profitable, good, or commodious; and once (...) n="e" Prou. 1.13.
of great price and worth. In our English Bibles of the new Translation, it is
rendered most commonly, precious n="f" 1 Samuel 3.1. and 26.21. Prou. 3.15. and
6.26. and 12.27. and 20.15. and 24.4.
; sometimes, costly n="g" 1 King. 5.17. and 7.9, 10, 11.
; once, noble n="h" Ezra 4.10.
; once, better n="i" Eccles 9.18.
; and once, goodly n="k" Zach. 11.13. In the sight.
. Neither can I but remember what one has noted, saying; Dicitur autem
pretiosum, quod rarum, and non omnibus obuium est; that is to say, That thing
is called precious, which is rare, and not to be met with of all. Out of this I
gather, that Precious in this place is as much to say, as of great esteem, an
excellent thing, exceeding profitable, good and honorable.

In the sight; (...) begnene. The Hebrew signifies, in the eyes. Properly the
Eye is that member of the body, whose faculty is to see lightsome things, and
to direct our way. Now diverse members of the body of man are attributed to God,
as the head, the hands, the heart, the feet, and here, the eyes; but not
properly, but figuratively; for properly God has no such members. The eyes of
God.


The Eyes of God do signify, either first, the good will and favor of God
n="l" Psalm. 17.8. and 33.18. and 34.15. 1 Pet. 3.12.
; as in that speech of the Psalmist: The eyes of the Lord are upon the
righteous: And of Job n="m" Job 36.7.
; He withdraws not his eyes from the righteous. n="n" 2 Chro. 16.9.
; as in that speech of Hanani the Seer, to Asa King of Judah; For the eyes of
the Lord run to and fro throughout the whole earth. the knowledge of God,
that so we might understand that God is not ignorant of any thing, but knows
all things, both secret and apparent; past, present, and to come, as perfectly
and thoroughly, as if he looked upon them, and saw them with his eyes. Thus
Solomon says: The eyes of the Lord are in every place, Prou. 15.3.
beholding the evil and the good.

The sight of God.
But according to our English Translation, not any member, but one of the
outward senses, is here attributed to God, to wit, the sight; for it is said,
In the sight of the Lord: but the meaning is all one. For the sight of God
having any of his own works for the object, signifies his judgment,
account, and approving of the thing. As God is said to have seen the light,
that it was good, Genesis 1.4.
that is to say, to have judged, accounted, and approved it to be good. But if
it have men and their doings for the object, then it signifies his perfect
knowledge both of them and of their doings: As the Apostle says; Hebr. 4.13.
Neither is there any creature that is not manifest in his sight: but all
things are naked and opened unto the eyes of him with whom we have to do. And
so it is said of the Kings of Israel and Judah, that such a one did right, and
such a one did evil in the sight of the Lord. And thus we read, that the
Angel of God, to wit, Jesus Christ, spoke unto Jacob in a dream, saying; I
have seen all that Laban does unto thee. Genesis 31.12. Exodus 3.7. Prou. 15.3.
And when the Lord said, I have surely seen the affliction of my people which
are in Egypt. In this sense also the eyes of the Lord are said to be in every
place, beholding the evil and the good. In this text which I have now in hand,
these words, in the sight, be as much to say, as in the judgment, esteem, and
account of the Lord.

LORD in great letters.
Of the LORD. Ye find (if ye mark it) the word LORD, written in this place,
and in many places else in the Bibles of the new Translation, in capital or
great letters: and likewise the word GOD, diverse times so printed, and namely
in the Prophecy of Ezekiel. In all these places in the Hebrew, it is either
Iah, or Jehovah, but most commonly Jehovah, as it is in this text. Except in a
few places, where the English of Adonai, the LORD, is so written: as namely in
the places quoted in the margent n="a" Genesis 18.27. Number. 14.17. Deu. 10.17.
Josh. 7.8. Judge. 13.8.2 King. 4.28.
. And likewise of Adon, the LORD, once in Malachi n="b" Mal. 3.1.
. And contrarily, the English of Jehovah, the Lord, is written in small
letters, in one place of Jeremiah, in some Bibles, in these words, The Lord of
hosts in his name n="c" Ier. 51.19. Printed Anno 1613. in 8. The names of God.
. And this might happen either through the Scribe, or the Printers fault.

The names of God in the Scripture be diverse, whereof some signify the
proprieties of his essence; as the Almighty, the most High, the Holy one. And
others the very essence it self: and these in the Hebrew text be three,
Jehovah, Iah, Ehjeh; and may be rendered in English; God, the Lord, I Am, or,
the Lord, the Lord, I Am. Here he is named Jehovah, by the first of these
three. A name so proper to the Lord, that it is never attributed, nor can it
agree to any of the creatures. As the Psalmist says; That men may know that
thou, Psalm. 83.18.
whose Name alone is Jehovah: art the most High over all the earth.

What Jehovah signifies.
It signifies three things; first, that God has his being of himself n="d"
Reu. 1.4. and 16.5.
: Secondly, that all creatures have their being from him n="e" Act. 17.28. Romans
11.36.
: Thirdly, that he causes all things to come to pass, according to his own
meaning, whether he promise or threaten. For this cause he adds so often this
speech; And they shall know that I am Jehovah, or, that I am the Lord, to his
promises n="g" Ezekiel. 29.21. and 34.30.
, and threatenings n="h" Ezekiel. 7.27. and 12.15, 16. and 15.7. and 20.26. Jehovah
used personally, Psalm. 110.1. See also Psalm. 2.2.
.

It is used two ways, either Personally, or Essentially.

First, Personally, to note one or two of the Persons of the blessed Trinity,
as the Father, in this speech; The Lord, in the original, Jehovah, that is,
the Father said unto my Lord, that is, unto the Son, Sit thou at my right
hand: until I make thine enemies thy footstool. It notes the Son, when
Moses says; And the Lord, in Hebrew, Genesis 18.1.
Ieheuah, appeared unto him, in the plains of Mamre. And it notes the Holy
Ghost, in these words of Isaiah; Holy, Isai. 6.3, 5.
holy, holy, is the Lord of hosts. And again, for mine eyes have seen the
King, the Lord of hosts. In both these speeches, this word, the Lord, is in
Hebrew Jehovah; and that it notes the Holy Ghost is plain by this, that the
Apostle Paul alleging the same words, which the Lord in this place commands
Isaiah to tell the people, says; Well spoke the Holy Ghost by Esaias the
Prophet, Act. 28.25.
unto our Fathers. And in this same place of the Prophet Isaiah, it notes also
the Son. As appears by comparing it with that place in Saint John, where he
says; John 12.41.
These things said Esaias, when he saw his glory, and spoke of him. Sometimes
also the Father and the Son are noted by this title, being twice used in one
and the same verse. As when Moses says; Then the Lord, that is, the Son,
Genesis 19.24.
rained upon Sodom, and upon Gomorrah, brimstone and fire from the Lord, that
is to say, from the Father, out of heaven. And again, in Zechariah; And the
Lord, that is, the Son, Zech. 3.2.
said unto Satan; The Lord, that is, the Father, rebuke thee, O Satan, even the
Lord, that is, the Father, that has chosen Jerusalem rebuke thee. In all these
places the word translated, the Lord, is in the original, Jehovah.

Jehovah used Essentia^ly.
Secondly, this word is used Essentially, to note God Almighty, one God in
essence: as in this speech of Isaiah, The Lord Jehovah is my strength and my
song. Isai. 12.2. and 26.4.
And again; Trust ye in the Lord for ever: for in the Lord Jehovah is
everlasting strength. In this sense it is taken, in these words of David;
Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints.

The death. Understand by death here, The death.
the death of the body, or temporal death, which is a privation of the life of
the body, by means of the local separating of the soul from it for a time.

Against the Vbiquitaries.
I would have this word well marked, that I say, by means of the local
separating of the soul from the body. For hereupon the death of Christ
confuteth the Vbiquitaries, which hold that his body is every where present.
But if Christ died truly; if his death that he dyed upon the cross were a true
bodily death, then his body is not every where: because if it were every where,
and if it had been every where, at that time when it hung upon the cross,
then his soul could not had been locally separated from his body: but his
soul was locally separated from his body, or else he dyed not truly; therefore
the body of Christ, nor yet his soul was not every where then. And as it was
then, so is it now; for his body is the same which then it was, and has the
same proprieties which then it had. And if his body, nor yet his soul, Of his
Saints.
were not every where then, neither be they every where now. It follows.

Of his Saints. The Hebrew word is (...) Lachasidau; which is as much to say,
as Of his dearly beloved ones; or, of his tender hearted, meek, and merciful
ones; or, of them of whom he has pity, and on whom he has mercy. For the
Hebrew word (...) Chasid, imports such as to whom God shows mercy, and so
are made also to trust and rely upon his mercy and goodness, and to show
themselves pitiful, merciful, and godly in their conuersations. It occurres
much oftener in the book of the Psalms, than in all the rest of the Bible.
Most commonly it is translated by the Septuagint in their Greek translation,
(...) n="a" Deuteronomy. 33.8. 2 Samuel 22.26. 2 Chronicles. 6.41. Psalm. 4.3. and 12.1. and
16.10. and 18.25. and 30.4. and 31.23. and 31.6. and 37.28. and 50.5. and 52.9.
etc.
; holy; once (...) n="b" Psalm. 89.19.
, a Son; once (...) n="c" Mic. 7.2.
, venerable, or religious; and once (...) n="d" Pro. 2.8.
; reuerencing. In our English Bibles also of the new translation, I find it
diverse ways translated. Most commonly, Saints n="e" 2 Chronicles. 6.41. Ps. 30.4.
and 31.23. and 37.28. and 50.5. and 52.9. and 79 2. and 85.8. and 97.10. and
132.9, 16. and 145.10. and 148.14. and 149.1, 5, 9. Pro. 2.8.
; sometimes, holy n="f" Deuteronomy. 33.8. Psalm. 16.10. and 86.2. and 89.19. and
145.17.
; thrice, godly n="g" Psa. 4.3. and 12.1. and 32.6.
; twice, merciful n="h" 2 Samuel 22.26. Psalm. 18.25.
; and once, the good man n="i" Mic. 7 2.
Out of which I gather that by Saints in this place, are meant Gods Elect and
beloved children, effectually called, justified, and sanctified; people that
are holy, righteous, sober, and godly.

Thus have I gone through with the words of the text, taking word by word. Now
let us gather into one sum, the total of the things which have been
delivered touching the meaning thereof.

Precious, that is to say, of great esteem, very profitable and honorable, in
the sight of the Lord, that is to say, in the judgment of the Lord, and in his
account, is the death, that is, the bodily death, of his Saints, that is to
say, of his elect, whom he has called and sanctified, and to whom he has
vouchsafed his special favor, and the grace to live soberly, righteously, and
godlily in this present world, denying ungodliness and worldly lusts.

Thus have I done with the first thing touching the meaning of the words. The
second follows, touching the parts of the Text.

The parts of the Text.

THis Text has two parts: First, a proposition or theme; secondly, an argument
of confirmation, or a proof thereof. The proposition is this, that the death
of the Saints is precious; precious is the death of his Saints. The proof is
in these words; in the sight of the Lord.

In the proposition there be two things to be considered; First, the subject or
antecedent; Secondly, the attribute or consequent.

The subject contains the matter whereof the speech is; in these words of the
text; The death of the Saints.

The attribute shows what is spoken of this matter, in these words; is
precious.

And thus have I done with the second branch of my promise. The third
remains, which is concerning the instructions that arise from this Text,
which I will propound unto you according to the order of the parts, as now ye
have heard them.

The Instructions.

FIrst then I have to begin with the proposition, and namely with the subject
or antecedent thereof, in these words of the text, the death of the Saints.
Neither let any man marvel, that I begin with the last words of the text
first. The learned do see the reason for it. For the parts are inuerted in the
order of the text. The proof being inserted between the consequent and the
antecedent; and both the consequent and the proof being set before the
antecedent. But let the inuerted parts be placed in order, and the text stands
thus: The death of his Saints, or, the death of the Saints is precious in the
sight of the Lord. In this order the parts do plainly appear; and this order
must I follow.

To proceed then with the subject, the death of the Saints: first note this,
that in the Scripture there is a twofold death attributed to the Saints; the
one spiritual, and the other, bodily.

The spiritual death attributed to the Saints.
The spiritual death attributed to the Saints is likewise double, one before
their calling, most miserable and woeful; another after their calling, most
blessed and comfortable.

Before their calling they are dead in sins and trespasses. Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5.
As the Apostle says, And you has he quickened who were dead in trespasses
and sins. And again a little after; But God who is rich in mercy, for his
great love wherewith he loved us, Even when we were dead in sins, has
quickened us together with Christ. What death in sin, or spiritual death is.
This spiritual death is a privation of communion and fellowship with God, and
of the grace of God quickening us together with Christ: and is incident to the
elect together with the reprobate before their calling.

Three branches of spiritual death in the Saints.
But after their calling they have experience in themselves of another manner of
spiritual death, of which there be these three branches; first, upon the right
understanding of the doctrine of the Law to be brought to see and feel that
they are dead and most wretched, 1. A death at the coming of the commandment.
and that there is nothing in themselves, save matter of death and eternal
damnation, by reason of their sins; and so they are stirred up to seek
succor elsewhere. Thus Paul died; as he says; But when the commandment came,
Romans 7.9.
sin revived, and I died. That is to say, when I had the right understanding
of the commandment of God, and had considered well of it, sin did rage and
trouble my mind, which had lain still before, and by reason of my sin, I saw
nothing in my self, but matter of death and damnation, and so I was driven to
seek help in Jesus Christ, that my soul might be saved.

Secondly, the Saints are dead to the Law; 2. A death unto the Law. Gal. 2.19.
as the Apostle says; For I through the Law, am dead to the Law, that I might
live unto God. The meaning is; they are freed from the dominion of the Law: and
that by means of the Law it self, which accuses, terrifieth, and condemns
them, and thereby occasioneth or urges them to fly unto Christ, which is the
cause of this death. And they are dead to the Law, that is to say, they are
free from the dominion of the Law in four respects. Act. 15.10. Romans 6.14, 15.
and 7.6.
Romans 7.8.
whereby as an occasion it provoke and stirs up the corruption of the heart
in the unregenerate. Act. 15. 1 Cor. 9.1, 19. 2 Cor. 3.17. Heb. 9.10. John 1.17.
of the Judicial and Ceremonial Law, to wit, so far, as they properly
pertained only to the policy of Moses, and the rutorship of the ancient people
and Church of God: such as be the laws concerning sacrifices, and the whole
outward worship prescribed by Moses. But such laws amongst them as belong to
the Law of Nature, and have always bound all Nations of the world, there is no
death to them, nor no freeing therefrom.

3. A death unto sin and the world.
Thirdly, there is a spiritual death which the Saints feel in themselves, by
which they die to sin and to the world, that is to say, by which they more
and more bid sin farewell, 1 Cor. 15.31. Gal. 6.14.
and sever themselves from the men of this world, as much as possibly they can,
by faith and repentance.

This is a blessed death springing from the death of Christ, by a virtue and
power derived therefrom for the beating down and killing of the strength of
sin in us that be his members. For that same divine power, which supported
his manhood so that he sunk not, when he stood charged with our sins, and
died for us, and we in him; even that same divine power works in all his
members for the mortifying of sin through his death. From whence it comes
that every true believer dies more and more to sin continually. And this now
cannot but be a most precious death in the sight of God, being an effect of the
death of his Son, of whom he says; This is my beloved Son in whom I am
well pleased: and in whom he was (as the Apostle bears witness) reconciling
the world unto himself, Matthew. 3.17. 2 Cor. 5.19.
not imputing their trespasses unto them. But nevertheless it is not that
death, which David here means.

We must therefore consider that other kind of death, which according to the
Scripture the Saints be subject unto, Bodily death attributed to the Saints.
and that is the death of the body; of which I said, that it is a privation of
the life of the body, by means of the local separating of the soul from the
body fora time.

This death of the body (as I conceive) is the death which David does
especially mean in this place.

The death of his Saints.

FIrst, this very mentioning of the death of the Saints, does imply this much,
which I note for the instruction of some ignorant and unlearned people, that
live among us, whom I desire well to mark it, and to learn from this Sermon,
that

Doct. Some be Saints in this life: And namely all Gods people, even all that
be saved, Gods people be all Saints before they die.
be Saints before their death. This very speech, the death of his Saints,
implies thus much. And it is according to our Creed, in the ninth article
whereof, we confess that we believe the Communion of the Saints; which is not
only to be understood of the Saints in heaven, but also of the Saints upon
earch. And thus the Epistles of Paul, for diverse of them, are directed to the
Saints. As the Epistle to the Ephesians; To the Saints which are at Ephesus.
Ephesians. 1.1. Philip. 1.1. Col. 1.2.
And the Epistle to the Philippians; To all the Saints in Christ Jesus which
are at Philippi. And likewise the Epistle to the Colossians; To the Saints and
faithful brethren in Christ, which are at Colosse. In all which places are
understood by the Saints, Gods faithful servants then alive upon the earth.
And as it was then, so is it now. Psalm. 30.4. and 31.23. and 34.9 and 37.28.
and 50.5. and 52.9. and 79.2. and 85 8. and 89.7. and 97.10. and 13 29, 16. and
145.10 and 148.14. and 149.1, 5, 9. Psalm. 16.3. Act. 9.13.
As many faithful servants as God has amongst mankind throughout the world,
so many Saints there be living at this day upon the earth. And in this sense
the word Saints, is taken above a dozen times in the book of the Psalm. In one
place whereof express mention is made of the Saints on earth. In the sixteenth
Psalm at the third verse, be these words: But to the Saints that are in the
earth. And in the Acts of the Apostles; Ananias says: Lord I have heard by
many of this man, how much evil he has done to thy Saints at Jerusalem. And
Paul himself in the presence of Agrippa declaring his life from his
childhood, has these very words; Act. 26.10.
And many of the Saints did I shut up in prison. Which cannot possibly be taken
otherwise, then of some that then were alive upon the earth. And thus Aaron,
while he lived, and was envied of some, is called the Saint of the Lord: They
envied Moses also in the Camp, Psalm. 106.16.
and Aaron the Saint of the Lord. So that it is certain, and as clear as the
sunshine, that there be Saints in this world. If it were not so, there were no
holy Catholic Church for us to believe according to our Creed: nor any one man
nor woman living at this day upon the face of the earth, that were the true
child of God.

Question. Who then be the Saints now alive upon the earth?

Answer. Lambert in his Paradoxes. cap. 2. Parad. 31, and 36.(...). Mac. hom.
17. Why Gods children on earth be called Saints.
Lambert shall tell thee: They be Saints, (says he) that be translated from
profane or worldly things, to godly and spiritual things, and made holy and
consecrated unto God. And again; All true faithful people be Saints.
Otherwise thus: Every man and woman that is effectually called, and
regenerated by the Holy Ghost, to live justly and holily; every such is a
Saint. And such be called Saints, not to note an absolute perfection in them:
1 Cor. 2.30.
But of him are ye in Christ Jesus, who of God is made unto us wisdom, and
righteousness, and sanctification, and redemption.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly: and I pray God your whole
spirit, and soul, and body be preserved blameless unto the coming of our
Lord Jesus Christ. There is no part nor power of body or soul, but feels the
virtue of Gods Spirit purging away corruption, and fastening impressions of
holy qualities. It may be this power of Gods sanctifying Spirit appears not
alike evidently in every part, yet has every particle his seasoning with
sanctity.

1 Pet. 1.16.
Be ye holy, for I am holy: they labor to express holiness, both in their
thoughts before God, and in their words and deeds before God and men. Because
it is written; Heb. 12.14.
Follow peace with all men, and holiness, without which no man shall see the
Lord.

Gal. 1.4.
This present evil world, and be said all of them to lie in wickedness, in
these words of S. John: We know that we are of God, 1 John 5.19.
and the whole world lies in wickedness. Thus ye see who in the world be
Saints, and why they be so called, being yet alive upon the earth.

The Use. This serves to condemn that ignorant sort, that all this while in
the clear light of the Gospel, To condemn their ignorance, that think there
be no Saints upon earth.
have not learned thus much, that there be Saints upon earth. Nay (as it
seems) some lie so plunged in this gulf of ignorance, that not only they do
not know that there be Saints upon earth, but that they dare break out and
say, that they will never believe it: I will never believe (said one) that any
be Saints upon earth. Oh graceless speech I Oh damnable ignorance! I wish all
you that hear this, be better instructed in this point. But mark what I say;
I speak it to thee, that art of the mind that there be no Saints upon earth.
Thou thine own self art either a Saint or a Devil. And if thou be no Saint,
thou have no faith in Christ. For none that has faith in Christ, but he is a
Saint. Again, mark this, if thou be not a Saint upon earth before thou do
die, thou shall never be a Saint in heaven after thou art dead. And therefore,
if thou will never believe that any be Saints upon earth, I will never believe
that ever thou shall be a Saint in heaven. For death does sanctify none.
Neither will God make any one a Saint in the kingdom of heaven, which was not
before his death made a Saint upon earth. Consider of it, and receive
instruction.

The death of his Saints.

THere be two or three things more to be noted in these words; The death of
his Saints: whereof one arises as the former point from the very mentioning of
the Saints death, The best ^re subject to death. Heb 9.27. and 11.13. Z^^^. ^.5.
and that is this, that

Doct. The best men are liable to bodily death. The holiest Saints that live in
the world must make this account, that they shall one day die. The Apostle
makes no exception, when he says to the Hebrews; It is appointed unto men
once to die. And of certain of the Saints he says; These all died in faith.
And Zechariah says; Your fathers, where are they? And the Prophets, do they
live f^r ever? Death is the way of all the earth, as Joshua and David said,
when they were ready to die. And behold, this day I am going the way of all the
earth n="a" Josh 23.14.
. And David: I go the way of all the earth n="b" 1 King. 2.2.
. Adam n="c" Genesis 5.5.
, Sheth n="d" Genesis 5.8.
, Enosh n="e" Genesis 5.11.
, Cainan n="f" Genesis 5.14.
, Mahalaleel n="g" Genesis 5.17.
, Iared n="h" Genesis 5.20.
, Methushelah n="i" Genesis 5.27.
, Lamech n="k" Genesis 5.31.
, Noah n="l" Genesis 9.29.
; though their lives were long; for they lived all of them many hundreds of
years; yet they are dead and gone. Likewise Abraham n="m" Genesis 25.8.
and Sarah n="n" Genesis 23.2.
, Isaac n="o" Genesis 35.29.
, and Rebekah n="p" Genesis 49.31.
, Jacob n="q" Genesis 49.33.
and Rachel n="r" Genesis 35.19.
, Job n="s" Job 42.17.
, David n="t" 1 King. 2.10.
, Solomon n="u" 1 King. 11.43.
, Hezekiah n="*" 2 King. 20.21.
, Josiah n="x" 2 Chro. 35.24.
, Samuel n="y" 1 Samuel 25.1.
, and the Prophets n="z" Ioh. 8.53.
are dead. All these were Saints, yet they have tasted of deaths cup, with many
thousands more.

Question. But why should the Saints die, seeing Christ has died for them?

Answer. It is true that Christ has died for them: yet they must die. The ends
of Christ's death.
as the freeing of the Saints from bodily death. For these be the ends of
Christ's death.







Heb. 9.15, 16, 17.


Heb. 2.14.
the Devil.



Heb. 2.15.
and sin might not reign in us.

Romans 6.11, 12.
that we should be Christ's being married to him, as a wife to a second husband
after the death of the first. Romans 7.2, 3, 4.


1 Cor. 5.15.
and rose again.

1 Ioh. 3.16.
and publish it unto others.

1 Thessalonians. 5.10.


1 Ioh. 3.16.
and the brethren.



Romans 6.10.
the wages of sin.

These be the ends of the death of Christ, 2 Timothy 1.10.
but the discharging of the Saints from bodily death is none of them.

Objection. But if among the ends of Christ's death this be reckoned for one,
that he might abolish death, it seems then that the Saints should not die.
For what is it to abolish death, if it be not quite to take it away, that it
should not be at all?

How death is abolished.
Answ. If ye understand it of death eternal, which is the second death, it is
quite taken away in respect of Gods elect: according to that speech of our
Savior Christ; John 11.26.
Whosoever lives and believes in me, shall never die. The second death has
no power on the Saints. As says Saint John; Reu. 20.6.
Blessed and holy is he that has part in the first resurrection: on such the
second death has no power. But if ye refer it to the first death, to wit,
the death of the body, the sting of it is taken away, so that it is no more a
curse for the sins which we have committed; nay it is turned into a
blessing, and made a joyful passage and entrance into heaven. But if ye apply
it to the death of the soul, which is another kind, or another branch of the
first death, that also is vanquished and overcome, and we recover out of it,
when we are spiritually quickened with the life of grace, 1 Cor. 4.11. Ephesians.
4.18.
called by S. Paul, the life of Jesus, the life of God; and it is also called
the life of the spirit. And though this death hang about us, as long as we are
in this tabernacle, Romans 8.23. Romans 7.24.
and make us groan within our selves, and cry out with the Apostle; O
wretched man that I am: who shall deliver me from the body of this death? Yet
it cannot hurt us; and it daily abateth as the life of grace increases. And
when our change is come, we shall be fully and for ever discharged from it. For
death is vanquished, but the time is not yet come, that it must be utterly
destroyed. For the Apostle has taught us, that it is the last enemy that
shall be destroyed; 1 Cor. 15.26.
The last enemy (says he) that shall be destroyed, is death. It is
captiuated, and brought under the power of Christ the Conqueror, and comfort
your selves, every kind of death shall be fully destroyed, and quite abolished
in the due time.

sanctify it unto us: that that which at first came by means of sin, and in
it self is a curse for sin, and the wages thereof, may be turned into a
blessed means to further our happiness. And thus also we are weary, and
hunger, and thirst, and feel pains many and manifold, although Christ also
has suffered all this for us. Conceive it then, that in respect of the Saints,
death is abolished both the first and second, of the soul and the body, as it
is the wages of sin, (for what have we to do with the wages of the works,
which we do not attend?) but yet we must still suffer it, as it is an
infirmity to which our bodies are made subject, and we must pass through it, as
it is the way and gate into that glorious life in the kingdom of heaven.

Malachi; Mal. 3.18.
Then shall ye return and discern between the righteous and the wicked,
between him that serves God, and him that serves him not. Now if only the
reprobates, wicked men and hypocrites, did die, and the elect not die, then
might it be discerned who were elected and truly sanctified, before that day
come.

Adam, saying; Genesis 3.19.
In the sweat of thy face shall thou eat thy bread till thou return unto the
ground: for out of it wast thou taken, for dust thou art, and unto dust shall
thou return.

pride of our own nature, the false ouerweening and vain selfe-trust
wherewith we be puffed up, how stubborn we be against the Lord, and at how low
a rate we prise his goodness, and we shall find, that to do us good and to
bring us to life, he must be feign to make us pass through the gates of death.
And why? To keep us in awe and humble us, to make us to know our selves, and
how rich he is in mercy, in his dealing with us; to the intent we may yield the
more honor and reverence to our only wise, immortal and good God. And may
say every one of us, alas, I might justly have been sunken before this day to
the bottom of hell, and if God were not wondrous merciful, what is due to my
whole life for my manifold sins? I have deserved to die not only the death of
the body, but the second death, even the death of soul and body eternally.
Thus you see how it is good for the Saints to be kept in awe, and taught
humility, by being appointed to die.

1 Cor. 15.36.
as the corn which is sown is not quickened except it die: so is it with us;
we cannot partake of the resurrection of the just, except we die. For they
that remain alive at the coming of the Lord, shall not die to attain unto
the resurrection; 1 Cor. 15.51. 1 Thessalonians. 4.15, 16, 17.
but they shall all be changed, and be hindmost in the company that shall
meet the Lord in the air.

The Use. First then, is it true? are the Saints subject to death? We must
ponder upon this, that we are subject to death.
Let us ponder upon it, that we deserve such an unhappy condition. And that
were it not for Gods mercy unto us in Christ, contrary to that which we have
deserved, we must all die and be damned for evermore. Let us think upon it.
Neither let any think it strange, because Christ has died for us, and rose
again, and are dead with Christ, and risen again with him, and when as our
sins are forgiven and quite done away, which brought death upon us, that yet
nevertheless God will not release us, but make us drink of deaths cup. For
although we ought to be glad of it, because God proceeds and deals in such
wise, that we be nothing hindered thereby, but that we may come boldly unto the
throne of grace, and call upon him quietly and without distraction, and at the
hour of death may commend our souls into his hands, and pray for the glorious
resurrection of our bodies, and (as it were) cast our selves into his fatherly
lap; although I say, we ought to be glad of this; yet is it good for us to have
some feeling of the misery, into which we have plunged our selves, not only to
humble us, and that we should set the more store by his mercy, as I said
before, but to make us judge our selves, that we be not judged of the Lord, and
to make us by faith to lay the faster hold upon his gracious promises, and the
more carefully to serve him with such reverence and fear, as is requisite for
us.

Awake from sin and leave it.
and make us shun it, and hate the very motions of it. For sin is the
cause of all our misery and mortality. As the Prophet Jeremiah says in his
Lamentations; Wherefore does man complain, Lam. 3.39.
a man for the punishment of his sins? Intimating that man by his sins does
bring punishments upon himself. And the Apostle Paul says; Romans 5.12. (...).
Mac. Hom. 11. Jude 23. Mic. 3.1, 2. Amos 5.14, 15.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin: and so death
passed upon all men, for that all have sinned. He makes sin, ye see, the
cause of all men's mortality. Wherefore shun sin, and as the Apostle Jude
says; Hate even the garment spotted by the flesh. And be not like those heads
of Jacob, and Princes of the house of Israel, of whom Micah says, that they
hate the good, and love the evil. Be not like to them; but as Amos says:
Seek good, and not evil. And again; Hate the evil, and love the good. For
say, we must die, and cannot avoid it, whatsoever we do; yet take away
sin, and the sting of death is gone. For, as the Apostle says: The sting of
death is sin. 1 Cor. 15.56.
Let sin therefore be away, and death when it comes shall do us no hurt;
nay, it shall be advantage and gain unto us, as the same Apostle says: Phil.
1.21.
For to me to live is Christ, and to die is gain. This therefore should rouse
us, and drive us from sin. Tell me, who but a mad man, would give advantage
to his utter enemy, whereby to spoil him? Now death is this enemy, and our
sin is the adu^tage. If we live in sin, we give death the adu^^^age to,
kill us eternally: but if we coufesse and forsake our sins, death has no
advantage against us, and come when it will, it shall do us no hurt. I beseech
you consider of it, and turn from sin, from covetousness, pride, and from
whatsoever God forbids.

Good and bad subject to death, and the li^e afflictions: but with great
difference.
For death is the chiefest curse, and contains under it all the curses n="a"
Genesis 2.17.
that be fallen upon mankind. Howbeit this understand, that the Saints be not
subject to death as it is a curse, but as it is sanctified, and become an
entrance into life. And as they are subject to death, so are they subject
likewise to all other miseries that this life affords: to hunger, nakedness,
imprisonment, sorrow, hatred, slanders, and manifold persecutions and
temptations. So that the Saints cannot be discerned by their outward state.
But nevertheless, between the same afflictions and manner of death falling
upon the Saints and upon the ungodly there is great difference: because the one
are in Christ the fountain of all goodness and blessedness, by whom all
curses are quite taken away; according to the words of the Apostle; Gal. 3.13.
Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being made a curse for us:
for it is written, cursed is every one that hangs on a tree. But the others,
to wit, the ungodly, are our of Christ, and therefore under the curse. Remember
it then, that howsoever the same affliction and death may befall to the good
and the bad, yet there is such a change made by means of Christ, that they are
far unlike unto the one and the other. When Ioah had slain Abner, David
lamenting over him, spoke these words; Died Abner as a fool dies? So we may
say, 2 Samuel 3.33.
Died Lazarus as the rich glutton died? or die the Saints as the ungodly do
die? yea, it is most certain; as it happens to the ungodly, so it happens
to the Saints: even one thing befalls them all: they all go unto one place,
all are of the dust, and all return to dust again. But lo what follows; the
Saints die to live, but the ungodly die eternally. In the death of the Saints
God is not their enemy, but in the death of the ungodly God is their enemy.
The Saints death has no sting, but the death of the ungodly has a most
venomous sting. But notwithstanding this difference, yet let the common
condition of good and bad be carefully marked, to weane us from the world, to
make us mind our home in the kingdom of heaven, and not to seek our
felicity in this present life. For here have we no continuing city, but we
seek one to come. And there is no bodily misery, Heb. 13.14.
even unto the death, that the vilest miscreants be subject unto, but the best
that breathe are subject to the same.

Prepare and be always ready for death. Certa stat omnibus mortis sententia,
hora autemnihil incertiuo.
and be always in a readiness, that whenever death comes, it do not take
us unprovided. There is nothing more certain, than that death will come: nor
nothing more uncertain, than at what time it will come. By experience we see
it true: To day a man, to morrow none. It behooves us therefore to be provided
at all times. We see as young, as healthie, as strong, as rich, as noble, and
religious, Aequa lege necessitas sortitur ir sign^^ and imos. Hor. (...). Mac.
Hom. 4. Job 14.5.
as any of us all, are taken away before our eyes. And we cannot always live
here. We must go the way that this our brother, and many thousands more, have
gone before us. And how soon, or whose turn may be the next, we do not know.
Our days are determined, the number of our months are with the Lord, he has
appointed our bounds that we cannot pass. And he that tarrieth longest, James
4.14.
shall not be long behind. For what is our life? It is even a vapor that
appears for a little time, and then vanishes away. Be we therefore ready
to depart at all times when the Lord shall call us. Four thin^s to be done to
be always ready for death.
And that we may be always ready; Matthew. 24.46.
he may find us so doing. Blessed is that servant, whom his Lord when he
comes, shall find so doing. Luke 12.18, 9.
which built him greater barnes, persuading himself, that he should live many
years about, at his own ease and content: but making account that every day,
nay every hour, may be our last hour, and the hour of our death. Six godly
meditations against death.
as namely with these, and such like.

Eccles. 8.8.
For there is no man that has power over the spirit to retain the spirit,
neither has he power in the day of death: and there is no discharge in that
war, neither shall wickedness deliver them that are given to it. And indeed
what win the stubborn fort, by their desirousnesse of life, and loathnesse to
die, but this, to be overcome by force, when they have struggled and striuen,
as if they would sight against God, and resist his will?



Cum accersitionis propriae dies venerit, incunctanter and libenter ad Dominum
ipso vocante veniamus. Cyp. de Mortal. sect. 17.
and whenever God gives him any token that he will take him out of the
world, it behooves him always to have one foot onward in the way; as if he
should say, lo here I am, Lord, I am ready to answer thy call, and to come
unto thee.

they confessed that they were strangers and pilgrims on the earth. Heb. 11.13.


Ioh. 17.24.
where he is, to behold his glory which the Father has given him: so we keep
fast hold of him by a true and lively faith, and be not separated from him by
growing weary of well doing, nor by embracing this present world, nor yet by
continuance in sin.

Jacob, Genesis 49.33.
when he had made an end of commanding his sons, gathered up his feet into
the bed, and yielded up the ghost. And Moses, Deuteronomy. 32.48, 49, 50. and 34.1, 7.
when God sent him up into the mountain Abarim, unto mount Nebo, and told him
that he should die there, repined not, but showed all obedience, and prepared
himself unto it, when he saw it was Gods will that it should be so. And
Paul's time drawing near, he speaks of himself, as if when he were executed,
he should be offered up in sacrifice unto God. For I am now ready to be
offered, 2 Timothy 4.6.
and the time of my departure is at hand. And before that, when Agabus the
Prophet had showed the danger that he should be in, if he went up to
Jerusalem, and both they of his own company, and the men of that place, that
is of Cesarea, had besought him earnestly not to go up, he was much troubled
with their tears, and with the ado which they made about him, but nothing at
all with his own afflictions and death. For he made them this answer, Acts
21.13.
What mean ye to weep and to break mine heart? For I am ready not to be
bound only, but also to die at Jerusalem for the Name of the Lord Jesus. I
should be long to speak of Aaron, of Samuel, of David, and of a great number
of faithful Martyrs. Yet I cannot omit the example of Christ, which is the
chiefest of all, who after he had drunk of the cup of his fathers wrath, the
bitterest cup that ever man drunk of before his departure, commended his soul
into his Fathers hands, Luke 23.46.
and gave up the ghost. These examples we must bear in mind, and ponder upon
them, to learn thereby, that whenever God shall call us out of this world,
we may not stick to go willingly unto him. On the one side is misery, on the
other a Crown; on the one side a pilgrimage, on the other our salvation; and
death is between. Shall we be afraid of death? There is no cause. For its
sting is gone, and when we have passed through it, there shall be an end of our
misery, and we shall have the crown of righteousness: our pilgrimage shall
cease, and we shall receive the end of our faith, the salvation of our souls.

These meditations and resolutions, and other such like, being well digested
and settled in our souls, will make us evermore ready and well disposed to
depart out of this life, whenever God shows us that our hour is come.

The death of his Saints.

A Further thing that is worth the noting in these words of the text, The death
of his Saints, is touching the most happy estate of the children of God, in
that they are called HIS Saints. The death of HIS Saints. Remember from hence,
that

Doct. The Saints are the Lords. And they are not only the Lords as all men
are, but after a peculiar manner. The Saints are peculiarly the Lords. Deuteronomy.
32.9. 1 Pet. 2.9. Exodus 19.5.
They are the portion of the Lord, and the lot of his inheritance, a peculiar
people, and to use Moses words; they are a peculiar treasure unto him above all
people: for all the earth is his. So that they may with much comfort think of
the Apostles speech: Romans 14.8.
Whether we live therefore or die, we are the Lords.

Question. In six respects.
How are they the Lords after a peculiar manner?

Answer. In diverse respects. Ephesians. 1.4.
He has chosen us in him, that is, in Christ as members in the head, before
the foundation of the world, that we should be holy and without blame before
him in love.

unto the Church of God which is at Corinth, 1 Cor. 1.2.
to them that are sanctified in Christ Jesus, called to be Saints. As many as
are called, are not therefore called of God, because they are Saints: but
therefore they are Saints, because they are called of his grace. In this
respect therefore the Saints are the Lords.

Page 12.
by which they are made holy in the sight of God.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
And the very God of peace sanctify you wholly, that is, thorowout, in your
whole soul and body.

Luke 1.74, 75.
to serve him without fear, in holiness and righteousness before him all the
days of our life. To this effect says Paul: 1 Cor. 6.20.
Ye are bought with a price.

Psalm. 119.38.
As David says; Stablish thy word unto thy servant: who is devoted to thy
fear. And this the Saints do, Acti agimu^. Cant. 1.4.
not of themselves, but through the grace of the Spirit, which first moves and
stirs them. For the ability to move to any thing pleasing to God, is merely
from his grace.

The Use. First, ye see then, if we be of the number of the Saints, Ye Saints,
study to please the Lord, and serve him.
that is to say, of Gods faithful servants, how many ways God has a peculiar
title unto us; or rather, in how many respects we are peculiarly obliged above
all the men of the world, unto the Lord: to wit, in respect of our election,
vocation, justification, sanctification, redemption, and the willing addicting
of our selves through his grace unto his service. What remains then, but that
we study in all things to please the Lord, and obey his Commandments? As the
Apostle says: Col. 1.10.
That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing, being fruitful in
every good work, and increasing in the knowledge of God. The Apostle, ye see,
would have us walk worthy of the Lord, that is, that our life should be
proportionable to the measure of the goodness of God toward us. We having
therefore received so great mercy of the Lord so many ways, we must lead our
lives in a proportionable measure of holiness and obedience. We must not
break out into blasphemous oaths, cursed speaking, drunkenness, riot,
stealing, lying, and other filthiness of life, as many do; but thinking how
good the Lord is, and has been unto us, we must walk worthy of his Mercy.
Has he taken us to himself after a peculiar manner? Has he made us some of
his Saints? He has not dealt so with a great number of people which were as
good as our selves, nay far before us in many respects. And therefore we must
worship him better than they do, and yield him that honor which a great
number will not yield him. Where others will not stoop, there we must stoop:
and his doctrine which they refuse and will not receive, we must receive it
with meekness, and be obedient thereunto. For as the earth rendereth to the
husbandman the fruit of his pains bestowed upon it: so we must render to the
Lord the fruit of his manifold mercies bestowed upon us, and that is
repentance, a renouncing of all ungodliness, and a living soberly, and
righteously and godly in this present world.

Affect the Saints company, and to be of their number. Psalm. 16.2, 3. and
119.63. See also Ps. 101.6.
it should move us to affect the company of the Saints. As David did, saying;
My goodness extends not to thee: But to the Saints, that are in the earth,
and to the excellent, in whom is all my delight. And again; I am a companion
of all them that fear thee: and of them that keep thy precepts. And as we
desire the company of the Saints, Pro. 1.15. and 23.20. 1 Cor. 5.9, 10, 11. 2 Thessalonians. 3.14.
so should we loath and eschew the society of Atheists, drunkards, fornicators,
swearers, and all wicked and ungodly persons. Neither is it enough to affect
the Saints company, but we must strive and labor to be some of their number.
Judas the traitor got little in the sight of God by conuersing with Christ and
his holy Apostles, being himself a devil. And so it shall little avail us to
be continually with the Saints, if we be not our selves some of the number of
the Saints. Mat. 24.40, 41. Luke 17.34, 35, 36.
For when the Lord shall come, the Saints shall be taken, and we shall be left.

No reprobate can be truly sanctified.
it must needs follow, that never a reprobate can be sanctified. They may make
a show and profession of holiness, but the truth and rooted soundness
thereof, they can never have. No? cannot a reprobate be sanctified? Does not
Paul make mention of some, that they counted the blood of the covenant
wherewith they were sanctified, Heb. 10.29.
Yet were they sanctified. True. But how were they sanctified? By the blood of
the Covenant, says the Apostle; that is, not by the effectual and gracious
working of the Spirit creating in them, as in the elect, converted souls, that
new quality of holiness, whereby they can in some measure truly hate their
own sins, with a firm purpose to leave them; and can love Gods law, with a
resolution to perform it in some good measure: not so; but sacramentally only.
And so many a reprobate may be sanctified, that is to say, he may be baptized.
Nay more, he may be outwardly reformed, and have some inward good things, as
joy in hearing of the word, and he may be sanctified in the charitable opinion
of others, yea and in his own conceit and persuasion; and yet all the while
want that peculiar work of the spirit of God, of which I spoke even now, and
so be destitute of the substance and truth of the grace of sanctification. For
this he can never have, make what show he will: It is the portion of Gods
elect: it is part of his childrens bread; he will not take it and cast it unto
dogs. It is a holy thing, not fit for dogs, and a pearl of more worth than to
be cast before swine.

It is a singular comfort to be truly sanctified.
what a comfort is it to be truly sanctified? He that is such a one may build
upon it, that God will protect him, and that he shall be saved. For as Solomon
says; Pro. 2.8.
He preserves the way of his Saints. And Jude says; Jude 1.
to them that are sanctified by God the Father, and preserved in Jesus Christ,
to wit, to life eternal, and called. Deuteronomy. 33.3.
And Moses says; All his Saints are in thy hand. Which is more for their
safety, than if they had all the castles and bulwarks of the world to defend
and save them. For we know what Christ says: No man is able to pluck them out
of my Fathers hand. John 10.29.
So that it is a marvelous comfort to be truly sanctified. Such may have
enemies both many, and mighty, by whom they may look to be fiercely assaulted,
but no multitudes nor power can prevail against them. And albeit they seem
often to be overthrown with the wrongs which they suffer, as some are stripped
of their possessions, others are imprisoned, others are banished, others are
tormented, others are killed; yet they are still the Lords. And this that they
are so dealt with, comes not to pass through the might of their adversaries,
but by the will of God; neither does he suffer it to satisfy their foes, but
to increase their own happiness. 2 Cor. 4.17.
For our light affliction which is but for a moment, works for us a far
more exceeding and eternal weight of glory. And besides, in all their
afflictions he cares for them, and does them good.

Question. Six marks of sanctification.
But how shall I know that I am truly sanctified?

Answer. How can I do this great wickedness, Genesis 39.9.
and sin against God? said Joseph.





is called, 2 Thessalonians. 2.13. John 17.17.
the sanctification of the Spirit. And our Savior says; Sanctify them
through thy truth: thy word is truth.

1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
it is wrought in the whole spirit and soul and body.



The death of his Saints.

LAstly from these words, in that the dear children of God, whose dignity is
great, and far beyond the highest dignity, that this world affoords; in that
these are expressed under this title of Saints, I gather, that

Doct. The very title of a Saint is full of honor and dignity. The title of a
Saint is honorable.
The Scripture, ye see, when it makes mention of the best, and of such as the
world is not worthy of, expresses them here, and many times elsewhere, by the
title of Saints. 2 Chronicles. 6.41.
Let thy Saints rejoice in goodness, said Solomon in his prayer.

The Use. First the hearing of this must teach the Saints to walk in
holiness. Walk in holiness. 1 Pet. 1.15, 16.
According to S. Peter's exhortation: But as he which has called you is holy,
so be ye holy in all mann^r of conversation. Because it is written, Be ye
holy, Ephesians. 5.2, 3.
for I am holy. And S. Paul says thus; walk in love, as Christ also has
loved us, and has given himself for us, an offering and a sacrifice to God
for a sweet smelling savor: But fornication and all uncleanness, or
covetousness, let it not be once named among you, as becomes Saints. Here
is the ground of his exhortation, that having received so great mercy and grace
as to be made Saints, we are to walk as is fitting for the Saints of God.
And it should be a shame that any professing themselves Saints, should be
found unholy in their conversation.

Against them that reproach others with th^^^ holiness, and make a mock at
the title of a Saint.
hearing the Gospel, and knowing their Creed, should be so strangely blinded,
and so desperately wicked, as to scoff at the endeavor and practice of
sanctity, and reproach others with their holiness; saying, You are one of
these holy folk; nay, so graceless and ignorant as to turn this very title
into matter of reproach, saying; You are one of the Saints, you know your place
in heaven already. But do thou know thy self? Can thou tell me what thou
art thy self, thou that after this fashion do make a scorn of other men's
holiness, and of the blessed title of a Saint? I must tell thee plainly, that
both thou and all others that make a scoff at holiness, and that scorn the
title of a Saint, ye are none of Gods children, ye are unholy Atheists, and
very Devils incarnate. Consider well of it, and pray God to enlighten you, and
turned our hearts.

And as for the children of God, Four comforts against reproaches for
holiness.
they have many good meditations to comfort themselves with against these kind
of reproaches: and namely these.



1 Thessalonians. 5.24.
who also will do it. He will never leave them, nor forsake them.

Eccles. 4.4.
As Solomon says: Again, I considered all travel, and every right work,
that for this a man is envied of his neighbor: this also is vanity, and
vexation of spirit. But God will arise and maintain his own cause, and avenge
all their wrongs, 2 Samuel 10.7. etc.
no otherwise than David did the indignities of his servants upon Hanun the
son of Nahash, the King of the children of Ammon.

Zechariah; Zech. 2.8.
He that touches you, touches the apple of his eye. And so long as the Lord
does acknowledge them for some of his, and does account them so near and dear
unto himself, they need not greatly cure for any reproaches of men. For his
favor is enough to counteruaile all. So that as Elkanah said to Hannah,
comforting her against her barrenness; Am not I better to thee, 1 Samuel 1.^.
than ten sons? So may every one of us say, of the favor of God, when all
men reproach us, and none care for us; Is not the favor of God better to us,
than all the kindness and favor of the men of this world? And thus may we
comfort our selves against all manner of reproaches for holiness sake.

Thus far of the subject of the proposition. Now the Consequent follows, in
these words; is precious.

Precious is the death of his Saints. Or more plainly: The death of his Saints
is precious.

WHat means this; The death of his Saints is precious? For this may seem a
Paradox, and beyond the credit of all men, that the death or any should come to
be precious, seeing death came by sin, and is a common looking-glass, and
record unto us of Gods curse, not upon one or two folks, but upon all mankind.

Answer. The meaning is, that the death of the Saints is of great esteem and
honorable in Gods account, and very profitable for themselves. But not in it
self, but by accident only: that which in it self is the wages of sin and a
curse, being by the grace of God and the death of Christ turned clean about,
and made an excellent blessing. Remember it then, that

Doct. The death of the Saints is a matter of great price. It is much set by in
the sight of the Lord: The Saints death is precious. Mors Sanctorum est finis
and meta laborum, consummatio victoriae, carina vitae, and perfectae
eternaeque^ securitatis ingressio. Bern.
and in regard of themselves it is truly precious, as being the end of their
labors, the consumination of their victory, the gate of life, and an entrance
into most perfect security.

We have a world of meditations to clear the truth of this. precious is the
death of his Saints. And how can it be otherwise, seeing they die unto the
Lord, and sleep in Jesus, as the Scripture speaks?

Romans 14.8. 1 Thessalonians. 4.14, 16.
by death they are more nearly united to their sovereign and chiefest good,
even to God Almighty. For the further off that any is from sin, so much the
nearer he is joined to God, that pure, and perpetual, and immortal good, to
cleave fast unto him, and to be always with him, whose offspring he is; as
the Apostle says; For we are also his offspring. Acts 17.28.


to the assembly of the Saints, to their own dear parents, children,
brethren, sisters, kinsfolk, and friends, which are gone to heaven before
them: and which is more than all this, to Jesus Christ their Redeemer, into the
house of their heavenly Father, in which he has prepared a placefor us; Heb.
6.20. and 10.20.
into heaven whither the forerunner is for us entered, even Jesus Christ: by a
new and living way which he has consecrated for us through the veil, that is
to say, his flesh. And whither he is gone before, that we might follow him,
whenever he shall please to call us.

Eccles. 4.1, 2.
in Ecclesiastes, where Solomon says; So I returned and considered all the
oppressions that are done under the Sun; and behold the tears of such as
were oppressed, and they had no comforter; and on the side of their oppressors
there was power, but they had no comforter. Wherefore I praised the dead which
are already dead, more than the living which are yet alive. Death takes us away
from their envy that now live, and sets us free from all fear of them, which
are yet to come.

Paul; Romans 6.6.
He that is dead, is freed from sin. After death the temptations cease, which
all the life time did tie the soul, and lead it into captivity to the law of
sin. So that now there is no such tying, nor leading captive of the Saints,
but an enjoying of perfect freedom for evermore.

Job 14.22.
But his flesh upon him shall have pain, and his soul within him shall
mourn. This is the lot of the living; neither can we be freed from it until
death come. And a thousand things there be to disquiet and grieve our minds,
but nothing more than the risenesse of sin. For as the filthy conversation of
the wicked Sodomites vexed Lot; as Peter witnesses, saying; 2 Pet. 2.7, 8.
That righteous man dwelling among them, in seeing and hearing vexed his
righteous soul from day to day with their unlawful deeds: So the Saints at
this day cannot choose but be vexed in seeing and hearing so many enormous
vices to be daily committed. Such renting of God in pieces by fearful oaths,
such cursing and lying, such excessive drinking and drunkenness, such breaking
of the Sabbath, such devices and slanders to disgrace Gods children, and to
hinder the free passage of the Gospel, with a thousand enormities more, make
every Christian heart ache, and fill it full of vexation from day to day. From
this also death frees us.

thick one upon the neck of another, that it can scarce meet with every one
of them; and them that it does meet with, it is hard to resist almost any one
of them. If covetousness be subdued, lust arises; if lust be mastered,
vaineglory stirs; if vaineglory be vanquished, angrinesse comes in place;
pride swells, envy urges, and heat of spirit breaks forth and makes
discord. The world also, and our own flesh make many assaults upon us, and
much annoy us. Of all this and a great deal more does death make an end.

And what shall I say more? For the time would fail me to produce all the
meditations that make for this purpose. And that which has been said does
abundantly prove, that the death of the Saints, as the Psalmist here says, is
precious.

Objection. It by the preciousnesse of the Saints death is not visible.
But some may think that all this is but words, and that he sees no such
matter in the death of the Saints, but that they die as other men do; If their
death be so precious, why does it not appear so?

Answer. Their death is precious, but yet it does not appear so; first,
because it is no treasure of this world, but an heavenly treasure. I say, the
preciousnesse of the Saints death is an heavenly treasure, and therefore hid
from the sight of carnal eyes in that treasury of the Lords, in Jesus Christ,
by whose death it is made precious.





we see it by faith. Our eyes are no judges in this case, and the world is
worse than our eyes. For the glory is not earthly, nor known to the men of
this world, whereof we speak, but the treasure is spiritual, and of the
spiritual man it is discerned. Know thy self, that by faith thou art Christ's,
and he thine, that he died for thee, and thou live by him, that thou art a
member of his body, of his flesh, and of his bones, and whatsoever is his, is
thine: have this faith, and now come and see, and thou shall see all the
rubies, and precious things in the world, less precious than the death of such
a man as thou art. Thy faith if it could comprehend more assurance of the
preciousnesse of the Sun, yet should thou see the preciousnesse of it,
above all thy thoughts. For who can comprehend how precious that is, which is
prcious in Gods sight?

The Use. First, we behold in this the great goodness of God, See Gods
goodness in changing evil to good, to his children. Romans 8.28.
who changes evil into good unto his faithful servants; that it may be every
way, and for ever true, which the Apostle says; We know that all things work
together for good, to them that love God, to them who are the called according
to his purpose. All things in general, even those that seem most to hinder
our felicity, are made of God to serve as helps and furtherances thereof.
When it comes to death, in which is some token of Gods wrath, death is turned
to our gain and profit, so that we have cause to rejoice in all respects; and
to hearken to the Apostle, when he says; All things are yours, 1 Cor. 3.21, 22.
whether Paul, or Apollo, or Cephas, or the world, or life, or death, or things
present, or things to come, all are yours: that is, all are for your good.

There is great difference between the death of the godly and the ungodly.
This appears many ways. For the godly die in the Lord; the ungodly die in
their sins. The godly have their death turned into a blessing: the death of the
ungodly remains still a curse. To the godly to die is gain: Phil. 1.21.
to the ungodly to die is loss; for they lose the comforts which now they
enjoy, and the kingdom of heaven, which they hoped for. The death of the godly
is a passage into life: John 5.24.
the death of the ungodly is a passage to damnation. The godly being dead do
live to God: Luke 16.22, 23.
the ungodly do die eternally. The souls of the godly when they depart from
the body, be carried by the Angels into heaven: the souls of the ungodly go
to torment in hell. Isa. 57.2.
The death of the godly is the end of their misery; for when they die, they
enter into peace and rest: the death of the ungodly is the beginning of their
torment, and everlasting pain. The death of the godly is precious: Mors
peccatorum mala, pejor, pessima: sed bonorum mors bona, melior, optima. ^e^n.
Mors justi est bona propter requi^m: melior propter nouitatem: optima propter
securitatem. Idem.
the death of the ungodly is most vile and shameful. To be short, the death of
the ungodly, as Bernard says, is bad, worser, worst of all, but the death of
the godly is good, better, best of all. Good, by reason of the rest that it
brings with it: Better, because it renueth us; Best of all, because it
puts us out of danger, and secureth us for ever.

Rejoice in this, that thou art a Saint.
some of riches, some of horses, some of one thing, some of another; and let
the profane of the world make a scoff at holiness, and abhor to the death
the very name of a Saint, and let them hinder the means of holiness, as much
as they can, speaking evil of the ways of the Lord; this let others do. Yet
thou, if thou will attain unto such a death as is precious in Gods sight,
which only is comfortable, and a passage into life, do thou: boast thy self
of a sanctified heart; yea glory of this, that thou art a Saint; and further
the means of holiness to the utmost of thy power, as the faithful preaching
of the word, the private reading of the Scriptures, the repeating and
conferring of Sermons, and the like.

Judge aright of the Saints.
we learn to be of another judgment than the world is of concerning the
Saints upon earth. The Saints zeal in religion, and integrity of life is
oftentimes such, that it causes men to neglect them, yea to malign them, yea
to cry our upon them; peradventure also to persecute, imprison, and put them to
death: And when the world sees this, they think them forlorn and miserable
creatures. But lo, their death is precious, and happiness is treasured up in
heaven for them. Therefore we should count them happy, and be of the mind to
adioyne our selves to their company, and become like them which are so little
regarded, and so hardly thought of for their holiness sake.

Comfort against cruel persecutions.
Let all the ungodly band themselves, and lift up their hands against thee,
what can they do? They cannot devise the means to do thee any final hurt.
Romans 8.28.
All things shall work together for the best to thee that love God. It is
not possible for man to alter this. Look upon thy death, that is precious and
gainefull. They can do nothing unto thee, but that which in the end shall make
for thy good. Look further also throughout the bounds and compass of the
whole heaven and earth, and with pure eyes, even with the eyes of faith thou
see excellent things; thou see the first sorrow cast out with shame, death
trodden under feet, hell abolished, the Angels encamping about thee, Saints and
Angels before thee, a blessed immortality lengthening thy days, and the glory
of God is before thine eyes, 2 Cor. 3.18
and with open face thou beholdest it as in a glass.

Comfort against the fear of death.
if thou be a Saint, thy death shall be precious. There is no evil in it
that thou need to fear. And although thou must of necessity pass that way,
with all other creatures, (for it is the way of all the earth:) yet does God
take thee and keep thee, as his chosen child. And if thou beleeuest that Jesus
died and rose again: 1 Thessalonians. 4.14.
so assure thy self, that thee also, and all them which sleep in Jesus will
God bring with him.

Comfort to the friends of him that died a Saint.
Died he a Saint? nay lived he a Saint? for if he lived a Saint, there is no
question of his death, but he died a Saint. For he cannot die euilly, Non
potest male mori, qui been vixcrit. August.
who has lived well. The disease may be such, that either the speech may be
hindered, or else idle, and accompanied with some unseemly motions and
gestures, which none must be dismayed at, but take in good part even in this
regard, Cuivis quod cuiquam.
because we our selves may be in the like case. I say not therefore, died he a
Saint? but that every ones comfort may be the fuller; lived he a Saint? For we
must not think so much of the manner of the death, Non mola mors putanda est,
quam bona vita praecesserit. August.
as of the tenor of the life. Neither must we think that death to be evil,
before which there has gone an holy life. So then here is the comfort. Has
he lived a Saint, and is he dead? He is blessed in heaven. Why mourn ye? weep
not for him, his death is precious. Weep for your selves.

Four comforts for them that mourn over the dead.
And yet weep not excessiuely, but remember; First, that God gave him you but
for a while, and therefore ye must not take it grievously if he has called him
again from you. Secondly, that he shall in a glorified body be restored unto
you, and joined with you in the next life. Thirdly, that it goes well with him
that is delivered from so many perils and mischiefs, as the Lord has foretold
should fall out in this last age. Lastly, that he is well provided for before
the Lord, and in far better case than we that be alive.

Precious is the death of his Saints.

Moreover from this that the Saints death is here said, and so expressly
affirmed to be precious in the sight of the Lord, I gather this comfortable
meditation; that

Doct. The Saints are never neglected of their loving God, neither does death
befall them without his special providence. God regards his Saints both in
life and death.
If in their life time they meet with calamities, so that they mourn, he
regards their tears: which made David pray saying: Psalm. 56.8.
Put thou my tears into thy bottle. And at their death he looks after them.
Yea both in life and death he has a gracious respect of them. His Angel in
their life time encampeth round about them: and when they die, they are carried
by the Angels, Psalm. 34.7.
as Lazarus was, into Abraham's bosom, that is to say, Luke 16.22.
into the place of bliss, where Abraham now is, with the rest of Gods elect
which be departed this life. This care has God of every one of his Saints. So
that nothing can befall them in life or death, but as he disposes it. What
time he will have them to live, so long they shall live; as he will have them
to be tried with sundry afflictions, so are they every one tried; and when his
time is come, that he will have them to die, then and not before, they shall
depart this life. And (which is most comfortable) when that day comes, he will
draw near unto them, and make them feel by experience that which they have
learned, and believed long before, that precious in his sight is the death of
his Saints.

The Use. Now then beloved, see what a gracious God the Saints have in heaven.
It is most true, Take notice of Gods goodness to his Saints.
and too too commonly seen, that generally amongst men, the Saints of all
others are least regarded: but with the Lord of heaven there is none regarded
with any special favor, but only the Saints: and these he respects after a
special manner; as the Psalmist faith: Behold, Psalm. 33.18. and 34.15.
the eye of the Lord is upon them that fear him: upon them that hope in his
mercy. Many parents are very careful for the welfare of their children: but
no parents care can be compared with the care which God has of his Saints. For
notwithstanding the greatest care of the best parents in the world, yet some
things they shall see to befall their children, which they cannot do to, and
which they were not able for their lives to prevent: but in respect of the
Lord, there is no such thing can befall his Saints: but whatsoever he pleases,
and whatsoever his hand and his counsel has determined before to be done,
that only shall befall them, both in life and death.

To banish distractions.
all distracting thoughts, whether concerning maintenance, bodily safety,
protection from dangers, or whatsoever thing else, and to make us cheer up our
selves, and learn that good lesson which David gives us, Psalm. 55.22.
saying; Cast thy burden upon the Lord, and he shall sustain thee: he shall
never suffer the righteous to be moved. Behold and know, that the Lord cares
for the righteous, and sends forth his holy Angels, which are all ministering
spirits, Heb. 1.14. Ps. 42.11. and 43.5.
to minister for them, who shall be heirs of salvation. Do thou believe
this? then let not thy soul be disquieted within thee, but hope in God: Be
doing good, and fulfill thy duty in that place which God has set thee. He will
surely bless thee, and keep no good thing from thee, and at the last thy
death shall be precious. For God himself will have the whole ordering of it,
both for the time, the manner, the place, and every way else.

Comfort over the Saints death.
Consider this speech well: Precious in the sight of the Lord is the death of
his Saints. For this being true, that the Saints death is precious in the
sight of the Lord, it must needs follow, that whenever they die, be it
sooner or latter, they die in the due time, that is to say, in that time which
is best for them in respect of their good. It is the portion of bloody and
deceitful men not to live out half their days: Psalm. 55.23. Job 5.26.
but it is otherwise with good men, as Eliphaz says; Thou shall come to thy
grave in a full age, like as a shocke of corn comes in, in his season. Oh
then, think, when thy Christian friend is taken from thee, that he died not by
chance, he died not before his time: but his time was come and God has 1296
sent him to his grave in his season, yea even in that time, when it was best
for him, and most for the comfort and salvation of his soul. What could
thou desire more? Therefore mourn not excessiuely, but comfort thy self, and
make ready for the time which God has appointed for thee. It will not be long
ere thou shall go the way, which thy loving friend, thy guide and thy comfort,
is gone before thee. For death is the way of all the earth.

Encour^gement to serve God and trust 1 in him.
should both embolden us, (come what will come) to go on in his service, not
being dismayed with any crosses or afflictions; and also make us to trust
steadfastly in him, yea even then, when we can discern no tokens of his favor
unto us. For of this we are certain, that if we walk in holiness, howsoever
it be with us all our life long, that God watches over us, and our death when
it comes, shall be precious in his sight. And this we have further for our
comfort in this case, that we shall not die, when the ungodly would have us
die, but at that time which God has set. For as David says, so we may every
one say, My times are in thy hand. Psalm. 31.15. and 41.5.
The ungodly may say by us, as they did by him; when shall he die, and his
name perish? But nevertheless, we shall run out our race, and come to that
period which God has appointed for us.

Thus far of the Proposition. Now remains the Proof thereof, in these
words of the Text; In the sight of the Lord.

In the sight of the Lord.

DAVID proves the death of the Saints to be precious by an argument, not
fetched from the consideration of the thing it self, but taken from without
it, to wit, from the testimony and authority of God, in these words; In the
sight of the Lord: as if he should say; can it choose but be precious, which
the Lord himself approves, and highly esteems of? It is not possible. For
he best knows to distinguish between good and evil, between precious and
vile. Wherefore if in his judgment any thing be precious, it must needs be
true, that it is precious indeed.

Put the question then; How comes it to pass, and how might we be sure,
that the death of the Saints is precious?

And the answer is given: because it pleases God to account it so. Precious in
the sight of the Lord is the death of his Saints. It is not long of the Saints,
but of Gods mere goodness and mercy unto them. And because that he of his
goodness does so account of it, therefore it is precious, and not for any
worthiness or desert of their own. Neither is this preciousnesse of the death
of the Saints supposed and imaginary, but real and true: the Saints death is
truly and really precious. For although man may be deceived, and err in his
judgment, yet it is otherwise with God. It is true of man that in the error
of his judgment, he may take a thing to be precious, and say, that it is so,
when there is no such matter, only because he does imagine and conceit with
himself that such a thing is precious: but God cannot be so deceived. But
whatsoever he judges and pronounces precious, it is truly and indeed
precious, and it cannot be otherwise. And thus it comes about that the Saints
death is precious, and upon this ground we are certain of it. It is precious,
and we know it, because the most wise God does account and pronounce it to be
precious in his sight. Thus ye see the sum of the confirmation.

To gather profit thereby, we must consider two things; first, what manner of
argument this is: secondly, the application thereof to the matter in hand.

There be two kinds of proofs, the one called artificial, the other
inartificiall.

Artificial proofs are such as are fetched one way or other, Artificial
proofs.
from the consideration of the theme or matter it self which is proved, and of
their own force or nature are able to prove or disapproue. This proof of
David's in this place is no such.

Inartificiall proofs are such as are fetched from authority, Inartificiall
proofs.
either divine or not divine. Such a proof is this that David here brings,
fetched from the authority of God.

Now this kind of proving of a matter by the authority of God, howsoever it
never touch the nature of that which is proved, neither explicateth nor
illustrateth it, yet it begets in the mind the greatest credit and belief
to the matter that may be. For no argument can be devised so forcible to
procure faith and credit to a matter, as this that is drawn from the authority
of God. Deus per se est (...).
For God is simply to be believed for himself, and to doubt of that which he
affirms, is great impiety.

In this respect therefore this testimony serves for this use; for the
strengthening of our faith touching the preciousnesse of the Saints death. That
we should not doubt nor stagger through unbelief, but be fully persuaded,
that the death of the Saints is precious.

Comfort over the death of a Saint.
How full of comfort is this, to know upon a sure ground, and beyond all
exception, even from the express testimony of the Lord God of truth, that the
Saints death is precious, and that it is so in his sight, howsoever the world
do judge of it? Can any thing be more comfortable to a Christian soul, to
cease the mourning thereof for the death of a Saint, and dear child of God?
Let it sink into your hearts, and comfort your selves with this meditation.
There is, I confess, just cause of mourning for the death of the Saints. But
where find we this cause? Is it in themselves? Their life was holy, their
course is finished, their death is precious, their body is at rest, their soul
is in heaven, their memorial is blessed, they shall arise to glory, and be
with Christ in heaven for evermore. The true cause of mourning for the Saints
death.
In respect of themselves there is no cause of mourning. But in respect of us
that remain alive, there be many causes. For when any of the Saints die, we
see that all of us be enclosed within the curse of God, because of Adams
sin; and seeing that, it behooves us to feel what we have deserved, and be
ashamed of ourselves, and be touched with the fear of Gods vengeance, and be
so wounded therewith, as it may provoke us to sorrow, because of our sins,
which we have committed. Again, when any of the Saints die, we lose a help
to the peace of our Sion, I mean, of our Church and Commonwealth, a help to
the Gospel, a help in the house, an intercessor to God, a loving friend, and
a shining star. If it were a thing possible, it were best for us to keep
such men still with us, but for them it is far better to depart hence, and to
be with Christ. For when such are taken from us, our Lord chastises us, and
shows us a sign, that (except we speedily repent) he is minded to diminish
his grace unto us. The taking away of the best men, and of them that do most
good in the Church, and amongst us, is always a threatening unto us. And ought
we not to be grieved at the threatening and feeling of Gods displeasure? And
therefore we may justly mourn for the death of the Saints. But yet so let us
mourn, Comfort.
that withal we remember to keep a measure in our mourning, and to pacify
our selves with this consideration, that their death is precious. And that God
calls them hence to free them from a great deal of misery, and to do them a
great deal of good.

In the sight of the Lord.

COncerning the application of this proof to the present matter; in as much as
David affirms the Saints death to be precious upon this ground, because it is
so in Gods sight, that is to say, because God does so esteem it; Out of this I
gather, that.

Doct. The right judgment of matters is to judge of them as God does. To judge
aright, we must judge of things as God does.
They are precious and good that he approues of, but they are vile and naught,
which he disapproues.

The Use. First, how much does this condemn the people of our age? For is not
this the nature of the most, Against following only the judgment of the world.
that they never regard what account God makes of a thing, but only, whether
men do esteem of it or no? And if they see it in esteem with men, is not
that enough? Yea they care for no more. They be so wedded to the world, that
they will never look whether God do like or dislike that which they fancy,
or set themselves against: and they be so blind and obstinate, that whatsoever
is taught them, they will neither see nor learn, nor at no hand admit any
other judgment of matters, than that which they have received from this wicked
world. But let them look to it; they that now follow the world, and build so
wholly upon the likings of the multitude, shall hereafter perish with the
world. For the friends of the world must fare as the world does. Oh how much
better were it to judge otherwise than the world does; than now to agree with
this present evil world, and in the life to come to partake of her plagues!

To show us the rule of judging aright.
We must not presently like and commend a thing, because men generally do like
it: nor we must not presently condemn that, which most men do dislike. For as
our Savior says: Luke 16.15.
That which is highly esteemed among men, is abomination in the sight of God.
As namely, the counterfeit holiness of the Pharisees. So then there be some
things that God abhorres, which men highly esteem of. And think the like on
the contrary, that there be some things again, which men despise, which God
highly esteems of, as holiness, purity, instancie in preaching the Word in
season, out of season, powerful applying of the doctrine, and such like. Now
therefore if we will judge aright, we must learn what things be approved with
God, and make account of them; and what things he disapproues, and dislike and
condemn them; and never regard the judgments of men to the contrary.

See that thy judgment of matters do agree with Gods.
Then if we believe this, as our duty is, it cannot possibly be, but that we
shall make more account of the judgment of God concerning all things, than
most men do; and accordingly will we give diligence not only in using the
means whereby to have our judgments to agree with Gods judgment, but also in
learning what things be in esteem with him, that we also may have the same in
like esteem with us: and esteem all other things, which he esteems not, as
dross and dung, howsoever the same be in esteem with the world.

Comfort against contempt and discredit for judging of matters as God does.
against the contempt and loss of credit in the world, for making much of some
things which God esteems, but the world regards not, and for setting light
by some other things, which God esteems not, but yet the world does admire
and highly commend them. Thus it often comes to pass through the perverse
judgments of men, and their selfe-pleasing and self-will, that virtuous and
godly people shall be lightly regarded and out of credit even for regarding
that which the most care not for, and for not regarding that which they admire.
But be not discouraged. For as long as thy judgment does agree with the
judgment of God, and theirs does not, thy judgment is better than theirs. And
as much contempt and loss of credit as thou bring upon thy self by this
means with the world: so much honor and good credit thou winnest with all
them that do truly fear God. And the time will come, when thy judgment shall
be approved, and theirs rejected. Consider of it, and take comfort.

THE OCCASION OF this meeting.
NOw as touching the occasion of this our meeting, this first I say, that that
which the Holy Ghost does here teach us to hold of the death of the Saints in
general, Christian charity does bind us to conceive concerning our worthy
brother departed in the faith of Christ. For if the death of Gods Saints be
precious in his sight, and our assured hope be, that he was one of his Saints;
why should we not conceive assured hope that his death was precious, and that
his soul is blessed? Now that charity binds us thus to conceive of him I
will make it manifest. For besides that there is no evidence to the contrary,
and charity evermore judges the best: we have also sufficient evidence,
whereupon to conclude according to the judgment of charity, that he lived and
died a Saint. I say, according to the judgment of charity. For as the
judgment of certainty belongs unto the Lord: so the judgment of charity
belongs unto us, that serve the Lord.

Let us therefore take a brief view of such fruits (according to which alone,
being charitably interpreted, true charity does judge) I say of such fruits
and signs as have appeared both in the time of his health, and also in the
time of his sickness until his death.

First then, Mr. Cleybrooke was 1. A zealous professor of the true Faith.
to begin with his Religion: he was neither Popish nor Schismatic, nor any
way factious, neither was he a Neuter or Nullifidian, which is too common a
vice, but a professed Protestant and an open Professor of the true faith of
Christ. Neither was he a cold or lukewarm professor (as many are, who have no
care of Religion) but a forward and zealous one: one that had his Fathers name
written in his forehead, Revel. 14.1.
as the faithful are described in the Revelation. For he would make it
appear upon every just occasion, of what Religion he was, and without fear
of any man maintain the truth, and such points of every man's duty as belong
thereunto. Neither could he endure to hear it trodden under foot, nor any to
be spoken against for maintaining thereof.

2. A great reuerencer of Gods Name.
He did so fear that glorious and fearful name of the Lord his God, that he
stuck to put the paper, in which he saw any of the titles of the blessed
Trinity written, to any dishonorable use.

3. A diligent frequenter of religious Exercises.
He was a diligent frequenter of the holy Exercises of Religion, and a furtherer
thereof by his travel, credit, money, and other ways; and a constant
Communicant according to the order of the place, from month to month. Yea,
and when he was not able to travel a foot to the Church, he used helps that
he might not be absent. And as he did himself, so he caused his household to
do. So that he and his household became an example of frequenting their Church,
and often receiving of the Communion.

4. A true friend to faithful Preachers.
He loved, reueren^ed, and favored any faithful Ministers and Preachers of
Gods word. And whereas double diligence in preaching is a cause why many cannot
brook the Preacher, this was one special thing which drew his affection unto
him. He loved Preachers for laboring painfully in the Word and Doctrine.
According to the Apostles rule; 1 Thessalonians. 5.13.
and to esteem them very highly in love for their works sake. As touching my
self, I do with thankfulness acknowledge the greatness of his love
manifested toward me diverse ways, and most of all toward his latter end.
And this I dare avouch, that the Saints of the Lord can be discerned by no one
sign better, than by a due respect to the Ministers of the Word. For our
Savior says; He that receives whomsoever I send, John 13.20. Luke 10.16.
receives me; and he that despises you, despises me. As he that despises a
Minister in respect of his calling, and faithful pains in his Ministry, does
evidently bewray himself neither to have any grace nor yet to desire any,
because the grace which either he has or can desire, ordinarily is attained by
the Ministry, as I could show at large; so he that loves and reuerenceth a
Minister for his works sake, (as this worthy man did) he does show that he
has found the ministry of the Word to be the power of God to his salvation.

5. A lover of the Saints.
He honored the Saints, and made much of them that were truly religious: but
vile and naughty persons in whom was no religion nor knowledge of God, were
odious in his sight, and their fond delights, and vain mirth and pastime were
a vexation to his heart. Which is one good note of a child of God; as the Holy
Ghost does witness, saying: that he shall abide in Gods Tabernacle, Psalm.
15.1, 4.
and shall dwell in his holy hill; In whose eyes a vile person is contemned;
but he honors them that fear the Lord.

6. A man gracious in his talk.
He delighted much to confer of points of Religion, and of the present estate,
and duties of a true Christian. And in his conferences he would often
complain of the rifenesse of sin, of the negligence and bad doings of diverse
in the Ministry, of the omitting of the due execution of justice for sundry
ordinary offenses, of the corruption of his own flesh, and of his own
untowardness and dullness in Gods service; and inueigh seriously and to good
purpose against excessive drinking, and other vices of the times.

7. Patient under the Cross.
He was patient under the cross, of which he has had much and long experience,
more ways then one. For it pleased the Lord to exercise him certain years
before his death, with diverse temptations both inwardly and outwardly: in all
which he abode constant, submitting himself quietly to the will of God,
making use of all to the glory of his name, and being so far from being
discouraged, that his zeal, his love of the truth, his patience, and other
virtues increased still to his dying day.

8. Sober, and grave.
He was a sober, grave, discreet, frugall, temperate, and chaste man. He
contented himself with plain apparel, and neither affected costlinesse, nor
new fashions therein. He went always plainer, and a great deal more mean,
than many others, which in estate were far inferior to himself.

9. Without ambition.
He was not ambitious. He coueted no titles of honor, nor places of public
service: but wondered at others, what they saw therein, to covet and desire the
same; and contented himself with his own estate.

10. Not high minded.
He was nothing high minded, but made himself equal to them of the lower sort;
according to the Apostles rule: Romans 12.16.
Be of the same mind one toward another. Mind not high things, but
condescend to men of low estate.

11. A loving husband.
He showed always great love and fidelity to his wife.

He was a very careful father for the godly living and well-doing of his
children. 12. A careful father.


13. A virtuous master.
He banished from among his servants many horrible vices (which as they be
usual now adays in great Families, so no doubt they will pull down the
fearful judgments of God upon them) I mean, swearing and swaggering, and
such other enormities; and he so governed, admonished, and ordered them, that
some have departed out of his house, more godly, sober, frugall, and honester
men, than they were before they came unto him.

14. A perf^rmer ^^nsel ^^f good duties at home.
He performed himself the ordinary duties of Religion in his house at home, if
no Preacher were present.

15. Provident in his busin^sses.
He was wise and provident in managing his affairs, and left none of his
bu^inesses at six and seven, but was a careful ouerseer of all himself.

16. Bountiful to the poor.
He was plentiful in releeuing his poor neighbors; a peaceable liver, and
one that put up a great number of trespasses. 17. Peaceable.


18. Able and willing to give good advice.
He afforded his counsel willingly for their best direction that stood in need
of it, and especially for the good estate of the place and Parish in which he
lived; unto the people whereof, and to many others, he bare good affection.
Neither did he manifest his affection in word and tongue only, but by showing
himself forward in any good cause for their instruction and profit any manner
of way. The truth whereof, if we did not sufficiently see, whilst we enjoyed
him: I doub^ we shall too well feel, by wanting of him now he is gone.

19. No nouice in virtue.
Neither was he a nouice in the practice of any of these things, but a well
experienced soldier of many years standing.

20. Constant to the end in well-doing.
And unto all this was added constancy and perseverance unto the end. His
well-doing was not by fits, nor for a while only, as it has proved by some,
but till the end of his days. Witness his bounty and liberal contribution
to have the Word often preached. Neither was he weary of that which he did.
Nay he was so far from being weary, that notwithstanding both the death of
one of them that joined with him, and that the unfaithfulness of some, which
have fallen from their word, had caused him to be at more charge, than at the
first he had thought of; yet of his own accord he charged himself somewhat
further, than his own compartners in that business did know of. And being
motioned to some course, whereby to be discharged from all, he spoke no word to
approve of it, but all to the contrary. Then it being signified unto him, that
some further course must be taken, and what was expected, his answer was, that
it was as little as could be. August. 5.1622.
And all this, not long before his last sickness. By which it appears how his
mind was settled not to faint in well doing, but to continue to the end.

21. Mindful to set his house in order before his sickness. He was taken in
the night with a dead palsy in half his body: on August. 15. 1622.
Before his last sickness he had made his will and set his house in order. But
in the time of that sickness, which was about the space of nine days, he had
but little use of his speech; neither was he able to express himself in
diverse things to the understanding of his friends, which appeared by certain
tokens to be a great grief unto him. And because of this, we doutlesse want
much of that testimony of his faith which he would have given us, if he had had
the liberty of his speech. The godly speeches understood in his sickness.
But yet some few things he uttered now and then which were understood; as that
a certain Minister which was with him all the time of his sickness, had done
him much good, which when the Minister heard, he entreated him to render the
whole praise thereof unto God alone, who blesses the weak endeavors of his
servants in the ministry for the good of his people. Which thing he also did,
as appeared by the present motion of his hands and eyes. Again he said; that
God accepts the heart, and the desires thereof. And when he was told that his
words, which were imperfect to us, were perfect to God, and that God understood
what he did desire; he answered, yea: and gave us such tokens as he was able,
that he knew so much. Further he said; God gives us some refreshing and
rejoicing, that we may be able to pass through: expressing (as I conceive) the
comfort of his own soul, which God gave him in his extremity. And his last
speech that I understood, was this, that we are less than nothing before him.

22. He was desirous of prayer in his sickness.
In all his sickness, from the first morning thereof, (for he was taken in the
night) he was very willing and desirous to have prayers duly and often unto
the Lord. Sometimes he himself would call for the performance of this duty.
He desired us to pray unto God for him and with him. He died of ^n Apoplexy
On August. 24. 1622.
And when the motion was made unto him, while his sense continued with him, if
it were deferred but never so little, for any cause whatsoever, he himself
would hasten it; saying, When? when? as he was able.

I am not able to speak al, which of so worthy a man might truly be spoken.
And in that which I have spoken, you are not to understand me, as though I went
about to maintain, that he had no infirmities, or that he never failed in any
particulars: for alas, James 3.2.
in many things we offend all. And highly is that man to be commended, whose
general course is such, as I have now set down, although he fail through
infirmity in many particulars.

And the things considered, and weighed in the balance of charity, which have
been spoken, we may be bold to conclude according to the judgment of
charity, that he is in the number of those Saints whose death in this place,
the Holy Ghost pronounces precious in the sight of the Lord.

Now what remains? but first that those whom he has left behind him, who in
his life time were the nearest and dearest unto him, do set before their eyes
so godly a pattern, and strive by all means to resemble him to the utmost. It
was Elishaes request when Elijah was taken from him, that a double portion of
his spirit might be upon him. 2 King. 2.9.
Ask (said Elijah) what I shall do for thee, before I be taken away from
thee. And Elisha said, I pray thee, let a double portion of thy spirit be upon
me. And when David had given order, and Solomon was made king, David's servants,
(as says the text,) came to bless their Lord king David, saying; 1 King. 1.47.
God make the name of Solomon better than thy name, and make his throne greater
than thy throne. And the king bowed himself upon the bed, showing his good
acceptance of his servants words. Even so wish I, that the virtues of the
deceased may be doubled upon the living. And I beseech them all by the mercies
of God, that the remembrance of the things, which (as I was able in respect of
mine own knowledge) I have now rehearsed, and of all other good things, which
they have known and seen to be in him, far better than my self, may be so
imprinted in their hearts that they may never be forgotten, but that in the
whole course of their life they may imitate and follow them, and add more
thereunto, that as they inherit his lands and goods* so they may inherit his
reputation and good report* and that with much more honor and greater fame
than he did enjoy it himself.

Finally it rests, that both they and we all, which remain alive, and are
left behind him, do humbly beseech the Lord to sanctify us wholly, and to
grant us that the life which we now live in the flesh, we may live by the
faith of the Son of God, that whenever God shall call us, our death may be
precious, and we may sleep in Jesus: and sleeping in him we may be brought
with him, and be glorified with him by the full fruition of God himself the
chiefest good: To which most gracious and most glorious God, the Father, the
Son, and the Holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, and glory, both now and for
evermore. Amen. Amen.

FINIS.
Erratum.
CHristian reader, at page 11. line 26. for Psalm. read Psalms. And the rest is
well and truly printed from the beginning to the end.

Give all the glory to God.


