A BREEF DISCOVR^ wherein is declared of ye travails an^ miseries of this
painful life, and that death is t^^ dissoluer of man's misery. Gathered out of
d^uers good writers, by Leonard Staueley. Wh^ unto is annexed the Authors muse
of this life / in English Vearse and his praise likewise of Virtue / Felicity
and true Gentillitie.

Cicero. 1. Tuscul. Moriendum est omnibus: estque finis Miseriae in morte.
Death draws on
We must be gone,
From Bed to Beer:
In time repent,
Thy life ill spent,
Whiles thou art here.
For after death
Has stopped our Breath,
We shall be sure:
In Heaven to dwell
Or else in Hell
Where pains endure.
Imprinted at London at the long shop adjoining unto Saint Mildreds Church in
the Pultrie by John Allde.

To the Right Worshipful Ancient and grave Knight, Sir Robert VVingfeeld of
Letheringham Leonard Staueley wishes increase of worship, Virtue and Godly
sluing, with Nestors years, Craesus wealth, and Galliens happy health.
FOr as much (Right worshipful) as I find in sundry histories of antiquity,
of the tha^kfulnes of diverse kinds of beasts (which want reason and
understanding) shovved unto their Benefactors, and for that I were very loathe
to be included in the number of unthankful Creatures: I have therefore presumed
by this little trifle, upon the courteous inclination of your gentle nature
which to all men is apparent, to show my self to be an other poor Sinatas
whose good vvil and thankfullnes in heart and mind, I trust you vvil way
as well in a drop of svveet running water as if it were a gift of some
precious or more greater value. For as I remember Erasmus in his witty
Appothegmes says that, Donum quodcunque dat aliquis, proba: and Munerum animus
est optimus.

But paraduenture your worship vvil meruail why I (being one of small or no
understanding) have attempted to put my Pen to the paper to write of a more
vvaightyer matter the^ my vvittes or learning are able to attain unto. The
truth is though I never went further then a little in the Grammar Schole (yet
by common experience, reading of books, and mine own industry and travel) I
have conceived some thing. For when I consider the sundry mischaunces of
fickle Fortune (if any such thing there be:) the miserable estate of mankind,
now puffed up in Pomp of all Pleasures, now thrown down into the dungion
of all dolors, anon comes a flowing flud, by and by a low eb water: so
that the uncertainty of this vain fleeting life may be well compared to a
violent flood, which is quick in rising, swift and troublesome to passover,
enduring but for a while in one condition and certentie. Wherefore these (as
the first fruits of my good vvil what soever they be) I have dedicated to your
vvoorships Patronage, under whose Sheeld of defense a number of afflicted
members have sure sauegard, and gentle refuge, amongst whom I am one, who am
bound by double duty and vvil be pressed (if service by hand or heart may do any
thing) to you and yours for ever.

But for as much as the hugenes of the head defaseth a little slender body, and
a tedious tale may breed some offense, and lest in lengthning mine Epistle I
should disgrace that small thing which follovveth, here in breef I vvil end,
remembering that a little Musicque to the heavy heart is often found more
delightful and pleasant then a great deal of untunable melody.

Your vvoorships most humbly to command during life, Leonard Staueley.

Verses Written upon the name of the Right woorshipfull Sir Robert Wingfeeld
Knight.
Regarding right, way well in mind,
Of life and death the end of all.
Beware of friends that are unkind.
And seek to kill by courteous call.
Recoyle from him which lays a net:
Thy silly Soul in sin to get.
With hearty love like well that friend
In whom great vvisdome does remain
Neclecting vice, so in the end
Great gifts of God thou sure shall gain.
Flee swift with (Wing) and vvin the (Feeld)
Extolling Gods word still on bye
Live well, live ever, to Virtue yield,
Dred God and Prince, most carefully.
Keep Conscience pure, and pa^y to God
Not living like an Epicure,
If that thou do his heavy rod,
Great plagues and vvoes thou shall endure
Heavens bless the race being gody run
The guerdon is when life is done.
Stand steadfast, L. S.

To the courteous and freendly Reader.
AS I have seen by diverse and learned woorks (most gentle Reader) that there
was never yet any matter so handled / but some fault has escaped, so for want
of skill (in mine own doings, Lacking the benefit of exact knowledge) I have
ru^ne a Rouing without any order in my writings. But such as it is I present to
thy friendly reading, wherein I have declared some part of man's intolerable
passions and frailty, for redres whereof I say that death is the disoluer of
his miserable misery.

If I gain thy good word I have my desire, but if I reap thy reproach: thou
show but thy noysom nature wherefore (hoping the best) I wish thee use this
til time afford better, and as I here of thy freendly report: so will I write of
other matters to thy contentation, profit and pleasure. et sic Vale.

Savwel.

The Book to the Reader.
I Rashly pend, do spring from barren brain,
A simple me^e, in prose for to declare:
what sorrows sour, what greefs and pi^ching pain
This life does bring, vvherby we may prepare,
With death to Christ away from hence to fare,
Wherefore in gree accept what here is said:
Since mere goodvvil was cause that he it made
I show in breef how Virtue vvinneth Fame
How she alone brings true Felicity:
How all that is on earth is naught but vain,
And how we ought esteem Gentillitie.
Misconster nothing that thou spiest in me,
So by that means thou vvin'st his heart and all:
In promptest wise to pleasure thee at call.
Blame not his skill,
for of good vvil^
From him I came:
as only mean,
To purge him clean
of thankles name.
As does behooue,
let him thy love,
And good word gain*
abandon Spite,
So may thou quite
his little pain.
Love is a solace.

Ba. He. to the Reader.
SWeet is ye smell, which pleases all men's sent,
Well can he write, which feeds every vain
If this smell sweet to those who has it sent,
The Author has his hire for his pain.
To show and prove wise Solons saying true,
Til Death, that none can be a happy man:
Good Staueley shows by that which does ensue,
And with his pen it proves, as best he can.
If pain for others gain, deserve but well,
If toil for common weal be worthy praise:
Commend the Author then, who shows his skill,
To profit thee, and others, with his phrase.
His willing mind to write, do not repreeue,
All spiteful terms for envious men reserve:
Let Staueley for his pain, obtain thy love,
And wish him well, as well he does deserve.
FINIS.
T. F.

William Brogdon in praise of the Authors travail.
Muse you that list from whence I came,
or what good Stauely meant:
Whose care was such to vvoork the way,
for which his time was spent.
Read you what he has careful writ,
and follovv you his lore:
So death thou shall learn to contemn,
that dreaded death before.
It Is follye for to fear that thing,
which no man can eschew:
Live then to day as thou would dye.
so Staueley vvilles thee do.
He tells thee what thy life it is,
And what thine end must be:
To day a man, to morovv none,
by proof we know and see.
What troubles are in vvretched life,
and what hangs over head:
Thou may behold and here for see,
which often thou do not dread.
Which may thee teach for to be wise,
how thou hereafter lives:
Eschew the evil, embrace the good,
as Staueley Counsel gives.
And so farvvel and him do thank,
which for thee took such pains:
His study is not for himself,
but thou the profit gains.
If thou this platform follovv vvil,
which freendly he bestovves:
Then shall thou suerly dye to live,
as he in sequel shows.
Finis.
VV. B.

Oswald Speed to the Reder.
AS many men, so many wits,
Some loathe that which other love:
And one thing never all men fits,
As this my friend shall prove.
What Is some man's meat, does poison some:
And this man's bliss is that man's doom.
In reading some condemns those,
That in the plainest sort:
His meaning to them does disclose,
And some again report
Him blessed, that has the loftiest vain:
And deem the rest of barrein brain.
Another sort does him commend,
That igmys in middle mean:
Not much affecting, to offend,
Nor yet without it clean.
So one for this, and some for that do call:
That one man cannot please them all.
So he my friend that writ this Book,
Would willingly delight
All those, that on the same do look,
If possibly he might.
He seeks nothing for his pain:
But Readers liking for to gain.
And thus fare you well,
The best is soon said,
Asvvell as the vvorst:
This all men can tell,
It is not best made:
That Is done at the first.
Finis.
quod Oswold Speed.

A Breef Discourse
Having tasted of the insatiable sea of sowsing sorrows, and drunk of the
careful cup of peruerce perturbations as well of mind as of body: I find by
proof that dreadful Death (at the naming whereof we tremble, is the dissoluer
of our continual cares, troublesome cogitations and man's most miserable
misery, which to approve and verify, let us first call unto rememberance ye
grievous gronings of our painful Parents in the time of our nativity and
education.

For with what weeping, wayling, sobing and sighing at our first entrance into
this vale of misery are we beyond all measure most grievously afflicted?

The weary watchings ye cold and long winter nights, the rising, ye rocking ye
lulling, ye lame^ting and all to assuage our passions intolerable (which we
the^ scarsly know although we most sharply feel) might be a mean to daunt
our haughty hearts, and to a bandon our lewd lives, liui^g in these careful
calamities oppressed with sorrows innumerable. But (alas) the first Act being
finished: we enter into another kind of life (severe and strict, as yunglings
do think it) which is going to scoole to lern ye precepts of Philosophy, and
ways to virtue, whereby we become of monsters: men, of senseless souls:
learned lights, (notwithstanding indeed some for the attaining thereof bide many
a sharp shower, with careful and grievous correction) which in my mind might
often be wun sooner with mildnes of the Master, then with much severity. When
we have got learning, by reason whereof we are called in the Commonwelth, to
some public Office, and are the meeter to deal in our private affairs, wherein
our studyes are incessant, our cares continual, and our service most painful
to perfoorme our pretended purposes and the discharge of our desired duties.
Here, here begins the tragical discourse of our grievous gronings and
unfortunate troubles, at which time we think to reap some solace for our late
sustained sorrows, but even then a thousand of troubles, nay a hell of miseries
upon our heads, when we think our selves in greatest safety and most
security. For Matrimony so presses us diverse ways as scarsly can we bend our
studyes to any good perfection, it takes away our liked liberty and brings
these incombrances, a Iangling wife, unquiet Children, brawling (and sometimes)
untrusty servants, with innumerable such like torments, therefore all these
being well wayed, it may seem to the virtuous and honest mind, such a warfare
of woes, and such a tempest of troubles as he might think (and justly say) that
Death is the looser of man's most lamentable living, and the dissoluer of this
wretched state and cares inco^perable. Morouer there is such Envy in many, such
Pride in general, and such seeking for gain: as the unquietness of this life is
rather to be lothed, then the pleasuers thereof to be wished or desired. Do we
not see, what privy detracting, what Envious maligning, what cruel
conspiring, and all for offices, liberty and lordly living. The husbandman not
content with his estate, seeks to live like a Lord rather then an inferior
person and would become of worse then a yeoman: a gentleman and so forwards.
But mark ye unquietness of their minds, for though no delay may daunt them, no
calamities control them: yet the supernall powers perceiving their ambitious
intention in a moment (by Death) throws down hedlong yt they vainly
pretended and deuelishly attempted.

O if we which bear the names of men, would but once remember ye end of all
which is Death, assuredly, assuredly, then would burning hatred be cold, secret
matire ly dead and be quite quenched in ye ashes. But care to maintain this
life with abundance, ambition, pomp, pleasures, riches, riot, Liberty, same,
good fortune, favor, Freendship and goodly countenance is so super abundant,
as neither can we take our desired rest quietly, eat or drink merrily, nor do
any moderat action to the contentation of our afflicted minds, so grievously
are we turned on the wheel of carking care continually. I have red in the
ancient Annualls of the renowned Romans of ye civil wars betwixt the
puisant Pompey and the coragious Caesar, only for Ambition and desire of a sole
Regiment, whose cares were continual, the one seeking the overthrow of ye
other, which Death first using the Tutors of young Ptolome as his instrument
sleew Pompeyus and sent his head unto Caesar, who seeing it: (as writers report)
wept. But by ye hands of Brutus and Cassius, Caesar's life was shortly after
finished, for they in the stately Senate house of Room gave three and twenty
wounds with Penkniues or bodkins most cruelly bereuing Caesar of his lofty
life. O detestable desire of glory, Oh deuelish device for honor, Oh va^quisher
of Virtue, could thou not be satisfied until thou hadest the life of goodly
Caesar, who (as Ignatius says) was most wise in counsel, full of eloquence,
profound in wisdom, valiant in strength of body, expert in marshall affairs,
and finally in him no exellent quality lacked yt was requisite for any noble
man? I could tell you likewise how Tiberius was dispatched by the hands of
Caligula for the government and domination of the Empier of the Romans, and
how Caligula had his deadly wound of Tiberius Drusus, who governed a short
time, the Regiment of that kingdom with infinite such like. Thus may you see
here that Death has ended their covetous conceits and ambicious desires,
bridled their wilful wills, and restrained their wicked entents. Death is
fearful, yea but the loss of eternal life is more to be feared, death
depriueth us of honors, worldly renown, riches, Friends, Parents and children:
yea but if we forgo the Crown of imortall glory, the heavenly Riches, the
company of our deer friends Moses and the Prophets, and the society of our
first Parents Adam and Eve, and their children; Seth, Enos, Kenam, Mchalael,
Iered Henoch, and Methuselah, who lived in this Pilgrimage nine hundredth
threescore and nine years, this is a greater loss and much more to be feared.
Death aba^doneth our delicate delights, our pleasant Pastimes, our worldly
solace, and takes from us all our bags gold of and silver, our treasures,
our famous buildings with all the rest of our joys. Yea but in steed of them it
restores us to a celestial place fol of blessedness and inspekable felicities
which no eye has seen, ^ Cor 2.9.
no ear has herd, no heart can conceive, nor no tung able to utter. In this
place is a heavenly Ieruzalem where all joys incomporable are to be found, and
sorrows utterly exiled. But peradventure some one will say, I live a quiet life,
I have the good gifts of Fortune, she never frowneth on me, my neighbors enuey
not my estat of worldly felicity nor my happy proceedings, and I have
mountains of wealth and no man hates me but I have many Friends by reason of
my gold, and therefore by this means I can procure my estate, pleasure, health,
life and liberty to my liking. O vain man, do thou not know that thy state
is so much the more miserable, by how much the more thou esteemest of thy self
and those transitory things? For I assure thee most wretched is he that never
has tasted any misfortune, and he is hated of the Gods that never feels any
troubles Demetrius calls a quiet life without adversity Mare mortuum, a dead
Sea. Pollicrates a tirant of the Samians, whose good Fortune was such as he
never felt any mischaunce in all his life time saving toward his death, who
being weary of his continual joy and gladness, towing in a vessel for his
pleasure into the depth of the Channel and mening to turn his present good hap
to changeable and futer ill fortune, wilfully cast a precious Ring of gold
having (...) Pearl in it of inestimable value into the waves thereof, which a
hungry fish snapped up the same in sted of other feeding, which being
presently taken with Fishermen and presented into the Kichin of Pollicrates for
her singular rarenes: the Cook ^^pping ye belly unawares found this Ring, took
it and delivered it to his master. Although Pollicrates did now ride on ye top
of Fortunes wheel, yet at the last the wheel turned and he had a great fall,
for in the wars which were between him and Darius King of the Pertians,
Orantes the cheef Captain or Lieutenant of Darius took him prisoner, and after
most painful and terrible torments: caused him to be honge upon a gibet upon
the top of a steep hill, or mighty mountain. O blind and unstable fortune.
Had it not been better for Pollicrates now and then to have tasted some of thy
sower sops of sorrow, and sometimes to have droonk of ye bitter drink of
Adversity then altogether in his brauest iollitie not only to lose his
kingdom but also his deer life in most shamful manner? As you then deltst with
him: so since thou have used others thy guests in like sort.

But yet you think that gold can redeem you from greet, Silver from sorrow,
and deeds from Death, no I tell you they are rather means to hasten your
dispatch, then to linger your delay. For (as Bion reports) Arristippus a very
wise Philosopher had a Servant who was over charged with the weight and charge
of his Masters money, therefore bidden by his master to cast away the overplus
and carry that which he might with his ease, which done: Aristippus happening
to be on the Sea with Pirates threw all his Gold and Silver into the waves
thereof, saying: better it were that all this geere be thrown away by
Aristippus then Aristippus by them: meaning that the keeping of the money might
procure him a dismal day he being in ye company of such falce and fained
friends.

Not much unlike to this I find (as the worthy Poets record in their most
sacred Verses,) how Arion the exellent and cuning Musition, who for to increase
his knowledge in foreign contries, and to augment his estate in gathering gold,
for sooke Lesbos his own native soil and Contry, and sailing into Scicile
remained there a season, from thence he traueled into Italy, where having got
his wished desire of gain, and pretending to pass to Corinth being a Ship
board in most safty as he thought with his own contrie me^, they
understanding what riches he had: sought by all means privily how to slay him:
but he perceiving their intent: desired of the^ to take his gold and other
treasures and save his life, which they would not agree unto, but granted him
that he should throw him self into the waves of the Sea hedlong and so stop
his breath for that he should not bewray their mischeuous Act of Robbery,
wherefore with abundance of tears: he requested the Mariners, nay rather.
Thieves and Pirates (for no other term can I better give the^) to grant him his
lamentable Lute and eke his mourning Roab, which being obtained, he sung to
his sollemn Lute a sorry song, and so amiddest the surging Sea did see the face
of Death yet being alive. But for all that he was delivered by the help of a
Dolphin fish who presently received him on her back and most safely conuaied
him a shore when he least looked for any such matter.

I remember that the renowned Poet Maro in his Eneidos of the destruction of ye
famous City of Troy writes how the ancient and wise King Priamus fearing lest
the mighty Greeks should overthrow and utterly destroy all ye regal blood
and Issue there: sent his yungest son Pollidorus to his cosen Pollimnestor
being a King, having a great some of Gold with him to minister unto the Infant
necessaries. Polimnestor made much of Pollidorus so long as his Father Priamus
lived, but he being dead: the cruel Tirant for the greedines of his gold,
slew him most unnaturally to his shame, dishonor, reproach, and perpetual
infamy. Wherein we may perceive what little save guard is in golden riches, and
how unstable fortune is, sometimes fauning, so^times frowni^g, sometime content,
sometimes displeased, and lastly the little love of fained friends and unkind
kinsmen for their private profit how it is soon forgotten and ended, so that we
may well think, it is better to rest from our Labors then with pain
continually to toil against nature, the common misery, ye unknown pains, the
pinching penury, the sobbings, the sorowings the trauelings, ye toylings, the
sower Bread of heauynes, the bitter drink of carefulnes, the afflictions, as
imprisonment, derth, Fire and sword, which before our eyes we rufully do
behold, the innocent opressed, the poor man persecuted, the rich man
regarded, Falshod favored, Truth neglected and all goodness quite devoured,
does or may drive us to think ye happy and thrice happy is he that has passed
this laborsome Laborinth in the paths of Virtue, goodness and honesty, and come
to the happy Haven of rest and quietness which is through Death the disoluere
of man's misery. For what other thing means the Poets when they paint out
Ulysses, tedious troubles, his perilous passages, sometimes lighting on
Poliphemus a terrible Giant ready to deuower him, sometimes on the wanton Dame
Calipso ready to allure him, otherwhiles passing by the shoares where the subtel
Sirens were ready to drown his Bark by the incha^tment of their marvelous
Mellody, for the resisting whereof (being governed by the grave advice of
prudent Pallas) he was feign to stop his ears with wax, to bind him self to
the Mast of the ship and to feed of the sweet herb Molie which was given him
by Mercury to avoid all the incantations of Circe, with the rest of like
treachery? Nothing I say but to paint out unto us (as in a glass) that Man is a
mirror of misery, subject to many hard adventures, and in danger of many
perrils: Satan our old Enemy ready to pray on us if our own mighty captain
Christ were not (in our distresses) ready to defend us against his subtle
assaults, without all doubt we should soon become Bondslaues to all sin and
iniquity, the wanton Allurements and wicked entisements of Dame Pleasures with
her mi^sing mates are so dressed up in gallant bravery as hardly can we save
our Barks and bodies from drowning in the waves and woorks of wicked vanity,
were it not yt our great God Jehovah the heavenly wisdom by his good Counsel
does give us Virtuous Precepts of good living to the contrary. I cannot forget
the notable misfortunes and evil chances of Oedipus (written by Euripides) in
slaying his Father Laius marying his own Mother Iocasta of whom he begat his
two infortunat sons Polynices and Eteocles, who after the Citizens of Thebes
had exiled their Father: fell in contention one with another for the seat of
government. For the greef of these former wickedness Oedipus plucked out his
own eyes and became an exile, and would often if his Daughter Antigone had not
hindered him with glistering blade wrought his own final destruction, but he
often wished to dye in vain, yet at the last he was with a flame of lightning
from heaven sudenly strooken to death. The mening as we may partly gather by
sense and reason is, yt the wickedness of our desires in Venus deuelish
delights are so great yt (for ye attaining thereof) we will not let to murder
our Parents, kinsmen and friends yea and then to mary in our own blood and
consanguinitie, whereupon it comes to pass yt our offspring, our children or
so^e of them througth the sin of the Parents violently and with all rigor
seek by all means to percecute one another, yea even to Death. All which
detestable dealings being seen of ye thundering Jupiter: he of his mercy
strikes us unawares with his Rod of correction and whippeth us with his
scourge of Vengeance by lightenings, thunderings, earthquakes, Tempests,
strange noyses, rumors of wars, visions, inundations of waters, Pestilences,
new and strange diseases called Gentle warnings, and sometime sudden Death to
the'nd we might repent us of our sin and be the more redier when awful
Atropos shall with her deadly darte sommon us before the great and terrible
Judge, either to our salvation if we repent and amend: or else to our
condemnation if we live and dye without repentance. Now what is the life of man
whereof he so much bosteth? I will answer partly with Arristotle, the pray of
Time, the play of Fortune, the image of inconstancy, the slave of Envy, the
sea of worldly calamity: a fading flower, a buble of water, a blast of wind,
a fleeting shadow, a smothering smoke, a peevish pilgrimage: a slumbering sleep
(which as grave Homer terms it) is the brother of Death, a Stage play the
Acts whereof are uncertain and the length before we come to the Catastrop or end
of our Comicall action is inforsed with infinite mischefes, the relefer where of
is dolful Death that invincible Champion. For even as he which saileth on ye
Sea by wi^de, time, and tides whether he be sitting or standing, lying or
going, sleeping or waking at last (all perils passed:) enters the wished port
of saftie. So the life of man by course of age and years will he nil he (how
soever he spend his tickled time:) continually is carried to ye end of his
painful days, and to ye finishing of his careful course to ye happy harborow
of eternal life, for as life flies a way with the wings of time: so Death
draws on with the feet of age. But forasmuch (as Enius thi^keth) that that
Death is not to be lamented the which immortal Fame follows. Therefore he
which has sung much is not the best Musicion, nor he that has governed the
Ship longest is the perfetest Pilot, nor he that has been longest at the
University is the best student: but he which has done it the soonest,
quicklyest, and perfectest. So to knit up in breef (if already I have not been
to tedious) I will end saying yt not he which lives longest is most blessedest
because of his silver here is and long time: but he which has lived well and
soonst trod his footsteps in the path of Virtue, and dyed an honorable Death,
is the man that may be accounted most hapyest.

Death dissolueth Dollors.

The Authors muse upon this life in manner of a Dittie.
I Musing in my mestiue mind,
of this vain fleeting life:
By perfect proof this do I find,
it is nothing else but strife.
Which when I see the pinching, pain
wherewith poor men are pressed:
I deem him happiest that has this gain,
by Christ eternal rest.
For here I see our cares abound,
and sorrows still increase:
And never lin til under ground,
our corpse do lie at ease.
Our labor then is ended sure,
and blessedst is that wight.
That greatest greefs did here endure,
and led a life most right.
For here such spitefulnes does rain,
such swelling Pride aloft:
Such seeking all for worldly gain.
such sin so deerly bought.
Such carking cares to keep this life,
in brauest port and Fame:
Such seeking still for pleasures ryfe,
such follyes fond and vain.
Such breaking sleeps, such tugging toil,
such watchings and such wiles:
Such seeking one of others foil,
such tears of Crocodiles.
Such laying traps for the innocent,
such seeking of his blood:
Such subteltie, when truth is meant,
such ill, such little good.
Such woorking woe to harmeles hearts,
such cloking Vice and sin:
Such playing of most cruel parts,
such lusts our lives are in.
Such framing of sweet hunnyed talk,
such luring of the wicked will:
Such going wrong, that few right walk,
such sights the soul to spil.
Such ielious fits, such frantic parts,
such anger all for naught:
Such close deseits in holow hearts,
such secret mischeefs wrought.
Such facyng of fine forgid tales,
such swearing all for pence:
Such falsehood both in waights and scales,
such saving of expense.
Such little hospitallitie used,
such pinching of the poor:
Such forsing them to be abused,
such Vice done every ower.
Such haunting of vile Venus trulles,
such brawling for their cause:
Such cutting, slashing, knocking skulls,
such breaking of the laws.
Such Avarice in every man,
such Usury out of measure:
Such tossing of Liaeus Can,
such spending of their treasure.
Such biting with malicious tunges,
such scoffing at the wise:
Such slothfulnes, such open wrongs,
such storms do still arise.
As when I think upon this life,
which nothing is (I say:)
But only cares and mortal strife,
and smoke that flies away.
Then happy ten times blessed is he,
whose ruthful race is run:
And does enjoy Felicity,
when all his cares are done.
Which mighty Jove grant us I pray
The true Felicity:
That we may at our ending day,
Receive his great glory.
And that likewise here in this vale,
of sorrows and of moan:
We may enjoy without ten fail,
heavens bliss when life is gone.
Our gracious Queen Elizabeth,
do keep O Lord we pray:
In glorious pomp, and after Death,
in joys that rest she may.
Amen.
Life is strife.
His praise of Virtue, Felicity, and Ientillytie. To the courteous and gentle
Reder.
THese simple lines which here I written have
Declare the force of Virtues good effect:
(Good Reader) bear with rudenes mine I crave,
For here thereby no man I will detect.
Uprightly judge and then I need not fear:
But thou with it in freendly sort wilt bear.
Judge justly,
In praise of Virtue. Virtue only brings Felicity.
ALthough Apollos filed phrase,
and Pallas learned skill:
Within my breast took never place,
to feed my muse at will.
Yet I like Pan in rural rithme,
for good will that I bear:
Unto the race of Gentlemen,
will wright as shall appeer.
It is not Fame ne flattering force,
ne hoordes of heaped gold:
But only Virtue forces me,
this sentence to unfold.
Dame Virtue she that heavenly Queen,
and Perragon of price:
Is only cause that silly souls,
to honor do arise.
She brings true felicity,
and Vice she does expel:
She teaches how to fear the Lord,
and save thy soul from hell.
I read a wise Philosopher,
which Aristotle hight:
In stately style, has left her force,
apparent to our sight.
Saying: that Virtue aptest is,
to those of youthful race:
A pleasant thing to ancient men,
to Rich a goodly grace.
And to the poor she profit bringes,
aduauncing him full hye:
For Virtue only is the cause,
of true Felicity.
Unnoble men she noble makes,
and glory is their hap:
Whose chance is such to take their ease,
in Virtues lulling lap.
A solace she to woeful wights,
whom carking cares oppress:
She bringes them perfect Patience,
and makes their greef seem less.
Who sowes the seeds of Virtue sweet,
shall reap eternal Fame:
And true Fame overcomes Death,
through Virtue this we gain.
A Sage of Greece was asked once,
what thing to man was best:
Even Virtue (answered he) because,
in her consists great rest.
Without the which no good thing may
once wrought or spoken be:
For she alone brings perfect bliss,
and true Felicity.
Wise Solon told rich Craesus King,
it was not flowing wealth:
Ne strength of men, ne Tagus sands,
Ne Gallens merry health.
Ne Lordships great, ne honors hye,
ne Pleasures hunnyed bait:
That happy made his stiffing days,
his frail and brittle state.
But if he made a godly end,
and virtuously did dye:
He, he, it is that knows the use,
Of true Felicity.
But now who virtue does frequent?
who seeks this virgin pure?
Even men of basest Parents born,
whom Honors do allure.
Minerua joined with Diligence,
makes many worthy be:
Because that Virtue gives the light,
of true Felicity.
The ancient race of Gentlemen,
have wun their Sheelds of Arms:
Through Virtue and through valiancie,
defending Prince from harms.
But now a days some Gentlemen,
do give both spear and sheeld:
Although indeed they never came,
in any foughten feeld.
Nor yet by Counsel grave at home,
did profit Commonwealth:
But sought their own vtillitie
and eke their private health.
Gold makes the Heraldes paint such forth,
as likes best their haps:
Yet Apes are Apes though golden Roabs,
often times be on their backs.
True Gentlemen of worthy race,
through Armor, Spear and Sheeld.
Have won their Arms by dint of sword,
and push of Pikes in feeld.
But now (alas) I must lament,
that Gentlemen of Fame:
Let pass their ancient Gentery,
forgetting clean the same.
Some scrape up goods by crafty means,
Some royatly all spend:
Some through excess of pounsing pride,
are brought to balefull end.
By thousand means good Gentlemen,
are brought to dire decay:
The reason is, that virtues loare,
in them does bear small sway.
Vpstarts contrarily, attend,
on Virtues rayall train:
From step to step, from grace to grace,
til honors step they gain.
It Is better far a mean man born,
in Virtue to exseed:
Then one who Vice does still frequent,
though Gentle man indeed.
For nobleness begins in him,
and in the other dye:
Which does appeer that Virtue brings
the true Felicity.
Who now is the true Gentleman?
even be (as Seneca said)
Whom Nature with Mineruas skill,
to Virtues lore has made.
If any man to praise thou chance,
because he Gentle is:
His Parents and his Ancestors,
thou praysest them iwis.
It is not Parents progeny,
(As Ovid does us tell:)
But Virtue makes Gentlemen,
alone for to excel.
Wherefore to Gentle men I write,
your ancient bloods renew:
With Virtuous Arts and Gentleness,
bid filthy Vice adieu.
And as the names of Gentlemen,
deservedly you have:
So frame your lives that you may pass,
with Virtue hence to grave,
Let Justice mixed with Mercyes meed,
And Wisdom be your guide:
Riches contemn, and Pleasures hate,
from Faith do never slide.
Pride, Covetousness, Ambition,
Vnreuerentnesse likewise:
Vain glory, Discord, Envy eke,
at any hand despise.
Be humble to inferiors,
and have a lowly heart:
Then will the common people say,
a Gentle man thou art.
Seek learnings deep Philosophy,
and peace do thou ensue:
Hate ireful rage and tirannie,
and Backus bliss eschew.
So in the end this glorious Gem,
Dame Virtue will thee give:
A Garland of Immortal Fame,
whereby thou aye may live.
For after Death our Virtues raines,
whereby we never dye:
But find that she alone it is,
bringes true Felicity.
Virtue wins Woorship.
A pretty pamphlet of faithful Freendship.
THe truethlesse trust of fained friends,
the wayward wily ways:
The deep deceits of hollow hearts,
which hap in these our days.
The silly soul so soon betrayed,
the Poor man so oppressed:
That scarce Rich Dives will him give,
a Crum to be refresht.
These things do move my mestiue Muse,
of Freendship to declare:
That it a Virtue is wherewith,
no Jewel may compare.
The Spring whereby our life is fed,
the Jewel of our joy:
The very mean which helps the heart,
all sorrows to destroy.
In time of great prosperity,
a pleasure to the mind:
A solace in Adversity,
a faithful Friend we find.
Fine Tullie termd a faithful friend
to be another I:
As who should say like to my self,
in every property.
A faithful friend is such a one,
as makes thy sore his smart:
The pricking of thy finger eke,
the pearsing of his heart.
Thy misery his mestiue move,
thy pain his present greef:
Thy sorrow sower his hateful hap,
thy health his sole releef.
In doutful dangers thou shall find,
that he will do thee good:
And for thy sake not stint at all,
to spend both life and blood.
He sticks fast at all assayes,
mischaunces him approve:
To be of trusty Troylus kind,
in freendship and in love.
Its he who absent seems to be,
in presens every hour:
Yea dead, alive and all this springs,
through this most fragrant flower.
The very mean whereof does move,
the fearse Barbarians mind:
In myserye abooue all wealth,
a faithful friend we find.
It is not flashing flames of fire,
his freendship may restrain:
Ne Midas muck, no Irus greef,
ne bliss ne pinching pain.
But like the purest Franckensence,
which yields forth a smell:
^ore sweeter in the flame then out
experience this does tell.
^r as the golden Glass woorme shines,
most brightest in the night:
^e miserye tryes faithful friend,
to be a trusty wight.
^r not unlike the redolent Rose,
of dulsed Dammask kind:
Which sweeter is in still then stalk,
as we by proof do find.
^^thagoras did once pronounce,
that Freendship love does bind
and in two bodies fast conioyne,
an equallnesse of mind.
^he Poet Empedocles said,
that all things firm did stand:
^ea all the world and all therein,
uphold by Freendships hand,
^^gratitude neclecting love,
and Freendship put to flight:
^his follows then an end of all,
life is dissolved quite.
^ertue begets this Iuell rare,
and it conserues always:
(...) very freendship Virtue is,
(as Aristotle says.)
(...) such a League as neither time,
^y peecemele may divide:
Nor Fancies fond affects nor fraud,
infrindge at any tide.
A Friend will hazard life and lims,
yea goods yea wealth and all:
Ere that he see his friend take harm,
in danger dyre to fall.
Of Damons love to Pithias,
example is lose to us:
Of Nisus and Euriolus love,
the Poet does discuss.
To Gysippus his friend did prove.
a trusty Titus true:
And Theseus to Pirotheus,
like freendship did ensue.
Wise Sipio and Lelius,
in freendship did excel:
And Palemon with Crates eke,
for freendship bare the bell.
The love of freendly Lincius,
( Josephus writes plain:)
Unto his dear Artorius,
to their eternal fame.
And Ionathas saved David's life,
in sacred writ we find:
So that no Jewel here on earth,
is like a freendly mind.
It is not strength of mighty men,
that freendship does obtain:
^^e heaps of Gold, but faithfulness,
and kindenes it does gain.
^indenes annexed with Gentle deeds,
true freendship does inflame:
and Loyal looues fidelity,
does still increase the same.
The likelynesse of manners makes,
conjunction of the mind:
and Virtue joined with honesty,
true freendship firm does bind.
^ike will to like (the Proverb says,)
the Turtle looues her make:
and mournes til death for want of feehr,
and all for freendships sake.
But hot love soon is could (some say,)
the sequel is too true:
and fair words makes fools feign,
which always does ensue.
The purest wine makes Vinagre,
to be of sharpest kind:
and deepest love to deadliest hate,
is often chaungd we find.
True trial proves trustiness,
in trust is treason found:
Who climbs upon a rotten bough,
may catch a fatal wound.
For in adversity we see,
the flattering faithless feend:
To start a side and here us make,
in misery our end.
As Swallows comes in somer time,
when pleasures grow full green:
But when the winters rage comes on,
are no where to be seen.
So fained friends when wealth a bounds
will speak what we do say:
But when as Fortune frowns on us,
they quite do flee away.
Then are they like the Be which has,
the hunnie sweet by kind:
Within her mouth, but yet she bears,
a smarting sting be hind.
For as they erst with sugared words,
did promise golden grapes:
So now their Tippets clean they turn,
and leave us in the brakes.
In fellowship lies falsehood hid,
and fraud in freendly looks:
And under sweet and hunnied baits,
do lurk the harmful hooks.
An painted pots sweet poison is,
whereby our bane does rise:
In cleerest streme the vgliest Tode,
in grass the Serpent lies.
The filthy rotten bones some time,
in curious grave we find:
and in a Judas kiss there lies,
a privy galling mind.
Like Siren with her silver songs,
whose notes do often allure:
The silly ship man to the sands,
his death for to procure.
Or as the Crocodile who yields,
a sorry solemn sound:
Til she have brought the wailing wight,
lie sprawling on the ground.
The Spider weaues a curious web,
the silly Fly to wile:
The woolfe does wear a smiling face,
the Lamb for to beguile.
The Panthers breath does sweetest smell,
when pray she does ensue:
I freendly face means falsest faith,
experience is to true.
In freendship all that seems to shine,
it is not purest Gold:
Nor every word is Gospel sure,
which Friars have us told.
(...) Leaden Dagger often is found,
with in a golden sheath:
And sure a flattering faithless friend,
does bring us present death.
^n extrem need when Fortune faites,
few friends a man shall find:
But then like to the Reed they shake,
with every blast of wind.
In Prison if thou chance to lie,
when worldly wealth does fail:
My Skin is nearer then my Shirt,
this suer will be their tale.
Wherefore if I may Counsel give,
I wish thee to take heed:
Of him who bears a knife to kill,
yet wears a freednly weed.
Let no fair words dim perfet sight,
but carefully beware:
Full sweetly does the Fouler sing,
to catch the Bird in snare.
Be sure whom as thou mindst to make,
to be thy faithful friend:
Thou eat a peck of salt with him,
and thus I make an end.
No fraud to fained freendship. quod. Leonard Staueley.

The censure of a friend concerning the former Verses.
Since freendships lore you do commend,
accoumpting it a Jewel rare:
And that so highly you extend,
such praise as nothing may compare.
Unto the same (so much of price:)
and trust me, I like your device.
Indeed firm freendship now a days,
is very geason I speak plain:
For Sicophants devise still vvayes,
falcely to flatter, fleere and feign.
For deep dissembling now does rest:
doutlesse almost in every breast.
But what mean I to speak so blunt,
as to condemn in general?
Although some faithless friends be vvunt,
to have disembling at their call.
Yet some do hap on such a friend:
as faithful bides until the end.
Praise after proof. Quoth James Yates.


