A brief sonet declaring the lamentation of Beckles, a Market Town in
Suffolk which was in the great wind upon S. Andrews eve pitifully burned
with fire to the value by estimation of tweentie thousand pounds. And to the
number of fourscore dwelling houses, besides a great number of other houses.
1586.
To the tune of Labandalashotte.


MY loving good neighbors, that comes to behold,
Me silly poor Beckles, in cares manyfolde,
In sorrow all drowned, which floated of late,
With tears all bedewed, at my woeful state,
With fire is consumed, most woeful to vewe,
Whose spoil thy poor people, for ever may rue,
When well you have vewed (...) decay,
And pity have pierced, your hearts it may,
Say thus my good neighbors that God in his ire:
For sin has consumed pore Beckles with Fire
For one only parish, my self I might vaunt,
To match with the brauest, for who but will grant?
The Sea and the Country, me fitting so nigh,
The fresh water River, so sweet running by,
My meadows and commons, such prospect of health,
My Fayers in somer, so garnisht with wealth,
My Market so served, with corn, flesh, and fish,
And all kind of victuals, that poor men would wish,
That who but knew Beckles, with sighing may say,
Would God of his mercy, had sparde my decay.
But O my destruction, O most dismal day,
My temple is spoiled, and brought in decay,
My marketsted burned, my beauty defaced,
My wealth overwhelmed, my people displaced,
My music is wayling, my mirth it is moon,
My joys are departed, my comfort is gone,
My people poor creatures, are mourning in woe,
Still wandering not wotting, which way for to go, A rude fellow by fiering
his chimney, procured their calamity.

Like silly poor Trojans, whom Sinon betrayde,
But God of thy mercy, relieve them with aid,
O day most unlucky, the wind loud in sky,
The water hard frosen, the houses so dry,
To see such a burning, such flaming of fire,
Such wayling, such crying, through scourge of Gods ire,
Such running, such working, such taking of pain,
Such whirling, such haling, such reauing in vain,
Such robbing, such stealing, from more to the less,
Such dishonest dealing, in time of distress,
That who so hard hearted, and worn out of grace?
But pity may pierce him to think of my case.
But O my good neighbors, that see mine estate,
Be all one as Christians, not live in debate,
With wrapping and trapping, each other in thrall,
With watching, and pryeng at each others fall,
With houing, and shouing, and striving in Law,
Of God nor his Gospel, once standing in awe,
Live not in heart-burning, at God never wrest,
To Christ once be turning, not use him in test,
Live lovely together and not in discord,
Let me be your mirror, to live in the Lord.
But though God have pleased, for sin to plague me,
Let none think there living is cause they escape free,
But let them remember, how Christ once did tell,
Their sins were not greater, on whom the wall fell,
But least you repent ye, thus much he does say,
Be sure and certain ye also decay,
Let none then persuade them, so free from all thrall,
But that their ill living, deserves a fall,
Thus farewell: forget not, my woeful annoye,
God send you new year and
Finis
quod D. STERRI

Foelix quem faciunt aliena pericula cantum.
Each stately Tower with mighty walls up prope,
Each lofty Roof which golden wealth has raise?
All flicke ring wealth which flies in firmest hope
All glittering hew so haught and highly praisde
I see by sudden ruin of Beckles town
Is but a blast if mighty love do frown.
AT LONDON, Imprinted by Robert Robinson for Nicholas Colman of Norwich,
dwelling in S. Andrews Church yard.


