A Rehearsal both straung and true, of heinous and horrible acts committed by
Elizabeth Style, Alias Rockingham, Mother Dutten, Mother Deuell, Mother
Margaret, Four notorious Witches, apprehended at winsore in the County of
Barks. and at Abbington arraigned, condemned, and executed, on the 26 day of
February last Anno. 1579.



Imprinted at London for Edward White at the little North-doore of Paul's, at
the sign of the Gun, and are there to be sold.

The Reader
AMong the punishementes which the Lord GOD has laid upon us, for the
manifest impiety and careless contempt of his word, aboundyng in these our
desperate days, the swarms of Mitches, and Inchaunters are not the last nor
the least. For that old Serpent Satan, suffered to be the scourge for our
sins, has of late years, greatly multiplied the broude of them, and much
increased their malice. Which practice, he has the more easily performed for
that wholesome remedies, provided for the curing of such cankers, are either
never awhit, or not rightly applied: For albeeit the Iusticer be severe in
executyng of the Laws in that behalf, yet such is the foolish pity, or
slackenes, or does of the multitude and under officers that they most commonly
are winked at, and so escape unpunished, to the dishonor of God, and imminente
danger on her Majesty's liege people. Nay the fondnes and ignorance of many is
such, that they succor those Deuilishe Impes, have recourse to them for the
health of themselves or others, and for things lost, calling them by the
honorable name of wise women. Wherein they know not what honor they do to the
devil. For it is Satan, that does all that plageth with sickness, that
mayneth, Murdreth, and Robs, and at his lust restores. The Witch bears
the name, but the devil dispatcheth the deeds, without him the Witch can
contriue no mischief. He without the Witch can work treason to much, to
often, and to soon. If then by the law of the Lord of life, Witches, and
Inchaunters, are accounted unworthy to live. If by the law of this Land, they
are to be done to death, as Traitors to their Prince, and felons in respect of
her highness subjects, whosoever thou be, beware of ayding them, go not with
Saul the reprobate to ask counsel of them, neither for Christianity sake,
seem to be more slack in a good purpose, then Cicero the Ethnique, who
plainly advises that Witches Poysoners. etc. are to be rather shut up in
prison, and tied with fetters, then moved to amend with counsel, and
persuasions, only afterward suffered to escape whereby they may renew their
malicious, and treasonable driftes.

1579. January the 28. day.
The true examination and Confession of Elizabeth Style, alias Rockyngham
uttered at the Gaile of Readyng, in the County of Bark* immediately after her
apprehension in the presence of the persons herafter mentioned.
ELiazbeth Style ali. Rockingham, late of Windesore widow, of the age of lxv.
years, or there about being apprehended at Windsore before said, and brought
personally before the right worshipful Sir Henry Neuell knight being by him
examined, and found by manifest and undeniable proffes of her honest neighbors
to be a leude, malicious, and hurtful woman to the people and inhabitants
thereaboutes, was thereupon committed to the common Gaile of Reading, there to
remain until the next great Assizes, there to be holden that her offense
might be more straightly sifted, and she the offender to receive the guerdon
due for her demerites. Whither when she was come, and moved by the Gailer there
named Thomas Row to turn her self to God, from whom she had notoriously
fallen, and mildely to bear the punishmente belongyng to her deeds passed,
and there withal urged in sign of her repentance, to confess her former
follies and facts, she seemed to have some remorse in conscience, and desired
to have some talk with the said Thomas Row. To whom with one John knight
the Counstable Ihon Griffeth an Inholder, and one William Printall being all
four present she confessed as follows.

And first concerning those persons that practice the damnable art of
Witchecraft, Sorcerie, or Inchauntement of her own cortaine knowledge, and
voluntare motion, she uttered to this effect ensuyng.
IN Primis that one father Rosimonde, dwelling in Farneham Parish, being a
widower, and also a daughter of his, are both Witches or Inchanters, which
Rosimo^d she says has and can transform himself by Diuelishe means, into
the shape and likeness of any beast whatsoever he will.



2 Item, that one Mother Dutten dwelling within one Hoskins in Cleworthe
Parish, can tell every ones message, as soon as she sees them approach nere to
the place of her abroad, and further, she keeps a Spirit or Feende in the
likeness of a Toade, and fedeth the same Feende liyng in a border of green
Herbs, within her Garden, with blood which she causes to issue from her
own flancke.



3 Item, that one Mother Deuell, dwelling nigh the Ponde in Windesore
aforesaied, being a very poor woman, has a Spirit in the shape of a Black
Catte, and calls it Gille* whereby she is aided in her Witchcrafte, and she
daiely feeds it with Milk, mingled with her own blood.

4 Item, that one Mother Margaret dwelling in the Alms house at Windesore,
goes with two Crouches, does feed a Kitlyng or Feende by her named Ginnie,
with croummes of bread and her own blood.

5 Item, the said Elizabeth Style, alias Rockyngham, of her self confesses
that she the same Elizabeth, until the time of her apprehension, kept a Ratte,
being in very deed a wicked Spirit, namyng it Philip, and that she fed the
same Ratte with blood, issuyng from her right handwrest, the marks whereof
evidently remain, and also that she gave her right side to the Devil, and so
did the residue of the Witches before named.

And thus far for the touching the persons before mentioned in general, now
rests her declaration of their detestable driftes, and devises in particular.
6 Furthermore, she confesses that when she was apprehended, Mother Margaret
came to her and gave her money, chargyng her in any wise not to detecte their
secrets, which if she this prisoner did, the said Mother Margarete
threatened that she should be hardly entreated.

7 And moreover, she says that Father Rosimo^d, with his daughter, mother
Dutten, mother Deuell, Mother Margaret, and her self the said Elizabeth
Rockingham, did accustom to meet within the backeside of Master Dodges in
the Pittes there, and did in that place conclude upon heinous, and vilanous
practices, such as by them, or any of them before had bin devised, or
determined.

8 Also she says, and confesses that they all purposed and agreed, by their
Sorceries, and Inchauntementes, to dispatche privily one Lanckforde a Fermour,
dwelling in Windesore by the Thames side, and that they murdered him
accordingly.

9 They also by their deuillishe art, killed one Master Gallis, who in times
paste, had been Mayor of Windesore.

10 The like they practiced against one of the said Lanckfordes maids, whom
by the m^schevous means above expressed they bereft of life.

11 Likewise a Butcher named Switcher, escaped not their treachery, but was by
their Witchcrafte brought to his grave.

12 Another Butcher named Mastlyn, was by them handeled in such sort, that he
consumed away.

13. The manner of their Inchauntemente, whereby four of the persons before
named were murdered was thus: Mother Dutten made four pictures of Red Wax,
about a spanne long, and three or four fingers broad for Lanckforde, for his
Maid, for Master Gallis, and for Switcher, and the said Mother Dutten, by
their counsel and consent, did stick an Hauthorne prick, against the left
sides of the breasts of the Images, directly there where they thought the
hearts of the persons to be set, whom the same pictures did represente, and
thereupon within short space, the said four persons, being suddenly
taken, died.

14 As for Mastlyn the fifte man, she confesses that he was bewitched, but
how or whether he dyed or no she vttreth not.

15 Further the same Elizabeth says, that her self did kill one Saddocke with
a clappe on the shoulder, for not keepyng his promise for an old Cloak, to
make her a Saffegarde, who presently went home and died.

16 Further she says, that she and every of them* did suer speak one Humfrey
Ho^ie and his wife, and one Richard Milles, and one Ihon Mathynglise, that
they lay sick in a strange order a long time, but they were recovered again.

17 Further she says, that mother Deuell did over speak one Wy^^iam Foster a
Fisher, and one Willies wife a Baker.

18 Further she says, that mother Dutten did give one Picture, but she
knows not whether it was of a man, or of a woman, and the man that had it
of her, she thinks to be dead, but she knows not his name.

19 Further she says, that one George Whittyng, servant to Matthewe Glouer
of Eaton, had one Picture of her self for one Foster, for that the said George
and Foster fell out at variaunce, and the Picture was made in mother Dottens
house, and that mother Dutten, Mother Deuell, and her self were at the making,
and that Mother Deuell did say too her Buime, or evil Spirit, Plague him,
and spare him not, and she did thruste a Hauthorne prick against the heart of
him, and so he lay at the poinct of death a long time, but Mother Dutten
recovered him again.

20 And in the end, they killed a Cow of his by their Witchcrafte.

21 And further she says, that they and every of them, if any had angered
them, they would go to their Spirits and say, such a one has angered me, go
do them this mischief, and for their hire, would give them a drop of their
own blood, and presently the party was plagued by some lamentable casualtie.

22 Elizabeth Style also confesses, that she her self has gone to old
Windsor, to the bed makers there, to beg a mess of Milk, which she could
not have, for that the maid was then Milkyng, but her Ratte had provided for
her both Milk and Cream, against her coming home.

23 Elizabeth Style touched with more remorse says, that Mother Dutten, and
Mother Deuell, were her first intisers to folly, and that she and every of
them, did meet sometimes in master Dodges Pittes, and sometime about a leven
of the Clock in the night at the Pound, and that Mother Dutten, and Mother
Deuell did persuade her, to do as they had done, in forsakyng God and his
works, and giuyng her self to the Devil.

24 Elizabeth Style confesses, her self often times to have gone to Father
Rosimond house where she found him sittyng in a Wood, not far from thence,
under the body of a Tree, sometimes in the shape of an Ape, and otherwhiles
like an Horse. She also confesses her self to have turned a childs hand in
Windesor clean backwardes, which was returned to the right place by Mother
Dutten.

25 Further she says, that she will stand unto her death, to all and every
Article before rehearsed: and that father Rosimond can transform him self into
the likeness of an Ape, or a Horse, and that he can help any manne so
bewitched to his health again, as well as to bewitche.

26 Further she says, that mother Seidre dwelling in the Alms house, was the
maistres Witch of all the rest, and she is now dead.

27 Further she says, that if she had bin so disposed, four or five, or more
of the best men in Windsor, should not have brought her to the Gaile, but that
she came of her own accord, and by the way as she came with Iho^ Brom who
brought her to the Gaile, her Bunne or Familier came to her in the likeness of
a black Catte, and would have had her away, but she banished him, hopyng for
favor.

Memorandum, that besides the examination, and confession aforesaid, there was
given in evidence, viua voce, at the Arraignement of the said Witches, one
special matter by an Ostler of Windsore, who affirmed upon his oath that the
said Mother Style using to come to his Masters house, had often times relief
given her by him. And on a time not long since, she coming to his Masters
house, when there was little left to be given her, for that she came somewhat
late, yet he giuyng her also somewhat at that time, she therewith not contented
went her ways in some anger, and as it seemed offended with the said Ostler,
for that she had no better Alms, and by the sequel, so it appeared. For not
long after, he had a great ache in his limbs, that he was not able to take
any rest, nor to do any labor, and having sought many means for remedy
thereof, could find none, at the last he went to a Wiseman, named Father
Rosimonde, alias Osborne, who told him that he was bewitched, and that there
was many ill women in Windsore, and asked him whom he did mistrust, and the
said Osteler answered one Mother Style, one of the Witches aforesaied: well
said the Wiseman, if you can meet her, and all to scratche her, so that you
draw blood of her, you shall presently mende. And the said Osteler upon his
oath declared, that he watchyng her on a time, did all too scratche her by the
face, that he made the blood come after, and presently his pain went away, so
that he has bin no more grieved sithe^s.

Moreover, on a time a man's Soonne of Windsor, coming to fetch water at a
well which was by the door of the said Mother Style, and by chance hurlyng
a s^one upon her house, she was there withal much grieved and said, she
would be even with him, and took his Pitcher which he had brought from him:
the boy going home wards, happened to meet with his father, and told him
how that Mother Style had taken away his Pitcher from him, well said his
Father, you have done her some unhappiness, come on with me, and I will go
speak with her. And so the boy going with his Father toward her house, did
suddenly cry out: O my hand my hand, his father there withal lookyng back,
and seeing his Soonnes hand to turn, and wend backwardes, laid hold
thereupon, but he was not able to stay the tournyng thereof, besides a
neighbor of his being in his company at that time, did also lay hold
thereon, and notwithstanding both their strengthes, the childs hand did
turn backwardes, and the palm thereof did stand, where the back did, to
the grievous torment of the said child, and vexation of his Father: The
which hand was turned again to his right place, either by the said father
Rosimond, or the said Mother Deuell.

Also this is not to be forgotten, that the said Mother Style, being at the
time of her apprehension* so well in health of body and limbs, that she was
able, and did go on foot, from Windsor unto Readyng unto the Gaile, which
are twelve miles distaunt. Shortly after that she had made the aforesaied
confession, the other Witches were apprehended, and were brought to the said
Gaile, the said Mother Deuell did so bewitche her and others (as she confessed
unto the Iailer) with her Enchauntmentes, that the use of all her simmes and
senses, were taken quite from her, and her Toes did rotte of her feet, and she
was laid upon a Barrowe, as a most ugly creature to behold, and so brought
before the Judges, at such time as she was arraigned.

Finis.

