CVRES WITHOUT CARE, OR A SVMMONS TO ALL SVCH WHO FIND LITTLE OR no help by
the use of ordinary physic to repair to the Northern Spaw.

WHEREIN By many presidents of a few late years, it is evidenced to the world,
that infirmities in their own nature desperate and of long continuance have
received perfect recovery, By virtue of Mineral waters near Knaresborow in
the West Riding of Yorkshire.

Also a description of the said water, and of other rare and useful springs
adjoining, the nature and efficacy of the Minerals contained in them, with
other not impertinent notes.

Faithfully collected for the public good by M. St.

Tibul. -- felix quicunque dolor
Alterius disces posse carere tuo.
LONDON, Printed by William Jones, dwelling in Red-crosse-street. 1632.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THOMAS LORD WENTWORTH of Wentwoth Woodhouse, Baron
Newmarch and Oversley, Viscount Wentworth, Lord President of his Majesty's
Council established in the North, Lord Leiftenant of the County of York, Lord
Deputy of the Kingdom of Ireland, and one of his Majesty's most honorable
Privy Council.
RIGHT HONORABLE,
I Had once (I confess rashly) given leave that this small Treatise should put
on the Printers livery without the convoy of a protecting pass. But as I cast
my last eye upon it, it appeared to me like a naked man ready to encounter an
army. For there are not more men, then vollies of censorious shot, that stand
ready prepared to batter any novelty. This consideration forced me suddenly to
look out for a defensative guard, against the daring boldness of this
critical age. Wherein I was not long unprovided. For who is he that casts his
dazeled eye on the brightness of your redoubled rays of honor, or fixes his
serious thoughts on your Lordships superintendencie in public affairs
(dilating it self not only from the north to the south, but spreading its
influence as far as the regal eye of great Britain does command) and
finds not in himself a tie to offer upon the altar of your Lordships meriting
greatness an oblation of his respect? And who so fit to patronize these waters
(not more wonderful in their effects, then happy that they are seated where
your judicious government does bless the country) then your Lordship, whose
eminency in those parts, does of right challenge the appropriation of what
rariety soever the listes of the North does empale? Be pleased therefore (in
all accomplishments most noble Lord) to admit of these waters (which even as
they neighbor to your spacious revenues claim an interest in your safeguard)
submitting to your honors shielding protection, and favorablely to accept of
the tender of his most humble service, who would willingly improve his best
abilleties actually to be honored with the title of

Your Lordships most humble servant, Mich. Stanhope.

To the Reader.
IT is plain, I have not the least intent to gull thee in magnefying the
Northern Spaw, nor yet to tyrannize over thee, by confining, and terminating
thy belief within the circle of my bare relation, by a general avernment of
what I write; for in nomination the parties who have received benefit by the
water, I open unto thee a large field for thy satisfaction. If it does appear
to thee (by conferring with any of them) that I have erred in some
circumstances, stumble not at it. So long as I retain the substance, it
matters not for the shadow. Nor think it strange that I omit others who have
made use of the water, since it proceeds not out of ignorance of what has
past, but out of a tender regard I have not to burden thy patience: supposing
that the culling forth of the most remarkable instances, would be as
satisfactorie to the judicious, as many heaps of examples. My purpose aymeth
rather at a compendious realtie of things, then multiplicity of stories. Most
of the parties I know, and have had conference with them: the rest I have
received from such authentical testimony that I doubt not but their
information, is of sufficient validity to beget an undoubted confidence of
their truths.

If any of those mentioned in the following discourse (out of a nice
scrupulocitie) think themselves disparaged by particularising their names, I
am sorry that they should be so ignorantly curious since former times have
afforded many presidents (written by way of Council, such as are those of
Fernelius, Crato, and many others) wherein diverse of eminent quality (besides
their names) have their diseases anotamised, without the least conceived
jealousy of their reputations. They ought rather to bless God, who has in
mercy vouchsafed them such easy means of their recovery, and glad themselves,
that others by their example may be encouraged to have have recourse to the
water for their relief.

It may be, it is exspected that I should satisfy the learned in one
particular, namely, what assurance I can give that this our Spaw does partake
with Vitriol, and Iron, which once confirmed, there will necessarily follow an
apparent probability of its ample performance of all and more then shall fall
within the compass of the following relations. This I foreseeing necessarily
premising the conclusion, I desire that they would please to take for proof of
the infallibility of Vitriol the taste of the water, which is very acide, and
rough upon the palate, in plainer English, ynkish, and so like to Vitrioll or
Copperes (called anciently Attramentum sutorium) that there is little or no
difference betwixt the taste of the water and the substance of Vitrioll touched
with the tongue; or a drop of the oil thereof mixed with a little water.
Besides, take a glass of the water (which in it self is translucid and very
clear, equaling the choicest spring) let the quantity be a pint or
thereabout, put to it so much Gall in powder as will cover our common farthing,
stir it never so little, and the water receives a perfect Clarret dye. Or
take a green Oak stick, bruise it at the end, and with it stir the like
quantity of water, and within a small space it is turned into a pure Saphir
blew, or (standing a while with the stick in it) to a Violet color, both
which has been often tried. As for iron we account it a demonstrative note,
the discollering of the earth and stones where the current of the spring
runs: for it makes the channel red, which proceeds (as may be supposed)
from Rubrique, otherwise called matter ferri. And the better to confirm that
the water is no stranger to iron, it is very well known that the whole soil
where this water rises is full of iron stone, the plenty whereof has been
such, that the working of iron stone has been a means to exhaust a world of
wood growing in that part, there being yet to see the remainder of a great iron
work within half a mile of the spring. Nor is the iron stone so concealed but
by digging in most places it is easily found, much of it appearing in broaken
banks, and in the surface of the earth. I might boldly add hereunto (for
further proof) the discollering of the stools of such as drink the water,
giving them a blacn or deep green dye, a common observed note in iron waters,
as also the operation of the water in all manner of obstructions, wherein (who
knows not) that iron does claim an unparaleled excellency, but the ensuing
discourse will make this good. Other notes an exact minerallist would easily
produce, to whose discussing and disquisition I willingly leave matters of this
nature, they being improper for the sphere, both of my capacity and profession.

How it comes to pass that these waters are thus vertuall, the learned can
easily make appear; for the mineralls that intermixe with them once granted,
from their natures will arise abundant satisfaction to all that are rational
of their excellent use. As shortly thus. Sulphur (say they that write of it)
attracts, resolves, mollefieth, discusseth, cooles and dries.

Salt (whereof our Sulphur spring contains a great proportion) is astringent,
detergent, purging, dispersing, attenuating, preserving from putrefaction.

Iron says (our learned Dr Jordan) has an opening or deopilating quality, and
an astringent also.

Vitrioll (according to Diascorides) does heat and bind. It has an exceeding
subtilty of parts says Tho. Iordanus, and is of a penetrative quality.

From their abstessive and incisive qualities, it is noted that these waters
do loosen and scatter viscuous and clammy matter, they attenuate the gross,
and after by their penetrative quality, the Liver, Spleen, the meseraique
veins, reins, and other parts are deopilated, and by this means freed from
such diseases as proceed from obstruction.

Dr Turner in his discourse of Baths and mineral waters says, that waters
partaking of iron and Brimstone, cool and dry, that they are proper for all
soars of the Kidneyes and Bladder, they both prevent and cure the strangury,
Dry up rumes, are good for them that are short winded or stopped in the breast,
that spit blood, they cure the green sickness, are very fit for cold
phlegmatic men that would gladly have children and have none; and so for women
whose default does proceed from too much moistness of the matrixe, they are
good by drink or glister against worms, and fit to allay the pains in the
small guts.

He says also that where iron bears the chief rule (as it does in our Spaw)
such waters are excellent for all manner of itch; hardness of the milt,
diseases of the joints, stiffenesse of the sinews, cramps proceeding of
moistness, numnesse or sleepiness in any part, dizinesse of the head, the
flixe, weak Kidneyes, pissing of blood, heat of urine, the often, too much, and
unwilling making of water, gnawings, and pains in the belly.

Waters (says Mounsieur Pigray in the observations of the German Spaw)
whereunto ours are little (I am but too modest) inferior, partaking of iron
and vitrioll; revive the spirits, provoke appetite, facilitate digestion, free
from all manner of obstructions; they oppose wonderfully the generatton of the
stone, and hinder the knitting of the gravel with the glutinous raw, and
vescuous humor. The Hermetically learned (says Hermannius Wolfus in his
tractate de viribus, and usu aquarum in Agro Cassellano) note that Vitroline
waters have a faculty of mundefying and purging all the parts of the hody,
corroborating the brain, curing the Epilepsie, exciting the appetite, killing
all sorts of worms, opposing the Palsy, Dropsy, Iaundise, breeding of the
stone, suffocation of the matrix, all inward oppilations, prevent the gout,
with many other excellent qualities as may appear in that his discourse in the
third chapter. Which faculties joined with the other minerals, our waters
partaking with them all, how useful these these waters may be, I leave to the
consideration of those who are able to deduce particular instances from assured
general grounds. With these authors agree many learned ones, whose opinions I
spare to transcribe, being very unwilling to embarque; my self in the
discourse of these mysteries, whereby I may be thought saucely to snatch the
pen out of the Doctors hand, to whom I leave thee for further satisfaction, the
former authorities being sufficient to grace our waters and confirm their
virtue.

They who with some violence put me upon this task of recommending to the
general notice this water, with its consiing springs, might (if they had
pleased) have undertaken it with a more plaucible entertainment: but their
profession tending to prescribe to those who are to use the water (I suppose)
caused them to forbear their pains, least a relation from them might seem to
reflect at their particular interest* wherein I am altogether free.

Omitting therefore all further apollogies, (for I fear the gates are grown
too great for the City) rather then the public should not be benefitted, I
have adventured bluntly to step upon the stage. Wherein if I may but be so
happy, as by my weak (though willing) pen to invite any to the water for their
good, and that I may receive of thee (that which an honest intention may
challenge) the Plaudite of a favourablr acceptance, I shall think my small
pains largely recompensed, and shall wish thee all success in the use of
these waters, and thy being partaker of that water, whereof whosoever drinks
shall never after be a thirst.

M. S.

A Catalogue of such persons as have received benefit or cure by Mineral
waters of Knaresborow in Yorkshire.
Of the Stone
Mrs. Rolfe of Hadley in ihe County of Suffolk, page 6. Henry Curra of
Whardale of 50. years. p. 6. Henry Rowley of Linton, aged 60. years, p. 7.
Mrs. May of York, very old, p. 8. William Shan of Medley, p. 13.
Of Ulcers in Kidneis
Mrs. Barker of Doare, p. 7. Mrs. Ellis of Beaverly, cured of the like,
Of Mallencholly.
Mr. Sacheveril of Darbishire, p. 8. Mrs. Air of Rampton, p. 9.
Of shortness of Breath.
One Wallis, aged 50. years, p. 14. The Countess of Buchingham, p. 14.
Of weakness in the Limbs.
M Fowls an Advocate of Scotland p. 11. The Lady Vavisour p. 13.
Of Swelling
Maude Bogge, aged 50. years. p. 18. A poor man of the like, p. 18. A poor
woman of the like in her breast, p. 19.
Of several other infirmities.
William Tompson of the Hecticke Fever, p. 10. Mr. Rauden of a strange sort of
worms, p. 12. The Lady Hoyle, a strange cure, p. 15. A poor Boy of the
Falling Sickness, p. 16. One Smith a Shoemaker of the Scurvey, p. 19. A
Minister of a violent Flixe, with many others*
A RELATION OF CERTAIN PARTICVLAR CVRES DONE BY Virtue of Mineral waters
near Knaresborow in the west riding of the County of Yorkshire
BEFORE entrance be made into the ensuing narrations, it will not be amiss for
the satisfaction of such who are mere strangers to the knowledge of these
waters, to let them know, that it is now full six years since notice has
been given to the world by a book called Spadacrene or the English Spaw
(written by Doctor Deane a learned Physician of the City of York) of certain
mineral waters seated in the Forest of Knaresborow, in the west riding of
Yorkshire. Since which time diverse have repaired to them from remote places
(according to their several necessities to experement them, invited by the
Doctors promised probabilities of their useful operations. What has been the
event and success, I have undertaken to present to the public view,
beginning first with a short Epitomie of the waters discriptions which I know
cannot but be expected.

Of diverse Springs that (as it were) press which should be first seen, within
a small distance one of another (some whereof being of the same nature,
differing only Secundum magis et minus, others varying in their composures
dispensed and ordered by the careful and inimitable hand of provident nature)
there are two most remarqueable, which beyond expectation have advanced
themselves by their admirable faculties. The one is now called the Spaw, but
formerly known by the name of the Tuit well, deriving its virtue principally
from iron and vittriall. This has bin long known, and of late has been much
frequented, blessing many that have made use of it with extraordinary good
effects. It is distant from Knaresborow (being a place very apt to accommodate
strangers plentifully both for diet and lodging) about a mile and a half.
Though the soil where this Spring rises does afford diverse of the like
nature, yet till of late there has not any bin so industrious as to search
which is it that may justly challenge the precedence. This last Summer 1631. it
was my hap to discover a new Spring distancing it self about a quarter of a
mile from the other, which after it had been trenched, and opened, did give
satisfaction to all (that were not partial) that it deserves a better degree
of estimation then the other. I would be loath to disparage the old spring, yet
I must take leave to presume that this late found Spring does exceed the other
in these following particulars, which whether they give luster to it by way of
excellency or no, I submit to the judgment of the learned.

First for the Situation, it is placed in the desent of a great hill, the
ground round about it being very firm, whereby it gives advantage of fair
dry walks, wherein the other is very defective, for that rising in a flat, the
ground near unto it is boggye, to the prejudice of the water, confining the
company that resort to it within too narrow a compass.

Secondly, in the trial with the Gall, the color of the new Spring changes
more hastily, and the water admits of a deeper dye then the other.

Thirdly, diverse who have tried this water voluntarily affirm that they can
with more ease, and with less nauciousnesse to the stomach, drink 20. glasses
of it, then 14 of the other, which if I mistake not) shows a great measure of
repleatnesse of Spirits.

Fourthly, being carried as far as the City of York, it retains as full
and as brisque a taste there, as the other does at the Spring head, and tried
so far off with the Gall, it looks with a bold ruddy face upon the
beholder: whereas the other abates much of its native taste being brought to
the City, and looks but with a pale shamfac't blush, having received the
admixture of the powder of the Gall. So that there is no doubt but this water
may be transported to very good use, supposing the bottells to be very well
stopped, which is a caution to be necessarily observed by all those that will
send for the water, whereby the way I would wish such as have the water brought
to them, to make use rather of glass, then of stone bottels, but as for
wooden ones (which I have seen filled with the water) in regard of the
poorness of that substance, it is but lost labor to use them, the life of
the water consisting chiefly in the spirits, which are of such a nimble agile
nature, that they are very apt to transpire, and scorn to be imprisoned in
wooden walls.

Lastly it is most aparant that this late found spring has an admixture of
Brimstone, besides the iron and vitriall, which I take to be an aditament of
worth and nobleness, for the more variety of mineral (say the best observers
of these waters) the more proper for diversity of diste^pers: and that sulpher
springs are profitable in the infirmities of the Lungs, there is no doubt to
be made, having also a healing quallitie, and therefore fitly appliable to any
inward vlcerated part by which the water shall pass. This spring upon
examination (proving in all points desirable) excellent, was this last summer
set with stone, where it now stands upon its trial, and does boldly challenge
any whatsoever of the same nature.

Neighboring to this, there are three other differing springs not a mile
distant one from the other, wherein Sulpher (not in its substance but vapor)
does predominate. One of them has been long known by the name of the
stinking well (for though the water be very clear, yet it is most true that
it has (scarce) a sufferable sent, whereby it has been found by them that
sought it not. It is actually cold, and besides its sulpherous quallitie (which
is in a very high de, gree) it is exceeding salt, so that a pottle of it being
evaporated, there will be found above half an ounce of perfect salt remaining.
There is another not yielding at all to this in its sulpheriousnesse, but it is
not perceivably salt at all. A third that is both sulpherous, and salt, but in
a more remiss degree. The first of these three is only in request, and has
acted its part with great approvment, the other two are neglected, though I am
persuaded they may be found (for some bodies) more apt and proper then the
former, were they iudiciously examined.

The Spaw springs though they usually challenge (as does the Spaw in Germany,
which is the reason we give them the same name) a singularity in easing and
curing (such as are curable of the stone, and gravel, as also in opening the
obstructions of the Spleen, and allaying all Melancholy effects and passions,
yet it will appear by the subsequent discourse and relations, that this kind
of water has other rare and secret influences and opperations, which has
procured no small wonder in those who have observed the effects! The particular
instances whereof (without any longer suspending thy expectation, I now intend
to enter upon, beginning first with the cure and alleviation of the stone and
other distempers incident to the Kidneys and Reins.

In the year 1626. Mrs. Rolf of Hadley in the County of Suffolk, having
occasion to give a visit to some of her near friends in Yorkshire, within a
few weeks of her stay there, she found her self suddenly surprised with
extraordinary sharp fits, which by there symptoms did manifestly appear to be
the stone. Hereupon she applied her self to the Physicians advise, but finding
little or no ease by their prescriptions (though probable ones) she was
persuaded to try the new water at Knaresborow, where she had not continued
above a fortnight, but she voyded many stones, to the number of a hundred,
bigger and less, whereby she was quit of all her pain, and has ever since
continued in health, free from all manner of anoyance in that kind.

Henry Curra of Whardale in the western parts of Yorkshire, servant to Sr.
Peter Middleton, about the age of 50. years, having suffered much pain for
diverse years, his fits of the stone being so violent that he was not able to
ride on horseback, or to lie in his bed an hour together without rising,
nothing that he could take affording him any ease, he went at last to the Spaw
spring, where having drunk the water about a month, he voyded diverse stones,
some whereof he has to show being bigger then a great Pea. He returned home
eased of all his pain, he recovered his strength, and is now well able to
ride about his occasions without any disturbance, nor has he ever since
(being now 3. years) had any fits worthy of complaint.

Henry Rowley of Linton, near Weatherby in Yorkshire, of the age of 60.
years, much perplexed a long time with the stopping of his water, by his
repair to the Spaw voyded much gravel, and from that time was no more
troubled so long as he lived.

Mrs. Barker of Doare in Darbeshire about the age of 34. years, had a
dangerous ulcer in her Kidney, besides a very obstructed body, wherewith she
was brought so low, that she was not able to go without the support of one or
two; her stomach had lost its appetite, not able through weakness to digest
any meat, no nor the most apt broathes that could be made, so that she was
forced to sustain nature by returning to her infant pap. In this weak and
desperate condition (having formerly not spared to use all the helps that
could be devised by the Physician) she was gently brought to the Spaw, not
expecting (as she told me her self) to be recovered, only she thought it not
fit to be wanting to any means that might be propounded. It pleased God to
give such a blessing in the use of the water (which she daily drunk as well as
she was able) that within a few days there came from her an incredible deal
of putrid matter, which gave her such ease, that by degrees she gathered
strength, her inward parts were deopilated, her stomach restored, and within
the compass of 5. weeks she was (to the wonder of all that had taken notice
of her) reduced to a most apparent state of health and ability of body. I
seeing her this summer, 1631. at the Spaw, (for it was the foregoing year she
had received her cure, and this year came only to the water to confirm her
self) could not but admire to behold so fresh a look, and so well liking a
body, considering the report of her former exceeding weakness.

I will not say it were time lost, but it might be better spent then to
multiply all the known examples in this kind, the foregoing ones being of
sufficient proof to make good the waters efficatious use in the infirmity of
the stone. Not that I am to seek for more, for I might (but that I willingly
avoid superfluous tediousness) add to the other.

Mrs. Ellis wife to Mr. Ellis Minister at Beaverly, who received a wondrous
cure in the like ulcerated part.

Mrs. May a Citizens wife of York, who after many years trouble (being of
great age) was absolutely freed from her long continued fits of the stone with
diverse others whom I purposely omit (nothing being more ordinary) that others
may come into play (though of a differing kind, yet) of remarkable note.

For Melancholy and Splenetique effects, there are few or none (that I have
ever yet heard of) who have repaired to this Spaw water, but have found
extraordinary ease, and a great abatement of those disturbances which are the
ordinary unwelcome attendants of that distemper.

Amongst others, Mr. Sacheveril of Darbishire (hearing of this Spaw water) came
to York to advise with Dr. Deane, who after he had fitly prepared his body (a
rule grossly omitted by many) sent him Knaresborow to drink of the water,
being in the year, 1630. to his great releife. For whereas he had been
exceedingly long time perplexed with many fearful passions, and upon slight
occasions, apt to entertain horrid and astonishing imaginations; the ordinary
companions of that desease called Hypochondriaca passio) he returned to York
to give Dr. Deane thanks for his sending him to the water, professing his
spirits to be much cheared, his fancy cleared from all cloudy and misty
conceits, which his very look and inspecttion did witness, and so he returned
home continuing ever since in a constant tenor of a quiet and uninterrupted
condition.

Mrs. Air wife to Mr. Anthony Air of Rampton, in Nottinghamshire, a
gentlewoman of much worth and esteem for her aproved virtue, and all other
requisites that give luster to her sex, had (with the expense of much money)
tried what could be done in the taming and qualifying of that same dull
malancholly humor, her self not unseene (as in many rare secrets so) in
curious receipts of that kind, at length grew weary in trying conclusions,
receiving little or no benefit by any. She was drawn at last by report of the
Yorkshire Spaw, to try the effects of it, which was in the year 1629. where
she found more comfort and ease by one months use of the water, then she
could ever receive by all the best advise her money could purchase.

Others I have known affected or rather afflicted in this kind, who have
acknowledged to have received great benefit by this water, whose names and
stories I spare the forenamed being sufficient instances of the powerful
effect of this water in moderating this same Ludibrium Medicorum, the
melancholy humor.

I shall now present a missellanie of other cures, or rather wonders, worthy
the serious consideration of the learned, and the admiration of all.

Mr. William Tompson Postmaster of Weatherby in Yorkshire, had continued
desperately sick of a hectic fever 28. weeks, living then in Cambridgeshire.
He had used the advice of the best Physicians in those parts, and was at last
given over as a man past hope, his weakness being such that he went not to
the stool in all that time, but by the help of a suppository, or the like
means. In this poor estate (hearing of this water) he adventureth in the
depth of winter (a most unseasonable time by the consent of all those who write
of the use of these kind of waters) to experiment them, and so with some
difficulty he was brought to Weatherby being distant from Knaresborow four
miles. Having rested a day or two, he began to drink of the water, which had
such good effect in him, that without any pain at all he had the benefit (the
first day) of nature, and within a few days he found a strange alteration in
his body, his stomach was quickened, and his spirits strangely revived. He
continued the drinking of the water 14. days, till at length he was not
sensesible of any defect that might cause him to make any longer use of it.

To be short, within a small time (through Gods blessings) merely by this
water he was restored to be a perfect man, and so continues. This was in the
year 1628.

Mr. Fowls a gentleman of Scotland, and advocate of Edenborow, about the age
of 57. years, throught a weakness of all his lims proceeding (as may be
supposed) from a relaxation of the sinews, was not able (but with much
trembling) to lift his hand to his mouth, or to get on, or off his horse but
with much help, he came to Knaresbow in the year 1627. where having staid
about a month, drinking every morning of the Spaw spring, and making use of
the Sulpher water by way of bath at his lodging, before he departed he was
able to perform all fit offices about himself, without the aid of any, and
has continued in good state of body ever since.

Mr. Rauden of Rauden in Yorkshire, had been many years soar vexed with
terrible panges, and gripings in his body, so that through the continual
extremity of his distemper, his flesh was decayed, his appetite lost, and his
sleep very short and unquet. He had used the advice of some of the best
Physicians of the Kingdom, but finding little or no ease, he came to try what
the Spaw water would do, being then but newly devulged. Not many days after
he had drunk of the water, he avoided two great chains of worms, being
either of them above a yard long, which though they seemed diverse worms linckt
together, by the several motions in many parts at once (which had they been,
would have amounted to thousands) yet were but one, of which the learned report
that kind of worm to be of a strange and scarce credible length. About 4.
days after he voyded 4. other single worms, great and very long, but dead;
After which he voyded no more, but was freed from all manner of pain, and by
degrees and steps ascended again to his former best health, and has continued
a sound man ever since.

The confident knowledge hereof invited a Gentleman (a neighbor of his) called
Rockley, having continued long a very infirm man, and not able by any means
to understand the cause of his weakness, to try the water, where after he had
staid a few days, there came from him 14. worms or rather Monstra, as some
will term them, every one about an intch long and alive. Their heads were
black, and their tails tipped with black, all of them having many feet. About 6.
days after he voyded 4. more of the like form alive: Most of them he kept
alive in a box a few days which were seen of many with no little wonderment.
Since which time he has recovered strength, and lives now in very good
health.

The Lady Vavisour (wife to Sr. Thomas Vavisour Baronet of Yorkshire) had lost
in a manner the use of all her lims, through what distemper I know not, but she
was brought to such a degree of weakness, that child-like she was rockt in a
cradle: There was no means unassaied which might reinable her, but all in
vain. In this estate she was brought to the Spaw water, by the use whereof (by
Gods mercy) she was restored to strength and health.

One William Shan of Medley in Yorkshire, being much troubled with the stopping
of his water, which caused intolerable pain, in a desperate mood in one of
his fits (being a man of extraordinary courage) caused an instrument of iron to
be made by an ordinary Smith, about the bigness and length of a pack-needle.
This (not any other daring to do it) he (boldly rather than wisely) thrust up
into his yard, and pulling it forth violently, he opened the passage, so that
a great quantity of water with an intermixture of blood issued forth, by reason
of a dangerous wound made by the instrument, which after proving ulcerous,
could by no means be healed. He (as his last refuge) repaired to the Spaw
water, where within a few days he received not only cure of his former
stoppage of water, but was perfectly cured of his ulcer.

One Walls of Copeland in the county of Northumberland, about the age of 50.
years, being of an extraordinary corpulencie of body, his belly especially of
a vaste greatness. For diverse years, he had not been able to go the space
of an hundred yards (especially if it were an ascent) without resting himself,
his breath failing him upon the least extraordinary motion. By the drinking of
the Spaw water he was brought to that pass within three weeks, that his
belly did fall to an ordinary size, he was able to go from the Town of
Knaresborow to the Spring (which is a mile and an half, part of it being a
great ascent) without any desire of ease, and has continued ever since a man
as able to foot it as most of his age.

The like effect the late Right Honorable Countess of Buckingham found, who
this last Summer 1631. vouchsafed to honor the Northern Spaw with her
presence. Her infirmity (I have it from her own mouth) was a shortness of
breath, not being able to get up an ordinary pair of stairs but with much
difficulty of breathing, and resting once at the least. There is none will
question but her ample fortune was able to command the choycest helps of
physic: Which failing, she had recourse to Wellingborow, but even that water,
(so much famed) was not able to perform any thing worth her stay. At last she
was advised by a learned Artist (who was no stranger to this our Spaw) to make
trial of our water. Her honor was pleased to tell me (having drunk orderly
of the water about ten days) that she found the whole frame of her body
reduced to a very good temper, and for that particular, which occasioned her
coming to the water, she did profess seriously, that she was well able to
mount two pair of stairs without either support, or the least desire of
respite. The time of the year was somewhat too far spent at her coming to
the water (for it was the middle of August) so that the couldnesse of the air,
and frequent showers, forced her departure before the water could finish its
work, which was no small prejudice to her after being.

Mrs. Fareweather of the City of York, dwelling in Micklegate had been long
troubled with a dizinesse in her head (call it the vertigo or what you please)
so that if she did but stoop to the ground (looking downwards) she was ready
to fall; by the use of the Spaw water for the space of a month was absolutely
freed from this her distemper.

The Lady Hoyle wife to the new Lord Mayor of the City of York, after she had
been the mother of four children, did fall into a strange infirmity. Her face
(for the most part every ten or eleven weeks after she had conceived) did
swell and grow very red, many knobs arising in diverse parts of her face. The
swelling sometimes was such that it almost deprived her (for the time) of her
sight: during the continuance of which trouble she miscarried of three or four
children together. It must be supposed one of her ability (being happy also by
enjoying a tender, loving husband) could want no means that part could afford,
but no proof or good success was found. She was at last advised to repair to
the Spaw, where she stayed about 3. weeks, finding apparent signs of her
bodies alteration. Within two months of her return home, it pleased God she
conceived, continuing in a constant state of health to the time of her
delivery. She has since then been blessed with diverse children, not having the
least touch of her former distemper.

A poor boy about the age of 13. years, had often strange fits like those of
the Epilepsie or faling sickness, yet somewhat differing from the ordinary fits
of that disease, neither foaming at the mouth, nor showing any distortions of
countenance. He would lie (as if he had been dead) the space of a quarter of
an hour without the least motion. In this case he had continued a year and
more, and did usually fall two or three times a day. He was brought to drink
of the Spaw water, and within ten days did so alter, that he did not fall
above once in six days space. He returned home in hope of recovery, yet too
soon if my advise might have taken place; but the party that brought him
thither, told me he was not able to stay in regard of the charge.

Mrs. Sadler daughter to that same reverend sage of the Law, Sr. Edward Cook
(let her pardon me that I close the relations of the Spaw with her name, who
for her worth and excellent parts deserved to be rank't and equalled with the
best of her sex) came to the Spaw in the year 1630. Her distemper (as near
as I can inform my felfe) was a long continued fixed pain in her head. It is
very probable that she received benefit by the waters use, which encouraged
her to repair to the water again the last year 1631. And pity it were she
should not find good success, she showed her self so rare a pattern of
patience, in attending the issue of 6. weeks stay, not any one that I have
observed, proceeding in the whole course in drinking of the water, with such
constant observation of all those rules which are requisite to be observed by
those who expect benefit by the water.

And now having finished what I think fit to instance concerning this our Spaw
water, I will add a few experiments of the Sulpher spring.

Maud Bogge (for by that name she is commonly known) a woman of an ordinary
condition, dwelling in the City of York; about the age of 50. years, had a
swelling about her Ancle, which had continued long. The place was for the most
part very red, and hard, whereunto was applied diverse means by the Surgeons
to bring it to a head, but nothing avayled. Her pain did daily increase, the
part was grown monsterously great, whereby she began to loose the use of her
lime. She was at length advised to go to the Sulpher spring near Knaresborow,
whether with much ado she was brought on horseback. The next day after her
coming she drunk liberally of the water, which purged her in a violent
manner, and at night she bathed her leg in the water at her lodging. This
course she continued for three days, during which time the swelling abated
very much, and she was able the fourth day to tread on the ground so boldly and
firmly, that without expecting any further operation of the water, she
returned to the City of York on foot, as if she scorned any other help, and
within a week she was so perfectly cured, that diverse who had seen her
swelled leg, did admire to see her trot up and down the City, as if she had
never ayled any thing. This was in the the year 1627. This Summer being 1631.
I spoke with her at York from whom I had her story, Dr. Deane and diverse
others in York taking special notice of it.

In the year 1629. there came a poor man to make use of the Sulphur spring,
whose name and abode I have not had the opertunity to learn. He had a great
swelling in his knee which had continued long. The place was exceeding hard to
feel to, and grown over with hair, nor could the force of any medicine make
it to yield to any abatement or suppuration. He drunk of the water daily,
which purged him, and bathed his leg often in it: within less then a fortnight
the part did sensiblely soften, and soon after did break, whence issued a
great number of small worms, to the amazement of diverse. Freed from these, he
was much refreshed, and within a few days returned to his home by all
appearance a sound man. Sr F. F.
A noble Knight (who lived then near Knaresborow) took (as there was good
cause) special notice of this strange cure, whose unblemished reputation is a
sufficient warrant to satisfy me in the publishing of it.

One Benson who dwells near the spring, assured me a poor woman had
received the like cure in one of her breasts, whereof he was a witness.

There is nothing more familiar then for poor people to repair to this
spring, most of the^ (that have the patience to stay) receiving cure of old
soars, and ulcerated parts. What inward deseases this water does properly
respect, has not yet (which is great pity) been judiciously examined: but
that it may be usefully applied, this one following instance may fully satisfy.

One Smith a Shoemaker dwelling in the City of York, was extremely overgrowne
with the Scurvey, so that he was in some danger of his life, usual medicines
nothing availing. He was at length advised by a learned Scholar in the City
(by profession a Divine, Mr G.
yet versed of late in physical notions) to send for the Sulphur spring water
to his house, which he not very willingly did, thinking it a hard task to
drink water in the cold of winter. His ordinary draught was half a pint in the
morning, which had such good success in him, that within less then a month
he was by this and other means quit of his disease.

The like effect a good old man in the City experimented to his great relief.
Mr A. P.


Lo here two springs of admirable operations! And if an exact Sumetritian by
the proportion of Hercules his foot be able to collect the whole fabric of
his body, why may not the learned (whose serious thoughts are bent upon the
theory of natures secrets) from these examples deduce excellent conclusions of
large and ample use.

I had thought to shut up this discourse but that I am loath to smoother any
thing that may tend to the public good.

Those who have observed the wonders of this our happy I Will, have taken notice
of a Spring seated underneath the Castle of Knaresborow, commonly called the
dropping Well, famous for the turning whatsoever is cast into it or casually
falls in (as Moss, leaves, sticks, and the like) into stone: whereupon it is
that this Spring is visited of many by way of admiration. But time has of late
discovered a physical use of this water, namely, that it is an infallible cure
for a flixe.

This year 1631. it was my chance to be a witness of this particular. A
Minister of Yorkshire one Greatheed, came to Knaresborow to give his
attendance on a noble Gentlewoman, whose infirmity did crave the aid of the
Spaw water. He (not intending to drink of the water seriously) thought he
might safely now and then (as many do for companies sake) take a few draughts
of the Spaw water within a weeks stay (by what accident I know not) he was
overtaken with a violent flixe, which continued three days in such a degree of
excess, that there was just cause to fear. At that time there was happily in
the house a Physician of good note, one Dr. Web (a Gentleman of extraordinary
curious parts besides his exact knowledge in his profession, to whom these
Northern waters are indebted for his careful examination of them, and his
willingness to advance their dew fame) whose advise being craved (and time it
was to advise, for the party was brought so weak, that he was stepped into a
degree of convulsions) he (out of former experience in a noble Lady in the same
case, who (all other means failing) had received present help by this
dropping Well) presently caused him to drink a draught of the said water,
which without dallying instantly stayed the flixe, so that within a few days
he became a strong man.

These fore rehearsed truths considered, whether may not Knaresborow challenge
any place in Europe for variety of useful and rare springs? If it be objected
by any (for there is a snarling generation that have ever something to say
(though to no great purpose) against any thing) that they have met with those
who have been at these rare waters, and have found little or no benefit by
them. I answer, was there ever yet any medicine heard or read of, of that
unvalluable worth that was an assured Catholicon against all diseases? I but
(say they) your waters have failed even in these particular instances which you
have mentioned. I grant it, and yet no derogation from the waters efficatious
use. A disease is curable at one time, which at another admits no possibility.
Veniente occurrite morbo. Sero medicina paratur, etc. A young twigge may easily
be pulled up, but let it grow, and there will be much ado to make it wag. If it
be replied that such as have repaired to the water, were but newly entered into
their distempers, and yet returned no better then they came thither: without
any long quarreling about the matter, I say it is a wonder that diverse who
drink of the water return not worse. For how many (if they were well
examined) prepare their bodies, which how gross an omission it is, let the
learned judge? Besides how few are there who keep an ordinary diet? How many
depart (in a chafe) from the water, because they have not found themselves in a
week as sound as a Bell; when as (the world knows) their bodies have been
cracked and crasie for many years?

And yet these gallants (gilty perhaps of all these errors) complain of want
of virtue in these waters, when the greatest want is in themselves being
refractory and averse in observing a methodicall course, without which the most
elaborate and choice recepts that ever were, are liable to disparagements.

But I have done squabbling with these humorists, and for the benefit of the
more ingenious sort, I desire that (for their own sakes) they would (if
necessity hale them to these waters, for they are no more to be played withal,
than any other physic) take notice of these following cautions, which require
a necessary observance of all.

First, undertake not thy self to judge of thine own body, what
correspondence the water may have with thy infirmity: but repair to the
learned Physician, to whom it properly belongs to determine of thee.

Secondly, being once resolved to use the water, fit thy self for it by taking
a day or two before thou drink of it, some such apt preparative as best may
suit with the quality and nature of thy distemper. For this purpose advise with
an understanding Physician (especially one that is acquainted with the waters
use) for he it is (and only he) that knows how to vary prescriptions, and
to apply to every one that which is most proper.

Thirdly, resolve during the time of thy drinking the water to keep an orderly
diet in the quality of it, avoiding all meats of gross nourishment, and in
the quantity let thy meals be spare but especially thy suppers. And if that at
other times thou art indulgent to thy appetite, now do as Solomon advises in
another case. Put thy knife to thy throat and restrain thy former liberty:
which strictness would be observed (to very good purpose) a month after thy
departure from the water, according to the opinion of the best observers.

Fourthly, keep thy self (according to the season) in such a degree of temper,
that neither immoderate heat nor coldness of the air offend thee, but of the
latter there is the more fear, the mornings being often cold. The place and
situation of these waters do a little too much expose all conditions of
people that repair to them to the inconvenience of a cold piercing air,
therefore it were to be wished that those of the more tender sort, whether of
sex, education, or accidental weakness, would (during the time of their
drinking the water) every morning when they go to the fountain be armed with
an indifferent warm garment, which if it be not put off till the water have
had its operation (which for the most part is four hours after the drinking,
unless the day prove more then ordinary warm) were not amiss. For I am
persuaded these same slash't carbonadoed suits so much in fashion, are no small
prejudice to most that wear them. And yet how many are there both of years
(though not of discretion in this) and of weak constitutions (but more weak
judgments) who (rather then they will not be at the command of that same
grand dominering Tyrant Mounsieur Deformite) care not how soon they leave the
world rather then live out of the fashion, be it never so useless and
monstrous.

Fifthly, attempt not to drink these waters, but with a prepared patience to
atte^d the issue of their opperation, according to the usual time allotted for
them, which ought to be a month at least. The precipitate and hasty parting
from them is no small cause why many find not the benefit which they expect.
In the close before thou leave the place, it is very convenient to take a
gentle purge of the nature of thy preparative.

Lastly, if in the use of the water it does plainly appear to thee that it
works effectually, cross not the course of it by an intermixture of any
other physic, whose aid ought only to be craved when the water is wanting
in its performance, or does produce some extraordinary sumptomes, and then the
learned hand of Art may be a great means to support and relieve the
weakness of nature, or any other accidental inconvenience.

Other concurring circumstances there are, not unworthythy observation in
drinking the water which are learnedly and accurately set down in the
Spadacrene, whereunto I refer thee for a full satisfaction both of the nature
and use of the water. Let me only put thee in mind that the most proper time
to use the water is from the middle of June to the end of August.

I am not ignorant that late years have brought to light in diverse parts of
the Kingdom, waters of near alliance to this our Northern Spaw: but by the
best enquiry I can make, it is plain they must all veil bonet to this of
ours, for fulness of mineral and activety of spirits, be they what they
will, whether those of Wellingborow, Tunbridge, Bristow, or any other. And that
which makes this our water not patternable (besides its own worth) is the
confluence and variety of Springs, that (by way of attendance) environ it. For
I dare be bold to affirm that within the distance of two miles, I will show
seven several Springs all of diverse natures, aparantly distinguishable
either in taste, or smell. So that (I am persuaded) had these waters but the
happiness to be honored one Summer with the presence, and examination of some
such learned Artist as Dr. Iordin (who in his late exact discourse of mineral
waters, and baths, shows he has a suparlative capacity of diving into the
bowels of the earth, and exposing to light those hidden mysteries that lie
locked up in the bosom of that dark Element) not only this Kingdom, but most
neighboring Nations would troop unto them, having once received allowance by
the divulging of his or the like judicious pen.

Nor is this all that is wanting to these waters. There is a stain unthought
of, which time I hope wash away, for it is a shame it has so long continued.

Those who neighbor nearest to these waters, are an indigenous poor people,
not able to step out of the road of their laborious calling, being plain
husbandmen and cottagers, and therefore it cannot be expected they should
accommodate them in their many useful concernments wherein they are most
grossly defective. What unseemely shifts have I seen many strangers of note
put to for want of a convenient place of retirement? How is the company forced
sometimes to leave the place for want of shelter to defend them from the gusts
of many a cold morning, wherein though all do suffer, yet those that are weak
(I assure my self) receive more prejudice by the piercing bleake air, then
benefit by the water? For if in the smallest physical preparatives that are
prescribed, we are fitly charged to beware of cold, or any impetuousnesse of
the air, how much more in the frequent draughts of this water, which is apt
(with some violence) now and then to open the body? And that which is strange,
of many scores that meet in a morning and continue for the most part an hour
together, there is scarce a seat provided for half a dozen to repose them. Is
it not a shame that the Sulphur spring (whereof many of the best sort have
occasion to drink) should lie open for the promiscuous use of all sorts,
without any due order observed in the keeping of it, so that poor Lazer,
impotent people, do daily environ it, whose putrid rags lie scattered up and
down, and it is to be doubted whether they do not wash their soars, and
cleanse their besmeared clouts (though unseene) where diverse after dippe their
cups to drink. Not that I would have the poor debard the use of the spring,
(God forbid that those should not be most especially cared for, who are least
able to care for themselves) but I see no cause why the use may not be reduced
to a better order. And if it be doubted that this spring will hardly be
accommodated for all sorts (which I make no doubt but it may, being carefully
guarded) I will undertake within a quarter of a mile to find one or two of the
same equal worth which may be appropriated for the meaner sort. From this and
the like abuse it is that diverse justly complain, and wish that some one
might be deputed by authority to manage these waters, and to provide all
things necessary for their more fit use, conditionally that allowance might be
made annually by all such as have recourse to them according to their
qualities. But if wishes would serve the turn, this (with many more neglects)
had found redress long since. That which I think worthy of complaint is, that
of so many of note who have received benefit by these waters, nay some of them,
who (under God) owe their lives to them, there is not one that has left
behind any memorial of their gratitude worth the remembrance. Of ten Leapers,
there was one that returned to give thanks, (which was the only fee that was
expected for his cure) and he alone was stamped upon as worthy his recovery.

Nahaman the Syrian by the dim light of nature could see that his restoring to
health would deserve a large recompense, and therefore he came furnished with
gifts of great worth, which he pressingly (though refused) tendered the
Prophet. And I verily think that there are some now living, who could they
have been assured (before their coming to these waters) of such a latitude of
unexpected health as now they enjoy by them, they would have purchased it at
half their estates. Shall after ages then take notice of so many as have been
raised from their weary sick couches to perfect strength, and no sign of
thankefullnesse remaining, but because they have been put to straights at
their being at the waters, must others hereafter shift as they have done? A
benefit (let it derive it self whence it will) does ever (in an ingenious
spirit) train after it a tacit and innominate obligation of a grateful
return, and implicitly challenge a proportionable retribution, according to
the quality of the person, and benefit received. Let it never be said
therefore (ye especially (whosoever ye are) whose estates raise you (like
Saul) the shoulders and upwards above others) that ye are indebted to the Spaw
for your recoveries, and that ye left it as naked of all fit supplement as ye
found it, but stir up one another to give a largess to make the place more
apt for after times, both to invite strangers thither, and comfort those of the
meaner sort with some fit accommodations, who are necessitated to use the
water. Ye that have been at these waters know the natural rudeness of the
place, how void it is of all provisions, and Christians (of all others) should
remember, that they are not borne for themselves, but that they ought to cast
an eye upon succeeding ages.

But if ye will leave this work for others now your own turns are served,
yet something (according to the old saying) has some savor: Me thinks the
neighboring poor of the place (who are not a few) might taste of your bounty
whom ye shall find the best treasurers and stewards of your liberality. Or
look upon some poor desolate Parishes that border upon the Spaw (which save
the ordinary service scarce once in a year know what the comfortable refection
of a teaching Minister means) what a sort of starved souls there are for
want of the word dispensed to them, and by supplying that defect, God shall be
honored, and a blessing will be the readier to attend the waters. Yet why do
I strive to rouse and stimulate your beneficence, by prescribing to you ways
of thankfulness? Where true charity is, it needs no prompting, but can find
a thousand dry channels to moisten with its welcome streams. I hope this
little blast I have made bold to give, will be sufficient either in you or some
other (if the world be not drawn dry of generousnes) to make your expressions
break forth into a flame of bounty.

To conclude (for my ambition to promote the common good, has perhaps (as some
may think) caused me to expatiate a little too far) since it is undeniable
by the preceding particulars, that these waters are worth the cherishing.

Cease then who ere thou art, (whose snarling vain
Will not permit thee, see thy Country's gain;)
To stain these waters with thy bleare-ey'd look,
Or mis-interpret this truth-speaking Book.
But if thy dreggy and distempered blood,
So cloud thy brain thou can not see what is good:
Repair to these our waters, which can quell,
Those mistie vapors and all fogs dispell.
Ye Chimists whose high-perching wits aspire,
TO extract the quintescence of all by fire,
Dream ye no more of what was never known:
(But by suppose) that all effecting stone
The gate to wealth, and what man's heart can think,
Which makes your brains to sweat, your pens with ink
To blur your papers, for ye do but leave
Behind dark mists of words that do deceive.
Here would ye spend a few of these lost days
Ye now bestow, O with what worthy praise,
Might ye endeare your Country's good and find
Matter well worth your labor, to unbinde:
By your extractions those same linkes and chains
Of hidden secrets which as yet remains
Untied, that their proportion duly known,
Their use might be divulged to every one.
And ye bold brazen scattered Empericks,
Who purge men's purses with your cheating tricks:
Leave to disport your selves with your conceats,
Of juggling powders that can work all feats.
The learned know, and who best judge must grant,
You Are gross impostures, blind and ignorant,
Come sit you down, by these our waters banks,
Note well their rare effects, what several ranks
Of starved bodies here receive their cure,
Which would ye mark in time ye might procure:
By your observing to direct and guide,
Such as to long sad weakness have been tide.
For here are wonders of no common strain,
Diseases cured without or grief or pain.
The shaking Palsy here gets steady lims,
The giddy Megrim and the brain that swims:
The Ulcer of the Kidneyes and the stone,
(That is not fixed) all such as make their moan,
Of perturb'd fancy rising from the Spleen,
The viscuous bowels that want making clean;
Distemper of the Livers fiery heat,
Weak indigestions both of drink and meat.
Flixes, Cathars, obstructions in their kinds,
Disturbing painful flutulent gross winds:
Worms of all sorts, the Epilepse, the sick,
Who plainly do appear they are Asthmatick.
These and what not that Art could ever cure,
Nature presents them with a water pure:
Which fitly used in its due season can,
Restore a dying to a living man.
Had Gallen met with waters such as these,
Or that same grave well-vers't Hypocrates,
Or those Arabian sages, learned men,
Rases, Averroes, or that Avicen:
These with the rest were they alive to see,
Our waters how they suit to each degree,
Of age and sex, and with what ease they do,
Effect their operation, they would woo,
To be spectators of these rare events,
Nature (unheard of) to the world presents.
My pen's too dull, to blaze them I have done,
It Is vain to prove there is brightness in the Sun.
FINIS.

