An exposicion of the kings prerogative collected out of the great abridgement
of Justice Fitzherbert and other old writers of the laws of England by the
right woorshipfull sir William Staunford Knight, lately one of the Justices of
the Queens majesty's court of common pleas:

Whereunto is annexed the Process to the same Prerogative appertaining. 1567.

To the right honorable sir Nicholas Bacon knight, lord keeper of the great
seal of England: Richard Tottel wishes health and long life, with increase
of honor.
NOt long sythens, right honorable, and my especial good Lord, there was
delivered to me A collection of the kings prerogative, which Master
Staunforde had gathered and dedicated unto your honor: which work because it
is thought well of by the Sages of the law, and well worthy to be printed, I
am therefore the bolder to put it in print, and publishe the same. And although
the said Master Staunforde very shortly after that he hadd dedicated the
same book unto your Lordship, were for his wisdom, gravity, learning,
integrity, and sincere dealinge, advanced to be a Judge in the chief Court
of this Realm for common plees, and for his good service therein was by just
desert made knight, and albeit that your Lordship also sythens that time have
achieued the place, title and degree of high honor by the judgment and
calling of the Queens most excellent majesty: Yet I have printed the Epistle
dedicatorie of the said woork, in the same terms that the Author thereof
used, and with the same style that your honor, and he both then had, when he
dedicated the said work unto your Lordship, as a Monument and token of the
mutual and long continued amity between you: most humbly praieng your
Lordship to accept in good part, according to your accustomed goodness, this
my boldness with your honor, and to pardon the same.

This 20. day of November. Your honors most bounden Richard Tottell.

Guilielmus Staunfordus Nicholao Bacono Regie Maiestati a Tutelarum
procuratione. S. D. P.
QVanquam Anglicanae leges (amice singularis) haud minorem merentur laudem,
qua^ Iudex Fortescueus libro de earum laudibus conscripto, eis tribuere
videtur: tamen quoniam earum cognitio tam procul nobis dissita sit, profectio
ad eam tam supra modum longa ac operosa, tu^ viae et semitae tam asperae, ta^
salabrosae, tam inamaenae sint, vt ad sui aditum paucissimos inuitet, qua^
plurimos ab sterreat, vel potius auertat: Optarem in tanta iurisperitorum
turba: quam Anglia nunc habet, aliquid excogitari posse, leuandis legum
Studiosis, prolongo isto ac molesto itinere. Vt propiore ac commodiore via
ducti, valerent et proficisce^do and absoluto itinere, alias degustare literas:
quibus, non solum legalem scientiam multum illustrarent, sed et munia eis a
Regia Maiestate mandata, tum pulchrius, tum honorificentius, administrarent. Id
quod (meo iudicio) co^modissime fieri possit, si tituli, in magna (qua^ vocant)
Fitzherberti Epitome, vel a Iudicibus nostris, vel ab aliis legum peritis,
sedulo forent euoluti atque elaborati, hoc est, omni titulo, in classes ac
ordines distributo, singulis eorum actis ac causis, certae legum regulae ac
Maximae presiderent. Exempli gratia. In Breuis titulu^ cadere possunt hec
videlicet, Forma, vitiosa Nomendatura, seu personae, seu vici, Eade^ res bis
petita, Obitus vel actoris vel rei, Nominis alterutrius partis pe^dente lite
mutatio, ceteraque huiusmodi quae nunc nimis longo titulo spersa tam
tumultuarie reperiuntur: vt multo maiorem tum eruditionem, tum sudores, tum
vigilias, exigat eoru^ distributio, qua^ recte distributa ediscere. Et tamen
non possum committere, quin tantae epitomes scriptorem: vel amplissimis
laudibus veham, qui suma sua doctrina, exactissimo iudicio, immensis ac pene
dixerim exanclatis laboribus, tam numerosam voluminum multitudinem, quibus vel
legendis vix vnius hominis aetas (quantumlibet viuacis) sufficeret: in vnu^
du^taxat volumen atque adeo epitomen contraxit, vt nunc nostratibus
iurisperitis modo volentibus minima opera componere liceat: quippiam, tam
facile, tam vtile, tam frugiferu^: vnde studiosi dimidiato tempore quo antehac
legibus obdormire sint visi: cum maturiore^, tum certiorem noticiam
assequerentur, Quo nomine: rei mihi tam vehementer expetitae: typum quendam pro
posui, ac quasi primas inde lineas duxi, Recipiens ad me, huiusmodi p^dictorum
titulos: qui Regiam prerogatiuam spectant: non quod sum aliqua ex part dignus,
rem tam eximiam, tamque sublimem tractare: nec quod eruditione id prestare
valeam: Siquidem de meo, nihilo plus hic est, qua^ collectio ac dispositio
tantum earum rerum, quae eisdem titulis includuntur: Sed magis quod istud meum
commentitium, qualecunque sit, tibi semper destinaueram, id quod in nullum
alium preter hunc titulum, co^mode experiri potui, tum quod ad magistra tum
tuum Regij procuratoris tutelarum, maxim partinere videbatur, tum quod
co^pertum habeo, te iurisprudentiae incu^bentem, hu^c quem proposui morem
hactenus obtinuisse: quod fecit, vt reliquos tuos contemporaneos eruditione:
multis stadijs precurras: tum denique quod tuum iudicium super hisce rebus in
quibus assidue versaris ac exercitaris requiro. Certus me hic rem habere cum
homine tam amico, vt si quid lectione dignum inuenerit: id pergrate sit
accepturus, sin minus, certe aequi bonique consulturus, reliquum quod habet
vitij: emendaturus, aut saltem ad id coniuere velle co^fido. Proinde istud,
quicquid est, tibi nuncupo, lege, ac pro tua voluntate fruere.

Vale.
To the right woorshipfull and his singular frinde Nicholas Bacon the kings
Attorney of his court of wards and Liuereys William Staunford wishes health,
long life and prosperous success.
ALbeit the laws of England right singular frinde are worthy no less
honor, praise and commendacion, then Justice Fortescue in his book written of
the praises thereof does attribute and give unto them, yet forasmuch as the
knowledge of the said laws is placed so far of, the journey thereunto so
exceading long and painful, and the ways and paths so rugged and
unpleasant: I would wish that among such plenty of learned men as be at this
day some thing were devised to help the stude^ts of their long journey that they
(being led a more nere and pleasant way) might both as they went and after they
came to their iorneis end gather some other knowledge, not only therewith to
garnish their own science, but also the better to serve in such honorable
rome as they be called to serve the king and sovereign lord in, which thing
might well come to pass after my poor mind, if such titles as be in the
great abrigement of Justice Fitzherbert were by the Judges or some other
learned men labored and studied, that is to say, every title by it self by
special divisions digested, orderd and disposed in such sort as that all the
judicial acts and cases in the same might be brought and appear under
certain principles, rules and grounds of the said laws. As for example,
under the title of Brief might come these titles, Fourm, Misnaming of the
person, Mysnaming of the town, One thing twice demanded, death of the
plaintifes side, death of the defendauntes side, chaunginge of the name of the
pleintife or defendaunt hanginge the suit, with many such other like which
now as things scatered abroad and out of orderlye hidden within the said
long title that it requires much more learning, pains and Study well to
order and dispose the matter in the same, then (after order made) to learn and
bear it away. And yet surely there cannot be to much praise and
commendacion given unto that great learned man the Auctour of the said great
abbridgement, which by his great learning, exact judgment and intolerable
pains, brought such an infinite number of volumes (to the reading whereof A
man's life would scant have suffised) to a much more less and narower
compass, whereupon now these learned men with less pains might compile the
thing that should be so easy so profitable and fruitful to the students
thereof, that in half those years they now lie sleping in, they might come to
a ryper and more certain knowledge and better judgment: For which cause I
have drawn as it were a pattern of the thing I so much desire taking upon
me such tytles as appertain unto the kings prerogative, not as one in any
part worthy to treat of a thing so high and preciouse as that is or in
learning sufficient or hable thereunto (for of mine own here is nothing more
then only a colleccion and disposition of that that is already contained in
the said tytles) but rather because I have always meant this my deuyse unto
you, which I could not do or practice so well upon any title as upon this
that appertains unto your office of Attourneyshippe of the wards and
liueries, partly for that I know your self to have observed the like order in
your own Study, which in few years has gotten you above other the great
learning you have, partlye also for that I covet your Judgment in these
matters wherewith you be daily in ure and exersised, knowinge that I have to
do herein with one so much my frynde that if there be any thing worthy the
readinge he will take it thankfullye, and if not so, well, yet will he take it
in good part, the rest that is amiss he will bear it with me. This therefore
what soever it be I dedicate unto you, read it, peruse it and make of it what
you will. Fare you well, from Greis Inn the sixth of November. Anno. 1548.

Prerogatiua regis, edita, Anno. 17. E. 2.
Cha. 1.
DOminus Rex habebit custodiam omnium terrarum eorum qui de ipso tenent in
capite per seruiciu^ militare de quibus ipsi tenentes fuerunt seisiti in
dominico suo vt de feodo die quo obierunt de quocunque tenuerint per huiusmodi
seruitium dum tamen ipsi tenuerunt de rege aliquod tenementum ab antiquo de
corona vsque ad legittimam aetatem heredis: Exceptis feodis Archiepiscopi
Cantuariensis, Episcopi dunolm^ inter Tine et Tese, feodis Com^ et Baronum de
marchia de terris in marchia vbi breuia domini regis non currunt. Et vnde
predict' archiepiscopus, ep^us Com^ et Baron^ habeant huiusmodi custodia^ licet
alibi tenuerunt de Rege.

Prerogatiua is as much to say as a privilege or preeminence that any person
has before another which as it is tolerable in some, so it is most to be
permitied and allowed in a prince or sovereign governor of a realm. For
besides that, that he is the most excellentest and worthiest part or member of
the common body of the wealth, so is he also (through his good governance) the
preserver, nourisher, and defender of all the people being the rest of the
same body. And by his great travails study and labors they enjoy not only
their life's lands and goods, but all that ever they have besides in rest
peace and quietness, as Seneca sayethe: Seneca de consolat ad Polibium
Omnium domos illius vigilia defendit, omnium ocium illius labor, omnium
delicias illius industria, omnium vacationem illius occupatio. For which cause
the laws do attribute unto him all honor, dignity, prerogative and
preeminence, which prerogative does not only extend to his own person, but
also to all other his possessions goods and cattals. As that his person shall be
subject to no man's suite, his possessions cannot be taken from him by any
violence or wrongful disseisin, his goods and cattals are under no tribute,
toll nor custom, nor otherwise distreinable: with an infinite number of
prerogatifes more, which were to tedious here to recite. Howbeit for so much as
in every realm, the kings prerogatifes are no small part and portion of the
profits and commodities of the Corone of the same, and namelye within this
realm of England, it has been thought good heretofore to declare and
setfurth in writing certain of the most highest and weightiest matters and
articles touching the said prerogatifes. And hereupon was there a declaracion
made in writing by authority of parliament holden in the.17. year of the
reign of king Edw. the.2. the beginning whereof is in manner and form as is
above written: Howbeit this parliament makes no part of the kings prerogatife,
but long time before it had his being by thorder of the commen law, as plainlye
may appear by them that have written before the making of the said statute of
prerogatife. Glanu. li. 70
For Glanuill, who was chief Justice in king Henry the.2. days writing of
this matter says in this wise. Notandum quod si quis in Capite de dn^o rege
tenere debet, tunc eius custodia ad dominum regem plene pertinet, sieve alios
dn^os habere debet here is five non, quia dominus rex null lum habere potest
parem, multo minus superiorem.

Bracton. li. 1 de custod' et marit' dominorum.
Also Bracton which wrote in the time of the latter reign of king Henry the.3.
says. Si aliquis here is terram aliquam tenuerit de domino rege in capite sieve
alios dominos habuerit sieve non, dominus rex aliis prefertur in custodia
heredis sieve ipse ab aliis prius feoffatus fuerit vel posterius, cum rex parem
non habet in regno suo. Both these writers do not only agree in every point,
but also give a reason why the king should have the prerogative contained in
this first chapter. Also Britton, an other old writer which wrote his book in
king Edward the first name says, des heirs nequedent si ils y eyent ascuns
qui auncestre morust seisie de ascun terre tenu de nous en chief des aunciens
demeanes de nostre corone volons aver les gardes de touts les terres do^t
appent que deiuent descend a ceux heirs come lour heritage ouesque touts les
blees en teles terres troues maintefoits de qui fees que les terres sont.
Britton here not only agrees with the other, but also gives the king the corn
growing upon the grounds which the kings tenant holds at the time of his
death. A. 21. H. 3. in Fitz. ti. Prerogat'. P. 26. and P. 25.
Also in the great Abridgement of Fitzherbert you shall find in the time of king
Henry the third written in this manner. Nota quod lex angliae et consuetudo
eiusde^ est quod a quibuscunque aliquis feoffatus fuerit dum tamen a domino
Rege aliquo tempore fcoffatus fuerit per tenementum qd' tenetur per seruic^
militare, quod dn^s rex habebit custod' omniu^ terrar' et teneme^toru^ ta^ de
feoffame^to alioru^ qua^ de feoffamento proprio. Which text if a man will any
thing wrest he may make the kings prerogative more lyberall then is made or
declared by this statute or any other the writters before remembered, for it
extendes to any lands holden of the king by knights service whether they be
holden of the king in capite or not: but forasmuch as the said other writers
have written so plainlye in this matter we will stand to them and extend the
prerogative no further, howbeit (as I said) all those writters being so long
before the making of this statute do plainly argue and prove that this statute
does but confirm and declare that that was the commen law before, M 15. E 4.12
unless we would doubt of the time of the making thereof as Littleton does in
15. E. 4. but without doubt it was made in king Edward the secondes time, and
that plainlye appears by the words contained in the third chapter of this
prerogative, which be these. Et illa voluntas tempore Regis. H. patris Regis E.
estimari consueuit etc. Which words were not written in king Edward the
first days, for then the words had been patris nostri, so that (as I think)
it is not to be doubted but that it was written in the time above limited and
expressed. Then go we to thexposicion of this first chapter of prerogative.
The words be, dominus rex habebit custodiam omnium terrarum eorum qui de ipso
tenent in capite per seruicium militare. These words go generally to all the
kings tenauntes, that is to say, as well to his tenantes for term of life, as
to his tenauntes of estate of enheritaunce, if it so be that he that is in the
reuercion have the said reuercion by descent, and be heir unto the said tenant
for term of life, not forcing whether he have the reuercion by descent from
the said tenant for term of life or else from any other ancestour, as take
the case to be this, a man holds no lands of the king but only as tenant
by the courtesy, and those lands are holden in chief by knights service and
the said tenant by the courtesy is seized in his demesne as of fee of lands
holden of other lords and dies, the lands holden of other descend unto him
in the reuertion which is indede next heir unto the said tenant by the
courtesy, in this case the king shall not only have the wardship of ye lands
that were holden by the courtesy if the said heir be within age, but also the
lands holden of other by virtue of this prerogative. And if the said heir
were of full age at the time of the death of the said tenant by the
courtesy, the king shall have primer season both of the one land and of the
other, as it appears in the new Natura breuiu^. fo. 298. Like law is it if
a woman be endowed of lands holden in capite and is seized in fee simple of
lands holden of other and dies seized, and they discende unto the heir
which is in the reuercion, in this case the king shall have both these lands
by virtue of this prerogative, like as he shall have in the other case before,
26. li. ass. p. 57
and that may you see in. 26. li. ass. for in both these cases they be the
kings tenauntes, and hold of him by knights service in capite, for tenant en
dower in the kings cas holds not of the heir but only of the king, as it
shall appear more fully hereafter. But if he in the reuercion be not heir of
the lands holden of other in the cases above remembered otherwise it is. But
what if he in the reuercion have the same reuercion by purchase and not by
descent whether shall the king then have his prerogative or not? and as to that
it should seem by the new Natura breuium fo. 259. that the king shall have
his prerogative in that case also, for there the remainder was to the heir and
to his wife and to the heirs of their two bodies lawfully begotten, and the
husband in the remainder did sue liuere, howbeit against ye law as me seems,
ideo quere. but if the case in the said new Natura breuium had been, that
lands holden by knights service in capite had been given to one for term of
his life the remainder over in fee which parson in the remainder has issue and
dies and tenant for term of life holds lands of other Lords and dies
which discende to the issue that is in the remainder, there it might be said
that the king should have prerogative in the whole like as he had in the cases
before remembered of tenant by the courtesy and tenant in dower, for like
reason will serve in the one case that serves in the other. The words of the
Statut be further, de quibus ips^ tene^tes fuerunt seisiti in dominico suo vt
de feodo die quo obierunt de quocunque tenuerint. These words rather
apperteigne unto the lands holden of other then too the Lands holden of the
King in Capite, as it should appear by the cases before remembered, and then
by these words the kings tenant in his life time must himself be seized
either in possession or reuercion of those lands that he holds of a common
person that shall dyscende unto his heir, For if he were never seized thereof
but they discende unto his heir from some other auncestor, the king shall not
have his prerogative in them as appears in 15. 15. E. 4. f. 10.
E. 4. but whether the kings tenant were seized of them in his own right or
in another bodies right it makes no difference, as take the case he were
seized of them but in right of his wife and has issue and dies, his issue is
in the kings ward for the land that his father held in Capite, and
afterward the wife dies the issue being still in ward, the King shall have
Prerogative in these lands of the wife also, because the husband was seized of
them in his demean as of fee the day of his death, and so within the
compass of this statute. And this case may you see in. M. 13. H. 4. 6.
13. H. 4. and note, that notwithstanding this statute speaks but of lands,
yet service are to be taken by the equity of the same, as it is plainlye
proved by the words of Diem clausit extremum, which says Quantum terre
tenet de nobis aut de aliis tam in dominico quam in seruicio. So that if one
hold of the kings tenant by certain services, the King shall have the
services in ward, for they be in nature and place of the land that is holden,
and so shall it be supposed. And therefore when the king has those services
in ward and the tenant that holds by those services di^th his heir within
age, if the said services were knights service the King shall have ward by
reason of wardshippe: But yet by that noe prerogative in the other lands of
the second ward which are holden of the other Lords, M. 6. R. 2. in Fitz.
ti. Guard P. 105.
as it may appear in 6. R. 2. For the kings tenant was never seized of those
other lands ne yet of the service that they were holden by, and so without the
compass of this prerogative. Like law it is where the King has the
temporaltie of a bishop in his custody duringe the time the Sea is vacant, and
one that holds of those temporalties by knights service dies his heir wtin
age, ye king shall have ye wardship of him, and the reason of it is, because ye
king has ye wardship of ye te^poralties, by reason whereof this wardship
comes, which temporalties the king has in ward by the order of the common
law, in lure corone: For they be barronies, which can be holden of none other
then of the king in capite, and then by the common law, I take it he were no
better then a common person: yet his highness must have the wardshippe of them
that hold of those temporalties by knights service if they fall duringe the
time the said temporalties be in his hands with such lands as they hold of
those temporalties but not with such lands as theye hold of other, and than
must the heir thereof when he comes to his full age sue a liuere as shalmore
plainly appear when we come to the third chapter of this prerogative. The
words of the statute before resited are, in dominico suo: this word demean
is not here taken to be the very possession or taking of the profits, for if
the kings tenant dye seized but of a reuercion or of a remaynder in lands
holden of a common person and duringe the minoritye of his son the particular
tenaunte dyethe, the king (this notwithstanding) shall have this land in
ward as he has the rest as it may appear. 22. H. 6.15. E. 4. and. 46. E. ^.
M. 22. H. 6. f, 20, M. 15. E. 4. f. 10. P. 46. E. 3. fo 10.
So it is if the kings tenant dye seized of an aduowson appendaunt to lands
holden of a common person. The words be further, die quo obierunt, and
therefore if the kings tenant dye seized, of Lands holden of a commen
person and a stranger abbatethe, yet the heir shall be in ward, and the king
may enter and so is it if the heir recover by assise of n^ortdauncestre as it
appears in the new Natura breuium fol. 2^^. and. T. 12. R. 2. But take the
case to be that the kings tenaunte dye not seized but is disseised and
dyethe, whether in this case the king may have prerogatyue or not, and it
semethe that he may, for in all such cases where the heir has a right of
enter, the king may enter in name of the heir and hold it afterward in
ward: but if the heir have but a title of enter or right of accion it
seemethe to be otherwise, howebeit look for those ma^^ers in the said book
of 15. E. 4. and. 12. H. 7. and. 18. Edwardi tertii lib. ass. P. 18. T. 12. H.
7. fo 17.
Where it is adjudged that of lands holden of the king in chief, the king
as in right of his ward might sease by a Scire facias upon a title of
enter. And note also that there is somewhat more to be understood bear
then is written or expressed, that is to say, that the said Lands must
discende too the kings ward, for notwythestandynge the kings tenant wear
seized in his demean as of fee day of his death in lands holden of a commen
person, yet if the same after his death do not discende to the kings ward,
but to an other heir, M. 12. E. 4. f. 18.
the king shall not have prerogative in them as it appearethe in. 12. Ed. 4.
The words of the statut be also De quocunque tenuerunt. Put case the kings
tenaunte is seized of certain things which neither are holden of the king
nor yet of any other, whether shall the king have them in ward or not, as
Merket, warr^n, A. 3. H. 7. f. 4 21. H. 6. f. 12. 46. E. 3. f. 10. 15. E. 4. f.
12.
Rent Secke, or aduowson en gross: and as it should appear in. 46. E. 3.
and. 21. H. 6. the king cannot have them in ward and yet in 15. Ed. 4. soome
hold oppinion to the contrary, therefore inquere and learn what the law will
in these cases. The words of the statute be, Per huiusmodi seruicium, that
is to say, by like service. Bye these words the lands that are holden of
other must be holden also by knights service or else the statute extendes
not to them, and yet the law is taken to the contrary, for if the lands
holden of other be holden but in socage or free burgage the king shall have
prerogative in them as it appearethe in. P. 24. E. 3. f. 13. T. 9. H. 3. ti.
Prerogative in fits. ^. 25.
24. E. 3. for this statute is but a confirmacion of the common law, and
therefore shallbee taken by equities and namelye when the law was so taken in.
9. H. 3 which was long time before the making of this statut. Howebeit
Bracton and Britton does extend this prerogative no further then to lands
holden of other by knights service, therefore enquire for the cause and reason
thereof. Bracton li. primo de custod. et releuiis. Britton. f.
The words be further, Exceptis feodis archiepi. cantuar' etc. This
exception extendes not to the body, wherefore the king shall hold that in
ward against al men, but it extendes to such lands as are holden of these
persons exempted by this statut. Put case then that any of these persons
pourchace a seignorie since the time of the making of this statute, shall the
king have his prerogative in the lands holden of that seignorie or not? And
it is clear he shall notwithstanding the aforesaid words of exception: for
theye do not extend but to such fees as we are theyrs at the time of the
making of this statut. Then further, for as much as there be diverse statutes
concerning wardeshyppe made as well before as since the time of king Edward
the second, let us see whether this prerogative will extend to those statutes
or not, and it seemethe it does, for as much as this prerogative has been
ever from the beginning as I have said before: And therefore if the kings
tenaunte beeinge seized of lands holden of a common parson makethe a feffement
thereof by collusion contrary is the statute of Marlebridge to defraude the
lord of the wardshippe and diethe, the king having his heir in ward and this
matter found by office shall sease upon a Scire facias if the collusion be
auerrable, or without a Scire facias, if the collusio^ be apparaunt and hold the
same in ward by force of this prerogative, and that appears in. 9. H. 4. So
likewise where the statute made in 4. H. 7. T. 9. H. 4. f. 5
prouidethe that the heir cesty que use shall be in ward. Put case that the
kings tenaunte in capite before the statute in Anno. 27. H. 8. had made a
ferfement of lands which he holdethe of a common per^one to the use of himself
and his heirs and died before that statute, in this case the king should
have had his prerogative in the Lands so being put in feoffament to an use
even as if his tenant had died seized thereof, T. 12. H. 7. fo 17.
as it appearethe 12. H 7. Than last of all let us learn how the lords whose
fees the king has in ward by his prerogative shall be demeaned and ordered
for the rentes to be dew for their seignories duringe the wardshippe whether
they shall leese them as they do the lands. 29. lib. ass, in fits, ti. Petic
p. 5. P. 24. E. 3 f. ^^ and the new natura breuium fo. 179.
And it appears in the book of assizes in. 29. E. 3. that they had them by
peticion at the Kings hands, and therewith agrees thoppinion of Hill' in
the.24. year of king E. 3. Learn the reason of these books, for it should seem
to me the law to be otherwise, because that al mesne seignories are suspended
duringe the time the king has the tenauncye in ward, if it be not per case
for the surplusage of a rent service which the mesne may sue for to the king
by way of peticion: and to say that the heir shall be charged at his full age
with the said rentes it wear noe reason, for then both his land should
be in ward, and yet he charged to pay rent for the same: wherefore it seems
that these books are against the law. And with me agrees Bracton in his first
book in the chapter de custodia where he says, Et cum tali ratione sint
aliorum feoda in manu do mini regis pred' ratione alij capitales domini feod'
illorum ni hill poterint exigere de terris et ten^tis illis nec in seruic' nomi
nat' nec in auxiliis ad filiam maritandam vel filium primoge nit' militem
facie^du^ vel in sectis qua^diu terre fuerunt in manu domini regis, sed
precipiet' vic' qd' hm^odi distringere non permittat. Howebeit Bracton in his
said book in the chapter, De releuijs says, that the heir at his full age
shall pay his relief to every of his lords notwithstanding he has been in
ward, quod nota: for in all other cases he never paiethe relief that is to
say where he has been in ward, and he makethe no other reason for it butte
this. s. quod hoc est speciale in rege propter suum priuilegium: and so is the
book in the.24. M. 39. E. 3. in Fits ti. Relief P. 1. Britton f. 163.
year of king Edward the third and the.39. year of the same king,
howebeit Brittons oppinion is that the heir shall pay noe relief to the
other lords after he has been in the kings ward, and commethe to his
full age, and I cannot find that the heir in any such case should or
doothe pay any relief to the king that is to say where he has been in
ward: therefore learn what experience teaches us in these cases.

The second chapter.
ITem Rex habebit maritagium hered' infra etate^ and in custodia sua existen^
sieve terre hered' eorundem sint ab antiquo de corona sieve de eschaetis quae
sunt in manu domini Regis sieve habuerit maritagium ratione custod' terrarum
dn^orum eorundem hered' nullo habito respectu ad prior' feoffamenti licet de
alijs tenuerunt. Bracton li. 1. ti. de herede sockman in cuius custodia esse
debe at. Britto^ f. 163 M. 24. E. 3. f. 24. H. 12. H. 4. in fits. ti. Guard. P.
81.


All that is contained in this Chapter was the kings prerogative by the order
of the common law, as it may appear in the books of Bracton and Britton in
the places before noted, and in a book in the 24. year of king Edward the
third where it is said that no lord can be more auncienter than the king,
for all was in him and came from him at the beginning. And therefore his
highness must have prerogative in the body of whosoever the infaunte holds
besides, be it that the lands are holden of the kings highness as of the
auncientnes of his Corone or of his new escheates, or come unto him as ward
by reason of wardshippe, or that his highness do pourchace the seignorie of
him that is lord by posterioritie, or pourchaseth a manor holden of one of his
honors, which are of his new eschetes, of which manner thauncester of
thinfaunt held by posterioritie: in all these cases the king shallbee
preferred to the wardeshippe of the body and marriage before any other lord
of whom the auncester also held them day of his death by priority of
feffement, that is to say, more ancient feoffement: how be it in these cases
his highenesse shall not have wardeshippe in the lands holden of the other
lords, because his tenaunte held not of him in ch^efe, but only shall have
preferrement in the body and marriage before all other. Then since the common
law and statute does give the king this prerogative, let us see whether his
highness may by grauntinge away his seignorie to an other, grant also with
the same his prerogative to the grauntee, that is to say, wheather his
grauntee shall have the same prerogative in the body of the child as his
highness might have had, M. 12. E. 3. in Fits. ti. Preroga. p. 25. et M, 14.
H 4 in Fits. ti. Guard P. 86.
in case the seignorie had still continued in him. And it appearethe in the.12.
E. 3. and.14. H. 4. that if the king grant the seignorye to an other in fee
simple that the grauntee shall have noe prerogative, because there remaynethe
nothing in the king of that seignorie vngraunted. But if the grant wear
made to a common person for noe longer time then during his life, and the
reuersion saved to the king, then learn what the law will in that case, H. 5.
E. 3. in. Fits, ti. prerogative. P. 20.
for we have in.5. Edward the third that wheare the grant was made to the
Queen for term of her life the reuersion in the king that her grace had
prerogatyue even as the king himself should have had, and for none other
reason there made but only because she held in right of the king. But a
man may add further to that reason and say that her grace and a common
person be not like, for though she be a person exempte from the king and
may sue and be sued in her own name, yet that that she has is the kings,
and look what she losethe so much depart the from the king, and therefore
all her tenauntes of parcel of her estate may have aid immedyatlye of the
king wytheoute making her party or pryuye theruntoo, and so she holdethe
merelye in the kings right: but a common person doothe not so. For the king
has nothing so do with the thing that he holdethe during the life of
the lessee, howebeeit if the grant be made to the Queen for term of her
life the remaynder over in fer^^ yt seemethe that her grace gettethe no
prerogatyue, M. 24. E. 3. f. 34.
and so yt is said in.24. Edward the third. Like law is it if the king
grant an honor to the Lord prince and his heirs kings of England, M. 21.
E. 3. f. 4^.
it seemethe by the better oppinion in 21: Ed. 3. that the Lord prince shall
have there with the kings prerogative, because it is not severed from the
crown after the form as it is geeuen, for none shallbee inherytoure thereof
but kings of this realm. And note well that notwythstandynge the law wear
so that none in this case but the Queen or prince might have the kings
prerogative, yet if the king having the seignorye in his hands after that the
ward does fall. grant the same ward over, the grauntee shall have and
enjoy the preferrement of the marriage against the other Lords even as the
king should himself, because that notwythstandynge any such grant, yet
the king is said still gardeyne and the infaunt driven to sue for his lyuerye
at the kings hands whenne he commethe to his full age, and not at the hands
of the grauntee, A. 13. H. 4. in Fits. ti. prerogative. P. 24
which in this case is but only as a commyttee. And so is the book in. 13.
H. 4. Like law is it in the case above remembered wheare the Queen has
prerogative and the ward fallethe and she grauntethe her wardeshyppe over,
her grauntee shall have preferrement in the marriage before all other lords. And
ye also appears in the said. 5. E. 3 howebeit that case was enforced by that
yt the king confirmed the state of the grauntee, H. 5. E. 3. in Fits ti.
Preroga. p. 20.
like law is it if the king have a ward of right of his corone, and
grants it over with special words that is to say, yt the said grauntee shall
also have ward by reason of wardeshippe if it fall during the mynoritie of
the first ward, in this case if there fall a ward which holdethe by
posterioritye of the heir that is in ward, yet that notwythstandynge the said
grau^tee shall have the preferment in the ward of the body and marriage, eeuen
as the king himself should have had if he had made noe such grant,
because it is merely in the kings right which remaynethe still lord, and
the grauntee none other but as it wear his comyttee: H. 12. H. 4. in Fits. ti.
Guard P. 81.
and this appearethe also in the. 12. year of king Henry the fowerthe.

The third chapter.
ITem Rex habebit seisinam post mortem eorum qui de eo tenent in capite de
omnibus terris et tenementis de quibus ipsi fuerunt seisiti in dominico suo vt
de feodo cuiuscunque etatis heredes eorum fuerint, capiend' exitus eorundem
terrarum and tenementorum donec facta fuerit inquisitio prout moris est, et
ceperit homagium huiusmodi hered'.

In the.52. year of king Henry the third long time before the waking
hereof was there an other statute made at Marlebridge concerning this matter:
In the.16. chapter whereof it is thus provided. De hereditate autem que de
dn^o rege tenetur in capite sic obserua^d' est, vt dominus Rex primam habeat
inde seisinam sicut prius inde habere consue uit, nec here is nec alius in
hereditatem illam se intrudat, priusquam illam de manibus domini regis recipiet
prout huiusmodi hereditas de manibus ipsius et antecessorum suorum recipi
consueuerit, et hoc intelligatur de terris feodis que ratione seruicij
militaris, socagij, vel seriantiae, sieve iure patronatus, in manibus domini
regis esse confueuerunt. Both these statutes declare themselfes to be of none
other force then as a confirmation of that, that was the kings prerogative by
the order of the common law, as it may appear by these words, prout moris
est, sicut prius habere consueuit, recipi consueuerit, esse consueuerunt. And
therewyth agrees also Britton. fo. 167 The words of the statute be, Rex
habebit primam seisinam, what prima seisna is, it is declared by the words that
follow. s^. capiendo omnes exitus etc. by which words it may appear ye king
shall not only seize, but also receive the hole profits till lyuerye be
sued, which suit most commonly has been and is within the year and day
next after the death of his tenant, and therefore the king uses to take
no more then the first fruits, that is to say one years profits if there
be not apparaunt defaulte in the heir that he will not sue his lyuerie, in
which case then the kings highness shallbee answered of all the profytes
taken till lyuerye be sued, or at the least tended and after pursued with
effect, yea and if it be a general lyuerie and not ryghtefullye pursued
according to the order of the law, the king shall reseise and be answered
of all the mean profits from time of suyng of the said lyuerye, for when the
lyuerie is missued it is as it had been never sued. Howebeit this reseisure
shall not be wytheoute a Scire facias, as I shall thereof speak more at large
hereafter. But if ye heir or he yt should sue lyuerie do make a rightful
suite for the same according to thorder of the law, and as much as in him
lyethe to do to have liuerye, howebeeit the king will not but willbee advised
ere he make him lyuerie, and so protracte the time, in this case his
highenesse of right may not have the profits from the time the party was
thus delayed, but ought to restore the^ unto the party upon his lyuerye, as
may appear in the first year of Henrye the seuenthe. H. 1. H. 7. in Fits.
ti. Livery P. 18.
And thereuppon it is to be noted that there be two kind of liveries, the one
general, the other special. The general is the liuerye that this statut
speaks of, ye especial may be more properly treated of when we come to the
12. chapter of this prerogative. And this general lyuerie is sometime made
cum exitibus, and sometimes sine exitibus, but for the most part sine
exitibus: for wheare it is made cum exitibus, from the time of the seizure,
there it is properlye noe liuerye, for it appearethe the king never seized
rightfully or by any title. As for example, if the king will seize the land
that is found in thoffice to be holden of Tharchebyshoppe of Canterburye, or
Bishop of Durham, or any such persons as are exempted in the first
chapter of this prerogative, in this case they shall have an Ouster le main vna
cum exitibus, H. 16. E. 3. in Fits. ti. Liuere. P. 29
as it appearethe in 16. E. 3. The same law is it if of lands holden in
capite there be a lease made for term of life, the remainder over to
estraunger, 14. H. 4. f. 34 18. E. 3. f. 21. 24. E. 3. f. 27.
tenant for term of life dy^th, and this matter found by office, now if the
king seize, he in the remainder shall have an Ouster le main vna cum
exitibus, as it appearethe in. 14. H. 4. 18 E. 3. and. 24. Edward the third.
Like law it is where.ij. hold jointly of the king, and the one dyethe, and this
matter found by office, and yet that notwithstanding the king seises, he
that suruiues shall have an Ouster le mayn vna cum exitibus, as it appearethe
in the book of Assizes 44. 44. li. ass. in Fits. ti. Liuere. P. 11. T. 45. E.
3. f. 18.
E. 3. and in the new Natura breuium fo. 2^^. and. f. 257. For in all these
cases where the Ouster le maine is vna cum exitibus the king ought not to have
seiseised, and so sayethe Thorp 45. E. 3. The words of the statute be further,
Post mortem eorum qui de eo tenent Upon this: it is to be seen at what time
after the kings tenants death this lyuerie shallbe sued. If the possession of
the free hold immediatlye after the death of the kings tenaunte discende
unto his heir it is to be sued fourthwithe, and if but only a reuercion
discende, then it is not to be sued till after the death of the particular
tenant, as it may appear in the new Natura breuium f. 291. where the heir
sued not lyuerie till after the death of the tenant by the curtesye, tenant
in dower, and tenant for term of life. But learn what the law should have
been if the kings tenant had dyed seized of a reuersion whereupon rent had
been reserved, his heir of full age, whether he should have the^ sued
liuerie fourthwith, or else to have tarried till the death of the particular
tenant for in the seuenthe year of king Henrye the sixte June thinks he
should tarry or else it might follow the king should have double lyuerie that
is to say one for the rent an other for the land, M. 7. H. 6. f. 3
but Paston is in contrary opinion, and resembles it to a reuersion dependyng
upon an estate tail with a rent reserved, howebeit at this day there is
election given unto the heir, that is to say either to sue his liuerie
immediately after the death of his au^cester in the life of these particular
tenaunts, or else to tarry until they die, and if he sue his lyuerie in their
life he paiethe for primer seisin but the moytie of one years profit, and if
after their death then he payethe the hole years profit, howebeit if there
be a rent reserved and he pursues his livery in the life of the particular
tenant, it seems besides ye half years profit of ye value of the land he
shall also pay ye hole years profit of the rent reserved, therefore learn what
common experience teaches us in that case. The words of the statut be, Qui
de eo tenent in capite. By these words he must hold of the king in chief,
for if he hold not of him in chief the king can have noe primer seisin. And
yet you shall see in the new Natura breuium folio. 296. that of lands in the
city of London holden of the king in burgage the king had primer seisin, and
the heir thereof sued his livery but that president semes to be against the
law, for Markham saiethe in 7. E. 4. yt in Neuels case it was found that ones
father died seized of certain land that he held of the king in Burgage, T.
7. E. 4. f. 9
and thereupon thexchetor did seize, which seiser by thaduise of all the
Justices was discharged by a Supersedeas awarded to thexchetor, for the words
of both the foresaid statutes be very plain therein, that is to say that
he must hold of the king in capite, but whether he hold of the king by
knights service or by Socage in capite it makethe noe matter so that he hold
in capite, for the king in both cases shall have primer seisin although not
with so large a prerogative in the one case as in ye other. For in the first
case where the tenure is knights service in capite the king shall have the
same prerogative when the heir is of full age at the death of his au^cester
as he should have had if he had been within age, that is to say primer
seisin as well in the lands holden of others as of him self, be it that the
lands holden of other be holden by knights service or in Socage. But
otherwise yt is where the tenure is but a tenure by Socage in capite, for there
the king shall have noe primer seisin in lands holden of other, namelye if
theye be holden of other by knights service, as it appearethe plainlye by the
statute of Magna charta capit. 27. and in the new Natura breuium fo. 2^^. nor
yet any primier seisin of lands holden of himself in Socage in capite* If
the heir at the death of his auncester be not of the age of. 35. H. 6. f.
47. T. 45. E. 3. fo 1^.
14. years, as appearethe, 35 H. 6. and 45. Edward the third and also in the
new Natura breuium fol. 2^6. and fol. 2^^. But in every of these cases theye
to whom the body belongs shall have an Ouster le main of the lands vna cum
exitibus that is to say the lords of whom the land is so holde^ by knights
service in the one case, and the Prochein amy in the other case. But where the
lands be holden of the king in Socage in capite, and the heir of the age of
14. years at the death of his auncester, there the king shall have primier
seisin and the heir^ driven to sue lyuerie, for there is no person that can
make any title to the heir or his lands but only the king, and therefore
the king must have his primier seisin, and the heir driven to sue his liuerie
by express words of the foresaid statut of Marlebridge, and so it seems
also in that case yt his highness shall have primier seisin in lands holden of
other, so they be holden but in Socage, for the reason above remembered, Tamen
quere. The words of the statute be farther, de omnibus terris et tenementis
de quibus ipsi seisiti fuerunt in dominico suo vt de feodo. These words may
be conferred and coupled with the first chapter of this statute of
prerogative which has the very self same words. And therefore look in
what cases noted upon the first chapter the king has his prerogative by
reason of wardship, In all the same cases shall his highness have prerogative by
reason of primer seisin if the heir wear of full age at the death of his
auncester. Wherefore to reherce the^ here particularly it were but superfluous,
except it be in the case only of collusion given by the statute of
Marlebridge where the heir is within age, because it speaks nothing of the
heir that is of full age. And therefore in that case it seems the king cannot
have like benefyte of primier seisin as he has of wardeshippe, when the
heir is wythein age. Howebeeit there is a book in that point left at large
which is 17. E. 3. and 7. E. 3. and there the case was. M. 17. E. 3. f. 63. M.
7. E. 3. in Fits. ti. Relief. p. 11.
The tenaunte enfeffed his son and heir and dies before the feffee gave
notice thereof to the lord. Ideo quere. The words of the statut be farther,
Cuiuscunque etatis heredes ipsorum fuerint. To these words also shall the
first chapter of this estatute have relacion, for they plainly declare that
if the heir were within age at the death of his auncester, the king shall have
primer seisin and the heir driven to sue his lyuerie, notwithstanding also
the king have had the wardshippe of him. For the words be generally spoken
and may be extended as well where he was within age at the death of his
auncester, as where he was of full age. And so has it been ever used,
sauinge that where he has been in ward he payethe but one half years
profit for primer seisin, and in the other case he payethe the hole. The
words of the statute be farther, capiendo omnes exitus eorundem terrarum and
tenementorum, donec facta fuerit inquisitio pro ut moris est et ceperit
homagium hered'. By these words it may appear that the king after the
death of his tenaunte and before any office found, might seize the lands
and take the profits, which thing surely is true, as plainelye is proved by
the writ of Diem clausit extremum which has these words Cape in manum
nostram omnia terras and tenementa etc. donec aliud inde perceperimus and per
sacrum proborum hominum diligenter inquiras etc. So the seiser goethe before
the inquisition, howebeit since the statut made at Lincoln Anno. 29. E. 1
called statutu^ de Escaetoribus it is not used to seize till office be found,
and then the king to be answered of all the profits since his tenaunts
decease, which commethe all to one effect. And that statute does not
restrain the seiser, but that thercheator may seize at this day without
office. By the aforesaid statute of Marlebridge cap. 16. it is expounded and
playnelye set forth of what lands and fees the king shall have primer
seisin, for these be the words. Et hoc intelligatur de terris and feodis que
ratione seruicij militaris, socagij, vel seria^ciae, sine iure patronatus, in
manibus domini regis esse co^sueuerunt. By these words it may appear that
he that is ward because of wardeshyppe shall sue lyuerye, or where one
holdethe of the kings ward by knights service or in Socage and dyethe his
heir of full age, the king shall have primer seisin of the lands, that are so
holden of his ward, and the said second heir driven to do his homage or
fealtye as the case shall require to the king, and also to pay his relief
unto him, and to sue lyuerye of the said lands as it appearethe he did in
the new Natura breuium fol. 294. and 295. For it is withein the compass of
these words, que ratione seruitij militaris. So is it if the king have a
Bishops temporalties in his hands during the time that See is vacant, and one
that holds of that temporalties by knights service or in Socage dyethe his
heir wythein age, in this case, after that the king has had the
wardeshippe, the heir at his full age shall pay primer seisin and sue his
liuerye. And so shall he do if he be of full age at the time of the death of
his auncester, for the words of the statute be, De feodis quae iure
patronatus in manibus domini regis esse consueuer', and therwithe agreethe the
new Natura breuium folio. 286. Butte learn if the kings tenant in chief dye,
his heir of full age and one that holdethe of the heir before he has sued
his lyuerie dyethe, his heir also being of full age, whether in this case
the king shall have primer seisin of the lands of the second heir or not,
as he should have had if the heir of his tenaunte had been wythein age,
and in the kings ward at the time when this second heir did fall, and it
seemethe to me he shall, for the reason made before. Thanne last of all
whether this prerogative extend to any statute made since the time of king
Ed. 2. and it seems it does, and that for the reason noted in ye first
chapter, as the feffees of Cestuy que use, before the statut made in ye.27.
year of king H. 8. used to sue an Ouster le mayn sine exitibus, which was in
nature of a lyuere for ye heir of cestuy que use which had been inward. Item
for as much as there be exceptions in the first chapter and none in this,
whether theye also be comprised within this chapter or not: and me seems
theye be, because these.ii. chapiters must concur together and agree in
every thing. And if the heir be within age at the death of his auncester,
the Archebyshoppe of Caunterburye shall have an Ouster le mayn vna cum
exitibus, so that the heir shall not sue lyuere of that, and then by the same
reason if he be of full age at time of the death of his auncester, for the
lyuere in the one case and the other is given by this chapter as me semethe, Tamen
quere.

The fowerth chapter.
ITem assignabit viduis post mortem virorum suorum qui de eo tenuerint in
capite dotem suam quae eas contingit etc. licet heredes fuerint plenae etatis
si viduae ille voluerint, and viduae illae ante assignationem dotis suae
predictae sieve heredes plenae etatis fuerint sieve infra etatem iurabunt qd' se
non maritabunt sine licencia regis. Et si se maritauerint sine licentia regis
tunc rex capiet in manum suam nomine districtionis omnes terras et tenementa
quae de eo tenentur in dotem donec satisfecerint ad voluntatem suam ita qd'
ipsa mulier nihil capiet de exit' etc. quia per huiusmodi districtiones
huiusmodi mulieres seu viri eorum finem faciant regi ad voluntatem suam, et
illa voluntas tempore regis H. patris regis E. estimari consueuit ad valenc.
predictae dotis per vnum annu^ ad plus nisi vberiorem gratiam habuerint.
Mulieres quae de rege tenent in capite aliqua^ hereditate^ iurabunt similiter
cuiuscunque fuerint etatis quod se non maritabunt sine licentia regis, et si
fecerint terre et tenementa ipsar^m eodem modo capia^tur in manu^ domini regis
quousque satisfecerint ad voluntatem regis.

This statute likewise does but confirm the common law before as it appears
by ye statut of Magna carta ca. 7. which was first made in the time of king H.
the third, which is, qd' nulla vidua distri^gatur ad se marita^du^, ita tame^,
qd' securitate^ faciet qd' se no^ maritabit sine asse^su nostro, si de nobis
tenuerint. And also in the 24. year of the said king henry ye third, it is
said, that when the kings tenant dies and his wife endowed, she cannot marie
without the kings license, and if she do, she and her husband shall make
fine. Thexposicio^. It should apere by the words yt the wiefes of al them that
hold in Capite can not have dower at any man's hands but only the kings if
his grace will, for in yt his grace has a prerogative above al common persons
as well for yt she shall the r^bie hold of his highness in chief as for that she
shall not marie with out license: for so she might be married unto the kings
enemy, and there bie ye strength of ye crown enfebled. Therefore it is
provided that his highness may assign the dower whether the heir be of full age
or within age, to thentent that she before ye receuing thereof shall take a
corporal oath not to marie without the kings lice^se. The manner of the
assignement whether the heir be of full age or within age is very well set
forth in the new Natura breuiu^ fo. 2^^. in the writ de dote assignanda.
Howbeit for yt so^e things are there noted which seem to repunge with our book
cases, I purpose to confer the one with the other and se how they can agree. In
the said Natura breuiu^ it apereth that not withstanding the king had committed
the land over to an other, yet the woman sued in the Cha^cere to the king for
her dower and not to ye co^mittee, and in our books you shall se many writs
brought against ye comittee, yea and in some of them that she recovered her
dower and the king not made party to the same, as the book is in 4. H. 7.
where the writ of Dower was brought against ye kings co^mittee, H. 4. h. 7.
fitz ti. Eyde de Roy. P. 33.
who pleded in bar without praiyng in eid of the king, and the bar was
found against him, and notwithstanding that it did apere unto the Justices that
the king might be touched thereby, yet would they not surcesse, but awarded that
the demandant should recover* and took for their cause the statute of Bigamis
the third chapter which says in this manner. De dotibus mulierum vbi aliqui
custodes hereditatis maritorum suorum custodias habent ex dono vel concessione
regis, Sieve custodes rem petitam teneant Sieve heredes dictorum tenementoru^
vocentur ad vvarrantu^ si excipiant quod sine rege respondere non possint, no^
ideo Supersedeatur quin in loquela predicta prout iustum fuerit procedatur.
This Natura breuium and this book of.4. H. 7. seem not to agree. For where takes
she any oath where she recouers by a writ of dower in the common place? which
oath she must needs have taken if she had sued in the chauncerie, or how may
the committee endowe her, when percase he will endowe her of more then she
ought to have or endowe her where she is not dowable by the law? whereunto one
may answer in this wise, that his wrongful endowment shall not conclude the
king, but ye his grace may refourme the thing when he will, and sins he has
committed all his interest over Durante minore etate, his grace may permit
thendowment made by the comittee if it be rightfullie made to stand: and
specially because of the statute of Bigamis which alowes it so to be. And
notwithstanding she take no oath, yet can she not marie without the kings
license, for this endowme^t by ye comittee is the kings endowment upon the
matter, for ye that she holds in right of the king which continues still
garden notwtstanding any such comissio^ or grant made of the wardship. Therefore
yt should seem ye after the ward committed over (as is aforsaid) it is at the
eleccio^ of the woman whether she will sue to the king in the chaunceri or at
the common law against the comittee: But if the king do but commit the ward over
Durante been placito otherwise it is, for there she must sue only to the
king, as apereth. 8. E. 2. Fitz Tit. Dovver. P 169.
And note well that this statute of Bigamis before recited will also that if
the heir of ye husband be vouched to warrantie being in the custody of those
committees yt the Justices shall not surcesse no more then when the writ of
dower is brought against the comittee. Contrary to this branch of ye said
statut are there diverse books, as 18. E. 3. and 8. E. 3. and. 19. E. 3. where
the said comittee came in, 18. E. 3. fo. 38. H. 8. E. 3. in Fitz ti. Voucher.
P. 154. H. 19. E. 3. in Fitz Tit. Aid de Roy. 64.
the heir being vouched in their ward and showed how they held of the kings
lease and praid in aid of the king and had it: whereat I do not a little meruel
because of this statute of Bigamis which was never spoken of ne yet remembered
in these books, their judgments as it should seem being directly against
this statute. Howbeit ye manner of the lease does not there certenlye apere, yt
is to say, whether ye wardship were granted Durante been placito or Durante
minore etate, for yt would make a difference as I have said before. Also the
book is. 39. 39. E. 3. fo. 10
E 3. where in a writ of Dovver brought against ye comittee there was aid
granted of ye king, but yt semes to be out of ye compass of ye statute of
Bigamis which spekes only of the^ ye have it of ye kings grant, and so has
not the second Comittee, therefore learn what ye law will in these cases. But if
ye wardship be committed to ye wife without any exception or forprise of her
dower, she by yt is concluded to claim any dower during ye said wardship, as
it may apere M. 2. H. 4* in ye said new Natura breuium. fo, 2^^. It is also
said yt where liuerie is made to ye heier before the woman sue for her dower in
the cha^cerie, and in the said liuerie there is no saving made for her dower,
yt the^ she must pursue her writ of Dovver against the heir: and the reason yt
there made is, because the king has made liuerie generally without any
reseruacion of Dower to be assigned by his highness: whereunto I answer, yt
when liuerie is sued before assigneme^t of dower, there is most como^lie in ye
writs of liuerie a sauinge made for her dower if it so be yt she were found the
kings tenantes wife in thoffice, and she being so found if the heyr sue a
general liuerye leuing out these words Salua dote or retenta dote etc. it is a
good cause for ye king to resese the hole, for ye liuerie is missued in that
case, and that I learned of justice Spilman which noted it so in.11. of H. 8.
but if she be not found wife in the office, the heir may sue his liuerie
without any such sauinge and to say ye the king by making such a liuerie
should waiue the advantage of his prerogatife in the dower: that semes not to
be true unless the said waiuer were by expres words, wherefore it semes the
heir in that case after liuerie is not bound to yield unto her dower, but her
only remedy is to sue for ye same to the king, and that must be first upon an
office (as I think) finding that she was his tenantes wife, Ideo quere, and
learn whether she may have dower in any case either in the chancerie or by
writ of Dower at the comen law against the co^mittee or the heir, unless she
be found wife first by office as is aforesaid, except it be in cases where the
king will refuse this prerogatife. And note that like as the king has a
prerogatife by this statute to yield dower to the wife of his tenant, so has
his highness a prerogatife by the common law to withold dower from the wife of
his tenant, which no common person has. As put case in a write of Dower the
heir be vouched in the kings ward, and the tenant shows for his lien the
feffement with warranty of the husband which is father to him that is vouched,
yet that notwithstanding she shall recover her dower against the tenant and not
against the heir, because yt else the king should lose ye wardship of the lands
where the woman may (without her loss) as well recover her demand against the
tenant as she should against the king, and yet if the king were a common
person in that case he should lose the wardship of so much as she demaundethe.
26. E. 3. fol. 58* H. 8. E. 3. i^ Fits ti. Voucher P. 154.
And this book is.26. E. 3. where it is said that the kings comittee of the
wardship shall not have ye prerogatife, and therewt agrees. 8. E. 3. And note
yt like as ye king has prerogatife against the wife that brings the writ of
Dovver, so shall he have prerogatife against the tenant in the said writ of
Dovver: for notwithstanding that the tenant in ye self sa^e case have iudgeme^,
to recover over in value, against the heir which is in the kings ward, yet he
shall have no execucion of that recovery til the land be sued out of the kings
hands. Howbeit 27. E. 3. 27. E. 3. fo. 87
is contrary to the said book of 26. E. 3. ideo quere. And learn and enquire
whether a woman being thus endowed at the hands of the feffee of her husband of
such lands as he died not sesed of and whereof the king at that time can have no
wardship, whether she may marie or not without the kings license, and it semes
she can not for any words comprised within this statute. And it apereth in
the book of Assizes. 26. E. 3. 26. li. Ass. P. 57
that where a woman was endowed by gardein in chiualrye and afterward the
garden committed treson wherbie the seignorie was forfet to the king, that
after this forfeiture she should hold of the king and not of the heir which
was in the reuersion, in which case then she can not mary without license as me
thinks. The^ further, it is to be seen to what lands the statute does extend
unto and to what not. It extendes to lands holden in capite whereof any woman
claymeth dower, as may apere by the words of the sa^e statute and not to any
other lands, for if the king have in his custody bishops temporalties during
the time the Sea is vacant, and one that holds of those temporalties by
knights service dies his heir being within age, whereby the king has the
wardship of his heir and e^doweth his wife, in this case she shall make no oath
but may marie without lice^se. Like law is it where she is endowed of lands
that are holde^ of him that is the kings highness ward by reason of a tenure in
Capite, for in both these cases the land whereof dower is demanded are not
holde^ of the king in chief, and this does apere in the new Natura breuium
fo. 264. and yet in both those cases she is endowed in the chauncerie, but what
is that to the purpose? for so shall the heir in those cases sue liuerie of
those lands, and yet they be never the more for ye holden in chief, but only
used for a solempnity because they were in ye kings hands once by office, which
is matter of record. The words of the statute be further. Et si se
maritauerint sine licentia regis tunc rex capiet in manu^ sua^ nomine
districtionis o^nes terras et ten^ta quae de eo tene^t in dote^ etc. These
words be knit in a copulatife to ye former words contained wtin this chapter,
that is to say, where she has demanded dower and is sworn not to marie, but
if she will never demand dower of ye lands holden in Capite she may marie where
she will: for the words of the statute be quod assignabit viduis dotem, si
vidue illi voluerint, and so thinks Justice Fitzherbert in his Natura breuium
fo. 17^. How be it by the book in.40. 40. Li. Ass. in Fitz ti. guard 40. r.
libro. Ass. it apereth that the wife never demanded dower and yet had
alowance of it and did marie also without license and yet paid no fine, and
therefore the case was: The kings tenant in tail in chief made a feffement by
license and took estate again to him and to his wife and died, the wife takes
an other husband and dies, after whose death the ancient estate tail being
found by office, the license was holden void because the king was disc^ued
therein, and the second baron driven to answer for ye mean profets of ii.
parts of ye la^d but not for ye third part, because she was endowable. quod
nota. A woman tenant in dower of no man's assignement, and some there thought
she should forfet her dower because she was party to ye disceit. Howebeit this
case seems not to be properlye wtin ye co^pas of this statute. Also
Fitzherbert in the said Natura breuiu^ thinks that where the king has used to
grant to other ye marriage of his widows that a composicion with the grantee
made for the same (whether it be made by ye wife or the husband) is as good as
if it were made with the king, yet can not ye gra^tee in such case compel her
to marie, for ye should be contrary to ye statute of Magna carta cap. 7. which
will ye she shall not be constrained to mary by distres, but if she will she
may live sole. Howbeit at this day by the statute of.32. H. 8. cap. 46. the
composicion is given to the master of ye kings wards and liueries with iii. of
ye counsel of ye said court. And likewise authority is given to the^ where ye
kings widows mary the^ selves without license to tax a reasonable fine by their
discrecio^s acording to ye statute of prerog. regis which statute plainly
sets forth what has been used to be done in such cases, yt is to say, the
value of her dower by one year, and therwt agrees the new Natura breuiu^. fo
174. And for ye fine ye king shall sease all the lands and teneme^ts so holden
in dower as it aperes by ye letter of ye statute. How beit the Register gives
yt the king may sese as well the land of the husband as of the wife, because ye
marriage is a wrong done to the king but the statute is contrary to yt, and
therefore Fitzherbert in the said Natura breuiu^. fo. 1^^. thinks it to be no
law: For as well might the lands yt the woman has of her inheritance be the^
sesed, wherefore no other land ought to be sesid then yt she holds in dower,
as it aperes in ye said Natura breuium. fo. 2^^. And learn whether ye woman
obtaining dower at ye hands of the comittee or of the heir of lands holden in
capite without making any oath may marie or not without lice^se, and as me
seems she can not, for as soon as she is e^dowed of those lands she is ye
kings tenant and not tenant to ye heir which is in ye reuercio^: for if a
trespass be done upon the land, she shall have a writ out of the cha^cerie ye
one such has entered upon the kings possession and the auowrie to be made by
the king rests only upon her, and so is the opinion of vvood in.1. H. 7. And
yet the reuercio^ is in ye heier only, for if she do wast, 1. H. 7. fol, 3.
ye heier shall ponish her for it and not the king. The^ further, let us se of
what force this dower is when it is made in the cha^cery, and how she shall be
admesured in ye sa^e if it be to great, for if it be to little there is no
remedy for her but to stand to her own harms if she in ye cha^cerie once did
accept it, not forci^g whether she were the^ wtin age or of full age, as it may
apere in. 18. E. 3. 29.
18 E. 3. The dowment in the chauncerie is of this force, that whether it be by
right or by wrong it can not be defeted by way of plea without a suit made in
the chauncerie for the defeting thereof, 17. E. 3. f. 71. M. 31. E. 3 in Fitz.
ti. Dovver. P. 128.
as it apereth i^, ye.17. and.31. E. 3. And therefore in a very strong case one
does trauerse the office which is in the chancerie by reason the land is holden
of him by knights service and not of the king, and has an ouster le main vna
cu^ exitibus: yet if she were endowed before in the chancerie upon ye office,
her dower remains vndefeted notwtstanding this trauerse and ouster le main
until an other suit be made in the chauncerie for the defeting of the same.
Howbeit in this case if the dower be to much, the lord that tended the trauers
may have a writ of admesurement at the common law and so cause it to be
admesured without suing to the king for the sa^e. For it is no loss to his
highness though she be admesured, seeing the land is not holden of of him, as it
apereth. 7 R. 2. 7. R. 2. l Fitz ti. Admesur. P. 4.
and there it is agreed that the heir shall have a writ of admesurement of
assinement of dovver made by his auncestor, quere tamen. But the abatour shall
not have a writ of admesurement nor garden en fait of assinement made bye
garden endroit, nor if the heir within age, the garden of his heir shall not
have a writ of admesurement. But take the case to be that a woman is endowed in
the chancerie the rest of the land there remaininge still in the kings hands,
if it be surmised by the heir or any other for the king that ye land assined to
the wife is not extended to the very value, but that it is more in value then
it is extended for, now upon this surmise there shall be a new extente made,
which being returned in to the chancery a Scire facias shall be awarded against
the woman, and if she be warned and come not, or apere and say nothing she
shall be newly endowed, as it is said in Natura breuium fo. 265. Then let us see
farther at what time the woman may ask her dower in the chauncerie, and when
she is endowed and loses her dower upon a recovery had against her by an eigne
title how she shall be recompensed. If the husband have land in diverse counties
wherbie after his death there be awarde several writz of Diem clausit extremum
in to every of those counties she shall not be e^dowed until such time as all
ye said writs be returned again in to the chancerie, as it may apere in.16. E.
3. H. 16. E. 3. in Fitz ti. Liuere. P. 29
And note that when she is endowed in the chancerie and afterward loses by a
recovery upon an eigne title, then she has none other remedy but to cause
the record of the same recovery to be removed in to the chauncerie, and upon
the first record whereby yt apered she had dower and this other record of ye
recovery, she shall have a Scire facias reciti^g both the records against the
tenant of the ii. parts to resese the said ii. parts in to the kings hands
and to be newly endowed of the same, but not to recover any damages, not
withstanding damages were recovered against her, and this apereth 43. in the
book of assizes. 43. lib. ass. in Fitz ti. Dovver. P. 79.
Now to the last braunce of this statute, which is, that women that hold of the
king in chief any inheritance of what age so ever they be shall likewise swear
not to marie etc. By the order of the common law before the making of this
statute al women that were wtin age and in ward should when they came of full,
age be married by their lords every one of them with their porcions, and if
they were of full age at ye death of their ancestors, yet should they
nevertheless be in the lords keeping until their were married by the advice and
disposition of their lords. For as Gla^uille in his.7. book yt he wrote in the
time of king. H. 2. sayethe Nulla mulier here is terrae sine dn^orum
disposicione vel assensu maritare potest de iure vel consuetudine regni, and
therefore says he if a man have issue one or more daughters which be his
heirs aparente and marieth any of them without the assent of his lord, that be
therbye forfets his in heritance by the law and custom of the relme, so that
he shall never recover yt again but only through his lords mercy, and yt for
this cause: For when the husband of such a woman shall do his homage for ye
teneme^ts so holden by knights service it is requisite to have the lords will
and asse^t lest he be compelled to receue homage of his mortal enemy or some
other unable personage, nevertheless if ye tenant sue to his lord for license
to marie his daughter, the lord is bound to consent or else to show cause why
he should not, and if he will not, the woman may marie where she listes without
his assent. And the said Glanuill further says, that Tenant in dower can not
in likewise marie without the assent of him that is her warrant, that is to
say the heier: And if she do she shall lose her dower, and yet there ye
husband shall do no homage, but what then? he shall do fealty and for that
cause also she shall have license. And further says if she hold of diverse
lords it is sufficient for her to have the asse^t of ye chief lord. Also he
says that women being in ward Si de corporibus suis foris fecerint: which
words as I understand them be if they commit fornicacion and that be proved,
then they that offend shall be disherited, so that her portion then goes to the
other sisters yt have not in the like offended: And if they all offend, then
the lord shall have the inheritance by way of eschete. Howbeit says he where
they be ons married by ye lords assent and after beco^e widows they shall be no
more in ward, but yet if they marie again they must have his asse^t for ye
reason before made. But then after they have been once married, they shall not
forfet their inheritance for their inco^tinencie, so that it aperes plainly
here by Glanuill that this hole statute of prerog. should be but a confirmacion
of the common law. And that the law was so as Glanuill took yt, it may partly
apere by the said statute of Magna carta cap. 7. For the words are not only
quod vidua securitatem faciet quod se non maritabit sine assensu nostro si de
nobis tenuerit, Bracton libro 1, de custodia sockmanorum
but are also vel sine assensu domini sui si de alio tenuerit And Bracton
agrees also with Glanuille. Howbeit he says where a woman in the life of her
ancestors mary's without the asse^t of the lord or where the widow mary's
without the assee^t of her warrant, that the inheritance or the dower shall not
now be forfeted, although in old time yet was. And farther says that the
heier in socage being a woman shall be married by the lord like as she should be
if she wear heier of lands holden by knights seruise. And farther says that
the heier male shall be married by the lord more the^ once, that is to say, as
often as he shall come unmarried in the time that he is under the age of xxi.
years. But now by the statut of w. 2. cap. 22. the lords are abreged of their
power in these marriages of the heirs females, for if they now be within the
age of xiiii. years at the death of their auncestor and the lord does not marie
them before they come to xvi. years, then shall they recover their heritage
without any thing given either for the ward or for ye marriage. And if their
maliciously or thorough euel counsel refuse to marie where their lords do
apoint them without disparagement, then shall their lord hold their land until
they come to the age of xxi. years and longer until they have taken the value
of the marriage. Out of this statute (if it be well considered) a man may gather
that the common law was no less then is here recited. And this statute was
made about the.3. year of king, E. the 1. a litl^ before that Britton began to
writ his book: for Britton f. 169. says yt the marriages should be offered to
the heirs females before they acco^plishe the age of xiiii. years, and if not
the lord shall lose his right in the said marriages. I suppose that the
printer mistoke the number of the years and should have printed sixteen where
it is but forteene, and therefore it is good too see other copiees for this
matter. And Britton. also says that if he or she have been once married by
the lord or in the lyefe of their father or once agreed with their lord for
their marriage, they shall never again be married by him, but may marie them
selves where they list, so that they hold nothing of the king. And fo. 168. he
says yt the king shall have the marriage of all the heirs females where they
hold of the king of what age so ever they be as often as they shall be to marie,
so that they can not marry without the kings license. Thus is the last clause
of this chapter expressly proved by Britton that ye common law did still remain
as it was for the marriage of the heirs females in the kings case and not
altered or abreged by the said estatute of. west: primer, and therefore was ye
statut in ye 39. year of king H. 6. the last chapter made in this wise. Item de
auisame^to, assensu et aucthoritate pred. ordinatu^ est and stabilitu^ quoth
mulieres existentes etatis. 14. annoru^ tempore mortis antecessoru^ suoru^
absque questione seu difficultate habeant liberacione^ terraru^ et ten^torum
suorum sibi descensorum quia sic lex istius terrae vult quod tunc ipsi
haberent. How beit this statute prouides not where they be within the age of.14.
years at the death of their auncester, ideo quere. For as our late books go sins
Brittons time the king has lost his prerogatife, upon what occasion I know
not, but I would gladly learn, 35. H. 6. 46.
for Fortescue says. 35. H. 6. that when the heir female sues her liuerie she
takes no oath that she shall not marie as the kings widow does, and therefore
says he it should seem she should make no fine if she marie without lice^se.
Howbeit Littelton says that if the heir female be of the age of 15. years at
ye death of her a^cestor and marie her self without license, that she shall make
a fine, for it amou^teth to an alienacio^. For after issue had the husband is
become the kings tenant and he solie shall do homage in his own name. And
yet afterward in ye 15. year of E. 4. ye same Littelton says yt ye latter
clause of ye same statute is void, for the daughter which is inward mariynge
her self to an other without license shall not make a fine to ye king. Thus by the
argument of the said book of.35. H. 6. it aperes that they take the king to be
bound by the said statut of.w. 1. and make him no better then a common person,
whereat I have no little meruel sins he is not named in the said statute. For in
the said book it is agreed by ye court that if the king after the age of 14.
years and before 16. do marie the heir female she shall have liuerie forthwith
upon the marriage, H. 35. H. 6. in Fitz ti, Guard. P. 71.
although she then be not of the age of xvi. years because that she was of
full age before as it is there said, that is to say, as soon as she was. 14.
And yt ii. years over is but only given for the marriage, which when it is once
had and the.14. years past the king or lord lose their interest. And so it
was granted that if she were married before the age of.14. and after her husband
dies before the said age when she comes to the said age of.14. she shall have
livery. And there it was also said yt these ii. years were given to the lord to
tender her marriage in, for the tender before was void, because it was wtin ye
age of 14. years. But note yt if the heir female being under the age of 14.
years falls in to the kings hands as ward because of certain lands that her
father held of the king in chief, and by reason thereof the king has also the
lands inward which are holden of other in socage, in this case when she comes
to the age of 14. years and is unmarried she shall not have livery of these
lands holden in socage, and yet by reason of them the king has not the marriage
of her. But what then? she cannot sue her liuerie by parcels, and that is the
cause that the hole land shall tarry in the kings hands til a hole liuerie may be
sued of them all, and this aperes in the new Natura breuium fo. 256. And last
of all note yt this latter clause extends not to women that claim by purchase
but only by disce^t. And therefore it aperes.15. E. 3. 15. E. 3. i^ Fitz ti.
Liuere. P. 31.
that where it was found upon the Diem clausit yt the wife was jointly infeffed
with her husband she had an ouster le main without findinge any suertie of her
marriage. And note also that by the common law if one will mary the kings nief,
33. li. ass. in Fitz ti. Trauers. P. 36.
that is to say, his bondwoma^ without license he shall pay a fine unto the
king, as aperes in 33. E. 3. li. Assisarum.

The fifth chapter.
ET si vna hereditas quae de Rege tenetur in capite desce^dat pluribus
participibus tunc omnes illi heredes facient homagium Regi et illa hereditas
quae de Rege tenetur participabitur inter heredes illos ita quod quil'z eorum
extunc partem suam tenebit de Rege.

This statute is somewhat declared by a statute long time made before, that is
to say in the 14. year of king H. the.3. called statutum Hibernie de
coheredibus which for the better declaracion of this prerogative I have also
here noted. He^ricus dei gratia rex Anglie dominus Hiberniae et dux Aquitaniae
et Normann^, comes Andigauie dilecto et fideli suo Gerardo filio Maurisci
Iusticiar' Hibernie salute^. Cum milites de partibus Hiberniae nuper ad nos
accedentes nobis ostenderunt quod cum hereditas deuoluta sit inter sorores in
terra nostra Hibernie Iustic' nostri in eisdem partibus itinerant' incerti
sunt, vtrum post natae sorores tenere debeant de primogenita sorore et ei
facere homagiu^ an non. Et quia predicti milites petieru^t certiorari qualiter
i^ regno nostro' Anglie i^ casu consimili hactenus vsitatum fuit: sic ad
instantiam eorunde^ vobis significamus, quod in regno nostro Anglie talis est
lex et consuetudo in hoc casu, quod si quis tenuerit de nobis in capite et
habuerit filias heredes, ipso patre defuncto a^tecessores nostri habueru^t, et
nos semper habuimus et cepimus homagium de omnibus huiusmodi filiabus, et
singule earum tenerent de nobis in capite in hoc casu. Et si infra etatem
fuerint, nos habebimus custodiam earum et maritagium singularum. Si autem de
alio domino tenuerint et ipsae sorores infra etatem fuerint, earum dominus
habeat custodiam et maritagium singularum, et primogenita tamen faciet homagium
domino pro se et omnibus sororibus suis, et alie sorores cum ad etatem
peruenerint facient seruicia dominis feodi per manus primogenitae. Nec potest
primogenita ea ratione vel occasion, a postnatis sororibus homagium vel
custodiam vel aliquam aliam subiectione^ exigere, vel habere. Quia cum omnes
sorores sint quasi vnus here is de vna hereditate, si primo genita posset habere
homagium aliarum sororum vel custodiam petere, tunc esset illa hereditas
diuisa, ita quod primogenita soror esset simul et semel de vna hereditate
domina et here is. Here Is aute^ suae partis, et domina sororum suarum, quod quidem
in isto casu fieri non possit, cum ipsa primogenita nihil posset petere plus
quam aliae sorores, nisi capitale mesuagium ratione eineciae. Preterea si
primogenita huiusmodi homagium a post natis sororibus suis acciperet, esset
quasi domina earum, et habere posset custodiam earum et filiorum suorum, et hoc
esset quasi committere agnu^ lupo ad deuorandum. Et ideo vobis mandamus quod
predictas consuetudines quas in regno nostro Anglie habemus in hoc casu vt
predictum est, in terra nostra Hiberniae proclamari ac firmiter teneri facias
et obseruari. In cuius rei etc. Test me ipso apud west. ix. die. Februarii.
Anno regni nostri. xiiii. Gla^uil li. 7.


Before the making of this statute called statutum Hibernie it appears by
Glanuill which wrott in ye time of king Henry the second that the husband of
the eldest daughter should do homage unto the Lord for the hole inheritance,
and that the other daughters or their husbands should do their service for
their teneme^ts unto ye chief lord by ye hands of theldest sister or her
husband, and yet they for ye same should not be bound to do any homage or
fealti to the eldest sister or her husband duringe their lives, ne yet yt
heirs that come of them in the first degree or second degree. But the heirs in
ye third degree by the law of the Land were bound to do homage and to pay
relief for their tenements unto the heir of the eldest daughter Quod nota.
And the reason of it after the mind of Bracton which agrees with Glanuille is
this, that when issue descends of them to the 3. or.4. degree it is not like
that issue should fail of their bodies, Bract' li. de hom^ capie^d.
and then may the heirs of theldest daughter take homage very well, for it is
unlikely that the eldest daughter or her heirs should then have the same by
descent, for these be his words, Quia cum sint heredes tres de herede in
herede^ extunc vix poterin: deficere, et ideo tunc sequitur homagium
absqueda^pno et periculo donatoris. For if therwere likelyhode of the descent,
in this case ye taking of homage should be rather hurtful then beneficial:
For by the ancient Laws if one had infeffed an other to hold of him and had
taken his homage, he could never be his heir afterward, but the next under ye
feoffor and his heirs of ye kindred should rather have it. As put case before
the statute of Quia emptores the eldest son had enfeoffed the middelmost to
hold of him and had taken his homage, the middlemost dies without issue, ye
youngest should have had the land and not the eldest because of the homage yt he
took: howbeit if there were no younger son ne any other heir, then the
feoffor might claim the Land again by eschete and not otherwise: for as long
as there were any, the feoffor or his heirs of whom the Lands were so holden
might not have it. And that Bracton shows also in his first book in the title
de maritagii^s reuersis ad donatore^ pro defectu heredis. For he has this text
or sainge there, quod homagium expellit dominicum et retinebit seruicium and
quod non potest quis esse dominus et here is: so that you may now perceive that
this statute of Irelande agrees with Glanuill, saving that Glanuill dilateth
or declares the common law farther then this statute does. Also Bracton says
further in his title of Homage that if the eldest daughter in this case will
prevent the time and take homage before she needs, she by that leseth the
benefit of the descent, and says that the reason why the ser^yce ought to be
done by the eldest for them all is, because ye lord shall not be driven to take
his service by parcel mele, and further says that although the eldest may not
have homage of her sisters forthwith but must tarry a time, yet shall they out
of hand do fealty unto her, and all the other services that are to be done,
and the eldest shall do them over, which is contrary to Glanuill, for he says
the other sisters shall do neither homage nor fealty. Howbeit Britton fol.
175. agrees with Bracton, and there sets forth the manner of the fealty by
the younger sisters to be done to the elder, and says that it is at the
eleccion of the lord whether he will take homage and the other services by the
hands of the eldest only for the^ all, or else of every sister severally for
her service, for if he might not so do, the lord in process of time might
happelye lose the wardship of the heirs of the other sisters, because of the
words in the write of Ward, which are, that the ancestors dyed in his
homage, and that would be hard to try when the homage was ever done unto him
only by the eldest sister. And Bracton in his said title of Homage says, Cum
quelibet soror de facto acapitauerit dn^o capitali, hoc reuocari non poterit a
primogen^ vel eius marito, sed semper qd' factum est tenebit, quia capitalis
dn^s quod ei oblat' est non recusabit, sed sieve tenuerint de dn^o Rege sieve de
alio cu^ homagium factum fuerit sieve ante tercium hered' sieve post, statim
sequentur releuiu^ et alia seruic^ and a little before that says, si plures
sorores de dn^o rege tenuerint in capite tu^c pri mogenit' missa omnes
acapitabunt et homagium facie^t dn^o Regi, and therewith agrees Britton. fo.
171. And yet fo. 198. says that theldest only shall do homage unto the king
for her self and her sisters. Thus have you now thexposition of ye said statut
of Ireland by the old writers, by which said statute and the said writers yt
appears that this statut of Prerogative is but a confirmacion of the common
law, and does only set forth and declare what the kings Prerogative is when
lands holden in chief descend to twoe coparceners. For in this the king has
a Prerogative above a common person, as well for that they shall seuerallye hold
of his highness, as for that that his highness shall make the particion, for
whether they be of full age at the death of their auncestour or within age, or
some of them of full age and some of them within age, none of them that be of
full age shall have any liuerie but with a particion, and that for the kings
benefit: because that upon the particion every one of the^ shall have for his
portion some part of the lands that are holden of the king in Capite. For if
some should have for their portion only the lands holden of ^ther, then the
king should lose his prerogative in those lands hereafter for ever, because
yt they that have them when they shall dye hold nothing of ye king in capite:
and so might the king be deminished of his ancient rights of the Crown, which
were against all natural equity.

Wherefore the law was ever they should all hold of the king. And that
appears by the writs of Liuerie, in which writes there is a prouiso that
every one of them shall have in her purparte parcel of the lands that are
holden of the king in Capite, as you may see in the new Natura breuium fo. 2^^.
And this livery must be sued with a particion or else it is missued, H. 16. E.
3. in Fitz. t. Liueri P. 29.
and it cannot be sued forth until such time as all the writes of Diem clausit
extremu^ are come into ye Chau^cerie and returned, as appears. 16. E. 3. And
then if all the coperceners be found of full age, then a write shall go out of
the Chauncery to the Sheriff to extend the lands, and after the extent
returned, a write shall go to therchetour to make particion and liuerie
according to thextent thereof made, as appears in the new Natura breuium fo.
262. But if one of the coperceners be within age and in the kings ward, then
the particion may be made in the Chauncery and then to have a write of Liuerie
to thexchetour of her part, or else it may be wholly done in the Country by
thexchetour like as they had been both of full age, that is to say, she of
full age being there present in her own person, and she that is within age
only by Prochein amye, as it appears in the said new Natura breuium. fo.
26^. Which write shall be returned with the particion and afterward enrolled
in the Chauncerie. And it should seem that if after the write of extent
returned she that is of full age do pray a write of liuerie with a particion,
that she shall then never after have a reextent if so be that before it were so
highlye extended.

Like law is it if the particion be not egal, and she notwithstanding will
accept it. But in all those cases she that was within age if she have to little
for her portion, she may have a write of participatione facienda against her
other copercener or a Scire facias in the Chauncerie upon the record of
Particion that is there, to show why new particion or extent shall not be
made. By which write if they be warned and come not, or come and say nothing,
the land shall be received into the kings hands, and a new extent made in the
presence of the parties, which if it be not extended as it should be, they
may pray a reextent before particion made: for after particion the prayer
comes to late. And this may ye see in the new Natura breuium. fo. 65. and
in.2. E. 3. et. 2. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Liu^e P. 8. and 13. E. 1. eodem ti. p. 6.
13 E. 1. but learn whether she may defete the particion by enter without suyng
any such writes or no, because the other are in by matter of record, ye is to
say, by liuerie, whereunto she is also after a manner party. So is it not like ye
case of a stranger, for a stranger that has eigne title may enter upon them
after Liuerie notwithstanding they have the possession by matter of record. a
7. E. 3. f. 36.
And it is said by Hill. 17. E. 3. that aduowson assigned in Purpartie may be
defeated by puttinge debate upon the presentment without any other Process:

And note that sometimes the king is to take a detriment by the liuere with ye
particion: As take the case to be where some of them be within age and in the
kings ward and some of full age and their auncestour dies seized not only of
Lands holden in chief but also of Lands holden of other Lords, they of full
age have liuerie with a particion, now the king leeses the wardwip of as much
of the lands that are holden of other as they have Liuerie of, and yet if no
particion had been made the king should have had the Wardshippe of the whole
til the heir had come of full age, as Mombray affirms. M. 21. E. 3. 32
21. E. 3. And note also that of things entier the king shall have by nonage
of one of them the whole, and the other that be of full age get no part of
it ne yet liuerie thereof ne particion: as take the case to be this: A manner
holden of the king in chief whereunto aduouson is appendaunt descend unto three
coparceners, and one of them is within age and in the Kings ward, the other
two that be of full age may sue their liuerie for the land with a particion,
but not for the aduowson: For that shall whollye remain to the king duringe
the minority of her that is in ward. 38. H. 6. f. 10. and M. 21. E. 3 fo. 34.
And this appears. 38. H. 6. et. 21. E. ^.

And note that if upon particion made thexchetour retourneth that some have
their parts delivered them and some not, because they sued not to him for it,
they that did not sue, may at all times in the Chauncerie sue out a writ
unto Thexchetour to have the same delivered unto them, in which write there
shall be enclosed a transcripte of the Particion, as it appears in the said
new Natura breuiu^ fol. 2^^ and there it appears also fol. 293. that liuerye
with a particion was sued for lands holden in Burgage: but by likelyhode it
was no commen burgage: for as it appears the heir did his homage for the
said lands. And note also that if the Coparcener of full age take the part
of her sister which is in the kings Ward by lease or grant of the king
Durante minore etate, by this she suspendes the particion: For notwithstanding
she have the one moitie delivered her with the profits of the other moitie,
yet when her sister comes to full age, both they shall sue a new lyuerie with
a particion, as appears in the said new Natura breuium. fol. 2^2.

The sixth chapter.
SImulier ante mortem antecessoris sui qui de rege tenet in capite ante annos
nubiles maritat' fuerit tunc rex habebit custodiam corporis illius mulieris
vsque ad etatem quod consentire poterit. Et tunc elegat ipsa vtrum maluerit
habere virum illum cui premaritat' fuerit vel alium quem Rex ei obtulerit.
nullus qui de Rege tenet in Capite per seruicium militare potest alienare
maiorem partem terrarum suarum ita quod residuum non sufficiat ad faciendu^
seruicium suum, fine licencia Regis, sed hoc non consueuit intelligi de membris
et particulis earundem terrarum.

This Chapter contains twoe matters being diverse in nature, and therefore I
entend to sever and deuyde the one from the other, and the Chapter followinge
to adioyne to the latter branch hereof, because they entrete both of one
thing.

The seventh chapter.
DE Serieantiis alienatis sine licentia regis consueuit rex arentare huiusmodi
Seri^antias per rationabile^ extentam inde faciendam.

13. H. 3. in Fitz. ti. Guard p. 147.
This statute is but a confirmacion of the common law. For it is written in
the.13 year of king H. 3. in this wise. Thomas summonitus est ad respondendum
regi quare abduxit Helenam filiam et heredem E. etc. T. dicit quod ipse per
assensum E. in vita ipsius E. desponsauit predictam Helenam in facie ecclesie
etc. et quia predicta Helena est infra etatem et cu^ ad etatem peruenerit
potest co^sentire matrimonio vel dissentire, ideo remanet predicta Helena in
custodia dn^i Regis vsque ad etatem vt consentiat vel dissentiat etc. Here it
is not set forth nor expressed what is thage in a woman to consent to
matrimony, and that is all that is to be sought upon this statute: for Bracton
in his first book in the latter end of a chapter which has this paragrafe.s.
De minoribus qui debent esse sub tutela et Cura dn^orum vel parentum says quod
femina septimo anno etatis sue potest consentire matrimonio, et virum sustinere
anno duodecimo, for he says, quod femina maius est capax doli qua masculus,
et quod maturiora sunt vota mulieris quam viri: So that by him it appears
that a Woman may consent to matrimony after she is.vii. years of age. And so
I judge the law was at that time taken. For it appears in the time of king
E. 1. that a man that held by knights service married his heir apparent being
under age and died, 13. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Guard p. 138
the lord claimed the wardship of the body, and an issue was tended against
him, that at the time of the said marriage the infant was of thage of seven
years, and this issue was received by the Court for a good issue to bar the
lord of the wardship of the body, qd' nota, Howbeit it apperes not by the said
book whether the heir were male or female. and Wangford says An. 35. H. 6.
fol. 37. that when a woman is.vii. years of age her auncestour may then gather
aid to marie her, which saying argues as me seems that she is then
mariageable. And also this seems to make with Bracton, Howbeit the law is not
so taken in these days. For she cannot now consent to matrimony before thage
of.12. years. This statut spekes only of the heir female, and yet Cheiny
says in.7. H. 6. M. 7. H. 6. ^^ 30. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Guard p. 156. and 128
that ye heir male shall be taken wtin the compass of this statute by an equity,
because the statute is beneficial: And so it should appear.30. E. 1. where the
son was married in ye life of his ancestour then being no more then of chage
of.v. years, and when the child came to ^hage of xii. years thancestour died
and the court adjudged in this case yt the lord should have the wardship of the
body, to thentent that if the enfant hereafter ere he pass thage of.14. years
disagree to the first marriage, the lord may have the marriage of him: And so it
may appear by this book that this statut is but a confirmacion of the common
law, for every lord shall have like advantage in this case as the king shall
have, and therewith agrees Paston. 7. H. M. 7. H. 6. 11
6. adding farther to this that by the order of the common law before this
statut of Prerogative, if ye heir would have stand to ye first marriage when he
or she came to ye years of conset, they should have paid ye double value: and
by this statut they pay nothing, and therefore the case was there: The kings
tenant in chief having a son and heir of ^hage of.14. years does mary him and
dies, the king offers the child marriage at the age of.14. years, which he
refuses, and holds him self to the first marriage, and adjudged yt then fant
might so do and that for the same he should never pay the double value ne
single of his marriage, and there Babthorp says that if ye woman had died the
heir being within the age of consent, the king should have had the
marriage of the child, notwithstanding that he was once married in the life of
his auncestour, for yt was no marriage, but at pleasure: and therewith agrees
Britton fo. 169. Yea although the wife had died after the years of consent and
before the child had come to thage of xxi. years, quere of this matter for I
am informed that the law is not taken at this day as the said book is in.7.
H. 6.

Now to the other branch of the Statute and the chapter next following the same.
It appears by Glanuill in the beginning of his seventh book, that every
freeman having land whether he had an heir apparent then living or not, or
whether the said heir apparent would consent to it or not, yet might he give
some reasonable portion of his lands with his daughter or any other woman in
marriage, or to any man that had don him service, or in alms to any religious
house, or to any other whom he would, so the said gift were made in his
health, for in extremity of sickness he might not be suffered so to do, lest
it should be thought to be done rather of a rage and fury of the mind, which
through sickness for the most part comes to men, then of any good
discrecion, and so might he in his gift excede measure. Howbeit such a gift
in sickness was ever good with the consent of the heir or with his
confirmacion. Again if he had many sons, he could not without ye consent of
his heir apparent give any portion of his enheritance to any of the younger
sons, for so might he disherit theldest thorough affeccio^ yt the fathers
lightly bear toward their younger son more then toward thelder. But of
his purchased land he might give the younger a portion whether theldest would
or not. And if he had none issue he might geeue away all his purchased lands.
But of the lands of his inheritance he might give away no more but a
reasonable portion. And if the lands were departible amongst the heirs
males, then might the father in his life time geeue every child what portion
he would, so it exceded not the portion yt should descend unto him. And in
that case whether the gift were of lands purthased or of inheritance it made
no matter. Howbeit neither Abbot nor Bishop might i^ any of these cases give
any portion of their lands away, without the kings assent or his
confirmacion, because their baronies be of the alms of the king or of his
progenitors. Hitherto have ye heard what Glanuill has said. After this was
the Statute of Magna carta made, where in the.31. chapter thereof it is written,
Nullus liber homo det de cetero amplius de terra sua vel vendat de cetero, quam
vt de residuo terre sue possit sufficienter fieri dn^o feodi seruiciu^ ei
debitu^ quod pertinet ad feodu^ illud. Which statute is but a confirmacion of
the common law, as it does appear by that that is written in Glanuil. for so one
yt had held by knight service if he might have been suffered to alien ye
greatest part of his land he would have aliened the same peradventure to hold
of him but in Socage or by some small rent, and than having so little a
liuelyhod left to himself, how had he been then able to have done the service
of a knight or a man of war, or what should his lord have had in ward to have
found one to have done that service, surely little or nothing. Whereby the
strength of ye Realm might have much decayed: therefore it was a reasonable law
to restrain him as me seems. Howbeit Bracton in his first book under the
title, Si ille cui datu^ est rem datam vlterius alteri dare possit disputes
this matter after a sort, that is to say, whether ye tenant may enfeffe an
other against the lords will or not, and he there affirms he may, yea and that
to hold of him by what service he will, and calls it Damnu^ absque iniuria,
seeing that though ye wardship be not so good after alienacion to the chief lord
as it was before, yet the relief is as good in every point, and then if the
lord be served either of the wardship or relief, he has all that knights
service requires. Howbeit says he when the tenant is so disposed to sell his
land, the lord shall be preferred to the sale thereof before a stranger giving
as much as an other will. It seems by Bracton that it was very doubtful
notwithstanding the statut of Magna carta whither the kings tenant might alien
his whole tenancy or not. And therefore was ye statute of Quia emptores terr'
made, where it is provided that from thenceforth which is in the.18. year of
king E. the first and after Bractons time, it should be lawful for every fre
man to sell his lands or tenementes or any part thereof at his pleasure to
hold of the chief lord by the same service yt the feffour held. Provided
always that by any such sales there comes no lands to Mortmaine. This
statut remedies the mischief that was found in the wardship, but not the other
mischief that is to say touching the defense of the realm. For when one man's
lyuinge is so dismembered never a one of them is able to do the service of a
man for want of lyueho^e. Yea and much more vnabler since this Statute, then
before. For before where he gave it to hold of himself, he reserved somewhat in
place of the land that went from him, where as now he can reserve nothing of
comen right, Howbeit notwithstanding yt this statute of Quia emptores terraru^,
made it lawful for all other men's tenauntes, Yet was it not lawful by the
said statute for the kings tenants so to do, that is to say, neither to alien
the whole, nor any parcel thereof without the kings license. And that appears
by Bracton fo. 88. Which speaks generally yt the kings tenantes in chief
cannot dismember his fees without his license. And because that before the time
of king Edw. ye first they might have aliened without license to hold of
themselfes, as other men's tenauntes might have done in the like case, and
thinking it more lawful for them so to do after the making of ye said statut
of Quia emptores tha^ before, it was thought good to provide some stay for the
same by this statut of Prerogative. And yet by ye words of ye other chapter
following it appears that the kings tenant by grand serieantie, could never
have aliened any lands holden by grand seriantie without the kings lyce^ce. For
yt was so high a service, as Bracton in his first book in the title de magnis
seria^ciis names it Regale seruicium, and says it was first invented wtin this
realm in the time of the Conquest, that they could not dismember any part
thereof without the kings license. For he says in another place in the said
book amongst his writes of particion. Quod seriantia diuidi non debet ne
cogatur Rex accipere seruiciu^ suu^ per particulas. Howbeit since the making
of this statut of Prerogative, sundry opinions have risen in these matters as
may appear by the statut made in the first year of king E. 3. ca. 12. Which
says in this manner. Item pur ceo que plusours gents du Realm soy pleinont
deste greues de ceo que terres et tenem^ts que sont tenus en chief du roy, et
aliens sans son conge ount este pris auaunt ceux heures en mains le roy et
tenus come forfets, le roy, ne les teigne my come forfets en tiel case, mes
voet et grant que desormes de tiels terres et tenementes aliens soit
reasonable fine pris en le cha^cerie per due process, So that by this statute it
appears they took the lands to be forfeted that were holden of the king in
chief and aliened without his license. And so it appears by a book in.14. E.
3. where Wilby says that at this day lands holden by graund seriantie and
aliened without license be forfeted. 14. E. 3. in Fitz ti. Quare imp. p. 54.
For the service of one man's body cannot be changed into another man's body
without the kings assent. Also in the said first year of king E. 3. the. 13.
chap. It is provided in this wise. Et auxi come plusors gents du people soye
plenont deste greues per purchase de terres et ten^ts que ont este tenus des
ancestors le roy que ore est come des honors, et mesm^s tiels tenements ont
este prises en le maine le roy, auxi si come ils eussent este tenus du roi en
chief come de sa corone, le roy voet que mes ne soit home encheson pur null tiel
purchase. By this statut it appears yt if a man hold of ye king as of any
honor which is come to his highness by disce^t from any of his auncestoures,
that by reason thereof he should not hold in Capite: For that was contrary
to the law, as if may appear by the words of the Statute, which says
that the people complained them selves to be greaued hereby, Which is to be
understood unjustly grieved, for by the words in the first chapter of
Prerogatiua Regis it appears that if it shall be said a tenure in Capite, it
must be holden of ye crown of a long time. s. ab antiquo de Corona And that
is it not when it is but newelye come: and the statute of Magna Carta. ca. 31.
did help this matter by express words, If such an honor came to the
crown by way of eschete, but not if it came by way of descent or any other
way. And that statute does set forth certain honors by name which be not
of the auncientnes of the Crown, that is to say the honor of Wallingforde,
Notingham, Bolingbroke and Lancaster. Therefore he that holds of the King as
of these honors, holds not of the king in chief. But other honors there
be which of so long time have been annexed to the Crown that to hold of them
is to hold in chief, as it appears in the new Natura breuiu^. fo. 2^^. and
f. 289. Where one held of the king as of a certain honor to yield a certain
rent to the keepinge of the castle of Dover, this was there taken to be a
tenure in chief. And so it was where one held of his highness as of the honor
of ye Abbey of Marle. Therefore learn what honors be of the auncientnes of
the Crown: and what not. Also there is another Statut made in the.34. year of
the said king the.15. chapter. which says in this wise.

Item accord est et establie que alienacion de les terres and te nements faits
per gents que teignont du roye Henry besayl au roy que ore est ou des auters
roys deuant luy, a tener de eux mesmes, que les alienacions estoie^t en lour
force. Salua^t touts foits a nostre seignour le roy sa prerogative de temps son
aiel son piere et son temps demesne. M. 20. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Ass. P. 122. and
P. 124. and 26. li. ass. eodem ti. P. 146.
This latter statute does argue that the king ought to have prerogative since
ye time of king Edward the.1. and none before. And surely so was the law
taken, as it appears.20. and.26. E. 3. and therefore to the intent these
alienacions made in king H. the.3. days and before should not now be brought
in question, this statute was made so that his grace should have fine for all
alyenacions without license made since king Edward the first time, but not
for any made before. And this should be the meaning of this statute, which
(under correction) is mistaken by master Fitzherbert in his Natura breuium. fo.
226 Howbeit for mine own opinion I do not see by all these statutes but that
the king has his Prerogative by thorder of the common law, at lest wise as the
comen law has been taken since the time of king Edward the first, or else he
could not have it now, for any thing that I see provided for him by these
statutes. For this statute of Prerogative goes but to that where his tenant
in chief alieneth the greatest part without license, Ergo He may alien the
lesser part without license, and so does the statute expressly set it forth,
except you will say there be twoe licenses understood here, that is to say
a general license by the order of the commen law, and a special license by
this statute, the one to be requisite where any parcel is sold, the other when the
more parcel is sold. Therefore enquire and learn what other men's oppinions are
upon this statute. For I find no book to prove it common law before Britons
time, for Glanuill ne Bracton speaks any thing of it. And where this statute
of Prerogative speaks only but of knights service, the law is otherwise
taken. For if one do hold of the kings highness in Socage in chief he can
alien no piece without license. Then let us see what things may be granted
or done without license and at what time: And how the tenaunts that has
license shall pursue the same. The Kings tenant that holds of him in chief
may grant a rent charge out of the same without license as it appears.40.
li. ass. et. 7. H. 6. 40. lib. Ass. in Fitz. ti. License. P. 4. M. 7. H. 6. f*
For the king by that shall sustain no detriment. For his highness need not to
hold it charged except he will. But if one hold an aduouson of the king, or a
rent, and grants over the same without license, the graunter shall pay a
fine. 21. E 3.22
And that appears. 21. E. 3. For there the case was that upon license with a
particio^, an aduowson was allotted solye to one of the coparceners and after
by composition between her and her fellows she was agreede to leave thaduouson
again in common amongst them all and to present by turn, and adjudged that
this was an alienacion, for the which she must make a fine: For before she was
tenant solye and now she is become tenant jointly again with her fellows.
The like law is it if there be lord mesne and tenant, the king is the lord
and the mesnaltie is holden of him in chief, if the mesne release to the
tenant without license, 38. lib. Ass. in Fitz. ti. Fines p. 109
he shall pay a fine, as it appears 33. li. Ass. and yet the release goes
there by way of extinguishment, but what then? he holds now by the service
the mesne did, that is to say, in chief, and so thereby the tenancy is
altered. The self same law is it if twoe iointenauntes be, and the one release
to the other without license, the king shall seize for a fine, 40. lib. Ass. in
Fitz. tit. License. P. 4. et P. 8. H. 4. tit. codem P. 1.
as it appears. 40. li. ass. et. 8. H. 4. For the like reason that is made in
the case of the coparceners before. But where there is nothing but a bare
right released which goes by way of Extinguishement otherwise it is. For
they of thexcheker upon a fine sur release only use to make out no process to
answer the king of an alienacion. The kings tenant in chief may make a
lease for term of years without license, but not a lease for term of life,
nor no higher interest; P. 45. E. 3. f. 6.
as it appears. 45. E. 3. and in the new Natura breuium. fo. 198. Then at
what time or how he should pursue his license: if the license be granted by
one king he cannot by virtue thereof alien in the time of an other king as it
appears 2. E. 3. Like law if the lands be in the kings hands for Primer
seisin or alienacio^ without lyce^ce, P. 2. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Offie de court. P.
29.
at which time ye king does license his tenant to make a feffement, he cannot
make this feffement till the lands be out of the kings hands, as appears.
21. H. 7. H. 21. H. 7. 7
Also he that has license may not vary from it in any point: As if the king
license the Abbot and Covent to make a feffement, and thabbot sole will make it
this is void, as appears. 21. H. 7. H. 21. H. 7. 8.
And there Frowike said that if the king license me to make a feoffement by
deed, I can not make it without deed Nec econtrario. H. 3. E. 3. in Fitz. ti.
Fines p. 164.
And herewyth agrees the book of. 3. E. 3. Where the license was to levy a
fine of the manner of Dale to find twoe chapleynes and he would have leuyed
the fine leaving out the chapleynes and could not be suffered. And. 30. E. 3.
18. E. 2. in Fitz. ti. Fines P. 124 M. 30. E. 3. 22
the license was to leuye a fine of the manor of Dale yeldynge a rent, and he
would have levied the fine of the manor with a Forprise, that is to say,
exceptinge certain acres parcel of the manor yeldinge the rent, and could
not be received so to do, for that should not agree with the license, which
would the whole manor to be charged with the rent. But if there had been no
rent reserved it semes he might have alyened any part of the manor by a
lyce^ce of alienacion of ye whole manor tamen quere, For it should seem to
be within the words of this statute which would you should not dysmember
the kings fees, and learn if ye king license his tenant to make a feffement,
whether he may make it upon condition or not, for they use when a condicionell
feffement is to be made to express the condition within the license: and if
the condition be to make an estate again to the feffour, all this goes under
one fine and in one license. And note that if the Justices before whom the
fine shall be leuyed be informed that the lands are holden of the king and
that so appear to them by any record, they will not take the fine till they
have seen the license nor yet engrosse it till they have received a write out
of the Chauncerie called Quod permittat finem illum leuari, by which they may
be fullye certified of ye kings pleasure, which writ apereth in ye new Na.
bre. f. 147 and that they have thus used it appears 4. E. 2. and 33. H. 6.
But they never used so to do upon a recovery in these commen writs of enter
in the post, 4. E. 2. in Fit. ti. Fynes. p. 1^5. M. 33. H. 6. ^
because ye recouerer in such case should pay no fine: for it was no
alienacion since the recouerer claimed not in by the tenant. But now by the
statute made in the.32. year of king Henrye the 8. it is ordained that the
recouerer in such case should pay a fine for alienacion. And note that if an
alienacion be made without license the pardon is most commonly made unto the
Feffee and not to the Feoffour. And so I suppose it ought to be, because the
wrong grows by the enter of the Feffee which has entered the kings fee
without his license.

And therefore the case is 14. H. 6. that where the kings tenant aliened
without license, 14. H. 6. 27
and took estate again to him and to his wife in tail, the remainder over to
his right heirs and dies without issue, and the king pardons the wife all
manner of alienacions, this was thought good to exclude the king of his fine
that he should have had for the said alienacion. And it is further to be
noted that the license must be purchased upon a true suggestion or else it is
void. For if the kings tenant in tail pretendinge to be tenant in fee
simple will pourchase license to make a Feoffement, this is a void license, as
it appears 40. li. ass. 40. lib. Ass. in Fitz. ti. Guard p. 1.
And in all cases where the kings tenant in chief will dismember his tenant,
that is to say alien any parcel hereof without license, the King may
distraine for his whole rent in the parcel so aliened, but if he have the
kings license to make such alienacion, the alience shall have a writ in the
Chauncerye called de deonerando pro rata porcione, that he shall no further be
charged then after the quantity of the portion that he holds. This writ you
may see in the new Natura breuium. fo. 2^4.

The eygthe chapter.
DE ecclesiis vacantibus quarum aduocaciones specta^t ad regem and alij
presentauerint ad easdem: Ita qd' contentio inter dominum regem and alios
oriatur, si Rex per consideracionem curiae presentationem suam recuperauerit
licet post lapsum sex mensium a tempore vacationis nullum currit ei tempus, dum
tamen rex presentauerit infra tempus sex mensium.

Of this chapter I find nothing neither in Glanuile, Bracton nor Britton ne
in any other old writer before the making hereof, sauinge that I find this
text both in Bracton and Britton. s. quod nullum tempus occurrit regi, which
Bracton in the beginning of his first book under this title que res dari
possit appliethe unto liberties apperteyninge unto the crown saying in this
wise, quod illi qui huiusmodi libertatem sibi vendicat doceat huiusmodi ad se
pertinere, quia si warrantum non habuerit speciale in hac liberate defendere
non poterit, quamuis pro se pretendit seisinam longi temporis, diuturnitas enim
longi temporis in hoc casu non minuit iniuriam sed auget, nec in isto casu
currit tempus contra regem, nec incumbit ei probatio qd' ad ipsum pertinet cum
constare debeat singulis quod huiusmodi de iure gentium pertineant ad coronam.
sed sunt alie res que pertinent ad coronam que non sunt ita sacre quin
transferri possunt, sicut sunt fundi, terre and tenementa and huiusmodi, per
que corona Regis roboratur, et in quibus currit tempus co^tra regem sicut
contra quamlibet priuatam personam. This it appears by Bracton that this
text does not serve the king in all cases, for prescription shall hold
sometime against the king in such things as a man may prescribe in, 8.
H. 5. ti. trauerse. P. 47.
as it is commen in our books that one shall prescribe for wayfe and strayfe
and such like against the king. And also it appearethe in the book in 8. H.
5. that the king may surcesse his time: as where it is found that tenant for
term of life has forfaited his estate to the king, whereby the king ought to
sease, if his grace sease not but tarry till he be dead so that he in the
reuercion enters, he can not then sease, and so it may appear unto you yt
though this be an auncien text. quod nullum tempus occurrit regi, yet in cases
it does: and where this text is only appointed by this statut to serve where
the bishop takes the benefice by laps, yet by an equity it is taken in some
cases to extend to a plenartie, that is to say, where a stranger has
presented and his clerk is in by six months: As take the case to be where the
king has aduowson in ward and a stranger usurps and his clerk is in by six
months before the king bring his Quare impedit, yet shall this plenartie be
noe plea against his highness, but that he shall recover: and the reason of it
is, because else the king should be witheout remedy. For writ of right he
cannot have having but an estate in the thing as gardeyn. Wherefore in this
case nullum occurrit ei tempus, for else it should appear that a stranger
might hold a thing merelye by wrong against him without any good ground
or beeginnynge that can be intended of it, which case is agreed.18. E. 3. et
43. P. 18. E. 3. fo. 15. P 43. E. 3. fo. 14.
E. 3. But yet in this case the king may not put out thincumbent which is
admitted, instituted, and inducted in the benefice without suit, that is to
say, Quare impedit, because it is so provided by the statute of.25. E, 3.
capitule.3. and.3. R. 2. cap 1. Like law is it if the kings tenant be seized
of a manner holden in chief to the which aduowson is appendaunt and alienethe
the manner with the aduowson wytheout license, after the church beecommes
void and a stranger usurps and so twenty vsurpacions one after an other,
and afterward these alienacions without license are found by office, and the
church becomes void, the king shall present notwithstanding those
vsurpacions, and if the church be full, H. 4. E. 3. in Fits, ti. quare
impedit. 33.
his highness may have a Quare impedit against thincumbent Causa qua supra.
And this appears in.4. Edward the third. But if the king be seized of an
aduowson in his demean as of fee, it seems that plenartie shall be a good plea
against him, for there his highness has remedy provided him, that is to
say, 18. E. 3. f. 15. 43. E. 3. 14.
bye writ of right, and so is thoppinion of Sharde and wylby 18. Edward the
third. Quere, for in the books of.43. Edward the third, the defendaunt durst
not abide by the plea but trauersed the title that was made for the king. And
learn whether plenartie be a good plea against the queen which holdethe for
term of life the reuercion to the king, P. 18. E. 3. f. 13.
for this case is also left at large in. A. 18. Edward the third. Now to the
statut, where the words be that no laps shall hold against the king if he
present within syx months. These words if he present within six months be
void, for though he present not, yet title of laps shall not take place
against him by this statute, P. 18. E. 3. 21
and therefore the book is.18. Edward the third, that where the laps was
incurred in the life of the kings tenant and before the ordina^^^ presented
the tenant dyed, and yt was adjudged that the king could not present
wythein the syx months, because his tenant was then alive. What say you
then to this case, if the laps did incur after the death of the kings
tenant and before office found, the king not withstandinge shall have the
presentment after office found as it is greed 14. Henrye the seuenthe, P. 14. H
7. 22
and yet there the king might have presented after the death of his tenant
before office found and did not. And in the said book of.14. H. 7. it is
left for a question, sins the ordynary ca^ not present by laps against the
king, how and in what manner the cure shallbee served in the mean time that
is to say, beetwene the laps and the kings presentment, sum think in that
case that the ordinarye should present one for the mean time which should
be remouable always at the kings pleasure, and some other think he should
sequester the fruits to find ye cure Ideo quere. And Bracton li. 3. in the
writ of Darrein presentment saiethe that this title of presentment by laps
was geeuen to thordinarie by a constitution made in the council of Lateranense.

The nynthe chapter.
REx habebit custodiam terrarum fatuorum naturaliu^ capiendo exitus eorundem
sine vasto and distruccione, and inueniet eis necessaria sua de cuiuscunque
feodo terre ille fuerint, and post mortem eorum reddat eam rectis heredibus,
ita quod nullatenus per eosdem fatuos aliene^tur nec quod eorum heredes
exheredentur.

This prerogative began in the time of king E. 1. as yt should seem to
me, because I find none that wrote of it before Britton, for Bracton speaks
but a little of Ideotts i^ his fifthe book in the title of exceptions against
the plaintiff where he sayethe: it is a good exeption to the parsone of him
that complainethe or brings any accion to say he is a fool natural, quia
tales non multum dista^t a brutis qui ratione carent, nec valere debet quod cum
talibus agitur, sed tamen discussio huiusmodi exceptionis discrecioni iudicis
re linquitur. and sayethe like law is it of him that could never here nor
speak from the time of his nativity, and quod inuenienda sunt eis necessaria
quoad vixerint per officium iudicis pro qualitate person and hereditatis
quantitate si here is esse debeat, and si semel authoritate curatoris adquisierit
si fuerit inde eiectus recuperabit per assisam sicut minor. By this it appears
that ye king had no prerogative but the judge. Howbeit Britton. f. 167, saiethe
that the king ought to have his prerogative herein, for these be his words:
Et pur ceo que ascun foites auient que ascun heir est sotte naste, per quoy il
nest my able a heritage demau^der et garder, volumus q^ tiels heirs de qui que
ils ne vnques teigo^nt males and females demurgent en nostre guard ouesque
toutes lour heritages, sauant a chescu^ seignour touts auters services que a
luy appendaunt de terre tenus de luy, and icy remainount en nostre guard tant
come ils duront en lour sotie, and ceo ne voilomus nous my de ceux qui
deueignount sotes per ascun maladye. Upon these words of Britton I note.iij.
things, one is yt the king shall not have the custody during their liefes but
duringe their Ideocy, the second notwithstanding the land is in the kings
hands, yet the other lord shall have their seignories, which is by way of
peticion as I take it: and the third is that the other lord shall not have
the wardshippe of the heir nor of his lands but only the king: which
thi^de things by this statute of prerogative are not so plainelye set fourth,
and also by this statute it appears that the king shall have the custodye of
such Ideottes during their lives, for the words be, Et post mortem eorum
reddat eam rectis heredibus and not before. The manner how the king shall
come to his prerogative appears by a book case.16. Edward the third, 16. E.
3. in Fits. ti. Livery P. 30.
where Sharde says that when the king is enfourmed that there is such an
Ideotte his highness shall send for him and cause him to be brought before
his chauncelloure or some other whom he shall appoynte, and if by examinacion
he be found an Idiot, yet his hyghenesse ought not to sease his lands
until such time as he be found an Idiot by office. And in the new Natura
breuium folio. 232. it appears that the king appointes all this matter to
theschetour or sheriff both to examine and enquire, in which said Natura
breuium folio. 229. it appears that this office when it is found shall have
relacion a natiuitate to avoid al mean acts done by the Idiot, that is to
say, his feffements or release: but learn and enquire whether such feffees
shall be put out by thoffice without any Scire facias to be awarded against
them. M. 18. E, 3. in Fits. ti. 30. Scire facias. P. 10. et. 106.
In 18 and.32. E. 3. a Scire facias was awarded in that case, and learn also
whether the office shall have relacion for the profits from the time of his
nativity or only from the findinge of thoffice. Then to the exposicion, the
words be, Rex habebit custodiam terrarum fatuorum naturalium. By these
words it apperethe that he must be a fool natural, that is to say, a fool
a natiuitate* for if he were once wise and beecame a fool by chance or
misfortun, M. 18. E. 3. Fits. ti. Scire facias. P. 10.
ye king shall not have the custody of him, and so it is agreed in.18. E. 3. And
also in the new Natura breuium. fol. 2^3. and the manner of the trial of him
to be a fool natural appears in the said Natura breuium folio. 233. that
is is to say, if he cannot tell to twe^tye pence, or tell his age, or who was
his father and mother, or such like things: whereby yt may appear he has
no kind of understanding in that that is either for his profit or damage.
But if he be learned or apt to learn, then is he no Idiot as master
Fitsherbert there thinks, M. 31. E. 3. ti. sauer de defaulte. P. 37.
and Grene sayethe in.31. Edward the third, That if he be able to begette
either son or daughter he is no fool natural. The words of the statute
be further, Capiendo omnes exitus eorundem sine vasto et destruccione et
inueniet eis necessaria sua. By these words it appears that the king may
take the profetes to his own use, finding them their necessaries. And
therefore in the book before of Tricesimo primo of Edward the third the
king did not let the land unto one of the cosyns of the Idiot yeeldynge a
rent (butte these words, finding them necessaryes) is not only mente to
the Ideottes themselves, but also to all them that hang upon them, as their
wife children and familye. And also by these words sine vasto and
destruccione, M. 3. E. 2. in Fits. ti. Guard. P. 5.
it appearethe the king is bound to reparacions of their lands and
tenementes. The words be also, De cuiuscunque feodo terre ille fuerint By
those words it should seem the king should be preferred in this title of
Ideocye, before any other lords which might claim the Idiot as his ward,
howebeit learn what other men think therein. Et post mortem eorum reddat
eam rectis heredibus. Bye these words it should appear that the king
should save the custodye during the life of the Ideof, and that than an
Ouster le main in nature of a lyuerye shallbee suyd of the same out of the
kings hands: butte whether yt shallbee made with the yssues and profytes
from the time of the Ideottes death, or only butte from ye time of the
tender of the Oustere le main learn, butte if the lands that the king had
so in custodye be holden of him in capite, then notwythestandyng these
words of the statute yet the king shall have wardeshyppe, prymer seisin, and
all other prerogatives as if his tenaunte in chief had dyed seized thereof,
being noe Idiot, as it may appear in the new Natura breuium. fol. 2^6. And
there it appears folio. 2^2. also, that allthoughe the Idiot held noe lands
of the king, yet a Diem clausit extremum shallbee awarded after his death to
enquire what lands he dyed seized of, of whom they are holden etc. And it is
to be noted yt if one be found Idiot by office and before ye king seaseth ye
lands ye Idiot dies, yet the king shall sease, because of these words in
the statute ^ post mortem eorum reddat eam rectis heredibus. which his grace
cannot do but upon a seizure, and this appears 18. M. 18. E. 3. in Fits. ti.
Scire facias. P. 10.
Edward the third. And note also that if there descend to an Idiot no
possession in lands butte only a right, be it right of enter or title of
enter or right of accion, the king shall not enter and have the custody of
the same, 1. H. 7. 15.
as appears in. 1. Henrye the seventh, and yet if his tenant of lands holden
of him by knights service be disseised and dyethe his heir within age, the
king shall enter and hold the same in ward: and therefore learn what is the
reason that should make a difference in these cases. The words be further
Ita quod nullatenus per eosdem fatuos alienentur nec quod eorum heredes
exheredentur Bye these words it appears the lands cannot be aliened by
the Idiot nor the heirs disheryted, and therefore if the Idiot make a
feffement or release of his lands and that found by office, the king shall
avoid it as I have before noted, and so likewise his heirs after his death
by force of these words of the statute. And yet it appears.31. E. 3. that a
recovery by default passed against an Idiot, but execucion of the judgment
was stayed because of the kings possession: which proves that notwithstanding
the king have the possession during the Idiots life, yet his highness has
noe freehold thereby but only a bare custody, for the freeholde remains in the
heir. And therewythe agrees. 17 Edward the third. H. 17. E. 3. 11
But what than? this recouerye is not like to this alyenacion, for by the
recouerye the Ideottes heir is not dysherited by thact of his auncestoure if
so be that the recouerye wear upon a good title. And it appears in.33. P.
33. H. 6. f,
Henrye sixte, that an Idiot shall not be received to plead by gardeyne or
Procheyne amye, but he him self shall appear in proper person in every
accyon brought against him, and whosoever will plead best for him shallbee
admytted: and learn and enquire if the Idiot be but tenaunte for term of
life or years if the king shall have his prerogative therein or not, because
the Idiot cannot alien that land to the disherison of his heir: and if he
shall, how the lessour shall ponishe the waste done in the kings time. And
learn also whether the king shall have the goods of an Idiot as well as
land, then last of all if one be found Idiot which is none in deed. The
manner how he shall avoid this office appears in the new Natura breuium
folio. 233 that is to say, he that is falslye found to be an Idiot either
by him self or his frinds shall come in to the chau^cerye or before the
chauncelloure of England and the kings counsel and pray to be examyned of
his ideocye, or he may sue a writ out of the chauncerye to him that has
the keepynge of him to bring him before the king and his counsel to be
examined, and if he be found upon his examination to be noe Idiot, then by that
is thoffice and all the rest of the process avoided without any farther
trauerse: howebeit where a Scire facias is awarded against the feffee of the
Idiot, there the feffee appearing upon the Scire facias may trauerse the
Ideocye, as it appears, he did in the book before of.18. Edward the third.
And note that by a statut made in the.32. of Henry the eight the xlvi.
chapter, Ideottes and their lands be in the surueye of the court of
wards, and the same court may let and set their lands, but not to grant
the custody of their bodies for any words that I can perceive in the same
statute.

The tenthe chapter.
ITem rex prouidebit quando aliquis qui prius habuerit memoriam and intellectum
non fuerit compos mentis sue sicut quidam sunt per lucida interualla quod terre
et tenementa eiusdem saluo custodiantur sine vasto and destructione, and qd'
ipse and familia sua de exitibus eorundem viuant and sustineantur competenter,
and residuum vltra sustentacionem eorundem rationabiliter custodiatur ad opus
ipsorum, liberand' eisdem quando memoriam recuperauerint, ita qd' predicta
terre et tenementa infra predictum tempus nullatenus alienentur, nec rex
aliquid de exitibus percipiat ad opus suum. Et si obierit in tali statu, tunc
illud residuum distribuatur pro anima eiusdem per consilium ordinarij.

It appearethe bye Bracton in his fifthe book among thexceptions to the
person of the playnetyfe that it is a good exception to say that he that is
demaundaunt or plainetife is of Non sane memory. For these be his words.
Competit etiam tenenti exceptio peremptoria ex persona petentis si petens
furiosus fuerit, vel non sane mentis quod discere nesciat, vel quod omnino
nullam habeant discretionem: tales non multum distant a brutis que ratione
carent, nec valet quod cum talibus agitur du rante furore. Possunt enim quidam
aliquando dilucidis gau dear interuallis, and quidam habent furorem perpetuum:
quod autem actum fuerit cum talibus tempore quo dilucidis gaudent interuallis
ratum erit, ac si cum alijs ageretur sieve furorem suu^ simulauerint sieve no^,
acquirere quidem non poterunt in ipso furore vel cum non fuerint sane mentis
aliqui qui consentire non possunt nec adquisita alienare vel dare, quia
alienacioni non magis consentire possuut quam adquitsiioni, sed seisinam
retinent quia animum mutare non possunt que^ acquirendo cum esse^t sane mentis
habuerunt, and furor superueniens nichil adimit non maius quam morbus
incurabilis, sicut lepra: secundum quod dicitur quod multa impediunt
contrahendo que non dirimunt contractum, and ita sunt multa que impediunt
promotionem, que non deiciuntiam promotum. Et talibus de necessitate dandus est
tutor vel curator. So it appearethe by Bracton that in his time yt was thought^
expediente that folks that wear destraughte should have a tutoure or one
that should take the charge of them, which office sens is reuolued unto the
king and made parcel of his prerogative. For as Fitsherbert in his Natura
breuium folio. 252. very well sayethe. The king is the protectoure of all his
subjects and of all their goods, lands and tenementes, and therefore of
such as cannot govern them selves nor order their lands and tenementes his
grace (as a father) must take upon him to provide for them, that theye them
selves and their things may be preserved. And because that Lunacye or
madness is not from the time of ones birth, (as Ideocye is, M. 3. E. 2. in
Fits. ti. Guard P. 5.
butte comes sometimes bys fytes or courses) his grace therefore can claim
no certain intereste in the lunatike person, like as he may do in the
Idiot: and therefore it is ordained that his book. f. 27. which now this
statut has made clear and without question.

The twelfthe chapter.
ITem habebit escaet' de terris Normanoru^ cuiuscu^que feo di fuerint, saluo
seruicio quod pertinet ad capitales dominos feodi illius, et hoc similiter
intelligendum est, si aliqua hereditas descendat alicui nato in partibus
transmarinis, and cuius antecessores fuerunt ad fidem regis Francie de tempore
regis Iohannis and non ad fide^ regis Angliae, sicut con tingit de baronia
Monumete postmorte^ Iohannis de Monumeta cuius heredes fueru^t de Britan^ and
alibi de feodis alioru^ recuperauerit Henricus plures escaetas de terris
Norma^noru^ occasion predicta, and eas contulit tene^das de capitalibus do
minis feodi per seruitia inde debita and consueta.

It Appears by the Cronicles yt king Ihon was ye last duke of Normandy and
that in his time Normandy was lost, whereupon king Henry his son as it may
appear by the later clause of this chapter recovered diverse escheates of
land within this realm holden by Norma^s, which after they began to adhere to
ye French king ye kings enemy and became traitors unto his highness, they
forfaited al their lands by order of the common law to the king of who^soeuer
they were holde^. Howbeit in such cases after ye forfaiture, if the king had
given these lands to any other he might not have given them to hold of him
self, but only of them of whom they wear before holden: as this statute
plainelye declares that king Henry the third so did. M. 20. ^. 3. ti. Assi. in
Fits. P. 124. et per. 46. E. 3. ti. Peticion. P. 19.
And likewise in 20. and.46. E. 3. it appears that if the king do otherwise,
his patent shallbe repelled and made to hold of the lords of whom the lands
wear holden before the treason, and that by a peticion of right to be sued
unto the king for the redress of the same, for other remedy have they none,
and distrayne they may not, as appears in the new Natura breuium f. 180. And
further it should appear by the said book of.20. E. 3. that the king ought
not to reteyne such land in his own hands no while but must dispose the^ over
to hold of them that were lords thereof at the time of the treason committed.
Hereby may you gather that this statute in his first branch is but a
confirmacion of the common law, and that long time before the making hereof
king H. 3. had this prerogative, as it does manifestlye appear in the later
branch thereof. And also by Bracton in his first book in the title De custod'
and maritagijs dn^orum, and likewise in Britton folio. 28. The words of the
statut be further. Hoc similiter intelligendum est si aliqua hereditas
discendat alicui nato in partibus transmarinis et cuius antecessores fuerunt ad
fid e^regis Franciae de tempore regis Iohannis Angliae, sicut de baronia
Monumete post mortem Iohannis de Monumeta, cuius heredes fuerunt de Brittannia
vel alibi. By this branch it should appear that at this time men of
Normandy, Gascoign, Guion, Angeo and Britain, were inheritable wtin this realm
as well as English men, because that they were sometime subject unto the king of
England and under their dominion until king Ihons time as is aforesaid, and
yet after his time those me^ (saving such whose lands wear taken away for
treason) wear still inheritable within this realm, till the making of this
statute. And in the time of peace beetweene the twooe kings of England and
France theye wear aunswerable within this realm if they had brought any
action for their lands and tenementes, as it does plainly appear by Bracton
in his fifth book in ye title De exceptione quia alienigen^, for these be his
words. Est aute^ alia exceptio q^ competit tenenti ex persona petentis propter
defectu^ nationis q^ dilatoria est et no^ perimit, actione^. Vt si quis
alienigena qui fuer' ad fide^ regis Fra^cie and actione^ instituit versus
alique^ qui fuerit ad fidem regis Angliae, talis no^ respondeatur saltem donec
terre sint communes, nec etiam si rex ei co^ces serit specialiter placitare,
quia sicut Anglicus non auditur in placitando aliquem de terris and tenementis
in Francia, ita non debet alienigena and Francigena qui fuerit ad fidem regis
Franciae audiri placitando in Anglia. Note here that he sayethe that this
exception is but dilatorie and not peremptory, which proves that he shall
have his accion at an other time, that is to say, in the time of peace. And
also he says after, Donec terre sunt communes, which is as much to say until
such time as there is peace beetwene France and Inglande. Also Bracton in his
third book under the title quod mulier ostendat warrantum per quem petit
dotem sayethe si warrantus fuerit ad fidem regis Franciae and excipiatur de
warranto remanebit dotis exactio in suspenso imperpetuum vel ad tempus saltem
donec terre fuerint comunes. This warrant of dower is the heir of the husbands
for by thau^cient law if a woman had brought her writ of dower against any
other but the heir, he was not bound to answer her dower until such time
as she had brought forth her warraunt that is to say, the heir. In like case
after she is endowed she is not bound to answer to any other without the
heir, and if it might appear that the heir had no right in the second part,
then should she be barred of her accion of dower, as it appears in the case
before that his right is suspended when he is a Frenchma^ and the.ij. realms
at war. Howebeit it appearethe as I have said before that this exception is
not peremptory, but that after the twoe realms be again at peace, she shall
have her dower. The words of this branch be also in the Copulatyue, that is
to say, that the auncester must be of the allegeaunce of the French king, and
that the heir of the said au^cester is born in ye part of beyond sea. I put
case than that the auncestour were of the allegeaunce both of the one king and
the other that is to say the French king and the king of England whether is
this within the compass of this statute? For Bracton in his said v. book under
the title De exceptione quia alienigena says. Quod su^t aliqui qui sunt ad
fidem vtriusque sicut fuit W. comes Marescallus and manens in Anglia et
Michaell de Seins manens in Francia et alii plures, et ita tamen quod si
contingat guerra moueri inter Reges remaneat personaliter quilibet eorum cum eo
cui fecerit ligeantia^. Whereby it should appear that of such as were in
allegeaunce to both kings, the king should have no eschetes of their
lands. For the words of the statute be not only ad fidem regis Franciae,
but also et non ad fidem regis Ang. ideo quere. And who shall be inheritable at
this day that be borne in the parties beyond the sea, and who not. See the
statute thereof made in the.25. year of king Edward.3. de natis in partibus
transmarinis.

The thirtenth chapter.
QVando aliquis qui de rege tenet in Capite in fata decedat, et here is eius
ingrediatur ten^tum qd' antecessor suus tenuit de rege die quo obiit, antequam
fecerit homagium regi et seisinam suam ceperit per regem, tunc nullum accrescit
ei liberum teneme^tum. Et si obierit seisitus per idem tempus vxor eius no^
habebit dotem de tenemento illo, sicut contingit de Matilda filia comitis
Hereford vxoris Manusel marescalli, qui post mortem wilhelmi Marescalli Anglie
fratris sui cepit seisinam castri et manerii de Scrogoill, et obiit in eodem
castro antequa^ intrasset per regem et fecisset ei homagium, et vnde
concordatum fuit quod vxor non haberet dotem, eo quod vir suus non intrauit per
Regem immo per intrusionem, sed hoc non intelligatur de Socagio et paruis
tenuris.

This Statute is but an affirmacion of the common law, as it may appear by
the case comprised in the same which was ruled before the making of this
statute and judged according to theffecte hereof. And this statute seems too
put a pain upon the heirs that will entrude before they have sued their
lyuere, and takes away from them the free hold that the law had else vested
in them: And yet it is not taken so generallye as the words be, but
specially and only of intrusions after office found, and not before: And
therefore if the heir enter after the death of his auncestour and before
office found, and the king pardons him all entries with the profits, this
is good and amounts to a special liuere, so that the heir needs to sue no
more liueries, and yet if thentrusion were after office and then the king
would pardone him it were void, because that at the time of the pardone he had
no freeholde whereupon the pardon might enure. Like law is if the heir
before office enter and make a feffement and ye king pardone the feoffee it is
good, A. 3. H. 7. 2.
and yet such a feffement after office with a pardone were void, for the
reason I have made before, Like law is if thentrie before office and the
pardone after office this is void, because that by office the king takes
the possession from the heir or feffee, and then is there no possession
whereupon the pardon may enure: And so void. For the office when it is
found has relacion from the death of the kings tenant, if it be so that
the king do not release his right before th^ffice found, P. 16. E 4. 1.
and that appears. 16. E. 4. where it is also said that the pardone must be
as well of the profits as of the entry, or else after office found the
king shall be answered of the profits, and.13. Henrye.4. M. 13, H. 4.
there is a difference put beetwene the pardone that is made to the heir, and
the pardone that is made to the feoffee: For in the case of the feoffee the
pardone must be special rehersinge all the matters. Then let us see further
for the endowement, if after the death of the kings tenant the heir does
not enter but dye before office found, his wife shall be endowed because of a
possession in law that was in him.

Like law is it if he dye after office found and before any entry. Like
law is it if he enter before office and dye. But if the king be once seized
by office and the heir dye before license, and the next heir will enter
before a Deuenerunt sued and dies, his wife shall not be endowed, for in
that case it is an intrusion after office. For when the king is ones seized by
office this seisine remains till liuerie or ouster le maine be sued, 1. H. 7.
3. 4. H. 7. 1. et. 2 M. 38. E. 3. 35.
And these cases are 1. et. 4. H. 7. The words of the Statute be further sed
hoc non intelligatur de Socagio et paruis tenuris.

These words are to be intended of common Socage, for if he hold of the
king in Socage in chief and will intrude after office, nullum accrescit ei
liberum tenementum, no more than if the lands were holden by knights service
in chief. 24. E. 3. f. 34, H. 21. E. 3. 2^
And it is a general ground that in all cases* where he that sueth his
general lyuerie or ouster le main missueth the same and enters thereby, this
entrye is an intrusion upon the kings possession, and his wife of that
possession shall not be endowed as appearethe. 21. et. 24. Edward. 3.

The fourtenth chapter.
ITem Rex habebit escaetas de terris libere tenentium Archiepiscoporum et
Episcoporum quando ipsi tenentes damnati sunt pro felonia facta tempore
vacationis, dum temporalia eorundem fuerunt in manu domini regis, conferend'
cui voluerit imperpetuum, saluo seruicio quod ad dictos prelatos inde pertinet
et fieri consueuit.

Of this statute I find no bookecase, Howbeit the letter of it is very plain
and needs no manner of exposicion. For it goes not to any other eschetes than
such as grow upon offenses. And if the crime or offense were done while the
land was in the kings hands, notwithstanding the party were not attainted
thereof until such time as the lands be out of the kings hands, yet the
king shall have the eschete by force of this statute. And hear it appearethe
how the king shall not hold the lands forfaited still in his hands but must
give them over to hold of them that they were holden of before.

The fiftenthe chapter.
QVando dominus Rex dat vel concedit alicui manerium vel terram cum pertin^,
nisi faciat in charta sua vel scripto expressam mentionem de feodis mill'
aduocationibus ecclesiarum, et dotibus cu^ accidunt ad predictum manerium vel
terram pertinen^ tunc his diebus rex reseruat sibi eadem feoda, aduocationes
cum dotibus licet inter alias personas non fuerint obseruata.

It is agreed in.43. E. 3. M 43 E. 3. 19
that by the order of the common law before this statut, if ye king had been
seized of a manner to the which aduouso^ had been appe^da^t, and had given it to
me, notwithstanding that in the kings grant there had been no mention made
of the auowson nor of these words cu^ pertin^, yet thauouson had passed
from his highness by the said grant: for in those days ye king was but a common
parson, and a write of Enter sur disseisin, A. 20. H. 3. ti. assise. in Fitz p.
431 M. 24. E. 3. f. 23 H. 22. E. 3. f 3
and all other accions did lie against him as against any other common person.
And therefore in 20. H. 3. A write of entry was brought against one supposing
yt he had no entry but by disseisin, which ye king did to the demaundant when
he was wtin age, and also Wilby. 24. E. 3. reports yt he has seen a write
which was Precipe H. regi Angliae, in place whereof is now given Peticion by his
Prerogative. And so it is said.22. E. 3. yt in time of king H. 3. and before
the king should be empleded as any other come^ person. But king E. his son
ordained that none should sue him but be driven to their peticion. Howbeit
(saving reformacion of these books) I think the law was never so that a man
should have any such accion against the king. For Bracton which wrote in king
H. 3. time or nere thereupon, says in his.iii. book under ye title Contra
que^ co^petit assisa in this wise: Inter cetera videndum est quis sit ille qui
deiecit, Princeps ex pote^tia, vel aliquis nomine suo, vel iudex qui male
iudicauerit, an priuata persona, si princeps vel rex vel alius qui superiorem
non habuerit nisi deum, contra ipsu^ non habebitur remedium per assisam, imo
tantum erit locus supplicationi, vt factum suum corriget et emendet, quod si
non fecerit, sufficiat ei pro pena quod deum expectet vltorem, qui dicit, mihi
vindictam et ego retribuam, nisi sit qui dicat quod vniuersitas regni et
Barronagium suum facere possit et debeat in Curia ipsius regis, sed si alius ex
facto et disseisina principis statim vel ex post facto in seisinam institerit,
quamuis talis incidat in assisam et in penam vel tantum ad restitutionem
secundum quod seisina ad ipsu^ peruenerit statim vel ex post facto sine
principe tamen conueniri non poterit per assisam, quia licet quodamodo
disseisinam fecerit tamen non per se sed cum alio. s. cum principe et ita quod
sine eo respo^dere non potuit, et ita non procedit assisa. Indirecte tamen et
quasi ex incidenti et sine breui comprehendi poterit persona principis ad hoc
quod factum suum emendet, vel in personam suam redu^dabit iniuria manifest, vt
ecce. Esto quod impetretur assisa tantum super eum ad quem res translata est
sine principe, et qui tenetur ad restitutionem et ad penam, vel ad minus ad
restitutionem, et ipse respondeat quod sine principe qui fecit iniuriam per se
vel per suos respondere non debeat, quia ipse princeps per se fecit iniuriam
vel ipsi duo insimul, extunc erit factum et iniuria in manu domini regis, qui
dici debet in facto quasi warrantus, et quod tunc poterit si warrantus voluerit
factum suum emendare quasi a lege compulsus, et quam in persona sua cum sit ei
submissus debet firmiter obseruare. So that by Bracton it appears that no
accion lies against the king but the party grieved is driven to sue to the
king by peticion. But the reason why that aduowsons should pass in the kings
case by the order of the common law though it were not expressed in the
grant was this I suppose, because that lands or tenementes were not then
compted as things that touched the royal estate or that made the kings
crown like as Liberties or fraunchises did. For the one a common person might
have as well as the king, but the other none might have but the king or such
as were able to show his grant thereof, and therefore says Bracton in his
first book under the title que res dari possint that for lands currit tempus
contra regem sicut contra quamlibet priuatam personam Which is as much to say,
that if the king had right to any such lands or tenementes and had surcessed
his time so long, that it exceeded the time of limitation in a write of right,
his highness had lost then his right for ever. And herewith agrees Briton fo.
29. But that is (says Britton) of lands, parcel of the kings eschetes or
pourchased lands, and not of the ancient demeasnes of his crown, for of
those nullum currit ei tempus, if he have any right to demand them. So
that by Britton this reason will not serve for lands parcel of the crown.
Ideo quere vera^ rationem. Howbeit since this statute made, what lands soever
they be those things that are comprised in this statut pass not without
making express mention thereof. Hitherto we have spoken of the reason why at
the common law aduowsons should pass by grant of the manor without being
named, now let us see how since the making of this statute it shall likewise
pass by grant of the manor without being expressly named and how not. And
if the king render up to him that was in ward, at full age, his lands, or to
a bishopp his temporalties, although he make no mention of knights fees or
auousons, yet all pass therewith, for like as the kings seisine in such case
is by these words omnia terra et tenementa, without speakinge of fees or
auowsons, even so being sued out of his hands by these words, omnia terre et
tenementa, Liuerie p. 7. and T 16 E. 3. p. 30.
fees and au^wso^z do pass without making any mention thereof. And this
appears.5. E. 3. and.16. of the same king. Where after the death of an ydeot,
the king rendered again the lands to the heir not making mention of fees or
auousons, and yet he had them. And likewise 41. et 44. E. 3. the king granted
the temporalties to one that was elect bishop before he was co^secrat, H. 41.
E. 3. f 44. E. 3. f. 22.
and aiudged yt fees and aduousons passed without making any mention thereof, and
yet at ye time of the grant he was not bishop, for he lacked consecracion. And
ye reason in all these cases is, for that ye king was but seized in another
bodies right and by his liuerie he gives nothing unto them but only
restores the^ to their right they had before. Like law should it appear to be
by Finchden.29. E. 3. H. 29. E. 3. in Fitz. ti. Quare impedit p. 190.
If auouso^ of a church be appe^da^t to a Priorie which Priorie is seized into
ye kings hands by reso^ yt an alie^ is patron of it, and afterward ye king
dimiseth the said Priorie cum pertinen^, not making mention of thauouson unto
the said Prior yelding a rent, to have and to hold the same during the war.
And his reason is this, for that ye right and freehold in this case remains
still in ye Priour notwithstanding any such seisin, and the king is but to
have an annuel profit thereof, and no right, but if any be to sue dower or
liuerie with a particion out of the kings hands they by that cannot have
thauouson if mention be not there of made, no more than they can that claim by
Grant: and yet the king renders them the thing in respect of a right be fore,
as he does in ye other cases. But what then? they claim not ye whole land that
is in the kings hands but only parcel thereof, and then thauouson evermore
abides with that that remains, if express mention be not made thereof, and so
not like the cases before where the king makes liuerie of the whole. And this
case appears also in the said book of 5. E. 3. And note that in all cases
where ye king seiseth a thing as his own proper right as he does in the case of
wards, eschete, and such like, there nothing passes by Grant of the
appurtenance if express mention be not made of the thing that is appurtenant
by name: and therefore the case was.29. E 3. That where auowson of a church did
belong to a Priorie which Priorie was seized into ye kings hands ratione
guerre, and letten again to ferme for a rent to ye Prior, and afterward the
king granted away the patronage of the Priorie to a man and to his heirs, and
the custody (duringe the war) of ye Priorie with all that belongs to the
same and of the rent reserved with all the profits of ye Priorie yt the king had
seized, and yet thought ye thaduouso^ passed not, for yt it was not named. But
if there be words in the kings grant that do amount to as much as thexpresse
naming of ye thing or conteruaile as much, then the thing passes as far
fourth as if it were expressly named. And therefore if a manner to the which
auowso^ is appendant be in ye kings hands by eschete or purchase and the king
gives the manor as fully and as wholly as such a one held the same before
theschete or pourchase, in this case thauouson passes, and so it is agreed.43.
E. 3. fo. ^.

And learn forasmuch as this statute makes me^cio^ but of three things, that
is to say, knights fees, auowsons of churches, and dowers, whether in such case
any other thing than auouson which is appendant or appurtenant should pass by
words cu^ pertin^ without naming of it. P 18. H. 6. 1^
For it appears.18 H. 6. that where a Let was wtin a town and the king
granted ye town cum pertin^ not naming ye Let, and it was thought the Let
should pass thereby. But ye reason was there because it was parcel of the
town, and that ye is parcel or incide^t to an other thing, passes by grant
of ye king without making any mention thereof. And therefore if ye king be seized
of a corodie by reason yt he is a patron of a Priorie, and grants away ye
patronage without making any mention of ye Corody, yet ye gra^tee shall have ye
corodie: and so it is aiudged.26. 26. li. ass. p. ^3
li. ass. and yet ye kings gra^tee of a ward shall not have guard per cause de
guard if express mention be not made thereof. And so is it if one be to have
restitucion of the auouson vna cu^ exit' and the church becomes void, and the
king makes him restitucion with the mean issues and profits taken, yet he shall
not have this auoidance yt is so fallen without express mention be made there of
in his restitucion, as appears.18. 24. 39. et. 46. E. 3. P. 18. E 3. 21. P.
24. E. 3. 2^. M 39 E. 3. 2^. P. 46. E. 3. in Fitz. Grant p. ^0.
And yet if ye king be seized of auowso^ and the church beco^mech void and he
grants ye auowson away, his highness shall not now put nor take the benfite of
ye auoidance, as appears.9. E. 3 in Fitz. ti. Prese^tme^t al esgl' p. 5.
Therefore enquire what the reason is of these diversities and what is meant by
these words in ye statut Dotibus cu^ acciderit ad predictu^ maneriu^ vel
terram pertin^. For as I suppose those words serve to none other purpose but
where ye king is to assign dower, and he gra^teth over ye manner Durante minore
etate of the heir yt is inward to another, this patentee shall not have
thassignement of dower if mencio^ be not made thereof in his pate^t. Howbeit
learn and enquire what is ye true meani^g of the said words.

The last chapter.
ITem Rex habebit omnia catalla felonum damnatoru^ et fugitiuorum vbicunque
fuerint inuenta, et si ipsi habeant liberum tenementum tunc illud statim
capietur in manum domini regis, et Rex habebit omnes exitus eiusdem per vnum an
number et vnum diem, et tenementum illud vastabitur et destruetur de domibus,
boscis et gardinis, et aliis quibuscunque ad predictum tenementum spectantibus,
exceptis hominibus quorundam priuilegiatorum inde per regem. Et postquam
dominus rex habuerit annum, diem et vastum, tunc reddatur tenementum illud
capitali domino feodi illius nisi prius faciat finem pro anno die et vasto de
consuetud' tamen dicitur quod post annum et diem terre et tenementa felonum in
Gloc reddentur et reuertentur proximo heredi, cui debuerant descendisse si
felonia facta non fu isset, Et in Kent in Gauelkinde the father to the boughe,
the son to the ploughe. Ibidem omnes heredes masculi participabunt
hereditatem eorum, et similiter femine: sed femine non particibabu^t cum
masculis. Et mulier habebit post morte viri medietatem pro dote sua, Et si
mulier fornicetur in viduitate perdet dotem suam, vel si sit desponsata viro.
Before this statute Glanuil did write in this wise in his vii. book under the
title De vltimis heredibus. Notandum quod si quis de felonia conuictus fuerit,
vel confessus in curia et de domino rege tenuerit in Capite, tunc tam terra
quam omnes res mobiles sue et catalla penes quemcunque inueniantur, ad opus
domini Regis capientur sine omni recuperatione alicuius heredis sui, si autem
de alio quam de rege tenuerit is qui vtlagatus est vel de de felonia conuictus
tunc quoque omnes res eius mobiles Regis erunt. Terra autem per vnum annum
remanebit in manu domini regis. Elapso autem anno, terra eadem ad rectum
dominu^ scilicet ad ipsum de cuius feodo est reuertetur, veruntamen cum domorum
subuersione et arborum extirpatione. Et generaliter quotiescunque aliquis
aliquid fecerit vel dixerit in curia propter quod per iudicium curiae
exheredatus fuerit, hereditas eius ad dominum feodi de quo illa tenetur tanquam
Eschaeta solet reuerti. Foriffactura autem filii et heredis alicuius patrem non
exheredat, neque fratrem neque alium quam se ipsum. Preterea si de furto fuerit
aliquis condemnatus, res eius mobiles, et omnia cattalla sua vicecomiti
prouinciae remanere solent, terra^ autem si quae fuerit dominus feodi
recuperabit statim non expectato Anno. By this it should appear that in
Glanuiles time, for theft only the shirife should have the goods that were
forfaite, and that as it should seem to his own use, and not to the kings.
For he says, the lords in that case should recover their eschetes before
the year, day, and the wast. Howbeit, the statute made since that time geues
all felones goods to the king without any exception. And hereuppon it is to
be seen first what is comprised in this word catalla. Catalla is a general
word which comprehendes as well Chatels mouable as not moveable. For leases
for term of years are within this word catalla, as appears by Bracton in
his second book in the title of Forfaiture of Felons saying quod terminum
annorum erit domini regis, vt catalla. Quia accipit terminum ad similitudine^
catallorum. And therewith agrees the book in. 39 H. 6. 39. H. 6. 34
Also under this word catalla is taken the issues and profits of lands and
tenementes of them yt fly for felony until such time as they be attainted
or acquitted. And like wise of the Lands and tenementes of clerks conuicte,
until such time as he has made his purgacion, I mean lands and tenements
as well of their wines right as of their own right, P. 4. E. 2. in Fitz.
Forfaiture. p. 16. 16. E. 3. Corone. p. 356, 296. et. 344.
and so is the book. 4. E. 2. et. 31. E. 3. Also under this word contra are
taken the emblements yt were growing upon the ground at the time yt the
forfaifure of ye goods first began to take place, as appears 3. E. 3. Also
under this word Catalla is comprised a right of accio^ to goods, as where goods
be taken away wrongfully from the felon, or where one is endetted to the felon
by obligacion, P. 6. H. 7. in Fitz ti. Forfaiture. p. 12. M. 19. H. 6. fo. 47.
et H. 30, H. 6. fo. 5. P. 28. E. 3. 92 et t. Trauers 32. lib. Ass. p. 33.
or is accomptable to ye felon for any receites or otherwise, and this
appears. 6. H. 7. et. 19. H. 6. Also under this word Catalla, is taken
sometims goods wherein the felon has no property, as if a man deliver money
out of a bagg, or corn out of a sack to one to keep which is afterward
attainted of felonye, the money or corn in this case is forfaited. Like law it
is if a thief that steals goods severally from sundry persons and afterward
is attainted for one of ye said felonies, by this one attainder the goods that
are stolen from the other be also forfaited to the king. Like law is it if
one steal goods and before he be attainted thereof he kills him self, or
dies in prison or abiures the realm confessinge an other felony then that
for the which he fled to the church, in these cases he forfaiteth the gooddes
that he did steal. So it is if the wife kill her husband, she forfaites the
goods of her husband. 44. E. 3. f. 39. 26. li. ass. p. 32
And these cases ye may see in the title of Corone in Fitz. p. 317. 323. 334.
318. 162. 319. 380. 379. 423.

And in the title of Auowrie p. 151. And in the title of Forfaiture p. 15. Then
let us see further what may be said upon this word Felonum. If thoffence that
is committed be felony, then is it properlye within the compass of this word
Felonum, and he that committes thoffence shall be said Felo. Notwithstanding
that he therefore shall not suffer death: as in a case where one kills another
se defendendo or by misaduenture, this offense is felony, and he that
committes it shall forfait his goods notwithstanding that he obtain pardon of
life. Coron^. 116. Felony. 599. Dower. 183.
For it was at ye kings pleasure to grant pardon or not. And this appears.
15. E. 3. But so shall not he that kills one that would rob him in his
house, Or the officer that kills one that will not be rested, nor he that
kills any thing not yet borne, as a child in his mothers bellye, nor the
parsone that is straught that kills another in his madness. For in all these
cases it is not felonye.

The words be further, Damna toru^ and fugitiuorum. Sometimes the king shall
have his chatell, although he be not condemned of the felony, as if a man be
arrested for felony and afterward breaks the arrest and the other ere he
can take him again killes him, in this case he that is killed shall forfaite
his goods, and yet he was never attainted of thoffence. Coro^. p. 312. et. p.
290.
Like law is it if be were killed in ye first arrest where he would not be
arrested. And this appears. 3. E. 3. Howbeit since that time there was a
statute made. anno. 34. E. 3. cap. 12. Which seems to alter the law in these
cases if it be not that you will say peradventure that he shall forfait them
quia fugam fecit. Ideo quere. He that is felo. de se shall forfaite his
gooddes and yet he was never attainted. Like law is before, H 34 E. 3. in
Fitz. Eschet. p. 10.
of the clerk convict. And so is it of such as stand mute or challenge above
the number of. 2 enquestes, as appears. 34. Ed. 3. Then further, this word
fugitiuorum is taken such as flee or withdraw themselves for the felonye that
they be endyted, appealed or accused of, for that makes a great presumpcion
against them, as Bracton says in his second book under the title Ad quae
restituaturvtlagatus, and for that presumption sake shall the vtlawrie proceade
whether he be giltye of the felonye or not. And also says he in the said
book quod vtlagati de felonia gerunt caput lupinum, and secum suum portant
iudicium, ita quod sine iudiciali inquisitione pereunt, quia merito sine lege
pereu^t, qui secundum legem viuere recusauerunt, et hoc ita si in capiendo
fugiant vel se defendant. Si autem viui capti fuerint vel se reddiderint, vita
illorum et mors est in manu domini Regis, et qui taliter captum interfecerit
respondebit pro eo sicut pro alio nisi sit in locis vbi consuetudo se habeat in
contrarium. videlicet in com^ Hereford et Glouc^.

And in an other place he says, Quod nullum crimen maius inobedientia, quia
pro contemptu et inobedientia porerit quis excommunicari, sicut pro quolibet
peccato mortale, cum omnes subditi debeant esse Regi tanquam precellenti,
maxim in honestis, et ducibus eius tanquam ab eo missis, et sic concordat lex
diuina aliquantulum cum humana. And also says quod vtlagatus de felonia
foriffacit patriam et amicos, forisfacit quae pacis sunt, forisfacit quae legis
sunt, forisfacit quae iuris sunt, et possessionis, et forisfacit actionem ante
vtlagariam sibi datam. Thus by the way have I noted unto you such things
out of Bracton, as me seems be notable, and make somewhat for this purpose:
Although I needed not to have gone so far as to outlawrie for exposition of
this word fugitiuorum, but might have rested at the flyenge. For if one flee
for the death of a man, and this presented before the Coroner, he shall
forfait all his goods that he had the day of that presentment or at any
time since, till he be acquitted of the said death. And notwithstanding
that an enquest upon his arrainement does afterward acquyte him, Forfaiture,
32. et. 35. Coron. 296. and. 344
and also find that he did not flee, yet his gods remain still forfait, as
it appears. 22. lib. Assise. p. 96. et. 3. Edward the third. Like law is it
where one arrayned of felonye before justices is found not giltye of the
felonye, Howbeit it is found that he withdrewe himself for the said
felonye, now shall he forfaite his goods but no profits of lands as he
shall do in the other case where it is found before the Coroner, For when the
forfaiture shall have no further relacion, but to the day of the presentment
and not to the day of the flyenge, then when at the same day he is acquitted
of the felonye, then is the kings title gone as to the lands and so
consequentlye gone as to the issues. And this appears. 3. Edward. 3. Coron.
344


Also there is an other manner of fleeynge, for the which a man shall forfait
his goods, and that is where in appeal or enditement of felonye, the party
that is appealed or endited will not appear, but suffer the exigent to be
awarded against him, he thereby forfaiteth his gooddes and the profits of his
lands, which he had the day of thexigent awarded, or at any time after.
And notwythstandinge that he afterward happen to be acquyted of the said
felonye, yet the forfaiture remains, For when he tarrieth the awardynge of
thexigent it appearethe of record that he has withdrawn himself, and this
you shall find in. 22. lib. Ass. pl. 81. and 41. li. Assise. 41. Ass. p. 18,
Howbeit herein is there heed to be taken lest there be error in the
awardynge of the said Exigent: For if there be, he shall then forfait
nothing, as if the exigent be awarded against the accessorie before it be
awarded against the principal, or before the principal be attaynted, or if
an exigent be awarded against one that has a charter of pardone for the
felony of elder date, than is the awardynge of thexigent and has found
suertye according to the statute and the same returned into the chancerye
before thexigent awarded: P 43 E. 3. ^^. 17
For in these cases he shall avoid the forfaiture upon the matter showed.

Contrary law it is if after the exigent awarded the appelle do abate for
insufficience, or for that that he that is outlawed was emprisoned mean
between the awardynge of the exigent and the outlawrie pronounced.

For in that case if he reuerse the vtlarie, yet his goods remain still
forfait. Forfaiture.31. et.19.
Howbeit if he were emprisoned at yt time of the exigent awarded otherwise it
is, and this appears.19. E.3. and.30. H.6. Also it is to be noted that one
may flee for felonye and yet he shall forfait nothing, as where one is
arrested for suspicion of felonye and escapes, yet for this he shall not
forfait his goods if he were not taken with the manner, or at the suit of the
party, or endited of the same as it appears.42. Coron. 224.
li. Ass. Quere if he be endited afterward whether he shall then forfait
them or not. Also an accessorie after the felonye committed shall forfait
nothing upon a Fugam fecit. Otherwise it is of accessories before the
felonye committed, Forfaitur. 10
as it appears.4. H. 7. But he that withdraws him self but for Petit
larcenie shall forfayte his goods, Coron. 406
as it appears.8. E. 2. tamen quere. And note for a general rule that the
towneship where the goods of felones or fugitives be found shall always
answer the king of them, and the shiriue, of the issues and profits of the
lands: and therefore the towneship may seize them for the king. For it is no
plee for them to say they were not delivered unto them. 22. Ass. p. 81. 11. H.
4. 39
And this appears in Fitzherbert, in the title of Corone pl. 390. et p. 366.
300. 347. 290. 308. 22. and in the title of forfaiture pl. 32. But at what time
the goods of a felone or fugitive shall be seized it is further to be seen and
how the attainder shall have relacion. When it is found by enquest before
the coroners quod fugam fecit, by and by the shiriue shall seize his lands
intoo the kings hands by word only without taking any enquest for the
same purpose, and also shall seize all his goods into the kings hands, and
take an enquest as well of free men as of villeines to apprise them and cause
them prise to be enrolled to the coroners and to deliver them to the towneship
to make answer thereof to the king, And this appears 22. lib. ass. P. 96.
And herewith agrees the statute of Coroners and also Britton. fo. 4. Where you
shall see this matter set fourth more fully. And in.43. M. 43. E. 3. fo. 21.
it is said that the kings minister may seize ye goods of a felo^ before
attai^der, and if the party find suertie then he to leave them in the
custody of the party or else in the neighbors custody. For the said minister
ought not to carry them away with him. T. 7. H. 4. fo. 41.
and 7. H. 4. Hull says yt if one be endited of felony, yet till he be
attai^ted his goods shall not be removed out of his house, but in the mean time
shall be in his neighbors keapinge and he to be found of the same. And in the
Register there is a write quod ten^ta et bona taliter capta videantur,
imbreuientur et saluo custodiantur per balliuum ipsius capti qui se curitatem
regi inuenie^t ei respode^d' si etc. saluis inde ipsi capto et family sue
necessariis quam diu fuerit in prisona. And so is Britton. fo. 17. Howbeit now
by ye statut made in the first year of king Richard.3. the third ca. it is
ordained yt none shall seize the goods of any person arrested or emprisoned
before that they be attainted, or that the goods be otherwise forfaited, upon
peine to pay the double value thereof. This statute extends not to any other
but too such as be in prison: For by the statute de proditionibus 25. E. 3. ca.
14. If one be endited of felony which is not emprisoned, the sheriue at ye
second Cape shall seize his goods, and yet they be not at that time forfaited.
And also the statut of.R. 3. does not extend to lands but only to goods.
Then for the relacion, as for the goods it has no relacion but only from the
day that the forfaiture is presented or verdit given, and therefore it is said
in 33. E. 3. that if he sell them before he be attainted the sale is good,
Forfeture. 30. 30. H. 6. f. 5 38 E. 3. fo. 37. Corone. 290. et 285.
but for lands it has relacion to yt day of the felonic committed, be it
that the attainder be by verdite or vtlarie as it appears.38. E. 3. et 30. H.
6. or be it that he be attainted without process of law, as in the cases above
remembered where he is killed in the fleing, as appears 3. E. 3. And note that
if thattainder and the office found of his lands be both wtin the year of the
felony first committed yt it shall have no relacion for that years profits,
otherwise it is if it be after ye year, as it appears 3. E. 3. This book must
be understand as I take it where the attainder and the office be before any
day of payment within yt year. The words of this chapter be further. Et si
ipsi habeant liberu^ ten^tu^ tunc illud stati^ capietur in manum domini regis
et rex habebit omnes exitus eiusdem per vnum annu^ et vnum diem et tenementu^
illud vastabitur et destruetur de domibus boscis et gardinis et aliis
quibuscunque ad predictum tenementum specta^tibus: It should appear by Glanuile
in the beginning of this chapter that the common law was as much before the
making hereof in all cases of feloni saui^g for theft, in which in ye king had
no year and day. Howbeit after Glanuiles time the statut of Magna carta was
made which said in the 22 chapter thereof. Nos non tenebimus terras illorum qui
conuicti fuerint de felonia nisi per vnum annum et vnum diem et tunc red dantur
terre ille dominis feodorum. By this it should seem this statute does remitte
ye wast because it speaks nothing of it: or else perauenture you will say
that this word Nisi argues and proves yt the king before the statut of Magna
carta might have holde^ it as long as he would, but to the contrary of that
exposition is Glanuile, as it appears before: And also Bracton which wrote
somewhat after this time: For by Bracton in his second book it appears that
before ye making of the said statut of Magna carta the king had nothing else
but the wast, and to thentent he should remitte ye wast, the year and day was
afterward given to the king: For these be his words in the title of Vtlarie.
Si vero terra^ liberam habuerint vtlagati, statim capienda est in manum do mini
regis et tenenda per vnum annum et vnum diem, ad capitales dominos post
terminu^ illu^ reuersura si de alio tenuerit qua^ de rege, si aute^ de rege
tunc erit Eschaeta ipsius regis, et hoc veru^ est quod per tale^ terminu^
remanebit in manu do mini regis nisi ipse capitalis dominus vel alius fine^
fecerit protermino regi habendo, fed quesit causa quare terra remane bit in
manu domini regis, videtur quod talis est, quia reuera cu^ quis fuerit
co^uictus de aliqua felonia in potestate domini regis erit prosternandi
edificia, extirpandi gardina, et arandi prata, et quonia^ huiusmodi urge bantur
in grave da^num dominoru^, pro co^muni vtilitate prouisu^ fuit quod huiusmodi
dura et grauia remanerent, et quod dominus rex propter hoc haberet co^moditate^
totius terre illius per vnu^ annu^ et vnu^ die^, et sic omnia cu^ integritate
reuertere^tur in manus capitaliu^ dominoru^, nunc aute^ petitur vtru^.6. finis
pro termino et similiter pro vasto. Et no^ video ratione^ quare, nisi quod
terminus been poterit esse per se sine vasto eo quod fugitiuus et vtlagatus non
solu^ delinquit erga eu^ qui sequitur et appel lat, sed erga rege^ cuius pace^
infri^git contra fide^ sua^ cui tene tur, quia quilibet cu^ faciat sacrame^tu^,
jurat salua fide domini regis. Thus our autors agree not upon this year and day,
for Bracton is contrary to Glanuille yt wrote before him. Howbeit Britto^
which was likewise before ye maki^g of this statut of Prerogatiua agrees with
Bracton, as it appears in his book fo. 14. adding further yt the king shall
not have ye year and day of land yt is holden only for term of life or years,
or by fresh disseisin, or in fee ferme or in mortgag. And so is Bracton also
therwt agreing in his second book but now sins the time this statut of
prerogatiua was made, which geues the king as you may perceive both the year
day and the wast. And first he says quod rex habebit omnes exitus eiusde^ per
vnu^ annu^ et vnu^ die^. By this it should appear yt the king should not have
the issues of ye land but by a year and a day, but yet it is clear yt he shall
have the issues also from ye time of ye felony done until ye time his highness
has had ye year day and wast, and not ye lord (allowing yt that is to be
allowed for ye finding of ye prisoner) for it can not be intended yt ye lord
should have ye mean profits, because the la^d shall be delivered unto him without
profit, yt is to say wasted and destroyed. 3. E. 3. in Fitz ti. Corone 290.
49. E. 3. fo. 1^
And therwt agrees the book in 3. and 49. E. 3. And there it appears yt if an
office be found 20. years after the attainder ye king shall have the profits
from ye time of the felony committed until the year and day next after the
office found. For though the lord be entitled to have theschete, yet the
kings title for the year day and waste goes before the lords: For the
words be Postquam dominus rex habuerit annum diem et vastum tunc reddatur
ten^tum illud capitali domino Also by this word Reddatur it semes the lord
can not enter intoo his esc^ete after office found, but is driven too sue an
ousterle main for the same out of the kings hands, as it appears 8. 8. E. 2.
in Fitz ti. Trauers Pl. 48.
E. 2. but if a stranger abate before office, the lord shall have a writ of
eschete against him and recover, and yet that notwithstanding when an office
shall be found, afterward the king may seize for the year, day and wast, and
shall be answered of the mesne profytes, like as it is when the kings tenant in
chief dies his heir of full age an estra^ger abateth, the heier may have
assise of mort dauncestore if he will, and recover against the abator, and yet
upon an office found afterward the king shall seize for primer season and be
answered of all the mean profits, and the heir driven to sue liuerie. Further
then let us see in what cases the king shall have annum, diem et vastum and in
what not. The king shall not have annum, diem et vastum of clerks co^uict
after verdit, because he forfetes no land. Like law is it of lands in
Gauelkinde where the father is hanged, but otherwise it is if he be outlawed or
abiured for felony, for there the king shall have the year, day and wast,
and this appears 3. 3. E. 3. in Fitz ti. corone. P. 332. et Prescription. P.
50.
E. 3. et 8. E. 2. If the husband be atteinted of felony the king shall have
the year, day and wast of the lands of the wife, and yet in ye case the
lords shall not have their eschetes. But what then? the husband might have
done wast and the wife had had no remedy for the same, and by the same reason
the king may do as much, and this appears 3. 3. E. 3. in Fitz ti. corone.
P. 327.
E. 3. And also in Bracton in his second book. And also it should there
appear that the wiefe is driven to sue anouster le main after the death of her
husband. If one be arested for felony and brekes the arest, so yt in the
pursuyt of him he is killed because he would not otherwise be taken, 3. E. 3.
in Fitz ti. Corone. P. 312. et 290 et 308.
the king in this case shall have the year, day and wast, as it appears. 3. E.
3. If a man commit felony and has his charter of pardon, yet the king shall
have the year, day and wast and the lords their eschetes, and this appears
3. E. 3. for the pardon does not restore him but to the law. For though the
king would pardon him with words of restitucion, yet his grace could not
thereby restore him to the lands holde^ of other. And note yt the king shall have
the year, 3. E. 3. in Fitz ti. Corone. P. 310.
day and wast of lands in ancient demesne if it so be yt the tenant might have
sold the said lands against the will of the lord, as it appears. 3. E. 3. and
that notwtstanding yt the said lands were always used to be surrendered by ye
rod and to pass by surre^der. The words of the statute be further Exceptis
hominibus quoru^da^ priuilegiatoru^ ind^ perrege^. 46. E. 3. f. 14. 1. H. 6 fo.
12. M. 8. H. 4. f. 1 Corone. 31.
That is as much to say except such as have Bona et cattalla felonu^ by the
kings grant for a man can not prescribe to have Bona et catalla felonu^, as
appears. 46. E. 3. 1. H. 7. 8. H. 4. nor none may have this prerogative of
year, day and wast but only the king although he would claim it by charter
from the king or otherwise, as it appears 3. E. 3. But when the king is
seized of it he may commit it over, as appears by Bracton in his said 2. book.
But if the land whereof the king should have the year, day and wast be under
the yearly value of iii s.iiii. d it is used to be remitted for the smallness
and simpleness of the thing, as appears. 3. E. 3. 3. E. 3. in Fitz ti.
Corone. P. 327.
for it should cost more the suing of it out of the kings hands than the
thing is worth. And note the custo^e of Gloc' comprised in this statut, whereby
it should appear that notwithstanding any such custom yet the king should have
annu^ et die^ but not so of lands in Gauelkinde as I have said before.

Process to be sued after the death of the kings tenant in chief.
By a statute made in the 33. year of the late king of most famous memory, H.
8. the 22. chapter it is ordained and provided among other things, that no
person or persons having lands or teneme^ts above the yearly value of five
pounds shall have or sue any liuerie before inquisitio^ or office found before
theschetour or other commissioner or commissioners by virtue of the kings writ
or commission too be directed out of the kings chau^cerie or other courts
having authority to make such writes or commissions for suinge of liueries,
which writs or commissions shall not pass out of the chancerie nor any other
courts but by a warrant or bill too be assigned and subscribed with the hands
and names of the master of the kings wards and liueries, surueiour of his
liueries, or the attourne and resceiuor of the court of the wards and
liueries, or three, two, or one of them, to be directed and delivered to the
chanceller of England or to any other chanceler or officer having power to
awarde such writes: And if ye lands or tenements whereof any inquisition is to
be had by virtue of any such writ or commission excede the yearly value of five
pounds that then such as sue for such writes and commissions shall pay for the
seal and writing thereof such fees as has been accustomed. And if ye said lands
and teneme^ts whereof any such inquisicions and offices ar to be found by virtue
of any such writ or commission excede not the said yearly value of v pound,
the^ such as shall sue for such writs or commissions shall pay for the seal of
every of them vi. d and for the writing vi. d and not above. This statut does
not set fourth the name of the writ or co^missio^ that shall be sued, howbeit
these words that follow, that is to sayr (for suinge of liueries) do somewhat
open the mind of the makers of this statute, and declare that their meaning
was of the diem clausit and such other writs or co^missions as serve for that
purpose, and not of every writ or co^missio^, for so might an office be found
by a wrong writ or co^missio^, which should want matter or be other wise
insufficient to make liueries. But learn and enquire if after a good writ or
co^missio^ sued fourth, the office that is found is not sufficient, whether the
party shall have his liueri or not without suing a melius inquirendu^, or a new
office, because that some parauenture will say yt the words of the statut be
performed yt is to wite an office or inquisition is found. But to that it may
be answered and said that yt it is no office when it is insufficient at least
wise toward the party that should sue liuerie thereupon, although it be a good
office toward the king if any thing therein contained be for his benefit. And
learn also if the kings tenant dye seized of lands in diverse counties
whether by force of this statut he shall cause an i^quisitio^ or office to be
found in eueri cou^tie where ye lands lie, for so is it used to be done upon al
general liueries, and he that sueth his general liuerie otherwise missueth the
same, and is an intruder upon ye ki^gs possession: howbeit peraue^ture you will
say yt if the lands excede ye yearly value of.xx. marks he must sue a specyal
liuerie and not a general, and therefore it makes no matter for the inquisitio^
or office, and that the words of the statute will bear it well enough if there
be but one office found. But as to yt it may be said, yt the meaning of ye
statute was not so, for ye king can never be fulli e^formed of his title
unless there be an office found in every shere, and also by finding of several
offices one record may be better for the king then an other, whereof his grace
may take aua^tage, for the best shall be taken for ye king. Thus it appears by
statut how that of lands above the yereli value of vli. inquisicio^ must be
made and an office found after the death of the kings tenant be fore liuerie
can be had: and that must be by a writ of die^ clau sit extremum, for that is
the proper writ that is to be sued for that purpose if any suit be made within
the year after the kings tenants death, or a special commission in the nature
of the writ of diem clausit. For upon a general co^missio^ to enquire generally
of all wards no particular person can have liuere. And if he tarry till after
the year, then he cannot pursue any of these, but for his remedy must sue a
writ called Mandamus or a commission in nature of that writ, and thereupon to
cause an office to be found and so to have liuerie: But if an office be once
found by diem clausit and the heier dies in the kings ward, his heir must sue
Deuenerunt and no Mandamus although it be after the year of ye death of him
that dyed in ward, and so is the rule in the register. Sumetymes it happens
yt after delivery of the writ or commission and before office found theschetor
dies or is removed from his office, in which case then ye process yt is awarded
to his successor is a writ called Datur nobis intelligi, but if office be found
before his death or removing, which office is not returned, then shall therbe a
certiorari awarded to his executors to return the same. For it is a matter of
record as soon as ye iurrors have put their seals unto it, notwtstanding it be
not returned. And note ye thawardig of this writ of diem clausit or special
co^missio^ is peremptory to him ye sueth for it. For if he lose it or be taken
from him with force he gettes no more writs or co^missio^s for the lands in that
cou^tie and this appears in the new Natura breuiu^ fo. 2^^, Howbeit in 14. E.
4 it is touched by the way that in such cases he should have a new writ. H.
14. E. 4. so. 5.
ideo quere. But after office ones found by a die^ clausit or specyal
commission as well the king and party thereby are bound as every other
stranger: for so much lands as are comprised within the office, and neither the
king ne yt party nor any other shall have any more writs or co^missio^s to
enquire any further of these lands, except it be in such cases as I shall
hereafter recite, for so the law should never have end, but new heirs might
be found every day by office which were inco^uenient and the king should not
know to where to make liuerie, and this appears.14. E. 4. and 2. et 4. 14. E.
4. f. 5 2. H. 7. f. 2. 4. 4. H. 7. f. 13.
H. 7. But where after office found it is surmised for ye king that his
highness has a better title than was found for him by the first office, whether
ye matter surmised may stand with ye matter found by the first office or not, yea
although it be mere co^traria^t or repugnant it is not material: But in such
cases a new writ or co^missio^ shall be awarded. As take the case to be this. By
the first office it is found the kings tenant in chief dyed seized his heir
wtin age where in deed he dyed without heir so yt thereby the lands ought to
have escheted to the king, or that he was tenant in tail and dyed without
issue of his body, whereby the lands ought to have reuerted unto the king, in
these cases the court shall awarde a new writ or co^missio^ for the king. Like
law is it where the daughter is found heir by office and afterward ye son is
borne, or where there is but one daughter found heir by office where there
ought to have been two found heirs, or if by ye first office one is found heir
and of full age which is not heir in deed, but an other is heir which is within
age: In all these cases there shall be a new writ or co^missio^ awarded Causa qua
supra, 14. E. 4. f. 5 4. H. 7. f. 13.
as it may appear.14. E, 4. et 4. H. 7. 12. R. 2 et 30. li. ass. yea and a more
stronger case as it should appear in the new Natura breuium fo. 2^^. fo. 2^2.
et f, 295. that is to say, where the king was to have no benefit at all more
then he had by the first office, and yet a new commission was awarded, and
therefore the case was there, the second brother was found heir by the first
office and of full age, now the eldest had a commission being also of full age
to find him heir, and thereupon had his livery. So is it where 2. be found
daughters and heirs to one man of certain lands where in deed parcel of the
said land was given to one of the said. 2. daughters in fra^k marriage, now she
that claimed the frank marriage had a special commission to enquire of the
sa^e: and yet by that second office ye king had no benefit ideo quere. For this
Natura breuiu^ seems to impugn ye books before rehearsed. And like as he may
pray a new writ or commission in ye cases above rehearsed before liuerie had,
even so may he do in the like cases after liuere had if the liuerie be a
general liuerie, and thereupon as soon as the title is found the king shall
rescise: but not without a Scire facias because the statut made at Lincoln has
so provided as I shall open more fully when I come too that place, and yt in
all these aforesaid cases a new diem clausit may be as well awarded as a new
commission, as it appears titulo Trauser in Fitz. pl'. 28. anno. 29. li. Asss

What thing shall be in ye king without office or seasure and what not, and where
by an office only without any seasure or other process the king shall be in
possession and where not, and where he shall be in possession without an office
but not before a seasure, and how the king may be e^titled by any other
record as well as by an office, and where a man may enter as well upon the
kings possession as any other.
By a statute made the.33. year of the late king. of famous memory H. 8. the
20. chapter it is among other things provided that if any person or persons
shall be attainted of hye treson by the course of the common laws or statutes of
this realm, that in every such case every such attainder by the common law
shall be of as good strength, value force and effect as if it had been done by
authorite of parliament. and yt the kings majesty, his heirs and successors
shall have as much benefit and aua^tage by such attainder as well of uses,
rights, entres, co^dicions, as possessions, reuercions remainders and all other
things, as if it had been done and declared by authority of parliament: and
shall be demed and a judged in actual and real possession of the lands,
teneme^ts, hereditame^ts, uses, goods, cattals and all other things of the
offe^dors so attai^ted which his highness ought lawfulli to have and which they
so being attainted ought or might lawfulli lose and forfait if the attainder
had been done by authorite of parliament, without any office or inquisicion to
be found of the same, any law, statut or use of the realm to the contrary
thereof mani wise notwtsta^di^g. This statut maks it clear and without question
that in cases of hye treson the lands of him that is attainted are in the king
biand by without any office. But for other attainder it remains as it was at
the common Law, and therefore learn if one which holds of ye king be attainted
of petit treson or felony, whether in this case by thatainder his lands be in
the king without office, and me seems by attai^der and death together they
should be in the king in law, howbeit not in deed, until such time his
highness seize themby his officer, or that an office be thereof found, for by
thattainder the lands are forfaited to the king by matter of record, and then
when the party dies either the frehold must be in suspense, or else aiudged in
the king in law, for he that was seized has corrupted his blood and is dead
without heir, and therefore his highness is beecome owner thereof in law, and a
possession in law vested in him of the same lands, which his highness at his
will and pleasure may make a possession in deed as so^e as he will take upon him
knowledge of the said lands and sease them by his officer. And therefore the
book is agred 20. E. 4. 20. E. 4. so. 10
that if he yt is attaynted be seized of auowso^s appendau^t, as so^e as ye
church becomes void ye king may present without any office which proves yt ye
king by thattainder was patron before any office found or else how could his
highness present? and I see no difference between lands and auouso^s in this
case, for auouson is not so transitory toward the king, but yt he may take
the presentment thereof at all times when he will, quia nullum te^pus ei
occurrit. Howbeit learn what the law will in this case, for many me^ are of the
contrary opinion. And see the book.4. E. 4. co^cerni^g this matter. And so note
what is said of a possession in law, 4. E. 4. 21.
for as I take it there may be a possession in law in the king as well as a
possession in deed, which possession in law is ever without office or any other
matter of record, as when the possession is cast upon his highness by a disce^t,
reuerter, remai^der, or escheit, or in title of his seignorie or prerogative,
as for wardship, primer seisi^, or for the custody of the te^poralties of a
bishop during the time yt the sea is vacant, in all these cases without any
office or other matter of record here is a possession in law vested in ye kings
highness, yt is to say, for yt that does desce^d, reuert, remain or eschet, the
freholde is cast upon him in law as it should be upon a common person in the
like case, or else ye frehold should be in suspense, which may not be, and of
the rest the possession in law of a cattle is in his highness in right of his
seignorie, which his highness at his will and pleasure may make a possession in
deed by enter or seasure, but not to make it a possession in deed by his
grant, because there is a statute made in the 18. year of H. 6. ca. 6. to the
let thereof, which provides yt all letters patents made of lands and tenements
before office found and returned, or within one month after but only too him
that tendethe his trauerse shall be void. This statute extdes only to lands
and tenementes, therefore of the body of his ward his highness may make a
grant notwithstanding this statute as me seems, for that is neither la^d ne
teneme^t: also notwithsta^dinge that this statute does restrain the granting
of the lands and teneme^ts, yet the seisin thereof remains and is in ye king
as it was by order of ye common law which is as I said before in his highness in
law, although not in deed, until such time as he has made a seasyn or an
entree by his eschetour, or a grant thereof, which wayethe both to a seasure
and a grant, in such cases where the grant may be good and not restrained
by statute, or until such time an office thereof be found: For an office that
entitleth the king to the possession is sufficient by it self without any
seiser or enter of the eschetour to make a possession in deed in the king, if
it be so that the possession were vacant when the office was found. But if the
possession were not vaca^t, but an other tha^ he in whose right the king
seiseth was tenant thereof at the time of the findinge of the office, then must
the king enter or sese by his officer before the possession in deed shall be
judged in him: yea and if his highness seize not by the space of a year and a
day after the findinge of the office, then may be not seize without a Scire
facias to be pursued against him yt is tenant thereof. 9. H. 7. f. 2. 7 49. E.
3. f. 22. 20. E. 4. f. 10. Estopel. 255. Trauers. 50. 32. Ass. P. 32. 29. Ass.
P. 30. 21. H. 7, f. 7. P. 21. E. 4 f. 1 Guard. P. 105
And of those matters you may see books 9 H. 7. 49. E. 3. 20. et 21. E. 4. 4. E.
2. 10. H. 4. 21. H. 7. 29. et 32. li. ass. But heruppon is there a distinction
to be made, whether that yt the king is e^titled unto by office be a thing
manuell and whereof profit may be taken forthwith after the findinge of the
office or not. For if it be such a thing as is not manuel and whereof there is
no profit too be taken forthwith until such time it falls, in that case
although the king be in possession of the right of the thing, yet is he not in
possession of the profit thereof until such time as his highness actually by his
officer when it falls takes and perceives the said profit, as for example.
The thing yt king is entitled unto by office is no land but auowson, rent or a
common, although that the king by this office be patron of thauouson or owner
of the rent or common, and thereby when the benefice becomes void may present,
or when ye re^t day comes may receue the rent, or when the common is to be
taken may use the said common, yet if the office that entitleth his highness be
false, and he that was in possession at time of the office take the profit
when it falls before the kings officer do take it, in this case this taking
is no entrusyon upon the kings possessions, for he was never seysed in deed:
wherefore being driven to his accion if his highness bring his Quare impedit or
accion of trespass, the defendant may trauerse the office with him in the said
actions keeping still his possession, and need not too sue in the chancerie for
the traversing of the same. This may you see a Difference beetwene a thing
that is manuel and a thing not manuel, and what the reason thereof should be
learn, for as I. suppose the reason of it is no other but as I said before,
yt when a stranger is tenant at time of the office finding the office makes
no possession in deed in the king before an entry or a seiser. And then
when the kings officer takes not the profits when it falls but suffers
him that was in possession to take it, then was the king never seized, but he
still remains in possession that was possessed at the time of the finding of
the office until such time as seiser be made for the king, which can not be
done at all times as it may be of land, but only at such times as the profit
thereof is too be taken, that is to say, when it fallethe, and that is now
past for this time seeing it is allredy taken: and therefore the king in that
case is driven too his action. But quere whether his highness may be brought in
possession in those cases by a claim or not: And these cases may you seee in
ye books of.17. E. 3. f, 10. 21. E. 4. f. 1. 5. E. 4. f. 3. et. 4. E. 3. 15. H.
7. f. 24. Quare Impedit P. 33
Like law is it where an office is found which does not entitle the king to
the possession by entry but only by action, as where it is found that the
kings tenant for term of life or years has done wast, or being his tenant in
fee simple has cessed by ii. years, or made a feffeme^t by collusio^ contrary
to the statut of marlebrige, or such like. For it is a general rule that in all
cases where a common person cannot e^ter but is driven to his action, there the
king can not have the possession but by like action, or else by a Scire facias
after office found in nature of ye actio^, for the office in ye case entitleth
the king to no other thing but only to the action, as appears 21. H. 7. f.
1^. 21. H. 7. fo, 1^
But quere of a feffme^t yt is found to be made by collusio^ contrary to ye
statute A. 34. et 35. H. 8. ca. 5. for in ye case it semes his highness may
enter without Scire facias because the said statute apointes no action to be
sued in ye case. And note yt in all these cases before where ye king is driven
to his Scire facias or other accio^ if the office be false, ye party may
trauerse the office with ye king, keeping still his possession whether it be in
ye chancerie or in any other court, and need not to sue any ouster le main if
it be found for him, because he was never out of possession. The^ further let
us see in what cases ye king can not be e^titled but only by office or other
matter of record, and in what cases he may, howbeit not to have any possession
either in deed or in law until ye time there be a seasure made. And as to yt,
note that in all cases where a common person can not have a possession neither
in deed nor in law without an enter, there ye king can not have it without an
office or such like matter of record, as where ye king has title to enter for a
mortmain or for a co^ditio^ broken, in this case ye king can have no title
until such time as ye said mortmain or co^dicio^ broken be found by office or
by some other record, as it appears 2. ^. 9, H. 7. 2. H. 7. in Fitz ti. proc.
P. 10.
So it is in diverse other cases concerning ye kings prerogative as in ye case
of Ideotes, of lunatikes which have lands or teneme^ts, or when his highness is
to be e^titled for annu^, die^, et vastu^ of persons attai^ted, or for an
alienacio^ without license, or to sese ye te^poralties of a bishop for a
contempt, in all those cases his title must be furst found by office or
otherwise apere of record for these rights his highness has only as king. But
if his highness have cause to seize the lands of his widow that has married her
self without license his highness may seize, notwtstandinge there be no office
found of her marriage, as it appears in ye new Natura breuiu^. f. 174 Learn
what should be the reason thereof, more then in the case of alienacio^ before.
Like law has been used where his highness is to sese lands of priors aliens
within this realm ratione guerre, his highness does it without any office, for
in both these cases the kings title is notorious enoughe although it appear
not of record. But yet in those cases his highness must seize ear he can have
any interest in the lands because they be penal toward the party and of
these cases you shall find books 49. E. 3. f. 17. 21. E. 3. fo. 31. 21. H. 7
fo. 7. 14. H. 4. fo. 37. 22. E. 4. fo. 4. 3. et 17. E. 3. fo. 1. et 17. Other
prerogatives the king has which extend only to personal and transitory
things ad bona et catalla felonu^, wreke de mere, tresour troue, or the
profits of lands of clerks convict of felony, or of persons outlawed in a
personal action, to these things it semes the king is e^titled although
there be no office or other matter of record found of them as it should appear.
11. H. 4. fo. 39. 21. H. 7. fo. 7. et 27. li. ass. P. 50 And note that if the
kings title appear any way of record, Guard. 1. 40. Ass. P. 36
it is as good as if it wear found by office. Therefore if the kings tenant
alien without license which alienacion appears by fine or other matter of
record, in this case if there be an other record found that proves the lands
to be holden of ye king in capite upon these.ii. records together process
shall be made against the party by Scire facias to come and show why he should
not make a fine for the alienacion. Like law it is where there is a record to
prove that he that aliened is but tenant in tail of the kings gift, and he
pretendinge to be tenant in fee simple does purchase a license of alienacio^
and a lienethe and after dyethe without issue, which death is found by office
but nothing of his state tail or license appears in ye said office, yet
upon all these records laid together ye king shall have a Scire facias against
the alienee to show why the land should not be seized in to his hands and his
highness answered of the profits since the death of tenant in tail, for
when he was but tenant in tail it appearethe that the license was pourchased
upon false suggestyon, and so void, 40. li. assise. in Fit. ti. Guard P. 1.
and then the lands ought to reuerte to the king because his reuercion
could not be discontinued. And this may you see 40. li. ass. Then last of
all it is to be seen whether the possession may be taken from the king bye
entrye or not. And as to that, if the kings possession be by matter of
record, noe person can dysseise him or take the possession from him, for like
as the king may not take by gift from any person but by matter of record,
noe more may the possession depart from him but by matter of record, and
therefore his hyghnes ca^ not have assise or Electione firm sieve custody,
like as a common person may: yea and though the entry be not immedyatlye
upon him but upon his committee or fermer, yet it is noe disseisin to his
highness, as it appearethe 4. H, 7. folio. 2. M. 2. H. 4. M. 14. E. 4. folio.
35. H. 6. in. Fits. titulo. Suggestion. P. 9.
2 and M. 35. H. 6. folio. 1, Bye the which said book of 35. it also
appearethe, that if the king or his commyttee be cast out of the wardeshyppe
of the lands that the remedy is in this manner, that is to say, upon
suggestion thereof made in the Chauncerye, there shall be awarded a writ
called Amoueas manum, and that upon a certain pain, which writ may be
awarded only upon this suggestion without any presentmente or inquiry,
and this writ may be granted to the committee as well before possession
had of the ward as after, for where the king was once possessed by office,
and grauntes it over, yet this possession still remains, for the king abides
still gardeyne notwythstandynge any such grant: And therefore this writ of
Amoueas sub pena lyethe for the grauntee or committee, although the grant be
absque aliquo inde reddendo. And if upon this writ of Amoueas the defendant
do not restore the thing, then shall go out against him an attachement, upon
which writ the defendant may appear and show his title, which if it be
found against him he shall then make restitucion by judgment and pay a fine
and answer the mean issues and profits. Thus does it appear that the king
cannot be disseised or eiected if his highness be once seized by matter of
record. Otherwise it is before his seisin be by matter of record, for if
before office a stranger enter by title or without title this is no intrusion
upon the kings possession, but in this case the heir may have Assise of mort
dauncester against the stranger if he will, which proves that by his entry
he has gotten both a freeholde and a fee simple. But as soon as the office
is found and the eschetoure enters, this possession of the stranger which
entered witheoute title is clearly undone, and the freeholde and the fee simple
reuested in the heir But if the entry of the stranger wear by title and
afterward office is found and the king seisethe, whether then it be so or not, learn. And it should seem to be all one, or else the kings seizure is
not good, for how can the king seize in an other bodies right if the right
wear taken away before by an entry? therefore it should seem either his
highness has noe title in that case to seize, or else by his seizure, the
freeholde and the fee simple must reuest in the heir. But note that if the
king will bye color of a record seyse an other man's land, which record
geeues him noe title in deed, notwythestandynge any such seysure, yet he
that has right may enter upon the king, and bye his entry reuestes again
in himself both the freeholde and fee simple as where it is found the kings
tenaunte dyed seysed but of an estate for term of life the reuersion to an
other and this notwythestandynge the king seisethe, in this case if he in the
reuersion enter upon the king this is a good entry: and therefore the case
was, he made a feffement after his entry and it was thought to be a good
feffeme^t. Like law is it where the king is entitled but only to the
profits as upon an vtlagarie in a parsonall action or upon the conviction of
a clerk, in these cases if the party enter and make a feffeme^t or if a
stranger that has title to enter do enter he dyschargeth the king of his
interest, and of these matters, Trauers. 12. Assise. 156.
you shall find books 8. H. 4. f. 16. 21. E. 3. f, 1. 3 H. 7. 10. E. 3. 27. ass.
P 15. 9. H. 6. f. 20. and. 21. H. 7. f. 7.

Enterpleder.
Sometime it happenethe that by two several offices found in one county
several parsones be seuerallye found heirs to one man, wherebye forasmuch
as the king is brought in doubt to which of them his highness may make
liuerie, they therefore must first enterplede, and when by enterpleder the
priuitie of the blood is tried beetweene them, then his highness ought to
make the liuerye to him that is tried to be the next heir of him that dyed.
As for an example, by one Diem clausit or special commission in one county
one is found heir to him that dyed the kings tenant and of full age, and by
an other Diem clausit or special commission in the same county one other is
found heir also to him that dyed and within age, in this case the heir that
was first found shall have a Scire facias in ye chauncerie against him or her
yt was last found heir to come and show why liuerie should not be made unto
him that last dyed seized thereof upon which writ if a Scire feci be
returned and the party defendaunt comes not, or if he come and confess that
he himself is not heir then the plaintiff in the Scire facias shall have his
lyuerie, but if he come and entitle him by the second office, and trauerse
the first as he needs must (for thenterpleder must needs rest upon the
first office, and not upon the second) then as thissue is found, P. 36. E. 3.
in Fits. titulo. Trauers P. 44.
so shall he or theye for whom it is found, have lyuerye. And this
appearethe in the new Natura breuium fo. 294. 36. E. 3. and 16. E. 4. folio.
4. Howebeit a great doubt ryseth in our books upon this matter whether
thenterpleder shall be fourthwithe after the second office found or not until
such time as the heir that is found within age commethe to his age, and as
it appears by the said book of 36. Ed. 3. in this case, where one was first
found of full age and after the other within age thenterpleader was
fourthwithe, for it wear noe reason that he that was right heir and of full
age should be delayed by the nonage of the other that is noe heir. And a
stranger shall be received to trauerse the office not withstandinge, the heir
that is found by the office that is trauersed be withein age. And then it is
noe reason that the heir in this case be in worse condition then a stranger.
But take it, by the first office one is found heir and within age, and by the
second office an other is found heir, and of full age, whether in this case
they shall enterplede or not, or whether thenterpleader shall be before thage of
the other: And surely it should seem by the grounds and rules declared
before upon the writ of Diem clausit extremum, that the second office in this
last case is void, because there is noe better title found for the king than
was by the first, and then if it be void, there can be no enterpleder.
Howebe^yt in the new Natura breuium fo. 2^0. it appears to the contrary
hereof and that they shall enterplede in this case, and yt the second office is
not void for there the heirs found by both offices wear of full age. And
yet that notwythstandynge theye enterpleaded. And so is.5. T. 5. E. 4. f. ^
Edward the fowerthe where it is said that if by one office the heir is
found within age, and by an other office an other is found heir and of full
age, that in this case theye shall enterpleade but not before the child come
to his full age. And Townesende justice says in.1. H. 7. that if by diverse
offices ij. Livery. P. 17
be severally found heirs and within age, now the king shall keep the
lands till their full age, and then theye shall enterpleade, and if theye
dye before enterpleder their heirs within age, several Deuenerunt shall be
awarded yt is to say, for every heir one and by the same being found
severally heirs to the auncester, theye shall enterpleade at their full age,
like as the auncester should have done if they had lived, and if the dyinge
of any of them wear wytheout issue and the other found to be his heir then
is thenterpleder determined. Thus may ye see how books vary in this matter, and
yet by the way note this difference, that is to say, where by the first
office the heir is found within age and were of full age, for by these books
it should seem that if he be first found withein age, notwithstanding
that by an other office an other is found heir and of full age, yet he shall
not enterplede with the other till he be of age, contrary it is if the first
be found of full age, and the next within age, and the reason may be for that
the king is first seysed of him yt is wythyn age, with whom the law weyes more
in presumption to be heir than the other, and this title is the best title
that the king has, for it entytlethe his highenesse to a greater benefit
than does the second office, and this second was found upon a commission
granted more for the kings benefit tha^ for ye heries that should be found by
ye same and therefore it wear reason that he that is first found heir have
more favor if any favor be to be showed thanne he that was last found
heir, or at the least for the kings benefit that the matter be respited til
the child be of age. Also the said Justice Townesend said further, that if
one be found heir in one county and an other found heir in an other
county, yet they shall enterplede, which can not be as me seemethe: for once
we have a general ground that a man can not sue a general lyuerie by
parcelles but first he must cause an office to be found in every shere
where he have lands, and when all the offices be returned, then to have his
lyuerie and not before, then this case where one is found heir in one sheere
and an other in an other sheere, hear none of them both can have lyuerye,
because he has noe office found butte in one sheere and not in the other:
and then if there can be noe liuerie there can be noe enterpleder, wherefore
it should seem in yt case they ca^ not e^terplede. 2. ^. 7. f. 2. Trauers 49.
And here with agrees the book in.2. and.8. Henry the seventh. So no
enterpleder can be but where there is an office thorough the whole found for
every heir in every county wheare the lands lie, but it is not allwaye
requisite that theare be several offices found, for sometimes upon one
office found by it self alone there may be an enterpleder, and that is
wheare ij. be found heirs by one enqueste as two twynnes that is to say, two
children borne at a burden. And it is to be noted that every enterpleder is to
try the priuitie of blood only, that is to say, which of these ye enterplede
is next heir to him that last dyed seysed, and not to try their rightes in
the lands. And therefore if by one office one be found heir of a general
tail, and by an other office an other is found heir to the same land as of
estate in special tail, theye shall not enterpleade, as it appearethe in 21.
H. 7. fo 3^. Also they must be both found heirs to him that last dyed, and by
whose death the king did seize: for if one be found heir to him that dyed
seized and another is found heir to the au^cester that dyed seized next
before the last dyinge seized, in this case they shall not enterplede, as it
appearethe in H. 2. H. 6. f. 5. Also theye shall not enterplede but where both
heirs claim by one self title of lands holden of the king, for if the kings
tenant dye seized of lands holden of other as well as of the king, and one is
found heir to all the lands, and by an other office an other is found heir
only to the lands holden of other, in this case theye shall not enterpleade,
as it appears in.12. E. 4. f. 18. for he yt is found heir by the second
office can not have liuerie if thenterpleader wear found for him, because he
is not found heir of all as is before remembered. And therefore if one be
found heir virtu te breuis. and an other is found heir virtute officij, in
this case they shall not enterpleade, because he that is found heir virtute
officij, can not have liuerie if thenterpleader did pass with him: for ye nature
of enterpleder is to have (...) for him with whom it is found. And note that
notwithestandyng an enterpleder is not to try the right in the land but
only the priuitie of blood: yet the issue tried between them shall be an
estoppel afterward in an action used of the possession of the same auncester
by whom theye claim, Estoppell P 255.
as in Assise of mortdauncester or cosinage, as it appears in.4. Edward the
second. And note that as two or more shall enterplede that claim as heirs,
even so shall any other that claim not as heirs, but by soome other title,
if it be so that their title affirm the kings possession, as take the case
to be this. Land holden in chief is alyened to diverse persons at diverse
times, and this found bye office the king seiseth, and after comes every of
ye alienees and prays to make his fine and to be restored, now they shall
first e^terplede and try which of their feffem^ts ought to take place are any
of the^ gets restitucio^, as appears in 43. Trauers 25.
li. ass. So it is if any of them come into the chauncery wytheout process and
confess thalienacion, as it appears by the said books, for by the
confession the king is entitled against him that confesses as well as if it
had been found by office.

Trauers.
TRauerse for goods was at ye common law, but trauers for lands found by
inquisition before theschetor is given by ye statut made in ye 34. year of E.
3. ca. 14. which says in this wise. Item acc^ est q^ la ou terres ou ten^ts
so^t seisies en la maine le roy per office del eschetor co^teigno^t q^ le
tenant le roy ent fist alienacio^ sa^s co^ge le roy, ouq^ le tenant le roy per
service de chl'r morust ssi^des terres and ten^ts aua^tdits en so^ demene come
de fee et so^ heir deins age, et puis la cause ^^tifie en la chau^cerie, et
celuy qui terres so^t seisie veigne en la cha^cerie et voet trauerser loffice
qui fuit primes pris per ma^dem^t le roy, que les dites terres ne soyent my
seisables, soit a ceo resceu and soit le process mau^des en bank le roy a tryer
et oustre fair droit. This statut exte^ds only to the offices taken virtute
breuis aut co^missionis, and not to offices taken virtute officij. And also by
this statut though ye trauerse were found for ye party, yet might he not have
had judgment til a proce de^do ad iudiciu^ had been awarded. And therefore was
there an other statut made in the 36. year of ye said king the.13. cha. the
tenor whereof is this, Pour les greuouses complaints queux le roy au^ oye de
son people de ses eschetoures, and de lour male port, il voet and ordeigne del
assent auauntdit, que terres seisies en sa maine par cause de guard, soyent
saluement gardes sauns wast ou destruction. Et que leschetoure neyt nulle fee
de bois, veneson ne pessoun, nauter riens, mes respoign^ au roy des issues et
profits annuels proueignaunts des dits terres sans wast, ou destruccio^ fair.
Et fill face auterment et de ceo soit attaint, soit reint a la volunte le roy,
et re^de al heir ses damages au treble, a sa proper suit, sibien deins age
come de pleine age, and eyent ses amiss tanque il soyt deyns age la suite pur
luy, respoignants al dit heir de ceo qui serra issint recouere. Et auxint
dauters seisies en la main le roy par enquest doffice pris deuaunt lefchetor
teign^ mesm^ cest ordiuau^ce and penance deuers leschetours. Et sil eyt null
ho^e qui met challenge ou claim as terres issint seisies, qui Leschetour
maunde lenquest en la chancellary deins le mois apres les terres issint
seisies. Et que brief luy soyte liuere de certifier la cause de sa seisine en
la Chauncellarye, and illeoques soyt oye sau^s delay de trauerser loffice ou
auterment monstrer son droite and illeoques maunde deuaunt le roy affair
final discussion sauns attender auter maundement. Et en cas que ascun veigne
deuaunt le chaunceller and monstre son droyte per quel demonstraunce per bones
evidences de son auncien droyte et bone title que le chaunceller per sa bone
discretion and aduis du counsel sil semble que il besoygne auoire counsel,
que il less et baylle les terres issint en debate al tenaunte rendaunt ent au
roye le value si au roy appertient en manner come il et les auters chauncellers
deuaunt luy ou^t faits auant ces heurs des lours bons discretions issint que il
face suerte que il ne ferra wast ne destruction, tanque il soyt aiudge. Et que
les dits eschetours preigne^t tielx enquests en les bons vill' and per bons
gents, and de ceo ouertment, and par endentures affairs enter les dits
eschetours et ceux des e^q^sts come auter foits estoit ordeign^ per estatuts.
Anno. 24. E. 3. Et si null eschetor face au contrary de cest ordinance suisdit
eit la prison des.ii. ans, and ouster ceo soit reint a la volu^te le roy. By
the common law before the making of these statutes a man had no other remedy
to avoid a false office but only his peticion. Howbeit in.24. E. 3. 24. E. 3.
f 4.
wylby says that if thoffice had been found before commisioners or any other
shanne theschetor, the party should have had his trauerse by thorder of the
common law. Parauenture he may be moved so to say because those statuts give a
trauerse only to offices and before eschetors, making no mention of any
offices and before any commisioners. Also before these statutes if after
l^uerie or Ouster le maine sued, there had been a new office found, whereby
the king had been entiled to reseise, and thereuppon a Scire facias according to
the statut of Lincoln against the party that had pursued the liuerie or Ouster
le maine to come and show why the land should not be reseised, the party in
that Scire facias might have trauersed the office that was so newly found, as
I shall more plainly declare when I come to that place. Also Bab. said in the
schequer chamber before all the Justices An. 8. Trauers 47.
H. 5. that these statutes that geeue trauerse are only to be understand where
ye king is entitled to ye land but for a time, as for wardship, alienacio^
without lice^s and such like. But if his highness be entitled to ye fee simple
or the freehold, there he yt is put out by the office shall not have his
trauerse, but is put to his peticion Tamen quere, for though the first statut
be this as Bab. has said, yet the second is not, but is general, and therefore
may be extended to al offices what matter soever they conteyn, Tra^ers 37.
as appears H. 19 R. 2. where it was found yt one had encroched upon the kings
demeines which office in deed was false for that yt the thing supposed to be
encroched was parcel of his manor that was so presented and no part of the
kings demesnes: in this case ye party being put out of that parcel of ground
by theschetor was received to trauerse the office, and yet thoffice entitled
the king to the fee simple. Also those statutes seem not to give trauerse but
to him that is put out of possession by the office. But the statut of.8. H. 6.
ca. 16. alowethe any trauerse profred by him that feels himself grieved by
any such enquest although he be not put out of possession by theschetor. And ye
statut semes all so to allow trauers of an office taken as well before
commisioners as before the eschetor. Howbeit ye statut gives no trauers but
only makes thereof a rehearsal. These statuts that give the trauerse seem to
offer it generally to any man that will desire it or that does put challenge or
claim to the lands whereof he is put out by any office. Howbeit ye exposition
has been otherwise that is to say, that his challenge or claim must be such as
the law will admyt and allow, for every man can not trauerse that would or that
makes his challenge or claim: for these statutes are intended where the king
is entitled by office only, for if his highness be entitled by an other record
beside the office and entitled as it were by a double matter of record, the
party shall never have his trauerse. As take the case to be this, a man is
attainted of treson by act of parliament or otherwise by verdit, and afterward
it is found by office that the said person attainted was seized day of the
treason committed of certain lands, which in deed were never his lands but
mine, in this case if I be put out of my la^d by this office I can not trauers
it Causa qua supra, and yet I am a stranger to this record, 46. E. 3. f. 17.
10. H. 6. f. 15. 4. E. 4. f. 27.
as appears in 46. E, 3. 10. H. 6. and. 4. E. 4. But if therbe noe such
record of attainder I shall be received well enough to trauers the office,
aleginge first to enure me to a trauerse that there is no such record of
attainder as appears in.4 H. 7. Also he that is found heir by office shall
not trauerse the same office that so finds him heir if that part of thoffice
that concerns the tenure in chief be true, 4. H. 7. f. 6.
although the rest of the office be false: and therefore if the kings
tenant dye seized his heir being of full age, and by a false office the heir
is found within age, in this case, he can not trauerse this office as
appearethe T. 5. E. 4. 5. E. 4. f. 4. et. 5.
And the reason of it is beccause the heir can not salsifie thoffice that he
himself is to affirm by his liuerie whenne he shall sue it. For though he
would cause an other office to be found according to the truth of the
matter, yet it were not to the purpose to help him, for ye best office shall be
taken evermore for ye king, that is to say, that that geues his highness most
auantage and the heir driven to sue his liuerie upon that office only, for
seeing the king is bound by an office as well as is the heir, it is reason if
any be better for him tha^ other that he be bound to that only, and not to
the other, and the law presumes the one office to be as true as the other
until such time a trial thereof be made, which trial cannot be by the heir,
for he is bounden as I said before by the office that is found, without any
further choice, having no prerogative in such matter, and if he should be
received to his trauerse in this case, then upon the trauerse found for him he
should have the lands out of the kings hands by an Ouster le mayn without any
liuerie suing, as lands that the king ought to have seized, which were
inco^uenie^t. For every way ye king ought to have seized those lands against
any yt claims to be heir until such time as liuere be sued thereof. Like law
it is where the kings tenant dies seized of land in diverse cou^ties his heir
being of full age, and in one cou^tie the same heir is founden wtin age, and in
an other county he is founde^ of full age, in this case the heir shall not
trauerse thoffice that found him within age Causa qua supra: for then for the
lands in one cou^tie he should have the^ out of the kings hands wtoute any
office or livery suing. Trauers. 39.
And this case appears in.32. H. 6. But if an office find yt my father held
his lands of the king in chief by knights service wherein deed he held not of
him in chief, in this case I shall be received to trauerse this office. For if I
should sue my liuerie upon the sone I should be concluded evermore after to
say, but yt the lands were holde^ in chief of the king, and for ye cause I
shall be received to my trauerse as every stranger shall be in the like case: for
if my trauerse be true the^ ca^ ye king have no cause to seize those lands, and
therefore not like the cases before remembered, as appears M. 1 H. 7. Livery. P,
10
The words of these statuts be yt he whose lands be seized shall trauerse or he
yt puts challeng or claim to ye la^d so seized. These words be not so
gen^aly understand as they be spoken for most men understand them that he
will challenge or claim but a term of years only shall not be received to
his trauerse where the king is entitled to the freeholde by thoffice, as where
it is found that the kings tenant is seized of certane lands and is dead
without heir whereby the lands ought to escheate to the king, comes one and
sayethe that he is tenant for term of years of these lands of the demise of
a stranger, without that that he that is supposed to be the kings tenant
was ever seysed of these lands, this trauerse lies not in his mouth: for he
that has but a chatell shall not be received in any case to falsify the
record that gives any man interest in the freehold although he be a stranger
to that record. Contrary law is it of him that has a freeholde or
inheritance in the land, for they shall trauerse the record in such case.
Like law is it where the king is entitled but to the wardeshyppe of the heir
of his tenant he that is fermer of the dimise of a stranger shall not
trauerse his office although the king be not entitled thereby to any
freeholde, for it was not the mind of the makers of these statutes to help
them that claim: but chatels which are accounted in law as nothing, because
they perish and abide not. Et de minimis non curat lex. Howbeit learn what
the law will in these cases, for I have seen noe books of them. The lord in
title of wardshyppe shall trauerse the office, and yet he claymethe but a term
of years in the land, as where it is found by office that such a one held
lands of the king in chief and dyed his heir within age where in deed he
holds no such land of the king but only of me by knights service, in
this case, I that am lord shall trauerse this office, that is to say, show
how they be holden of me by knights service without that they be holden of
the king, as appears in 1. H 7. Trauers. 20.
For there it touches the lords inheritance in the right of his seignory, and
because he by ye false office is to lose ye profit yt is presently fallen by
reason of his seignorie, it is reason he be received to trauerse the office.
But if he were but lord in socage he should not be received to his trauerse,
because he thereby can make no title to the wardshippe of the body, 37. lib.
ass, P 35.
and lands of the child, for it is a good general ground if the king be
once seized, his highness shall retain against all other that have noe title,
notwithstanding it be found also that the king had no title but that the
other had possession before him, as appears in.37. lib ass. where it was
found that neither the king nor the party had title, and yet adjudged that
the king should retain, for thoffice that fyndes the king to have a right or
title to enter, makes ever the king a good title allthough it be false, and
his highness thereby may take possession against any other that is seized of the
lands, and reteyne until such time as thoffice be trauersed by him that has
title and tried to be a false office. And therefore no man shall trauerse
thoffice unless he make him self a title. And if he can not prove his title
to be true allthoughe he be able to prove his trauerse to be true, yet this
trauerse will not serve him. As for an example, it is found the kings tenant
died seized of certain lands that he held of the king in chief, his heir
beeinge within age, where in deed he had made a feffement in his life time to
an other of those lands, it is no trauerse for the feffee to say he dyed not
seized, but he must first make him self a title by the feffement: and for
as much as it is found that the lands are holden in chief, if he will make his
title good against ye king he must show fourth a license of alienation or a
dispensation thereof, or else he must trauerse the tenure in chief as well as
he shall do the rest of thoffice, otherwise his title is not good, Trauers P.
44. et. 46. Liuerie p. 18
as it appearethe in.36. E. 3. 3. H. 4. 6. H. 5. and.3. H 7. f. 14. Howbeit
Hussy holds opinion that not man may trauerse the tenure but the lord or the
heir unless his title be found by office, but whether the law be so or not
learn, for as I take it the lord and every stranger yt has a title against
the king, making his title shall trauerse the office before his title be
found by office: for when the trauerse is found for the party his title now
appears of record, and by the trauerse found, the office which was the kings
title is utterly destroyed and gone, so that now the king is not to make any
liuerie of the lands to any person but only to a move his hands from the same,
with the mean issues and profits as one yt had no cause to seize them. And
therefore every man may enter now that will if he have right or title of entry
to the lands, for the king delivers them to no person certain but only
ryddes his own hands of them as he that had never seized the^, but otherwise it
is where the king is to make liuerie, for there his highness must be informed
certainly by matter of record who shall be his tenant and who it is that ought
to receive the liuerie at his hands least his highness be deceived in
thadmitting of his tenant which is and ought to be a great matter toward the
lord, and therefore the cases be not like, wherefore I think a man may trauerse
by force of these statutes without having their title first found by office:
and so be our books.36, E, 3. 2. E. 4. f. 10. 16. E. 4. f. 4. Trauers. 44.
and 43. li. ass. P. 20. Howbeit 5. E. 4. fo. 5. semes to weye to the contrary
hereof, and 12. H. 6. also, where it is said that if it be found that the
kings tenant died seized where in deed he was jointly enfeffed with me, now can I
not trauerse this office except an other office were found for me. But
contrary law should it be if it had been found by ye office iointenant with him
for term of life where in deed I was iointenaunt with him in fee simple, in this
case I may trau^se thoffice, because me^tio^ is made of me in ye said office,
this book case admitted to be law, yet it varieth from ye case before remembered
of ye stranger that trauersed thoffice, for here thoffice is true, and when it
is found by office that he died seized, this may be allthough the said dying
seized were iointlye with an other for any thing that is expresselye found to
the certainty, and then the king here is to admit an other tenant, as in the
case of ye liuerie before of whom as yet he has no credible informacion, that
is to say, by matter of record, and then it is like to the cases of tenant by
the courtesy, tenant in dower, and the deuisee which in no wise can be admitted
to their estats unless mention be made of them in the office or some other
office or matter of record found for them, 9. H. 7. fo, 24 Brief. 618.
as appearethe in 46. E. 3. and M. 11. H. 8. and for none other reason as I
gather it but only for that thoffice is true, and they are to be admytted the
kings tenants which can not be but by informacion by matter of record, vt
supra. Then let us resort to the place we were at before: that is to say, no
man may trauerse with the king unless he make himself a good perfect title,
as to say that the tenant which is supposed to dye seized did enfeffe him, or
that a stranger was seized and did enfeff him without that that he dyed
seized. And so note by the way that he may convey his title as well from a
stranger as from him that is supposed to dye the kings tenant, as appearethe
in.36. Trauers 44.
Ed. the third, and when he has made thus his title, then he must trauerse
the kings title which is thoffice, for it is not enough for him to rest upon
his own title al though it be never so strong without aunsweryng the kings
title, yea although it were good against a common person, yet against the king
it is not so without traversing ye office. And therefore if he will say yt the
tenant in his life time did levy a fine unto him of these lands, Sur
conusaunce de droit come ceo quil ad de son done, by virtue whereof he was
seized until such time as he was put out by this office and prays
restitutio^, this is no ple against ye king, and yet this matter were a good
plee in assise of Mortdau^cester brought by ye heir, for in that case he
should be stopped by this fine, which is executed to say the contrary
thereof, that is to say, that his father dyed seized without showing how his
father got the possession again sins the time of the fine levied. But yt is
no plee against the king, for the king can not be estopped namely in this
case beeinge a stranger to the record. And also the statut geues a trauerse
and by this manner of pleadynge he takethe no trauerse. Like law it is if it be
found by office that the kings tenant in chief enfeffed one B. without
license, comes one D. and says that he dyed seysed, per. 46. E. 3 in Fits.
titulo Trauers. P. 17.
and his heir entered and enfeffed him by the kings license, this is noe plee
without traversing the feffeme^t made to B. and yet against any common person
it were a good plee but not against the king, for his title must be answered
fully: and that is the feffeme^t, and these cases appear 46. E. 3. 43. li.
ass. P. 25. Also it is not sufficient to trauerse one of ye kings titles but
he must trauerse them all, for though the kings title that he is seized by, be
found not good, yet if there be any other record that makes the king a title
whereby he may retain the lands, the party must avoid also that title or else
he gettes no Ouster le main, but learn if there be no such record in Esse or
being at the time of the trauerse tended, and hanging ye plee upon the
trauerse a new record yt s^ to say, an office is found which entitleth the
king, whether in this case ye pertie shall be driven to trauerse this office or
not: ere he have his Ouster le maine. And it seems he shall not: for so he
might be delayed of his possession infinitlye by finding one office after an
other, wherefore this office found hangyng the trauerse shallbe accounted in law
as though it had been found after the party had had his Ouster le maine, in
which case then the party upon the first trauers found for him shall be
restored to his possession by an Ouster le maine, and then after upon a Scire
facias sued against him to show why these lands should not be reseised,
upon this new office found for the king, he shall be received in that Scire
facias to trauerse this new office. Howebeit this auantage he winnes hereby,
that is to say he then trauerseth with the king keeping still his possession,
where else he should trauerse being still out of possession. And this case ye
may find.11. T 11 H 4.
et M. 13. H. 4. Thus may ye see when a man trauerseth with the king, he must
trauerse all the kings tytles that have then their being by matter of record,
and is not bounden any further to answer for that time. Then let us see how
the king shall replye unto this trauerse: and in that it is to be noted that
the king has a prerogative that a common person has not, for his highness
may chose whether he will maintain thoffice or trauerse the title of the
party, and so takes trauerse upon trauerse, or when all his tytles be
trauersed his highness may choose to maintain them all or else but one of
them. But then note that if he maintain but one, that is to say, take issue
but upon one which is found with him that tended the trauerse, in this case
the party shall have his ouster le main notwithstanding there be no issues
taken upon the other titles, but whether the king shall ever take advantage
of the other titles after or not this is to be seen? and I think he should,
for though the other titles shall not in this case let the party of his Ouster
le main, yet it seems the king may call the party again by a Scire facias
to answer his other titles, or else his highness to reseise as I said
before, for no nient dedire can prejudice the king nec tanta remun eratio,
like as it may do a common person. And therefore seeinge he did not renounce
his other titles openly nor expressly, it seems his highness by his
prerogative shall have advantage of them at any other time when it shall be
his pleasure. Trauers. 15
And these cases ye may see.13. Ed. 4 fo. 8. 9. Hen. 4. et 4. H. 7. f. 4.
Howebeit it appears in the said book of.13. E. 4. that after the king
ioineth an issue upon a trauerse, his highness cannot in an other term wayue
this issue and take a new, for so the party might be delaied infinitely of
his right, which should be as it were a wrong committed unto the party,
and the king by his prerogative may do no man wrong: but after issue
joined he may demurre in law, and waiue thissue for there is noe matter
changed but the old remainethe And by the demurrer the law presumes that
thissue was misioined and so might be a ieofaile, and therefore his highness
may demurre in law after issue, but not change his issue and take a new. And
note that if the party take a trauers which is judged insufficient in the
law, this is peremptory unto him, Trauers. 24.
and he shall not be received after to take a new, as it appears.40. lib.
Ass. Howebeit.14. E 4. fo. 1. the contrary oppinion is holden, and that it is
not peremptory, because it proceeds in the Chauncerie which is the court of
conscience. But as to that a man may answer and say that a Chaunceller
has two powers, the one absolute the other ordinary, and this trauerse is
before him by an ordinary power, in which case all things touching the same
must proceed as it should before any other ordinary judge of the common
law, and therefore it should appear by a book in.4. H. 6. fo. 12. et 22.
Trauers, 12.
Edward 4. fo. 9. that if the party be nonsuit in this trauerse it is
peremptory unto him, for so might he delaie the king infinitely, tamen
quere, and learn whether one may proceed with a trauerse the heir beeinge
within age or else shall tarrye till he be of full age for the book is in 5.
T. 5. E. 4. f. ^
Edward 4. that he shall tarry till the heir comes to age. But in this
question one may make this distinction, that is to say Whether ye trauers be
te^ded by a stranger or by ye heir, for so^tymes it happens, yt ye heyr shall
trau^s as well as a stranger. For no more then a stranger can have ouster le
maine without trauersinge all the kings titles, no more may the heir have
liuerie without trauersinge all his tytles, and then if the trauerse be to be
taken by the heir, he shall not be thereunto admytted until he be of age,
because that before that time he has no cause to have his liuerie. But that
reason serves not where the trauerse is to be taken by a stranger, and
therefore it should seem that he should have it by and by: For he has
cause to have an ouster le maine forthwith, and that with the mean issues and
profits, and therefore it were no reason that the nonage of a third person
should hinder him with whom he is not to plede or to try any right but
only with the king.

For if the child have right, he may enter upon the stranger after he has
his ouster le maine and try his right with him: and so at no mischief. And
note as I said before that the heir must trauerse all the kings titles ere
he can have liuerie, and that whether the kings title be in his own right or
in the right of an other, in his own right, as if there be a record that
proves this land to be aliened without the kings license, or that thauncestour
of thenfaunt that would sue his liuerie was but tenant for term of life, the
reuercion to the king and has made a feffement to the kings disheritance or
such like, in these cases notwithstanding the king did not seize by virtue
of these records but only by virtue of thoffice which found thauncestour
of thinfaunt dyed seized the kings tenant in chief of estate in fee simple,
yet the heir geatteth no general liuerie upon that office until such time
as he has avoided these other records And if he have it before: it is a
cause of reseiser. So it is where the kings title is in right of any other,
as if one be found heir by office, and after by another office an other is
found heir of the same lands to the self same auncestour, in this case he
that was first found heir cannot have his general lyuerie until such time
as he has destroyed the other title either by an enterpleder or a trauerse,
for if it so come to pass that he cannot enterplede, then must he trauerse or
by some other means avoid the record ere he can have his said general
liueries, and if he sue his general liuerie otherwise, it is then missued, and
a good cause geeuen to the king to reseise. And this enterpleder or trauerse
beetwene them that claim as heirs is by the order of the common law and not
by statute, and can never be, but where both their titles be found first by
office, and the reason is, because that as soon as the matter is discussed
between them, he for whom it is found shall forthwith have his general
liuerie, which he can never have if his title be not first found by office:
and therefore not like the case where a stranger trauerseth with the king
that is to have but an ouster le maine, for there the king had no right too
seize, and therefore his title need not to be found by office as I have said
before. But in the other case who so ever shall claim the land as heir, his
highness has right to seize in the right of the said heir, and to have his
primer seisine or wardshippe as the case does require. And therefore his title
must be first found by office: but where one heir is to trauerse with an
other heir duringe the kings possession, this shall not be until he that
is first found heir by thoffice come of age, because until that time, the
lands ought to remain in the kings hands and then he to have liuerie: but
whether he that was first found heir should tarrye for thage of him that
was last found heir I have said my mind therein before in ye title of
Enterpleder. But where a stranger is to trauerse, he shall not tarrye for
thage of the heir for the causes before remembered. And so there appears to
be a great difference beetwene a trauerse taken by him that is a stranger,
and by him that is heir. But at this day most liueries that be sued are
special liueries, which contain in them selves a pardone, and therefore the
myssuinge of them is dispensed withal by the words of the pardone contained
in the said liuerie. And so many of these things that I have spoken of
before are not much to be observed if the liuerie or Ouster le maine be not
general. For I see no let but that an ouster le maine may be granted
specially as well as a liuerie. And last of all it is to be noted that this
trauerse extendes not to every record that entitleth the king, but only to
such records as be trauersable, as an office or such like, as I shall show
my mind therein more fullye in the chapter of Peticion. Other trauerses there
be which be trauerses by order of the common law. And not by any statute,
as trauerses upon enditements or presentmentes, whereof I entend not to
entreat in this place, among which trauerses there is also by order of the
common law a trauerse concerning goods and cattalles of persons attainted,
for the which a man shall trauerse with the king although his title
thereunto be by double matter of record. As take the case to be, a man is
attainted of treason or felonye or outlawed in a personel accion and after by
office it is found that he was possessed of a horse or any other gooddes as
his own proper cattle where in deed they be the goods of a stranger, in
this case the said stranger shall trauerse this office with the king. So is
it if it be found by office that a man outlawed in a personal accion is
seized of certain lands which in deed are my lands, and theschelour by force
of that falls office takes the profits, in this case I may disturb him
without trauersinge thoffice. And those cases appear.4. Edward.4. fo. 24. 13.
Edward.4. fo. 8. T. 9. H. 6. fo. 20. and M. 47. E. 3. fo. 26. Then further. The
words of the said statutes of anno 36. be, that if any came before the
Chanceller and show his right, whereby it may appear by good evidence that he
has an ancient right and good title, then the chaunceller shall let the
said lands to the party that tends the trauerse yeldinge to the king the
value if it be aiudged for the king, in manner as he and the other Chaunceller
have done before him by their good discretions, so that he to whom it shall be
letten find surety to do no waste or destruction before the trauers be
discussed. By the words of this statute it should appear that the
Chauncellours before this time by their discrecions had used to let the
lands to the party to ferme, Quare impedit p. 34.
and that is true, for the king used so to do upon a peticion which was
made to his highness by the order of the common law in steed of a trauerse now
used, as appears 5. Edward 3. Trauers, 12.
and therefore I think his highness may do so at this day both upon a peticion
and a Monstrance de droit, although the statute make no mention thereof, for so
it was used to do by order of the common law, as it appears by the book
before. And of this matter see the book.3. Henrye.7. Now is this statut
amplified and made plainer in this point by the statute made in the.8. year
Henry.8. the.26. chapter, which will that no lands or tenementes seysed into
the kings hands upon enquest taken before eschetours or commissioners be in
any wise granted or letten to ferme by the Chaunceller or Tresorer of
England or any other the kings officers, till the said enquestes or
verdites be returned fullye intoo the Chauncerie or theschequer, but all that
time shall abide in the kings hands and by a month after the said return,
if it be not so that he or they that feel themselves grieved by the said
enquest or that are put out of their lands and tenementes come into the
chauncerie and offer to trauerse the said enquestes and to take the said
land or tenementes to ferme, which if they do then the said Chancellor,
Tresorer, or other officer shall let them have them to ferme shewinge good
evidence, proving their trauerse to be true according to the form of the
statute of an.36. E. 3. to hold till the issue upon the said trauerse taken
be found and discussed for the king or else for the party, and also
finding sufficient suertie too pursue the said Trauers with effect, and to
render to the king the yearly value of the tenementes whereof the trauerse
shall be so taken, if it be discussed for the king. And if any Letters
patentes of any lands or tenementes be made to any other parson to the
contrary, then the same to be void after the month. Hereuppon is to be noted
that the shewinge of the euyde^ce is only rehearsed to the lettynge of the
lands to ferme and not to the trauerse, For by this statute he may trauerse
without shewinge any euydence, but not have the lands to ferme. Also by these
Statutes he is not bound to noe certain time for taking of his trauers, but
only for taking of the lands to form, for he may tend his trauerse when
he will so he desire not the ferme of ye lands, But if he will have them to
ferme he must tend his trauers within the month, as appears.P. 13. E. 4.
fo. 8. and now by the statute of anno. 1. H. 8. ca. 9. he has three months
liberty to do it. Also note the things that he must find suertie for, that
is to say, to sue with effect, to pay the rent after the trauers be
discussed, and to do no waste or destruction. In this word rent is emplyed
all the arrerages of the rent that shall encurre mean between the taking of
the ferme and the discussinge of the trauerse and yet it is not so expressed.
Also the lease that is made to him that tendes the trauerse is not of any
term certain, but only by these words Donec discussum fuerit, for the
words of the statute be so, and therefore as soon as the trauerse is found
against him that tends it by and by the lease he had in the lands by
force of the Statute is void, as apperethe in.4. Edward the.4. folio.29.
without any further process: Howbeit forasmuch as the words be to hold
till the issue upon the said trauers taken be found and discussed, for the
king or for the party, I would learn if the party be nonsute upon his
trauerse or that the trauerse be aiudged against him upon a demurrer in
law, whether the lose should be void or not, like as it shall be upon the
issue found.

And it seems it shall be by the words comprised in the said statute of anno
36. Edward.3. But not by any words comprised in the said statute of an.8. H.
6. For the words be tanque il soit aiudge, and therewih agrees the book in
4. H. 6. fo. 12. Also note that before this statute of anno.8. H. 6. the king
did use to grant the custodye both of the lands and body to any other to
whom he would after office and before any trauers tended, and this grant
was good, because it was not then restrained by any statute. Howbeit upon the
trauers tended a Scire facias should have been awarded against the patentee
comprehendinge in the same all the trauerse. And if he had been returned,
warned and came not, his patent had been void eo facto, as appears in the
said book of.4. Henrye.6. at least wise for the lands, and yet there was
then no estatute that made them void, quod nota. And then by and by they
should have been letten to ferme to him that had tended the trauerse. But
now whether since the making of the said statute of an.8. Henry the.6. fo.
17. a Scire facias. shall be awarded against the Patentee upon a Trauers, learn
for the said statute makes such letters patentes void for the grant of the
lands, but not so for the body, and therefore it seems a Scire facias
shall be still awarded and the grant also of the said lands is not void till
after the month. H. 8 H 6. 17. 5. E. 4..3 and.5 M. 14. E. 4. 1
And now by the said statute of anno.1. Henry.8. not till after three
months, and so it should seem by the book of.5. and.14. Edward.4. and 8.
Henry 6. that a Scire facias shall be awarded at his day notwithstanding the
statute of.18. Henry.6. cap.6. which ordeines that all letters patentes made
before the kings title found by inquisicion returned into the Chauncerie or
other matter of record shall be void. For that statute also extendes but to
lands or tenementes no more than the other statutes do, so that the graunte^
of the body or of any other thing which is no land or tenement is good at
this day before any office or inquisition thereof found. And it is further to
be noted that this statute of an.18. Henry. 6. makes not such letters
patentes good for any time which he granted contrary to the tenure of that
statute but they be void fourthwith. And learn and enquire if at this day
within one month or.3. months after office found and returned the master
of the kings wards and liueries with advise of one of the counsel of the
kings court of Wards and liueries made a lease of ye wards lands or of an
idiotes lands being in the kings hands for the time of the kings interest
in the same, and after within the time appointed by the statute comes a
stranger and trauerseth the office, whether in this case he shall have ye
lands to ferme or not. And it seems that no, because this statut that geeues
that power to the master of the kings Wards, was made long time since the
statutes of an.8. or.18. H. 6. that is to say in the.31. year of king H.8.
which statute is general and no saving or exception made of thither statutes
before. And then it is a general rule Quod posteriores leges priori bus
contrarias abrogant. And some thinks at this day for wards lands, or idiots
lands there shall be no lettynge of them to ferme to him that tended ye
trauers, if they were letten before the trauers tended by the master of the
kings wards, but of other lands it remains as it was before the making of
this statute of a.31. Henry.8. and note that if the king seize not for any
Wardshippe but only for primer seisin because the heir is of full age, if a
stranger in this case will trauerse it is to little purpose. For if the king by
and by after will make liuerie to the heir, the trauerse is become void as
appears 1. Henry.7. fo. ^. for the king in that case has no cause to
retain the land but to deliver the same to him in whoes right he seized being
able for it, and he that tended the trauers is at no mischief, for he may
now after this liuerie pursue for his remedy against the heir, and if it
should tarrye in the kings hands for the trauerse sake, his highness should
then have all the profits if the trauers were found with him for all the time
that the said trauers did depend, whereunto his highness has no right but
only the heir, and therefore it seems there shall be no trauerse but where
the lands is to abide in the kings hands for a certain time, as for
Wardshippe, fine for alienacion, or such like. But if he that tended the
trauerse be found heir by office, and is to have liuerie of that land as
well as the other that was first found heir, otherwise it is for the reason
made before. And so of an enterpleder, For in that case the king is bound to
make the liuerie too him that is tried rightful heir, but not so in the case
of a trauerse tended by a stranger which claims not as heir, for he is to
have noe lyuerie, but only an ouster le maine, by which ouster le main ye king
delivers nothing but leaves his own possession as one that has no right to
keep the possession any longer. And it appears sufficientlye that he had
no right to keep it after the time the heir that should have it was of full
age: Wherefore a stranger in that case cannot trauerse, for so twoe that had
no right, by trauersinge together might keep the third that has right from
his possession: which was never the meaning of the makers of the said
statutes. And notwithstanding that this book. 1. H. 7 be that after the
trauerse and before the ferme granted the liuerie was made, yet that makes no
difference, for whether the ferme were granted before the lyuerie or after
when the trauers is become void by the liuerie, the ferme which depends
upon the same is also void as me seems. And note also that the said
statute. 1. Hen. 8. which geeues three months for having the lands to
ferme makes no mention of the tresorer of England, but only of the
Chaunceller, so that for any thing that is to be letten by force of that
statute it must be done only by the Chancellor and not by the treasorer. As
it should seem as well of offices returned into theschequer as into the
Chauncerie, and therefore within the month after an office returned into
theschequer, the tresorer may let the lands to ferme to him that tendes the
trauerse according to the said statute. 8. H. 6. But if it be to let after
the month the Chaunceller of England must do it as it should seem. And note
also that by a statute made anno. 1. H. 8. cap. 11. Any person that sued his
liuere in time of king H. 7. upon any office that found he held in chief
where in deed he held not in chief, which said offices were found by the
procurement of Empson and Dudley in the time of ye said late king, may
trauerse thoffice in like manner and form as he might have done before the
liuerie sued, if it be so yt he be now seized of ye same lands, saving that
he shall not be restored to the mean issues and profits. This statute
seems not to extend to the parties heirs that had liuerie, but only to
the party him self. Quere hoc.

And note that in the court where thoffice is first returned into, there I
shall tend my trauers: as if it be returned into the Chauncerie, then in the
Chauncerye, and if in the Eschequer, then in theschequer, as in deed all
offices virtute officij are retournable in theschequer only, and such as be
virtute breuis vel commissionis be retournable in the Chauncerie. And now by
the Statute of.33. H. 8. cap. 22. No eschetour may sit virtute officij only
to find any office of lands holden of the king of the value of v. li. or
above upon pain to forfait v. li.

Monstrance de droit.
THe Statute of an.36. E.3. that geeueth a trauerse says in this wise. Et sil
eit null home qui met challenge ou claim aus terres issint seisies que
leschetour maunde lenquest en la chauncellarie deins le mois apres les terres
issint seisies, et que brief luy soit liuere de certifier la cause de sa
seisin en la Chancellarie, et illeoques soit oye sauns delay de trauerser
loffice ou auterment mre son droit, et illeoques maunde deuaunt le roye a fair
final discussion sauns attender auter maundement. This statute speaks both of
trauerse and Monstrance de droit disiunctiuely, whereby a man may gather that
if Monstraunce de droit were not by thorder of the common law as it is said
13. E. 4. f. 8. that it is: yet were it geeuen by this estatute. And no book
that bears date before this statut can I find that treates any thing of
Monstraunce de droit. Wherefore without prejudice to any man's oppinion, mine
oppinion is that it is given only by this statute, but whether it be so or
not so, I do not greatly force. Let us see what it is, and in what cases it
lies. If the king be entitled by office or other matter of record that is
trauersable, Howbeit there is no cause of trauerse for that the office or
record is true, in this case any manne that has right to the possession of
the freeholde of this land which in shewinge of his right is able to confess
this office and avoid it, shall be received if he be put out of his
possession or grieved thereby to come into the Chauncerie and show his said
right, which being there proved to be true, judgment shall be geeuen that the
kings hands be amoued from the possession of ye said lands with the mean
issues and proftes to be restored unto the party that sueth the said
Monstraunce de droit As for an example, it is found by office that the kings
tenant by knights service in chief dyed seized of certain lands which are
descended to his heir being within age, where in deed in his life time I
recovered this land against him, and suing no execution suffered him to dye
seized thereof, now upon this office returned into the Chauncerie shall I come
and show my right, that is to say, this recouere and auerre that this land
found by office is the land that I recovered or parcel thereof, which being
so proved and tried I shall have an Ouster le maine. Like law it is if the
kings tenant disseised me of those lands, and I made my continual claim, or
that I had title to enter for condition broken into the said lands in the
life of the kings tenant, and I entered and after was disseised by him. But
quere if I did not enter in his life, whether now I may be helped by a
Monstraunce de droit upon the kings possession. And me thinks not because I
have noe right in that case till I enter, for until that time the right
continues still in him, so that the king then has a right ere I have a right
which ought too be preferred and take place since it is but for a time before
mine. And for these cases see the book in.3. H 7. fo. 2. But if the king be
entitled by matter of word not trauersable as if he be entytled by double
matter of record, in this case I can not have my Monstraunce de droit no more
than I can have in the like case of Trauerse, unless my title be found by one
of the said records. As take the case to be, It is found by office that one
such that holds of the king disseised me, and then committed a felonye,
upon whom I entered, after which entry the said tenant was attainted of
the felonye, in this case I shall have the land out of the kings hands by a
Monstrance de droit causa qua supra. And yet the kings title is here by a
record and not trauersable, that is to say, thatteinder. But what than? My
title is also found by office, and appears by matter of record, M. 3. E. 4.
26 A. 4. H. 7. 6
which being proved true does clearelye avoid the kings possession, and that
is the reason I shall be received in this case to a Monstraunce de droit, as
appears in.3. Edward. 4. And therewith agrees the book 4. Henry. 7. where
king Richard ye third was attainted of Treason by act of Parliament and found
by office that he was seized of certain land, comes one B. and says that in
the said Parliament it was enacted that an atteinder of treason had against
the father of the said B. should be avoided and adnulled, and he restored
to his lands, and yt these lands comprised in the office were in the hands of
the said king R. by attainder of his father, and aiudged that upon this
Monstraunce de droit the party should have restitucio^ because his right
appeared by matter of record. Like law is it where it is found by office yt such a
one is attainted of felony and is seized of such lands which are holden of ye
king, now he that has cause to sue his Monstraunce de droit can not be
admitted thereunto by reason of these two records. Howbeeit if it be so that
there is noe such attainder in deed, then may the party that would sue a
Monstraunce de droit say that there is no such record of attainder, which
beeinge found true, he shall be received to his Monstraunce de droit, as
appears in the said book.4. H. 7. For now is there no record against him
but only the office, and notwithstanding that by thoffice thattaindour is
found, yet this fyndinge makes nothing for the king: if it be untrue: For
the jury can never find a matter of record, and if they do, it is to little
purpose: for the record is ever triable by it self, and if there be such a
record it will appear though they find it not, and if there be none, the
finding of it is void. This may you see that a Monstrance de droit lies
sometimes although the king be entytled by double matter of record, if it
so be that the parties title appear by matter of record or else it lyethe
not: M, 14. E. 4. f. 1. and. 7
And yet Choke, Littleton and Nedham, held oppinion in.14. E. 4. that if it
be found before theschetour that one was tenant in tail of certain lands
holden of the king the remaynder to another in fee, and that he in the
remainder is outlawed of felonye, and that tenant in tail is dead without
issue, where in deed he being tenant in tail before the statute De donis
condicionalibus after that he had issue enfeffed one B. in this case the
said B. shall show this matter, and that the vtlagarie was after the
feffement made and so have the lands out of the kings hands by a Monstraunce
de droit: But it should seem their oppinion is against the law and the
books before rehearsed, unless this feffement were found by office,
Peticion.12. Trauers.7.
because it appearethe that the king in this case is entytled by double matter
of record. And note that where the king is entitled but by office alone,
there the party may have his Monstraunce de droit although his title be not
found by office, as well as he should in the like case if he were to take a
trauerse, But otherwise it is where the king is entitled by an other record
beside the office which is not trauersable, there he shall not be received
unless the parties title appear by matter of record. And note that if the
king have committed the land over, he that sueth his Monstrans de droit must
sue a Scire facias against the commit even as he should upon a trauerse,
and as for taking the lands to ferme or for suynge the said Monstrans de
droit during the time the heir in whose right the king has seized is
within age. Like law is to be used as is before declared upon the title of
Trauerse.

Peticion.
PEticion is all the remedy the subject has when ye king seiseth his land or
takes away his goods from him having no title by order of his laws so to do,
in which case the subject for his remedy is driven to sue unto his sovereign
lord by way of peticion only: for other remedy has he not, as it has been
sufficiently declared before upon the 15. cha. of the kings prerogative. And
therefore is his peticion called a peticio^ of right, because of the right the
subject has against the king by the order of his laws, to ye thing he sueth
for. And this peticion may be sued as well in ye parlem^t as out of ye
parliament, and if it be sued in ye parliament, then it may be enacted and pass
as an act of parlem^t, or else to be or dred in like manner as a peticio^ yt is
sued out of ye parliament which is in this manner, first after ye peticio^ is
endorsed it shall be delivered to the Chau^celer of England, and the^ shall there
be a co^missio^ awarded out of the chau^cerie to find the right or title of
him that sueth the peticio^, which being found by enquest, then he may
enterplede with the king and not before, Trauers 51.
as appears in 18. E. 3. fo. 15. 4. E. 4. f. ^. 11. H. 4. f. 5^ et 10. H. 4.
And if upon the said commission no title be found for the party but only
for the king, yet the peticion shall not abate, but the party shall have a
new commission in that case for the peticion is butte as void until the
parties title be found by office, Peticion. 11.
and is not to be said depe^dinge until that time, as appearethe in.3. H. 7.
Quere for he sued a new peticion in that case. And note that when the peticion
is endorsed, the party must follow and pursue the same according to the
endorsement, or otherwise his suite is void: because the endorsemente is his
warrant there in, Peticio^. 1. 3. and. 18.
as appearethe in 18. 22. et 46. E. 3. and therefore sometime bills of
peticion be endorsed and sent into the kings benche or common place and not
into the Chauncerie, and that grows upon a special conclusion in his
peticion and a special endorsement upon the same, for the general conclusion
is que le roy luy face droit et reason, which is as much as if he had prayed
restitucion of that that he suethe for: And there upon such a general
conclusion the endorsemente is Soit droit fait as perties which ever is
delivered unto the Cha^celler, as is declared. But if the conclusion in the
peticio^ be special and the endorsement special, then they shall proceed
according to the said special endorsement. As for an example, the king
recouereth in a Quare impedit by defaute against one that was never summoned,
in this case the party that lost can not have a writ of disceit until such
time as he have sued unto the king by peticion for the said wrytt and if in
his peticion he conclude and pray that the king do him right generally, now
the justices before whom the recovery was had can not examine the deceit
without an original writ directed unto them for that purpose, and yet before
he obtained that writ his right shall be enquired of by commission, but if he
conclude specially in his peticion that it may please his highenesse to
command the justices to proceed to the examinacio^, which peticion is
endorsed accordinglye, the^ may they do it, without any such writ or co^missio^
to be sued, as appears in.10. H. 4. Trauers 51.
So ever the following and pursuynge of the thing must be according to
thendorsement, for howsoever the conclusion in the petition be, the endorsement
may be always as it shall please the king as me seems, and according to that
the party must pursue it. And note that in every peticion where the king
has granted the land over to an other, a Scire facias must be awarded
against the patentee like as it shall be wheare a trauerse or Mo^strans de
droit is tended, which patentee if he have not the whole fee simple but that
there is a reuersion in the king or that the king is bound to warrauntie,
when he appears upon the Scire facias he may pray a write of Search to
be awarded into ye tresorie to search what theye can find for the kings
title, as appears in.9 E. 4. f. 5^. where Sottle sayethe that every peticion
must make mention of all the kyinges titles, for if it be found by the write of
search that any be omitted, the peticion shall abate: and the reason of it is
because that if on this suit of peticion the king take an issue with the
party which is found against him, his highness then shall be concluded for
ever more to claim by any of the points contained in ye said peticion. And
here with agrees ye book T. 16 E. 4. 16. E. 4. f. 6.
But quere if search shall be granted upon a trauerse or Monstrans de droit,
because the statute of An 14. E. 3. cap. 13. that concerns search does speak
only but of a peticio^, but to that it may be said that at the time of
making of ye statut there was noe trauerse geeuen. And Skrene says.7.
Peticion.6.
Henry the fifth that search shall not be granted but where one suethe by
peticion. And note also that in every peticion whether it be sued in the
parliament or else where, or whether the lands remain in the kings hands
or not in the kins hands but be granted over, yet writs of search shallbee
awarded to search the kinks title ere ye party shall e^terplede with the king.
Also (...) appears in the book of.16. E. 4. before remembered ye in^^ a
peticio^ the kings pate^tee had aid of the king, and there appears also yt if
ye king be not entitled by any matter of record but without any title do enter
into my land wherebye I sue unto his highness by peticion, yt in this case no
search shall be granted, because no title ca^ be intended for the king in such
case. Thus have I opened and declared the manner of suing a peticion, but to
declare specially where yt lies and where not it were a long matter to entreat
of, But generally and by general rules a man may brieflye declare it, that is
to say, in all cases where the party has a right against ye king, and yet no
trauerse or Monstrans de droit, will serve, there is he driven to his peticio^.
As for an example, where the king is entitled by double matter of record. Like
law is where he is entitled by a record not trauersable, as take the case, the
king recovered by assent and without title, a stranger that has good title
shall not salsifie this recovery by a trauerse or Mo^strans de droit, but is
driven to his peticion, so it is where the king recouerethe by erronyous
process the party shall not have a write of error, until he have sued by
peticion for it. So likewise it is if lands are holden of me bye knights
service a stranger brynges a Precipe in capite of those lands against my
tenant and recouereth by defaut, although by this recovery, I am not put out
of possession of mye seignorie but that the tenant holdethe of me as he did
before and also of the king by conclusion, yet in this case if the recouerer
dye his heir within age, and the king seisethe the ward, I am driven now to
my peticion for the ward, 17. E. 3. f. 36.
as appearethe in.17. E. 3. for this is an other thing than ever I was seized
of. Also it is a general rule that where a stranger that has title can not
enter upon a common parson but is driven to his action, there he ca^ have no
remedy against the king but only a peticio^, as take the case to be. It is
found by office the kings tenant in chief died seized his heir within age
where in deed ye said tenant had nothing but by disseisin done to me, and I
suffered him to die seized without any claim made, in this case I get no remedy by
Monstraunce de droit or trauerse, but am driven to mye peticion. And so in all
cases like wheare mine enter should be tolled if the lands were in the hands of
a common person, as appears in 8. and. 9. H. 4. M. 7 H. 4. fo. 27. 36. et 41.
T. 9. H. 4. f. 7 et 11.
Also where as the king does enter upon me having no title by matter of record
or otherwise and put me out, and deteines the possession from me that I can not
have it again by entry without suite, I have then no remedy but only by
peticion. But if I be suffered to enter, mine entry is laweful, and no
intrusion: or if the king grant over the lands to a stranger then is my
peticion determined, and I may now enter or have mye assise by order of the
common law against the said stranger being the kings patentee, as appears in
4. E. 4. f. 23. and. Assise. P. 156
M 24. E. 3. f. 34. And a great difference is between this case and the case
where the king is entitled by double matter of record or such like, for in these
cases notwithstanding the grant made over by his highness of the lands to an
other, yet am I driven still to my peticion to the king and have no other
remedy, but it is not so in this case: and the reason of this diversity is
because that when his highness seiseth by his absolute power contrary to the
order of his laws, although I have no remedy against him for it but by
peticio^ for ye dignities sake of his person, yet when that cause is removed
and a common person has the possession, then is mine assise revived, for now
the patentee enters by his own wrong and intrusion, and not by any title
that the king geeueth him for the king had never title ne possession to in
that case: and therefore not like the other cases before, where the king has
the lands by the order of his laws that is to say by doble matter of record
or such other like. Trauers. 134
And this apperethe in 4. E. 4. f. 21. et 25. et in. 24. E. 3. f. 34. et 33.
li. ass. Like law is if I have a rent charge out of certain land and the
tenant of the land enfeffed the king by deed enrolled, now during the kings
possession I must sue by peticion, but if his highness enfeffe a stranger I may
distreine for my rent upon the stranger, and so is it in all the cases before.
where a man may have his trauerse or monstrance de droit, if the lands be once
out of the kings hands, the party the^ may have his remedy that the common law
gives him: for in all these cases the peticion did lie only for the dignity
of his person and not for the right that he had to ye possession of the thing.
But if the king purchaceth lands holden of me, learn what remedy I may have
for my seignory during ye kings possession: for wilby says in 20. E. 3. that
I have no remedy in ye case and if his highness make a feffm^t of these lands
to hold of him self, Assise. 124.
yet can I not distreine for my seignorie like as I might do in the case of the
rent charge before, because there can not be ii. seignories of one self land,
but am driven to my petition in this case, Peticio^. 1^
for the king upon this feffm^t by order of his laws should have revived the
seignorie in me that is to say, to have a^de the feffee to hold of me of whom
it was hold before, as appears in 46. M. E. 3. and. 7. E. 3. f. 59 and so
has it ben used always where his highness has lands by forfaiture of treson
holden of a common person, if he make a feffement of those lands it must be
Tenend of them that they were holden of before as I have opened upon the xii.
chapter of the kings prerogative. And so it is where the time is concluded to
his highness for a mortmain: But that is given by the statut de religiosis. Also
if the king disseise my tenant, during this possession I have no remedy for
my seignorie but only by peticyon, and if ye king e^feff mye tenant to hold of
his highness, yet have I no remedy for my seignorie, but only by peticion. But
if one hold certain lands of me which are falsely found by office to be
holden of the king in Capite, and the king seiseth them and enfeoffeth my
tenant thereof to hold of his highness, in this case I may now distreine for
my seignorie and am not out of possession, Auowrye. 113. Assise. 122. 124.
and these cases appear.20. 32. et. 46. E. 3. fo. 1^. and the reason of the
diversity is this, because that in the last case my seignorie was never
suspended, but ever more had his being and that notwithstanding thoffice, for
it did not appertain to me to trauerse thoffice and discharge the tenure, but
that matter was left to my tenant to do, and seeinge he did it not he has
charged him self of a tenure by way of conclusion to the king as well as to
me, but it is not so in the other case. Also it is to be noted that if the
king seize lands in title of Wardshippe and make a feffement thereof in this
case the heir need not to sue his peticion but may have a scire facias, to
repele the said letters patents, because ye king was deceived in his grant as
it appears. T. 7. H. 4. fo. 17. and M. 21. E. 3. fo. 50. For there the king
himself is in possession still till liuerie be made so ye heir there has no
cause to sue by peticion, and the king is bound to deliver it unto him in
whose right he seized. Also note that suit by peticion can be to none other
than only to the king, for no such suit shall be made to the Queen or to the
lord prince, for these parsonages have no such prerogative, as it appears 10.
and. 11. Trauers. 51.
H. 4 et. 10. et. 14. E. 3. but though the king he seized sometime in an
other bodies right and not in his own, Peticion. 4 Voucher. 135. Scire facias
135.
yet the suit that is to be made must be by petition as well as if he were
seized in his own right, as appears.10. H. 4. And as I said in the beginning
a man shall have his peticion for goods as well as for lands, as where
theschetour seyseythe goods of one that is outlawed and has accoumpted for
them in the Eschequer and after thutlagarie is reuersed in this case ye party
has no remedy for his goods but only by peticion. Peticion. 8.
And this case you shall see in.34. H. 6. Howbeit Catesby and Hussy hold
oppinion to the contrary here of M. 1. Peticion. 10
H. 7. And learn if a peticio^ be sued for lands and the plaintiff be nonsute
whether it be paremptorie or not, because some say that that suit is as it
wear his write of right, Peticio^. 11. et 17.
and hereof see the book. 11. H. 4. and.3. H. 7.

Where a Scire facias must be sued before a lyuerye or Ouster le maine.
IF the king be seized of a ward and grantethe yt durante minore etate now when
the heir comes of full age and sueth his general liuerie he needs not to
sue a Scire facias against the pate^tee, because his estat is determined by the
full age of ye heir, and yet it may be that the heir had forfaited his marriage
unto the patentee, and then he has good cause to retain the land til he
be satisfied of the forfaiture. But the law shall not entende any such
forfaiture to be, and therefore there needs no Scire facias be sued. Like law
is it, as seems if the king grant the wardshyppe for no time certain, but
quamdiu in manibus nostris fore contigerit, if he make a special liuerie unto
the heir beeinge within age, there needed no Scire facias to be sued, so is it
where the grant is but dutante beneplacito nostro, but if the king have land in
ward and enfeffeth thereof a stranger some think the heir needs not to sue
any Scire facias against the feffee but at his pleasure, and some other think
he must, beccause his estate is not determined by the full age of the heir,
as it is in the first case I put before. And it may be that an auncester
collateral unto the child has released with warrantie which is descended
which the feffee might plead if he came in by Scire facias or else by the
liuerie she said warrantie is utterly lost, and these cases appear P. 7. H.
4. f. 27. 30. and 43. 10. M. 12. E. 3. 50 2. H. 7. f. 2
H. 6. f. 20 M. 1. H. 7. f. 11. and.5. E. 4. f, 3. Howbeit me thi^ks it were
wisdom for the heir to sue a Scire facias to thentent that he therebye with
the kings help might repelle the said letters pattents and bring them as
it were out of his way, which thing he may ^oner bring to pass by the
kings suit than by his own. Also the heir when he sues livery need not to
sue any Scire facias against him that has the lands to ferme upon a
trauers, as appearethe in 1. H. 7. Livery. P. 18
for he has noe term certain in the land but donec discussum fuerit, which
words are beecome void after the heir is of full age, because it can not be
then discussed with out preiudyce of the heir: and therefore void. Then
further let us see wheare he that sueth by peticion or that tends his
trauers or Monstrans de droit shall sue a Scire facias and where not. And as to
that it is a general rule that if the king have granted the wardshyp of the
lands over for any term certain, or granted any other certain estate in the
lands, he that sueth his peticion, Monstrans de droit, or trauerse must sue a
Scire facias against the kings patentee in such case, Trauers 25.
but he needs not to sue any against the heir in whose right the king is
seized of the land, because he that sueth does not plead with the heir but
only with the king or such as has his intereste, as appears in 37. lib.
ass. Like law it is if the kings grant be but durante beneplacito nostro, or
that it be made hanging the trauerse, peticion, or Monstrans de droit, in
this case he that suethe need not to sue any Scire facias. And these cases
appears in 5. E. 4. f. 3. and 13. E. 3. Brief P. 260.
And note that if the king grant the wardshippe to one which grants it
over to the husband and to his wife, then must there a Scire facias be sued
both against the second lessee and the patentee, but the wife need not to
be named in the Scire facias, For there lyethe no voucher in this Scire facias
Howebeit in a writ of guard she should have been named, but also of the
voucher, Brief. 618.
and this case is adjudged. 46. Edward the third and yet nevertheless Neuton
is of oppinion in. S Henry the sixte f. 17. that no Scire facias shallbee
awarded against the lessee in this case but only against the kings patentee.
And learn if the king grant but the body alone whether there need any Scire
facias to be sued or not. Also note this case, that is to say, where the king
seized forwardshippe before office and made a grant over, and after office
was found wherbye it appeared that the childs father in whose right the king
seized, Assise. P. 156
was but tenaunte for term of life, the reuersion to an other, in this case he
in the reuersion had an Ouster le main without suinge any Scire facias
against the patentee, as it appears in.10. Edward the third, and at this
day the case is more stronger for such a grant were void because it is
before office. And therefore upon any such void grant there need no
Scire facias And in.14. Edward the fowerth fo. 1. it appearethe that one had
trauersed an office which was sent into the kings benche to try and had
forgotten to sue his Scire facias, and yet he was suffered to go again into
the Chauncerie to pray a Scire facias upon the first trauerse for it was said
that the Chauncerie is a court of conscience and for that cause the thing
that was there amiss may be reformed at all times. And learn if this Scire
facias be sued against many and one of them dies whether this shall abate
the trauerse, Monstrans de droit, or peticion wheruppon it is sued or else
only the Scire facias, It semes that nothing shall abate but the Scire
facias because no mention is made of the tenant neither in a trauerse
Monstrans de droit of peticion. And of this matter see the book in M. 7 H. 4.
fo. ^.

Ouster le main.
OVster le main is the judgment that is given for him that tends a trauerse
or sueth a Mo^strans de droit or peticion, for when it appears upon the
matter discussed that the king has no right nor title to the thing he
seized, then judgment shall be geeuen in the Chauncerie that the hands be
amoued: and thereuppon Amoueas manum shall be awarded to theschetour, which
conteruailes as much as if the judgment wear geeuen that he should have
again his land as appears, in 24 E. 3 f. 3^. and this judgment sometime is
given in the kings bench and not in the chauncerie, and that is in case where
the parties descend to an issue. then for the trial thereof theye of the
chauncerie must awarde a venire facias returnable in the kings benche at a
certain day, at which day notwithstanding that the shirife return not the
writ, yet the Alias venire facias shall not be awarded out of the cha^cerie
but out of the kings bench: for there and no where else it is recorded, quod
vicecomes non misit breue, as appears in.13. E. 4. f. 8. And when the issu is
found for ye party they of the kings bench shall gave judgment and awarde an
ouster le maine without suinge for the same in the chau^cerie, as appears in
21. H. 7. and.29. Livery. P. 10
li. ass. and yet the record of the issue that was tried was not sent thither
but only ye transcript thereof, but what then, the judgment is to be given
upon the verdit which is there of record, and when both courts be courts
of the common law and the kings courts, theye use not to remaunde any thing
to the place from whence it came but to give iugem^t there where it is tried,
and Sharde said that when a record comes once into the kings benche, it
shall never go from thence. Also note that sometime there goes an Ouster le
main as well to the kings patentee as to the eschetoure and that is where the
king has granted the thing that he seized to any other, but notwithstanding
yt there go such wryttes of Amoueas manum both to theschetor and to the
party, yet the king is out of possession as soon as judgment is given in the
chauncerie, not forcing whether any of these wryttes be awarded or not either
to theschetoure or to the party: and thereupon the party for whom judgment
is geeuen may enter forth with into the lands and shall be said noe intrudor,
Assise P. 156.
as appears in H. 10. E. 3. and the reason of yt is because the judgment
tyethe not the king to the delyuerye of the possession, but only to leave his
hands of the possession. And note that if a Diem clausit come to the eschetor,
he hy virtue of that write before he make any inquiry may seize the land for
the kings beehofe, which after he has once seized, if after by office noe
title be found for the king then the party yt ought to have again the land,
may sue for the same in the chauncerye where the office is returned and then
Amoueas manum shallbe awarded, for until the making of a statute at Lincoln.
Anno.29. E. 1. called the statute De escaetoribus the party had noe remedy
in such case but only to sue unto the king himself, as it appearethe by
the said statute, and now that statute geeues an Ouster le maine vna cum
exitibus. Howbeit this Ouster le main may not be sued by parcels no more
than a livery and therefore if diverse writtes or commissions be awarded into
diverse counties to enquire after the death of A. B and in one county it is
found that he holdethe nothing of the king but in socage, and in the same
county and bye ye same e^quest it is found yt he holds of an other by
knights service yet ye lord by knights service gettethe noe Ouster le main
until ye other e^quests be also returned in, Causa qua sup^ for if he should,
then he should have it for the lands and not for the body, and so should have
it by parcelles, for the body may not be delivered as long as there is any
enquest to be returned in. And the reason of it is, because that enqueste may
find a tenure of the king by knights service in chief, in which case his
highness ought to have the whole lands, and if it be but a common tenure by
knights service, yet his highness at the least ought to have the
preferrement of the body, yea and though the lord of whom it is found to be
holden be the archebyshoppe of Caunt or such a one against who^ the kings
prerogative will not hold for the lands, yet because it holds for the bodies
he gets no Ouster le maine until all the offices be returned in, for the
reason before made, as appears in 16. E. 3. Liuerie p. 29
Howbeit by favor and grace of the court tharchebishoppe had his Ouster le
maine before the other offices returned. And so note how in times past men
have sued Ouster le maine upon a seisin made for the king although the office
found afterward did not entitle his highness. Howbeit at this day it is not so
used, for theschetor will not seize unless there be an office found, although
he might lawfullye do it by the words of the writ Diem clausit, which usage I
do nothing mislike, consideringe the great trouble it auoideth that might else
ensue to the kings subjects. And note that in all cases where the king is
seized or in possession of the la^d by office or any other matter of record,
his highness seisin can not be delivered out of him until such time an Ouster
le maine be sued, as if the king be seysed by office of the land of any
Idiots, or for a^nu^ diem and vastu^ of lands of any that is attainted, in
these cases he that should have these lands after the kings title determined
must sue an Ouster le maine, otherwise yt is where the king is not seized of
the land but only entitled to the profits, as of the lands of him that is
outlawed in a personal action, or of clerk conuicte or such like, there need
no Ouster le main to be sued, as appears in.8. E. 2. 4. Trauers 28.
E. 3. and.9. H. 6. f. 20. and if the lands which is seysed into the kings
hands be holden ioyntlye bye many yet every one of them by himself may sue
his Ouster le maine of his own part without his companions, as appears
in.2. Assise p. 166.
H. 4.

Lyuerye.
THe manner of the suing of a general livery does partly appear in the title of
Liuerie in the great abridgeme^t of Justice Fitsherbert A. 12. H. 4. ti.
Liuerie p. 4. and A. 21. R. 2. ti. Liuerie. p. 5. Where it is declared yt after
the heir that was in the kings ward is come to full age, then a writ De etate
probanda shall be awarded unto the shirife of the shiere where the said heir was
borne, to e^quire of his age, in which case it is required by the law yt
every one that shall pass in that enquest shall be of the age of.xliij. years,
meaning thereby yt they and every one of them should be of full age at birth of
the child, because that such have better knowledge and remembrance then
other of lesser age have, and that the heir that is in ward inform the
enquest by certain signs and tokens of the time of his birthe, as to say,
that that year there was a great tempeste or a great plague, or such like,
which signs so given in evidence shall be returned by the shiriue as well as the
principal matter. But whether it be requisite to have xij. or a less number
in the said enquest or not, learn, for soome think that any number from two
upward will serve, because the trial is by proves, and see the new Natura
breui um fo. 136. where it appears that this writ of Etate probanda was
directed to the eschetour of the county where he was borne and not to the
shiriue. Howebeeit note always that theye wheare the land is shall never
enquire of this matter, unless the birthe and land wear both in one shiere,
for theye have enquired of it allredy, that is to say when theye did find the
first office. Thus when theye have found his age, that enqueste shallbee
returned into the Chauncerie, and from thence shall be awarded a write to the
Lord Keeper of the privy seal, signifying unto him that the heir is of full
age, and upon that a privy seal shallbee directed to the Chamberlain of
England to receive his homage, which being received, the said lord
Chamberlain shall certify the lord Chaunceller by write of the receipte
thereof, and then shall the heir have his liuerie. But it seems that if the
heir were never in ward but of full age at death of his auncester and so
found by office, that then he shall have liuerie as is declared upon that
office only, without suynge any write of Etate probanda: for the writtes of
liuerie in this case make no mention of any Etate probanda as they do in the
other case, but if the heir be withein age and in the kings ward and after
when he comes to his full age other lands descend unto him which the king
also seisethe by an enqueste that fyndes the heir of full age, yet this not
withstanding he must now sue an Etate probanda upon both offices, as
appearethe in M. 13. Henrye the fowerthe. And the reason of it is, M. 13 H. 4.
because the finding of him of full age is but as void as long as there is
a record which found him within age, to the which record the king might
cleave unto as the best record that makethe for him until such time the
contrary thereof be proved bye the write of Etate probanda. Howebeeit at this
day the statut made Anno. 33. H. 8. has much abridged the fees that have been
given upon the suit of a general liuerie, namely for liueries to be sued of
clear yearly value of v. li. or under, and that it may be sued without any
office to be found. But I do not see that the manner of the suit is in any
other point altered or changed by the said statute but it remains as it did
before And that statute also gives men license to sue a general liuerie of
lands not exceeding the clear yerelye value of.xx. li. whereby I see no let
but that a man may sue his general liuerie also for lands above the yearly
value of xx li. as he might have done before the making thereof, for this
statute is not contrary to any law that was before in that point, sauinge
that a general live uerie under the value of.xx. li. can not pass or be sued
if he have not first his warrant from the master of the kings wards and
liueries, surueyours, atturneys, and general receiuour, or three of them,
signed and subscribed with their names and hands. Thus may you see the manner of
the suing forth of a general liuerie, which liuerie may not be sued by
parcelles as I have said before, but entierlye, that is to say, of all the
lands the king is or ought to be seized of in his right that sues the
liuerie. And therefore if the heir sue livery but of parcel of that that is
found by office, or if the auncester we are seized of other lands than are
found bye office, if the heir sue his general lyuerie before an office
thereof found omitting them in the liuerye, the lyuery is missued, T. 12. R.
2.44. E. 3. f. 1^. et. 25. 2. H. 7. f. 2.
as appears in.12. R. 2. 44 E. 3. and. 2. H. 7. and therefore it beehoues the
heir before he sue his lyuerye to cause an office to be foynde in every
sheere where his auncester had any lands. And this entier lyuerye is
intended as well of lands holden of other lords being in the kings hands
as of the lands that are holden of the king, and therefore if a man hold
of the king in chief by knights service, and of other lords in socage and
die his heir being a daughter within the age of xiiii. years, in this case when
the said daughter comes of the age of xiiii. years she gets no liuerie of
the lands holden in socage: but must tarry till she be of the age of xvi.
years, yt she may then sue liuerie of the whole, as appears.35. H. 6. H. 35.
H. 6. Liuerie. 19.
But note that in some cases one shall have liuerie of parcel, and that is where
lands descend to diverse daughters and one is within age and the other of full
age, now she of full age shall sue liuerie with a particion of her part of
all things that are seuerable: and this liuerie is well sued although it be not
of the whole lands descended, but if there be any things in the kings hands not
seuerable, as aduousons or such like, that must so remain still until the
other be of full age, as appears. 38. H. 6. 38. H. 5. f.
And so note that in a general liuerie if any thing be omitted, the liuerie is
missued: and therefore some say that after such a general liuerie had there
shall be a writ awarded to enquire of the concelement, that is to say, whether
the heir has left out of his liuerie or not any of the lands that were his
ancestors, which writ is called breue de terris concelatis. And see the
statut. 28. E. 3. ca. 4. that geues the rents to them that sue liuerie when the
rent day comes although it comes next day after their liuerie. And look more
for liuerie in the exposition upon the third chapter of the kings prerogative.

Reseisir
REseisir lies where a general liuere or ouster le main is missued by any
person or persons unduly and not according to the form and order of the law,
or upon an office which is insufficient in the law for the party to have
liuerie or ouster le main, in this case the king may reseise the lands without
suing any process against the party, Liuerie P. 8.
and shall be answered of all the mean issues and profits received and taken
from the time of their first seisier if it were sued out of his hands by an
ouster le main, and if by a liuerie, the^ but from the time of the liuerie. And
the party that has pursued it shall be accounted none other than as an intruder
upon the kings possession after office, in which case no freehold shall be
aiudged in him, nor his wife of that possession shall have any dower, as
appears 18. E. 3. 21. E. 3. fo. 1. H. 2. E. 3. f, 1. 24, E. 3. 34.
and 24. E. 3. fo. 34. But if one have liuerie or ouster le main by due process,
and after a record is found in the tresorie or else where, or an office in the
contrie, whereby the king is e^titled of a title growe^ unto hi^ before ye
sui^g of ye said lyuerie or ouster le main, although the party should have
had no liuerie or ouster le main in case the said records had then appeared
unless he could have avoided the said records, yet for as much as they did not
then appear, he shall not be now after liuerie or ouster le main cast out of
his possession with out a Scire facias to be pursued against him, for so has
the statut provided that was made at Lincoln in ye 29. year E. 1 called
statutum de Escaetoribus, the tenor whereof is this Ad parliamentum regis apud
Lyncolne tentum in octa bis sancti hillarii anno regni sui vicesimo nono, per
consilium regis concordatum est coram domino rege, ipso rege conse^tiente et
illud extunc fieri et obseruari precipiente, de consilio venerabilis patris w
de langto^ Coue^tr et Lychr. episcopi tunc eiusde^ regis Thesaurarii, Iohannis
de Langton Cancellarii et alioru^ de consilio tunc ibidem presentium, et coram
rege, videlicet. Cum inquisiciones per escaetores suos capte per quecunque
breuia Regis in cancellaria ipsius domini regis fuerint retoru^, et per easdem
inquisitiones compertum fuerit quod nihil tenetur de ipso domino rege, per quod
custody terrarum et ten^ huiusmodi ratione inquisitionis in manum domini regis
per ipsos escaetores capte ad ipsum do minum regem nullo modo pertineant: quod
statim and absque dilatione aliqua mandetur per breue domini regis de
ca^cellar' precipiend' quod escaetores de terris and tenementis sic in manum
domini regis per ipsos captis manum suam amoueant omnino, and exitus si quos
leuauerint de ipsis terris et tenem^tis sic in manu^ domini regis per ipsos
captis de tempore quo terre and ten^ illa in manu domini regis exti terint,
integre reddant ipsi vel ipsis cui vel quibus per inquisitiones prius per
eosdem escaetores captas compertu^ fuerit quod terra et tenementa illa debeant
remanere, saluo semper domino regi, quod si postquam escaetores sui manus
amouerint, per breue ipsius domini regis, vt predictum est, ali quid contigerit
inueniri in cancellaria vel ad scaccarium, vel alibi in curia ipsius domini
regis, per quod custodia terrarum aut ten^ eorundem, de quibus escaetores manus
suas amoueri^t in forma predicta domino Regi pertineant, quod statim
premuniatur ille, in cuius seisina tenementa predicta fuerint per breue de
cancellaria, quod sit ad certum diem coram domino rege, vbicunque. etc. ostens.
si quid pro se habeat vel dice re sciat quare dominus Rex custodiam earundem
terrarum et tenementorum habere non debeat, iuxta formam euidentiarum seu
memorandorum pro ipso rege compertorum. Et si venerit, and pro se osten dat
quare eadem custodia ad dominum regem non pertineat aut pertinere non debeat
immo quod remanere sibi debeat recedat quietus, and custodiam suam retineat. Si
autem premonitus non venerit, vel venerit, and nihil sciat dicere, quare rex
custodiam illam habe re non debeat* statim resesientur terre and tenementa illa
in manum domini regis nomine custody tenend. vsque ad legittimam eratem hered.
eorundem, sicut superius dictum est Et si compertum fuerit per inquisitiones
per escaetores suos factas et retornatas, quod custodia eorundem terrarum et
ten^ in inquisitionibus contentorum, et in manum domini seisitorum domino regi
remanere no^ debeat, quod statim ma^de tur escaetoribus quod manus suas
amoueant, et exitus integre reddant. etc. Eodem modo si postea compertum fuerit
per euidentias and memoranda in cancellaria aut scaccario vel alibi, vt
predictum est, quod dominus rex custod' eorum habere debeat respondeatur ipsi
domino Regi de exitibus integre per manus illorum qui terras, aut tenementa
illa tenuerint a toto tempore, postquam terre et tenementa illa primo in manum
ipsius domini Regis per escaetores su^^capta fueri^t per breuia supradicta, and
iste modus de cetero obseruetur in cancellarie, no^ obstante quadam ordinatione
nuper per dominum regem facta de terris and ten^ in manum suam per ministros
suos capt' and non liberand' nisi per ipsum dominum regem, and prout continetur
in quadam diuidenda inter ipsum regem and cancellarium facta. Cuius vna pars
penes cancellarium remanet. Statutum de escaetoribus editum.29. E.2. Also a
year before the making of this statut was there an other statut made entitled
articuli super cartas which in the 19. chapter thereof says in this wise. De
rescheiue la ou lesche tour ou le vicont seisont en le main le roy terres la ou
il and reason de seiser, et puis quant troue est la non reason les issues de
mesne te^ps ount este ceo en arrere retenus et and rendus quant le roy ad le
main ouste, voet le roy que desormes la ou terres sont issint seisies et puis
le main ouste pur ceo que il ny ad raison de seiser ne tenir soient les issues
pleinment re^dus a celuy a qui la terre demurt et auoit le dam^ resceu. By this
statute it plainly appears how that before the making thereof therewas no
ouster le main granted vna cum exitibus although it might never so plainly
appear that the king had no cause to seize. Howbeit that mischief is now
remedied by both these statutes. Also by the one of these statutes. Also by
the one of these statutes it appears that the Ouster le maine in such case
might not be granted without suinge to the king himself, which is also
remedied by this statut de escaetoribus, which statute although it make no
mention of liueries, but only of ouster le maine, yet liveries are taken to
be within the compass and provision of the same. And where the letter goes
only to the cases where the king seiseth before office, 9. E. 4. 54.
and after ward thoffice that is found does give his highness no title, that
there the party may have his Ouster le maine making no mention of an Ouster le
maine to be granted upon any peticion, trauerse, or Monstraunce de droit, as
in deed a trauerse was not in ure at that time, yet men by an equity extend
this statute de Escaetoribus both to the one and too the other, because the
statute is beneficial, as it appears 9. E. 4. and in diverse other books.
And Yeluerton there says that if after liuerie or ouster le maine an office
be found which entitleth the king of a title grown unto him since the
liuerie or ouster la maine granted that in that case this statute
notwithstanding the king may reseise without a Scire facias, for the words are
only where a record or an office is found that maintains the title whereby
ye king first seized. Howbeit many hold oppinion against him, and say that
it was in the self same mischief the statute was made for, tamen quere, for
this statut de escaetoribus should seem to be meant only to remedy that ye
was a mischief at common law before ye making of ye said statut, as where there
was no record found at ye time of ye liuerie or ouster le maine sued to let or
hinder the party from suynge of their said liuerie or ouster le maine, but
afterward was there found such a record, now this notwithstanding would the
king reseise and putt the party from his possession without answer or any process
sued against him, whereupon he might answer and so drive him to sue by peticion
and make him render all ye mean profit, which was a great mischief and
hinderance to ye party, for remedy whereof this statut was made: but the like
mischief or hinderance is not where the king is entitled by a title growe^
since the liuerie or ouster le maine, for here ye party shall not answer the
profits but from the time of this title grown. And also the king does him no
wrong, for it stands with and affirms ye livery or ouster le maine, and the
king thereby makes not yt party an intrudor as he does in the other case, and
if the said Yeluertons opinion should not be law, they would make yt the
king could not seize upon an alienacion without license made and found by office
since ye liuerie or ouster le maine sued, which were no reason, and therefore I
think the said Yeluertons opinion should prevail in this case. And to the
same intent and effect be those books yt I can find, for I can find no Scire
facias sued but in cases of a title grown before the liueries or ouster le
maine: and therefore in a Scire facias sued upon this statute against ye party
yt had liuerie or ouster le maine being tenant of the land at ye time of Scire
facias sued he was den^ed in the self same plight and course against the king
as he was at time of ye suing of his liuerie or ouster le main: for where he
had made a feffement by license and taken an estate again jointly to him and
other, yet this scire facias did lie against him soly and did not abate, for
the iointenauntes. So was it aiudged in a scire facias sued upon this statute
ye the party must maintain the title, whereby he has livery or ouster le
maine, and must maintain it so that it is and was a good title and sufficient
to have liuerie upon, notwithstanding any record that is now found, as take
the case to be this, one has liuerie as sole daughter and heir, and after by
office it is found yt she has a sister, which ought to have had liueri with
her, whereupon a scire facias is sued against the party yt had liuerie, to come
and show why the land should not be reseised, if she come and will say that
they be daughters by several ventres, and that this land was geeuen to her
father and mother in special tail, and so ought she to have the liuere as
she had, ye is to say soly, this plea will not serve her, because it does not
maintain ye liuerie: for how could she have had liuerie soly, unless this
matter had been so found by office. For if this second office had appeared
before the liuerie, she could not have trauersed it, unless she had made
title, and then title can she never make against the king as heir unless
the said title be first found by office. Wherefore no more than she might
trauerse the said office if it had been found before liuerie, Trauers, 31.
no more may she trauerse it now in this scire facias after liuerie, as it
appears 30. li. Ass. and so note that ye record can not be trauersed in this
scire facias in no case unless it were trauersable before livery or ouster le
maine. Also in the new Natura breuium fo. 26^. and in.5. H. 5 H 5.
H. 5. I find a scire facias sued upon this statute against him that had
liuerie, because an office has found an other to be nerer heir to the
auncestour that dyed than was he that sued liuerie. So always as far as I
can find it is sued upon a record ye disproues the liuerie or ouster le
maine, and not upon any that affirms it, whereby I suppose that yeluertons
opinion is law as is before declared. And it semes that by this statute the
king must sue a scire facias al though the record or title that is found for
him be found within a year after liueri or ouster le maine sued. And learn
whether Assise lie against ye eschetour that sesseth without a scire facias in
cases where a scire facias should be sued. For by ye sta. of W. 1. ca. 24.
assise lies against him in cases where he seiseth any lands by color of his
office without special warrant or commandment or certain authority that be
longs to his office so to do. And learn whether the king by that seizure
has any possession, for if the king seize without a scire facias where he
ought to sue a scire facias, the party has no remedy but to sue unto him by
peticion even as he should do if his highness had seized any other lands of his
without cause. Howbeit the king by such a reseiser undoes not the parties
possession, so that he shall be said an entruder from the time of the liuerie
or ouster le maine sued as it does in case the reseiser had been upon a scire
facias, wherefore in such case although the party cannot be suffered to recover
his possession again by entry upon the king, yet when the king graunts it
over, he may now enter or have assise, Trauers. 26.
as appears.24. E. 3 fo. 34. et. 43. li. Ass. Also note yt this statute that
geeues the scire facias extendes but unto him or them have liuerie or ouster
le maine or any other claiming by them. For if after liuerie on ouster le
maine sued a stranger by an eigne title in disaffirmyng the tena^ts interest
enter as heir upon him, or recover by assise of mor dauncester or any other
accion auncestrell against him and is entered into the land as heir, now
because the lands are holden of the king in chief, his highness may seize the
said land for primer seisine or title of Wardshippe as the case does require
without any scire facias, 21. E. 3. fo. 1.
as appears.21. E. 3. For it is not to be said now a reseiser, because
against him there was no seiser made of the said lands before. And learn and
enquire if he that missueth the liuerie be within age whether the king shall
reseise in that case as he shall do if it were missued by one of full age, as
take y^ case to be, lands are holden of the king in Socage in Capite, now
the liuerie is sued within age, that is to say at the age of.14. years whether
in this case ye missuing of ye same shall be a cause of reseiser or not, T. 12.
R. 2
see the book thereof 12. R. 2. The words of the statute be further, that if
any record be found in the tresorie or else where that upon this record a
scire facias shall be awarded. But that is to be understand in this manner,
that first the transcript of the said record shall be by writ removed into the
Chauncerie and then out of the Chauncery shall there be a scire facias awarded,
and not out of the tresory as it appears.21. ^^. li. ass.
lib. Ass.

Issues mesne
NOte that if ye king have a title, right or interest to any lands or
tenements, his highness when he seiseth shall be answered of all the mesne
issues and profits from the time of his said title, right, or interest grown,
and whether it be a right of enter or title of enter it makes no diversity in
the kings case, as for an example, the king enters for a condition broken,
his highness shall be answered of all the issues and profits sins the condition
broken, and yet in that case a common person shall not have the issues and
profits but from the time of his entry. Like law is it if the kings tenant
a^en in mortmain, and the king enters, but otherwise it is if he enter for
mortmain in lands not holden of him upon a title deuolued unto his highness in
defaut of other lords. And these cases appear H. 19. et 41. E. 3. fo. 21. 19.
E. 3. Enter co^g. P. 39.
The same law is it where his highness is entitled to seize for that the lands
are of his foundation, and aliened contrary to the statut of west.2. ca. 41.
which geues the writtof contra forma^ collationis, H. 46, E. 3. Forf. P. 18.
in this case his highness shall be answered of all the mesne issues grown from
the time of the alienatio^, as appears H. 46. E. 3. And note also that if the
king make any grant which is not sufficient in the law or is deceived in the
making of the same by reason it was made upon a false suggestion, in his case
if this highness does resign this grant and adnull it iure regis as he may, he
shall be then be answered of all the mesne issues and profits which were lost by
reason of the said insufficient grant, as appears.11. H 4. But if his
highness be entitled to any lands nomine destriccionis, there his highness shall
not be answered of the profits, but from the finding of that title, 11. H. 4.
f. ^.
as in case where the kings tenant in chief alieneth without license and an
office is thereof found, in this case his highness shall not be answered of the
profits from the time of that alienation, but only from the time of the
findinge of the office, or from the time of a Scire facias returned where the
alienatio^ is of record, P. 8. e. 4. f. 4
and hereof see the book 8. E. 4. Like law is where his highness is to seize the
lands of his widow that has married her self without his license. 40. li. Ass.
Guard P. 36.
And note that where the king is to be a^swered of the mesne issues and profits
perceued and taken of any lands which have come to so^dry hands sins the kings
title first grown to the same, there every one of them yt have sondrely so
perceived and taken the profits shall answer for his own time and not one for
all, as it appears in the book of 46. before remembered. And note also that by
the statut of w. 2. ca. 32. it is provided that if any spiritual man bring any
real action and recover, that the land recovered shall remain in the kings
hands until such time as it be sued out of his hands by him that recovered, or
else by the chief lord and in the mean time the shiriue shall au^swer the
king in ye eschequer of the profits, by which statut whether the collusion
be found or not found, yet the king shall have the mean issues as it is
thought 20. H. 6. 20. H. 6. f. ^
So it is in a writ judicial of deceit brought against any the king shall have
the issues grown from the time of the first judgment until judgment be given
in the said writ of disceit.

Some times the king recou^eth of the issue in the allowance of an estraunge
title, as if the husband being the kings tenant upon a false suggestion
purchases license to alie^ and to take estate to him and to his wife, and so
does, and afterward dies, the wife holds her in by title of Suruiuor and
occupies, now upon a Scire facias against the wife, his highness shall be
answered of all the mean issues since her occupiynge of the ii. parts of the
land, and the third part he recopeth and allows for her dower.40. li. Ass. P.
36.

Note that in a writ of disceit upon a recovery in a Preeipe quod reddat of
land where the process was a grand Cape, 40. Li. Ass. Guard. P. 1.
if the pleintyfe recover, he shall recover the land and his damages, but not
the issues of the land since the first judgment, because the king shall have
them by the graunde Cape, and the shirife accomptable of the^. quod vide titulo
disceit in Fitz P. 33. 46. 7. 32. Contrary law is it if there lie no grand
Cape in the action, as if the recovery be in a Scire facias, as it appears
titulo Disceit in Fitz P. 36. and 27.

Finis
Diverse other prerogatives therbe, which ye king has by the order of ye common
law yt be not wti^ this statute co^pri^sed, a great part whereof under ye title
of Prerogatife master Fitz herbart has most dilige^tli noted in his great
Abridgme^t, and so well ordered and placed there, yt I do of purpose omit to
rehearse them here. The rest would require so long a search that oneles I had
gathered and noted them al ready (as I have not do^e in deed) I should be feign
to peruse the hole body of ye common Laws for the knowleg thereof wheruntoo
time seruethe me not, wherefore at this time mine intent is not to meddle with
them.

Imprynted at London in fleet street within temple Bar at the sign of the
hand and star. by Rychard Tottel, An. 1567.

Cum priuilegio.


