THE CHVRCHES LAMENTATION FOR the loss of the GODLY: Delivered in a Sermon, at
the funerals of that truly noble, and most hopeful young Gentleman, JOHN Lord
HARINGTON, Baron of Exton, Knight of the noble order of the Bath and his
Majesty's Lieutenaunt of the County of Rutland, at Exton in Rutland, the last
day of March 1614. Together with a pattern of Piety, and the power of
godliness expressed in his life and death, who yielded to Nature the 27. of
February, 1613. when he wanted two months of 22. years of his age.

By RICHARD STOCK, Pastor of Alhallowes-Breadstreet in London.

LONDON, Printed by JOHN BEALE. 1614.

blazon or coat of arms NODO FIRMO


Virtutem antiquam haec spirant insignia multam:
Et Nodo Firmo gloria firma manet.
Sanguinis en quanto fueras dignatus honor?
Mayor Auis meritis gloria facta tuis.
This ample Coat speaks ancient virtues praise,
United with th'indossoluble knot;
His greater merits nobler trophe's raise,
To house and name, which never be forgot.
blazon or coat of arms SINGVLVM MILLITARE HONORIS


Ecce detus dant prima decennia principe dignum:
^n coelis illum proxima pene locant.
This honor was he graced with at ten years;
Before twelve more he climbes beyond the Spheres.
I. P.

portrait of John Harington DOMINVS JOHANNES HARINGTONVS BARO DE EXTON etc.


Aspicis Herois vultum, graphicamque figuram:
Ingenium, Mores, pingere nemo potest.
Effigiem verae virtutis, Nobilitatis,
Candoris niuei, Relligionis habes.
F. H. D. M.

In this dead picture, only does appear
A Lord, and Lords sole heir, to Country dear;
If his souls portrait 'twere, it would thee tell,
That here great Arts, virtues and grace did dwell
I. P. Cant. Col. Syd. Suss.

In the Epistle Dedicatory, in the margent at the letter r read exonerans.

TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE THE virtuous and worthy Ladies, the Lady LVCIE,
Countess of Bedford, with her Right Honorable Mother, the Lady ANNE
HARINGTON. Baroness, together with her Honorable Sister the Lady FRANCIS
CHICHISTER: All increase of true Honor and piety.
THe holy spirit of God by his Penman St. Paul, tells us, and teaches us, that
1. Tim. 4 8
Godliness has the promises both of this life present, and of that which is
to come. Among which, this is none of the least, Psalm* 112.6
The righteous shall be had in everlasting remembrance. Namely, such a
remembrance as the wise man speaks of; Prou. 10.7
The memorial of the just shall be blessed. Such a blessing it is, as is Pro.
22.^.
Above great riches, above silver and gold. For no man of any ingenious
disposition, but if he had these two propounded to him, riches with shame, and
poverty and penury with true honor and good reputation, and free choice given
him; but he would freely choose the latter before the former: yea such a
blessing it is, that men who were able to judge, thought it not inferior but
above their natural life. As that learned Rabbi, brought up at the feet of
Gamaliel, speaking of his good reputation says; 1. Cor. 9.15
It were better for me to die, then that any man should make my rejoicing vain
And Tertullian by a speech of his to the persecuting tyrants shows, that thus
they esteemed it, and professed no less to the world. Ad Lenorem proxime
damnando Christianum, quam ad ^eonem, confessiestis labem pudi^itae apud nos
omni atrociorem poena, and omni morte reputari. Tertull Apoll.
While you condemn, says he, a Christian matron to a baud, rather then to a
Lion, you openly confess for us, that we abhor the blot of Chastity and
honesty, more the^ all other punishments; yea then death. And this is that
which the light of Reason teaches men; that for a man to die honorably, is no
death; for a man to live dishonourably, is worse then death. And as it is a
curse for a man, to survive his good name, so is it a blessing his good name
should survive him. So that, he which helps to keep the righteous in a blessed
memorial or remembrance, he does but bring the promised blessing of God upon
the head of the righteous, help^ng to honor those whom God would have
honored, and who have honored God; yea, as I may so speak, he helps to pay
Gods debt to the righteous; he having made himself a Debitorem se fecit
promittendo. August.
debtor to them by promise. A thing that all ought to do, and not unbefitting
any, no not the Ministers of the Gospel; when as our Savior Christ says,
concerning Mary; Mark 14.9
Wheresoever this Gospel shall be preached throughout the whole world, this
also that she has done, shall be spoken of in remembrance of her. And by whom
more then by the Ministers of the Gospel? who if they must honor her, by
reporting what she had done, being but one act of piety performed to Christ,
how much more may they do it for those, who have performed many and manifold
works of piety and charity to Christ and his members? Upon which ground, I
took my self warranted to express the love and honor I bore toward your
deceased honorable son and brother, in speaking those things I did at his
funerals concerning his truly religious life and right blessed death, wherein
I labored to make evident to others for imitation, that grace which God had
made so eminent in him. The whole Auditorie were much affected with it, and
many both godly and learned, both Ministers and others desired much to have it
published to the world, whereof diverse the same day set upon, and since by
letters have importuned me much, besides others in the name of many (who have
but heard a flying report of the excellent graces and most worthy parts that
was in him, and delivered by me) have still pressed me to imprint it, to make
that common to others, which was so lovely in the ears of those that heard it.
After all this I began to think, that this proceeded from the Lord, and to say
with my self, as the Apostle Peter to others, Act. 11.17
Who was I, that I could let God. So, who am I, that I should let God,
thinking also with my self, that that which was so desired of many, might be
by the grace of God profitable to many mo; knowing that God has not only,
appointed his word to beget faith, and teach godliness, but by the same word,
has sanctified the examples of godly men, to provoke to godliness: as is
manifest in holy writ; yea examples are of that force, that men are often won
by them to the liking of the word, who before had either a hatred or distaste
of it; and after, by the word are won unto God. Many men must see the Gospel
in the lives of the professors of the Gospel, before they will believe it in
the mouths of the Preachers of it. And as Chrysostom says of the Gentiles:
His quae dicuntur a no^^^ non intenduni Gentiles, sed his quae geruntur a nobis
Ho. 70. ad Pop. A^t.
They do not regard what things are uttered by us, but what are acted of us.
So may I say of many who live amongst us, and bear the name of Christians,
they little regard either what we preach, or profess, but what we practice.
2. Pet. 3.1.
And if the husbands may be won without the word by the submisse and meek
conversation of their wives; the^ may others with the word by the holy
conversation of those who profess the word, be won unto godliness. And as by
others, so I am persuaded by the life and conversation of this holy young Saint
(so was he in earth, so is he in heaven) of whom I will not here speak much,
lest any should tax me with flattery. Yet this I will say (glorifying God
that I can truly say it of him, not to honor him so much by it, as the
Gospel of Jesus Christ:) that I challenge the whole army of the uncircumcised
Philistimes of Rome, to bring me forth the greatest Goliath, I say not of the
like age, honor and rank, but almost of what age or degree soever, that ever
showed so much power of popery or the form of seeming sanctity, as this young
man David did, the power of true piety and godliness. Let them then cease
defying the host of Jsraell, when they came hardly parallel our younglings with
men of the best grouth they have or formerly have had. But if I should follow
this matter I should hardly keep measure, and therefore I will content my self
with this.

Why I have dedicated this to your name cannot be strange to any which know the
great and nie intrest you had in the subject, and so most right to the Sermon.
To say nothing of my own bond who have received such love from him, for which
I must and will honor all his; yea who have so deeply tasted of the bounty
of you his honorable mother. Accept it I pray you as a small testimony of my
thankful mind, and as a true testimony of that love and reverence that I
have borne to that grace of God which was manifest in him. The Lord has
greatly honored you with the worty being and the blessed memory of such a
gracious Son, such a godly brother, yea so honored you as in all respects he
has hardly honored any Mother, any Sisters; having given you, his honorable
Mother, the fruit of all your great care, labor, and cost you so naturally and
religiously took, in tilling his young heart, wherein you not only labored
by your self in his infancy, as another mother of Prou 31.
the worthy Lemuel to instruct him, teaching your Timothy like another Eunice
(renowned in holy writ) 2. Tim. 1.5. and 3.15
The holy Scriptures of a child, and seeking to plant in him the unfeigned
faith which dwells in you his mother. But also providing for him a worthy
Tutor, a man of no less piety then learning (Oh that all of your rank would
do the like, then might we hope for more religion and piety among our
Nobility) who might perfect that your sex had begun, but could not thoroughly
perform; and after most plentifully rewarded him, Ruth. 2.20.
Not ceasing to do good to the living and to the dead, for his sake to his
wife and children. Of which you reaped a plentiful and timely harvest of joy
and comfort, though it is your grief to live to see his autumn and fall. Job
2.^0.
Must we receive good at the hand of God, and not receive evil? But yet give
leave to add ( Job 32.22.
For I may not give titles, lest my maker should take me away suddenly) as
Bernard in another case; Deus exhon^rans, on erat Ber.
When God does unburden us, he does burden us: So God having unburdened you of
that grief and sorrow, of that infamy and reproach which many mothers and
sisters have, and to to many of your rank, while theirs live lice^tiously,
reprobate to every good work, dishonouring Christ Jesus whom they profess* and
their kindered from which they did proceed. I say while God has unburdened you
of this, and honored you with the contrary, he does onerate and burden you with
the duty of thankefulnes, which among other duties is this, that you continue
with a godly zeal and Christian care to imitate and emulate the worthy graces
and practice of godliness which were in this your honor and crown, which is
worthily esteemed in him, and will be in you, the highest matter of your honor
and praise. Divines give the reason of it to be this, because by piety and
holiness of life we ascend, Ad primarium illud bonum vnde originem traximus
Nazian. orat. 33. in land. Hiero.
to the first and primary good whence we had our beginning. And in the Apostles
phrase it is to 2 Pet. 1.4.
Be partakers of the godly nature. Seeing we are the generation of God, made to
his image, what greater glory ca^ we have the^ to preserve that image and be
like unto him to whose similitude we were made, for as one says, Vna
nobilitas imitatio dei.
There is no honor to the imitation of God: which is then performed when we
imitate those who have walked with God. The Heathen man says, Vt quise comunt
adhibent speculum, sic gesturus negotium proponit sibi laudatorum virorum
exempla. Plutar.
That as they who dress themselves use glasses, so those who are to perform
any thing, propound to themselves the examples of praiseworthy men. You
honorable Ladies have a most true, and (as I may so speak) a natural glass
to see to address your selves to goodness by, even the life of your worthy, it
is that which will sooner check you then any, as it ought to direct you more
then any* nay it is that by which others will sooner reprehend your stepping
aside and straying. I humbly beseech you therefore (give me leave to further
your forwardnes) walk after his ways and run with good resolution the race
of piety and true godliness he has finished before you, of whom I may say as
Ambrose of Abraham, Mortuus est imbona senecture, eo quod in bonitate propositi
permansit.
He died in a good age, for why? he perseuerd in his good resolutions even unto
the end, and now enioieth the crown of life.

And so I humbly and heartily commend you all to the grace of God which is able
to build you further, and give an inheritance among them who are sanctified by
faith in Christ Jesus and so I rest.

Your in all humble manner, RICHARD STOCK

To the Christian READER.
Christian reader whosoever thou art, whether one that was an auditor of this
sermon, or one that otherwise knows me and my practice in this kind of
funeral duties, If thou he of the first sort be informed, that in the sermon
thou shall find some few things added not to the substance, but to the
amplification of some use, which I could not for the straightnes of time
deliver. In the commendations of this most commendable Noble thou shall find
some few things added, which slipped out of my memory at the time when I
delivered it, but not many; and the like number added which came to my
knowledge since. At also one thing displaced, namely his meditations upon his
sermons in the morning, which he did after dinner. I assure thee I have set
down nothing, as I delivered nothing, but the true and general grounds of
every particular, I knew my self; diverse particulars I received of others who
are judicious, honest, and religious, agreeing al with the grounds of my own
knowledge, and so as I had ground to believe them, I knew nothing why I might
not then, and now communicate them to thee, whereby I may profit thee by the
blessing of God more, then my praise can honor him. But if thou art one of the
second sort, knowing my use to he very sparing in praising of the dead, and so
may wonder I should be so plentiful in the commendations of this honorable
gentleman, know, I never had such a subject to speak of, whether thou respect
nature or grace, his earthly or heavenly condition.

For this cause I have bin the more large, and specially because he was a
public person, more eyes were upon him, and well they might be, for he was
not so eminent in place as he was in grace, for his gifts and graces and power
of religion were so excellent and rare, as I never yet knew in any, whom I had
occasion to speak of I wish I might hereafter meet with some like him, but I
have little hope, though I do not despair. If I find any deserving as he did,
I will not lessen their worthiness nor darken their light, specially if they
be public persons. Yet me^ must give me leave in all things, to go upon my
own grounds, and not tie me to their conceits. Affection often blinds those
who are specially linked together, when it can not deceive other;, who are a
far of: often when friends highly think of their friends estate, the physician
discerns better of their condition, and finds both spirits and blood tainted,
when they think they are in good health. I would willingly set forth true
golden vessels to the view of the world, but I have no affection to gild
potsheards. If I know men's lives I can the better judge of their deaths, if I
knew they have lived well, I shall be better persuaded of their deaths: if
evil, I shall be made to doubt much, of that, though it be seemingly good, yet
I had rather think charitably then speak confidently. In this kind if I
speak sparingly I pray men (...) blame those who give me no more ground, and
not to reprove me, that dare not be so bold as some others, I will add no
more, neither will I longer detain thee, gentle reader, from Gods word of life
and death, nor from the life and death of this worthy noble. I pray God give
thee as much good by them, as I intend to thee, to thy heart and life, and so
farewell.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, RICHARD STOCK.

Faults escaped in Printing.
Page 19. line. 14. vrbilius, r. vrbicius p. 44. l. 1. County, r. country. p.
47. l. 14. take out he. p. 47. l. 15. r. he only. p. 54. l. 4. im. r. him. p.
85. l. 25 servants r. sermons. p. 86 l. 4 that upon. r. that as upon p. 93. l.
10. beauties r. beauty.

In the margent.
Page 3. Ier. r. sermon p. 22. etiam r. Basil. p. 33. voluisse, r. Dei voluisse.
p 35. etc. r. ex. p. 42. vituticu, r. viaticu. p. 46. ledere, r. ludere. p. 53.
trahence, r. trabente. ibid pretiosum. r. pretiosam. p. 90. vites. r. viles. p.
93 et fi, r. et si.

A Sermon PREACHED AT THE Funeral of the Lord HARINGTON.
MICAH 7.1, 2.




THe elect vessel and holy Apostle both for Jews and Gentiles Saint Paul,
tells the Corinthians, and in them the whole Church, that they were 1. Cor.
3.9.
Gods husbandary; whence it will follow, and out of relation, that the Minister
is Gods Husbandman. Now the secular husbandman has and observes his seasons
to sow his seed, and his ground to cast his corn into, as he sows some in
the Autumn and fall of the lease, some in winter and dead time of the year,
some in the spring and renewing of the year, some in a dry season, and some in
a wet; some in a moist clay, and some in a dry sandy ground: and as the holy
Ghost speaks, Esaias 38 25, 26
He sows the fetches, and cummin, and casts in wheat by measure, and the
appointed barley and rye in their places. And all this, for his God does
instruct him to have discretion, and does teach him. As the secular, so the
spiritual husbandman has his seed for all seasons, and for all grounds, all
hearts: some for the time of mercy and judgment, for the season of mirth and
mourning, as wet and dry seasons: some for the birth and burial, as for the
spring and fall: some for them who sorrow in Sion, and some for them that
rejoice in Jerusalem, and as Esaias speaks, Esaias 61.2.
to preach the acceptable year of the Lord, and the day of vengeance of our
God, and to comfort all that mourn. And all this, because his God does
instruct him to have discretion, and does teach him. And as the same Prophet
says, Esaias 28.29.
This also comes from the Lord of hosts, which is wonderful in counsel, and
excellent in works.

Now to allude to the words of Saint Paul, 1. Corinthians. 3.10.
According to the grace of God which is given to me, as a skillful master
builder, etc. As Bernard speaks of himself, so I of my self, Non sum
Propheta, non sum Apostolus: and Prophetae tamen and Apostoli (audeo dicere)
vice fungo^: and quibus non equor meritis, eorum impli^or curis. super Cant.
Ier. 46.
I am no Apostle: and yet (I may be bold to say) I am in stead of a Prophet, of
an Apostle, I supply the place, and serve in the turn of a Prophet and an
Apostle, and though I am inferior to them in fitnes and ability, yet I am
encumbered with the same cares. I say then, according to the grace of God given
me, as a skillful husbandman in my measure, I have thought this portion, and
this measure of the eternal seed of God, fitting this season: seed of sorrow
for a season of sorrow, and a portion of Scripture containing lessons of
lamentation for an Auditory, which I know well are, (as they have just cause)
full of lamentation.

This Chapter brancheth and divides it self naturally, without any violence
into two principal parts. The first is a lamentation of the Prophet and the
godly, from the first verse to the eight. The second is a consolation to the
Church and faithful, from the eight verse to the end of the Chapter. In the
lamentation are two things laid down: The thing which they lament for and
bewail, in the 1. 2. 3. 4. 5. and 6. verses. And a counsel and direction to
the godly, how to demean and carry themselves with some good wisdom and
profit amongst those evils lamented for, and that in the 5. and 7. verses. The
things lamented for are of two sorts: First, the paucity and great defect of
the good: Secondly, the plurality and great abundance of the wicked. The first
contained in my text, is set down first under a Parable and similitude, which
helps both present attention, and future memory, being delightful: Secondly,
plainly, and without parable, which truly enformeth the judgment, being
perspicuous.

Woe is me.] As if he had said, The meaning.
how hard is my case? how heavy is Gods hand upon me? how miserable is my
condition, that have now so few holy, good, and righteous men remaining in me,
who have formerly abounded with good men of all sorts and ranks? I that have
been as a field full fraught with Corn, as a Vineyard abounding with
beautiful bunches of Grapes, am now destitute, and deprived of these, being
all gathered from me to their Fathers, and the Father of all spirits: Ruth.
1.20, 21.
Woe is me. Call me not Naomi, but call me Mara: for the Almighty has given me
much bitterness. I was full, but the Lord has made me empty: Why call ye me
Naomi, seeing the Lord has humbled me? and the Almighty has brought me into
adversity, as Naomi speaks.

I am as the summer gatherings, and as the grapes of the vintage.] To pass by
many interpretations of these words, which breed confusion rather then
understanding: Hieroms reading of them I conceive fully and naturally to
express them. ^^^ra factus sum sicut qui co^ligit in (...) ^ace^^^ vi^de m^^.
Hie^ (...).
For I am as he that gathers in harvest the Grapes of the vintage. For having
said that he was as he that gathers in Summer, and not expressing what he
gathers, he adds, the grapes of the vintage.

There is no cluster to eat.] And it is with me as it is with him; that as he
found not a cluster of grapes, all being gone before he came, that he could
find none to refresh himself; so not I one good man to comfort my self
withal.

My soul desires the first ripe fruits.] To pass here also by diverse
interpretations as not profitable to be stood upon, I conceive it to be as if
he had said: I am as he that gathers Grapes, and finds none, desires that
he might but have the first ripe fruits: when all should be ripe in the time of
Harvest, I wish I could find but a few like those that are first ripe before
others, but I find none of them at all.

The good man is perished out of the earth.] The Prophet here explaineth the
parable, and sets down in plain terms that he did before in similitude,
and shows that there are but few good men left in the Land and Church, which
he proves, because the Lord had gathered many good men in peace to their
fathers, and taken them away. The word translated here, good man, is by some
read, the merciful man, and then they take it either actiuely, one that
shows mercy and goodness to others; or passiuely, one that God has showed
mercy and goodness to: this is the cause of that, man being merciful, because
he has found mercy. Hierome reads it sanctus, as it were, one whom God has
sanctified, and of his grace consecrated to himself. The Septuagints read it
(...): that is, reuerens and religiosus; a devout, reverent, and religious man:
they are all to one purpose, and in deed the same. Now the Prophet bewaileth
the taking away of such: for though he says, he perish^th, yet he means not
simply that they were perished; but as Chrysostom of one, Dormuit, non mortuus
est: quiescit, non perijt. Chris. hom. 69 ad p^p. Ant.
He sleeps, he is not dead; he rests, he is not perished: so here of
these, they sleep, and are not dead; they are at rest, and are not perished:
for the Prophet speaks out of the opinion of the wicked, who were fixed, as
it were, in the world, and had there their felicity, and so judged them to be
perished, who were taken out of the world somewhat untimely, and unseasonably,
as it seemed to their sense and judgment.

There is none righteous.] By this the Prophet tells, how many are gathered
from among men, not a few, but many, even so many, that none remains: he
means, in comparison, not simply none, but as it is used, none for very few,
and in comparison of the great multitude none; as in the Psalm, Psalm. 14.3.
All are gone out of the way; they are all corrupt, there is none that does
good, no not one. Here all is put for the most, and none for the fewest, and
in comparison none. and as in the Philippians, Philip. 2.21.
All seek their own, and not that which is Jesus Christ's. By righteous man,
he means the upright man, which walks uprightly with God and man, and
turns not to the right hand, nor to the left; one that shows his holiness by
his upright and just dealing.

Solomon says, Pro. 23.1.
When thou sit to eat with a Ruler, consider diligently what is before
thee: Which words Bernard translateth from corporal to spiritual food, and
feasting, from a table to a text, from dishes to doctrines, and says to the
hearer, Int^^mini presentem mensam, quomodo supernis est refert^ delicijs
spiritualia sunt, et diuina, quae nobis in ra appo^untur. Bernard: super Cant*
sermon* 29.
Behold the present table, how it is furnished with delights from above: they
are spiritual, and divine, which are therein set before us. And to the
teacher: Diligenter considera quae tibi appon^ntur, quia talia te oportet
praeparare. Ibidem.
Consider diligently what things are set before thee, knowing that such also
thou ought to prepare: that he take his doctrines from the text, and not
bring them to it: carue them of the things upon the table, not fetching things
elsewhere.

Honorable, and beloved, behold this table, see how it is furnished with
spiritual dishes: and I for my part will consider them, and not propose all,
so much as to your sight, or taste, but will only labor to feed you with
some two or three which are most fitting our present occasion, and your
prepared appetites. The first whereof is this.

David by the spirit of God lament Psalm. 12.1.
Help Lord, for there is not a godly man left, for the righteous are failed
among the children of men. Thus the Prophet Esaias bewaileth when he had
prophesied how few there should be remaining that were good, Esaias 24.13.
As the shaking of an Olive tree and as the grapes when the vintage is ended.
After he expresses his sorrow; verse. 16.
My leanenes, my leanenes; woe is me. Thus certain men fearing God, made great
Acts 8.5.
lamentations for Stephen, that the number of the good was lessened but by one.
This may show that undoubtedly they lamented the death and decay of good men,
when they Acts 21.10.11.12 13.
wept so greatly for the danger of Paul, prophesied by Agabus.

And why think we this to be matter of lamentations? Ioash the King lamented
sick Elisha, and weeping upon his face said,) 2. Kings 13.14.
The Charet of Israel, and the horsemen of the same: not for their persons, who
are men inferior to many others, not for their policy, which are of
inferior reach then many thousands, but for their piety and prayers: Job
22.30.
For the innocent shall deliver the Island, and it shall be preserved by the
pureness of his hands. And as Chrysostom says: Vt ciuitas non cincta muris
facile venit in potestatem hostium sic and anima non munita precibus. Chris. de
precat. lib. 2.
As a City not compassed with walls, easily comes into the power of the
enemy, so the soul not fenced with prayers: so on the contrary; the walls of
the City are the prayers of the saints, or at least they uphold the walls. As
Josh. 6.20.
at the shoutings of the people, the walls of Ierico fell down, so at the
prayers and cries of the godly, the walls of the Church and country stand up.
These are the strength of their strength.

at hand ready to break in upon them, as the red and lowering sky in the
morning, is a sign of a shortly ensuing tempest: so the taking of these away
of an imminent plague, the Prophet Esaias gives this reason of it: Esaias 57.1.
The righteous perishes, and no man considers it in heart, and merciful men
are taken away, and no man understands that the righteous is taken away from
the evil to come: Their taking away, does then directly presage an evil to
come? for as the Apostle says in an other case, so I in this, 2. Thessal. 2.7.
Only he which now withholds shall let, till he be taken out of the way:
these while they are, withold and keep back the plague. As the Angel said
to Lot, Genes. 19.22.
I can do nothing till thou be come thither, namely to bring the plague upon
Sodom and Gomorrah, but he no sooner was entered into Zoar, but instantly the
Lord reigned fire and brimstone upon Sodom and Gomorrah. As Noah was no sooner
in the Arc, Genesis 7.11.13.
but in the very self same day were all the fountains of the deep broken up,
and the windows of heaven were opened.

Saluian said of some in his time: An credimus forte quod Captinus populus ille
no^ fuerit, qui laetus tunc in suorum captiuitatibus fuit? Captinus cord et
sensu non erat qui inter suorum supplicia ridebat, qui iugulari se in suorum
iugulis non intelligebat, qui m^^i^st in suorum mortibus non put^bat? Salutanu^
de Guber. De li. 5.
Do we believe that that people was not captiuated in mind, who were glad at
the captivity of their own people; that they were not captiuated both in heart
and feeling, that laughed at the punishment of theirs, who understood not that
in their slaughter they themselves were slain, who thought not that in their
deaths they themselves died? In the same manner may I speak of these: do we
not think that these are captiuated in their minds, who thus joy in their
dangers? are they not miserable, and blind, and benumbed, who thus laugh in
their perils? who understand not, that by this they are as Samson was, shorn
of his hair, and so deprived of their strength; who think not that by this
they take away those that keep back the judgments of God, and make way if
they may have their wills, that they may the sooner and more severely break in
upon them? And this whether they do it, as Cain hated and slew his brother,
and for that cause as St. John speaks. 1. John 3.12.
Because his own works were evil, and his brothers good; because they take
themselves withal reprove by their carriage, more then by their words.
Efficacius loquitur vox operis, quam sermonis. Bern.
For the voice of deeds speak more effectually then the voice of words: as
Bernard says. Whether a man teach or reprove, and so hate them for this, and
not without cause. For (as Saluian speaks) Nam quis dicere possit, quod sine
causa, homines scilicot omnibus a se vitae ac morum studijs discrepantes, in
quibus nihil videbant suum quoniam dei totu^. Maxima enim causa est
discordiarum diuersitas voluntatum: quia fieri aut omnino non potest, aut vix
potest, vt eam rem in alio quisquam diligit, a qua ipse dissentit. Itaque eos
non sine causa (vt dixi) oderunt, in quibus omnia sibi aemula atque ini^ica
cernebant. Saluian lib. 8. de Gub. Dei.
Who can say that it is without cause, being me^ altogether different in their
life and manners, in whom they saw nothing that was theirs, because the whole
was Gods: for the greatest cause of discord is the diversity of wills: because
it either cannot be at all, or scarce be, that any should love that thing in
another, from which he himself dissenteth: therefore (as I said) they hated
them not without cause, in whom they saw all things repugnant to themselves.
Whether it be for this, or it be for the truths sake which they profess, hold,
and defend, as the seed and brood of Antichrist ever did the Church of God, or
for any other thing, yet do they nothing more then deprive themselves of their
safety and defense, lay themselves open to the plagues and judgments of God,
though they benefit and advantage the faithful: for as Eusebius speaks in the
life of Constantine, but of that which happened in the days of Constantius his
father, that the Emperors did so persecute the godly, Vsque eo, vti breui
imperatorum regiae sanctis vi^is essent omnino orbatae: quae res authors
maleficij clementi dei obtutu, and curatione prorsus priuauit, quippe qui dum
homines pios insecturentur, etiam little preces insectati sunt, and a se peuitus
a^erterunt Eusebius. in vit. Constant. l. 1. cap. 11.
that in a short time the palaces of the Emperors were destitute of all good
men: which thing (as he says) did altogether deprive the Authors of this
wickedness, of the favorable countenance, care, and regard of God, for while
they did persecute godly men, they also persecuted their prayers, and so
altogether turned them from them. So is it with these, and so will it be with
those who thus hate and seek to remove the godly and faithful, that as Justin
Martyr spoke to Antonius Pius in his second Apology for the Christians. Vt in
delatores ipsos animaduertatis, min^me petimus: sufficit enim ipsis sua
malignitas, and bonarum rerum ignoratio. Just. Mart. Apol. 2. pro Christianis.
We desire not that ye punish the accusers, for their own malignitie, and
ignorance of good things is enough for them: So may we say; no need to pray
for vengeance upon the haters and persecuters of the godly and faithful, for
their own wickedness is enough to bring Gods judgments upon them, their
ignorance of good things, to bring evil enough upon their backs, when by this
they bring much good to the godly: for as Austin says, In Psalm. 93. Illi qui
martyrs persecutisunt persequendo in terra, in caelum mittebant and scientes
quidem praesentis vitae damnum infe^rebant, sed nescientes futurae vitae lucrum
conferebant.
They which persecuted the martyrs, in persecuting them on earth, they sent
the^ to heaven, and when wittingly they infered upon the^ the loss of this
present life, unwittingly they conferred upon the^ the gain of the life to
come^ yea as Eusebius. reports the speech of Lucius to Vrbilius the Governor
condemned for speaking against his sentence which he gave against Christians,
and professing himself upon, interogation to be a Christian he confessed,
Permagnam se debere gratiam profitebatur, nam ita se non iniqui^ solum and
improbis eiusmodi dominis liberatu^ sore dixit, sed etiam ad bonum patrem, et
clementem regem d^um recte profecturum. Eusebius. Hist lib. 4. cap. 16.
That he did owe great thanks, for so (he said) he should be not only free
from those wicked Lords, but also should go directly unto God the father of
goodness, and King of mercy and clemency: And these gone, then nothing but
plagues remains for the other; nay whether they be gone, or abide still among
the^, they are but a curse to the wicked world, not but that they might have a
blessing by them, and have more then they see or acknowledge, nor that they are
the cause of evil to them, but the occasion, because of their hatred and
handling of them, for while they euilly entreat them, living with them, and
will not let them freely serve their God, neither with them, nor separate from
them, as Pharaoh and the Aegiptians would not suffer Israel: therefore like
Egypt are they plagued with sundry judgments for abusing of them, though by
their prayers many are turned and kept from them. And when they are taken from
them, more heavy plagues do abide them, and will come in upon them: For as
Chrysostom says, Egredientibus Israelitis de Aegipto, exterminata est
Aegiptus, sic and sancti cum de isto mundo defecerint, casurus est iste mundus.
Chrisost. in Mat. 1. Hom. 1.
As the Israelites going cut of Egypt, Egypt was destroyed, so when the godly
shall be quite departed out of the world, the world shall be destroyed. This
considered, they have no cause to hate them living, and wish to be rid of them,
much less to procure their departing: but much cause have they to sorrow and
grieve when they are taken from them. And therefore much are they blinded with
malice, that they can wish their fall, and rejoice and laugh at the time of
their departure, and willingly, and wilfully thrust them out of the world, as
the Egiptians did Israel

to be a heavy curse and fearful judgment to a Land, to a Church, when men
of piety and religion, faithful and godly men are taken away; why else do the
suruiuing godly mourn and bewail them, when there is no band of nature, no
worldly or civil respect that wrings tears and sorrow from them, but merely
because such are taken away. They were neither fools nor children to weep for
trifles, and things wherein there was no loss. When they wept, and wept
bitterly with great lamentations and mourning, the cause must certainly be
either their sin, or else some great judgment, either privative or positive.
The taking away of the godly, especially by an ordinary hand of God cannot be
sin, but a punishment for sin, and that which is manifested to be a very
fearful one. Then must we, then ought we to sigh and groan, to sorrow and
mourn under this, as a very heavy judgment: we shall perform herein no
unfitting, thing, nothing unworthy of us, whatsoever we be, or whosoever we be;
it is fitting the most holiest, when Esaias the Prophet, and other of the
faithful have done it: it is fitting the most honorable, whenas David the
King, and Esaias of the blood royal have done it, and thought themselves to have
calling to it and cause enough when such things befell the time they lived in.
We are all (honorable and beloved) called to mourn; for how many men of note
for piety and holiness, for religion and vprightnes, whom God had specially
endued with grace and goodness, and anointed them with this oil above their
fellows, and men of their rank and fashion, how many of these are taken, and
removed from us within these few years, we being altogether unworthy of them,
and he having made them Reu. 3.4.
worthy (as it is said of a few in the Church of Sardie) that is fitting for
himself. And while we inioied them, we prospered by their presence and
prayers, we were blessed for them; for their sakes, at their suites were many
judgments turned from us, that otherwise would have fallen upon us, as Moses
by his prayers tied the Lords hand that he could not hurt Israel: as for
Joseph not only Potiphar fared the better, but for his, and the family of
Jacob, Egypt prospered, and was preserved when other countries perished with
famine in the time of want. Doubtless as Elisha said to Iehoram, 2. Kings. 3.14.
If it were not that I regarded the presence of Iehoshaphat King of Judah, I
would not have looked toward thee, nor seen thee: so if it had not been for
their presence and prayers, God would never have respected our armies, and our
generals to have given them such relief as they found, when they were often in
distress in Ireland, and elsewhere. As Tertullian says, that M. Aurel.
germanicam sitm Christianorum forte militum precationibus impetrato imbri
discussam contestatur. Tertul. aduer. Gent. Apol.
M. Aurelius the Emperor, when he was in fight against the Germans, and in a
straight for water; by his letters witnessed, that the German thirst was driven
away with ashower, obtained by the prayers of the Christian soldiers: So may I
say, that from many streights, have we and our armies obtained relief by
them. Yea as Moses and his prayer overcame more then Joshua and his power and
strength: for Exodus 11.11.
when Moses held up his hand, Israel prevailed: that is, when he prayed
fervently, Israel had the day of the Amalekites, but when he let his hands
down, Amalek prevailed: that is, when he left praying, the enemy got the better.

So may we say of the faithful of the land, that at all times their suites to
God when they were fervent, prevailed more then the swords of our Captains and
soldiers; their prayers were of more force then all their pieces, their cries,
then all the Cannons of the Army: Heb. 11.34.
by their faith were turned to flight the armies of the Aliants. But now when
so many of these are taken away, when they have yielded to nature, and are
received into glory, have we not cause to mourn with great lamentations? Yes,
yes, if we did understand those things that did belong to our peace, and
safety, if we did conceive rightly of things tending to our woe, and misery; if
we do not, if we cannot, it is because, as Saluian says to the Catholic
Church, Repugnante contra temetipsum tua foelicitate. Saluian. l. 1. ad Eccles.
Catholiam.
Thy own felicity fights against thy self: our prosperity, our plenty
stands against us, and has bewitched us, we are so drunk with the
pleasures thereof, that as drunken men we see no danger, though we lie open to
infinite danger hereby. Shall use that of Saluian? Ablatus erat a peccatoribus
timor ne posset esse cautela. Saluian. de
Fear was taken away from offenders, that there should be no caution against
it. We are destitute of the fear of evil, because we should not take care to
avoid it, and that it should come upon us unawares: God forbid, God forbid, let
me be found a false Prophet. But to draw to an end of this point (Honorable and
beloved) had the old world cause to fear and mourn when Noah went into the
Arc? was it high time for Sodom to lament when Lot was taken away, and
hastened out of it by the Angel? and have not we cause? can we not mourn
when so many Noah's and Lots (I wrong none, as I take it, though I honor some
by this comparison) are taken away? and hastened away out of our Land and
Cities? Trust me now, or time will come when you shall trust me, that we have
cause and cause again to lament and mourn, not for them who dying in the
Lord, are happy with the Lord, and rest from all their labors and miseries;
but as Christ said to the women that followed him, Weep not for me, but for
your selves and your children: so we for our selves and our children: for
having been safe by them, and strengthened through them, they are taken away
from the plague, we lie open to it, and it hastneth the faster, because they
that kept it from us, are removed. Men use to fence and defend, to keep watch
and ward over their corn fields, whiles the corn and fruits are in them
vnreaped, ungathered: when they are gathered, and put safe into the barn, the^
is open tide, as they say, they lay them open to beasts of all kind, and
sometime set fire on the stubble. So, and so has God dealt often times with many
lands and countries, wherein his Church and the godly have lived. And are we
better then they? Nay as Saluian says, Deteriores sumus quia meliores esse
debemus. Saluian.
We are worse, because we should be better: having such examples to admonish
us: have we any privilege or protection more then they? nay, nay, we have no
help, unless we cease to do evil and learn to do well, and labor to be
good and faithful as they were, and believing this to be true, it may be, (as
Tertullian speaks in one place: Fides facit formidinem, sormid^
solicitudinem. Tertull.
faith causes fear, fear carfulness:) so our faith may breed fear, and
our fear care to cease to be evil, and learn to do well, that repenting for
our sins, and practicing true piete, we may still live and eat the good
things of the land.

Let us proceed to a second point.

Job speaks, Job. 14.1.2.
Man that is borne of a woman, is of short continuance, he shoots forth as a
flower, and is cut down; he vanishes also as a shadow, and continues not. But
a man would think that James ^.18.
he that is begotten again of Gods own will by the word of truth: that John
3.5.
he that is borne again of water and of the spirit and so John 1.13.
borne not of blood, nor of the will of flesh, nor of the will of man, but of
God: yea 1. Pet. 1.23.
borne a new, not of mortal seed, but of immortal, the word of God, which
lives and indureth for ever: A man (I say) would think that he should not
die: and yet behold the whole generation of Gods Children, they all die in
their appointed time, and undergo death, Non supplicium sed ^ri^utum viuendi.
Seneca.
not as a punishment, but as a tribute (as the heathen man speaks) which every
man must pay for his life. Though the fool die, yet may not the wise man live
ever? Eccles. 2.16.
How dies the wise man? as does the fool: (says the Preacher): but though
the subject die, yet cannot the Sovereign put away death with his Scepter.
Psalm. 82.6.
I have said ye are Gods, and ye all are children of the most high: but ye
shall die as a man, and ye Princes shall fall like others. But though Prince
and people die, yet are not the Prophets excused? Zach. 1.5.
Your fathers, where are they, and do the Prophets live for ever? Examples of
other times, experience of our own teaches us, that all of all sorts die, and
are gathered to their fathers. Yea Etiam muta Clamant cadauera Basil.
the dumb and dead bodies cry this aloud to us. As Basil of Seleucia says of
Noah: he preached without preaching, every stroke of the Arc was a real
sermon of repentance, so every corpse we follow and accompany to the grave
preaches really this truth to us.

And this truth has certain ground. Heb. 9 27.
It is appointed unto men that they shall once die: The decree was made Genesis
3.19. Genesis 3.19.
Thou art dust, and to dust thou shall return. If it be his decree, it must
needs have a certain effect: the decree is certain, the event is inevitable.
Psalm. 115.3.
Our God is in heaven, and he does whatsoever he will. Vol^isse fecisse est.
Cypr. de Duplici martyr.
Gods will is his deed (as Cyprian says, if he have once willd it, it is as
good as wrought if he have decreed it, it is as certain as if it were done.

Job 4.19.
made of clay and earth, whose foundation is in the dust, which shall be
destroyed before the moth. Hence the Apostle calls men's bodies 1. Corinthians.
5.7.
The earthly house of this Tabernacle. It is true that as there are difference
of stars, though al made of th same matter: and difference of mettalls, some
are gold, some silver, some lead, some tin, but all made of one earth: so are
there difference of bodies, some more excellent then other, and made of a purer
earth, but yet all subject to corruption, as the matter whereof they are made
is. It being the body then that dies and sees corruption, one must die as
well as another.

1 John 1.8, 9, 10.
If we say we have no sin, we deceive our selves, and make God a liar. The
holy and beloved Apostle ranketh himself with others, and confessed, that he
had still sin in him: He Qui se inculpatum dixerit, aut superbus est, aut
stultus. Cypr. de oper. and Eleem.
that says he is without fault, is either proud or a fool, says Cyprian.
Then must all be subject to death; for says the Apostle Romans 5.12.
As by one man sin entered into the world, and death by sin, and so death
went over all, for as much as all men have sinned. Sin the only cause, says
one, which enlarged deaths dominion, and made all the world to become his
tributaries, for had it not been for sin, death had never entered into the
world. Si Adam non peccasset, mortem non gustaret. Aug: enchirid. cap. 104.
If Adam had not sinned, he had not tasted death (as Austin speaks) And the
Lord said Genes. 2.17.
In the day that thou eatest thereof, thou shall die the death: not actually,
but potentially become mortal. Now that which is true in the root holds in
the branches.

Basil says, Deiu mortem non fecit, sed nosmet ipsi ex mente praua, nobis
ipsis etiam sponte attraximus, quam Deus minime prohibuit, ne immortalem in
nobis morbum conseruaret. Basil. sermon. 9. quod Deus non est author malorum.
God made not death, but we our selves by our wicked minds, of our own
accord, we have drawn it on our selves, which God did not at all forbid,
lest it should keep in us an immortal disease. And as Epiphanius brings in
Methodius disputing with Proclus the Originist: Instar medicamentariae
purgationis mortem Deus been inuenit, quo sic omnino inculpabiles, and in noxij
inueniantur, etc. Epiph. haer. 64. etc. methodio.
God as the true Physician has appointed death to be a physical purgation for
the utter rooting out and putting away of sin, that we may be made faultlesse
and innocent: and that as a goodly golden image, says he, sightly and seemly
in all parts, if it be broken and defaced by any means, must be new cast and
framed again, for the taking away of the blemishes and disgraces of it, even
so man the Image of God being maimed and disgraced by sin, for the putting
away of those disgraces, and the repairing of his ruins and decaies, must by
death be dissolved into the earth, thence to be raised up again perfect, and
without default.

meanest, the wisest as the simplest, for if any one then all and if any more
then other, the greatest, for they are not the least, but rather the most
subject to this, as they challenge themselves to be of the finest of the common
mould, so they must know that they are not by that exempted from the common law
of nature, and force of Gods decree, but as the finer the metal, or the purer
the matter of any glass, or earthen vessel, the more subject it is to
breaking, so they to mortality: And therefore both they, and all must labor for
this spiritual Arithmeticke. To number their days, which is a religious
meditation and sound consideration of their frailty and mortality. A thing
worthy every man's best disposed thoughts and intentions: for seenig every man
must die, and has a course to finish, which being finished, he must away, it
is special wisdom to learn to know the length of his days, as it were the
length of his lease; for as he has used himself in his farm, he shall
enter at the expiration of his time upon a better or a worse. David for his
learning a Prophet, for his accepation a man after Gods own heart, for his
authority a King, was then very studious in this knowledge, when after watching
and fasting he besought God to be instructed in it. Psalm. 39.4.
Lord let me know mine end, and the measure of my days what it is, let me
know how long I have to live. So Moses wise in all the wisdom of Egypt and
Israel, accounted faithful in the house of God, prayed yet for this point of
wisdom to be informed in it, as well himself as others. Psalm. 90.12.
Teach us so to number our days, that we may apply our hearts to wisdom, like
careful Scholars who break their sleep, and forsake their meat, and are
often in meditations when they beat upon some serious subuect.

What think you it will profit a man, if by his skill it Arithmeticke he be
able to deal with every number, and to divide the least fractions, and never
to think of the numbering of his days with the men of God, which are so few,
and evil?

What will it profit him if by Geometry he be able to take the longitude of
the most spacious prospects, and not be able to measure that which the Prophet
has measured with his span? What will it avail him if with the Astronomer he
be able to observe and know the motion of the heavens, and yet have his heart
so buried in the earth, that he cannot think of that which passes away as
swiftly as them? What profit if he be able with the Philosopher to search out
the causes of many effects, and to know the causes of many changes, as of the
ebbing and flowing of the Seas, the increasing, and waning of the moon, and
the like, and be not able to know his own changes, and the causes of them?

Doubtless all this will profit him nothing, all his knowledge will be to little
purpose in the end. Many men beat their heads about frivolous matters, some
being more busy to know where Hell is (says Chrysostom) then how to avoid
the pains of it, others pleasing themselves in pelting and needless questions
to seem singular amongst men, neglecting this, and the like necessary things:
but when they come to their departing, they shall find they have spunne a
fair thread, and wearied themselves in vain: every one then, as Daniel
searched and found out by the books of Jeremiah not only the return, but the
time of the return of Israel to their own land, from their captivity; so by
study of the Scriptures ought they to search, and so may they come to know the
time of the return from their exile on the earth, to their country in heaven;
and though they cannot find the particular day or year, yet they shall find it
to be most certain, and that which in short time shall be finished. And thus
shall death when it comes be less hurtful, as a tempest before expected.
Death is compared to the Basilisk which if she see before she be seen, there
is some danger; but if a man first descrie the Basiliske, the serpent dies,
and then there is no fear:

1. Tim. 6.7.
1. Tim. 6.7. We brough nothing into the world, and it is certain we can carry
nothing out. It is wisdom then in every one, to labor to be fitted for this
passage Ad hunc exitum praeparem^r, multis enim nobis opus est vitaticu:
quoniam et multus est ^stus, multa sic cit^^, multa solitudo. Non iam licet in
diuersorio requiescere, non est quod ^matur ab eo qui non hic omnia sumpserit,
audi certe quid dicat virgins: Mat. 25. ite potius ad vendentes, sed
profectae, non inuenerunt. Chrysostom. hom. 51. ad pop. Aut.
Let us be prepared to this journey (as Chrysostom says) for we have need of
much provision, because there is much heat, much drought, much solitude; no
Inn, no resting place, no place of abode: there is naught to be boght of him,
who has not taken all things here. Hear what the Virgins say. Mat. 25. Go
rather to them that sell: but going, they found not. What ought we then to do?
we must not so labor for the things of this life, from which me must be
taken, and which we must leave behind us; but for those which concern a
better life, and we may carry with us: not for those things which shall have
either a finem tuum, or finem suum; Finem tuum, ant finem suum. Bern.
(as Bernard speaks,) an end of thee, if thou have not an end of them; either
shall they be taken from us, as they were from Job; or else we from them, as
the rich man was from his substance and wealth: but for those things which we
may carry with us, and may either bring us to, or adorn us where we must be
perpetually, and for ever. It were a very foolish part, and a senseless
practice for strangers when they are in exile, or far from their own country,
in a foreign soil and dwelling, whence they are sure to be called either by
their own Prince, or cast out by the Prince of the country, to lay out all
they are worth upon some farm or Lordship there, never providing for that
which they may carry with them to their county adorn them when they come
there, specially if the so employing of themselves and their estate, be a
means to keep them from the enjoying of the happiness of their country; yea
a cause that they shall be cast in to prison and plunged into misery: So it is
but a madness for us to employ all our care, and spend all our time and endeavor
for this life, and things for it and the body, upon earthly and transitory
things, things we found here, and must leave here. 2. Corinthians* 5.6.
And being here from home, strangers in the body, absent from the Lord, and our
own land (as the Apostle speaks) whence we know we shall be called, either
by a natural or a violent death, ordinary or extraordinary, taken away by God,
or thrust out by the cruelty of men, never providing for that which must adorn
us there, or further our passage, yea procure our entrance: specially when such
things, and the care for them, which was joined with the neglect of so great
things, even of so great salvation, shall procure misery and punishment, where
the other would procure mercy and happiness: Hic ista relinquuntur, illa vero
nobiscum migrent, et istorum quidem rationem dabimus, horum autem praemia
repetimus. Chrysostom. hom. 63. ad pop. At.
here these things are left behind us, those go with us; of these we shall give
an account, of them we shall reap a reward (as Chrysostom says): we must
therefore imitate strangers, who provide for their departure, and store
themselves with such things that are both portable and profitable, as may stead
them in their passage and possession of their country: so must we provide for
spiritual things, store our selves with them, which we only must carry with
us, and cannot be taken from us, and shall be commodious to us when we come to
our country. Chrysostom says; Virtute inutus talem habet vestem quam non
tantum tineae, verum and mors ipsae ledere nequit, and merito, non enim hae
animae ^irtutes ex terra originem trahunt sed spiritus sunt fructus. Chrysostom.
hom. 47. ad pop. At.
He which is endued with virtue has such a garment, which as moaths cannot so
neither can death it self hurt, and not without cause; for these virtues of
the mind, take not their beginning from the earth, but are fruits of the
spirit. They will then be eternal riches, and we shall be eternal by them;
and though death dissolve body and soul, and destroy our present being in the
life, yet as Justin Martyr spoke for himself and others, to their persecutors;
Vos occ^dere quidem potesti^, at nocere non pot^^tis. Just. Mart. Apol. 2.
You may kill us, but ye cannot hurt us. So death may kill us, but it cannot
hurt us, while it comes thus expected and provided for, it may be to our great
commodity and advantage.

And now I will come to the third point.

away before he be come to the full period of his life, that in the course of
nature, and the eye of reason he might attain to, is a thing that may betide
good men, and not be a curse to them. Here the good man perishes, is untimely
taken away. And this is the Iame that is in Esaias, Esaias 57.1.
The righteous perishes, the merciful man is taken away, namely untimely: for
if they died in a full age, it were not blame worthy for a man not to consider
it in his 1. Kings 14.13.
He heart. So of Ieroboams son only of Jeroboam house shall come to the
grave, because in him is found some goodness, toward the Lord God of Israel
in the house of Jeroboam, The Preacher teaches us this, Eccles. 8.12.
Though a sinner do evil an hundred times, and God prolong his days, yet I
know it shall be well with him that fears the lord, and do reverence before
him; that is, though God do not prolong their days

Now this truth is confirmed unto us by two arguments, the one drawn from the
malice of the wicked against the godly, the other from the mercy of God to the
godly. Caine slew and cut off Abel, and wherefore slew he him? because 1 John
3.12.
his own works were evil, and his brothers good. As the Patriarchs sold
Joseph, and sent him out of the house of his father, because he was a means
they were Genes. 27.2.
checked for their evil sayings. This is that we have in the book of Wisdom,
Wisd. 2.12.
Therefore let us defraud the righteous, for he is not for our profit, and he is
contrary to our doings. He checketh us for offending against the law, and
blames us as transgressors of discipline, verse. 14. He is made to reprove our
thoughts, it greeueth us also to look upon him, for his life is not like other
men's, his ways are of another fashion, verse 20. Let us condemn him unto a
shameful death, for he shall be preserved as himself says. But all this is
not against them, but as Joseph said of his brothers envy, Genes. 50.20.
When you thought evil against me, God turned it to good. So when they think
and do evil against them, God disposes it to good through his mercy, and
that partly to their bodies, partly to their souls for their bodies:

Lot out of Sodom, Genes. 19.1^.
The Lord being merciful unto him, the men brought him forth and set him
without the City. So them out of the world, and as Huldah the Prophetess sent
Josiah word by his messengers and from the Lord, 2. Kings 22.20.
Behold, I will gather thee to thy fathers, and thou shall be put in the grave,
in peace, and thine eyes shall not see all the evil which I will bring upon
this place. Plotinus the Philosopher as Austin has it, Hoc ipsum quod mortales
sunt homines corpore, ad misericordiam dei partis pertinere arbitratus est, ne
semper huius vitae miseria teneantur. Aug. de Ciuit. l. 9. cap. 10.
De ciuitate dei, saw this in part, This very thing that men are bodily
mortal, he thought it an appurtenance to the mercy of God the Father, lest
they should always be tied to the misery of this life. It is no less mercy to
be taken sooner away that they may see and suffer less misery which the length
of their days would effect.

same spirit that 2. Pet. 2.7.
Lot was, they cannot choose but be vexed as he was with the unclean
conversation of the wicked. For it cannot be but as in the Proverbs A wicked
man is an abomination to the just, Proverbs 29.27.
as he that is upright in his ways is abomination to the wicked. Again they
being endued with a true filial fear, they grieve to offend so gracious a
father, which they cannot but do whiles they are here, but after this life
shall be freed from it. Austine reports that Cyprian used to comfort his
friends in dying with this; Non solum fidelibus non in vtilis est more verum
etiam vtitis reperitur quoniam peccandi periculis hominem subtrahit, and in non
peccandi securitatem constituit. Aug. de praed. sanct. lib. 1. cap. 14.
Death is not not only not unprofitable to the faithful, but is also found to
be profitable, because it takes a man out of the danger of sinning and puts
him in security of not sinning. The sooner they are freed from these, the
greater blessing and benefit.

Ob. We find in the fifth commandment long life promised as a blessing to an
obedient and good son, fearing God, and honoring his parents, to have these
days shortened, is it not, seems it not to be a curse?

Sol. Whatsoever it seems, yet it is not. It is answered by some, that the
blessing there promised, was a blessing peculiar and special for the Jews,
for the Land of Canaan being the land of promise, and a special pledge of Gods
favor to live long, in it was a special testimony of Gods love. For to be in
it, though dead, was specially respected of the Fathers, as we see by Jacob and
Joseph. But these restrain this promise and Gods bounty too much. Neither is
there any reason that it being annexed to a moral precept and written in the
Law, should not be general and perpetual, yea the Apostle writing unto the
Ephesians, does so make it, where he seems, also to expound it. Ephesians. ^.3.
That it may be well with thee, and that thou may live long on earth. Wherein
he shows, that it is not absolutely a blessing, but so long as a man was well
on earth; noting it else no blessing to live, but rather a favor to be taken
away from the evil to come. Say the father promise his son a large lease in
some rich place, but very unhealthful, for his obedience and service; and
after take him thence, and in a richer soil, and only healthful air, give
him a fee simple of such a thing as for fruitfulness and pleasantness far
surpassing the other, has he not dealt faithfully and fatherly with him?
Chrysostom uses this similitude, I confess to a different purpose, but yet
it fitteth our point, Si ad aliquem profectus mercatorem duobus propositis
lapidibus hoc quidem falso, hoc autem pretioso, and diuitiarum multi^ trah.
nec, illius parui pretiu^ deponens magnum accep^sses, nunquid illum incusasses?
nequaquamsed potius suisses admiratus. Itidem and nunc propositae sunt duae
vitae, temporalis and aeterna, ipsas autem venundat Deu^. Sed hanc nobis non
illam vendit, quid incipientium instar pueroru^ tristamur quod pretiosum
acceperimus. Chrysostom. hem. 38. ad pop. Ant.
If thou should come to a merchant, and of two stones laid before thee, the
one false, the other right precious, and very dearly purchaseable, and laying
down the price of the lesser, should get the greater, would thou accuse
him? No verily, but would rather admire im? In like manner now there are two
lives proposed to us, viz. a temporal, and an eternal: both these God sets to
sale, but he sels us the eternal, not the temporal. Why like silly children
are we sad, because we have received the best? By these we may well perceive
that this is neither crossing to Gods promise, nor a curse to the godlies
person. I now come to the use of this point.

hour glass of his life, which nature might afford) they deem it like the
Prophet Ahijah that met with Ieroboams wife, and told her, that he was sent
with heavy tidings, and namely with that specially, viz. 1. King. 14.6.12.
Thy child shall die. So these judge it heavy tidings, to hear that their
friends are like apples, pulled before they be ripe, but in this sorrow here is
sweetness, the best are subject to it, and it is no extraordinary thing to them.
Again though as grapes, they be gathered before they be ripe, and as lambs
slain before they be grown, yet they have this benefit before those that grow
longer, and live more years, they are freed from the violence of the wine
press, that others fall into, and escape many storms that others live to taste
of. To say nothing of the good they have gained, of the glory they have
obtianed, though they have lost much, they have gained more. As Tertullian
comforted the martyrs, Si aliqua amisisti vitae gaudia, negotiatio est, aliquid
amittere vt maiora lucreris. Tertul lib ad Martyr.
If thou have lost any of the ioies of this life, it is trading to loose some
lesser matter, that thou may gain greater. They have made a most gainful
traffic, and happy change, they have lost shadows, and gained substa^ces,
they have parted with lead and found gold, they have lost earthly things, and
possess heavenly, and are made very rich in a short time, yea obtained that in
a very short time, which many labor for twice or thrice as long before they
can obtain it. None would grieve to see his friend come sooner then ordinary,
more speedily then usually others do to riches and honors, to see his friend
or child outstrip others, even many thousands, and obtain wealth and dignity
in their youth, which others obtain not till they be well stricken in age, and
hoare headed; nay in stead of grieuing, they joy much in it: Much more is here
cause, when they have obtained so speedily such a measure of spiritual riches,
and such height of heavenly glory in so short a time.

Lot did the Angels, who came to fetch him out of Sodom: for though he be
pulled from his seat, which was to him as the plain of Sodom seemed to Lot,
as a pleasant Paradise, yet shall he find with Lot, he is taken away from the
judgments to come: howsoever he be taken away, either by the malice of the
wicked or by the mercy of God, and that he is separated from the sins of the
world, which grieved his soul, yea from sinning himself, and his own sins,
which grieved the Lord, even his so gracious and kind father. For while he is
in this world, he cannot but sin having so much means to draw him to it; as
Cyprian in his book of mortality, Quid aliud in mundo qua^ pugna aduersus
diabolum quotidie geritur, quam aduersus iacula and tela conflictationibus
assiduu dimicatur. Cum auaritia nobis, cum impudicitia, cum ir^, cum ambitione
congressio est. Cum carnalibus vitus, cum illecebris secularibus assi tua and
molesta luctatio est, obsessa men's hominis est vndique diaboli infestatione
vallata, vix occurrit singulis, vix resistit Si auaritia prostrata est, exurgit
libido. Si libido compressa est, succedit ambitio: S^ ambitio contempta est,
^ra exasperat, i^sta superbia, vin^tentia inuitat, inuid^a concordiam rumpit,
amicitiam zelus abscindit Coger^ maledicere, quod diuina lex prohibet.
Compelleru iurare, quod non licet. Tot persecutiones animus quotidie patitur,
tot periculis pectus vrgetur, and delectat inter dioboli gladios diu st^ re?
cum magis concupiscendum sit and optandum ad Christum subueniente velociter
morte properare. Cypr. l^b. de mortal. Reu. 22.17.
What do we else in the world but fight a combat with Satan, then with daily
conflicts encounter his darts and weapons, we must grapple with covetousness,
wantonness, with anger and ambition, we have a daily and tedious combat with
the corruptions of the flesh, and inticements of the world. The mind of man is
beseiged and beset on all sides with anoiances from Satan, so that it is not
able to resist or withstand every one. If covetousness be overcome of us, some
evil affection will assail us: if that evil affection be strangled, vain
glory will afflict us, if vain glory be despised, wrath will incence us; if
wrath be pacified, then pride will puff us up, drunkenness will provoke us,
envy will break concord, heat will interrupt friendship. Thou shall be forced
to curse, which the law of God forbids. Thou shall be constrained to swear,
which is not lawful. The soul suffers so many persecutions daily, the heart
is pressed with so many dangers, and does it delight still to abide amongst the
swords of Satan, and not rather desire by the means of a speedy death to
hasten to Christ. When he shall then be pulled from this evil and brought to
this good, to enjoy sooner the presence of God, and the lamb, yea as a bride to
his beloved Bridegroom, that that which the bride desired that he would come,
that she might have his presence he inioies before his general coming,
preventing as it were his coming by his going to him by, the means of this
imature does.

Now how should that but be a welcome guest, how but a choice blessing, which
as a gentle guide leads him to his Christ, carries his soul to her beloved
husband. This was the resolution of Ambrose, who neither loathed life, nor
feared to die, because, says he, we have a good Lord to go to. This was the
faith of Simeon who having Christ, prayed to depart in peace. This was Saint
Paul's gain, when he said, to die is to me advantage: because this passage was
a dissolution, and this dissolution was to be from the body, and this his being
from the body was to be with Christ, though it came untimely. Thus may and
ought every good man to resolve with Ambrose, to pray with Simeon, to triumph
with Paul, when he shall be carried swiftly from the Coast of his banishment
toward his own country, not with the wind only against the tide, not with
the tide against the wind, but both with wind and tide to the haven of
happiness, to the Heaven of blessedness, where he shall enjoy the presence of
God, and the Lamb, Psalm. 16.11.
in whose presence is fulness of joy and at whose right hand there are pleasures
for evermore.

Thus much out of my Text fitting the present occasion.

ANd now (Honorable and beloved) I know you expect some discourse of me, and
from me, of the life and death of this truly honorable Lord. I profess first
to you, that I have often grieved at the licentiousnes of many of my brethren
in this kind, whereby they have been very offensive, and made themselves evil
thought of, and those they commended never the better, but have given the
occasion that the hearers who knew the deceased better then themselves, have
raked into their lives, and ripped up their former carriage, to their great
disgrace, and laid open that which happily would have been kept secret, if
this occasion had not drawn it out.

But yet herein, me thinks I saw the ouer-ruling hand of the most wise God,
ordering men's sins and infirmities to make good his own word; Prou. 10.7.
The name of the wicked shall rot. So that as Austin speaks, Hoc ipso quod
contra voluntat^m Dei fecerunt, de ipsis facta est volunta^ e^^^ Aug En^^
Laurent. ^. 166.
In this that they did against the will of God, is his will fulfilled by them.
But yet I have ever judged it most fitting to speak somewhat liberally, so it
might be done warantably, of public persons, and eminent men, deserving well,
Spe vel re, of the Church and common wealth, that they may be brought to see
their loss, and they made sensible of the hand of God, in depriving them of
such notable means of their good, and worthy instruments of their peace and
prosperity, as of his kingdom and glory.

Thus iudgeing, I will so practice in the present, by your patience, to speak
a few things of this deceased honorable person; the most hopeful Gentleman,
of a subject, for the common good of the Church and common wealth (if my love
deceive me not) that many ages have afforded us, of what rank and condition
soever they were: I say a few words of his life and death, by your patience,
that when we see his worth, we may conceive of our own loss, and be assured
of his gain; and so in sorrowing for our selves, yet we may rejoice over him.
In speaking of whom, I fear, Ne tanti viri lauds oratione mea eleuare^ magis
quam exornarem. Chrysostom. de sacerd. lib. Bern. sermon. supra Cant. 34.
as Chrysostom did when he fell occasionally into the commendations of Saint
Paul; Lest my speech should rather blemish and diminish the praise of so great
a personage, then any ways adorn it: I will do what I can, and if I satisfy
not men's expectations, as Bernard in another case, Culpetur sane ingenium, non
voluntas: Blame my wit, and not my will.

But why hold I you thus in suspense? I will pass by the birth of this
honorable person, and his progenitors, though it be worth the esteem to be
borne of those that are truly worthy and anciently noble, and to descend from
their loins. Yet it is more properly another, then his commendations, and is
common to those who have nothing commendable in them, nor have any profit by
it, no more then a channel or river that sloweth from a pure and wholesome
spring if it be corrupt and defiled, whereof the world has too many, who are
not so much honored by their noble auncesters, as they dishonor them and
their stock. Dignitas in indigno ornamentum in Luto, says Saluian; Saluian.
ad eccles. cathol. lib. 2.
Honor in an vnhonorable man, is like an ornament in the dirt, a jewel in the
dunghill more defiled then it can adorn. Alas for grief, that in this age of
the world it may be spoken to many, which Nazianzene reports was sometime
spoken to a Noble man dispising another that was come of mean parentage, and
boasting of his own nobility: Mihi inquit probro genus meum est, tu autem
generi tuo. Nazian. in nobilem male morat.
My parentage is a reproach to me, but thour art a reproach to thy parentage.
This honorable Lord as a thankful man for honor received, returned honor to
his ancestors, and that with advantage, being no less honorable to them, then
they were to him: I know they will acknowledge and subscribe to this with much
joy and comfort.

I will omit to speak of his education and bringing up, which is the honor of
his parents, having been so religious and truly Christian as it was. Non est
parui apud deum meriti been filios educare. So Hierome. Hieron. epist. 9. ad
Sal.
It is a thing of noe small account with God, for men to bring up their
children well, and in the fear of God, especially men Children, which as
Chrysostom says, is Magis intollerabilis and cum maiori formidine. Chrysostom. de
sacerd. lib. 1.
A greater burden, and more full of fears and cares.

I will not stand upon his natural parts of wit, memory, sweetness of nature,
ability of body, all which were in him excellent, but they are common to many
others, yet in this different, namely in the well using and applying of them A
good wit (says one) unsanctified, is a prey for the Devil; so I may say of
the rest: but when it is true of them which Bernard says. Gratia ordinat quam
donauit creatio. Bern. tract. de gra. and lib. 6.
Grace does order aright that which Creation has given. Then are they
honorable and comme^dable indeed. Such were they in this honorable person truly
sanctified, and religiously applied to all good, as shall appear by that which
follows.

For his learning, I must leave it to others to speak, that had occasion to
confer with him and co^uerse with him in that course, I mean for humane
knowledge of tongues and arts, and the like, I know many both strangers and
Englishmen speak admirably of him. As some out of certain knowledge testify
of him, that he had attained four languages very sufficiently, The Greek,
Latin, Italian, and French, being able to read Greek authors, and to make use
of them in their own language. Speaking Latin well and writing a pure and
grave style, so also he was able to confer with any stranger readily and
laudably in the Italian and French, as men of best judgment have thought, able
also to understand the Authors he read in the Spanish tongue. So for his
knowledge in the Arts, specially in Philosophy, and the Mathematics, some who
are Masters of these Arts, and others of note witness with them, that his skill
as well in the practike part as contemplative, was of that degree toward
perfection, as that he was not only to have been accounted excellent, in
respect he was a gentleman of noble rank and place; but that he might justly
be paraleld with most of the best that were renowned in the only professing of
the same: For his knowledge in the Theorique of the art Military and
Navigations, he had made so good a progress therein, as some who understand
those arts well do witness, he wanted nothing but the practice to a great
perfection in them both. For his understanding in heavenly knowledge, and the
mysteries of salvation, as his desire was very fervent to it, so was his
success very prosperous and happy in it. For he had attained that measure,
that I never knew in any of what rank soever of his years, (that did not
intend to make it their profession) I have conferred with him many and many
times, I never knew the question come in our way, which he was not able
suddenly and understandingly to speak unto.

But to come to the best, and that which is most comfortable, as touching him,
and may more make us to bewail our loss; This desire of knowledge was not as
Bernard notes of some, who desired to know, Eo fine tantum vt sciant. Bern.
sermon. supra Cant. 36.
For that end only that they might know; which is, Turpis curiositas (says the
Father a filthy curiosity. Nor, as others who desired it, vt scia^tur ipsi;
that they might be known, which is, turpis vanitas, foul vanity: Nor as
others, vt scientiam suam vendant; that they may make sale of their knowledge,
which is turpis quaestus, filthy lucre: But it was as he speaks; others
desired knowledge, vt aedificent, that they might profit others, which was
charitas, charity, and as others, vt aefidificentur, that they might be
edified, and prudentia est, and it is wisdom. Of all these only, the two last
are found free from the abuse of knowledge, as who would therefore understand,
that they might do good. Horum omnium soli vltimi duo non inueniuntur in
abusione scientiae quippe qui ad boc volunt intelligere vt benefaciant.
These two last are not the abuses of knowledge, because they desire to know
well, that they may do well: such I assure you was the desire of knowledge in
this honorable person, which I manifest thus unto you.

The grace of salvation, that is, this saving knowledge by the Gospel,
teaches not for the speculation, but the practice of it, it being like the
voice that bad Lazarus arise, and made him able to rise out of his grave, and
to walk and work. I say, it teaches three lessons, and enables them that
truly apprehend it, to work three maine things. Sobriety, Justice, Piety,
Titus 8.11.12.
The grace of God that brings salvation unto all men has appeared, and
teaches us that we should live soberly, and righteously and godly in this
present world. How well this noble worthy had both learned, and was enabled by
the grace of salvation to practice these three, I will manifest to you in few
words: of the first two more briefly; of the latter, more largely.

For his sobriety, he was a wonderful, sober, and chaste man in his life; nay
his lips not heard to utter any unchaste, nay scarsely unseemly speech, as many
report of him, with whom happily he would have spoken more liberally and opened
himself more freely then with me: which was the more commendable in him,
because he was as Hierome speaks in lubrica aetate, in a slippery age, in the
flower of his youth; but yet more, because: he lived in lubrico loco, in a
slippery place, the Court; most of all, because he had bin a traveler in
those places where are schools of uncleanness, whence few ever return such
as they went out; but of good and chaste, return unchaste, being unchaste when
they went out, they are seven fold more defiled then before. So was it not with
him, but like fishes which retain their fresh taste, though they live in salt
water; so in an vnchastage, in unchaste places, he ever kept his chastity, yea
he grew in the love of chastity, and hatred of all uncleanness.

And no marvel, for he took the way to it; he avoided the occasions, he spent
not his time in courting of young Ladies, and amourosly beholding beautiful
women, the bellows of lust, and baits of uncleanness, of whom Saint Augustine
speaks thus, Videre illas obest cordi, audire illas inflammat animam, tangere
illas stimulat carnem; omne denique quod cum faeminis agitur, laqueus est
homini cum illis conuersanti. Aug de cohab. cler. and mulier.
To see them, hurts the heart, to hear them, inflames the mind, to touch them
stirs up the flesh, and last of all, all whatsoever is done with women (which
are not their lawful wives) is a snare to that man that deals with them. But
this chaste spouse esteemed his books above their beauty, and in stead of
daliance with them, his delight was in men of parts and learning, for arts and
Arms. But besides this, as a special means of chastity, he was temperate in
feeding, and rare in feasting, and frequent in fasting (of which, when I come
to his religion.) he was moreover a great auoider of idleness and sleep, the
two nurses of uncleanness; with his will he ordinarily never slept above six
hours, and when he lay awake, he sought to exclude all evil thoughts with
meditation upon some heavenly things, as I shall tell you when I come to his
piety.

For his justice, he had no public place to show himself in, he was but
coming up on the stage and God called him away, and suffered him not to
manifest what he had gotten by his careful fitting himself for such a place:
for his private carriage, I have not heard, but that he dealt honorably and
honestly with every man that he had to do with; He attended upon the Lady
Electresse 10. years or thereabouts.
that great and honorable care he had that his fathers debts, which were very
great by his manifold both private and public occasions, and some few of his
own (which I am informed to be no great matter) establishing power in his
honorable mother and executresse, to sell all, or any part of the land,
presently and speedily to pay and discharge all: and when the gentleman who
drew the conueiance demanded of him, if he aproued of that he appointed to be
done, and confirmed to this purpose; he answered, Yes with all my heart, for my
honor and my honesty are my nearest heirs. If any think that to impeach his
justice, that he left not the land to the heir male, to uphold the house, I
must tell the^ that in justice, the paying of just debts ought to be preferred
before upholding or houses, and will give more comfort at the last: yea there
can be no true comfort without care of this: and the tail being cut off as I
am informed (by his father) in this honorable respect, to pay every man his
own, his sisters were nearer to him then his cosien german, both by the law of
God and nature, who being honorable Ladies, professors of religion, as it lies
in their power and the world looks for it from them: so if they leave no
children to inherit, no doubt, they will have an honorable care to uphold the
house, and the name; which I think will be much to their honor

And now honorable and beloved, I come to the third branch, and the third
effect of this saving knowledge, his godliness and religion, of whom I may say
as Saluian says of one, Erat fide nobilis quae omnibus semper ornatibus
ornamento est, quia sine hac nihil tam ornatum est, quod ornare potest. Salu
epist. 1.
That he was noble in that faith which always in all addressings, is an
ornament, because without this faith, there is nothing so specious that can
garnish and beautify.

This, this is the Temple that sanctifies the gold, this is the Altar that
sanctifies the offering, by this the sobriety and justice (which in an heathen
or civil man, without this, are but glistering sins as, Splendida peccata
splendida virtutes.
Austine calls them) in him were glorious virtues. For this in general, such
was his piety, that not I only, but many others, better able to judge then my
self, will affirm with me, that we knew not any of what rank soever, in who^
we discerned more, nay so fervent a desire of saving knowledge, so constant a
resolution to practice al known good duties, so great tenderness of conscience,
and fear to offend God in the least thing which he knew to be sin. How and
whereby we discerned this, I will discover to you in particular, which when you
have heard, I doubt not but you will judge, that we conceited not things amiss,
but as they were.

We discerned this, and it did discover it self unto us two ways, by his
private and public exercises of piety, which were such, as I say not, were
rarely found in a young man, more rarely in a noble man, most rarely in a young
noble man; but such they were, as are rarely found in such measure in any man
of what age and condition soever he be. I will first speak of his private
course, and tell you how he spent one day, and in like manner he spent all the
days of the year.

His private exercise and course of piety was on this sort; he usually rose
every morning about 4. or 5. of the clock, not willingly sleeping above six
hours, as soon as ever he was thoroughly awake, he in devoured religiously to
set his heart in order, and to prepare it for goodness all the day after,
offering the first fruits of the day and of his thoughts unto God. Thus having
tuned his best instrument, his heart, in the next place he read a Chapter of
the holy Scripture; that done he went to prayers with his servants in his
chamber, after this he read some divine treatise to increase his knowledge in
spiritual things, and this for the greater part of an hour: he had of latter
times read over in this course Caluins Institutions, and was at the time of his
sickness reading the works of a reverend man now living, one M. Rogers. And all
this he did besides that which was performed with all the family, with whom
he joined in the order his honorable father left in the family namely,
reading of the Psalms, and a chapter, together with prayer, according to the
order of our Church, before dinner and supper, and singing of a Psalm and
prayer after supper.

But to return to his morning business, after he had bestowed the former time
in the manner aforesaid, he with drew himself to his closet, and after his
own private prayer, disposed himself to some serious study (if some special
business interrupted not his course) for the space of 3. or 4. hours; after
which time, he addressed himself, if he had time before dinner, to dispatch
business, if any there were required of him, or to converse and confer with
his friends, to better the^, or be bettered by them, or to ride his great
horse, or walk abroad. But why place I these with his religion? because hereby
he kept himself from idleness, and gave no way to the temptations of Satan,
knowing well that the flies settle upon the sweetest perfumes when they are
cold, and corrupt them.

Soon after dinner, if he had the opportunity, he ordinarily withdrew
himself for a while to the meditating upon some Sermons which he had lately
heard, for which use, he retained some 5. or 6. in his mind. He would not
fail though he was disappointed of that oppertunitie, to meditate upon them
before he slept, yea many times traveling by land or water, he performed this
duty, and then would desire his companions to forbear talk, they might
think a while he did ordinarily meditate and call to mind 4. or 5. in a day.
The rest of his afternoon he gave to business as the occasions were, and to
study Histories, and to get instructions from them who were skillful in the
discipline of War, or in the Mathematikes and Navigations, wherein some report
he had made great success for his age and time.

After supper, he betook himself to prayer with his servants and that which
is markeable above many other things, after prayers with them, he withdrew
himself from his servants and friends, and there in a book which he kept for
the account of his life, he set down what he had done all that day, how he had
either offended or done good, and how he was tempted, and with stood them, and
according to his account, he humbled himself; and such was his wisdom, that
such temptations as were not fit (as I suppose) to come to any man's view but
his own, and his Gods, he writ in a peculiar Caracter known to none. After
this, giving himself to his rest, as rising he had care to shut out evil by
possessing his heart with good thoughts, and the reading of the holy scripture;
so had he care to shut up his heart against such things: one of his Chamber, as
he was laying him to rest, I have known a great light of our Church (who now
rests in peace) use the same practice.
reading a Chapter or two of the sacred word of God. And this was not taken up
for a fit, and as a novelty, but he continued it for the space of 4. years
last past, as some inform me, that is, from January 1609. to the 15. of
February 1613. the day when he took his bed, some 12. days before his death.

And now honorable and beloved, for his public exercises, which you may well
think were carefully and conscionably performed. For he that had such care to
approve himself to God in private, had no less care to approve himself both
to God and man in public. This appears in his religious use of the time and
means of Gods worship, and his own edification and salvation.

He was a most religious obseruer of the Saboth, in public and private duties,
professing to affect the public means (if he were where he could enjoy
them) before all private, though they were differently performed, and had
resolved, though he entertained an household Chaplain, yet ever to frequent
the public assemblies upon the Sabbath day, a thing worthy the noting, to the
reproof of many of his own, as of inferior rank, who so much neglect the
public assemblies. And for his present practice, he did not miss ordinarily
twice a day to hear the word publicly: no not when he was a Courtier: yea he
has ridden 4. miles to the public worship of God, when he could not enjoy it
nearer. After he had heard, he usually withdew himself from company before
dinner, if he were so fitted for circumstances, that he might for the space of
half an hour meditate upon what he had heard, or for some other private
meditations. After the afternoones public exercise (two of his servants having
written, his memory being such as it exceeded often times all their writings)
he repeated with his servants before supper both the Sermons, and writ them
down in his night-booke, and after all this, he prayed with them, wherein he
had a great gift. And that which helped him the better to keep the Sabbath, he
was constantly accustomed upon Saturday at night, besides his account for the
day, to call himself to a strict account how he had spent the whole week,
that according as he found his estate, he might better fit himself to
sanctify the Sabbath following. In the morning he repeated to his servants as
he was making ready, those servants which he had heard the Sabbath before.
Note this, not out of time, though somewhat out of place, that a most inward
familiar of his has, fin^ the delivery of this acquainted me with: that upon
the Saturday he took a view of all the week, so upon the month Saturday, he
took a view of all the former month, to se how he had bettered, as one week
more then another, so on month more then another, how he had added and got
more grace and strength of piety.

In the hearing of the word, he was one of the most attentive, and reverend
hearers that ever I observed, or mine eyes have seen, that have seen many
thousands; for he well knew that he was before God, and that he heard not the
words of man, but God: and as well did he acknowledge, that it is but the error
of great men to think they have a privilege to be less reverent and
regardfull in hearing, then the meanest in the congregation: yea he knew that
Kings Scepters are as much inferior to Christ's Scepter, as he that bears it
is inferior to Kings: therefore when he came to hear, he willingly laid down
his honor at Christ his feet.

For the Sacrament, he received it constantly (if by any conuenience he could)
every first Sunday of the month, and to fit himself to feast at Christ's table,
he fasted the Saturday before (besides many other times when he humbled
himself) spending the day in prayer, with meditation, and examination of
himself and his estate, how it was with him since his last receiving, never
coming out of his study (unless very importunate occasions pressed him) till
toward supper time, nor meddling with any business that day. On the Sunday
morning, besides his ordinary preparations, he read the 1. to the Corinth. 11.
where the institution of the Supper is set down. And for the space of an
hour, he read with his servants that should communicate with him, a little
treatise that is in print, teaching men how to be prepared for worthy
receiving. Thus careful was this worthy to be fitly prepared for his Saviors
supper, that he might be a worthy receiver. Note, that he was so free from
ostentation in all these, that he admitted no man either to pray with him, or
to repeat the Sermons with him but his servants, and his one friend he so
deerly esteemed, (Sr. Ed. Har.) neither did he admit him, but after a great
time of acquaintance, and him only did he acquaint with these private and secret
holy duties, save but when for his better informing, he had conference with
some learned Ministers.
And all this piety and godliness did this noble heart practice in this age (to
speak no more particularly you may if you please, apply it to other
particulars) in this age, I say, which is such as Saluian complained his times
were, that is, wherein, Si quis ex Nobilibus conuerti ad Deum caeperis, flatim
honorem Nobilitatis amittit. O quantus in Christiano populo honor Christi est
obi religio ignobilem facit. Sal^. lib. 4. de Gub. Dei.
If any of the Nobles began to be converted unto God, straight way he lost the
honor of his Nobility: O how great is the honor of Christ among Christians,
where religion makes men ignoble! This is for Atheists or Papists, it is enough
and too much for them, to scorn men for religion: how impious a thing is it
for Christians to contemn men for the religion of Christ? As Hierome to some,
Qui christianum te dicis Gentilium arma depone, aut si tu numero hostiumes,
ostende te libere aduersariu^, vt Ethnicorum suscipias vulnera. Hierome
Thou which call thy self a Christian, lay down the weapons of the
Gentiles, or if thou art of the number of the enemies, freely profess thy
self an adversary, that thou may feel the smart of infidels. So I to these,
if you profess your selves Christians: Oh that you would turn Atheists, or
Papists, or else lay aside the bitter arrows of Atheists and Papists, if you
be of the number of such, profess your selves no longer Christians, but such,
that you may be esteemed for such, and either be avoided, or rewarded as such.
Pardon (I pray you) my digression. In this age, I say, thus affected, wherein
as Saluian speaks in the place before, Per hoc omnes quodammodo mali esse
coguntur ne vites habeantur. Salu. ib. vt supra.
By this means, all in a manner are compelled to be evil, lest they should be
accounted vile. Even in this age was this Honorable worthy, that I may speak
in the phrase of the Apostle with some change, Philip. 2.15.16.
Blameles and pure, and the son of God, without rebuke, in a naughty and
crooked nation, amongst whom he shined as a light in the world, holding forth
the words of life, and did rejoice in the day of Christ, that he had not run
in vain, neither had labored in vain: yea and resolved with the Kingly
Prophet David, that if this were to be vile, when it was for the Lord and for
his service, he would yet be more vile then thus, knowing well the time should
come, that he should be had in honor of those that dishonored him, and that
for these things.

Now all this piety was inseperably attended upon with two inseparable
fruits of true godliness, the manifest proof of the truth of it: Love to all
religious persons, and specially to faithful and painful Ministers; and
abundance of compassion toward the needy saints and members of Christ, of
which many particulars might be given, but one may serve for many.

I am certainly and credibly informed, that since his return from his
travels, by way of thankfulness to God, and for refreshing of the poor members
of Christ, he gave yearly, by the hands of a private friend (besides many and
many occasional works of charity) the sum of twenty pounds, and in the
first Sabbath save one, he was in the land, after his return (having spent the
Saturday before it with his Turor, in fasting, prayer, and thanksgiving) he
spent in public hearing the word, and receiving the Sacrament, giving to the
poor of that place, into their basin, five pounds, and gave other forty pounds
to be bestowed upon poor Ministers, and other Christians, for the relief of
their present necessity: yea such was his liberality in this kind, (which is
come to my knowledge by his accounts) that he gave the tenth of his allowance
to the poor, and other good uses; his allowance being a thousand pounds the
year: besides what he gave in the way as he walked and traveled, and in the
streets, which he did often, and much, but what it was, no man can tell.
Finally, all these were beautified, and adorned with such admirable humility,
as is rarely found in any, specially in those, that have things, which
naturally for the most part puff up the mind, as nobility, and many natural
indowments. Nay, not in those, who have many spiritual prerogatives, many
gifts and graces, that have learned Christ, yet have they not so learned of
Christ, as this Honorable worthy had done, to be Matthew. 11.28.
Meek and lowly in heart. Of which I will use, and to whom I will apply only
that of Bernard, Decor animae humilitas est, verum in eo qui grauiter peccauit,
and s^amanda non tamen admiranda humilitas. At si quis innocentiam retinet and
nihilominus humilitatem iungit nonne is tibi videtur geminum animae possidere
decorem? Bern. supra Cant. sermon. 45.
The beauties of the mind is humility, but in him who has griuously
transgrest, howsoever humility may be to be embraced, yet not at all admired.
But if a man keep his innocence, and withal adds himilitie, seems not this
man unto thee to posses a double beauty of his soul? This Honorable vessel
was double gilt, with true and entire innocence (though imperfect through
humane frailty) and true humility. Thus was he decked, and thus were all his
graces and gifts adorned, all seeming and truly appearing such as they were,
because he was by this so nigh to men, and not by loftines, and pride lifted
up above, and removed from men.

Thus have I discoursed to you of his life, and am come to the 15. of February,
last past, when he was visited with sickness from God, whereof he died.

Touching his carriage and comforts therein, we cannot doubt but that it was
very religious, and these very great, when such a life went before, wherein
there was such preparation and provision, such a foundation laid up in store,
against this evil day. I am only accquainted with them by report, for I was
never with him, though I much desired it and often, yet the wisdom of those
that were about him, thought it not fit, fearing not his death, till it was
very late, and he without hope of recovery, and I diverse miles remote from him.

That which was delivered unto me, by one that was with him all the time, or
most of his sickness, whom I dare trust, not mine own ears better (otherwise I
am jealous of all friends reports in this case) I will deliver unto you as
briefly as it was delivered unto me, which was thus. From the first day of his
sickness, he apprehended strongly the expectation of death (though diverse
thought nothing less till a day or two before his dying day) and therefore he
addressed himself thereunto; and besides his meditations, he called often for
others to pray, and often used prayers himself, confessing, and that often,
both his sins, and his faith and undoubted hope of salvation by Christ; and
with great alacrity he professed that he feared not death, in what shape
soever he came. He brake forth often into heavenly speeches expressing his
desire to be dissolved, and to be at home with his God and Father, professing
not two hours before his death, that he still felt the assured comforts of his
salvation by Christ, and so finished his life in peace and joy of the holy
Ghost, uttering near his death these longing words, O that joy, O my God when
shall I be with thee? Which joy he undoubtedly enjoys, and is with his God in
glory and everlasting happiness.

Thus honorable, and beloved, you see by these things, the worth and excellency
of this deceased person, honorable both by nature and grace, the more his worth
was by these natural and spiritual endowments, the greater our loss, and the
greater his gain, and the more cause have we to sorrow for our selves, though
to rejoice on his behalf. The whole has cause to mourn, and bewail, and
many particulars to bewail a part.

His honorable mother, whom God has deprived of her son, her only son, of
such a son; such a^ staff and stay of her age, and such a joy of her life.

His honorable sisters, from who^ the Lord has taken such a noble and worthy
brother, who would have been not only a crown of their honor, but a furtherer
of them in the way of piety, and godliness, to the crown of glory.

His kindred and aliance, who are deprived of such an honor of their house, and
such a glory of their name.

His kind and familiar friends, who are bereft of such a true hearted Jonathan,
one that was very kind unto them, whose love unto them was wonderful, specially
to him who^ he termed in his Will, his dear friend. Sr. Ed. Harwood.


His servants, that have such a master taken from their heads, the ground of al
their future hopes.

And not these only, but more generally others have cause to mourn and
bewail, as the Church, who has lost so hopeful and noble a Theophilus, that
would have defended her truth and doctrine; such an honorable Obadiah that
would have hid and protected her Ministers.

The common wealth, and specially this little Shire whereof he was L.
Lieutenant, that has lost so hopeful a Nehemiah, who would have set himself
for the public good, and given example and encouragement to keep the Sabbath,
and have charged them so far as his power had extended, to have carefully
observed it, and so governed them that he would not only not oppress them
himself, but have to his utmost power provided that they should be free from
the oppression of others. And here I will not omit that which may make the
loss the greater, something since brought unto me by his dear friend, of two
purposes he had for experience, to add to the former grounds of his study, the
better to have enabled himself for his Countries service. The one by a voyage
to sea into some places, the knowledge whereof for war by sea would have been
most useful; another by land, into one of our neighbor countries, fittest to
have enriched his mind in the knowledge of land-seruice. Thus is there both
general and special cause of mourning and lamentation; in respect of our
selves: but see what great cause we have of rejoicing for him.

What cause of rejoicing and thankfulness has his honorable mother, though
she has lost her heir, yet to speak in Chrysostomes words unto her, At
haeredem bonorumque successorem non habes: and quid malebas eum tuorum an
caelestium haeredem fieri? Quid vero cupis eum pere^ntiae suscipere, quae paulo
post esset dimissurus, an permanentia and immubilia? non haeredem eum hab^isti,
sed ipsum prote Deus habuit. Chrysostom. hom. 69 ad pop Ant.
But you have no heir, nor any successor of your goods: well, and had you
rather he should be inheritor of these of yours, then of those heavenly? What
do you desire he should enjoy perishing things, which within a small while he
must cast away, or permanent and immovable? Nay, you had not an heir of him,
but God had him for you.

His honorable sisters in their sorrow may rejoice over him, for though as
Chrysostom says, Propriorum non fuit fratrum cohaeres, sed Chr^sti
constitutus est Chrysostom. quo ant.
He was not coheire with his private brethren, yet he is made coheire with
Christ. And that not in hope, but in present possession; he now at his full
age, they but in their nonage as yet.

How may his worthy friends roioyce for him, when we can say to them as Hierome
to Heliodorus, comforting him over the death of his Nephew Nepotian, who died
in his youth, Intelligeres illum non emori sed emig^are, and mutar^ amicos non
relinquere. Hier. epist. 3.
Thou should understand that he does not die but decease, And only change
his friends, not leave them. So they should be informed, that he is not dead,
but translated, and has not left his friends but changed them, for far more
honorable and glorious then they, and so to rejoice in respect of him, lest
they may seem to envy his happiness.

What cause of reioiycing has the Church for him, so dear a child of hirs,
that has left the militant, but is possessed of the triumphant Church, that
has left the state of Militancie and warfaring, and is in the state of
triumphancy and victory.

How may the Commonwealth and this Shire rejoice over him, that is taken from
an earthly government, to an heavenly regiment; from ruling with men, to reign
with Christ, and has left these few corruptible ensigns of honor, but now
possesses true honor, and an immortal crown.

Finally, how may we all rejoice for him, and change our note as much as may
be, forgetting our own losses, and thinking of his gain. As Bernard of his
friend Gerard, Et meum faleor luctum poene in cantum conuertit dum intentus
gloria ecius, propriae fere misoria obliuiscor. Ber. super Cant. 26.
And I confess it turns my mourning almost altogether into singing, wholes
being intent upon his glory, I forget almost my own misery.

And now honorable and beloved, to draw toward an end, If for all this, his
loss and the want of his presence be drieuous to you, and that either in
general or particular you desire his presence, and to see him; let me speak
to you as Chrysostom to some that were like affected, Ipsum cernere de
sidera^? eandem cum eo vitam viue and sacram ocius illam accipis praesentiam.
Ch^ys. hom. 69. ad pop. Ant.
Do you desire to see him? then live a life like unto him; and so you shall
the sooner receive that his sacred presence. So I to you, lead the same life
with him, and you shall soon enjoy his holy and comfortable presence: but if
you will not, never look to enjoy him and it again. If this were the way that
he traveled Eastward to the heavenly Jerusalem, if you go Westward toward
the cursed city Hiericho, you shall never come to Jerusalem the place of
blessedness and happiness.

For if this be the way wherein he has passed, in the end whereof he has
attained to bliss and happiness; and if this be the only way, when there is
but one way, whosoever walks in another way, cannot come to this estate.

If he in the way of true chastity, upright justice, holy piety, has now the
fruition of happiness, and enjoys the presence of God himself, and his
Son, and his own blessed Savior, Lord and husband. Who soever imitates not
him in these, (I say not) whosoever attaineth not to the imperfect perfection
of these things that he had done, but whosoever does not carefully strive to
it, but lives in unchastity and uncleanness, in injustice and unholiness,
either scoffing, contemning, and neglecting this way, and course, shall enjoy
hell in stead of heaven, and torments in stead of blessedness; the just wages
of God for such workers of iniquity.

But to conclude all, It is written of Hierome, that when he had read the life
and death of Hilarion, and saw that after he lived religiously, he died most
comfortably, and happily, said, Well, Hilarion shall be the champion that I
will imitate. So now that you have heard the life and death of this Right
worthy Noble, and are truly informed how truly religious the one, and
certainly comfortable the other was, say you with Hierome, well, This noble
shall be our champion, whom we will imitate, we will follow his Chastity, his
Justice, his Piety will we imitate.

And so if you endeavor and do, say and perform, you shall be sure to enjoy
that in future time, which he possesses in the present, heavenly and eternal
bliss and happiness, through the merits and mercies of Jesus Christ, to whom
with the Father and the Holy ghost, be ascribed of us and in all the Churches
of the Saints, All glory, and majesty, and dominion, and power, now and for
ever, Amen.

(...).

(...) obitum inopinum, and praematurum Clarissimi Baronis, D. Ioannis
Haringtoni, Altae Indolis, and Maximae Spei Adolescentis, Epicedium.
IMmodice si quis migrantem ad Sydera flebit,
(Praesertim vt nunc sunt Tempora) flendus erit,
Vt mare, perpetuis iactatur vita procellis,
Mors placidus Portus, perfugium, Requies.
Aurea, quae Prisci celebrarunt, Secula, Nugae,
Ferrea quae fuerant Tempora, semper erunt.
Qui antiquo vixit, Pater olim Hebraeus, in Aeno,
Conqueritur paucos difficilesque Dies
Militiae humanae: quanto magis, heu magis isto
Si in senio Mundi degeret ille Senex?
Quo pietas vitio est virtus, Probitasque fidesque,
Ludibrio: cunctis Nil nisi turpe placet.
Clare Heroes, Nos te foelicein agnoscimus, istis
Sordibus ereptum, Coelicolisque datum.
Delicia Iuuenum flos verae Nobilitatis,
Vnica spes magnae, praesidiumque Domus
Ecce caedit subito: (triste omen) scilicet Illo
Indignifuimus dignior ille Polo.
Nos Res lugemus nostras, Ecclesia luget,
Interitum deflet Patria mesta tuum.
Vtraque damna dolet propria and dispendia, Lumen
Hec deflet, columen Altera mesta gemit.
Te Nobis vitia, et Mores rapuere maligni,
In Coelis Virtus Te tua sancta locat.
Terra tegit Corpus, Men's aurea regnat Olympo,
Fama Anglos inter celsa perennis erit.
Posuit Fran. Hering. D. M. moerens damnum, publicum, priuatum.

An elegy upon the untimely decease of the (...) honorable and virtuous Lord
HARINGTON.
LIght sorrows talk, great grief^ are tonguelesse quite,
Amazed, aft^nisht, Apoplecticall;
Why do I then, (vain man) seek to recite
That sad event which lately did befall
That worthy house of late by just demerit
Advanced to honor great, and greater credit?
That noble house which I do thus design
Well known to all and better much beloved
In virtue, fau^ur, glory, so did shine,
That few in England were so well a^proued
In Court, in City, country, thou mighist hear,
No ill, all good of Harington echwhere.
To him our King his second Jewel dear,
The Princess his sole daughter did commit,
Who's linckt in marriage to that German Peer
Whose vvorth the world admires; A match so fit.
So happy, that who thinks upon that day,
Lifts up his hand and thanks to heaven does pay.
Ten years the father of this matchless son
Had in that honorable service spent,
When the last act of love was to be done,
To bring Her home, and give Her full cont^nt;
Content to Her, to Him that did attend
Fatal it proved, with service life does end.
At his return for England, nature soil,
A sickness fierce, death^ Lictor does arrest,
This worthy Lord, and cruelly dispoile
Of strength of sleep; At last from noble breast
It drove Prometheus spark, and cauld it fly
From whence it came unto the starry sky.
What Homers pen can wo^thily express,
Of that great Lady (thus in foreign parts
Bereft of her dear Lord, all comfortless;)
The deep distress? The sad and mournful hearts
Of her attendants none can well relate,
B the that was in that or the like state.
(...) the first act of this sad Tragedy,
Which well may make a flinty heart to bleed,
Enlarging much our humane misery;
Yet if we mark what after did succeed,
This might be borne; The next might well confound
The stoutest heart that ever walked on gr^^nd.
This noble Father left a peerlesse Son,
As to his honor, so his virtues heir,
Who from all British youths the garland won,
In virtue, learning, piety so rare,
That he that of his praise should volumes write,
Need never fear the style of Parasite.
In huma^ne learning he did so excel,
That bred in Court, he shamed quite the schools;
No Arts, few tongues, but he did know them well.
Long-studied-Clarks, themselves accounted fools;
Hearing his grave discourse of matters sage,
Admired his ripenes in so tender age.
Religion found from cradle he embraced,
Professing it with zeal and purity,
Few of his rank in eminency placed,
Were so renownd for sincere piety:
Nor did it swim and float upon the brain,
Nor role on Tongue, but fixed in heart remain.
This blossom fair, this hopeful tender plant,
Which so much fruit did promise Church and State,
Alas, alas, my heart does throb and pant,
My tongue's benumd, and cannot well relate;
Within one year after his fathers death,
Did likewise lose his dearest vital breath.
What heart can now conceive the woeful plight,
Of that sad Lady, that at once despoild
Of Husband, S nne, of all that to her might
Contentment yield; Her face with tears besoyld,
Her breast with swellings, throbs and sighs quite rent,
If heaven had not both strength and comfort sent.
Such Lord, such son, few Ladies ever gaind,
And therefore none have tasted such a loss,
The happiness which she before attaind,
Double^h the grief, and greater makes the cross:
The loss was great, the cross much greater suit;
Thanks to the Lord who strength gave to endure.
Yet may we well that mother happy deem,
That brought to light so great an ornament
Unto this land; that we may just esteem
Whole months, wh^re years in tears and sorrow spent
For his untimely death, his sudden fall,
Which has amazed and terrified us all.
Who does not see the dreadful glorious God,
Threaten this Realm with judgments manifold,
(When thus he shakes at us his iron rod,)
Is too Mole-blind; this say I dare be bold,
Pillars demolisht of a palace great,
The ruin of the frame do truly threat.
Since that tall Cedar, chief of all the rest,
Prince HENRY fell by sad disastrous fate,
No one that grew in our English forest.
Gave such a blow unto the Church and state:
He was too good for us, unworthy we
Of such a treasure, such felicity.
His virtues have him called above the stars,
Earth was unworthy such a diamon,
He now partakes not of our brawles and iars,
For mourning weeds white robes he has put on.
Sin, grief, and tears have taken them to their wings,
And with the Lamb he Hallelu-iah sings.
Then let us cease for to bewail with tears,
That happy soul, possessing heavenly joys
That no tongue can express, no humane ears
Has ever heard, no earthly wit can poyse:
Let us lament our selves our sinful lives,
Which of so precious jewels us depriues.
By F.H.D.M.

An Epitaph upon the said rightly honored Lord in life and death, in English
Iambicks.
HEre liet Lord Harington, the second of that house,
Who scarcely left his second in the British I Will,
In honor true, in virtue, matchless piety.
The Phaenix of our age, in whose grave countenance
The graces sat, the Muses lodged in noble Breast.
At twenty years whose wisdom great did far excel
The hoary head of long and good experience.
Too good for earth; fit to adorn the highest heavens:
Where now his soul lives, reigns in celestial joys;
His body here reserved till the last judgment day,
His name like ointment sweet through all Europa smells,
And shall so long as virtue and religion,
Shall find renown in these cold Nothern Climats.
By F H.D.M.

Another Epitaph.
Here lies interred young Lord Harington,
Heir to his Fathers worth and dignity,
And now by too too soon succession
Of fathers fates, heir to eternity:
His body in his grand dames bosom is:
His minds suru^ving virtues speak his bliss.
His noble birth to learned Arts mode way,
His learned arts on virtue still attended,
His virtue on true piety did stay,
His piety has him to God comm^nded,
His birth, his Arts, virtues and pious grace,
Alot him earths large praise, and heavens place.
The Church tells what a patron now is gone,
The Commonweal did him a pillar deem,
He was his houses hope, truths Champion.
The good man's friend, indeed, as he did seem.
Their patro^, pillar, champion, hope and friend*
They wail, and mark where misery will end.
I.P. Cant. Coll. Syd. Suff.

To the living memory of the late and last Sr. John Harington Knight, Lord
Harington, Baron of Exton.
To the Book.
Go and speak true h; It is thy office now,
Not only to inform our lives, but how
By ^ are examples miracles agree,
With praise^, and wi^h praecepts: This was he.
His praise will not dishonor simple truth,
To say but what he was; and but a youth.
To the World.
If thou were all dull earth, I should believe;
Thou had no sense to feel: nor soul to grieve,
But o thou art compol'd of su^ler parts,
And see^t thy loss engraven in our hearts;
The purest part, of all thou art (alas
How frail, art thou then) was as frail as grass.
To England.
Thou have been beaten many thousand years:
With seas; and yet art safe, But o tears
Will more endaunger thee: he was in thee
The Hand, thou the sea; where such men be
Bea^en with rage of changes; yet they stand
Safe in themselves and fixed as any land.
To his Mother, and sisters*
Rather then tell how good he was; I will
Persuade you to forget: yet weep your fill.
For such a Son, O death, and such a brother
Is rare as heavens great eye; that has no other.
To his Friends.
To all that virtue love, I do commend
This title; It was al one to be his friend
And good; who has no claim and title now
He does not him, but virtue disauow;
And yet he had one nearer, then the rest, Sr. Ed. Harwood.

He lived at household with him: we at feast.
To the Arts.
Joy he is gone; he would have diu'd into
Your deepest secrets, and your knots undo.
As unknown ^ricks, discouerd easy seem,
He would to v^ reduce you; not esteem.
To Religion.
What have thou lost, o sacred mystery.
Thy Nurse, and yet thy Child? He did not die
To thee, of all the rest: he was alive
They martyr, and now dead, he does more thrive,
In thee: o no: his state takes no increase?
Full of the ioies of God: he lives in peace.
To Death.
Poor uncreated nothing; to contend
To make all things like thee; yet miss thy end.
Can thou hold him one hour, o envious death,
Or touch his last, yet everlasting breath;
O No: that fled where thou shall never come,
Though here a while thou triumph on his Toombe.
Thomas Roe, Knight.

draped coffin


