A SERMON PREACHED IN THE CATHEDRAL Church of Worcester upon Sunday Morning,
November. 27. 1636.

IN The time of PESTILENCE in other places of this Land, and now published in
the time of the Visitation of that City, with that grievous Sickness; and by
reason of it.

By GEO. STINTON,

PSALM. 1^2.8. For my Brethren and Companions sake I will wish th^e Prosperity.
OXFORD, Printed by L. Lichfield, for H.C. Printer to the University. Anno Dom.
1637.

TO THE FAMOVS, ALTHOUGH NOW DEJECTED CITY OF WORCESTER,
THE PLACE OF MY BIRTH and first breeding; and the dwelling place of many my
good friends and alliance, is this plain Sermon, since the Preaching revised
and amplified, in humble manner dedicated; Health and all Blessings wished from
the heart of the Author.

1. KING. 8. v. 37.38.39 If there be in the land Famine, if there be
Pestilence, Blasting, Mil-dew, Locust, or if there be Caterpillars; if their
enemy besiege them in the land of their cities, whatsoever Plague, whatsoever
sickness there be, What prayer and supplication soever be made by any man, or
by all thy people Israel, which shall know every man the Plague of his own
heart, and spread forth his hands toward this house; Then hear thou in heaven
thy dwelling place, and forgive! COme forth, O ye daughters of Zion, and behold
King Solomon (said King Solomon in his song chap: 3.11.) The daughters of Zion
are the children and people of the Church: and unto you (Beloved) who are such,
give me leave to say, Come and behold King Solomon. I might bespeake you as one
of our Savior's disciples did him Mark, 13.1. to behold the goodly buildings
of the Temple which King Solomon founded: that, if you please you may behold in
the chap. next but one before this; but let me bespeake you to behold and look
over the excellent prayer which he made at the Dedication of that Temple, set
down at large in this chap. and of which this my Text is part. King Solomon was
a Preacher, so he says himself: I the Preacher was King over Israel in
Jerusalem. Eccles. 1.12. That King over Israel in Jerusalem was a Preacher. We
have reason to love and like Preaching the better for his sake. But I must tell
you that the house which he built in Jerusalem, was not to be called the house
of Preaching, but the house of prayer. Math. 12.41.
It is written my house shall be called the house of prayer (said a greater
then Solomon of it. Math. 21.13.) and so Solomon made it; He as it were
seasoned it with prayer: and we may observe in this his prayer, how often he
speaks of prayer and supplication to be made in that house. V. 30.33. etc.
They were the words of S. Paul. 1. Tim. 2.1. I exhort that first of all
supplications, prayers, intercessions be made for all men. First of all, (...),
before any thing else, in the very first place; which Solomon did in this
place; and that for all men, as there should be occasion, and when they should
be in any adversity and affliction. When there should be in the land Famine,
occasioned by Blasting, Mil-dew, Locust, and Caterpiller, spoiling and
devouring the grain and grass, and fruits of the ground; or by Enemies
besieging the people in the land of their cities. When (I say) there should be
Famine, and War in the land, and that which is now in this land, Pestilence,
Plague, and sickness. Now, blessed be God for it, we may make an If of it, and
say, Jf there be in the land famine, if there be blasting, mil-dew etc. and if
there be Enemies besieging etc. for this our la^d is pestred with none of
these. But we cannot fitly say, Jf there be Pestilence, Plague, and sickness:
for we know and hear how it is in diverse places of the land. And in this
place, this city, we know what The spotted fever, the forerunner of a far
greater mortality this year.
sickness has been this year, and is still, and takes many of our good
friends away. God Almighty who has sent these, send them away again in his
good time!

And therefore now let me wave those o^^er, viz. Famine, Blasting etc. there
being no occasion of complaining of them; whereupon I may forbear speaking of
them. Only we have reason to pray, that there may be no occasion of complaining
of any of them hereafter, as there is now of that other, the Pestilence: by
reason of which this text of mine is very seasonable; I pray God make my sermon
upon it as profitable!

Which Text, you see, is very large, and of which you perceive, that much might
being made: and therefore you must give me leave with that Abbreviator of the
Roman History, Rufus ^e^^us.
morem sequi calculonum, qui ingentes summas aeris brevioribus exprimunt: to
do as accountants use to do, who make a few counters stand for great sums
of coin. In my present handling this Text, I shall pick out only a few things
to pitch upon. And they are these.

First, I shall speak of that which occasioned the choice of it; Pestilence in
the land.

Secondly, of that which has occasioned the Pestilence to be in the land:
which I gather from the words, the Plague of a man's own heart. The Plague of
the hearts of men, I shall show to be the cause of the Plague in the land.

Thirdly, I shall show what course is to be taken, when there is in the land
Pestilence, Plague etc. and that is twofold.

First, that every man ought to study to know the Plague of his own heart. And
next, that Gods people are to make prayer and supplication unto him in his
house, and there to spread forth their hands.

This is all that I shall do. And this while I shall do briefly, and very
plainly, I humbly crave Gods gracious assistance etc.

It was the prediction of our blessed Savior Mat. 24.7. there shall be
Pestilence in diverse places. (...) many times and fits of Pestilence, many
visitations by it. And that prediction we know and see to be fulfilled. And
here my observation is this, that when there are Pestilences in diverse places,
the Lord is angry with those places. In the Revelation of S. John chap. 16.1.2.
we read of the vials of the wrath of God, one of which being by an Angel powered
upon the earth, there fell a noisome and grievous sore upon men, and the
noisome Pestilence. Verse. 3.
(As it is called Ps. 91.) This plague and grievous sickness (as we call it in
our prayer) I may say is powered out of one of the vials of the wrath of God, by
that destroying Angel of whom we read 2. Sam. 24. Verse. 16.
This the Lord himself calls one of his four sore judgments Ezekiel. 14.21. a
sore one indeed it may well be called, a noisome and grievous sore falling by
it upon men (according to those words in the Revelation.) But to make what I
said, and that my observation more manifest. The words of my text are, If there
be in the land Pestilence. And the words of the Lord in the before mentioned
chapt. of Ezekiel. verse. 19. are, Jf J send a Pestilence into a land, and power
out my fury upon it. So that when the Lord sends a Pestilence into a land, he
then powers out his fury upon it. The wrath of the Lord and the Pestilence,
his anger and fury, and that disease going and being put together in the same
Prophet chap. 7.14.15. and Ierem. 21.5.6. But you shall have further proof
from examples. In the 11. of Nu. 33. it is said, that the wrath of the Lord was
kindled against the people, and the Lord smote the people with a very great
plague. And chap. 16. 46. the words of Moses are, there is wrath gone out from
the Lord; the Plague is begun. Again the Psalmist speaking of those Israelites,
says thus, They provoked the Lord to anger with their own inventions, and the
Plague was great among them. Ps. 106.29. Once more: 2. Sam. 14.1. it is said,
that the anger of the Lord was kindled against Israel; and then, verse. 15. that
the Lord sent a Pestilence upon Jsrael. Hence you see that still the Lord was
angry when the Pestilence was sent abroad; and that this sickness has been a
heavy consequent of his heavy wrath and anger. And withal from the last cited
place that it is of his sending, The Lord sent a Pestlence upon Israel. Even as
before I told you the words of the Lord in Ezekiel, If J send a pestilence into
a land, and I have sent among you the Pestilence (says he, Amos 4.10.) In
Psalm. 105.16. it is said, that he called for a Dearth upon the land: and in
like manner I may say, that he calls for (...) in septuag. for the Lord sent
a pestilence 2. Sam. 24.15. Verse. 9.
a Death upon a land, and sends it, bids it go, and it goes, come and it
comes, do this, and it does it (as the Centurion said of himself and his
soldiers, Math. 8.) The stormy wind fulfilleth his word, Ps. 148.8. and so
does the stormy wind (as I may call it) of sickness and death; which as it
were blows us away, it fulfilleth his word, his will and pleasure. Before him
went the Pestilence (said the Prophet Habakuk. chapt. 3.5.) it was ready at
hand, when he would be pleased to call for it. And as it went before him, so it
never went abroad but from him: making use of Labans words Genesis 24.50. I may
say, that this thing proceeds from the Lord. In the first of Samuel chap.
6.9. the Philistines being plagued with Emrods, the Priests and the diviners
talked of a Chance that might happen unto them; Jf (said they) the Ark of God
goes not such a way, then we shall know, that it is not his hand that smote
us, it was a Chance that happened to us. But we being now plagued must know
that it is not a chance that has happened unto us, but that it is his hand
that has smitten us. Verse. 19.
As the Magicians of Egypt Exodus 8. said of the dust turned to lice, This is
the finger of God: So may we say of the pestilence, that this is the hand of
God: and that we may perceive by the words of God himself thus threatening
Pharaoh, now I will stretch out mine hand* that I may smite thee and thy people
with Pestilence Exodus 9.15. And we know how David accounted of it when he made
choice of it, saying, Let us fall now into the hand of the Lord. 2. Sam. 24.14.
Answerably in the last Proclamation for the Fast, it is acknowledged and
pronounced to be the immediate hand of God. Yea, it is a sword in that hand, the
sword of the Lord, the Pestilence, is the language 1. Chron. 21.12. where is
the same story with* that 2. Sam. 24. Which sword (to use the words of David.
2. Sam. 11.25. devoureth one as well as another, as well rich as poor, young
as old, where it lights and hitteth; and of which we may say, as the same
David did of the sword of Saul, that from the blood of the slain it returns
not empty. Chap. 1.22. If I whet my glittering sword, my sword shall devour
flesh (says the Lord, in the Song dictated unto Moses, Deuteronomy. 41.42.) Oh! what
a world of flesh has this sword devoured? 1. Sam. 15.33.
How many Women (as Samuel said unto Agag) has this sword made childlesse? In
the holy story what do we read of? fourteen thousand and seven hundred Numb.
16.49. but there is a greater number in the same book, viz. twenty and four
thousand Chap. 1. Cor. 10.8.
25.9. and that (as S. Paul says) in one day. But we hear of a far greater
sum yet; even seventy thousand men, and that in three days space (some have
thought less then one day) 2. Sam. 24.15. All these in all, a hundred and
eight thousand, and seven hundred, among the Lords people Israel, as they are
called in the Text. In the Histories of other nations we find most strange
reports. To tell you some of them, Pet. Forestus. de febr. pestilent.
and concerning some great cities. As Venice, in which in one plague time (as a
learned Physician has reported) died sexaginta medici, no fewer then
threescore Physicians, who were not able to do themselves any good. And
Constantinople, in which the Plague has been very frequent, and is said to
have taken away a matter of two hundred thousand in a year. Henr. Blount. in
his voyage into the Levant. page 44.
But the greatest Plague that I ever heard of from one place, was that at
Grand-Cairo in Egypt, in which not many years since (as a late worthy
Travailer who was told it there, has told us) were swept away in one year
eighteen hundred thousand and odd. And here I think upon that which is
reported of that mighty Persian Emperor Xerxes, Herodot. lib. 7.
who having gathered together as huge an army as (I think) ever before any had
done, and having gotten to be seventeen hundred thousand strong, viewing upon a
time all that company, being together, broke forth into tears upon this
consideration; that within the space of one hundred years not one man of so
many hundred thousand would be left alive, Epist. lib. 3. ep. 7.
and (as Pliny says) quod tot millibu^ tam brevis immineret occasus, so great
a number should last so little a time. Upon the consideration of those eighteen
hundred thousand (one hundred thousand more then in that army) I cannot but say
this; Good Lord! that in so short a space, not of one hundred, but of one
year, not one man of so many hundred thousand should be left alive; and that
so great a number in so little time should be cut of. To leave other countries,
and to come home, to our own land, I cannot but here speak of that most heavy
and extreme plague in the twenty third year of King Edward the third AN. DOM.
1349. of which I may say as it is said of the hayle in Egypt, Exodus 9.24. that
it was very grievous, such as there was none like it in all this land, since it
became a Nation. When (as the words of our Historian are) vix vivi potuerunt
mortuos sepelire, Tho: Wa^singham.
there were hardly enough left alive to bury the dead: and the opinon of many
was, quod vix decima pars hominum fuisset relitcta ad vitam, that scarce a
tenth, one in ten of people was left alive. Judge of it, by what I shall tell
you out of our writers from but two or three places. And first of all our
greatest city (then not near so great as now) London; Stow.
in which the Churches and Churchyards being so filled that they could receive
no more, a new burying place (there where now the great hospital is) was
purchased and hallowed, The Charter House.
and therein more then fifty thousand persons laid and interred in the
aforementioned year. In which in another city, viz. Norwich, in the space of six
months, even from January the first, to the first of July, the relation is,
that there died fifty sven thousand a hundred and four persons, besides In
quibusdam Religiosorum domibus, de viginti vix supererant tantum duo. Walsing.
vid. Stow. in Annal.
religious persons. And having told this of Norwich, let me tell this too of
one Town in Norfolk, Yarmouth, in which is but one Church, and yet at that
time (as a Table hanging in that Church has witnessed) seven thousand fifty
and two were there taken away. But to come to later times, and fresher memory:
let me speak of London again, and to say nothing of the present condition of
it, of which we have weekly notice, give me leave only to reflect upon that
dismal time there about an eleven years since, in which above twenty thousand
Families got them gone, escaping for their lives, (as the Angel said unto Lot,
Verse. 17.
Genesis 19.) and (as it is said of the Levite, Verse. 8.
Judge. 17.) departing to sojourne where they could find a place. And yet
notwithstanding so many leaving that place, died of the Plague four thousand
four hundred threescore and three in one week. I here think of the words of
Samson, when he slew so many at one time, Judge. 15.16. heaps upon heaps! At
that time there were heaps of Carcasses one lying upon another, like dead bones
in a Charnel-house, and in that valley whither Ezekiel was carried, chap. 37.1.
Thus (beloved) you see how the Pestilence, although it walks in darkness, yet
it destroys in the noonday, and then makes thousands, and ten thousands to
fall, Ps. 91.6.7. It walks in darkness invisibly, we cannot see the coming
of it: like the Prince of darkness, Verse. 7.
Job. 1. it walks up and down in the earth, from City to City, from place
to place. It walks (I say) yea more, it flies, it being the arrow that
flies by day, as well as that walks in darkness, Ps. 91.5. And that flying
Roll, which the Prophet Zachary saw, chap. 5.1. and of which verse. 3. thus
says the Lord of Hosts, I will bring it forth, and it shall enter into the
house of the thief, and into the house of him that swears falsely by my name,
and it shall remain in the midst of his house, and shall consume it. Many
have been the houses, and households, which this sickness, being once in the
midst of them, has consumed. In the 12. chap. of Exodus v. 30. we read, that
in that great slaughter, of the first borne in Egypt, there was not a house
where there was not one dead. But we have heard of diverse houses infected, in
which have been all dead, not one left alive. As the Egyptians at that time
said, we be all dead, Verse. 33.
so have had many in many houses cause to say: for as the Lord threatened by his
Prophet Amos thus, chap. 6.9. It shall come to pass if there remain ten men
in one house, that they shall dye; so may I apply, and say, it has come to
pass, if there remained ten in one house, that they have all died. O the heavy
hand! O the cruel sword of God Almighty, and of his destroying Angel! O the
deadly Arrows of his quiver, the poison whereof drinks up the spirits of men
(to speak with Job, chap. 6.4.) Well might Moses say, V. 7.9.
Ps. 90. We consume away in thy displeasure, and when thou art angry all our
days are gone: and fitly may we say Thou in thine indignation have stricken us
with grievous sickness, and by and by, In the Psalm in the book for the fast.
we have fallen, as leaves beaten down with a vehement wind.

But it is now high time to strike upon another string, and to come unto what I
proposed in the second place, viz. The cause of the Pestilence in the land,
which I said, is the Plague of the hearts of men etc.

The Mariners in Jonah, in that mighty tempest desired to know for whose cause
that evil was upon them, chap. 1.7. being persuaded, although being heathens,
that there was a cause for it extraordinary. And (Beloved) when such an evil
as this, malum poenae, an evil of punishment is upon us, it is good and fit to
search, that we may know for whose, and what cause it is. S. Paul 1. Ep. 11 30.
told the Corinthians, that among the^ many were weak, and sickly, and that
many slept, and dyed. But there is a (...) a cause for it; for this cause
(says he) namely, for their evil carryage, and condition when they came to
the Lords Supper. When the Son of the Widow of Zaraphath was dead, what were
her words unto the Prophet? O thou man of God! art thou come to call my sin
to remembrance, and to slay my son? 1. King. 17.18. She took her sin to
be the cause of the death of her Son; and I may truly pronounce that which
she spoke of, to be the cause of the death, and slaughter of so many sons of
men. I may use the words of Solomon, and most fitly say of the Harlot Sin,
that she has cast down many wounded, yea many strong men have been slain by
her. Prove. 7.26. It is worth the observing, what you may find, 1. King. 16.
concerning that wicked king Zimri, who burnt a house over him self with fire
and dyed: But what was the cause of such his death? It is plainly said there,
that he dyed for his sins which he sinned, etc. ver. 18.19. In the pot of
sin there is death. Thou with rebukes do chasten man for sin, 2. King.
4.40.
and make his beauty to consume away, etc. (said David unto the Lord, Ps.
39.12. And I will make thee sick in smiting thee, in making thee desolate
because of thy sins, (said the Lord, Micah. 6.13.) As the Lord answered
David, when he enquired concerning the three years famine; It is for Saul, and
for his bloody house. 2. Sam. 21.1: So if any enquire concerning this, and
other years sickness, and mortality, and what may be the true cause of it, it
may be answered in like manner: It is for sin, and for its bloody house:
which bloody house, is that which my text speaks of, a man's own heart, in
which a man's spiritual part lies, and in which the Plague of sin has its
seat and residence. Of which part we may say most truly, what Tertullus did of
S. Paul most maliciously, that we have found it to be (...), a Plague: Act.
24.5. And as S. Peter did of Simon Magus, chap. 8.23. that we perceive it to be
in the gall of bitterness, and in the bond of iniquity. What bitter waters
issue from this fountain, how much iniquity, and how many Plagues are in this
part, the heart of man, our Savior has told us at large, whose words are, out
of the heart of men, proceed evil thoughts, adulteries, fornications,
murders, thefts, covetousness, wickedness, deceit, lasciviousness, an
evil eye, blasphemy, pride, foolishness, all which evil things (says he)
defile and infect a man, Mark. 7.21.22.23. This is that inward part, of which,
speaking to the Pharisees, he says, that it is full of ravening and
wickedness, Luke 11.39. The heart of the sons of men is full of evil, and
madness is in their heart, 1. King. 4.29.
(says he who had so large a heart. Eccl. 9.3.) And how can it choose; when
Satan many times fills it, (as S. Peter said to Ananias Act. 5.3.) this being
the house, out of which the unclean spirit came, and said he would return
into again, entering in, and dwelling there, (according to our Saviors words,
Mat. 12.) Satan thus filling it, V. 44 45.
and that unclean spirit dwelling in this house, it becomes like the giant
Augaeus his stable, full of unsavory matter, and as S. James says of the
tongue, chapt. 3.8. an evil, full of deadly poison. Of the deadly poison and
venom of sin, which infecteth a man, yea undoeth him; and by reason of which
many a man may cry out with the Prophet Jsai. chapter 6.5. and say, Woe is me, for I
am undone; because I am a man of unclean lips, and J dwell in the midst of a
people of unclean lips! Sin is the Plague of the heart, and the cause of the
plague in the land. Men have had this plague in their hearts, the plague of
pride and haughtiness: the plague of envy and malice: the plague of
covetousness, and inordinate desires: the plague of cruelty, of hypocrisy,
and the like: They have had it in their mouths, Luke 6.45.
speaking of the abundance of the heart, wishing a plague and pestilence, one
upon another; and now it is come home unto them, they have it in their houses.
I told you before the word of Tertullus the Orator, calling S. Paul (...), a
plague: and I remember the words of that pander Sannio in the Comedy, saying
of himself, Terent in Adelph.
ego sum pestis, I am one that am a plague; and I may say that men have been
(...), plagues infecting one another, with the plague, and contagion of sin;
and now they are (...), plagues to one another, in infecting one another with
the disease, and Contagio^ of the plague. Men have sat in cathedra
Pestilentiae, in the chair of Pestilence, according to the phrase in the
vulgar Translation, Psalm. 1.1. And now they sit, in domo Pestilentiae, in a
Pesthouse. Men have kept ill company, and therefore they are now kept from
company: Men have not feared God, and therefore God has made men to fear men.
Men have been sick of sin, Ephesians. 2.1.
and dead in it, and therefore are so many now sick, and dead of this
sickness. Our sins which the Prophet Jsai. chapter 1.6. calls putrefying
sores, have caused so many putrefying sores to break out. Our sins as red as
scarlet, (according to the words of the same Prophet, Verse. 18.
in the same chapt.) have made the red, and scarlet spots so common. Our proud
flesh has caused the Lord to use this sickness as a corrosiue, to eat it away,
and to make it eat, (...), as does a canker, or gangreene, (to use S. Paul's
words in another case, 2. Tim. 2. V. 17. Romans 13.12. Psalm. 88.5.
) Our works of darkness have brought among us the pestilence that walks in
darkness, and which sends so many to the place of darkness. Our sins have
increased, and therefore has this disease increased. Hear, and think upon the
words of the Lord unto Israel, Ierem. 30. J have wounded thee with the wound of
an enemy, with the chastisement of a cruel one; for the multitude of thine
iniquity: because thy sins were increased. v. 15. What shall I say? As David
says, Ps. 107.34. A fruitful land the Lord makes barren, for the wickedness
of them that dwell therein: So may I say, a full Land, a full City, he makes
empty, for the wicknednesse of them that dwell therein. Behold the Lord makes
the earth empty, and makes it wast, and turns it upside-downe, and
scatters abroad the inhabitants thereof. etc. and why? because they have
transgressed the laws etc. Isai. 24.1.5. To be brief; as the Lord says
concerning Jerusalem, Ezekiel. 14.22. Ye shall know that I have not done without
cause, all that I have done in it: So must we know and be assured, that what he
has now done unto us, and in this Land, he has not done without good cause:
with which cause it is time to have done, and I have. Only as Quintilian having
told of his many losses, says thus; Institut. l. 6. in Proaem.
Non sum ambitiosus in malis, nec augere lacrymaru^causas volo, uti namque
esset ratio minuendi! So let me say, I take no pleasure here in aggravating
this cause, or in making things more or worse, I wish rather there were cause
for the contrary. The time passes, and I now pass to the third thing, which I
said I would show, viz. what course is to be taken when there is in the land
Pestilence, Plague, etc. which I shall do as briefly as I may.

In the beginning of my last part I told you of the mariners in Jonah, how
they desired to know for whose cause that evil which they suffered was upon
them: Let me now tell you other words of theirs unto Jonah, ver. 11. What shall
we do that the sea may be calm unto us? In like manner it concerns us to
talk of, and to take a course, to advise what is best to be done, and to do
our best, that the sea (as I may say) of this sickness may be calm, the
storm of it be blown away, and a serenitie ensue. And here let me turn you to
an excellent place, then which, none sits our turns better; you have it
Lamentations, chap, 3. v. 39.40.41. Wherefore (says the Prophet) does a living
man complain, a man for the punishment of his sins? Let us search and try
our ways: Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God, in the heavens.
Living men when they are punished, are apt to complain, Job. 1.22.
and murmr, yea, to charg God foolishly, and with Jonah, to be angry, chapter 4.9.
even unto death: but wherefore (says Jeremy) does a man so? he does but
suffer justly, it is but the punishment of his sins. But to complain and
murmr is not the way, and course to be taken; to do so, will do no good,
but hurt: the best thing we can do, is to search and try our ways: to lift up
our heart, with our hands, unto God in the heavens. Which words you perceive
how well they do answer those in my Text, and that which at the first I told
you from them, when I observed the course, etc. which, I told you is twofold.

First, that every man ought to study to know the Plague of his own heart.

And next, that Gods people are to make prayers, and supplications unto him, in
his house, and there to spread forth their hands.

Of which, one after the other, let me speak. And here let me come in again
with the words of the Prophet Jeremie, let us search and try our ways: search
for the Plague of our own hearts, that we may know it, as David said he did,
Ps. 77.6. I (says he) commune with my own heart, and my spirit made diligent
search; and as that woman did, Luke 15.8. who swept the house, and sought
diligently for her lost piece. Venena non desunt sed torpent, (says Seneca)
poison does sometimes lie still, and as it were asleep: and the plague, we know
in some houses lurketh, and lies dormant a great while before it breaks out,
and is plainly known: and so does the plague of sin in the heart of man;
which heart (says the Lord Ierem, 17.9.) is deceitful above all things, and
desperately wicked, who can know it? what man can know the heart of another man?
and one man is loath that another should know the deceitfulnes, and desperate
wickedness of his heart. Even as we have known some who have known the
plague to have been in their houses, and yet would not be known of it, would
not acknowledge it till needs they must, being not able to smother it any
longer. In like manner there are many who know a plague to be in their own
heart but they will not acknowledge it, like Gehazi, 2. King. 5, 25. and like
Ananias, and Saphira, Act. 5.8. they cover their transgressions as Adam by
hyding their iniquity in their bosom, to speak with Job. chapter 31.33. even as it
is said of an adulterous woman, Prove. 30, 20. that she eats, and wipeth her
mouth, and says, I have done no wickedness. I said before what the Lord said
concerning the deceitfulness and wickedness of the heart Who can know it? but
I may here say, who will know it? I mean that of his own heart: that of
another man's heart many are most willing to know, and with Momus in Lucian they
would feign have a window made that they might see and know it: But the
deceitfulness, and desperate wickedness, the Plague of his own heart (I say)
who will know it? Men might know it, if they did but take the care and course
to know it; that that David did, whose words you heard before I commune with
mine own heart, and my spirit made diligent search. Or if they would do as
Seneca said he did, De Ira l. 3. cap. 36.
whose words are; quotidie apud me causam dico, totu^ diem mecu^ scrutor, facta
ac dicta mea remetior, nihil mihi ipse abscondo, nihil transeo. Every day I
have a pleading with my self: when the day is passed, I examine my self how I
have passed it away; I repeat with my self all that I have said and done, I
conceal nothing from my self, I leave nothing unthought of: and such a course
he that is a good and wise man indeed uses to take, as the Poet says in his
Character of such a one Iudex ipse sui totum se explorat ad ungue^. Virgil
He Judges, and searches, and sifteth himself thoroughly and perfectly. But
alas! as the Prophet Hosea says of Ephraim Chapter 7.9. gray hairs are here and
there upon him, yet he knows not: and as it is said of the Church of Laodicea
Revel. 3.17. that she knew not that she was wretched, and miserable, and
poor, and blind, and naked: So may it be said of many that they will not know,
will not be sensible of how it is with them, and of what is within them, the
Plague of their own hearts; Suis quisque malis blanditur: men are apt to sooth
themselves in their evil ways: even as David speaks of the ungodly that he
flattereth himself in his own eyes. Ps. 36.2. even as did that Church of
Laodicea, of which I told you even now, who when she was in that taking as you
heard, yet said, that she was rich, and had need of nothing. It is a most true
saying of Seneca, Epist. 116.
Plerique student magis excusare vitia quam excutere: it is the study of too
many rather to excuse, then to give over their vices: and it was the complaint
of the Poet.

Vt nemo in sese tentat descendere nemo. Pers. sat. 4.
No man goes down into himself, no man sounds the bottom of himself;
even as the Prophet Jeremy, speaking of the wickedness of the people,
complained and said, that he hearkened, but no man repented him of his
wickedness, saying, what have I done? Chap. 8.6. But enough of this, I will
not enlarge upon these complaints. Having told you the complaint of one Poet,
let me now tell you the counsel and advise of another -- teipsu^ Concute,
Horat. Sermon. lib. 1. Sat. 3.
number qua tibi vitiorum inseverit olim
Natura, aut etiam consuetudo mala.
Shake thy self, search thy self whether or no nature, or evil custom has
sown into thee any vices. Shake thy self: do as they do who have to do with
cloths and stuff in infected houses, who shake, and move, and stir them, to
get out of them the infection: or, as was enjoined to be done in a leprous
house, which was to be scraped within round about, Levit. 14. 41. Search thy
self I say. Let us search our ways (once again to tell you the advice of the
Prophet.) In the times of plague, we know there are searchers who have
experience, and can judge of the disease: Let us (Beloved) be our own
searchers, searchers of our selves, such a one as David was, who said (as I
said once and again before) my spirit made diligent search; and search he made
about his heart, communing (as his words are) with his own heart: by doing
which he came to know the plague of his own heart, saying, Ps. 51.3. I
acknowledge my faults, and my sin is ever before me, praying in that Psalm
thus, Create in me a clean heart O God, V. 10.
He knew his heart had been foul, and had need of clensing, and therefore
prayed for it, Purge me with hysope, and J shall be clean, wash me etc. wash me
thoroughly from mine iniquity, V. 7. 2. Ps. 19.12.
and cleanse me from my sin. O cleanse thou me from my secret faults. But to
make short: Let my exhortation be that of the Prophet Jsai. chapter 1.^6. Wash ye,
make you clean, put away the evil of your doings, and that of S. James chapter
4.8. Cleanse your hands, you sinners and purify your hearts ye double minded
and to make use of the words, Ezekiel. 20.43. Let us remember our ways, and all
our doings, wherein we have been defiled, and loathe our selves in our own
sight, for all our evils that we have committed!

There is one thing more you know which I must needs say something of, but now
can say but little, which is concerning prayer and supplication to be made by
Gods people. etc.

They are the words of S. James, in his last chap. 14. Is any sick among you?
Let him call for the Elders of the Church, and let the^ pray over him. Is any
infectious and contagious sickness among us? Let me say too, let the Elders of
the Church, the Ministers, be called unto, and upon, and they must pray for the
people: according to the advice, Joel. 2.16.17. (being part of the Epistle for
the Fast Day.) Gather the people, assemble the Elders, let the Priests, the
Ministers of the Lord, weep between the porch, and the Altar, and let them say;
Spare thy people O Lord etc. and as Pharaoh called for Moses, and Aaron, who
were Priests, (for Moses and Aaron among his Priests, Ps. 99.6. and said
entreat the Lord your God that he may take away from me this death, Exodus
10.16.17: So it is the part and duty of the Priests, and Ministers especially,
to entreat the Lord God, that he would take away from the people this death and
Plague; and this they must do, according to my Text, in his house, his holy
places, and Temples. As David said, Ps. 68.33.
Ps. 42.8. that he went with the multitude into the house of God, so the Priest
and multitude of people, who are safe and free, must go together into the
house of God, and there make prayer and supplication unto him; they must, as
the same David said, that he, and the people would do, Ps. 132.7. go into his
Tabernacle, and fall low on their knees before his footstool, and withal
(according to my Text) spread forth their hands there, and as the same David
exhorted, Ps. 134 2. lift up their hands in the Sanctuary: their hands, as
David's were, V. 6.
Ps. 26. being washed in Innocence, before they with him go to the Lords
Altar, and with those hands the heart being lifted up, according to the words
formerly cited, Let us lift up our hearts with our hands unto God in the
heavens, and thus with David, Ps. 5. coming into Gods house upon the multitude
of his mercies, and in his fear worshipping toward his holy Temple, both
Priest and people may say with him, Ps. 48.8. We wait for thy loving kindness
(O God) in the midst of thy Temple: and they may hope and be confident, that
although (as David says, Ps. 11.4.) the Lords seat is in heaven, yet with all
(as it is there) the Lord is in his holy Temple, that this Lord will (as the
same David was assured he would his, Ps. 18.6.) hear their voice out of his
holy Temple, and that their complaint shall come before him, and shall enter
even into his ears, and that (according unto the prayer of Solomon, David's
son in my Text) he will hear in heaven his dwelling place, and forgive. And
as there must be public prayer in Gods house, so ought there to be private in
our own, and in our private rooms, according to our Saviors advise, Mat.
6.6. Enter into thy chamber, and when thou have shut thy door, pray to thy
Father which is in secret, and according to the example of Daniel, who in his
chamber, kneeled upon his knees three times a day and prayed. Dan. 6.10. Both
public and private prayer are now enjoined by our Sovereign, and I trust it
will prove a sovereign remedy for the occasion. Let me be bold and say,
making use of our Saviors words, Mat. 17.21. This kind, this kind of sickness
will not go out of this land, but by prayer and fasting. We know what has
been the effect of prayer and supplication, and that at such a time as this.
The Lord threatened to smite his people with the Pestilence, Moses besought him
to pardon their iniquity, and the Lord presently said, V. 12.19.20,
J bave pardoned according to thy word. Numb. 14. The Lord did smite them with
the Pestilence, but when Phineas stood up and prayed, the plague ceased. (As we
use to read it, Ps. 106.30. In that great Plague, in the time of King David,
David and the Elders of Israel fell upon their faces, and prayed for the
people, and called upon the Lord, and the Lord commanded the Angel, and he put
up his sword again into the sheath thereof, (as we may read 1 Chronicles. V.
16.17.26.27. 2. King. 20.7.
21.) Once more, King Hezekiah was sick (as it is thought* and is probable) of
the plague, and sick to the death, and he prayed unto the Lord, and he spoke
unto him, and he gave him a sign (as it is 2. Chron. 32.24. And as we see
hence what has been the effect of prayer at such a time as this, so we are
told what it shall be, and that by the Lord himself, and that too, answering
this very petition of Solomon, which is my text: unto which you will find the
Lords gracious answer, in the last mentioned book 2. Chron. 7. The Lord
appeared, and said to Solomon, J have heard thy prayer, and if I send
Pestilence among my people, if my people which is called by my name shall
humble themselves, and pray, and seek my face and turn from their wicked
waeyes; then I will hear from heaven, and will forgive their sin, and will
heal their land, v. 12.13.14 and from this Lord, his Prophet Joel has assured
us that upon the humiliation of the people, upon the tears and Prayer of the
priests, the Lord will be jealous for his land, and pity his people, chap. 2
17.18. and the prayer of faith of Gods faithful people shall save the sick,
and the Lord shall raise him up etc. (says S. James chapt. 5.15.) and
therefore (as he says verse. 13.) Is any among you afflicted? Let him pray. And
let me say for those among us that are afflicted, let us pray; for it may be
the case is so with some of them that they cannot pray for themselves. Pray for
one another, that ye may be healed. (Says the same Apostle in the same
chapt. verse. 16.) It is the best office that one Christian can do for another,
which S. Paul most frequently and earnestly desired might be done for him; and
at the hands of those unto whom he wrote, begged for nothing more earnestly then
for that, as do show those words of his unto the Romans, Now I beseech you
brethren, for the Lord Jesus Christ's sake, and for the love of the spirit, that
ye strive together with me in your prayers to God for me! chapt. 15.30. And
therefore, as he said unto the Hebrews, chap. 13, 19. I beseech you to do
this: so let me beseech that this may be done, frequently, faithfully, humbly,
heartily. Pray for thy self out of great necessity; For others out of
Christian charity. Pray that thou may truly know the Plague of thine own
heart: that God would cease it, in thy heart: and that he would cease and stop
it in the land. Use the prayer of the prophet Habbakuk, in that chapt. where he
speaks of the Pestilence, chapter 3.2. O Lord in wrarth remember mercy! V. 5.
that of the prophet Isai, chapt. 64.9. Be not wrath very sore, O Lord, neither
remember iniquity for ever! behold, see, we beseech thee, we are all thy
people! That of the prophet Daniel, chapt. 9.19. O Lord hear, O Lord forgive,
O Lord hearken and do not defer for thine own sake, O God! Or that of
Solomon in my text, Hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place and forgive! pray,
that God would hear in H^^ven, his dwelling place, the prayers her^ made upon
Earth, his footstool: and that he would hear in heaven the prayers made in
heaven for us upon the earth, ^^ Jesus Christ our Mediator, who ever lives to
make intercession for us; By the blessed Saints, out of the altitude of their
charity, the Church triumphant for the Church militant; By the souls under the
Altar, who cry, and say, how long O Lord holy and true, O thou that hear the
prayers unto thee shall all flesh come. Ps. ^^
Now unto him that hears the prayers, God the Father; to Jesus Christ, God
the Son, who prays for us; and to God the holy Ghost, be all Honor, etc.

FINIS

