TREATISE ON THE FIRST PSALM.

BY MATTHEW STONHAM. Minister and Preacher in the City of Norwich.

S. Basil. prefat in psalm. The divine Hymns are high in mystery, profound in
sense, and comfortable in doctrine.

printer's device of George Eld

AT LONDON. Imprinted by G. Eld for Walter Burre. 1610.

^ in God, JOHN Lord Bishop of Norwich, all health and happiness.
SOme private reasons moving me (Right Reverend) to publish this my Treatise
upon the first Psalm: your Lordship by best reason, first above all other,
came into my mind, to whom I might dedicate it. Praecedens beneficium,
sequatur officium. Among many other inducements, your Lordships special love
toward my self, and respective care for my good, has necessarily challenged
this duty at my hand: Si grate hoc qualecun^ non beneficium sed officium Sen^c.
de B^^ ^i lib. 2. cap. 22.
meum accipias, non primam, sed totam eius pens^^nem soluisti. Your Lordships
acceptance, shall be my sole satisfaction. The bond of my duty has this only
bound of my hope.

The God of heaven so vouchsafe, to water you and yours with the dew of heaven;
that you may with the Godly man in this Psalm, prosper, is trees of his
planting, and so bring forth fruits in due season in this life, that at the
end of this life, your reward may be the beginning of this Psalm, even, true
blessedness. Thus in all dutiful humility, I take my leave.

Your Lordshipps Chaplen* most bounden in duty and ^^^e, MATTHEW. STON^^^

The first Psalm.
1. Blessed is the man that does not walk in the counsel of the wicked, nor
stand in the way of sinners, nor sit in the seat of the scornful. 2. But his
delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law does he meditate day and
night. 3. For he shall be like a tree planted by the riuer^ of waters, that
will bring forth her fruit in due season: whose leaf shall not fade: so
what-soeuer he shall do shall prosper. 4. The wicked are not so, but as the
chafe which the wind drives away. 5. Wherefore the wicked shall not stand in
the judgment, nor sinners in the assembly of the righteous. 6. For the Lord
knows the way of the righteous, and the way of the wicked shall perish.
A Treatise on the first Psalm.
The Psalm divided, and sins multiplicity.

TO omit any Preface or Preamble concerning either the whole Book of the
Psalms in general, or this particular Psalm in special: my purpose is for
to close with the Psalm it self.

This Psalm therefore in a word, was Penned by David, and Inspired by the
Spirit of God, standing as a Preface to the residue of the Psalms, placed by
Esdras, or any other, who were the disposers thereof, to exhort (no doubt) all
godly men, the perusers of this Book, to study and meditate on heavenly
Wisdom, which principally above other Scriptures, is contained therein.

This whole Psalm may be divided into three general Verse. 1. 2. 3.
parts, whereof the First concerns the Godly, in the three first verses
thereof. The Second the ungodly, ver. Verse. 4. 5.
4. and 5. The Third a Conclusion, by way of a certain Epiphonema, or
Acclamation, respecting them both, ver. 6 Verse. 6.
The perticulars whereof I shall then further limb and branche out, when I
shall come to the handling of them.

The First part of this Psalm therefore concerns the Godly in the three
first verses, who are therein set down unto us; First, by an Evidence of their
virtues. Secondly, by the Recompense of their virtues.

1. The Evidence of their virtues is contained. i. in a negative contestation,
in three points, verse. 1. First, that he Verse. 1.
does not walk in the counsel of the wicked. Secondly, that he does not
stand in the way of sinners. Thirdly, that he does not sit in the seat of the
scornful.

2 Secondly, it is contained in an affirmative contestation, verse. 2. in two
members: First, in that he takes Verse. (...)
pleasure in the law of the Lord, his delight is in the law of the Lord.
Secondly, in that he takes pains about the law of the Lord, and in his law
does he meditate day and night: Where-out I may observe unto you; first, the
practice of his pains; meditation: Secondly, the subject of his pains, his
law: Thirdly, the perseverance in his pains, day and night: Fourthly, his
vigilancie, in that he does it not only in the day, wherein God has appointed
man to labor, but in the Night, which God has ordained for man to rest in.

2, Secondly, the Godly man is set down unto us, by the Recompense of his
virtues, wherein there be considerable; the declaration and tenure of it.
verse. 1. Secondly Verse. 4. 1. Verse. 3.
the further dilatation and Title unto it. verse. 3.

First then, the Godly man is set forth unto us by the Evidence of his virtues,
in ^ negative contestation: of which I will first speak more generally, and
secondly, more specially.

More generally; first that there is a variety or multiplicity of Sins; for we
see that the variety of their number causes a diversity of their names, the
counsel of the wicked: the way of sinners: the seat of the scornful. Saint
Cyprian writing in a Sermon of his De mortalitate, says, Cypri^ser: de mortal.
that peccati frugifera seges, etc. there is a fruitful cropp of sin; If
Covetousness be cast to the ground, Lust rises up in place; if Lust be
vanquished, Ambition succeeds; if Ambition be dissolved, Anger exasperateth
us, Pride swells us, Drunkenness entiseth us, Envy breaks Concord, and
Wrath Friendship. It is like an evil Weed, which grows both quick and
thick, speedily and plentifully, according to the Proverb, An evil weed has
good speed. Sin is folly, therefore when as David in numbering of the people
had done very Sinfully, he makes his confession, that he 2. Sam. 24. 10.
had done very Foolishly. The whole world is full of Fools and Follies,
therefore also is it ^ul of Sinners and Sins.

As the Sons which have come from the loins of Adam be infinite, so the
Sins which have flowed from the disobedience of Adam, are far more
infinite, because there is never a Son of Adam, but he may say with Manasses
in his prayer: I have sinned above the number of the Sand of the Sea. Sins
therefore are most innumerable, most infinite! As there be many Errors, and
but one Truth; many Diseases and but one Health; so for one Virtue there be
many Vices.

Sins are compared unto Moates, Moates we know Math. 7. 3.
to be infinite; so the birth of Sin is like the troops of Madian, which
are said to be without number. Judge. 6. 5.
Democritus the Disciple of Epicurus and Leucippus, foolishly imagined the
World to be first made and formed of Moates; but the truth is, that the World
has been marred and deformed by the infinite Moates of enormous
transgressions. As Iron sharpneth Iron, so one sin touleth on another, till
they beecome Prou. 27. 17.
as a Flood, to the ouer-whelming of our soul, as that grand and terrible
Flood of Waters drowned all Flesh, Genesis 7. 21.

CHRIST was offered a Sacrifice, which is Infinite, unto GOD his Father, a
Majesty which is Infinite, to purge us from all Sin, which is also Infinite!
1. Ioh. 1. 7.
Quot crimina to^ d^monia; how many Evils there be, so many Devils there
be: as Devils therefore are assembled in Legions, so be Evils.

There is but one Soul, but a whole army of Lusts Luke, 8. 30.
which ^ight against it. Quemadmodum, si quis cla^dere voluerit aquae currenti^
meatu^^ etc. (says Saint Chrysostom) 1 Pet. 2. 11. Chr^^est. oper. in. per^.
in Matthew.
As if a Man will go about to stop the passage of a running Screame, if he
shall exclude it in one place, it with greater violence breaks forth in
another: even so it fares with Sin. If it be not such a sin as concern
the council of the wicked, yet may it belong to the way of sinners: if it be
neither, yet may it appertain to the seat of the scornful. As the brood of
Sin is manifold, so ought our care to be much to with-stand it. The Mariner
if he knows his Ship beset with many Pirates, will be the more Careful:
the Shepherd if he perceives his Flock to be assailed with many Wolves,
will be the more Diligent: the Gardener if he sees his Ground surcharged with
over many Weeds, will be the more Painful: the Soldier if he
understands his Forte to be environed with many and mighty troops of his
mortal and blood-thirsty enemies, will be more Vigilant. Oh these sins of
ours are not only Pirates, Wolves, Weeds, Enemies, which do Be-set, Assail,
Sur-charge, Inuiron our Souls and Spirits, to the utter wrack and confusion of
them; but they be also many, yea almost infinite in number! Oh it stands us
in hand therefore with the Mariner, Shepherd, Gardener, Soldier, to become
Careful, Diligent, Painful and Vigilant! and so much the rather, because the
moment of the matter we strive for, is far more great then of a Shipp, a
Flock, a Ground, a Forte, being that precious soul, for which Christ has
suffered his most precious blood to be shed. Let us therefore be Careful,
least we be ouer-growne with Security: and then it fares with us, as with the
Crocodile, who securely suffers ^. Pet. 1. 19.
the little Bird Trochilus to pick his teeth, while his enemy the (...)
gets into his mouth and belly and kills him. Let us be Diligent, least we
be intercepted by delay, and fail of that answer which Cyprian made to
Aspasius Paternus, the Proconsull of Africa, Cyprian.
In rebus sacris nulla sit deliberatio: About holy matters let all delay be
absent. Let us be Painful, least Idleness surprise us, and so (as a Father
speaks) we become as the Devils shopp wherein he forgeth a new spawne of
vices. Let us be vigilant, least being a sleep with Adoniah, the multitude of
our sins deal with us as Baanah and Rechah dealt with him, who took 2 Samuel
4. 7*
away his life from him. Let us (to conclude) as Christian Knights, stand upon
our guard against all the infernal troops, and (as I may so say) Black Guard
of hell. Let us be strong in the Lord, and power of his might: putting on the
whole armor of God, as we which wrestle not against a Principallity, or a
power, or against a Prince of darkness of this world, or against a spiritual
wickedness, as of one: but against all Principallities, and Power, and the
prince of darkness of this world and spiritual wickedness, as of many: It
stands us in hand therefore not to take unto our selves a part of it, but the
whole armor of God, that we may be able to make resistance Ephesians. 6. 10. 11.
12.
and stand fast: ver: 13. having our loins gird about with verity, and having
on the breast plate of righteousness, and our feet shodde with the preparation
of the Gospel of peace, taking above all things the shield of faith,
wherewith we may quench all the fiery darts of the wicked: taking also the
helmet of salvation, and the sword of the spirit, which is the word of God,
praying always with all manner of prayers and supplications in the spirit
Ephesians. 6.
and watching thereunto: That so we may not only take Council against the
Council of the wicked, but stop the Way against the Way of Sinners: and as
Christ in the Temple ouerthr^w the seats of those prophaners thereof: John. 2.
So we may overthrow the seats of the scornful. Ioh 2.


The second gene^all point that I will speak of before I come to the
particulars of this Text, is the Grows and Increase of Sin: It begins in
a doubtful walking, wandering as it were up and down as uncertain what to
do: after proceeds to a determination, whereby uncertainty comes to a
certainty, and wandering up and down ends in a Period or full point of
standing still; but concludes and ends in obstinacy and obfirmation of
mind, that what-soeuer may be said to the contrary, it will (an easelesse ease,
and a restless repose) set down.

Sin creeps like a Canker, which grows not to ripeness but by degrees;
the custom of it, causes it to grow from strength to strength: Psalm, 84.
17. Augustine opens this point, The Devil first August. lib. Confess. 8.
by concupiscence suggesteth evil thoughts, evil thoughts egg on delight,
delight toulleth on consent, consent grows to necessity, and necessity in
sinning is the forerunner of death. This increasing of sin from Walking, to
Standing, from Standing to setting down; It holds the course both in that
sin which con^rneth the corruption of doctrine by heresy, as also, that which
respects the corruption of manners by impiety.

First, it increases in the corruption of doctrine, by heresy, which
howsoever it at the first may seem of small Reckoning or of no importance, as
that which never then shows it self in the right coull^rs: Yet, crescit
eundo, it creepes on and gathers strength like the clowd which Elias Servant
saw. 1. Reg. 18. 44. at the first nothing could be seen, then began it to
rise, as big as a man's hand, in the end it darkened the whole sky, and fell
forthwith in a great Storm. So Heresy is a spark which not suddenly and
all at once, but by little and little, and degrees, breaks forth into a
flame* in which is v^rified that saying of Gregory Nazianzen. (...), Nothing is
suddenly made Greg. Nazi.
great. This may appear unto us by an Introduction of al Nicephor. Eccl^s.
hist. lib. 8. cap, 5. Sleid^. in^ commenta. Mast Knolles. gene. hist. of Turks.
heresies which have pesterd the Church from Time to time; more especially of
that of Arius in y^ ancient times of the Church: of the Anabaptists in the late
times thereof; as likewise that Sect of Mahomet in the middle times betwixt them
both; but it were in so manifest a truth, but (...), to show light to the Sun,
as the Greek Adage speaks. All which have first begun to walk by error;
proceeded to stand in Schism, and have concluded to set down in Heresy.

Secondly, the increasement of sin, from Walking to Standing, from Standing
to Setting down, holds the course in the corruption of manners by impiety,
so it was in Judas, who was first a cunning dissembler. Second, a secret
Thief, third an Impudent Liar: fourth, a Bloody Traitor, fifth, and lastly a
desperate Reprobate. First, sin seems Importable, then Heavy, then Light,
then Desirable, then Insensible and past feeling, and in the end Defensible; so
as we make a shameless and public defense of it.

Sin therefore gets strength by committing, as Figures in Arithmeticke by
numbering, where the first place stands but for One, the second for Ten, the
third for an Hundred, the fourth for a Thousand. So Sin when it is first
committed, seems to have but the strength of One, in the second place of
Ten, in the third place of an Hundred, in the fourth place of a Thousand; and
so if it be infinitely committed, it may be infinitely multiplied.

Chrisostom in Psalmos. Calls our sin by the name of Rags, to show that as
rags the longer they be worn the more they are increased: So sin the more
it is practiced, the further it is enlarged.

A storm we see by experience, if it in the first beginning thereof
dissolueth, grows to nothing but a barren mistiness, and so departs: but
if it more and more gathers unto it self, and thickneth in the own
substance: it falls from heaven to the earth by the rage of an infinite
dropping: peccatum procella (says Chrysostom) Sin is this storm, which if we
shall at the first Chry, homil. 5. ad ^opull Antioch.
dispell or disparke, it shall be shaken off with no more hurt to our souls,
then the viper brought to Paul's hand, when he shook it into the fire, and it
did him no harm. Acts 28. 5. But if we shall by often committing make it like
unto him, Abac. 2. 6. who was laden Act. 28. 5. Abuc. 2. 6.
with thick clay, it will like unto the Indian Fig Tree ground it self with
an infinite rooting. Sin is not unlike to a Ring-worme which desires to be
rubbed, and then increases by rubbing. The itching humor of one Sin intifeth
us to the committing of many, the committing of many to a custom of sinning, a
custom of sinning to a sencelessenesse of sin, a sencelessenesse of sin to a
final impenitency, when that saying of Hesiodus shall be verified in us.

Men, (...), wax old in wickedness, yea Hesiodus.
and die in it also, bequeathing (Oh fearful security!) their bodies to the
Beer of death, while they themselves sit in the Chair of sin.

Isiodorus says, that sin is committed, either by ignorance, Isiodorus.
this may be likened to the walking in the council of the wicked: or by
Infirmity, this may answer to the Standing in the way of sinners: or else of
set purpose; this may fit the sitting on the seat of the scornful. This is
the full pitch of sin, causing sin to be as the Sun at noonday in his
full strength. This increasing of sin, whereby sin is so intertayned, as it
is also cherished, ought to mpose upon us the exercise of a twofold Task for
the auoidance thereof.

The former Task concerns the hinderance of the Planting of Sin before it
be planted. The second Task informs the Supplanting of sin after it be
planted.

Concerning the hinderance of the planting of sin before it be planted. A
most happy thing it is if God give us grace to attain unto it: for what more
happy thing can there be then to have escaped the mortal sting of a deadly
Serpent? Sin is this Serpent from which, because it stingeth as a Serpent, we
are willed to flee as from the face of a Serpent, Eccles. 21. 2. What is more
happy then to have avoided the rag^^g flame of a tormenting fire? Sin is this
fire which a man cannot bear in his bosom, but he must of necessity be burnt
with it, Prou^^ 6. 27. What is more happy then to have declined the flattering
treasons of a false Traitor? Sin is this Traitor, fawning on a man with a
Kiss, and betraying him to the Cross, as sometime did Judas. Math. 26. 49.
What is more happy then to be Ridded from the Jaws and Talants of a hungry
and angry Lion, who longs speedily and greedily to devour us? Sin says S.
Basil, is the Devil, and the Devil is this Lion. 1. Pet. 5. 8. What (to
conclude) is more happy then to be delivered from a mortal poison, which will
not only work the dissolution of the body, but even the wrack of the Soul?
Sin is this dealy poison, James, 3. 8. Oh! then it must needs be deemed a
Quintessentiall part of happiness, or an happiness of happiness to hinder
this planting: that as, not a Dart of Senacherib was shot against Jerusalem the
City of the Lord. 2. Reg. 19. 32. So not a plant of Satan, may take root in
our souls, the garden of the Lord. Let us therefore with Hearts of Love, and
Arms of zeal, affect and embrace that Council which Saint Basil gives,
Quaeso ne bibas poculum. S. Basil. a^m. ad Fill. spiritu.
etc. I entreat thee not to drink of the cup whereby thou have seen many to
perish: Receive not the meat which thou have seen eaten to the destruction of
others: Go not that way, where thou have known many to suffer shipwreck: Avoid
those snares wherewith thou have understood others to be taken. To y^ which I
may Add: prevent those Plants whose increase is so prodigious, whose sap so
venomous. Secondly, seeing sin proceeds from footing to rooting, from rooting
to shooting out to such an increase: It is necessary for us if we cannot
hinder ye Planting of sin by Providence, yet to make the Supplanting of it with
speed, which is either done by making of Resistance unto it, or else by craving
of Assistance against it.

First it is done by making of resistance unto it, and this is performed
either, by weakening the hability of Sin, or else by opposing of his contrary
unto sin.

First, by weakening of the ability of sin; as by taking away all the occasions
to sin, by removing all the susteinments of sin; by making a holy Covenant
with every member of our bodies and power of our souls, ever to to repel sin,
never to admit it; by which means it may come to pass, that sin may be as a
Lake, into which the current of no Stream runs, which must needs be dried
up: as a House without a foundation, which must needs be ruinated; as a City
besieged without sustenance, which must needs be ^a^^ished.

Secondly, it is done by opposing of his contrary unto sin, Charity to Malice,
Temperance and Sobriety to Gluttony and Drunkenness, Liberality to Nigardise,
Vigilance to Security, Confidence to Distrust, Faith to Infidelity, Truth to
Leasing, Chastity to Incontinency; and so of the rest; by which means it may
fall out betwixt Virtue and Vice, as betwixt Christ and Satan; because vice
with Satan, as a strong man man keeps possession of his Palace, until
Virtue with Christ, as a stronger man, comes and ouer-commeth it, takes away
the armor thereof, and deuideth the spoils. Luke, 11. 21. 22.

Secondly we ought to work the supplanting of sin by craving of Assistance
against it, A blessing like unto that which Isaac gave unto Jacob his son,
even the Dew of Heaven, because it comes down from Heaven. Genesis 27. 28.
The means to obtain it, is by Prayer in the spirit, and the benefitt of it
is the Power of the spirit, even the grace of GOD, before the which the Troops
of sin can no more prevail, then Dagon did before the Ark of God, which fell
down before it, having both Head and hands cut off. 1 Samuel 5. 4.

Grace deals with sin, even as the rod of Aron with the rods of the
Aegiptian Inchanters. Ezod. 7. 12. which devoured them: or as the feathers of
Eagles are said to do with the feathers of other Birds, which consume them:
If then Sin, Hell, the Grave, and all the in^ernall troops shall band and
bend themselves against us; yet if grace be with us, GOD is with us; If GOD
be with us, what need we care though the whole World be against us: Is any
man doubtful? So in the like case was the Servant of Elishah, when he saw the
Horses and Chariots of the Aramites compassing Dothan, until his Master had
prayed unto the Lord that he would open his eyes; and when his Eyes were
opened, he looked, and behold, the Mountains were full of horses and chariots
of ^ire round about Elishah, finding therein the speech of his Ma^ster to be
true, who said fear not, for they that be with us are more then they which
be with them. 2. Reg. 6. As therefore at the prayer of Eliah fire came down
from heaven to consume the burnt offering, so as the wood and stones, and the
dust was also devoured, and the water in the ditch licked up. 1. Reg. 18. 38.
So, let us with humble and devout hearts pray for the heavenly fire of Gods
holy grace, whereby our vices may be consumed, mis-doings devoured, and sins
supplanted.

From these general Doctrines, I am to deal with the particular branches of
this Psalm: and therein first, with the Evidence of the godly man's virtues,
set forth unto us by the negative contestation thereof, in these words, that
he walks not in the council of the wicked. wher-out I may observe: 1. That
there is a council of the wicked. 2. that the ungodly walk in it. 3. that the
godly walk not in it.

First, it appears then that there is a Council of the wicked. This is
either a council which is Private in themselves, or else Public with others.

The council of the wicked, which is private in themselves, is a necessary
precedence in every wilful and intended sin.

In a wilful and pretended sin. (as the Shoole-men speak) Three things do
meet and concur together, Consilium, Actus, Exitus. A council, an act, an
issue, upon that Act let me instance this matter by some particular examples:
David after the walking on the roof of his Palace after the sight of the
beauty, and his surprise with the love of Bathshebah, first took council in
himself, concerning an inquiry what she was, and sending of Messengers unto
her to move her to come to him. 2. Sam. 11. 3. 4.

Secondly, committed the Act, and Lay with her. Ver. 4. Thirdly, the issue
there-vppon ensuing, was, that Bathshebah was conceived with child. David for
the saluing of his credit, was enforced to cause Vriah her husband to be
murdered, that so Bathshebah might become his own Spouse; that David being
admonished by Nathan, repented, and was absolved from Spiritual, but not from
Temporal punishment; but that the child conceived in adultery dyed: Absolon
his son rose up in Arms against David his Father, and Destowred his
Concubines in the open Sun-light. 2 Samuel Cap. 15. and 16. Ahab after the liking
of Naboaths Vineyard, first took council how he might compass it, either by
the exchange of another Vineyard, or 1 Reg. 21. 2.
else by giving the worth there of in money.

And in the end because he could not so obtain it by the advice of his wife
Iesabell, he took council also that False Witnesses might be suborned
against Naboath, that so Naboath might be unjustly Stoned for Blasphemy, and
his Vineyard seized upon to the Kings use, v. 8. 9. 10. Secondly, this was
acted, verse. 11. 12. 13. Where they proclaimed a fast, and set Nabaoth among
the chief of the people, and there came two wicked men and satt before him,
and the wicked men witnessed against Nabaoth, saying Nabaoth did blaspheme GOD
and the King: Then they carried him out of the City, and stoned him with
stones, that he dyed: And verse. 16. Ahab rose and took possession of Nabaoths
Vineyard. Thirdly, the issue which followed here-from, was, that which was
prophesied by the Prophet Eliah the Thesbite, that Dogs licked the blood of
Ahab, even in that place where they had licked Naboaths blood, Reg. 22. 28. And
in the field of Iezraell, dogs did eat the flesh of lesabell, so that there
was no more of her left then the scull, and the feet, and the Palms of her
hands. 2. Reg. 9. 35. The like might be exemplified concerning Absolon, Judas
and others, but for fear of being ouer-tedious: In all which it may appear
unto us: that the counsel of the wicked is the first egg of this venomous
Basilisk, Sin preparing the way for the Act, as the Needle does for the
Thread; like the head of a Serpent, which if he gets in first, then draws
he all his poisonous train after him. Saint Bernard says in a certain
Sermon, Quare peccas^ quia nescis quid facias? absit. Why sinnest thou? because
Saint Bernard.
thou know not what thou do? Be i^farre from us to think it. Quia
cogeris vt facias? absit: because thou art compelled to do it? be it far from
us to imagine it. Sed quia placet vt facias, but because it pleases thee so to
do. This pleasure of ours that we will so do, has a near alliance with the
counsel of the wicked, which they privately take in themselves, the seed of
this Colloquintida, the first head of sin.

Secondly, there is a counsel of the Wicked public with others: This is
either Temporal or Ecclesiastical.

Temporal, one example for all is, that when Absolon in his Insurrection
against David his Father, with-all the people the men of Israel, came to
Jerusalem. Then Absolon 2. Sam. 16. 20
said unto Achitophell, even in that bloody and unnatural conspiracy, give
Council what we shall do. And he gave that wicked counsel concerning,
Going in Verse. 21.
to his Fathers Concubines. Secondly, there is a public counsel of the
wicked, in matters of assemblies Ecclesiastical, as amongst, and above, the
rest, that Council which was assembled and gathered together for condemning
and executing our Innocent and guiltless Savior, Mark. 14. 55. where it is
said, that the high Priest and all the Council, sought for witness against
Jesus to put him to death, and found none.

It is an error in the Church of Rome, by no friend of truth to be tolerated,
that they so stiflye hold and maintain that General Councels cannot err, and
that Councels of the Church cannot prove Counsels of the wicked. Indeed it is
true of Councels of the Church, so far as the Church continues to be the
pillar and ground of truth. But by reason that Counsels consist of Churchmen:
1. Tim. 3 15.
and Churchmen are compounded of the Church, and Men, in many things, it
cannot be avoided. But that as Men, they may and do err in regard of their
variety of opinions, personal imperfections, multiplicity of interpretations,
mistaking, as Isack (though he were a Prophet) mistook Jacob for Esau. The
difference is, Genesis 27.
that Isaac took the good Jacob, for the evil Esau. But they here-in forsake
the Good for the Evil.

Saint Augustine writes, that Counsels are most Saint August. ^pist. 1 19.
wholesome Antidotes against the poison of heresies, yet will he have them to
be subjected unto the spirit, and Scriptures, which alone are privileged, Non
errare: not to err. Though Bellarmine and Stapleton, sweat in the proof and
auouching of the contrary, yet can it not be modestly denied, which Eusebius
lib. 7. Ecclesiast. Histor. has anciently recorded, that Counsels in number
(no fewer then ten) have confirmed the then ouerspreading heresy of Arianisme.
Three Counsels, as an 3. Counsels errid.
other grave Author, Commenting upon Cyprian, reports, have miscarried in
establishing the re-baptizing of converted herctiques. What should I speak of
the second Ni^ene Council, which reared up Idolatry and 2. Counsels of Nice.
gave bodies to Angels, and the souls of men? Councels therefore have been
mis^ed, and may err, whether they be Provincial, or Occumenicall, as (if I
thought it fit) I could plentifully prove. Thales when he looked toward
Thales.
the Stars, stumbled at a stone and fell on the earth: So men in their
Councels, while they pretend godliness may maintain wickedness. Council in
the Hebrew is called Gnatsc of a Root, Gnets which Gnets.
signifies a Tree. To show unto us, that as Trees be both good and bad: so
also may Councels: that as a good Tree brings forth good fruit, so do good
Counsel like a Tree.
Councels, and a bad Tree brings forth bad fruit: so do evil Counsels,
becoming therein the Councels of the wicked.

The second point which from hence I do observe, is that the wicked walk in
this Council.

Among other things obseruable in him that walks, this is one principally
intended, a man's Recreation or Pleasure. In that the wicked then walk in
wicked 2. Sam. ^ 1.
counsel, they may be said to make it as an Alley or Gallery to delight and
recreate themselves therein. As David sinned when he walked in his Gallery:
so the ungodly make sin their Gallery to walk in. Sin is divided into
three parts, Lust of the eyes: Lust 1. ^ohn. 2. 16.
of the flesh, and Pride of life: Hac tria pro trino numine Mundus habet.


These three Pleasures of Vanity, are esteemed of by the world, as the Three
persons of the Deity: for the world so possesses the Lust of the Eyes, as it
ioyeth in it; the Lust of the flesh, as it rejoices in it: the pride of life,
as it delights in it, and them all as it walks in the pleasure of them. He
that purposes to be sinful, so delights in sin, as he therein can
prescribe no bound unto himself, for the pleasure of sin towleth him on, to
become without measure in sinning. Let Absolon be our example, who first
sinned, in ^. Sam. 16. 22.
that he went in to the Concubines of another: Secondly, was impudent in his
sin, in that they were the Concu^ines of his Father. Thirdly, he took such
delight in it, and rather vaunted then walked in the pleasure thereof, as after
a triumphing sort he caused, ^ents to be spread in the top of the house, and
committed the folly in the sight of all Israel, and open sunne-light. He was
not abashed that the Sun of Heaven should see his so rebellious
Incontinencie. The pleasure which the ungodly take in sin, may appear in
this, that it is their desire to committ it: first, every whit; secondly, every
where; thirdly, ever: or if you will; First, all; secondly, at all places; and
thirdly, in all times. First, the wicked so walk in sins pleasure, as they
wish to commit it every whitt, or all; the wise man is said to fear the Lord
in all things. Eccles. 18. 26
So a fool (such as be the wicked here spoken off) wishes to anger the Lord
by all sins. As David answered Michol, that he would be more vile still; So
the ungodly 2. Sam. 6. 22:
purposes to be more wicked still, until they have gone through, genera
singulorum, the kinds of all sins, and singula generum, the p^rticulers of
all those kinds. Adding sin to sin, as we read of Joining house to house,
that they may sin alone, as they so do that Esaias. 5. 8.
they may dwell alone in the midst of the earth, as it is Ibidem.
in the same place. Leaving (if it were possible) no sin for others to
commit, as they no place for others to inhabit, retaining, voluntatem
peccandi, a will of sinning, though they have not, fac^^tatem, an ability to
sin, with Caligula: when they cannot sin against heaven, Caligula
yet casting stones against heaven, they would make a Monopoly of sin, as men
willing to engrosse it in their own hands.

Secondly, the wicked so walk in sins pleasure, as he desires to commit it
every where, or at all places, not privately but publicly in the open view of
all men. Therefore is he said to clothe himself with it, as with a raiment.
We Psalm. 109. 1^
put on our raiment, that our nakedness being covered, we may boldly come
into the sight of men; In that then Sin is by the Wicked put on as a raiment,
it argues that their sin is become as a Harlots forehead, without shame.
Doing as the Torlacchi, a certain Sect in great Torlacchi.
estimation among the Turks, who practice their sins openly, because the
more wicked they are, the more religious they are deemed.

Thirdly, the wicked so walks in sins pleasure as he delights to commit
it ever, or in all times, not only in his youth, concerning the sins,
whereof because it is more in^linable hereto then the other branches of our
life, David puts up a Supplication, Lord remember not the Psalm. 25 7.
sins of my youth: but even in his old age, when a man would think it were
high time to leave Sin, because sin is ready to leave him, but then deals
the ungodly with sin, as Phaltiel the son of Laish did with Michol 2. Sam
3. 16.
the Daughter of Saul, his wife, when she left him, to go unto her former
husband David, who followed her weeping.

It is recorded of Saint John the Evangelist, that he dyed with Love in his
mouth, so could the Sinner be^ content to dye with sin in his bosom: such
deli^ht takes he in Sin, even the walk of pleasure to the wicked.

The third point which from hence I do observe, it is that the Godly walk not
in it. The Godly walk not in it, for as much as they take no pleasure in it,
for they well know themselves to be the chosen of God, his elect ones like a
beautiful horse in the battle. Not to fight the combat Zachar. 10. ^.
of Satan, but to Abet and defend the cause of the Lord. For their dignity,
the godly are said to be as a crown: for their price, as the Precious stones of
this Crown: for their honor like the Stones of a Crown lifted up. They have
therefore a great care, that they may not impair this dignity, vili^ie this
price, aba^e this honor, which they cannot avoid but do, If they walk in
Zachar. ^. 16
the Counsel of the wicked, and therein take pleasure in ungodliness.

It is said, Ezra. 4. 14. We have been brought up in the Kings Palace, it
is not meet for us to see the Kings dishonor, much more may Gods Elect say;
We have been brought up in the King of Heavens Palace, that is, in the
Militant kingdom of GODS Church, whose last Act shall end in Triumph: How
then can we see such a Kings dishonor?

Seneca witnesses, touching Tiberius and Caius Gracchi: Seneca lib. conso^.
cap. 1.
Qui bonos viros negauerit, magnos fatebitur: Whosoever shall deny them to be
good men, will confess them to be great men; but the children of God, in that
they are good men, think themselves also to be great men: and in that they
are thus, great men, suppose themselves necessarilye occasioned to become good
m^n: for their greatness is effected by their goodness, and their goodness
is furthered by their greatness. They know that if this their spiritual
Greatness should become Badnesse; first, the World would sooner perceive it in
them, and in whom it is more eminent and conspicuous, like a little spot which
is more easily seen in white then in Brown paper.

Secondly, God does more speedily and severely punish it, as Vincentius
writes. Because Peter was a great Pastor: Vincentius in speculo.
Nulla vel leuis in eo ferenda culpa vel curiositas. No Fault at all though but
a light one: no Curiosity was to be borne with all in him, but himself was
speedily also reproved: That this fault might be as speedily and Ibidem.
effectually removed; The same Author says, that if Dust cleave to our Feet,
we much respect it not, but on our head we will suffer no Defilement. The
Godly well know, that as a man in this case is affected toward himself, so
GOD is affected toward Man, and therefore the rather with holds himself
from sinning, least God should not withold his hand from smiting.

The Godly are contrary to the Ungodly: as the Ungodly affect, so the Godly
abhor, not only the act, but, so far as may be, the thought of Sin
every whit, every where, ever, or all, at all places, in all times.

First, the godly abhor sin, every whit, or all, not 1. These. 5. 22. Jude
ver. 23.
only in Existence, but even in appearance, hating the very garment spotted by
the flesh.

Secondly, the Godly abhor Sin, every where, or, at, all places, not only
publicly in the eyes of men, but Privately also before the eyes of God, In
whose presence the darkness and light are both alike, therefore will he
Psalm. 1^9. 12.
surely know it, and find it out.

Thirdly, the Godly abhor Sin ever, or, in all times, not only in time of
Age, then like unto the foolish Pilot, cutting the Cables of iniquity, and
waighing his sinful Anchors, when himself is feeble, his Sails torn,
Maste crased, Shipp leake, when the Sea is troublesome, and the winds
contrary, In so much as there seems then great difficulty, and without
Gods especial aid, impossibility, ever to attain to the Haven of Happiness:
but even in the time of his youth, from his very youth, making himself a
Samuel dedicate to the Lord: consecrating unto GOD the first fruits of his
youth, as he 1. Sam. 1. 28.
is ALPHA, and the last Act of his Age, as he is Apocal. 1. 8.
OMEGA.

God protests by his Prophet Michah, that his soul longs for the first
ripe Grapes, which is the Godly one, even in the strength of his age, while
there is store of oil in his lamp, while his bones are full of marrow, and his
breast runs full of milk, while he is fresh as a Bridegroom coming out of
his chamber and strong as a Giant to run his course. The Godly then abhors
to walk in the counsel of the wicked ever; in Age, because then he would be
most wise: in Youth, for as much as he knows Epist. Jude. verse. 11.
it stands him in hand then to be most wary. He detesteth to walk in the way
of Caine, because he desires to walk with God as Henoch, Genesis 5. 24. Wisdom
(Prouer. 8. 11.) is praised to be better then precious stones, and all
pleasures are not to be compared to her. This rich Wisdom is to be found in
the Godly, Wise, and therefore this Pleasure in the walk of sin (in
comparison of her own Pleasure) is despised and shunned by her.

Wisdom persuades the Godly to despise and shun the walk of sins
pleasure, or the pleasure of sins walk. First, because she knows and
assures the souls Romans 6 21 Ibid. verse. 23
of the righteous, that it is pleasure without profit, and therefore
unfruitful, if there be any fruit the^ of, it is Shame or Death. Florida
quidem rosa est, sed mihi tristitiam infligit; Saint B^sil de paradiso.
The Rose is flourishing, but the Thorn therein affects me with sorrow,
because it puts me in mind of my sins, for which the Earth has been
condemned to bring forth Thorns and Thistles. So the Beauty of Sin brings
Bane, the sweet, sour, Pleasure* pa^^^ with it. And the Bane is more then the
beauty, the sour more then the sweet, the Pain more then the Pleasure, as
among Roses, the Thorns are more then the Flowers.

Secondly, because she knows and a^sureth the Souls of the righteous, That
it is pleasure without equity, and therefore unlawful for, (...), Sin is
the transgression of the Law, it is Privative, not Positive, ^. Ioh 3. 4.
it makes a Law to become as no Law, and therefore is unlawful.

Thirdly, she knows and assures the souls of the Righteous, that it is a
pleasure which wounds the Conscience, and therefore is sorrowful like unto a
sweet poison which leaves Death behind it, like The Locusts which had Faces
of men, and hair of women: Apoca. ^ Apoca. ^ S. Chryso^ Psalm. 50.
but brought the Tails and stinges of Sco^pions behind them. Conscientia
(says Saint Crysost) codex in quo quotidiana peccata conscribuntur, our
Conscience is a book wherein our daily sins are written. So written are our
sins in the register of our Conscience, as according to the Evidence thereof,
the conscience it self performs the office of an Accuser, Judge, Tormentor,
against our selves. This is a bitter gall of Conscience, not unlike unto that
gall of bitterness. Act. 8. 23. under the private curtains of those Act. 8.
23.
tragical Theaters, the Gorgons, Sphinxes, Hidraes, and Harpies (that the
Heathen speak off) do Act their bloody parts.

Fourth, she knows and assures the souls of the Righteous, that it is a
pleasure, Cuius extrema luctus occupat, the bound of whose extremity is the
extremity of greeuance, and whose Conclusion is knitte up in Confusion, whose
train trayleth after it, Affrightfull Death, Rage-full Hell, and Rue-full
Damnation, and therefore must needs it self be most Affrightfull, Ragefull,
Ruefull.

Sithence then it appears unto us that there is a Council of the wicked,
That the wicked walk in it; that is take their pleasure in the same, wishing
in that regard, that Sin might be committed by them every whit, every
where; ever: but that the godly walk not in it, as they who have weaned their
souls from such impious vanities, or vain impieties, All, At all places, In
all times, and so much the rather because it is a pleasure unfruitful,
unlawful, sorrowful, affrightfull, ragefull, ruefull.

Oh* let us not conform the Inclination of our affections, the affectation
of our will, or the conversation of our manners, to the crooked, but to the
upright: to the reprobate, but to the elect: to the sinful, but to the
sanctified Ones! But let us rather deal with Sin that wild Beast, which
lays in wait to spill our souls; as the Dragon did, to devour the Child:
as Commodus Apoc. 12. 4.
the Emperor dealt with those wild beasts he cast his Darts at, who (as
Histories report) never missed the Mark he threw at, and never gave a wound,
but it was deadly.

Oh let us also give a deadly wound unto sin, which would deadly wound us,
that so it may betide the monster-sinne as it sometime befell the Giant Goliath:
who thinking to have slain David was himself slain by David, 1. Sam. 17.
Auersemur (as writes Saint Basil) Saint Basil.
peccatum vt assolent bruta animalia, etc. Let us auert sin as brute
beasts are wont to deal with poisonous weeds: and let us follow
Righteousness as they do wholesome fodder: If we look to Reign with Romans
8. 17.
Christ. Sin must not reign in us. Romans 6. 12. Let us then take our
Council at GODS Oracle. Romans 3. 2. and not of the Council of the wicked. Let
us run the way of the Spouse, who says that if he shall draw her she will
run after CHRIST. Cant. 1. 3. and not walk the path of the Strumpet, whose
feet goes down to death, and her steps take hold of hell. Prouer. 5. 5.
that so our walk may approve us to be Godly, and not reprove us as Ungodly.

The second particular point in the Negative Contestation, whereby the Evidence
of the godly man's Virtue may appear unto us, is that, he stands not in the
way of sinners, where-out may be observed, first, that there is a way of
sinners. Second, that the ungodly stand in it. Third, that the godly stands
not in it.

First, then it is proposed, that there is a way of Sinners: for the better
understanding whereof, we must know that there is a twofold way, Away of
righteous, and Away of sinners.

First, the way of the Righteous is called in Scripture, by the name of GODS
Commandments: The way of truth, GODS way, etc. The way of Sinners in the Psalm.
119.
same Psalm, is termed an evil way; A wicked way, A false way, the way of
Lying.

The way of the Righteous, differs from the way of Sinners in the Entrance
into the way: the Company in the way; the Passage out of the way.

First, the way of the Righteous, differs from the way of Sinners in the
Entrance into the way. The way of the Righteous in the first Ingate
thereunto, seems (as indeed it is) A straight, rough, and unpleasant way: On
the other side, the way of Sinners appears in the first Front thereof to be
a Broad, Smooth and Pleasant way.

The way that the Righteous must begin (and continue to walk in the
pilgrimage of this li^e) it is according to the direction of GODS wisdom,
appointed to be Straight, Rough, and Unpleasant: A way that is besette with
Thorns; as the Church her self is said to be A Lilly among thorns.

As a Crown of thorns stood upon the Head of Christ, Cant. 2. 2.
So it is very fit and convenient that the Feet of Christians should tread
upon a way of thorns. That which the Prophet Hosea speaks may heere-vppon
fitly Hosh. 2. 6.
be applied to the Righteous: I will stop thy way with thorns: Does a Man
gather grapes of thorns? Math. 7. 16. Yet is it certain that the Righteous
are as Grapes growing, though not on, yet amongst these thorns; which being
bruzed and squeazed by the Wine Press of Afflictions, become as a delicate
Wine, sweetly tasting on the Lords Palla^e.

We must of necessity ascribe by an infinite Computation, more Wisdom to GOD
then to a Gardener: Gardiners hold opinion that Roses, and Violets sown or set
near unto Onyons or Garlic, are made of more sweet savor.

The graces and gifts of God in the Righteous, are as Roses and Violets, which
being sown or set near unto Afflictions and Tribulations, which are strong
and untoothsome, as Onyons and Garlic, will make them more delightsome and
acceptable.

The Righteous are as Gold, therefore must they not fear the furnace: as
Wheat, and therefore must they not fear the flayle: as Oil, and therefore
must they not fear the pressure: as Iron, and therefore must they not fear
the file: as the Palm Tree, and therefore must they not fear the burden: as
Sons, and therefore must they not fear the chastisement, To conclude, as
Lillies: and therefore Cant. 2. 2.
must not be ouer-sett with fear, though they may happily be besett with
Thorns.

David's Lot consisted in two points, in a kingdom, and in a trouble: He had
also two famous heirs, Solomon, who inherited his Kingdoms: and Christ, who
inherited his troubles: Solomon and Christ by nature were brethern in blood,
but not in inheritance of the same nature: Solomon was Rich, Christ poor;
Solomon passed his time in peace, Christ in disquiet: Solomon was a King,
Christ (by the censure of the world) but a Servant: Solomon had a Palace,
Throne, Power. Christ a Stable, a Manger, Infirmity. Oh! it S. August.
becomes, yea it behooves us rather to be like Christ y^ Truth, then Solomon
the Type: For as a father writes; every actio^ not of Sal^mo^ but of Christ,
ought to be our Imitation. We ought therefore to be like Christ in his Poverty,
in Disquiet, Bondage his Stable, Manger, Infirmity, then to be like Solomon in
his Riches, Peace, Royalty, Palace, Throne, Potentacy; especially considering
y^ as the exercise of ye Cross is (as the Shoole-men speak) Communis terminus;
as common as Community it self unto the godly: yet (be it spoken in the way of
comfort unto them) though there be so frequent a Community of it, yet have
they also a privileged Immunitie against it: for be it granted, not only,
that it is a Arodde to scourge them, but which is more, a staff to bruise them;
yet by Gods merciful disposal, shall both this Rod and ^^affe comfort them.
A Rodd Psalm. 23. 4.
shall it become rather of Consolation then of Desolation, a Staff rather of
Supportation, then of Supplantation. It ought to be our practice, because it is
CHRIST'S challenge. If any man will ^ollow me, let him forsake Math. 16. 24.
himself, and take up (not Salomons Crown) but his Cross and ^ollow me;
as if there were no following of CHRIST but by this Crosse-way straight, rough
and unpleasant in the in-gate there-into,

Second, the way of Sinners has the first front or entry thereinto, Broad,
Smooth, Pleasant, as a way which appertains unto such as Live and wax old,
grow in wealth, their seed is established in their sight, with them and their
generations before their Eyes: Their houses are peaceable without fear, and
the rod of GOD is not upon them: their Bullock gendreth and fails not,
their Job. 21. from ver. 17. to 14.
Cow calueth, and casts not her calfe, they send forth their children like
sheep, and their sons dance, they take the Tabret and the Harp, and
rejoice in the sound of the Organs.

They have then (as appears hereby) Goods, Houses, Lands, Cartell,
Children, Music and A long-life to enjoy all this: Then which way therefore
in the first entrance thereof, what can be more gaynsome? What more
delightsome?

They have prosperity in that abundance, that they are Drunken with it, as it
is said of Ephraim. Esaias. 28. 1.

The Gardener dispayreth of that Vine which he pruneth not. The Chy^urgian
has little hope of that festered wound which he launceth not. The Father
gives over that Son whom he rebukes not, and GOD reprobateth that servant
which he chastneth not.

It is said, Ezech. 16. 42. I will make my wrath to rest, and my Jealousy
shall depart, and I will cease and be no more angry. S. Bernar. Ser in Cant.
42.


Where-vppon Saint Bernard has these words, Solo auditu contremisco, vides
quod tunc, magis irascitur Deus, quando non irascitur. Misericordiam hanc ego
nolo: supra omnem ira miscratio ista. I tremble only at the hearing hereof.
Thou see how GOD is then more angry, when he is not angry. I will none of
this mercy (Oh LORD) This favor is above all displeasure.

The same Father writing (Bernar. medit. Cap. 6.) Says also, Sitecum Deus non
est per gratiam, adest per vindictum. If GOD be not with thee by his grace,
he is with thee by his revenge. But woe be to thee if he be so with thee:
(yea says he) woe be unto thee if it be not so with thee, for there is GODS
wrath where he does not scourge for Sins; et quem hic flagellando non
emendat, in futuro damnat: And whom here he does not mend by scourging, he
does condemn hereafter.

By the outward blessings of this World cannot a man Judge whether he stand
in GODS anger, or favor. Yea as they are the blessings of Esa^, rather then of
Jacob, of the le^t rather then the right hand, unless GOD season them with the
Dew of Heaven, the grace of his spirit, they argue that GOD is rather angry
then pleased with us in bestowing them vpp^n us, as they which are to be found
in the entrance of the way of Sinners.

The second difference which is betwixt the way of the Righteous, and the way
of sinners, is of Company in the way.

This Company is threefold; it is either Precedent, or going before them:
Concomitant or walking with them: Subsequent or following after them.

First, the Company Precedent, in the way of the Righteous, have been Abell,
Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, Job, Moses and the Prophets, Apostles, and
Evangelists, and such like, being the congregation of the first borne, which
are written in Heaven; and the spirits of just and perfect men, Hebr. 12. 23.
Who have already cast off the bonds of this li^es imprisonment, that they
might be received into the glorious liberty of the sons of God in Romans 8. 21.
Heaven.

Secondly, the Company Concomitant in the way of the Righteous, are all they
which live at the same time with the Righteous in this present world, whom GOD
has so Predestinate before the World, As he has called them out of the world:
As he may justify them in the world: And purposes to gloryfie them after
this World: As Saint Augustine alleges alluding to August.
Romans 8. 29. 30.

Thirdly, the Company Subsequent in the way of the Righteous, are all they, who
while the Earth shall stand upon her Pillars, while the Heavens shall be spread
abroad as Curtains: and while the frame of the world it self shall have any
being, shall hereafter until the final Consumation of all things, so breath on
the earth amongst men, as they shall belong to GOD in Heaven: A Blessed
society known unto GOD, not known unto us: Sealed by God, as yet Concealed
from us, for it is with GOD a foundation that remains sure, and has this
^ale, that GOD knows who are his. 2. Timo. 2. 19.

Secondly, on the othher side, The Company in the Way of Sinners Precedent,
have been Cayne, Corah, Esau, Ismaell, Saul, Ahab, Jeroboam, Herod, Pilate,
Judas and the like. Of all whom it may be said, as o^ ^^^au only. Romans 9.
13. That the Lord has hated them.

The Company in the way of Sinners, Concomitant, are all such as living in the
same age with them, are dealt with all by the LORD as the LORD sometime dealt
with Pharaoh, whose heart he hardened. These have so their Feet in the way
with sinners, as they lift up their Heel against Heaven by Sinning, as Judas
did sometime against CHRIST by Treason.

The Company in the way of Sinners, Subsequent, are all such as shall Heap
up unto themselves wrath against the day of wrath, and of the declaration of
the just Judgment of GOD, Romans 2. 5. Sons of Beliall who shall abandon the
Coullors of CHRIST. that they may receive the Mark of the Beast Apoc. 13. 16.

To him that trauelleth in the way, there is nothing more Delight some then to
have Good, there is nothing more Irksome then to have bad Company: Behold here
be offered unto us, and set before us two Ways, The one of the Righteous,
who have Precedent, Concomitant, and Subsequent good Company, as we have heard.

The other of the Sinners who have Precedent, Concomitant, and Subsequent bad
Company, as has been delivered unto us.

Now we may perceive that in some sense it lies in our choice which of these
Two Ways we will take. And I make no doubt, but that if the dew ^f Heaven
be not wholly d^yed up: If the sparks ^f grace be not altogether quenched
in us, we will betake our selves unto the Good way, that so we may have good
Company: not to the Evil way where we shall have badde Company: By the
former shall we be made like unto Young Tobiah, who had an Angel of GOD in
his company, by the latter Tob 5. 4. ^. Sam. 16. 14
shall we become like Saul, who had an evil spirit sent from God to vex him.

The third difference between the way of the righteous, and the way of
Sinners, is the passage out of the way.

The passage out of the way of the righteous is from Bondage to Liberty, from
Poverty to Wealth, from Sorrow to ^oye, from Tears to Triumph, from Death to
Life: from Hell (as I may so say) in this world, to Heaven in a better.

On the other side, the passage of the wicked out of the way of sinners, is
from Liberty to Bondage; from Wealth to Poverty; from Joy to Sorrow, from
Triumph to Tears, from Life to Death, from their Heaven in this world, to Hell
in an other.

It may then appear unto us by that which has been delivered, that the way
of the righteous, is not unlike unto 2 Reg. 2. verse. 19. 22.
the waters of Jericho, which were first bitter, and then made sweet. So the
way of the righteous, though it yields the taste of bitterness in the
beginning: yet shall it recompense the same with sweetness in the end. But the
way of Sinners is like the waters of Sodom, which were at the first sweet
and pleasant: but after that (as Histories mention) became they (and so
continue unto this day) bitter and vn-wholsome, resembling herein the Panther,
who is said to allure other beasts after him, by the sweet sent of his skin,
and afterward to prey upon them ^y bloody rage of his Tallants. Oh how shall
we then sl^^ken to walk in the way of the righteous? which is like the fruit
of the Tree of life, which grows by degrees from bitterness to sweetness,
as fruit uses to do, and being once sweet, can never wax bitter again:
And how far off ought it to be from us, and we from it, to step into the
way of Sinners? which is like Esaus pottage, Genesis 25. 34, which, it may be,
refreshed him for a time, but afterward cost him his Birthright. So will this
cost us no smaller price then our Birthright, Gods kingdom; the estimate
whereof is inualuable: and not only so; but will also subject us to the
torture of Hells thra^dome, the sorrows whereof are vnconceaueable. Picus
Mirandulanus, breaks Pi^us Miran: Epist. quadam.
out into these speeches, concerning the floating vanities of this life. Quid
optabile in Mundi voluptatibus? quae dum quaeruntur fatigant, dum acquiruntur
infatuant, dum amittuntur excruciant. What is to be wished for i^ this worlds
pleasure? whose getting is weary somnesse, inioyment folly, loss, grief. If
these also be found in the way of Sinners; after them all follows Hell to.
For as Death is the passage out of the Way: so Hell follows after Death in
this kind. Apoc. 6 8.


The second thing which here-out may be observed, it is, that the Ungodly
stand in this way. The Ungodly first begin with a doubtful walking; then
proceed they to a determinate standing. The former is as a seeking: this is as
a finding; the former is but (as it were) a floating, this a settling: because
the wicked by standing in this way of Sinners, do (as I may so say) pitch
their Tents, and erect their dwelling places there. For so standing is
sometimes taken in the Scriptures, Our feet shall stand P^al. 122. 2.
in thy gates O Jerusalem! Where by standing, is to be understood a resting or
settling to dwell there. In that the wicked stand in the way of Sinners, that
is, dwell there, they seem to be affected to the way of Sinners, in a bad
affection, as GOD was to the Hill of Sion, in Psalm. 132. 14.
a good acceptance: Who says, This is my rest for ever, here will I dwell,
for I have a delight therein. Where-out there is observed: first, a precedent
determination; here is my rest: Secondly, a future resolution, even for ever.
Here hap what hap will, will I dwell, here will I stand.

Thirdly, a reason thereof, because I delight therein: or because my delight is
in it. Wherein the wicked become apparently like the Dog or Sow, whereof the
former returns unto his Vomitte, the other to her Wallowing in the mire,
because they both delight therein; 2. Pet. 2. 22.
as the wicked do Stand, and in that respect Dwell in the way of Sinners,
because they repose their delight in it.

This Standing in the way of Sinners, implies with it an impossibility of
Amendment, so long as they so stand. In Repentance or Amendment of life, there
be two bounds, Malum, et Bonum, from the one thereof (if we look at any time
truly to Repent) we must of necessity pass to the other; of which passage
the former part is done, Auersione a malo, by the turning from that which is
evil.

Now needs must it be granted, that where there is a standing still, there is
no motion; where there is no motion, there cannot be (as they speak in
Schools) any Lation or transmigration, from place to place, and of necessity
must it be inferred, that where that is wanting, cannot be any Auersion or
turning away from that which is evil, or Conversion and turning to that which
is good.

The wicked then, in that they have their standing in the way of Sinners, are
as a standing puddle of corrupted waters, which the longer they stand still,
grow more and more corrupted. Since then we ought to be careful, that we
walk not in the counsel of the wicked: oh how much more watchful are we to
be, that we stand not in the way of Sinners! To stand in the way of Sinners,
it is like unto an Ulcer bred in the bone, which will never out of the flesh,
until God shall consume such flesh by fire, as he some-time drowned all flesh
by Water. Gen 6. 13.


The reason of the past drowning* all flesh by water, is set down Genes. 6.
12. because all flesh had corrupted his way: but the Reason of the future
consuming of such flesh as this, is by fire, may be because all such flesh
stands in a corrupt way, even this way of Sinners, here spoken of. Saint
Gregory says of Sin, that it is Cathena infernalis, Saint Greg^r.
An infernal chain: and so indeed may it be thought to be, because with the
ligature thereof, as with the Iron linkes of a Chain, the Sinner is so tied
and bound as he cannot stir or move himself either one way or other, but
is enforced to stand still: He stands in the wa^ of Sinners.

The third thing which here-out may be observed, is that, the Godly stand not
in the way of Sinners. They stand not in it. For as much as they are ever
watchful over themselves, (so near as may be) that they may not so much as
stepp into it. Who will stepp into that way wherein they know a Serpent to be?
The way of Sinners (as the Godly well know) is such a way, and therefore are
they so far from stepping into it, as they flee from it, Eccles. 21. 2.
Sins are the weapons of unrighteousness: for Rom 6. 13.
which cause the Righteous are affected unto them, no otherwise then David was
unto the weapons and Armor of Saul, who put them off, when he went against
Goliath, 1. Sam. 17. 39
as they which were unfit and unmeet for him. The Godly wish not to sin,
not so much for fear of punishment, as for love of Virtue, which Virtue in as
much as it comes from God, and leads to God, the godly esteem as their
Summum honum; their cheifest, highest and supremest good: Amiable, Estimable,
Desirable, not in any by-respects, but of and for it self only. It is a
saying, Nolens peccare propter se, fit volens propter aliud. He which is
unwilling to sin for sins sake, is made willing for some other consequence
sake, which may depend upon it, whether it be Pleasure, Lucre, Honor, or the
like: but the Righteous-one admits of neither, rejects both: he prays
so to be furnished by the seven spirits Apocal. 1. 4.
which are before the throne of GOD, that (if it may be) he may not fall at
all. But if his spirit be so vanquished by his flesh, as he not only falls,
but falls seven times a day, a lot from which even the righteous man is not
privileged, Prou. 24. 16. Yet as Saint Jerome writes, Saint Jerome. P^^nie
Ep^st. 4^.
loses he not the name of a righteous man, because he as often rises by
repentance again. Pliny mentions a certain fresh water, which retains
the freshness, though it runs among the brinish waves of the Sea: Such are
the righteous, who though they live in the darkness of this world, yet do
they not the works of darkness: though they be among Sinners, yet with
Sinners do they not stand in the way of Sinners, but are righteous still, much
more performing that by the light of grace, which Anacharsis a Scythian did by
the glimpse of Nature, who Erasmus in vidua Christi.
being at Athens (as writes Erasmus) in which City it was a most hard thing
to be a good man. Nihil tamen de sua seueritate remisit: yet diminished he
nothing from his gravity. So the righteous do much less impair any thing in
their goodness; but, tanquam margarita in Coeno. As Pearls in a Puddle: so
do they keep their virtue still.

It appears then by the premised matter, that there is a twofold way: The
one of the Righteous, the other of Sinners. That also there is a great
difference between these Two ways, both in regard of the entrance into the
Way: Company in the Way, passage out of the Way: that more-ouer the
Vngodly-one Stands, that is, Planteth and Setleth himself in this Way. On
the contrary side, that the Godly stands not in this way, because he is
careful what in him lies, by the direction of GODS spirit, not so much as to
step into this way: Oh let us then in the fear of GOD, if we would be
accounted as we are, and be as we are accounted! Let us I say, refrain our
feet from this Way, yea, even from the Path, that is the least means of
conueyance which may lead us to this Way, If we Prou. 1. 15.
will of necessity be-take our selves unto a Way: oh by how much is it better
for us to be-take our selves unto the way of GODS Commandments; saying, as
Job. My Job. 23. 11.
foot has followed his (that is GODS) steps, his way have I kept, and have
not declined. Though the Sinner s^pposeth that he stands in the way of
Sinners; Yet as Saint Bernard witnesses; he rather falls by Sin, Saint
Ber^ de ^^na domini.
then stands in the way of Sinners: and his fall has been, as that Father
speaks, on stones to bruise him, and on pollution to defile him: a pollution
so base and despiceable, Ezech. 24. 6.
as it is called by the name of Scumme, which first arises of corruption:
secondly, is light: thirdly, is unprofitable. So is Sin also, Corrupt, Light,
Unprofitable: and he which stands in it, stands in Corruption, Vanity,
Unfruitfulness. Whereas the Righteous ought to be Incorrupt, Virtuous,
Fruitful, as he which looks to receive a Crown, Incorruptible, Glorious,
Precious: and therefore he which is in the way of such preferment, as Heaven
is, will avoid to stand in the way of such defilement, as sin is.

The third particular point in the Negative Contestation, whereby the Evidence
of the Godly man's Virtues may appear unto us, is, that he sits ^ot in the
seat of the scornful. Wherein there be considerable: First, what is meant
by the scornful here spoken of: Secondly, that there is a seat of such
scornef^ll ones. Thirdly, that the wicked do sit i^ this seat: Fourthly,
that the Godly do not sit in it.

First, it must then appear, what the scornful are, or what is meant by
them. Scorners here spoaken of, are of two sorts: either such as scorn Men,
or such as scorn GOD.

Such as scorn Men, be either such as do it of Pride, because they think
themselves better then others; or of Envy, because they would have none
better then themselves, or else of Mischief, because they will have none worse
then themselves.

The first fruit of Scorning, grows from the root of Pride, which makes
them, who are there-withall tainted, to suppose that they are better then
others, and therefore in regard of themselves, do they contemn and
ouer-looke others. This kind of Pride is called by the Greeks, (...), which
is necessarily joined with the disdain of others. These kind of Men, if they
have Wealth; wax proud of it, and scorn other, who are poorer then
themselves. If they have Honors, they swell with them, and scorn others, who
are meaner then themselves. If they have Strength, they are puffed up with it,
and scorn others, who are weaker then themselves. To conclude: if they have
Health, Beauty, Friends, Liberty, Wisdom* Eloquence, Zeal above others,
they grow haughty and high minded with them, and scorn other more Sicklye,
Deformed, Friendlesse, Enthralled, Dullconceited, Stammering-tongued,
Coldly-affected then themselves: saying, in the abundance of their riches:
Depart from me, for I am welthier then thou: in the arm of their strength,
Depart from me, for I am mightier then thou: in the staff of their friends:
Depart from me, for I am more gracious then thou: in the fervor of their
zeal, Depart from me, for I am holyer then thou: To conclude, In the
confidence of any blessing which it has pleased GOD to lend them: Depart from
me, for I am better then thou.

Men they are, who wrest those gifts which GOD has vouchsafed them, unto a
wrong end. For where as God has anointed them, with the Oil of bounties,
above their fellows, to that end that they should support and maintain their
inferiors: they pervert them to disdain and scorn their Inferiors. But why
art thou so borne alo^t (O man!) as thou scornest other by Pride, when thou
oughtst so to be abased: as to loath thy self through Humility, whose
Conception cannot be thought on without shame: whose Birth cannot be remembered
without sorrow: whose Life cannot be advised without vanity: whose Death
cannot be mused on without misery, who was made of the Earth the lowest
Element; of the Slyme, the basest earth: not only Vain, but Vaynity, not
Vanity in part, but altogether vanity. ^alm. 39. 5.


In regard of the base matter he was made off, was Man called Adam: in regard
of the miseries he has ^ithence fallen into, is he termed Aenosh, subject to
the Fire, which may consume him: to the Pestilence, which may dispatch him: to
the Famine, which may starve him: to Inondations of waters, which may drown
him: to the Infection of the Air, which may taint him: to the quaking gapings
of the Earth which may swallow him: to Thunder-boltes, which may blast him: to
a whole Army of diseases, which may assault him: to Venom, which may poison
him: to little contemptible creatures, as Hyes, Lice, Frogs, which may
discomfitt thee: besides evil Spirits to possess him: maladies of the mind,
to torture him: Vanities of youth, and Infirmities of age to affright him.

Sithence then thou art compassed with such A clowd of miseries, as Heb. 12. 1.
we read of a Clowd of witnesses.

Why do thou, yea how dare thou go on? oh Man! to say that thy little
finger shall be heauyer then thy Fathers loins, with Reboam: And do not
rather protest that thy Soul Cleaves to the dust with David; Psalm. 119. 25.
1 Reg. 12. 10.
Why do thou seek to build thy nest in the Sun with the Eagle, and not
rather mourn and lament with the Pelican in the Wilderness? What is man that
thou art so mindful of him, as to crown him with glory and worship (says
Psalm. 102. 6. Psalm. 8. 4. 5.
the Kingly Prophet) But I may say, what art thou O Man? which art so
unmindful of thy self, as to scorn others by vainglory and contempt? that
whereas thou ought to look to thy self by Fear: Thou ouer-lookest others
with Pride, which is the first root of scorning of Man.

The second fruit of the scorning of Man, grows from the root of Envy,
because we would have none better then our selves.

Thus when Caine saw that the sacrifice of Abell was respected, and his own
rejected, his countenance is said to Genesis 4* 5.
fall, that is to say, he could hardly afford him a good look, because he was
big with scornful di^daine against him.

Thus when David had vanquished Goliath, and had made other prosperous
expeditions against the Philistians, and the women of Israel sang, that David
had slain his ten thousands, and Saul but his thousand. Saul waxed wroth, is
said after that time to have an eye at David, what 1 Samuel 18. 9.
means it that he had an eye at him, but that, inuidit, he enuyed him, and
with a look of scorn and disdain pried into him. Thus was Michol an evil
daughter of as bad a father, saw David more forward in holy zeal then her
self, in so much that he daunced before the Ark of God 2 Samuel 6. 14.
with all his might. Looking through a window, and seeing him leap and dance
she despised him in her heart, ver. 15. and that in such measure as she
speaks to his face. O how glorious was the King of Israel this day? Which
was uncovered this day in the eyes of the Maidens of his servants, as a fool
uncovers himself. Ver^ 20.


The King of Aram commands his Captains to fight against the King only* and
to let the common soldiers alone. 1 Reg. 22. 31.
So Envy bandeth and bends her scornful troops against Virtue only, and
lets base Vice alone. The envious returns the darts of scorn on them
from whom he is wounded with the darts of their Virtues, as Saint Basil
writes in a certain Homily of his.

Inuidius (says he) nihil ab homine nudo qui omnium iaculis petitur, differ
videtur: fort is est aliquis? aliu^ forma Basil. Hom. de Inuidia.
Charus? Eloquentia? Prudentia? tot sunt Iacula. That ^s, the envious man
seems nothing to differ from a naked man, who is aimed at by the darts of
all men; is any man valiant, Notable for his Beauty, Eloquence, Wisdom? Then
this Valiancy, Beauty, Eloquence, Wisdom, be as so many darts to wound him,
whose guise is to turn virtue from others, into wounds to himself, and to
return scorns from himself, for virtues from others. This is the second
root of the scorning of man.

The third fruit of the scorning of man, grows from the root of Mischief:
Because man will have none worse then himself: Men of this kind are such as
from the sole of the foot unto the crown of the head, have nothing whole in
them but wounds and swellings, and sores full of corruptions. Esaias. 1. 6. What
then can we else expect from Men Esaias. 1. 6.
th^s affected, but only wounds of scorning? from such wounds, but swelling
of disdain: from such swellings; but sores and corruption; from such sores so
full of corruption.

Can a man hope for oil out of the flint; or for honey out of the spider; for
grapes of thorns, or figgs of thistles? No, it is a thing altogether
impossible, and verily a thing as impossible it is, to look for goodness of
mischief. For mischieuons minded-men, who make Evil to be their only Level;
are altogether Unprofitable: Therefore are there none that do good, no, not
one; have their feet to shed Romans 3. from Ver. 12. to 19.
blood: therefore are they murtherous: have Destruction, and Calamity in their
way: therefore are they barbarous. The way of peace have they not known,
therefore are they rebellious. The fear of God is not before their eyes, and
therefore are they mischievous. And how I beseech you can it be otherwise?
considering that their throat is an open s^pulchre: y^ their tongues have they
used to deceive: the poison of aspes is under their lips, and their mouth is
full of cursing and bitterness, Romans 3. from ver. 12. to 19. That is of
execration and scornfulnesse, the third root of the scorning of man.

The second kind of Scorners, are such as scorn God. Though the kindness of
these men be many, yet will I insist only in three of them. Whereof the first
is the Covetous Mamonist. The second, the Sensual Carnalist. The third, the
Godless Atheist: whereof the first is possessed with the World, the second
swayed by the Flesh* the third, blinded by the Devil.

The first^hen of the three is the Covetous Mammonist possessed by the world.
We read 2. Corinthians. 4. 4. of a God of the world; But these men make the World
their GOD; appointing gods of gold and silver to go before them: and as Riches
increase, setting their hearts upon them, contrary to that, Psalm. 62. 10. Of
this Mammonist, if we would know him in his right coullors; there be these
signs. 1. an eager and sharp desire of getting, and heaping together; for a
man that has a wicked eye hastes to get riches: 2. ^ ^rou. 28. 22.
pinching and niggardly keeping that he has gotten, never willingly parting
from it, though it be to never so holy an use. 3. A neglect of holy duties, and
a coldness in Gods matters. 4. A trust in riches, A thing which the Covetous
minded man is so prone unto, as Timothy is admonished of S. Paul, not only to
exhort, but as if that were too little, to charge the rich men in this world,
not to trust in uncertain riches. If Mammonists then trust in their Riches, 1 Timothy 5. 17.
what do they but make them their God? As if when Riches ^ee on their side,
nothing could be against them.

Not unlike the rich worldling a^ these professed worldlings. Luk 12. 18. 19.
who wh^ he had resolved with himself that he would pull down his barnes, and
build greater, and therein would gather all his fruits and goods: charged
his soul with this vain Applause. Soul thou have much goods laid up for
many years, line at ease, eat, drink, and take thy pastime. To this end
Covetousness is called by the name of Idolatry. Colo. 3. 5. A golden Image is
it, which though there be no Commandment for it, as was for that golden Image
which Nabuchadnezzar set up, yet all nations and language are ready to fall
down and worship. Dan. 3. 5.


Couetsous men, as they cannot serve God and Mammon, so do they forsake God to
cleave to Mammon: playing herein the part of an Adulterer, who being joined
to his wife, coupleth himself with an other: So the Coueteous man howsoever
he be Married unto God, yet Adultereth in embracing Gold, and then scorneth
God, as the Adulterous Husband does his Wife.

The second kind of Scorner, which does Scorn God, is swayed by the flesh,
The wisdom of which flesh is emnity against God. If it be granted that it is
emnity against Rom 8. 7.
God, then is there no doubt but that it bears an Affection of Scorn against
himself.

The sensual Concupiscence which is found in the carnall-minded man, may be
likened unto Hagar the bondwoman, who when she had conceived, Despised Sara her
mistress; so when this Lust had conceived and brought forth Sin. then will it
despisea and Scorn even God^ himself. The third kind of Scorner which does
scorn God, is the Godesse Iam. 1. 15.
Atheist whom the Devil has blinded. This has the devil done that he may the
rather lead them to Hell, as Heliah struck ye heart of Aramites with blindness to
lead them to Samaria, and deliver them into the hands of their enemies. 2 Reg
6. 18. 19.
Hence it is, that while they gracelesselye, yea hellishly, maintain that Gods
Omnipotency is Impotency: his Wisdom folly: his Providence ignorance: his
Justice partiallity: his Truth a lie: and Himself either not to be at all: or
if he be, that he regards not humane actions. They cause their Heart to
wax big against the Searcher of Psalm. 2. 4.
Hearts: they lift up their heel against Heaven, and whett their tongue
against their Maker: so as they have him in derision on earth; who has them in
derision in heaven: and so scorn him, who will here-after scourge them for it.
A kind of people be these, who may rather be called Devils incarnate, then
people. Who as a worthy Historian writes, have defaced the divine Character
French. Hist. in Charl 9.
of the soul, and have prostrate the same, at the pleasure of the stinking
gate of Hell.

A Vermin, which as the same Historian mentions in the Kingdom of France,
in the reign of Charles the ninth attained to the number (O ruthful report!)
of thirty thousand men: (as their chief Leader then confessed) but since that
time (says he) it has had so great a scope, as such as deal with it in
great houses, are called Philosophers and Astrologers. As this has been said
concerning France: So do I humbly bend the knee of my soul before the Throne
of Gods Majesty, praying both with the vtt-most and in-most zeal of my spirit,
that it may not once be suspected of England. A brood of hell are they, not to
be confuted with words of argument: but to be cut off with swords of
punishment. That so without reply, both their mouth may be stopped, and breath
choked. A judgment (no doubt) too mercyful for them, who call into question
that which Heaven, and Earth, Angels, Men, Devils, all Ages of the World, all
Languages of Nations do affirm avouch, attest, approve, and verify: and the
conscience of the Atheist is more then a thousand witnesses, to testify as one
writes; affirmant tibi. non sibi, interdiu, non noctu: Tney affirm so to thee
not to themselves; in the day, when they think they may be more bold; not in
the night when fear does more possess them. Tully writes of Metrodorus an
Atheist of his Tully.
time. Nec quenquam vidi; qui magis ea timeret, quae timenda esse negaret,
mortem dico, et Deos: Neither have I seen any man man more fearful of those
things which he said were not to be feared; I mean Death and GOD. If God be
to be Feared, then is he not (O cursed Atheists!) to be Scorned.

The second thing that I am to handle, is that there is, A chair of those
scornful ones. The Scripture commends unto us a threefold Chair, of
Doctrine of Justice, and of scorning.

First, of Doctrine, in this sense, our Blessed Savior says of the Scribes
and Pharisees, that they sit in Moses chair. Math. 23. 2.
Teaching as he taught in the same seat: but sweruing from the purity of his
Doctrine, because they taught with much corruption.

Secondly we read of a chair, or seat of Justice or 1. Reg, 10. 18.
Judgment, such a one may that throne seem to be which Solomon erected.

Thirdly the Scripture mentions unto us a chair, or seat of the scornful,
spoken off in this present Psalm or place, Nor sit in the seat, or chair
of the scornful.

This Chair is a place of ease and repose, wherein the Proud, Envious and
Malicious-men which scorn man; The Covetous, Carnal and Malicious men which
scorn GOD, do accustom themselves to sit, even as Herod satte in the
seat of proud vanity, and as sometime Babylon did, who vaunted that she did
sit being a Queen, and was no widow; therefore in scorn Act. 12. 21.
(as it were) of all that God could do to her, she should see no mourning.

The third thing that I am to handle is, that the wicked sit in this chair or
seat.

They sit in it, both as lewd Epicures, corrupting themselves, and as false
Doctors mis-instructing others.

First, they sit so in this seat, as they make it notorious unto the whole
world, that they are as lewd Epicures corrupting themselves. They add by all
possible endeavor, Transgression unto sin, as some do add Drunkenness to
Thirst; and when they have so done, they sit them down in the seat of the
scornful, that they may take their case there, yea it may be that they may
fall a sleep there also. Oh this ease-full sleep of sin may well be called
(as says the Greek Poets) (...), Deaths brother, or, if you will, a dead
sleep. The Apostle, Romans 11, 8. calls it (...), the spirit of slumber.

These are they who have their souls the more desperately sinne-sicke, because
they feel not themselves sick at all. They have as the Schoolmen speak,
Conscientiam tranquillam, et malam, a conscience quiet, but evil; like unto an
incurable Fistula whose outward part seems sound and cured, but the inward
coare is rotten and putrified (...), such as have their consciences seared up
with a hot iron: so as all sense is mortified in them.

It is a point well worthy our observing, that the more ease we think to find
in sin, the further are we off from any case at all. A Man that walks, and
becomes weary of walking, thinks to find ease by standing still, but lo;
standing' still, as we have heretofore been taught, is worse then walking: A
Man that is weary of standing still, supposes to find ease by sitting down:
but behold, to sit down makes him in a worse case then when he stood: A
man who is once entered into the way of sinners, cannot get out unless he
walk: for as-much as when there is no moving, there cannot possibly be any
removing from sin; and he that sits must first Rise and Stand, before he
can Walk.

He then that Walks, has but one step to repentance, namely, coming
forth: he that Stands, seems to have Two: walking and coming forth: but
he that sits has Three: first Standing, then walking, and in the end
Coming forth. It is therefore a matter not of pleasure, but of terror thus to
sit.

Secondly, the wicked sit in the seat of the scornful, as false Doctors
mis-instructing others. This they practice either by Voice, which seems to
be a speaking example: or by Example which may be called a dumb voice.

The fourth thing that I am to handle is, that the godly do not sit in this
seat. They do not sit in it, first, bebecause they are careful not to
corrupt themselves in this Epicurious ease, in security committing thereby,
even capital crimes, and enormous transgressions. But they rather on the other
side, bear a watchful regard over every part and member about them, that they
may not offend or do amiss: Over their Ears, that they may hear no
uncleanness: over their Eyes, that they may behold no wantonness: over their
Hands, that they may do no violence: over their Feet, least the Mis-going of
any step should prove a Misdoing against their Maker: and so consequently
over their whole, both outward and inward man: that neither may offend God,
since both were made to serve God. But if at any time they do amiss (as he
must needs do amiss in so saying, who says he never does amiss:) No
sooner does the Grace of God knock at the gate of their heart, as the face of
CHRIST looked upon Peter: but they go Math. 26. 75.
out of their sins, as he went out of the Iudgementhall, and with him do
they weep bitterly. Math. 2^. 75. That as the Tears of the Vine (as Pliny
reports) do cure Plin. lib. 23.
Leprosy, So the tears of themselves which are graffed into the true Vine
CHRIST JESUS, may salve the Leprie of their sins.

They labor that the speech of Saint Cyril concerning Peter may be verified of
them, Locum flendo recepit, quem negando perdiderat: He received that place by
Weeping, from which he has fallen by Denying.

There is a twofold denying, or denial of CHRIST, the one, Ore, by Word: ^us
did Peter deny, ^ne other, Opere, by Work: thus more or less every sinner
denies him: if the Godly at any time have incur^ed Gods displeasure, by the
Tears of sin; they forthwith indeauor again (...) be reconciled by the
Tears of repentance: that it may so come to pass, That the heads of the
Dragons Psalm 74. 13.
may be drowned in the waters: that is, that sins as venomous and bloody as
the Dragon, may be drowned by the watery streams of their flowing tears,
they are so far from fitting still in their Sin, as Herod did in his
Sin, which concerned his brother Philipps wife, as they rather deal with
sin after the acting of it, as Ammon did with his Sister Thamar, after he
had d^slowred her, who forthwith, first hated her; secondly, exceedingly more
then he before had loved her: thirdly, he put her 2. Sam. 13. verse. 15. 17.
out of doors: fourthly, he locked the door after her, least she should
come in again.

Secondly, they do not sit in this seat, as misinstructing others by false
Doctrine, because concerning their Voice, they utter with it, words that are
gracious always, and powdered with Salt. Coloss. 4. 6. Touching their Example,
it is Romans 13. 12.
not the works of darkness, as of them who have no delight to sit in
darkness, and in the shadow of death, Luke 1. 79. But it is the example of
such, as have on them the Armor of light. Whereby they may and do so shine
before Romans 13. 12.
men, as they seeing the light of their good example, may glorify their Father
which is in Heaven: As they themselves look also to be glorified with their
father which is Matthew. 5 16.
in Heaven.

Hitherto have the Evidence of the Godly man's Virtues appeared unto us by the
Negative: Now comes i^ to be opened by the Affirmative contestation, verse.
2. of this Psalm. But his delight is in the law of the Lord, and in his law
does he meditate day and night. In which words I observe, first, the Pleasure
which the Godly man takes in the law of the Lord, in that he delights in
the law^ of the Lord.

Secondly, the pains which he takes about the law of the Lord, for that, in
his law he does meditate day and night. In the pleasure which the Godly man
takes in the law of the Lord, may I consider first the object of it: the law
of the Lord: Secondly, the act of it, he delights in it. The object
offers it self to be explained in two points: first, whose law this is: of
the Lord: secondly, what law this is here spoken of.

The pleasure then which the Godly man takes in the law of the Lord, comes
in the first place to our handling, and that in the object of it in that branch
thereof, whose law it is: the Law of the Lord: that is, the Law of GOD
himself, who is the Creator of all things, called Lord, in a sense of
Super-eminency, or Excellency, because he is Apoc. 19. 6.
the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords: A King, unto whom all Kings are
Lieutenants: a Lord, unto whom Prouer. 8. 15. Prouer. 8. 16.
all Lords are Vassalls: a King, by whom Kings reign, and Princes decree
justice. A Lord, by whom Princes rule, and the Nobles and Judges of the Earth.

That which the Philosopher speaks of Rhethoricke may be said of Law,
making that, in making of a law, Aristo. Rhetor. lib. 2. cap. 1.
whereby the manners of men are to be squared, that it may be of more
heedfull regard, and important efficacy: three things are necessarily
required: Wisdom, whereby he may be beloved: Love, whereby he may be
respected: Authority, whereby he may be feared: these three things may
abundantly be found in this sovereign and supreme Lawgiver the Lord, here
spoken of; who has first Wisdom, in regard whereof, he may and must be
believed, being not only, ipsa sapientia, as Saint Augustine speaks; Wisdom
it self, and that Aug. de cognitio^. verae vitae.
essential in himself, but containing in him all the deriuatiue treasures of
all Wisdom for others. The Wisdom then of all other creatures, it is but a
Deriuatiue from Coloss. 2. 3.
his Primitive, a Branche from his Root, a Spark from his Fire, a Stream
from his Fountaine^: and to conclude, as a Beam from his light, Qui idem
intelligibilibus quod Sol sensibilibus, says Greg. Nazian: Who is the same to
Greg. Nazian. de Theolog. lib. 2.
matters intelligible, that is, the object of understanding: of which kind,
Wisdom seems to be: which the Sun is to things sensible. Things sensible
without the light of the Sun should not be perceived: so things
intelligible without the rays of Gods wisdom could never possibly be
conceived. GOD is therefore not only wise, but first Primarily: secondly,
Absolutely: thirdly, Essentially-onely-wise: and therefore ought he as a wise
Lawe-maker, to be believed. Iud. ver. 25.


Secondly, he has Love, in regard whereof he is to be respected, in whom
mercy and judgment be so cou^^ed Psalm. 145. 9.
together, as his mercy is over all his works. Who so punishes a Sinner, as
he has no pleasure therein, but desires rather that he may live then dye.
Who is so brightness Ezech. 18. 2.
and Amber; a testification of his love: and Fire, an argument of his wrath; as
his Love by Brightness and Amber is to be found in his upper, his Wrath by
Fire Ezech. 8. 2.
in his nether parts. Who is said, to love the world: If you would know how;
Much, every way, in regard of the boundless measure of it: So, that is in
such abundance as cannot be expressed: Touching the effect of it, that he
gave his only begotten son: in respect of the end, that whosoever believes
in him, should have life everlasting. John. 3. 16.


Worthily therefore was it spoken by Saint Bernard. Bernar. decon sid. lib. 5.
Quid est Deus? quod ad se, ipse nouit, quod ad ecclesiam spectat salus. What
is God? what he is to himself, he knows best himself: but to his Church
or Elect, he is Sauing-health: And because of his love to us, is God to be
loved again of us, as a kind Lawe-giuer, having love, whereby he is to be
respected.

Thirdly, he also has Authority, whereby he is to be feared. Needs must
Authority attend upon him, who was so the Author of all things by his wise
omnipotency, as he ever since has been, and yet is, the supporter of all
things by his mighty word. To the Heb^. 1. 3.
scepter of whose regiment, the Knee, and Hand, and Heart of every creature,
are so pliant, as he is called the Lord of Hoastes, because the Hoastes of all
his Creatures are at the beck of his Providence, ready to execute the pleasure
of his will, not only among Angels and Men, Beasts, Fowls, Fishes, Worms,
Trees and Plants: but even the very senseless, yea liuelesse creatures
themselves. Thus the fire commanded by him, burnt up Sodom and Gomorrah.
Genes. 19. The water enjoined by him, drowned the whole world. The Earth
appointe^ Genesis 7.
by him, opened her mouth, swallowed up Dathan, and Number. 16. Psalm. 106. 17.
covered the congregation of Abiram. Not the Rams of war, but the sound of
Rams horns enabled by him, beat down the walls of Jericho. Josh. 6.
Haile-stones, which for their bigness are called great stones Ioshuah 10. 11.
ordained by him, did discomfit and ouer-throwe the army of the five Kings,
which were combined against Joshua, so as more dyed by them, then they whom the
children of Israel slew with the sword. Josh. 10. Thus the Stars in their
courses fought against Siserah. Judge. 5. 10. Thus to conclude, as it appears
by the Ecclesiastical Histories, the Heavens and winds fought for Theodosius,
that good Christian Emperor; In so much as the Poet says of him:

O nimium dilecte Deo, cui militat ether, Claudian.

Et coniurati veniunt ad Classica, venti. O Gods beloved! whom powers Aeriall,
And winds come armed to help, when thou do call.


He has therefore authority that he may be feared.

The second thing is, what this Law is, or what is meant by it. By Law, in
this place is not only to be understood the Moral law of Moses, consisting
of Ten precepts: which with so great terror of Thundering and Lightning, and
Smoke, which ascended as the Smoke of a Exodus 20.
Furnace, and a thick Cloud also upon the Mountain, and with the sound of a
Trumpet, was delivered by GOD unto his peculiar people Israel: But by a
Tropicall speech, of the part, put for the whole; By Law in this place, is
intended all the whole Scripture of God, all the holy Book of God, which
comes not by any private motion, but as the holy men of God have been
moved, and inspired by the holy Ghost, 2. Pet. 1. 20. 21. So far (as one
describes a Law) as the whole Scripture is, Ratio summa quae inbet Ciccro
del^gi. 1.
eam quae facienda: prohibetque contraria: A chief reason which commands
those things which are to be done, and forbids the contrary: which is to
be found, not only in the Morrall law of Moses, but even through-out the
whole sacred volumne of Gods Book.

The second thing is the Act of this pleasure, his delight is in it. A Law it
is, worthy; thrice worthy, yea, infinitely worthy to be delighted in, both in
regard of the Author of it, which is God: as also in respect of the Authority
of it, which is manifold.

First, we are to delight in the law of the Lord, in respect of the Author of
it, which is God, not any false or imagined idolatrous God of the Heathen; but
the true, certain, and eternal God of Heaven.

The Heathen, that they might make men to take the more delight in their
laws, have grounded the original of them upon some God. So has Numa among
the Romans on the Nimphe Aegeria: Solon among the Athenians on Minerua:
Lycurgus among the Lacedaemonians on Appollo: Minos among them of Crete on
Jupiter: Charondas among the Carthaginians on Saturn: Osyris among the
Aegiptians on Mercury: Zamolxis among the Scythians on Vesta, and others the
like. But all these were Idols; the Idaea and fantasy whereof, was first
invented and hatched in the brains of men: and as an Idol is nothing in the
world: so these laws had their groundwork laid 1. Corin. 8. 4.
upon nothing, But the Law of the Lord here spoken of, ought to be more wisely
and gravely pondered of us, and delighted in by us, as that which issues from
that Author, who is the only God, who is the Father, of whom are all 1. Corin
8. 6.
things, and we in him

Secondly, we are to delight in this law, in regard of the Authority of it: as
in that law which is most fully authorized by the Antiquity, Justice, Wisdom,
Truth, Pleasure, Profit of it.

The serious meditation of all which, ^ suppose should cause the Law of the
Lord to deal with us, as the Church did with Christ: of whom Christ says, in
regard of the surplussage of his love toward her, My Sister, my Spouse, thou
have wounded mine heart with one of thine eyes, and with a Chain of thine
neck. Ca^t. 4. 9.


This Chain, therefore, wherein the Excellency of the Law of the Lord
stands, cosisteth of the six forementioned Linckes. Whereof the first is,
that it is most Ancient. Long was it before the Paeinims Gods were extant. The
last writers of the Hebrew Canon, which were almost six hundred years before
the coming of Christ, namely Aggaeus, Zacharias, Malachias, Esra, flourishing
about the time of the beginning of the Persian Monarchy, were before the times
of Thucydides, Pherecides, Xenophon, Hellanicus, Herodotus, the most ancient of
the Gentil Historians: the matter and subject of whose writings, is chiefly the
^ests of the Persian Monarchy. And although we grant that Orpheus, Hesiodus,
Homer, being Poets, and Lycurgus the Lacaedemonian Lawgiver, were more ancient
then they: yet there-with-all do we urge, that (as an undeniable truth) it
may be granted, that the eldest of them fell short of the days of King
Solomon, which Solomon lived after Moses, the first penman of the Bible, five
hundred years. After the time of which Moses, many of the Cradles of the
Heathen Gods, as of Vulcan, Meroury, Apollo, Ceres, Aesculapius, Hercules,
Castor, E^phemer in Genca. Deor.
Pollux, were for a long space vnrocked, because themselves were unborn, much
less could the names of Gods be then borne by them. Jupiter also, Neptune,
Pluto, whom the Orator, de natura deorum, calls Deos maierum T^ll. de natu.
deorum.
gentium. The Godds of greater, or, elder nations, succeeded the times of
Abraham, who lived about five hundred years before Moses. He which desires a
furth^^ ^^tisfaction concerning this point, let him read Euseb^^^^^^
preparatione Euangelica. lib. 9. cap. 2. 3. 4. By all which it ^^^eareth, that
the Law of the Lord has Antiquity, (...) consequence Authority, for the which
we ought (...) light in it. It is a thing naturally given unto us, to delight
in that which is ancient, vidz. Coins, Statues, Ringes, Pictures, or any other
Monument; semblably does it be-come, or rather behooue us, to delight in this
Law of the Lord, because (a first Lincke of this Chain) it is most Ancient.

The second Link of this Chain, whereby the Law of the Lord is so adorned as
we are to delight in it, is that it is a most just law; giving to every man
as his deserts shall be: Wherein consists the very d^ist and intendment of
the Law of the Lord. Iustitia (says Justinian) Justinian. Institut. lib. 1.
est constans and perpetua voluntas, etc. Justice is a constant and perpetual
will of giving to every man, that which is his due: which Justice may
abundantly be found in the Law of the Lord, because all the Judgments
thereof are righteous altogether, Psalm. 19. 9.

The same Justinian in the same place, says, That the precepts of a Law,
according to this Justice, be, to live honestly: Justinian. Ibidem.
not to hurt another; to give to every man that which belongs unto him: which
precepts if they be not to be found in this Law of the LORD, they are not
surely elsewhere to be sought for. Every Leaf, Page, yea I had almost said
Line, are full of such motives, full of such admonishments. We ought therefore
to delight in this Law of the Lord, because (a second Link of this Chain) it
is most just.

The third Link of this Chain, whereby the Law of the Lord is so adorned, as
we should delight in it, is that it is a most wise Law, so wise as it gives
Wisdom even to them who are hardlye capable of Wisdom, even to the simple
ones. S(...) the Law of the Lord, as Psalm. 19. 7.
what soever is Wise amo(...) entiles is borrowed, and as Clemens Alexandrin
(...); robbed from thence. At Clem Alexan.
the Well of the Law (...)ets, Plato (being a Prince of the Gentill Wise-m^^
(...) so full a draught, as he is called, Alter Moses, and, Moses Atticus,
another Moses, and an Athenian Moses: and Justinius Martyr, an Author Justin.
Mart. Apolog. 2.
so ancient, as he is well-neare Apostolic, witnesses these words. Proinde
et Plato cum dixit (aileioe (...),) a Mose id acceptum protulit. Therefore
Plato also when he said (the fault is in him that did chose; but God is
without fault:) produced it as received from Moses. Seeing therefore all the
wisdom of the whole World, Jews, Christians, and Gentiles, depend on this
Law of the Lord, we are to esteem it as a maine point of our duty, to
delight in it, because (a third Link of this Chain) it is most wise.

The fourth Lincke of this Chain, whereby the Law of the Lord is so adorned,
as we should delight in it, is, that it is a most true law, wherein never
was, nor shall be found any contradiction. So perfect is it in the true
accomplishment of the Truth thereof, as it is said to be a perfect law. To
the which if any man shall add any Psalm. 19. 7.
thing; GOD shall add unto him the plagues which are written in this Book, if
any man shall diminish any thing, GOD shall take away his part out of the Book
of life, and from the holy City. Apoc. 22. 18. 19.


Here alone is to be found the true VRIM and THVMMIM: the VRIM, that is
light, and the THVMMIM, that is, Perfection: or if you please, the light of
perfect truth, or the true perfection of light. We must therefore acknowledge,
that we ought to delight in the law of the Lord, because (a fourth Lincke of
this Chain) it is most true.

The fifth Link of this Chain, whereby the Law of the Lord is so adorned, as
we should delight in it, is, that it is a most Pleasant law, not according to
the floating and uncertain pleasure of the Flesh, but according to the
constant and permanent pleasures of the Spirit. In which sense it is said to
be Sweeter then the honey, and the honycomb: Psalm. 19. 10.
A Sweetness not Sensual, belonging to the Flesh, but Intellectual,
appertaining to the Spirit. Every way of Sin, and transgression is a way of
Darkness; but the way of GODS Law, is the way of light, as holy Peter worthily
witnesses. We also have a most sure word, to the which ye do well, that ye
take heed as unto a light, that shines 2 Pet. 1. 19.
in a dark place. As therefore it is without comparison a more Delightsome
thing, to walk in a Lightsome, then in a Darkesome way: so much does the way
of Gods Law excel in pleasure the way of Lawless transgressors, (a fifth
Lincke of this Cheyne) that, we are to delight in it because it is most
pleasant.

The sixth and last Lincke of this Cheine, whereby the Law of the Lord is so
adorned, as we should delight in it, is, that it is a most profitable Law: It
is more to be desired, then gold, yea then much fine gold: yea it is dearer
then thousands Psalm 19. 1. Psalm. ^ 19.
of gold and silver. It is a (...), A thing which is profitable to every use: a
VVatch, or Dial whereby we are to spend our Time: A Fan which winnoweth the
chaff of sin from the grain of Gods graces. The Staff of out journey toward
Heaven, more fortunate then that of Jacob was, whereby he passed over Jordan: A
Star which leads the Godly wise to the Heavenly Bethel, where Christ is;
as the Blazing star brought the Wise Men of the East to Bethelem, where
Christ was. This Law of the Lord is to the poor, Pure gold, whereby they may
be made spiritually Rich; to the naked White rayments; to cloth their souls:
to the blind, spiritual eye-salue to recover their eyesight. And as Saint
Hierome says of Manna, Hier^. Apoca. 3. 18.
that it had the relish of every good taste; so may it be said concerning this
Law, that it has the fruit of every Good benefit: (A sixth Lincke of this
Cheine) that we are to delight in this Law of the LORD, because it is most
profitable.

Sithence then the Word of God, the Law of the Lord, here spoken of, appears
unto us by the matter promised to be a most Ancient, Just, Wise, True,
Pleasant, Profitable, Law, Oh how ought? (as the hearts of the two Disciples,
which went to Emaiu; burnt within them to hea e Luke 25. 3^.
the conference of Christ with them.) How ought I say, also our Hearts our
Souls and Spirits to be inflamed, enkindand burn within us, in an holy and
incessant zeal toward this Word of God, the Law of the Lord here spoken of?
How ought we more earnestly to long for the Waters of the Well of Life, then
David did for the waters of the Well of Bethleem? and when we have them, never,
oh never, to deal with these Waters of Life as the Isralites did with the
bread of Heaven? which (oh be it far from us so to do) loathed it. But much,
oh much better, shall we provide for our selves, if with the woman of Samaria
we shall say still, and again, LORD give me to drink of these John 4. 15.
Waters, crying out for these Waters, which bring us to a Crown of Life, as
CHRIST did on the Cross of his death, Sitio: I thirst; and again I thirst,
and euer-more, I thirst. Yea let us so thirst after them that we may follow
them: let us so follow them as we may attend on them, let us so attend on them
as we may continue both in the Hearing and Reading of this Law of the Lord,
the two true streams of these waters, whereby we with them, and they with us
do spring up, unto life everlasting. John 4. 14.


Two sorts of men there be who not rightly relishing the delight-some
sweetness of this Law, do sail to have the waters thereof to become the
Waters of comfort, unto them. Psalm. 23. 2.


The one sort be Recusants at all to hear it. The other sort Delingentes in
hearing it.

The Recusants to hear it at all, are either such as do it of Superstitious
contempts, as the Papists and Scismatiques, or such as do it of a Careless
neglect as the Worldlings and Epicures,

The Delinquentes in hearing it, consist principally in a twofold miscarriage:
the one of a Wandering thought: the other of a slumbering eye.

First, a Wandering thought, sets (as it were) a false pias to the
affections of the hearer. Whereby (when he ought to attend his ear, and
intend his mind to the Word delivered) he is mis-drawn some other way. Thus
the wanton neglects the Word, and thinks on his pleasure: the Miser on his
coin: the Drunkard on his cups: the Glutton on his dish: the Prodigal on
his game: the proud on his garments, his gate or his glass; abusing the
presence of GOD herein so much the more, in that When GOD is a spirit and not
a body. John, 4. 24. they are present in body only, and not in spirit.

When we preach, it is not we that speak, but, it is the spirit of God that
speaks in us. We, alas, are but the means, God is the Author: we be
the Instruments, the Holy Ghost the is the inspirer. The Message which we
bring, it is not the Word of man, without God, but it is the Word of God
within Man.

Oh with what willingness do we hear matters in Civil Assemblies, at the
Star Chamber, or such like? though the discourse of them be continued for
some hours together, being but the only invention of Man, and concerning
matters Temporal, for this life alone: and which happily appertain to other
Men, and not our selves; And shall we, who are of the Church of God, the true
Star Chamber indeed; whereof the lower room is the Church Militant here on
earth, having the Stars to be the roof thereof abone; whereof the upper
room is the Church Triumphant in Heaven, having the Stars to be as the
Pauement thereof below: shall we I say, be so dull eared? coldly affected?
wandering-minded? in the hearing of those matters, and that but one hour
alone, whose inspiration is from God above, which concern matters spiritual,
and a better life to come, and not so much belonging to others, as dearly and
nearly appertaining to our selves.

The second Delinquent in hearing the Word: the Law of the Lord here spoken
off, is he that has a slumbring eye, using his seat in the Church, as a seat
if not of scorners: forementioned; yet of sleepers, and the voice of the
Preacher as a pleasant song to sing him asleep. A singing indeed Ezech. 33. 32.
it is which may prove unto such (without Gods special preventing grace) as
the stinging of the Adder, which brings a man first into a pleasant sleep,
and into death immediately after it. This sleeping while Gods laborers are
sowing: that so the Enemy Satan may sow his Tares among the Wheat: it is
alas, and again I say alas, ouervsuall. Wherein the subtle malice of the
old-Serpent may appear unto us, who being not able to keep the Word from us,
as in the time of Ignorance, keeps us from the Word by this sleepy
Negligence. It is Morbus pandemicus, a Pandemicall disease; common,
ouer-spread, ordinary, usual, and that not in some, but (a thing to be
uttered with grief) well nigh in all congregations, as the practice almost of
all men proves it, their consciences witnesses it, the Pastors of God from
the places of their function (to their grief) have too often observed it, and
God himself who is present Ever, and in all places, sleeps never, and in no
place, knows it, and will (without our amendment preuenteth it) no doubt
punish us for it. If we look in a glass, and see but a spotte in our
countenance, we will not suffer it to remain there, but forthwith remove it:
behold* we have at this time by the glass of the Word discovered unto us a
most gross, and unseemly blemish, and that as it were in our Faces, because as
the Face is most in sight, so is this done in the Face of the Church, in the
public view of the whole Congregation. Oh let us therefore speedily labor to
wash and wipe it away, that so it may be redressed. If it comes of
Infirmity, let us pray against it; yea let us fast against it also; that so
Fasting may make us less heavy, and our Prayer may make us more lively. If it
comes of willingness, either because we resist it faintly: or else because
we admit it gladly; what then can be said of such but that they are as
Idolhearers, as the Prophet speaks of Idol sheapheards, such Hebr. 4. 1^.
as deserve A Woe not only to be denounced against them, but also to be
imposed upon them: It is said that the word of God is lively: and shall we be
in a dead sleep at the hearing of it? Mighty in operation, and shall it show
no might in us, to hold us waking? Sharper then a two edged sword: and shall we
be duller then the earth it self in receiving of it? which enters even to
the dividing a sunder of the soul and the spirit, of the ^oynts and the
marrow, and is a discerner of the thoughts and intents of the heart: and shall
we be more hard then an ^stamant in with-standing it? Oh let that be far
from (...) unless peradventure, we delight to have God to be far from us,
as we in sleeping, while he is speaking, are far from him. Let us
remember that we are The children of the light, and of the day, and not of the
night, and of darkness. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 9. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 5.
and therefore are we not to sleep as the Children of the Night and
Darkness use to do: but to awake as the Children of the Day and of the light
ought to do.

The second thing is, the Pains that the Godly man takes about the Law of the
Lord, after his Pleasure in this Law to be handled: And in his Law does he
meditate day and night.

Wherein I may observe four points. Whereof the first is, the practice of his
pains, He does Meditate: The second is the subject of his pains, In his Law
The third perseverance, Day and Night: The fourth vigilance, in that he is said
so to do, not only in the day, which GOD has ordained for Man to work in:
but also in the Night, which GOD has appointed Man to rest in.

First am I then to speak of the Practice of the pains of the Godly-One, in
that he does Meditate. Without this Meditation, the Law of the Lord either in
time will be forgotten, whereby we shall become unmindful of it; or else will
prove as a tallent wrapped up in a napkin and buried in the earth, Utterly
unfruitful unto us, being as the fire in the flint, without smiting, or as
the sent in the Pomander without chaffing, both of them fruitless and vselesse
also.

This Meditation, it is the third step of a truly converted and rightly
informed Christian. Whereof the first step is to hear the Word of GOD
readily: the second to Remember it dilligently: the third to meditate on it
seriously. This Meditation or calling our selves to remembrance, is like that
rumination or chewing of the cudde; to be found in the clean beasts, whereas
They Deuteronomy. 14. 6. 7. 8.
which chewed not the cudde were unclean.

This Meditation it is as a Looking-glass, or rather the very Eye of the soul
whereby she seeeth her self, and looks into her whole estate, her riches,
her poverty, her gifts, her defects: her safety, her danger: her way, her
journey in the way, and the place whereunto she iournyeth. It is the Key
which vnlocketh the very door of our heart, where all our books of accounts
do lie.

It fares with the Word of GOD, as with the Womb of a woman, where there is
first Hearing, this may be likened to Conception: secondly Remembrance, this
answer^^h to Retention: Thirdly Meditating, this agrees with Quickening.
Without al which together, Conception, Retention, Quickening, the Child must
needs come liuelesse into the World: So also without this Hearing, Remembering,
Meditating, the Word must needs be fruitless unto us. This Meditation of it
be rightly used, will not only become as As a bridle of temperance to
restrain our mis-doings, but even a^^ As the clubbe of Hercules, to beat and
bear down all the monstrous brood of awlesse transgressions, as that is said
to quell, and subdue the Monsters of the World.

It would first beat and bear down the Monster of Covetousness, by a
Meditation, that the possessions of this life are sickle; that the lives of the
possessors are brittle; that the transitory things o^ his World may be either
taken from us as they were from Job; or else that we may be taken from them,
as the covetous minded Worldling to whom it was said, Thou Fool this night
shall they fetch away thy soul from thee Luke 12. 20. that such as are
covetous are Earthly minded, Philip. 3. 19. and thereby have their hearts
cleaving unto the Earth, for which cause must they much more become an
Abomination unto the LORD then those Creeping things which naturally go with
their Bellies upon the ground. Leuit. 11. 20. that though they have some
Kingdom, yet have they but a small portion of the Earth, and that the least
fixed Star in the Firmament as the Astrologians testify, is eighteen times
bigger then the whole Earth: that the Heathen Man could say by the Light of
Nature, (...). An insatiable desire of getting, is the greatest mischief among
men: that Covetousness worshippeth Angels, not of Glory, but of Gold; even the
Creature for the Creator, making Goods (as they call them) their Chiefest Good:
and Gold, a God, because Covetousness is Idolatry, Coloss. 3. 5. That to
conclude, ^iuitiarum homm^ non sints ponitur vllus, Man has no end in getting,
or in his desire to get. But as he which has the dropsy, the more he
drinks, the more he thirsts: So the Earthly-minded Cormorant the more he
possesses, the more he coueteth: multiplying his possession, but not
increasing his joy, as we read, Esaias. 9. 3. of multiplying the nations, and not
increasing their joy.

Secondly, this Meditation would beat and bear down the Monster of Ambition,
by pondering that though the Ambitious man be growing, so long as he is living,
yet does he no more then the slimy and brutish Crocodile; that God resists
the proud, and gives grace, to the humble. Thus resisted he proud Nimrod,
Saul, 1 Pet. 5. 5.
Haman, Holofernes, Herod, etc. Thus gave he grace to humble Abraham, David,
Mordochee, Iudeth, John Baptist: That it is not the Sweet Fig Tree, nor the
Fat Oliue-tree, nor the Pleasant Vine; but the tearing and renting Bramble,
that presumptiously usurps The dignity Judge. 9. 8. 9. 10. Phauorinus.
of a Kingdom, that the ambitious man, according to the fage judgment of a
wise Gentile, is, Ridiculus, odiosus, miserabilis: to be laughed at, to be
hated, to be pittyed, To be laughed at, is he because he seeks after
honors, not measuring his own strength, whether he can be able to bear them:
to be hated, because he coueteth to be aloft rather for the glory and honor
of himself, then for the good and lucre of his Country: to be pitied is
he, because it fares with him for the most part, as with the Snaile, who it
may be climbeth up to the highest branch of the tree, yet never attayneth to
the full top thereof, because the winds (happily) unto whose force, it is
then most exposed, puffs and blows it down in whom is verified that
saying. Tolluntur in altum, Vt lapsugrauiore ruant. Ciaudia. lib. 1.



They are more advanced in their raise, that they may be more bruised in their
fall.

The Ambitious man is an eyesore to others, and a sore to himself as one
says: Honores tumores, Honors are Tumors,
and Tumors are sores. -- Esaias. 1. 6.



Thirdly, this Meditation would beat and bear down the Monster of
drunkenness, by weighing that it makes a Man a Beast; yea worse then a Beast,
for as much as a Beast takes that measure which is convenient for Nature, and
then is satisfied: but Man seeks not only to content Nature by Natural
appetite: but to quench Nature by Artificial quaffings, being herein far
more beastly then the Beast, in that the Beast is still sustained on his
legs, whereas Man cannot stand, but, while his head waueth, Brain swimmeth,
Heart fails him, he reeleth, falls by his reeling, and lies still being
fallen: that on a Drunkard, which cannot bear it, the world cries shame, as
on him whose legs foundereth, hands shakes, head reeleth, countenance is
disfigured, eyes inflamed, tongue swollen, belly belcheth, and whole man (to
conclude) is become a scorn of men, because he seems to be the outcast of
the people: that against a Drunckard which can bear it, God denounces a Woe.
Woe be to them Esaias. 5. 20.
that are mighty to drink Wine, and to them which are strong to power in
strong drink: that Saint Chrysostom calls Ch^^st. Sen^ca.
the Drunkard, (...), a Living, not Body, but Carcass: That Drunkenness is
nothing else (as one speaks) but a voluntary madness: a madness is it so
dangerous, as it has caused the great Conqueror of the World, Alexander the
great, never therein to conquer himself, but to be conquered by his
passions, so as he slew his most dear friend Clytus, burnt the renowned
Quint. Cur^^.
City Persepolis; stabbed his Physician, and committed many other filthy and
infamous deeds: that (to conclude) the Drunckard, as writes Saint Ambrose;
Though Ambros.
he swalloweth down the Wine, is swallowed up of the Wine, abhorred of God,
despised of Angels, derided of men, destitute of Virtue, confounded of Denills,
and trampled upon by the feet of all men.

The like may be said, that this Meditation will do with Gluttony,
Incontinencie, Malice, and that grand sin (of which Trismegistus says, that
it is, (...), the great disease of the Soul) I mean of Mercurius Trismegist.
Atheism; which execrable, rather then miserable sect, though they be both,
because they give little heed to the Book of GOD, or the sacred volume of the
holy Scriptures, if they would a little more strictly, draw home the loose
reins of their inconsiderate Sensuality, and meditate somewhat more
seriouslye on the books of Nature, contained in the greater volume of the
great World; and the smaller Tome of Man himself, who is called the Little
World; they could not choose but assume and challenge to themselves that name,
which the Scripture gives them, that they are fools. The fool has said in
his heart, there is no God.

By this then which has been spoken, may in some Psalm. 14. 1.
measure appear, the danger which comes by the neglect; the good that
arises by the Practice of Meditating. If Philosophy be the study of Wisdom;
and the knowledge of Christianity, be the true Wisdom, then be Christians
alone the true Philosophers: one says of the life of a Philosopher, that it is
a perpetual Meditation: much more then ought the life a Christian so to be:
as here we see, that the task of the Godly man in his pains, is, to
meditate.

The second thing is, the subject of his pains in his law: before we
mentioned the a^te of meditating, outspread, and at large more generally ^now
are we to consider the same, as it is reduced and bound up unto the subject
more specially, in his law does he meditate. David does measure the manage
of a Godly man's behavior by the carriage of his own virtue. I will meditate in
thy precepts, and consider thy ways. Yea and his meditation has Psalm. 119. 15.
been inflamed with the fire of that zeal, that he has Cleaued unto his
testimonies, and my hands will I lift up unto thy commandments which I have
loved, and my study shall be in thy slatutes. Ibid. ver. 48.
What means that talking of the laws of the Lord, when Ibid. ver. 48.
we tarry in the house, when we walk in the way, when we lie down and when
we rise up, that we should bind them for a sign upon our hand and set them as
frontlets b^twixt our eyes, and that we should write them upon the posts of our
houses and upon our gates? Deutero. 6. 7. 8. 9. but that as ver. 6. they should
be in our heart, that is that we should meditate in them, engrauing them
religiously in the tables of our hearts, as the Pharisees bare them about
superstitiously in the skerts of their hattes. We must not only lay them up
in our hearts, but so as we ponder them being Matt. 23. 5.
there laid up: as Mary did Luke. 2. 51. Not to hear this Law of the Lord at
all, is to be like Malchus without an ear to hear, and not to remember is to
be like Messala without a memory: to remember it and not to meditate John. 18.
10.
on it, is to be like Nabal without an heart. 1. Samuel. 25. 37.

The third thing is his Perseverance Day and Night. Perseverance is the garland
that crowns all our actions. This is that which brings the Church to her
rest after her labors: to her Peace after her conflict: to her Glory after her
misery: to her Heavenly crown after her bloody crosses and torturing passions,
even (...), he which overcomes: as may plentifully appear.

If we would be the beloved of God as David was, and Apoc cap. 2. 3.
his name signifies, then must we do as David did, we must be no truantes
in the school of CHRIST'S Law, but having cunned one lesson, we must covet to
learn another; and still call upon GOD as a good scholar upon his Master, Oh
teach me thy testimonies, teach me thy statutes, teach me thy ways, etc. As
we are the Psalm 119. 1. The^. 5. 5. 2. Pet. 1. 4.
Children of the Day and the Light. So are we to meditate day and night. As
the GODLY are partakers of the Godly nature, So ought they to labor to
approach as near the actions of GOD as may be, to whom the day and night are
both alike: so are they to meditate day and night. GOD which has bounded the
Day with the Psalm. 139. 12.
Night, has set no bound to a godly man's meditation; but he must meditate day
and night, to show that the life of the Godly is no ease-full, but a painful
life, a matter not of sleepy carelessness, but a diligent wat^hfulnesse, where
we must not stand still, like the Sun of Ioshuah: neither go backward, like
the Sun of Hezekiah: but go on like David's Sun, which rejoices as a Giant
to run Psalm. 19. 5.
his course. The four Beasts never cease day nor night, the Lamps of the
Temple burn continually, Timothy must be instant, oportune and importune, in
season and out of season. 2. Tim. 4. 2. The Church in the Canticles sleeps,
but her heart awaketh. Saint Ambrose says, Etiam somnus Ambros.
sanctorum operarius esto, even the sleep of the Saints, let it be a waking or
working: It is nothing to be, first, one that hears the word. Secondly, One
that receives it. Thirdly, Speedily. Fourth, With joy: if fifthly, he shall
be but (...), for a time only: if he shall not also continue to meditate
therein day and night. Matt. 13.


Three chief offenders there be against the intendment of this doctrine.
Whereof the first are such as go on it may be, though with some wavering, in
the day of prosperity: but in the night of adversity, they become like the
Swallow, who in Winter forsakes that house, wherein during the whole season of
the Summer, it has been safely harbored: whose guise is not with Paul, to
rejoice Galath 6. 14. Philip. 3. 14.
in the Cross of Christ: but rather with the worldlings, to be enemies to the
Cross of Christ: For this cause flee they from it, as Moses did from his Rod
turned into a cerpent. Exodus 4. 3.


Fitly may these men be compared to the Grasshoppers, Nahum. 3. 17. Who lay in
the Hedges in the cool of the day: but when the Sun arises, they fly away,
and the place is, not known where they were; so these men, while the cool
shade of prosperity ouer-spred them, as the pleasant Gourd did the head of
Jonas: so long they with Jonas, are exceeding glad: but when the Worm of
corruption is John. 4. 6.
b^ed, and the ground there-with-all so smitten as it withers: and the
fervent East wind breaths, and the sun beats upon them, as upon the head
of Jonas, then they with Jonas are discontented, and wish to dye. Their John.
4. 7. 8.
building up in religion, is like the walls and structure of a certain Castle
that the Chronicles speak of, which fell down as fast in the night, as they
were builded up in the In Vthert Pendragon.
day: so these men run away as swiftly being clowded by the black Night of
Adversity and Persecution: as they ever came, being invited by the lightsome
day of Prosperity and Peace. Oh how far was holy Job from this! wh^ has
been right worthily renowned for his resolute pa^^ence: and meriteth as high a
pitch of praises for his constant perseverance, who not tired with that which
was past, nor oppressed with that which was present, protests in the f^ruour
of his soul, concerning the scourge to come, though he kill me, yet will I
trust in him. Oh inimitable Job. 13. 15.
pattern, of patternlesse perseverance, even in a Gentil as Job was! very
sildome matched, though there be cause sufficient why it should be out-matched
of us Job. 1. 1.
which be Christians, who as we are termed Christians of Christ, so ought we
to be named Godly of God, and by consequence with the godly man, hold on and
continue in all good actions, both in the day of prosperity, and in the night
of adversity, and as here it is required, meditate day and night.

The second sort of offenders, who cross the intendment of this doctrine, are
those who go not on at all, but stand still, who though by likelihood they may
be of a turbulent stirring, and fiery spirit, in awaking the spouse of Christ,
in perplexing the peace of Jerusalem, and infesting the holy rest of the
Church; yet may they be compared to the Wheel or Sail of a Mill, which never
cease turning about all the day, and yet stands in the same place at night,
it was in the morning: men are they, who being not carried forth with any
stream of rightly informed zeal, are like the dead Sea, at a stand: and
therefore with the dead Sea are they easily corrupted. The Angels on the
Ladder, which Jacob saw in his vision, were either such as ascended, or such as
descended; none of them did stand still. So the Church of Christ, as the Ladder
of Jacob, Genesis 28. 12.
in the part Militant, like unto the foot in the part Triumphant, like unto
the top of that Ladder, ought in the members therein contained, to have a
motion of proceeding, no determination (much less action) of standing still.
The life of the Righteous, is called a way, Proverb. 4. 18. What is more
fi^ting with a way, then to go on and to walk? what is less agreeing then to
be at a stand, and to go no further? In the same place, this way is said to
be a light: but not as the light of the Evening, which Ibid.
by little and little declineth, till the Mantell of the Night has vayled the
Earth with darkness, but as the Morning light which shines more and more,
until it be perfect day. Let us therefore with that alacrity of heart, and
intention of spirit, which becomes Christians, embrace August. de ver. Apost.
ser. 15.
that saying of holy S. August. Semper tibi displiceat, id quod es, si vis
peruenire. ad. id quod nondum es, etc. Let that always displease thee, what
thou art, that so thou may come to that thou art not: for, if thou have
begun to please thy self, there thou have made thy stay, Si autem dixeris,
sufficit etia^ periisti. But if thou shall say, it is sufficient, thou have
also per^shed: add always, walk always, profit always: noli in via
remanere; remanet qui non proficit; Stay thou not, or, stand thou not still in
the way: he stays or stands still, who profits not: whereas it is the
guise of the godly man, to meditate day and night.

The third sort of offenders, who cross the intendment of this doctrine, as
they are the last, so be they also the worst, a monstrous crew of such as go
backward, for they are to be deomed no less monsters in grace, then they are
in Nature, whose guise is to go backward. It is not in Gods battle against
Satan, as in Gedeons battle against Madian: for God gives no permission, as
Gedeon did, that such of his Soldiers as were timorous and fearful should go
back, and return home again. God permits it not, Iud. 7. 3.
yet we, I speak it with grief of heart, practice it; for may we not be
challenged, as the Church of Ephesus was, that we have lost our first love?
have not the darkness of Apocal. 2. 4.
Pope^y been deemed to have produced more fruits, then the light (let our
faces blush to hear it, and our hearts intend to amend it) then the light I
say of the Gospel has among us? has not their ignorance been ce^sured to be
more charitable then our knowledge? their Error more fettill, then our Truth?
their barrenness more bountiful, then our fruitfulness? The records, say
they, of Works and Writings, do tes^^fie it: the memo^y of the aged confirm
it: the Edifices of Hospitalls, the foundations of Schools, the M^numents of
Churches and Chapels, the rubbish and ruin of defaced and demolished Abbaies
and Monasteries, and Truth her self, who is naked and cannot be falsified,
with the color of any dissimulation, do not secretly suggest it, but openly
proclaim it: all which has occasioned even the ignorance of those times, to
break forth into joy against us, because though they Esaias. 54. 1.
were desolate, yet have they brought forth more children, then the married
wife. Oh this is a thing not privately whispered, but openly divulged, and
publicly objected unto us! hence the brains of our adversaries have been
working, their pens writing, their presses Printing, and their Pamphlets and
books scattered and sparsed, not only in Gath, and in the streets of
Ascalon, to make the Philistims 2. Sam. 1. 20.
rejoice, and the daughrers of the uncircumcised to triumph. 2. Sam. 1. 20.
but even to drency all Christian eyes with tears of mournings, even so far
as the arms of the world do embrace the name of Christ: that our Religion is
no Religion, it fructifieth not, our Faith no faith, it works not, our
Charity no charity, it feeds not the hungry, clotheth not the naked,
refreshes not the thirsty, visits not the sick, comfort not the
imprisoned, etc. That we our selves are Libertines, because we, while we
have only faith in our mouths, have therewith (as they say) deceit in our
tongues, poison in our Luke 17. 32.
lips, lust in our cies, cruelty in our hands, blood in our feet, revenge in
our heart, and disobedience in all our actions; But oh! that we could rightly
remember Lotts wife, who for that she did but look back, was turned into a
pillar of Salt: but much more shall the punishment of such be sharp, which
shall go back.

The fourth and last thing is his Vigilancie, in that he does meditate not
only in the day which GOD has appointed man to labor in: but in the night
also, which GOD has ordained for man to rest in. The Godly man then meditateth
in the Law of the Lord, not only in the day, but in the night also, whereas
we are backward and untoward to attend it, either day or night. In the night
it is not among us by custom required, that we should hear and hearken unto
the sweet Oracles of God, but according to our received custom, in the time of
the day only; and chiefly (though on other days it may commendably be
practiced) on one in the seven, eucn yt Lords day, and that not the whole day,
but happily some few hours therein: and yet then how drowsily do we attend it?
sluggishly receive it? how sleepily entertain it? as if our Oratories were
turned into Dormitories, Temples into Cradels, and our Churches might
deservedly be called by those names, by which, of the Greeks the Churchyards
have been termed (...), that is, sleeping places, that albeit the word of God
should be of that force, that though we be as dead stones, yet it should make
us living stones: yet we being living men at the hearing thereof, become as
dead Pet. 2. 5.
stones.

We have now finished as God has assisted the Evidence of the virtues of the
Godly man, and that considered in the two membears thereof, both in the
negative and affirmative contestation.

Now am I to assume to mine handling the Recompense of the Godly man's virtues,
the second part of the first general head of this Psalm, which Recompense is
set forth unto us in two branches whereof the former is the declaration and
Tenure of it, verse. 1. Blessed is the man: the other is the further Dilatation,
and Godly man's tittle unto it Verse. 1.
verse. 3. for he shall be like a tree planted by the river, etc. Verse. 3.
the special limbs whereof shall then appear, when we shall come to the
special handling of it.

The Recompense then of the virtues of the Godly is prefixed and published in
the beginning of this Psalm in words very short in sentence, but sweet in
sense, Blessed is the man. If you would know what man, not every man, but that
man, whose most holy virtues (both in keeping himself from evil in that he
walks not in the council of the wicked, stands not in the way, and sets
not in the seat of the scornful as also in betaking him self to a sacred
pleasure in, and a vigilant pains about the Law of the Lord) have been
formerly handled. Before then we heard of his Labors, now are we to hear of
his Wages; besore understood we his Diligence, now are we to understand of
his Recompense, before considered we his Pains, now are we to consider his
Penny; before observed we his Virtue with toil, now are we to observe his
Bliss in triumph. God Who cannot suffer a cup of cold water to go
unrewarded, Mat. 10. 42.
How can he suffer the virtues of his Saints to go away vnrecompensed? He
will not do it, for he is merciful, he cannot do it, for he is just. A
Judge of the whole world is God, the pillars of whose throane are the parts of
David's song, Psalm. 101. 1. Mercy and judgment, a merciful and just judge of
the whole world is he, and shall not the Judge of the whole world do that
which is Genesis 18. 25.
right? A question is it which includes a necessary affirmative illation, as
if so be Abraham should have said it is imposible to be otherwise.

If the appointed Judges in the vain Olympicke games assuredly crowned there
conquerors, much more is it undoubtedly, to be expected that he which is,
Magniregnator Olympi, as the Poet speaks: that is the great commander virgill.
of the large territory of Heaven, will inf^llibly crown his champions, even
with this crown, though not of Gold, or silver, of grass, of oak, or of
bays as in those games wear accustomed, yet of most rich and immortal
blessedness. Blessed is the man.

It was not enough for the knot of Gordius to be in the hand of Alexander the
great: but if he will be conqueror of Asia he must undo it: It suffices us
not also to hear of this blessedness here spoken of, tied up (as it were) in
the knot of general terms, but if we would be possessed of Heaven a far
better atcheiuement then the conquest of Asia, we must untie it; we must losen
it.

That therefore even the inmost playtes of this knot may be the better
untwisted, and laid open unto us, we must know that there is a twofold
Blessedness; whereof the the one is only an apparent or seeming blessedness:
the other an existent or being Blessedness, the one may be compared to the
image of David, with which Michol deceived Saul her fathers Messenge^s, the
other may be likened to true David himself, the one not unlike the serpents
of the Egyptian inchanters, whose rods becams Serpents only 1. Sam. 19. 13.
in show, the other resemble the rod of Aron, which was turned into a Serpent
indeed, the one to conclude is a false blessedness so misdeemed by Men, the
other a true blessedness Exodus 7 12.
so allowed by God.

This apparent or seeming, false Bless^dnesse so misdeemed by men, is a thing
highly prized m(...)ollowed, and greatly delighted in by y^ profane,
vnre(...)at and irregular ones of the world, which y^ they who a^^ the better
sort may y^ beter know as mariners do (...) for the knowledge of Syrtes and
sands, and rocks the rather to decline them: They must understand y^ the limits
of this false blessedness were so largely extended, as Varro a great wise man
among the varro. Mo. (...). dever^^at ^^risti. r^l^g. c^p 18.
Romans reports, that in the books of the Philosophers there were to be
found in his time 288. sects: but my purpose is to reduce them to a three fold
rank: viz: the supposed good things, (...), that is (as they are called) of
Fortune, of the body; of the mind.

First, the World reposeth the chiefest Blessedness in the good things of
Fortune, so principally called, because they are but Fortunae ludibria, like
balls in a Tennis-Court, being bandyed and tossed too and sroe with the
Rackets of speedy and continual change; which howsoever they be many fold in
nature, yet will I bring them as dispersed members to one of these three
heads: Treasures, Honors, Pleasures: which as men be diversely affected, so
they diversely in their several acceptations embrace and prefer: He which is
couetously affected, places his Summum bonum, his chief Happiness in
Treasures: he which is ambitiously inclined, in Honors; he which is
Epicurelike disposed, in Pleasures.

The first good thing therefore (as it is called) of Fortune, is that, which by
the covetous man is deemed the only happy Estate, and the chiefest
Blessedness, consisting in the riches, treasures and possessions of this
life: therefore makes he this to be the bound of his thoughts, and the utmost
pitch of his desires, to have his coffers full with Dives. Luke, 16. his
granaries full with the rich Worldling: Luke^, 12. His Stables full with
Solomon, 1 Reg. 4. His tables full^^ith Belshazar, Dan. 5. His Purse full with
Craesus^ (...) grounds full with Job.

Benzo reports (...) Indians seeing the greediness Benzo.
of the Spaniards (...) said, That Gold was the God of the Spaniards: so may
these earthly and transitory possessions be avouched to be the God of the
covetous, who long for, and labor after riches, not that they may do good
with them, as Abraham and other the holy Patriarckes did, who there-vppon (as
Saint Hierome writes) deserved rather to be called Dispensatores, then ^romc.
Diuites, Stewards to dispose, then Rich men, to possess: or (as S. Chrysostom
says) Dispensatores, rather then Domim: Chrysostom.
Stewards to distribute them, then Lords to appropriate them to their own
use: but they hoord up goods to the alone benefitt (as they think) of
themselves, although they wholly tend to the hurt and endamagement of others:
for this purpose have they their vnsatible affection like unto the flesh-hooke
spoken off, 1. Sam. 2. 13. armed with a threefold tooth, whereof the first may
be said to be Petax, which desires all: the second Rapax, which rauineth all,
the third, Tenax, which holds all.

The covetous minded-man is not only like Hell in the enlarging of his desire,
Abuc. 2. 5. to contain all: but as the same hell which has straightned his
bowels, to retain Abuc. 2. 5.
all, that from him as from Hell there may be no redemption. More vehement (as
S. Basil writes) is Co^etousnesse Basil. Homil. in abquot. scrip^ tu. locor.
then fire, which inkindled in any matter goes out when the matter goes out.
Auarum autem quis retinere poterit. etc. But who can repress the
covetousness, whose desire does burn, as well when he has no matter, as
when he has?

But leave off, Oh thou covetous Miser, more abundant in folly then thou art
in money! though thy money consist in millions of millions: leave off I say to
deem false treasures true blessedness: for how can that be true blessedness
which makes man to become an abomination to his Maker, even as the Mole is
said to be; because with Leuit. 11. 30.
the Mole he is both blind in good things, and bunyed in the earth, in that
he is Earthly-minded. Philip. 3. 19.

How can that be true blessedness? Of which the Heathen man could say (...)
y^ the Love of money is the Mother of al mischief. And Fire and Water may as
well agree together as Blessedness and Mischiese. How can that be Blessedness
which wants in the midst of wealth, as Tantalus thirsted in the midst of
the waters?

For this is a memorable punishment which God imposes on the covetous man,
that he should become like the spyder which has long legs, a great belly,
and a little head: so has the covetous it may be, long fingers to get,
great bags to putt his gettings in, but little wit to use them.

Auaro tam deest quod habet, quam quod non habet.

The Miser as well wants what he has; as what he has not. --

How can that be blessedness, which is said to purchase Not a crown to
dignifie us, but thorns to choke us, snares Math. 13. 22. 2 Timothy 6. 9. 10.
to entangle us, perdition to drown us, and darts of sorrows to pierce us
through. To conclude, how can that be blessedness, whose matter is without
price, for it is dross? whose measure is without abound, for it is insatiable?
whose working is without mercy, for it is barbarous. Cruel is this (...) this
desire of having more, unto others, for it oppresses them: i^ksome also is it
unto the covetous themselves, for it pierces the^. The covetous rich man if
he may be called rich, (who is covetous) is as the Carbuncle which is the name
both of a precious stone and of a loathsome ulcer: so possesses he glistering
wealth, and fretting woe, both of them together: we must therefore elsewhere
seek it, for here is not to be found true blessedness.

The second good thing (as it is termed) of Fortune, is that which the
Ambitious man valueth to beethe Only blessedness, consisting in the honors,
dignities and preferments of this World. The swelling of this humor moves the
Ambitious man with Simon Magus to labor to become (...) Simon Magnus Act. 8. 9.
even Some great man: affecting the truth of that Proverb verified in
himself, which is a custom among the Rabbis, that he may rather be the
head of a Fox, then the tayl^ of a Lion. But cease, O thou ambitious aspirer,
whose deeds are more to be pittyed then state to be admired; cease I say to
censure thy honors as true blessedness, for that which is not in honorato, in
him which is honored, but in honorante, that is, at the disposition of the
mutable common people which Give the honor: how can that be blessedness? That
which, as Saint Arist. in Ethic.
Basil writes d^humilitate causes the mind to be like Basil. de humilit.
unto the swelling of an exulcerat and inflamed body; bringing with it
Peri^litand^ principium, pereundi occasionem, the beginning of danger, and the
occasion of death; how can that be blessedness? That which goes before a
fall, and causes the fall, when it befalls, to be the more dangerous,
because it is the more deep, as may appear by A^salon, who had his own hair
become his halter; by Haman who had his gibbet become his own gallows; by
Antiochus and Herod who thought themselves as gods and no men, yet by their
Ambition became they as worms and no men: As breathing graves and living
carrions, or rather dying food for living worms: How can it then be
blessedness? That which is a Greatness without a bottom; an height without a
foundation, which as Seneca writes: Seneca. Epist. 8 (...). (...)


Duplici laborat inuidia, nam ei inuidetur, inuidet ipsa.

Laboreth of a double envy, for both others envy it, and it enuyeth others --

That, of which Clemens Alexandrinus witnesses that that it seems a wonder
unto him, that they which sustain Cl^^ (...). ^^dag. 2.
it are not pressed to death under the weight of so great a burden. How can it
be true blessedness? We must therefor elsewhere inquire after it, for hear
is not to be found the true Blessedness,

The third good thing (as it is Termed) of ^ortune, is that which the Epicure
esteems to be the true blessedness, which be the vain pleasures, and
pleasing vanities of this life, which as they be sundry, so are they holden in
chase by sundry Epicures.

The first of these is the Vainglorious Epicure, who mostly hunteth after
those pleasures, which are grounded on a twofold foundation, of the Back, and
of Buildings.

The first ground work of Vaine-glorious-Epicurious-Pleasures is laid on the
foundation of his Back; whereon he wears that apparel (whatsoever
condition he be off) to be singularly observed of men, which is not only for
charge Sumptuous, but for shape Monstrous, being not ashamed, to wax proud of
that which God gave our first parents to cover their shame with: and recounting
that Gen 3. 10. 21.
as no mean point of his happiness, which being well advised, must needs
be accounted as it is in itself, a perpetual monument of their and our
Unhappiness.

The second groundwork of Vaine-glorious-Epicurious-pleasures is laid upon
the foundation of their Buildings, which they make like the Web of Penelope,
which was so by her Wouen as it was also Vnwouen, so Vnwouen as it was Wouen
again, so they so build as they pull down, pull down, as they may build
again, making their neastes for glory like the stars, As the Aegle makes
Obadi. ver. 4.
her nest among the stars: glorying in their vncer^ taine mansions, which God
has sent them, but for a time, even as Nabuchadnezzar did of his Babell. Is
not this Babell? yea great Babell? More-ouer, which I have builded by the might
of my power: yet further, for the honor of my majesty: Two infallible badges
are these of a Vaineglorious-Epicure.

The second is the Gluttenous^ Epicure; who pursues Dan. 4. 27.
those pleasures which concern the pampering of the belly; wishing their
belly, which they make their God, Phil. 3. 19. to be as the God Bell among the
Babilonians, who spent every day Two great measures of fine flower, forty
sheep, and six great pottes of Wine. Men Hist. E^l. and Drag. ver. 3.
are they so disposed, as the spacious Regions of the Air, Water and Earth are
scantly sufficient to satisfy the narrow straight of their throat, like to
Antonius, Vitellius, Heliogabulus, three Epicures rather then Emperors among
the Romans; of whom the first spent in one supper a thousand Boares: the
second two thousand Fishes, and seven thousand Fowls: the third six hundred
heads of Struthio Cameles.

The third is the Drunken Epicure, who intertaines those pleasures which rather
appertain to the quenching of Nature, then of thirst, by incessant and
vnstenchable quaffings: these are they who rise up early to follow
drunkenness and continue till night, till the Wine does inflame them. Esaias.
5. 11.


The fourth and last is the Carnal Epicure, who is wholly sold over to those
pleasures which concern the wanton dalliance of the flesh, rather Swine then
Men are they, delighting altogether to wallow in the mire of filthiness,
resembling the Centaures and Minotaures, whose upper parts were of Men: but
the lower 2. Pet. 2. 22.
parts of Horses and Bulls.

But may (I beseech you) in these pleasures of Vaineglorious, Gluttonous,
Drunken and Carnal Epicurisme, be found and inioyed, this sound and solid
Blessedness which we seek for? Oh nothing less, and be it far from us once
to imagine it.

First how can it be lodged in Vainglory? whether it be that Vainglory
which concerns the pride of our Backs, wherein though we be like unto
Solomon, yet are we Short of the Lillies of the field, or whether it Math. 6.
29.
be that Vainglory which respects the state of our Buildings, which may as
soon prove a Babell of confusion, spoken of, Genesis 11. as Babelles of Majesty,
mentioned Dan. 4.

Secondly, how can it be contained in Gluttony? which as Saint Hieron says, is
an infernal fire, whose matter is superfluity, flame, pride, sparcles,
unclean speeches, ashes, Hieren.
poverty, end, hell.

Thirdly, how can it be comprised in Drunkenness? against which the Scripture
denounces many Woes, as (to let pass other places) Esaias. 5. 11. and 22. verse.
which Drunkenness Saint Augustine, in a Sermon de Aebrietate, August S^r. de
Aebrieta.
calls Infernifoueam, the very Pit or Ditch of Hell.

Fourthly, how can it be comprehended in the unclean and wanton pleasures of
the flesh? which begin in Lust, proceed in shame, and (for the most part) end
in Lepry and Contagion. These pleasures be a deep Pit, and he (not which is
in favor with the Lord) but with whom the Prou. 22. 17.
Lord is angry, shall fall into it. Seeing then in these treasures, honors and
pleasures, the good things of Fortune it cannot be found, we must elsewhere
seek, that seeking, Matthew. 7. 7.
we may find, this true blessedness.

Secondly, therefore the world reposeth the Chiefest blessedness, in the good
things of the Body, which though they be many, yet our consideration shall
only respect three of the chiefest of them, namely Beauty, Health, Strength.

First, concerning Beauty, it is excluded from beholding the true beauty of
this blessedness, whether it consists in the clear brightness of the
skin, which is named Pulchritude, or in the clean making of the body which
is called Form; for how can that be rightly graced with the name of
blessedness, which Nature the Hand-maide of God, so for the most part
bestows upon the body, as it is accompanied with some defect in the mind? as
they on the contrary side, who are black, deformed, lame, and impotent in body
have therwithall some extraordinary Blessings in the mind like the Spirit of
Eliah, which rested upon 1. Kin. 2. 9. G^^ 32. 25. 29
Elishah in a double portion. Or like to Jacob who halted and was blessed both
together.

Secondly for Health it cannot sustain the person of true blessedness, which
if it shall be continual is rather a curse then a blessing, as that which
argues rather Gods anger then his favor, as that Godly Hermit made
application to himself, who having by an annual course bin visited in
sickness by y^ hand of God, one year among the rest finding an intermission,
lamented and wept as if that year had bin ouer-sinful, and in that regard God
had forgotten him.

Thirdly Strength cannot rightly be esteemed the price and crown of true
blessedness, whether it be Natural as that of Hercules, of Milo Crotoniata,
or of Maximinus the Emperor, Which yet is short of the strength of an
Elephant, and therefore being in a greater measure in a beast cannot be
blessedness in, or for a man: or whether it be strength supernatural such as
was to be found in Sampson, for that was so vain and brittle, (being taken
Literally and not Typically) as the flattering tongue of a false hearted Dalilah
could betray it.

Thirdly the world reposeth the Chief Blessedness in the Iud. 16. 17.
good things of the Mind, which passing by others of less moment consist
principally in those 3. Memory, Wit, Science.

Memory is a wonderful and excellent blessing of God, which approaches so
near God himself, as Plato says Plato.
that he which remembers, all things, forgetten no thing, seems to be no Man
But a God; yet the most that we can yield it, is to be a singular Blessing, not
this Blessedness, for how can that be adjudged Blessedness, which affects
Man's soul with Bitterness? man by nature commits more evil then good; the
more perfect the memory is, the more perfectly does it present and suggest unto
the conscience to trouble the peace thereoff all the evil thoughts, words, and
deeds where with man has stained himself, oppressed Man, and displeased God,
so as unless his mercy does pardon him, he must needs punish him. Memory must
therefore remembrance her-selfe, that she is incapable of this blessedness.

The sharpness of wit is a great possession, but because the wicked enjoy it
as well as the godly: and all men herein are far out-matched by Devils. I
hope, with the Devils, we will exclude it from this true blessedness.

Science also must have her due and deserved commendations, whether it be that
part of her which is called Prudence, which sits at the helmes of
Monarchies, Kingdoms, Provinces, Cities, and Corporations, or whether it be
that part which is termed Sapience, which either Metaphysically presses near
the knowledge of God himself, of Angels and Spirits: or Physically searches
the natural causes and motions of natural bodies; or mystically ^euealeth
secrets: or morally instructs the manners of men, or orderly comprehends
Arts, not only Mechanical common among men of common condition; but also and
especially those, which are more rare and hidden, which are named Liberal,
Grammar, Logic, Rhetoric, Music, Astronomy, Arithmetique, Geometry. All
which, being most ample portions given by God unto man; yet by man are to be
debarred from this true blessedness.

First, who which is wise hearted, will account Prudence blessedness, when he
shall consider that it harbored in such plentiful manner in Achitophel, as
his Counsel was Sam. 16. 23.
received as an Oracle of God: yet was it an occasion to become his own
executioner, and to hang himself. Sam. 17. 23.


Secondly, Sapience must be thought to fall short of this blessedness: because
Blessedness is perfection, and Sapi^nce among men cannot be found so perfect,
but that it may be made more perfect. Iabal, Tuhal and Iubal, were the first
inuenters of Tents, of cunning work-manshipp, in Brass and Iron, and of
Music, Genes. 4. 20. 21. 22, have that termination of their names which in
Hebrew signifeth Vanity, to show that as in these, so in all other Arts and
Scicnces in not contained the true Blessedness. To conclude therefore seeing
in Treasures, Honors, Pleasures in Beauty, Health, Strength: in Memory, Wit,
Science, that is to say in the good things of Fortune of the Body, of the Mind
this Blessedness cannot be found. Let us not settle our hearts and selves on the
things of this life as if they could make us Blessed. Let us consider that the
1. John. 2. 17.
world passes away and the lusts thereof. Let us advise our selves that all
flesh is grass, and the very grace thereof (that is whatsoever therein is most
precious) is as the flower of the field. Esa. 40. 6.


Oh we must not therefore take our full repast of the things of this life, if we
look after this life to sup with Abraham Isaac and Jacob. where the place of
our Supper shall be the Kingdom of God, and the diet of our Supper true
blessedness, which y^ we may the better perform let us seriously meditate
Augustine.
upon the saying of holy Angustine. Mundi gaudia diaboli venena, The joys of
the world be the poisons of the Devil: poisons which will work not the death
tempotall, which is the separation of the soul from the Body: but which will
effect the death Spiritual, which is the fearful separation of God from the
Soul: we must not then embrace the world, least the Devil embrace us: we
must not glut our selves with the pleasures of the world, least the Devil
poison us. Moller in Psalm. 1.


From the Apparent or Seeming, must I now pass over to the existent or being
Blessedness, in the original plurally expressed: Blessed is. etc.

This is the true blessedness indeed, to be found of him that shall seek it
both in this life grounded on grace, and also in the life to come established
on glory.

First this Blessedness is to be found by seeking as it is in this life
grounded on grace, a sacred issue proceeding from the Spirit of God, which
Spirit as it is said, to be seauen-fould, Apo. 1. 4,
so be the Gifts and Charismes which arises there from, according to the
mystery of the number, seven many-fould, an holy offspring is it inspired by
God, called the fruits of the spirit, Galat. 5. 22. 23. fruits of the spirit
are they, like the fruits of the Tree of life, many and souera^g^c, Apocal.
22. 2. many in kind, sovereign in virtue. The Apostle in the f^recited place,
sh^weth us some principal Gal. 5. 22. 23.
particulars of them: Love, Joy, Peace, long suffering, Gentleness, Goodness,
Faith, Meekness, Temperancie, the particulers whereof (...) cannot amplify:
only, let this be^ sufficient, that he which has the foundation of this
Blessedness laid on the groundwork of Grace in this life, so frames his
manners, as he loves man for Gods sake, because in him there shines the
Image of God: as he rejoices in the good of another man, as if it were his
own, as he is peaceable, as in whom serpentina prudentia, Matthew. 10. 16.
and, columbina mnocentia, the wisdom of the Serpent, and the innocence of
the Dove, are to be coupled together: as he suffers long, leaving vengeance
to the Lord Romans 12. 19.
to whom it belongs, as he has gentleness in manners toward all men,
though they be in their affections enemies; in their Religion, Turks, Jews
and Infidels: as he is good, even in imitation of God himself, who causes
his rai^e to fall, as well on the vn^ust as on the iu^, and his Matthew. 5. 45.
s^nne to shine as well on the bad as on the good: as he is faithful toward
God, in heart and zeal; toward Man in word and promise: as he is me^ke, as
the spirit of God is said to be a spirit of me^kn^sse; as he uses the bridle
of Temperance, to restrain his ouer-heady affections, both concerning meats
and drinks, and apparel, or what-so ever else might prove out of course or
disordered.

The Gentill wisemen were not ignor^nt of the Blessedness which comes by
Grace, as (...) Sr^t Augustine, August. de Ciu^ta. dci. lib. 10. cap. 2.
who has these word, (...) Philos^phi tenent qui docent nos fore beatos,
obieclo q^odam l^mme intelligibili quod Deus est nobis: that is, The
Philosophers also do hold a certain Grace, whereby they teach that we shall
be happy, by reason of a certain intelligible heart, which God is unto us.

The same Father, in the same place p^oduceth one of them, Plotinus by name,
who illustrateth this matter by a similitude of the Sun, which being the
Fountain of all light, transmitteth the beams to enlighten the Moon, which
otherwise should be in darkness: So (says he) does GOD transfuse the rays
of his grace on us, to make us happy, which otherwise should be in
wretchedness.

Secondly, this Blessedness is to be found, by seeking in the life to come,
as it is established on Glory: and this either to be handled, as it is builded
on in some model or portion of glory, or else as it shall here-after be
accomplished, in the fullness and perfection of glory.

First, it is to be handled as it is builded on in some model or portion of
Glory, in a rich, though not in the richest measure.

This Blessedness the Godly ones, are then made partakers of, when the
Apostles wish is become their portion, namely, to be dissolved, and to be
with CHRIST JESUS, Philip. 1. 23. For far be it, Oh be it far from us to
dream with some fantastical and giddye spirits, which both earlye and late
have troubled the peace of the Church: That the Souls even of the dearest
Saints of God, being losened from the body, are not forthwith admitted into
joy, but fall a sleep, and so shall continue until the Resurrection.

A pestilent Doctrine is it, which no Text in GODS Book does warrant, but the
whole volumne of the blessed Scriptures turns against, and ouer-turneth it.

It is said, Ecclesiast. 12. 7. That the Dust returns to the earth: That is
the Body made of Dust, and the spirit, that is the Soul to GOD that gave it.
If the Spirit returns, then it has a motion: if it has a motion, then is
there no binding up of the finewes, the instruments of sense and motion, as in
sleep it happens, if there be no ligature or binding up of these moving
and feeling finewes of the soul, then as (...), the spirit of slumber, Romans
11. 8. moves these men to think, or rather dream, there cannot be admitted
into the soul after her disunion from the body any sleep.

The Apostle Paul, Philip. 2. 23. wished to be dissolved, and to he with
CHRIST JESUS, which was best for him. Where he makes the end of his wish not
to fall a sleep, but to be with CHRIST, not so, as with CHRIST he should be
ouer-whelmed with a senseless slumber, but so as with CHRIST he should be
ravished with a sense of joy, for which he adds, that it is best for him.

Further, it is not likely, but rather absurd, to think that CHRIST, will
suffer their spirits to sleep in his kingdom, whose bodies he would not
suffer to sleep in the Garden, Matthew. 26. 40. But let CHRIST the wisdom of
GOD his Father. 1. Corinthians 1. 24. confute and confound the Wisdom of this
World, which is enmity unto him, which he will therefore destroy, and ca^t
away the understanding of the prudent in this kind. 1. Corinthians. 1. 19.

That mortal blow which he gave the Sadduces, Matthew. 22. 32. may serve also
as a fatal wound to strike these men dead. I am (says GOD) the GOD of Abraham
and of Isaac and of Jacob. GOD is not the GOD of the dead, but of the living.

If he be not the God of the dead, but of the living, then is he not the God
of such, whose spirits are fallen a sleep, and so by consequence bear the
Image of death, ^ot of life with them. More-ouer, what comfort could the good
Thief receive from the speeches of our Blessed Savior, hanging upon the
Cross? that he should be with him in Paradise, if his spirit should sleep
there? or what possibility was there, that Abraham should speak Luke 23. 43.
and confer with Dives, if the spirit of Abraham, and of all the faithful,
which be the Children of Abraham, Luke 16. 25
were a sleep? To conclude, what such resolution and protestation, could
rightly and truly have been found and made in, and by Polycarpus: (as the
Ecclesiastical histories witness) one living even in the prime and purer
times of the Church, before he entered into the flames to give his body to be
burned, that he might become a whole burnt-offering of a sweet savor unto
the Lord, enen that, that day (as he says) he should be presented unto the
Lord in spirit, if his spirit, should be presented unto God in the same
nature, that Eutychas was in, when Paul preached fallen a sleep. An opinion
has it Act. 20. 9.
been, which has not seized alone on the Foot, but even possessed (as some
men will have it) the Head of the Church. Which has not bashfully stood at the
Footestoole, but boldly set on the Chair of Peter (that the souls of men
sleep till the Resurrection) which matter may surely serve, not only as a
black-coale, both to blemish the name, and to obscure and blotte out the
writings and works of them, who have by Pens and Presses witnessed the
contrary, but also as an impregnable proof, that the Pope may err. An Opinion
has it been, I say, or rather an Haeresie then an Opinion, because it has
been manteined with pertinacie or stiffenesse against the Scriptures, hatched,
broched, published and patronized, by one of the Popes themselves, even Joban.
Gers. Ser. de Pasch. par. 3.
Pope John the 22. as Gerson a learned man testifyeth, who would have the
Souls even of good men to be bereft of the Happy-making vision of Gods face
until the day of Judgment; and so in some sense to sleep until the awaking
time of the resurrection, A matter (as it was well worthy) condemned as
Heretical by the whole University of Paris with the sound of trumpets in the
presence of Philip then King of France: a thing was it not of God, therefore
could it not stand. But we which are Act. 5. 38.
taught of God a beter lesson, ought to hold another course and believe that in
the life to come there is a building on, of our blessedness begun in this
life, the former step of our glory.

Secondly this Blessedness in the life to come, is to be considered as it is
(a second step thereof) consumate in glory, which shall then be fully
accomplished, when the bodies and souls of the Saints shall be reunited and
knit together again, in peerless blessedness, and endless Immortality,
chiefly and above al intended in this place Blessed is the Man. Which
blessedness yt we may the beter know, and by knowledge ensue it, we must
understand that it chiefly consists in two points. First this sulnes of
Blessedness consists in that matchless perfection which shall be enjoyed
from within us: secondly in that endless consolation which shall arise to us
from without us: The matchless perfection within us shall, concern both our
Bodeis and our souls.

First, our Bodies which are now earthy, then shall become heavenly, are now
mortal, then shall become immortal, are now corruptible, then shall become
incorruptible, are now subject to passion, then shall become impassible, Mat,
13. 43.
are now dull and heavy, then shall become quick and lively; are now (it may
be) black and deformed, 1. Cor. 15. 43.
then shall become shining as the Sun in the Kingdom of there father: are so
now as to be sown in dishonor, but then shall they be rased again in honor:
so now as to be sown in weakness, bnt then to be raised up in power. Wheare
the Eye shall so see the glory of God, as it shall never be dazeled, the Ear
shall so hear the most melodious music of the Heavenly Quire, as it shall
never be wearied, the Nostrills shall so participat of the most delicate sent
of the Paradise of God, as they shall never be satisfied, the Palate shall so
taste, how sweet the Lord is, as it shall never be cloyed, and to conclude the
whole man in his hole body and in every particular, thereof as in his joints,
siners, veins, arteries, fllesh, blood bone, ligament, mussekle and whatsoever
part or parcel besides, shall be so affected and disposed as they shall have a
never ceasing contentment, an everlasting reioycement, for, they shall be
satisfied with the pleasures of Gods house who shall give them drink out of
the rivers of his pleasures. Psalm. 36. 8.


The Eye has seen much, yet the eye has not seen it: the Ear has hard
more, yet the Ear has not heard it, the Heart is able to conceive most, yet
never has it, does it, or shall it enter into the heart of Man, what the heart
of Man shall then enter into, a joy which we must enter into it is so large.
Matthew. 25, 23.

For it cannot enter into us we are so little. A Masters toy which is able to
master the conceits and capacities of all men who seek to comprehend it.

When that complaint of Gregor. Nazianz. shall cease (...) I am little and
great, base and high, mormortal Gr^go. Nazian. Epitaph in sratrem.
and immortal earthly and heavenly, (...) having those things after the slesh,
these according to the spirit, but then in regard of the glorified flesh we
shall become Great only, and not Small, High only and not Base; Immortal
only and not Mortal, Heavenly only and not Earthly, because Christ shall
then change our vile body that it may be Fashioned like unto his glorious
body, Phili. 3. 2. 1. A matchless perfection of the body, one branch of this
Blessedness.

The second matchless perfection of this Blessedness is to be found in our
mind; whose Wit shall then be so sharpened as it shall never become dull
again: whose Memory shall then be so confirmed, as it shall never fo^gette
again: Whose Wisdom shall then be so enlarged as it shall never be
diminished again: whose Understanding shall then so be enlightened, as it
shall never wax dark again. Whose will shall so then be directed, as it
shall neuermiscarry again.

To conclude, whose knowledge, shall then be so accomplished as it shall never
be ignorant again.

As ye Wit, Memory, Wisdom, Understanding, Knowledge, of an Infant in the womb
of his mother, is nothing at all, especially in comparison of a Man in the full
pitch of his age and the ripeness of his best education: so, and much less
then so, ^s the Wit, Memory, Wisdom, Understanding Knowledge, of a Man, of the
most absolute complements in this world, in comparison of that which in the
world to come, we may certainly expecte and shall undoubtedly receive if we
be Gods Children. In the one we are as a child, in the other we shall be as a
man and putt away childishness: in the one we see as in a glass darkly; in
the other we shall see face to face: in the o^e we shall Know in part, in the
other, We shall know even as we our selves are known. 1. Corm: 13. 11. 12.

Here are we clogged with the weight, and entangled wi^h the shacles of an
heavy and combersome body; from whence the soul of man being then and there
delivered, it shall become more ready in cont^yning and less doubtful in
resolving, and every way more perfect, occulorum acies (says S. Chrysostom)
dum lucida est Chrylo st. ^n Euang. Johan. vel Ho^li. 1.
vell minutissima cernit etc. The sight of the eye, while it is clear sees
even the smallest things, but being dimmed with humors that fall out of the
head, is blind in perceiving even the greatest objects: so is it with the
soul, which being wrapped and incombred, with the thick mantle of a massy
body, is ignorant almost of every thing, but being once enlarged and set at
liberty, soas she is an abstracted substance separated therefrom, especially
in the brightsome light of Gods kingdom, it is v^conceiuable what she
conceiueth, and what kingdom it is; inconceivable what she conceiueth, and
what she understands passes understanding. The Christail the clearer it is,
the more capable it is to rec^iue, and the more brightly does it represent the
rays of the Sun, which shine upon it. So the spirit of man being then purged
and cleared from the dross of any corruption, receives more easily, and
represents more fully the light of Gods wisdom which rests on it. A
matchless perfection of the soul, a branch also of this Blessedness.

Secondly, this Blessedness hear spoken off, consists in an endless
consolation arising unto us, out of us, to be observed in sundry particulars:
leaving the ^es^due which might be collected, my purpose is to stand upon
these five.

Whereof the first, is the Company which we shall then enjoy off God: Angels:
Saints.

First, this endless consolation out of us, does arise unto us by the fruition
of the Company of God, in whose Presence, there is first joy, secondly,
fullness of toy. Psalm. 16. 12. Whom to behold is Blessedness. Math. 5. 8.
Where we shall be able to comprehend with all Saints what is the breadth,
and length, and depth, and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes
all knowledge, that we may be filled with all fullness of God. Where we shall
attain to Ephesians. 3. 18 19.
the mystery of the indivisible Trinity, in Unity. The Power of the Father, the
Wisdom of the Son, and the Love of yt Holy Ghost. If it were a praeeminent
dignity for those Magistrates to see the face of King Ahashuerosh: then
vndou^tedly must it of necessity be true Blessedness it self to Beh^ll the
face of God, the reward of the godly man's virtue here spoken off. A Reward
indeed (is it says Ber(...) Bern. m^ditat^. cap. 4.
(...) deum, vinere cum deo, viuere de deo, etc. To see God, to live with God,
to live of God, to be with God, to be in God, who shall be All in All unto us;
habere id quod ^st simmum bonum: to have that which is the chiefest good, the
Blessedness here intended.

Secondly, this endless consolation, out of us, does arise unto us by the
company of Angels, who for their Dignity, are Principalities; for their Might,
Powe^s: for their Authority, Dominations. Ephesians. 1. 21. For their Number,
Thousand thousands, and ten thousand thousands, which are infinite Dan. 7.
10. for their Glory so surpassing, as some of them be called Zeraphim. Esaias. 6.
2. tha it is bright, fiery, or burning, and therefore bright and glorious.

Thirdly, this endless consolation out of us, does arise unto us by the
company of Saints, which are called our fellow Citizens, Ephesians. 2. 19. A
glorious order of Patriarchs, an holy assembly of Prophets: a blessed
convocation of Apostles and Evangelists: an inumerable and most noble army of
Martirs, Virgins, Confessors, which All being of the household of God with us.
Ephesians. 2. 19. must needs afford us a mutual and perpetual consolation; a
branch likewise of this Blessedness.

The second of the five particulars; wherein this endless consolation does
consist, which out of us shall arise unto us in Gods Kingdom, it is the State
which we shall there sustain; Being a State of no less then Kings. A
Kingdom which we shall attain unto, not by force and policy, but by GODS
free favor and mercy. Fear not little Flock, it is your fathers pleasure to
give Apoc. 1. 6.
you a Kingdom. For which cause also, Christ shall say at his judgment unto
the elect, Come ye blessed of my father, Luke, 12. 31.
inherit ye the Kingdom prepared for you from the beginning of the world. It
is indeed prepared for us, but Math. 25. 34.
so, as we should not think, that though we sit idle the whole day of this
life, we cannot fail of it, but if we will find it we must seek it. Seek
ye first the Kingdom of God. Math. 6. 33. And then shall we be made
partakers of the Good things that belong thereunto, which be both Internal,
the Righteousness thereof and External, and al these things shall be ministered
unto you.

A Kingdom; concerning which S. Agust. witnesses Quale erit gaudium? cum te
videris esse socium Angelorum. etc. What manner of joy will it be, when thou
shall August. contra Jud.^. cap. 21.
see thy self to be a fellow of Angels, a partaker of the Kingdom of heaven,
to reign with the King, by desiring Nothing, to possess All things, to be
rich without coveting, to govern without treasure, to judge without a
successor, reigning without fear of Barbarians, and living an eternal life
without fear of death? A Soueraingne (no doubt) consolation, a branch of this
Blessedness.

The third of the five particulars, wherein this endless consolation does
consist, which out of us, shalll arise unto us in GODS Kingdom, is the place
where we shall enjoy it, even in the Heaven, as witnesses the Apostle. 2.
Corin. 5. 1. We know that if the Earthy house of this Tabernacle be
destroyed, we have a building given of God, that is an house not made with
hands, but eternal in the heavens. The outward Courts whereof if they be and
appear so glorious what shall we think that the Sanctum sanctorum is? The
Pauement whereof, if it be so beaut^ous: What shall we think that the Roof
and inward Seelings are? If the Suburbs thereof out-spread themselves (as it
were) with Curtains of State and Majesty; no doubt then but that thou art
thrice worthy that very excellent things should be spoken of thee. O thou
City of GOD! Excellencly concerning this point, writes holy Basit: St
sanctorum Atria; scilicet Caeli talia sunt, Basil. Hexa. Homil. 2.
et templi vestibula, tantam adeuntibus se reuerentiam incutiunt, etc. That is,
if the Courts of the Saints, namely the Heavens be such, if the porches of
Gods Temple do strike a great reverence into them which go unto it: and do
bear themselves aloft with such and so great a weight and state of their
pulchritude, as they do dazel our eyes (as it were) with twinkling and blazing
lightnings; What do we think that the Holy of Holyes is it self? No doubt an
endless consolation, a branch of this Blessedness

The fourth of the five particulars, wherein this endless consolation does
consist, which out of us, shall arise unto us, in Gods Kingdom; is the
practice we shall there exercise: Kings indeed we shall be, and that of an
heavenly Territory: but not carke and care, watch and ward, for the defense of
subjects, and the offense of enemies, as the Kings of the earth use to do; but
such Kings shall we be, As are coupled with Priests. Apoc. 1. 6. in offering
up the sacrifice of continual praises, the sweet odours which shall ascend
out of ye Censers of our hearts, accompanied with the Calves of our lips:
continually saying with the sour and twenty Elders, Thou art worthy O Lord to
receive glory and honor, and power, for thou have created all things, and for
thy wills sake they are, and have been created: Apoc. 4 11.
questionless an endless consolation, a branch also of this Blessedness

The fifth and last of the five particulars, wherein this endless consolation
does consist, which out of us, shall arise unto us in Gods Kingdom: is the
Time for which it shall last and continue, even for euer-more: therefore our
building which God without hands shall build for us, shall not only be in the
Heavens, but euer-lasting in the Heavens. 2. Cor. 5 1. A Kingdom, whose King
is the Trinity, whose law is Charity, and whose bound is Eternity.

Worthily therefore might Saint August. apply that August, de ciuitate. dei.
lib. 2. cap. 1. 19.
speech (which sometime Jupiter, in the Poet, spoke to Venus concerning Aeneas
her son) unto the Kingdom of heaven. His ego nec metas rerum nec tempora
pono.
Imperium sine sine dedi


To these do I set neither bounds of things, nor times, but have I given an
Empery without end. An endless consolation indeed, a branch also of this
Blessedness.

Hence may I further note (in a word) that the Spirit of God in this place
says concerning the Blessedness, not presently enjoyed, but futurely to be
reaped in the time to come: not that Blessed shall be-, but Blessed is the man:
To show that a Man that is especially called Godly, quallified, and truly
sanctified, may be assured of this blessedness, and by consequence of his
salvation.

Seeing then to conclude by that which has been delivered, it appears that
this True blessedness consists in the groundwork of Grace in this life,
and is both builded on in Glory, and consumate in the fullness of Glory in the
life to come: which contains in it a matchless perfection both in Body and
Soul within our selves; and also an endless consolation, arising both by the
company of God, Angels, and Saints: by our state, Kings, by our place the
Heavens, by our task, singing the songs of Praise and thanksgiving; out of
our selves. Oh let us in the name of Christ (in whose name alone we look to be
saved) Let us I say practice the virtues of the Godly, that we may receive the
reward of the Godly. Let us not walk in the counsel of the wicked: let us not
Stand in the way of sinners: Let us not sit in the seat of the scornful: but
let us delight in the law of the LORD and meditate therein day and night. That
so we may be Blessed of GOD our Father, as Jacob was by Isaac his Father: Let
us not think to get heaven (the substantial model of this Blessedness) by
sluggish idleness, and unprofitable security: but we must know, that as the
children of Israel could not come to the temporal Canaan with out Arms and
Conflict, Blood and Battle; so we can never attain unto the spiritual
Canaan, without many ^n^^unt^rings, many bickerings; against the world, the
flesh, and the Devil, that they may not subdue us, to walk in the counsel of
the wicked, to stand in the way of sinners, to sit in the seat of the
scornful: For the Spirit, to advance the power thereof, so as we may delight
in the law of the Lord, and meditate therein day and night. Non e^^ facilis ad
magna ascensus, Cypria tracta de habit vir^ia.
says Saint Cyprian. Things which are great, are not easily climbed unto. What
sweat, what labor, takes a man before he comes up to the top of an hill?
how much more is a Man to labor and sweat, before he attain to the height
of Mo^nt Sion. In cuius summo, summum manet bonum. In the topp whereof rests
the topp of our blessedness.

Hitherto have I handled the former part of the Recompense of the virtues of a
Godly man, namely the declaration and tenure of it, Blessed is the man. Now am
I to pass over unto the second part thereof, contained verse the third of this
Psalm, that is the further dilatation and title unto it. For he shall be
like a tree planted by the rivers of Waters, that will, etc.

The Words contain in them a similitude, in which as in a similitude, we may
note two parts. The former is the proposition or the praecedent part: the other
is the adiection or subsequent part thereof, in these words. so whatsoever he
shall do shall prosper. The praecedent part, or the proposal of the
similitude, tendereth to our consideration: First, whereunto the Godly man is
semblanced and compared to a tree: Secondly, not every common or triu^all tree,
of ordinary occurrence, but to a Tree which first, for the original of it,
planted; secondly, for the situation of it, by the Rivers of waters; Thirdly,
for the fructifying of it, that will bring forth her fruit in due season.
forth her fruit in due season. Fourth, for the slourishing of it Whose leaf
shall not fade.

First then man by this similitude is compared to a Tree. Sundry be the
resemblances wherein man may be compared unto a Tree; but omitting other, my
mind is only to insist in these four vidz. The Shape, the Growth, the State,
and the Trunk of a Tree.

Man may first be said to be like a Tree in the shape, of a tree. As a tree
has his root which is as his head, which grows on to his stock or trunk,
which is as his Body, and then spreads it self into boughs and branches and
smaller twigges: so Man's head is as his root, which grows forth into his
body which answers unto a stock or truncke, and then sheddeth it self into
arms and legs which be as boughs and branches, which as in smaller twigge
do end in fingers and toes. The difference is that the root or head of the
Tree natural stands in the earth and extends her Stock, Boughs, and
Branches toward Heaven upward, but Man (this mistical Tree) has his head as
his root standing toward the Heavens and outspreadeth his body as his stock
or trunk, and his arms and legs as his boughs, and branches to the earth
downward: to show that as the material Tree receaueth that sap which is like
unto Esaus blessing, the fatness of the earth. Genes. 27. 39. so man this
mystical Tree ought to be nourished with that juice which is like unto the
blessing of Jacob, the dew of heaven. Genes. 27. 28. Man then is as a Tree but
not as an earthly Tree: but as the Philosopher speaks (...), an heavenly
plant, the sap and juice of whose nourishment, is not to be derived Plato.
from the fatness of the earth below, because his root stands above and not
below: but from the dew of Heaven above, because his root stands not below
but above.

An excellent shape is this of Man's body to inform him how to form and
fashion his mind, to provide that for as much as he is no earthy but an
heavenly Tree, so he should not be earthy-minded, Philip. 3. 19. but that his
conversation ought to be in heaven. There is our Philip. 3. 20
Country, and there ought our desire to be: there is our City, and there
ought our (...), our civil behavior to be: there is our root, and there
ought our affections to be rooted. A place where the whole Deity, God the
Father, God the Son, and God the Holy Ghost is, and there ought we, who are
pertakers of the heavenly nature to be: where the Angels are, and we whose
allotment is to be, as the Angels must be: where the Saints 2. ^et. 1. 4
Matthew 22. 30. Ephesians. 2. 19.
are, and we like-wise which are fellow Citizens with the Saints, are of
necessity to be. In Heaven must we have our conversation, because from
thence is our generation. This knew and affirmed that thrice great Hermes,
Hermes Trism^g. in Peman.
among the Aegiptians: (...). GOD has begotten man like unto himself, whom
he has loved as his own issue: those speeches also of Plato make unto the
truth of this point: who in many places, especially Plato de legi. lib. 5.
says of man, that he is (...), meaning no doubt, in respect of his soul, the
kinsman of God, everlasting, immortal.

It is an old Prouerbiall speech, and it is as true as it is old: that It is
wisdom for every man to know his place, I am 3. 17.
so is it no doubt a plentiful measure of the best wisdom, even of that
Wisdom which is from above, to know our place: We which are but worms in
regard of our flesh, and in respect of our bodies, but dung and corruption;
yet touching our spirits are we partakers of the divine nature, the
generation of GOD, as his issue, kinsmen, euer-lasting, and immortal. A
certain and lively representment hereof, is made unto us in this, that Man is
as a Tree, whose head as his root, is planted and fixed toward the heaven. Let
us not therefore neglect so great a dignity, despise so high a calling, debase
so honorable an advancement, let us not serpent-like set our hearts on the dust
as the Serpent does place his belly on the dust; in that it Both goes on the
dus^ and eats the dust all the days of his life Genesis 3. 14. Let us not be
like those heavy and weighty fowls, quae frustra alatae. etc. Which being
winged in uaine, seldom or neu^^ use them, but are detayned on the earth among
the beasts. Which Saint Basil speaks of in a certain Epistle. But let us,
whereas Christ is there, as Christians be affected to be: B^sil. Epist.
quadam. Mat. 24. 28.
as where the Carcass is there Eagles will be gathered. We are as Mariners
sailing in the Ship of the Church, under the Mast of the Cross, guyded by
the Helm of the word, carried on by the Wind of the Spirit, floating on the sea
of this World, who look in due time to arrive at the Haven of happiness. Mos
est nauclerts in Caelum aspicere. etc. It is the manner of Mariners to look
up into Heaven, in the Day on the Sun; in the night; (...) on the Northpole
or some other apparent star, that so they may direct there way the better
says Saint Basil: so ought we in the ^asil homil, in princip. proverb.
like estate to frame our actions to there so necessary a president: we are to
turn our faces by Grace even thither whether they are already turned by
Nature: we ought to shape our course in the day time acording to the light;
motion and influence of our Blessed Savior, who is so the Son of God as he
is also the Sun of Righteousness. In Mala. 4. 2.
the Night also ought we to be guided by him, who is the only resplendent
Star to go before us to Bethell the house of God, as the Star Math. 2. 9.
became a loadstarre unto the wise men to bring them to Bethlem which is
interpreted the house of bread, as he was the bread of life. Ioh. 6. 48.
That as we are trees whose roots stand toward Heaven, so we may thereby
be admonished not to be Earthly minded.

Secondly, man may be said to be like a Tree in the grouth of a tree, which
is first tender and flexible in the twigge, secondly stiff and tough in the
stock; thirdly withernig and drooping in the age of it: so man while he is as
a twigge in the first spring of his infancy or childhood, is tender in his body
being but as a flower which is son blasted and withered away: And in his mind
is flexible as a twigge easily inclined either to Virtue if he be informed,
or to Vice if he be neglected, being as wax which may be wrought and brought
into all forms, but being once stiffened and confirmed in the strength of his
^^cke by his youth or Mans-age he is (it may be) in his body more firm
(though ^ee can never be wholly without them) against infirmities, and more
tough in his mind either to retain the habit of Virtues, if he shall be
seasoned with them, or to continue the poison of vices if he has been nusled
up in them. An exccellent Caveat unto all Parents and governors unto whom
the educacion of these young springes (even in the first sprigge or twige of
them) is committed that they may while they be tender enbow them, frame them
while they be pliable, and work them while they be flexible; least that when
of pliant sprigs they shall become stockish trunkes, they grow curelesse they
wax redreslesse. As Adam our first Parent was appointed to tend the Trees of
Pradise, so we his offspring Genesis 2. 15.
have mystical trees committed to our keeping and dressing even the fruit of
our bodies. Which if they shall be timely tended, duly ordered and rightly
framed unto that Mica. 6. 7.
which is good, will prove such plants as shall be both peaceble and
pleasant, peaceable shall they be because they shall be as Olive plants,
pleasant shall they be, because they shall be as curtains of ornament spread
round about our table. Psalm. 118. 3.
But if we shall be ouer-indulgent and ouer-tender toward them (a fault
ouer-rife in these times) they will grow stiff in sin, and be hardened in the
thick dregs of there own lose and misleading courses, proving no better
then wild-trees which will bring forth fruit no better then the Wild grapes.
Esaias. 5. 4. resembling the bramble in presuming against us, and usurping over
us there parents and Governors, though we be toward them for Fatness, as the
Olive Tree, for Sweetness, as the Fig Tree: for Pleasantness, as the Vine:
Rough and untrimmed Brambles I^dg. 9.
indeed will they argue themselves to be, which unless they may have their
minds, will threaten fire to come out of them, which shall consume the Cedars
of Libanon. A lesson is this seriously to be weighed, and ^eedfully to Judge.
9. 15.
be practiced in these times, wherein the complaint of Saint Chrysostom, may
often and again be used, Patr^: Chrysostom sup. illud Matthew: accessit ad illum
matter Zeb^d^orum.
et matres corpus suorum natorum amant, animam autem contemnunt, etc. Fathers
and Mothers do ^oue the bodies of their children, but lightly pass by their
Souls, for they desire only to see them in this world, not caring what they
shall suf^er in the life to come. A folly is this, even with tears of the
bitterest sorrow to be lamented, that Men should love the husk, and neglect
the grain; regard the Shell, and reject the Kernel; esteem of the Bag,
and despise the Treasure therein contained, beautify the Bodies of their
children, and suffer their Minds to be black, deformed, corrupted, whereby
these mystical trees wax so rough and tough in their stock, being not
other-wise set and disposed in their twigge, as they will be broken before
they be bent, ended before they be mended.

More-ouer, in the third place, is man in his growth like a tree flourishing
(happily) in his youth, but drooping in his age: looking toward the Dust, before
he returns to Genesis 3. 19.
the dust. This is the work of Time, who is the great conqueror of all things.
A time is appointed to ^uery thing: so Eccles. 3. 1.
cannot this thing escape from this appointment: There is a time to be borne,
and a time to dye; so is there (according to to the same proportion) a time to
be Young, and a time to wax Old also. Man's life is but a day, whose evening
will certainly follow his morning, until the night of death makes him to
sleep in the bed of the grave, unto the time that the day of the resurrection
shall awaken him again Be it that a Man in his youth be as strong as the
Oak, as tall as the Cedar, as straight as the Pine Tree, as flourishing as the
Green Bay Tree, yet when the winter or his age shall ceaze upon him his
strength will be weakened, his talenesse abated, his straightness, crooked,
his flourishing withered, because then the Keepers of the house that is the
hands will tremble; the Strong-men that is the legs will bow, the Grinders
that is the teeth shall cease, they shall ^axe dark which look out at the
windows that is the eyes, the doors shall be shut without, that is the
lips, and he shall rise at the voice of a bird, that is sleep shall depart
from him and the daughters of Music that is the ears shall be abased, and
they shall be afraid at the high thing, that is they shall stoop toward
the earth again: and the Almond Tree shall slorish, that is their hair shall
be as white at the blossoms of that tree: and the Grassehoppers that is (as
some will have it) the shoulder-pinnes shall stick up. And old age shall be as
an house which every man (if death cut him not of before) must go unto. Eccle.
12. 5. Eccl. 12.


The Philosopher mentions small flies near to the banks of a certain river
which live but one day. They are bred in the morning, like unto Man in his
infancy, therein Aristo. de natu. animal. lib. 3.
as a Tree in the twigge: they are at there full strength at noone, like unto
man is his confirmed age therein as the Tree in the stock, they are at night
growing toward there end like Man in his Old Age, therein as a Tree in the
drouping thereof.

Third, Man may be said to be like a Tree in the state of a Tree, which the
higher it is the more dangerfull it is, as that which then is more exposed to
the violence of the Winds, to the blasting of the Lightninge, to the dent of
the Thunder-boult, and the less fruitful it is as may appear by the Cedar
one of the talest Trees, yet none of the frut-fullest, whereas those Trees
which are of a lower and more base groth are both less dangerfull, as they
which are exempted by there submissenesse and deiection from the ragings of the
Winds, the flashings of the lightnings, and the fury of the Thunderbolts; as
also more fruitful as it may appear by the Vine, the lowest almost among the
Plants, as that, which unless it be by the care and hand of man, shoared and
underpropped, creeps upon the ground, leans and lays still upon the face
of the earth, yet yields she her fruit in Grapes, her Grapes in clusters,
and her clusters iu abundance of plenty. So is it with Man, this mystical
Tree, wh^ the higher he is, the more dangerfull he is, and the less fruitful.

First, he is the more dangerfull, Locaquae aliis celsa, ipsis praeupta
videntur, says Seneca. Those places which seem Seneca.
to be stately unto others, are steep unto themselves: they lay open unto the
contrary winds of alterations, to the blasting lightnings of disaster aspects,
if they be subjects of their sovereigns, if they be soucraignes, yet of GOD
who is the great Monarche and sovereign of the world, at the bar of whose
tribunal they stand ever arreigned, and many of them, as Pharaoh, Antiochus,
Belshazzar, Herod, etc. have been as with a flash of lightening, both very
suddenly and fearfully punished and confounded. Who sit on their chaires of
estate, as sometime Damocles did on the throne of Dionysius, having not one,
but many swords hanging over them: a sword of Envy from their equals in
foreign states: a sword of mutinies and insurrestions from their inferiors,
of poysnings from their feigned friends in their own territories; and of
murtherings from their open enemies, both foreign and domestic: It is an
excellent saying of Hugo Victorinus. Quatuor sunt quae trahunt H^g^ Victorinus.
elationis currum, etc. Four things there be which draw the chariot of
Advancement: Desire of rule, Love of our own praise, Contempt, and
Disobedience: the wheels of this Chariot, are first, Boasting of mind;
secondly, Arrogance, thirdly, Gloriousness of speech: fourthly, Leuity or
lightness. The driuer of this Chariot, is the spirit of pride. They who are
borne therein, are Lovers of this world. But far from security is both this
Chariot, and they which are borne in it, because as the same Author speaks,
the horses are unbridled, the wheels easily turned, the driuer froward, and
they but weak who are borne in it. And therefore if the Chariot shall be
ouerturned, must needs be the more grievously bruised, and more easily
oppressed. High places may be compared, to the Cantharides, whose outward show
is glorious, but their inward working poisonous: like a Tree, which the higher
it is, the more danger it has.

Secondly, Man (this mystical Tree) the higher he is, the less fruitful, as
Trees use to be. An high place (unless grace does alter it) occasioneth an
high mind, and an high mind is like an high Mountain, which the higher it
is, is also the barrener. Saint Gregory says, Greg. in moral.


Radix cuncti mali, et regina omnium vitiorum superbia.

Pride is the root of all Evil, and the Queen of all Vices --

How can a man then gather Grapes of this Thorn, or Figs of this Thistle? It
is not possible.

It may also appear unto us that man in regard of the state thereof is like
unto a Tree: because as a Tree the lower he is, the less dangerfull he is, and
the more fruitful.

First, he is less dangerfull, because he is not subject to Chaunges, to
Dis-fauours, to Envy, to Insurrections, Poysonings, Murtherings, as to so many
several raging wi^des, blastings, lightnings, fearful thunderbolts: for as
much as he with little David sits at home, tending (it may be) The Ewes
great with young ones, when his elder and stronger brethren are mustred to
ma^ch under Saul's coullours against the Philistines. 1 Samuel 17. The smaller the
marke^, the more hardly it is hitte: But the greater the more easily it is
pierced. The smaller frye may escape the net when the greater fishes shall be
entangled; and needs must he be safe, whose Lord Protector the Lord of
hoastes becomes, by whose grace and blessing it comes to pass; that when
the Bow and the mighty are broken, then the weak and humble gird themselves
with strength. 1 Samuel 2. 4. And though the Lords adue^saries be proud like
unto them, whom the Lord professes That he will resist. 1, Pet. 5. 5. Yet
shall they be destroyed, and out of Heaven shall the LORD thunder upon them.
1. Sam 2. 10. While he on the other side rayseth the poor out of the dust,
and lifts the beggar from the dunghill to set them among Princes, and to
make them inherit the seat of 1 Samuel 2. (...).
glory. To which end also Judith the humble handmaid of the Lord faith: Thou O
Lord art the help of the humble, and of little Ones, and a defonder of the
weak, and a protector of them that are for-saken, and the Savior of them
which are Judge. 911.
without help. Like a Tree, the lower the safer.

Secondly, Man (this mystical Tree) the lower he is the more fruitful,
therein not unlike to the Valleys. Humility is not only the foundation of our
Righteousness S. Chrysoft.
as S. Crysost. writes, but of our Religion, which according to the testimony
of blessed James, If it be pure and undefiled before GOD, even our Father
visits the fatherless and Widows in their adversities, and causes a man to
keep himself unspotted of the World. I am. 1. 27. By consequence whereof it
may appear, that none can sincerely have either true Purity in himself, in
keeping himself unspotted of the World: or true Charity toward other in
visiting the fatherless and widows, unless he be religious, which true
Religion man cannot have without Humility. Humility therefore it is the
groundwork of every good work, like a Tree, the lower the fruitfuller.

The fourth and last thing wherein Man may be likened to a Tree, is the end of
a Tree.

The end of a Tree is, either to become when it is cut down, timber for
building, ^t fuel for burning. So Man (this Mystical Tree) being cut down
by the axe of death, becomes either as an holy Timber to be built in the
Heavenly Jerusalem, a member of that Spiritual house mentioned. 1. Pet. 2. 5.
Wherein our building in Heaven, shall not be like unto that building up to
Heaven, as it was intended. Gene. 11. 4.

That proved but a Babell, a matter of confusion, as in the same chapter is
manifest; but, so shall this building 2. Co^in. 5. 1.
be reared up in Heaven, As it shall become a^ernall. A building where the
Stone shall not cry out of the wall, and the beam out of the timber shall
answer it, VVoe be unto him, which builds a Town with blood, and erecteth
a Cittye by iniquity. Abacu. 2. 11. 12. But shall sing like the Seraphins one
to another, holy, holy, holy is the Lord of hoastes, the whole world is full of
his glory. Esaias. 6. 2. As Math. 21. 12. We read of an house of prayer: so shall
we then be in an house of praise.

Furthermore Man (this mystical Tree) being cut down by the Axe of Death,
otherwise becomes as fuel for the fire; but for what fire? Not for The fire
Material, which when matter fails, forthwith goes out; but for Fire
(Alas) Immateriall, Infernal, Unquenchable, Math. 3. 12. which goes not
out. Mark, 9. 44. A Tophet Esaias. 30. 33. for the antiquity of it Prepared of
old: for the equity prepared not only for the Beggar, but for the King: for
the capacity of it, in bottom, Deep, in compass, Large: For the fuel of
it, Much VVood, yea the Burning thereof, is said to be Fire and much Wood,
where fire is made to be as fuel to the fire: for the bellows thereof, it is
the Breath of the Lord, like a River of Brimstone, to enkindle it; as the Lord
ever lives, so this fire ever lasts, because the bellows of Gods breath
never fails.

Seeing the Scripture in this place likeneth us unto trees, whose end (as we
see) is either to become building in the Lords House, of his Kingdom; or else
fuel for the sulphury flames of Hell.

Let us in the name of GOD, whose name is great, wonderful and holy: and in
the fear of God, whose judgments we perceive to be so grievous and terrible,
labor, as blessed beams, shining with the beams of most bright glory, to be
couched in the building of the Lord: and avoid to become as cursed brandes
appointed to be scorched with the hellish fire of ever continuing torments.
Let us make use of the saying, of holy Chrysostom, Chrysostom.
who says that God does menace us with hellfire, because he would not have
us come unto it. Let men be wiser then children, and let warned men, be as
burnt children. The burnt child (says the Proverb) dreadeth the fire, though
it be but a fire material and quenchable. Oh how much more ought we to dread
(especially being warned) that fire which is Immateriall and Unquenchable:
that so we may not be as Trees appointed for Tinder in the Devils furnace;
but as Trees ordained for Timber in GODS Palace.

As hitherto we have heard Man compared to a Tree, so the godly man is not
like unto an ordinary or triuiall Tree of a common condition: but as it
follows in this Psalm, he is as a Tree, which first for the original of
it; is Planted. Secondly, for the situation of it [By the Rivers of Waters:
Thirdly for the fructifying of it [VVill bring forth her fruit in due season:
Fourthly, for the flourishing of it [VVhose leaf shall not fade.

First then this Tree is set down unto us by the original of it. [Planted;
It comes not up then of the own accord, but as it is planted by Gods hand.
If it came up of it self, then were it not of Gods planting, if it be not
of Gods planting, then must it be Plucked up by the roots: But it is
otherwise with this Tree, which being in the number of those trees of
righteousness, spoken of by the Prophet Esaias, is with them in that place of
Gods planting Esaias 61. 3. and therefore come not up of it self.

This Doctrine first disableth and infringeth the free will of Man, this
missticall Tree unto good, because he must be planted, he cannot plant
himself. Indeed Man at his first creation had free will unto good, but since
his fall that blessing is fallen from him as writes Saint Augustine, Male
vtens predidit se et liberum arbitrium, Euilly using his free will he has
lost himself and his free will, so Angust. de libero Arbit.
that now it so stands with him that his Sweet is turned into Sower, his
Righteousness into Unrighteousness his Light into Darkness, and the Freedom
of his Will to that which is Good, into a thraldom of the same into that which
is Evil, in so much as though it might then be said of him potuit non
peccare, he could not have sinned, yet now it must be said of him, non potest
non pecare, he cannot but sin. The truth of this point may appear unto us
by the proof of a plentiful argument

First, what good can be willed by him? who being considered as he is a meare
natural man, is as a dead man: dead in trespasses and sins. Ephe. 2. 2.
Colo. 2. 3. so dead as to be made alive he must be borne again. John. 3. 3.
yea created again. Ephe. 2. 10.

Secondly, what good can be expected from him as a fruit of his Free Will
thereunto? who is wholly prone unto, and totally possessed with that which is
evil. The immagination of man's heart is evil, even from his Genesis 8. 21.
youth up.

Whereout I may observe unto you: first that man is evil; second that the
heart of man the fountain of all his actions is evil; third that the
imaginations of that heart the streams (as it wear) and riuerettes derived
therefrom are evil: fourth ever, even from his youth up. Which being
necessarily so, because the Scripture has a^^irmed it to be so: what I
beseech you, is left in man that is sound? Yea what is there left in him that
is not unsound?

The like testimony we find, Roman. 5. 8. They which are after the flesh,
savor the things of the flesh. Savor the things of the flesh; that is, the
(...), their wisdom, which should be most sauoury in them, is become fleshly,
that which should be most sauory in them, is corrupted. If that which is most
sauory in man, even his best parts, is fleshly and corrupted? What may we then
conclude concerning that which is almost unsavory in him, but that it is most
defiled, polluted, unclean?

Thirdly, the proof of this point appears by the Contestations and
Witnesse-bearing even of the Gentiles themselves, who no doubt having derived
the same from the blessed fountain of the Scriptures, do avouch and testify
the truth of this matter. To omit the residue I will insist on the Authority
of two of the chiefest of them. Plato writes that virtues are inbred in men,
afflatu numinis by the inspiration of the godhead. Plato. Arist. Ethi. lib. 1.
Aristotle says, Si quod donum dei est, faelicitatem illud esse statuendum
est, etc. If there be any thing which is the gift of God, we must determine
that to be Faelicity, or Blessedness. But this Blessedness, is no other
thing (says he) but the best action which proceeds from the best faculty of
the mind: But how? Per virtutem praestantissimam, by the best Virtue, which
best Virtue cannot properly intimate any other thing unto us; But God.

Fourthly, the ancient and most flourishing times of the Church, has both
affirmed and confirmed, approved and proved the soundness of this Truth: That
Man of himself cannot plant himself in any good course, as may be made
manifest unto us both by Counsels and also by the wrightings of the most
Orthodoxall fathers of the Church.

Amongst other Counsels, the Council of Carthage and the Mileuitane Council,
may give us satisfaction which both concerning this point have been anciently
holden against Pelagius, and with a sent^nce authorized by the Scriptures have
condemned man's Free Will unto good as, haereticall.

Among the Orthodoxall Fathers: S. August. has said. It is true, Man when he
was first created, received great Augu. s^r. de corp (...) Christi. Aug. in
psalm. 90. Aug. (...) de Verbis Apost. 7.
grace of free will, but by sinning he has lost it. The same Father
elsewhere breaks ^orth into this Paetheticall ^^clamation. Oh free will
which without God art evil! The same Father in another place calling (as it
were) fora Psalm of mercy at the hands of God; Utters these speeches:
Miserere mei deus, etc. Have mercy upon me O God: again: have mercy upon me
O God, and the third time have mercy upon me O God, (as if he would therein
include a mystery of ye Trinity) Wherefore (says he) because I have virtue, by
the which I may deserve thee? Notse. Wherore then? Because I bear the freedom
of will, whereby my merit Orig. in Romans Ierom in Jerem cap. 16. Chrysest ser. 1.
de ad^ent domini. ^m^^ os de voca. ent. lib. 2. cap. 2. Bernard. de gra. and
liber. arbitrio.
may go before thy grace? Not so. But of thine own mercy.

The like (but that I would be short) might be alleged, to whom I refer
the Reader, out of Origin, Jerome, Chrysostom, Ambrose, Bernard, with many
others.

By all which, and more that might be alleged, it is clear and evident, that
man in this his estate of depraved nature, has no Free Will unto good: as he
which is dead to virtue, wholly prone to vice, in his will; which is blind in
truth, sharp-sighted to error in his understanding. Let us not therefore
presume on the sinews of our strength; as if thereby, we could make our selves
good: neither yet trust to the wings of our own worthiness, as if we thereby
could mount into heaven: for how shall we be able being borne alost with ye
sick feathers o^ those feeble wings, to mount up into glory? When ye freedom
of our will to goodness is so inthralled and eclipsed, as we cannot thereby plant
our selves in Grace upon earth, for we are as Trees, not planting our selves,
but planted by God [For he shall be as a Tree planted

Secondly, this doctrine, in that man (this mystical Tree) must Be planted,
establishes and confirms the free Grace of God; by which when we fail to
plant our selves, yet as yet appears by the text are we planted. The Lord
must first turn himself unto us, before we can be turned unto him: Lament.
5. 21.

Fulgentius a reverend Father; first, will have all the good Fulgent. Epist, ad
Thcodor. Senatorcm.
we do, ascribed to the Grace of God: second, that when we faint in any good
action, we should crave a supp^y at the hands of God: third, that this mind
of ours, whereby we crave Grace, is the work of Grace: which begins first to
be powered into us, that it may afterward be begged of us; even as the light
of the air does first go into the eye to cause it to see before it can see,
which otherwise though it were made to see, remains blind. In his own might
shall no man be strong: and it is the 1 Samuel 2. 9.
Lord which keeps the feet of his Saints, as in the same place: From whence
I may note unto you two things: first, that every man is utterly dis-abled in
himself: in his own might shall no man be strong: second, that the whole
enable of man, is from the grace of God; It is the LORD which keeps the fcete
of his Saints. The Prophet David Psalm. 119. 22.
says, I will run the way of thy Commandments, when thou shall enlarge my
heart: Whereout we may observe, first, that David cannot run the way of Gods
Commandments until his heart be enlarged: second, that none can enlarge his
heart but God: When thou shall enlarge my heart.

When (as excellently writes a learned late Writer) all Z^nb, de Religi.
Christ. cap. de liber A^bitrio.
good things may be reduced to three heads. The first, is y^ good which
appertains unto the Sensitive and Vegetative soul which is common with us
and the Beasts. viz. to eat and drink, to be nourished, to be healthful, to
begett our like, etc. The second, is y^ good thing which belongs to the
reasonable soul and life of man only viz: al arts both Liberal and Mechanical,
Virtues, Moral, Political and civil Science and the whole body (as it is
called) of Philosophy. The third head of good things, respect and concern, a
Spiritual, Divine, and Super-caelestiall life, begun here in this world,
consisting in the true knowledge of God, and in faith, and in the effects
thereof: regeneration, obedience, charity, etc. In the two former, God (says
he) is a great help: yea in the latter of the two, the good things which do
concern the human and reasonable soul of ^^n: Saint Augustine goes so
far, as he will have all Augus^. cont. Juli. Pelagi. lib. 4. cap. 3.
Arts to be the gift of God: but how-so-^uer it be, it must needs be
granted, that GOD has the maine and principal stroke therein, as experience
may teach us, that those gifts do more eminently appear in some, then they
do in other-some, for no other reason, but because it pleases God so to
dispose of them. But in the third head of good things, of the life spiritual,
super-caelestiall, divine; Man is wholly to be excluded: GOD is only to be
admitted, and his grace alone to be acknowledged.

This is Gods doing, to the end that no flesh should rejoice in his presence,
but that every mouth and tongue 1. Cor. 1. 29.
might be open to confess with the Apostle, By the grace of GOD, I am that I
am, and his grace which is in me, was not in vain: For his Grace is both the
Fountain 1. Cor. 15. 10
from whence any good thing is originally ordained unto us; and the
conduict-pipe whereby it actually falls upon us: As when we were made, it
was GOD that made us, and not we our selves: so when we were redeemed, it was
GOD that bought us, and not we our selves: when we became righteous, it was
GOD that justified us, and not we our selves: when we were made holy, it was
GOD which sanctified us, and not we our selves. To conclude, if we be
Planted Trees, it is GOD that has planted, and not we our selves.

After the planting of this Tree, am I in the second place to consider the
situation, By the Rivers of waters. M^ller, in Psalm. 1.


It is by the greatest likelihood supposed, that the Tree whereunto the
godly-man is here compared, should be the Palm Tree: because Pliny says of
the Palm Tree: Plini. lib. 13. cap. 4.
Palma gaudet riguis, totoque animo biberc amat. The Palm Tree rejoices in
watery places, and heartily loves to drink much: that is to be much watered:
and this Tree in this place, is said for the better fructifying of it, to be
planted by the rivers of waters.

First, it is said to be planted by the waters: Secondly, By the rivers of
those waters.

By Waters in this place, are to be interpreted the holy Scriptures of God, as
they are accompanied and strengthened, and actuated by the cooperation or
fellowworking of the spirit of God.

The Scriptures of God thus qualified, may in several properties be likened
unto water.

First, water serves as a Looking-glass, wherein a man may see the blemishes
and defilements of his countenance: so is the word of GOD as a Glass, Iam. 1.
23. Whereby a man may perceive, the spots and sta^nes of his soul.

Secondly, Water does not only show and detect these blemishes and
defilements, but also can cleanse and wash them away: so the word of GOD has
a pu^gatiue virtue, if it shall be employed to wash away and purify the
blottes and stains of our spirits and conscices: For which purpose, after the
Kingly Prophet Danid had propounded that demand: Where-with-all s^all a young
man cleanse his way? he forthwith makketh this answer? Even by ordering
himself according to thy word. Psalm. 119. 9.


Thirdly, water has no color in it, so the word of GOD is and ought to be
without gloss. The word of God is and ought to be like God himself,
without color or shadow. Iam. 1. 17.


If the Water has any color, it is that most ordinarily which it receives
from the sky, whose color it, for the most part, ^epresenteth: if it has any
other color, it is but artificial, and accidental: so the word, if it
receives any color, it ought to be that whose tincture is from above,
otherwise it is to be reputed foreign and adulterine.

Fourthly, Water quenches heat: so the word of God also restinguisheth the
heat of our ou^r-inflamed passions: which may appear unto us: First, by the
repressing of the enkindled passion of lust: Which is as a fire which never
leaves (as says Saint Basil) till it has consumed Bas^^^de Virginita.
the matter which it has been bred in: a fire which if a man be but singed
with, blisters do certainly arise thereof: yet the word serves as water to
quench it.

Secondly, it may appear unto us by the restinguishing of the inflamed passion
of wrath, a flame that arises of the ouer-heating of blood; for which cause
the Prophet David, Psalm. 18. 7. 8.
speaking of Anger, mentions there-withall smoke: consuming fire, and the
kindling of Coals: S. Basil says also, Basil. Hom. de ira.
that the Angry man, a daemonibus neque, formae, neque, anim^ affectu differt:
differs not from the Devils, neither in form, neither in affection of
mind; whose kingdom is in fire, to show that Anger is fiery: yet the word
of GOD, by the sacred praecepts therein, serves as water to quench it.

Thirdly, it may appear unto us, by the putting out of the ouer-hott passion
of praeposterons zeal, which if it be not alayed with knowledge, will prove
like James and John, who forthwith would have commanded fire from heaven to
have consumed the Samaritans: and where as in the Luke. 9. 53.
same place they allege the example of Elias, our Savior Christ made answer
unto them, that their spirit was different from that of Elias, for they knew
not (which no doubt was known to Elias) what spirit they were of. Luke 9. 55.
This intemperate zeal may be compared to the fever H^cticke, which consumes
the body wherein it is. The very cause and original is this, of trouble and
tumults among men, in reasonings and d^sputations, as writes Gregory
Nazianzen. Like to the ouer-swift motion of Gregor. Naz. oration. 21.
the highest Sphaeres in the heavens, which unless it were repressed and
allayed by the (...), or counter-motion of the inferior Orbs, would (as it is
probable) set the whole world on a fire; like the benefit of the water of the
word, to repress and redress unbridled zeales-violence.

Fifthly and lastly, Water does fructify and make fruitful those places which
be watered and drenched by it: An example of this matter we have in Nilus:
The inundations of whose streams, fructifieth, even to this day the whole
country of Aegipt, in which sense most properly in this place, the word of God
is to be accepted, and thereof to abound with fruit, or to fructify in
abundance. To this intent, Jesus the son of Sirach, among other things
whereunto he resembled Simon the son of Oniah, who had been very
bountiful and beneficial unto his country, likeneth him (to express the
better the fruits of his well-doing) to the L^lies by the Springs of waters.
And when God had ordained his Paradise, appointed Eccle. 50. 8.
he also the rivers of Pishon, Gihon, Hiddekell and Perath, to water the same,
and to cause it to be fruitful: to intimate unto us the barren ground of our
hearts, the Trees here spoken of, cannot fructify without the Water of the
Word, and therefore are they hear said, for their better fructification, to
be as a Tree planted by the waters.

Secondly, this Tree is said to be planted by the ri^ers of waters: where-out
I am first to handle, the Quality, a River: Secondly, the Plurality, Rivers of
waters.

First, this Tree is said to be Planted by those waters, which for their
quality are a river.

Two remarkable properties be observed in a River, first that the guise thereof
is to flow forth without standing. second, that by reason of this perpetual
flow it holds fresh and sweet without corrupting.

In the first place the quality of a River is to flow without standing;
answerable whereunto ought the Word to be as a river euer-flowing by the
current of a double stream, the one of reading, the other of preaching.

The river of the word flows and ought to flow by y^ stream of reading; a
thing which though not in so great r^easure as preaching, yet has been very
profitably begun and from time to time continued in the Church of God. When the
children of Isarel stood half of them over against Mount Garizim, and half
over against Mount Eball, Ioshuah read all the words of the Law the blessings
and cursings according to all that was written in the book of the law, there
was not a word of all that Moses had commanded which Ioshuah red not hefore
the congregation of Israel, as well before the women and children as the
stranger that was conversant among them. Ezras also is said to read the Law of
Moses in the broad place of the gate of the Temple from Ioh. 8. 34. 35.
morning to midd^y, before the Men and the Women, and all the multitude
hearkened thereunto. 1. Esd. 9. 41. they so approved it as they wear very
attentive. Thus read Baruch the sermons of Jeremy. Paul exhorts Timothy to
give Bar. 1. I^r. 36.
attendance as well to reading as exhortation and Doctrine. 1. Tim. 4. 13. The
same Apostle charge the Thessalonians that his Epistle should be read to all
the brethren the Saints. 1. Thessalo. 5. 27. He also instructs the Ephesians
that by reading his Epistle they might know his understanding in the mystery
of Christ. Ephesians. 3. 4. What should I tell you? that Moses had them which
preached him, in that he was read in the Synagogue every Saboth. Act. 15. 21.
Or what should I allege? that there is an Happiness proclaimed even for him
which reads Apoca. 1. 3. or that Tertulian calls reading of the Scriptures
the feeding of the soul, and that the most ancient and pure Church had there
Lectore, readers. etc. We hold him unwise, who says that the least star in
the Firmament has no glory, because it is not therein comparable to the Sun.
No less senseless is he to be adjudged, who shall deny Reading of the word
even in the open assembly, to have no profit in it, because it yields not so
much fruit as Preaching. The gifts of Gods spirit in the Church, are like the
stars in heaven, one differing from another in glory. 1. Corin. 15. 41. so
one of these gifts differs from another in glory: Preaching has his portion
in a greater measure of glory: Readin^ has his shate in a lesser measure of
glory: one of the streams of the flowing River of these Rivers here spoken of.

The other stream whereby the current of the word of God flows, it is by
preaching, which consists in the true understanding; right dividing:
saithfull interpreting: zealous uttering: and powerful applying either of the
judgments, or the mercies of God, (as occasion shall serve) to the hearts and
souls of the people, unto the which personally Timothy, successively, all they
which bear the office of Timothy, even the whole Ministry of GOD are
exhorted. 2. Tim. 4. 2. Preach the word, be instant in season and out of
season, improoue, rebuke, exhort, with all long suffering and doctrine.
Ministers of this Function Matthew. 5. 13.
are the Salt of the Earth: by whose praecepts, the mind of man being
seasoned, should not be corrupted with the contagion of vices: are the light
of the world, Matt. 5. 14. because they are to inlighten (as it were) the
smaller Lamps of others by the more bright Cressetlight of their doctrine: are
the Trumpetters which ought to sound with courage, the Trumpet in Syon, and to
shoute in the holy Mountame: are the disposers of Gods secrets, to make the
people acquainted with GODS ^oel. 2. 1.
counsels, 1. Coxinth. 4. 1. are Watchmen from the Watchtower, to foretell
the people of dangers to come, Ezech. 33. 7. are shepherds: First, to
strengthen the weak sheep: secondly, to heal the sick sheep: thirdly, to
bind up the broken sheep: fourthly, to bring again the stray Sheep: fifthly,
to seek up the lost Sheep, Ezech. ^4. 4. A blessing of the Word preached, a
stream of the River here intended.

The Church of Rome would have these waters of the Scriptures to be no flowing
Rivers, but as standing pooles, for which purpose they intercept and damme up
the course and current of them, by locking them up in ^strange language,
contrary to the old custom, even of that Church. Quando benedictiones and
caetera omnia Lira. in Corin cap 14.
fiebant in vulgari lingua: When blessings and all other things were done in
the vulgar tongue, If all other things were done in the vulgar tongue, then was
reading of the Scripture also so performed. A manner was this never altered in
the Grecke-Church, both anciently in use, as also at this day continued in
Russia, (the regiment of which Church have been derived from the Greek
Hierarchy) where they have through-out that large Empire their Church-seruice
all and altogether read and celebrated in Dis^ouery of Eng^shmen. page 290.
their own mother tongue, that every man may understand it.

The second remarkable property in a River is, that by reason of the continual
flowing, it holds out fresh and sweet without corrupting: otherwise is it
then, with that stagnum piscatorium, the standing Fish-poole of them: who do
pass all things, sub annulo p^scatorio, under the signet of the Fisherman,
and do vaunt that they sit in Peters-Chayre, which was a Fisherman: for as in
a River successively, wave follows after wave, and stream after stream, a
great auoydance o^ corruption, and a maine continuance of wholsomnesse: so
ought the doctrine which flows in the current of this River of the holy
Scripture, to be pure, not taynted, hail, not unsound; true, not erroneous;
sincere, and orthodoxall, not corrupted and Schismatic, a stream like God
himself, the Fountain from whom it is derived. Iere. 2. 13.


Secondly, from hence may I note their plurality, in that this Tree is not
Planted by a River, but by Rivers of Waters: to show that the measure of this
word, and of the fruit that comes by it, ought not to be in scantnesse and
barrenness, but in plenty and abundance: so as it may not lodge for a night,
or soiourne for a season, but dwell in us, and that not in any stinted or
scanted measure, but plenteonsly, not in some, but in all Wisdom, not only so
as we do receive Documents and instru^ ctions from others, but so as we may
in some good sort be able to teach and admonish our selves. Coloss. 3. 16.

This was the estate of the Ancient Church, as writes Saint Chrysostom. Nunc
verbum Dei inter nos habitat abunde, cum omni sapientia, etc. Now does the
word Chrysostom. in Romans cap. 1.
of GOD dwell among us abundantly with all wisdom, etc. This also ought to
be the condition of the Church at all times, and is (God be praised) of this
our English-Church at this time; where-in the Belles of Aaron are continually
sounding, not in some, but almost in all congregations, not at some, but
well-nigh at all times.

The Lord give us his grace, that according to the free endowments of his most
gracious favors, we being as Trees a long time planted by the Rivers of
these waters, may fructify so in our knowledge, as we become not barren in
our practice; Unto whom much is committed, of them shall much be required. Oh
much has been every Luke 12. 48.
way committed unto us! Behold we have been planted, not of our selves, but
by the hand of GOD, not in any dry or barren wilderness, but by the foysoning
and fructifying waters of the holy Scriptures: not near some small and
shallow-running beck or brook, but upon a River: neither yet upon a River
only, as of one, but Rivers as many: therefore of us must much and every way
much necessarily be required, much skill in truth, much will to good, much
comfort in contemplation, much fruit in action, much knowledge, much practice.
Oh, let us not then where the word is most plentiful, there leest account of
it, most dis-regard it; like affected toward the Word, which is dearer then
thousands of gold or silver, as the Indians are toward their gold and silver;
which because they have the veins and mines thereof among them, therefore bear
they but a slight love and slight affection toward it. But let us receive it
with our ear^s, lodge it in thalamo cordis, even in the chamber of our heart,
practice it in our lives and conuersations. Let us so attend with our ears in
listening, as we also extend our hands to practicing; thus to extend the Palms
of our hands in Earth, will put Palms into our hands into heaven. The giving
of the ear without the giving of the hand, hearing without doing, harkning
without working, it is but a carcass without a quickening spirit, as bottles
without wine, clouds without water, lamps without oil, shadows without
substance, shelles without kernells, and trees without fruit. Which though
they be planted by the rivers of waters, are not fructified; but we on the
contrary side, if ever we look to be Denizens of the City with twelve gates:
even the heavenly Jerusalem. Apoc. 21. 21. ought to be as the Tree of Life,
which brings forth Twelve manners of fruits, and the leaves thereof serve to
heal the Nations. Apoc. 2. 22.


After the situation of this Tree, are we in the third place to consider the
fructifying of it, which may easily be branched into four members.

Whereof the first is Profitt, in that it brings forth fruit.

The second, Perseverance, in that it is not said for the time present that it
does; but for the time to come also, that it [will bring forth fruit.

The third, Propriety. [Her fruit,

The fourth and the last, Opportunity [In due season.

The first Member of the fructifying of this Tree, is Profit, [Bringeth forth
fruit.

This is the necessary duty of every godly Man, that he should be as a Tree
fruitful, as a Plant profitable, especially considering with himself, that
the planting of himself (such a Tree) (...) by the flowing and fresh rivers of
the Waters of the word; where God becomes his alone Planter, and only
Waterer, therefore must he not in any case fail to bring forth increase: God
has fixed his root and shall not he fructify in his branch? Oh be that far
from him!

But for as much, as by likelihood the dullness of our corrupted nature
blunteth and represseth the edge and forwardness of our desire in this
behalf. Le^te us I beseech you, conceive in our hearts a few reasons and
arguments; the authority whereof may somewhat egg on and incite us, to become
not Dry, but fruitful, not barren but profitable trees.

We are then as trees of Gods planting to become fruitful. 1. in regard of
God. 2. of the Gospel. 3. of Man, both our selves and others.

First we are to bring forth fruits in regard of God, and that in a sundry
observation. 1. because he deserves it. 2. commands it. 3. is gloryfied by
it.

First, God deserves it, in that himself has taken the pains to become our
planter. As it is he that has made us, and not we our selves: So is it he
that has planted us and Psalm. 100. 2.
not we our selves; whereby we are made the griftes of his orchyard, as Psalm.
100. 2. We are called the sheep of his pasture. He that planteth a vineyard is
worthy to eat of the fruit thereof: He that feeds a flock is worthy to eat
of the milk of the flock. 1 Corin. 9. 7. And shall GOD plant v^ and nourish us
being so planted, and receive nothing from us? O! this must needs prove us to
be unthankful toward him, who toward us has showed himself most
bountiful? We read of a generation of Vipers Math. 3. 7. Hereunto, if unto
ought else, may the unthankful man be compared.

The brood of Vipers eats out the bowels of the Dam that breeds them: the
unthankful man requiteth not, yea often-time iniuryeth him; the bowels of
whose commiseratio^ has relieved him. It is intolerable to be ingrate unto
man: but unthankfulness unto God is execrable yea damnable. Shall God deserve
at the hands of man? and shall man the work of GODS hand de^eine from God,
what God has deserved? Will God come to judgment and be a swift witness
against them, which deteine the hirelings wages. Math. 3. 5. and will he not
much more avenge the keeping back of his own deserved recompense? It then
stands us in hand, unless we will have the wrath of God, armata manu, with
an armed hand, or band of his innumerable and irresistible hoastes to stand up
against us, to become fruit-bearing-trees, because by his so planting us, he
has deserved it.

Secondly, we are to bring forth fruits, in regard of God which commands it.
An excellent charge whereunto is given unto us by the Apostle S. Peter who, no
doubt, moved by the spirit of God, in the counsel of God himself, commands
us that as he which has called us is holy, so should we be holy in all manner
of conversation: neither 1. Pet. 1. 15.
does he only so, but rendereth a reason of this matter, drawn from the
authority of God himself, derived from Leuit. 11. 44. For it is written be
ye holy, for I am holy. He 1. Pet. 1. 16:
then which is most holy commands us to be holy, and shall we affect rather
still to be unholy? God which might command and yield no reason, because his
command can never be severed from right reason of his unspeakable mercy,
yields a reason; and he which by his absolute authority might only have said
be ye holy: yet vouchsafes to add, for I am holy: which adiection may serve
both for a reason why we should be holy, and a rule how we should be holy

That we may therefore know the better, what our own holiness ought to be,
we must first look what Gods holiness is: a glimpse whereof is set forth unto
us, in that description mentioned. Deuter. 10. 71. 18. In that he ac^ cepteth
no man's person, nor takes reward, in that he does right to the fatherless
and widow, and loves the stranger giving him food and raiment. etc.

If then we would be rightly holy, as God is holy, and so by consequence
truly fruitful, as Trees of GODS' own planting: we must accept no man's
person, must be corrupted with no man's rewards, we must do right to the
fatherless and widow, and so love the stranger as we give unto him food and
raiment. The extent whereof ought in these and other virtues to be so largely
out-spread, as it does and shall concern not some, but all manner of
conversation. 1 Pet. 1. 15.


The reason why we must obey when the Magistrates command, is, because, they
are called gods: how much Psalm. 82. 1.
more important necessity compels us to obey when God himself commands.

Every man will be offended that it should be said of him that he loves not
God: yet behold he that obeys him not, loves him not, for, He which loves
him, keeps his commandments. John. 14. 15.


O beloved it is one of the enjoyed commandments of the most high God, that
we should become Holy as his Chosen, Fruitful as his Plants; and shall we
deal with God as Saul did, who disobeied his voice? Is there nothing so
pleasing unto God as obedience, which he therefore prefers Before sacrifice
and the fat of rams, and shall 1 Samuel 15. 22.
we fail to be obedient? Is there nothing more displeasing to God then
disobedience? which is therefore branded with the mark of rebellion, and
styled the Sin of witchcraft: and shall we like, to be disobedient? O how 1 Samuel 15. 23.
much better were it for us to submit our selves to the commandments of Gods
voice, that we may become fruitful as the vine. Psalm. 128. 3. then feel the
voice of his judgments, which will cause us to shiuer for fear, and break
into shiuers though we be as tall as the Cedar: that Psalm. 29. 5.
so our duty in becoming fruitful trees, may answer to his authority who
commands us to be trees bringing forth fruit.

Thirdly, we are to bring forth fruit in regard of God because he is
gloryfied by it. Let your light so shine before Math. 5. 16.
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your father which is in
heaven. Our Fructifying then is made Gods Gloryfying. What greater praise and
cause of joy can the^e be unto us, then to see the glory of him enlarged, who
has prepared for us a far most excellent and an eternal weight of glory. Does
the King of glory crown man 2 Cor. 4. 17. Psalm. 8. 5.
with glory and worshipp, and shall not man augment and increase the glory and
worship of the King of glory.

Was it not a woeful voice as ever was bruited in Izraell, which occasioned the
wife of Phinehas (old Elies son) to call hi^ son Ichabod, because the glory
was departed from Izraell: And shall it not be a rumor of far more
mournful report to have it noysed that glory is departed from the God of
Izraell? Is God so jealous of his honor 1 Samuel 4. 21.
that he will give it to no other? and shall we be cold Esaias. 42. 8.
in tendering to him the thing nee so greatly loves. The Heathen think they
bestow a kind of glory on their Idols, when they make them of Gold or silver:
but it is most true that we shall magnify the glory of the God of heaven, if
as fruits of this ^ree we shall charitabley bestow our gold and silver. The
Wise man says Ecclesi. 10. 23. That the glory of the rich is the fear of the
Lord: But we may say that the charitable fruit of the rich is the glory of
the Lord. The glory of man without gloryfying 1 Math. 2. 62.
of the Lord, is but dung and worms: but this dung and worm by glorifying God
shall be made glorious. When Phil 3. 21.
Christ shall come to judgment he shall come with power and great glory. With
power: Why? to punish no Mar. 13. 26.
doubt the reprobate: with glory: Why? to glorify no doubt the godly: that
they which have (as the sons of God) brought forth the fruit of their
planting, in ascribing unto him, and procuring for him glorious praise, may be
in Gods good time, rec^^^ed into the glorious liberty of the sons of God.
Romans 8. 21.


Secondly, we are as trees of Gods planting, to become fruitful in regard of
the gospel; that it may be beutified by it: that as the feet are beutifull
of them which bring unto us the glad t^dings of the Gospel. Romans 10. 15. So
also the hands of them may be bountiful which do receive the same: If we hear
the words of the Gospel, and bring not forth the fruits of the Gospel, We
are like barren ground which receives seed from the hand of the Husbandman,
and yield him no increase. As a woman is not adorned with outward apparrelling,
as with broyded hair, or gold put about, or the putting on of apparel but
when the hid man of the heart is vncorrupt, 1 Pet 3. 3.
with a meek and quiet spirit, which is before God a thing much set by. So
the Gospel cannot be said to be beautified, when the outward parts thereof
are materially garnished with Emblemes, decked with stones of price, or
filletted with gold, but when the inward sense thereof is so digested in the
heart, as the same also prospers and f^uctifieth in the outward actions and
dealings of our life. The Apost^e protests, that, he is not ashamed of the
gospel of CHRIST. Oh we ought to be ever and seriously Romans 1. 16.
careful that the gospel of Christ be not ashamed of us! shall the Turks
grace their Alcaron with good works, which are earnestly urged and
a^d^l^igently practiced among the^: and shall not we beutify the most holy
gospel of Christ, by adding the fruits of the Pomgranates to the bells of Aron?
the substance of our good deeds to y^ sound of Gods glad tidings? Is the Gospel
a light that shmeth in darkness? And shall we become as a thick and pa pable
darkness, to blind Luke. 1. 79.
and obscure this light? Has GOD given the Word that blessing, if we have
grace to apprehend it, that it would iusufie, ^rrchsie, and might one day
glorify us? and shall not we so much as beautify it? The way to (...) t, is
to ^^^^^fic by it. As the Philippians profitting Philip 4. 1.
by the labors of Paul, are c^l^ed Acrowne: so they (...) according to the
precepts of the Gospel, become plentiful in good works, become a Crown to
the Gospel, to dignifie and grace the same. It is said, that an (...) woman,
is a crown to her husband, but ^^ee that makes (...) ashamed is rottenness
to his bones. l ^ou. 12. 4.
The fiugali and fruitful Christian may be compared to this hu^ wifely and
painful Woman, which thereby becomes a Crown to the Gospel, as she to
her husband: but if he shall be id^e or evil, doing either nothing or
naught, therein becomes ^ee a shame to the Gospel, as such a Wife is to her
Husband, yea and in some sort rottenness to the bones thereof, because he
grieueth the holy spirit of GOD, I phes 4. 30. The Gospel, (Matthew 13.) is said
to be the Kingdom of GOD. Did Solomon so garnish the Porche of the Temple,
that it was there-vpon called Beautiful: and shall not we rejoice, Acts. 3. 2.
that by our ^^uit^s, not the Porch of the Temple which may (happily) not seem
much, but the Temple it self, and the Holy of Holyes of the Temple is adorned,
because the Gospel, and by co^^^quenc^ the Kingdom of God which cont^ineth the
whole frame of the Temple, not only material but also dragogicall i,
beautified?

Thirdly, we are as Trees of GODS planting, to become f^u^t^full in regard of
man, both our selves and others.

Touching our selves, we are as Trees to become fruitful, to make our
salvation sure: For certain it is, that though we be not saved by our
works, yet can we not be saved without our works. Non sunt causa regnandi,
sed via regni, says Saint Bernard. They are not the cause Bernard.
of reigning, but the way of the Kingdom. As a man then cannot come to his
iournies end without his way: so can we not ariue at the Kingdom of God (the
utmost goal of our race) without this way of Works to walk in.

Hence comes it to pass that the F^gge-tree, which being mercyfully spared
for three years space, yet remained barren, has this dome passed against it,
that it should be cut down. Luke, 13. 7. that the unprofitable servant having
^eceiued but one Talent making no advantage of it but burying it in the Earth,
had this Talent taken from him, and was himself cast into utter darkness,
where there shall be weeping and gnashing of teeth. That it Math. 25. 30.
is set down as a definitive sentence against us all, that unless our
righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, (...) we
shall by no means enter into the Kingdom of heaven: Math. 5, 20. (...) be two
negatiues, which according to the propriety of the Greek tongue, makes ye
stronger negation, serving as two boltes to shut such out of the Kingdom of
heaven. When Christ shall come to his judgment, he shall not give his
sentence against the godless and reprobate ones, that they should as cursed
depart from him into euc^lasting fire prepared for the devil and his Angels,
because they starued the hungry, took the drink from the thirsty, dislodged
the stranger, robbed the naked of his garments ma^e the hail sick, and
imprisoned them which were at liberty, therein doing that which they ought not
to do: but because they gave no meat to the hungry: imparted no drink on the
thirsty, lodged not the stranger, clothed not the naked, visited not the sick
and imprisoned: therein leaving that undone which they ought to do. Math. 25.
41. 42. 43.

Seeing then the fruitless Figge^tree was to be cut down: The unprofitable
servant to be cast into utter darkness, Where there is weeping and gnashing
of teeth: That unless our righteousness exceed the righteousness of the
Scribes and Pharisees, We cannot enter (by any means) into Gods kingdom: that
Christ shall give his sentence when he comes to judgment, not only
according to that which we have evil done, but also, according to that which
we have not well done. It appears, that without good works, without good
deeds, the fruits of this Tree our Salvation, i^ not sure: and so by
consequence, that by good works, by good deeds the friutes of this Tree (our
salvation) is made sure.

If we take a lease of House or Land, or of some other matter of like nature,
for certain years: we will carefully look unto it, that the instruments and
conueyances thereof be not wavering, floating, or doubtful, in any one point
of it, but that they be most certain, firm, and infallible: Behold here not a
lease of our own purchasing, but a deed of gift of Gods free gran^, passed
over unto us, not of earthy houses and lands, but of heavenly mansions and
territories: not for a certain term of years, but aeternall in the heavens:
And shall not we have a care to assure it? to confirm it? to ratify 2.
C^^in. 5. 1.
it? A work is this of good works, a fruit by which we are both to be
known unto men, by their fruits Mat^h 7. 20. Matthew. 7. 23.
ye shall know them, and without which God will not know us,

In regard of men also, others beside our selves, are we as Trees to become
fruitful; whether they be our brethren by grace: or adversaries to grace.

First, our brethren by grace do expect at our hands that we should be
fruitful, both they which are not called, that they may be won; as the
Ecclesiastical Hi^ ories report concerning Iustmus Martyr, that he seeing the
patient constancy, and the vnvanquishable virtue of the Martyrs of those
times, became himself a Martyr: as also they which are already called, that
they may the rather be encouraged, to level themselves according to our
rule, and guide themselves according to our direction, to work according to
our pattern, that when they see our Patience they may follow after Patience,
when they see our Humility they may follow after Humility, when they see our
Chastity they may follow as-Chastity, when they see our Constancy they may
follow after Constancy. When they see our Zeal they may follow after Zeal,
even as the Apostle wills, wh^^^ce 1. Cor. 14.
see love to follow after love.

That as we go before, and make Christ to be the Load-starre of our
direction so they may follow after and make us to be the Level of their
intention, as writes the same Apostle. 1. Corint. 11. 1. Be ye followers of
me even as ^am of Christ.

In respect of men like-wise, are we as Trees, to become fruitful, which are
adversaries to Grace, that we may silence their words, and stop their
mouths, who do whet their tongues and strengthen there sides to both decla^me
and exclaim against us: saying, or rather crying out then saying, that if we
be not Nullisidians, that is such as have neither Faith nor Religion, yet
be^ray we our selves to be Solifidians that is, which ^aue ^aith only
without Works, the fruits of Religion. This if they mean concerning our
Doctrine, the ^ead of this objection has often been cut of, but that it with
Hydra sorth-with brings up another.

Quo^^^dit in sedem capitis. caedemque prioris, that speed^^h no better then
his follow ^^d before him.

But if they mean it concerning our manners. Oh may not the guilt of our
convicted consciences gall our hearts with gri^ffe and dye our faces with
blushing, in regard of our defective miscariages in this behalf! God has
indeed planted us his Vineyard, on a fruitful hill of his Church, hedged us
in with the shield of his protection: has gathered out the ^ones of errors,
and planted us with the best Plants both of Doctrine and Sacramen^s, and nath
built in the midst of it the tower of Discipline, and when he might justly
look for grapes, because he may say in regard of his pains, what could I have
done any more to my vineyard that I have not done? Esaias. 5. 4. yet do we
either bring forth no grapes, or if they be any at all they be no better then
wild grapes.

The same God also has planted us as Trees by the waters of his word, whose
streams are as rivers ^lowing without standing, fresh without corrupting to
water and moisten our roots, tha^ ^o our branches may wax fruitful, and are we
not by reason of our corruption become as those Trees which being fixed in the
rivers Silarus and Eurimenus. Du. (...). w^^k 1. day. 3.
have both boughs and barks, and leaves and fruits turned into s^^ne? Stone
may we be s^id to be turned into, because our stony hearts are become like unto
the stony Mat 13. 5.
ground, bar^en and fruitless.

It is rather three times twenty years then three years since the Lord has
spared us as the fig-tee was spared. L^. 13. 17. For as much then as he has
year by year for so long succession of years, sought that Fruit of us which
is ought by us, and has found none, is it not now with fear and trembling to
be expected, that he will give his sentence against us which he sometime
uttered against that Fig Tree. Cut it down. Luke. 13. 17.

Shall the Turks at this day be given to good works, the (...) T^rkish (...)
cap. 21.
building of Temples, of colleges and Hospitalles? whereas their own private
houses are but base and contemptible, and shall we with those ancient
Tarentines, as if we should live cuer, dye never; build our own private houses
in state and magnificence, and suffer in the mean while Hospitalles for the
poor Colleges for the Student, and Tem les for God himself, to be de^aced,
demolished, (...).
and ^uinated, which are Christians? The most part of their legacies are given
to religious, holy and public uses, according to there Mahumetane profession,
either toward there Meschittes and Temples, or the making and repairing of
their highways, Bridges, Causies Condu^cts, Cisternes, Water-pipes, or toward
the redemption of prisoners, and the inrichments of their Soraglioes or
Hospitalls, whereof one of them may spend by yearly reuenew an hundred and
fifty thousand ducates. And shall we be either as Trees having leaves with
worme-eaten fruit like H^retiques: or leaves only without fruit, like
Hipocrites, or else having neither leaves nor fruits, like Barbarians, Savages
and Canniballes? shall we seek only our own profit and not the mutual
profit of each other? shall we be borne for our selves only? and neither for
the commonweal as Politique-men, nor (which is more to be lamented) of the
Church as Christian-men? Oh how poor is our devotion toward the poor? And
what a diminutiue, is our Minutum, our Mite, which we give to Gods ministers?
Alas it is but a mite, yet if we would bestow it on them with that
cheerfulness of heart, with which the poor widow cast her two Mites into
the treasury Mark. 12. 42. as that was commended by Christ, so by likelihood
might this be accepted with God, and we brought into his favor by it, but
being done with such grudging with such repining, how can it be gracious in 2.
Corin. 9. 7.
the sight of him which loves a cheerful giver? Oh the injury is not done to
us, the Messengers of God; it is done to God himself, whose Mouth we are,
and whose office we sustain, whose treasure we bear about with us in these
2. Corin 4. 7
earthen vessels. To spare our purse therefore in such a case it is to bring a
curse upon v^, and it will be as the proverb speaks, to loose, that in the
Shire, which we think to save Malach. 3. 9.
in the hundredth; to forgo y^ recompense of an hundredth fold, increase in Gods
kingdom, while we will stick and hucke with Gods Priests for there duties in
Gods Church. O! Let us therefore that we may not bury our tallent* but
perform our task, turn away Gods wrath and purchase his love toward, us
prove our selves to be as trees bringing forth fruit, and that in
consideration of God who deserves it, commands it, is glorified by it, for
the sake of the Gospel of God which is beautified, of our selves secured, ou^
brethren gained and confirmed, our adversaries ashamed and abashed through it.

The second branch of the fructifying of this Tree, is perseverance, in that it
is here said, for the time to come also, that this Tree will bring forth fruit.

It is nothing to begin well in well doing, unless we therein continue to
the end; yea it is better never to have begun well, then not to continue to the
end. We are Trees 2. Pet. 2. 21.
of righteousness, Easy 61. (...). therefore must we proceed to bring forth
the fruits of righteousness, otherwise it had been better for us never to
have known the ways of righteousness, then after the knowledge thereof, to
become as the dog returning to his vomit, and the Sow that is washed to the
wallowing in the mire. 2. pet. 2. 22


Sundry be the Motives, which if God shall accompany, with the dew of his
grace, and the operative virtue of his holy spirit, may move us to this
perseverance in our fructifying or fruit-bearing.

The first may be drawn from the (...) or deriuation of the name of religion,
which as both Saint Augustine, and also Lactantius do affirm, takes the name
a religando, of binding or tying, because thereby, as with a bond August. li^.
de q^antita. anima cap. 36. Lactant. ^lib. 4. cap. 28.
of Godliness, we are straightly bound unto God; and as writes Augustine:
the soul tyeth her self through reconciliation to one God. This tying
therefore, or knitting our selves unto God, ought to be as a bond or a knotte,
firm and durable: a bond of perseverance, as Ephesians. 4. 3. We read of a bond
of peace.

Four things are chiefly to be taught by religion: first, what things are to
be believed: this is Faith. Secondly, what things are to be loved: this is
Charity. Thirdly, what things are to be performed: this is Sanctity. Fourthly,
what things are to be sustained: this is the Perseverance here required, which
is even the sister of Patience, and can no more be separated from her, then a
man can well separate heat from fire, or light from the Sun.

The second motive or reason which may persuade us to this perseverance, it may
be drawn from the nature of Religion, a unity of spirit, to be found in one
body the Church; depending on one spirit the holy Ghost: one Lord Christ Jesus,
one Faith, one Baptism, one God and Father of all, which is above, through
all, and in all. If then Religion Ephesians. 4. from verse. 3. to 7.
be but one: the Truth one, the Church, Spirit, Lord, Faith, Baptism, and God
himself but one; then unless we mind to cast off all piety and religion,
and be found fighters against God, in that we open our mouths against heaven,
in denying there is a God; We are so in God and godliness to proceed; so to
persevere, as we have begun. If we shall either be at a stand, that we will
go no further, as Lottes wife being turned into a Pillar of Salt, or turn
back and relapse, like Ecebolius in the ancient Church, who after repenting,
craved of the Church to tread upon him as unsavory Salt. Surely, as Peter
answered Christ, when he asked him whether he also would go away, as many of
his Disciples did, who went back and forsook him. Master (says he) to whom
shall we go? Ioh, 6. 66, 67. 68.
thou have the words of aeternall life: So may it be said of us, Whether shall
we go? for here only are the words, and not elsewhere, of aeternall life,
and therefore here only we must continue, and produce the fruits of the Tree
of life, where only are to be found, the words of aeternall life.

The third motive or reason, which may persuade us to this perseverance, may
be drawn from our present good beginnings, and (by likelihood) forward
proceedings, in the fruits of godliness; and shall we now shrink? shall we
now give over? shall we hold on all the heat of the day? and shall we faint
and languish, and yield in the cool (as it were) of the Evening? Have we
prosperously guided our vessel through the maine and deepest Seas? and shall
we suffer it to be wracked at the very entrance of the Port of our
happiness? oh zealous speech of holy Polycarpus! worthy to be a perpetual
president of our serious and religious imitation, who made it Eusebius e^cl^s.
Hist lib 4. cap 15.
an argument, that he was still to serve Christ, because he had so long a
time formerly served him, therefore in the midst of persecutions, more hott
in zeal then his tormenters in bloodshed, brake he forth into this
protestation: Sexaginta et sex annos seruio Christo, et nihil me l^sit vnquam,
quomodo possum maledicere ei, et blasphemare regem meum, qui salutem m^hi
dedit? Sixty and six years do I serve Christ, and he has never hurt me at
any time, how can I now speak evil of him, and blaspheme my King, which has
given sauing-health unto me? Of this so holy a speech may we make an holy use
unto our selves: That for as much as we have so and so many years, been as
fruitful Trees in the Lords service, we should not now in any case become
barr^n. Is it reported of Socrates, that he never changed his countenance? and
shall we change our Religion? Ought we to forget that which is Philip. 3. 13.
behind, and endeavor our selves to that which is before? and shall we go
back from Christ, to follow the world with Demas, 2. Tim. 4. 10. Oh no ^let
that be far from us: but rather as God has continued a chain of his graces
toward us: whereof the first ^incke is by predestinating us, the second by
Calling us: the third, by lustifying us; the fourth shall be accomplished by
glorifying us in the world to come, Romans 8. 30. Let us also recontinue toward
him, a Chain of those graces which we have received from him, that so there
may be grace for grace: for which purpose are we to give all diligence, that
we may join virtue with our faith, and with our virtue knowledge, and with
our knowledge, temperance, and with our temperance, patience: and with our
patience, goodness: and with our goodness brotherly kindness: and with our
brotherly kindness, love, that so we may not be standing still, idle and
unfruitful. 2. Pet. 1. verse. 5. to 9. but going on working and fruitful in
the knowledge of our LORD JESUS CHRIST, like Trees, that still will, and will
still, bring forth fruit.

The fourth motive or reason which may persuade us to this perseverance, may
be drawn from the nature of God himself, with whom is no variableness nor
shadowing by turning, unto the which we ought to be conformed, Iam. 1. 17.
and become like it. First, because it is necessary we should so be, in
regard hereof, that we are said, to be partakers of the divine Nature. The
Divine nature, is without 2. Pet. 1 4.
Variableness; so must we which are pertakers thereof not change, but
immutably go on, to be fruitful: Secondly, because it will be most
acceptable unto God, if we so be, who being our heavenly Father will rejoice
no doubt, as earthly fathers use to do, in those Sons which are most like
him.

Thirdly, because in so being, we shall be most honorable unto our selves,
for the greatest honor (as writes Greg: Nazianzene) is to come nearest the
Image of God, wherein we were cr^ated: whose Image we then without ^reg.
Nazian. ^rat^, 26.
question do represent when we become unchangeable as he is vnchargeable,
whose name is like his nature, I am that I am. Exodus 3. 14.

The fifth and last reason or motive which may persuade us to this
perseverance, is the hazard which otherwise may and will be that we shall
never be saved. He that indureth to the end shall be saved. Mat. 24. 13. We are
in the Church of God as in a vineyearde, where we must labor and continue our
labor unto the end, before we can receive our penny, as in a race wherein
we must run and continue to the end, before we can be recompensed: as in a
warrefare, wherein we must fight unto the end, before we can be crowned.

For we ought to be faithful unto the death, if we look to receive a crown
of life: Apoc. 2. 10. to which purpose says Saint Cyril: Nolite vobis blandiri
fratres, etc. S. Cy^il.
Do not flatter your selves br^theren, that ye have heard and received my
speech: This is but the beginning only of salvation: unless ye shall abide in
the same, it shall not avail you,

Non qu^ritur initium sed finis (says S. Jerome) The beginning S. Jerome.
is not sought after, but the end. Saul and Judas began well but ended euilly.
The one killed himself and lost his kingdom; the other hanged himself tha^
he might go to his own place. Act. 1. 25. Paul on the other side begun
euilly, but ended well, so far forth as he was resolute in it; yt for as much
as he had fought a good fight and ended his course, there was laid up for him
a crown 2 Timothy 4 7. 8.
of righteousness. 2. Tim. 4. 7. 8. We must in the compass of our profession
be like a circle in Geometry, we must continue, a puncto ad punctum, from
point to point: from Alpha to Omega, from the first to the last, as Trees ever
fruitful. Will bring forth.

This perseverance here required, shows that the life of a good man, ought to
be the life of such a man as shall testify himself to be.

First, Laborious, in always bearing and bringing forth the fruit enjoined
him. No ease, no idleness which the Fathers call D^monis puluinar, the devils
cushion: But sweat, but labor must be his task, his portion. Saint
Chrysostom witnesses writing upon S. Cryso^^ in Math. 24. 13. (...)
the words. He that continues to the end shall be saved. Nomen tollerantiae
est nomen sudoris. The name of Tollerancie, is a name of sweat; and that which
is translated to abide, or continue, is in the Original (...), that is, One
that remains under, as it fa^eth with the porter in the bearing of his
burden: as a Tree laden with his fruit.

Secondly, this perseverance shows that the good man ought to testify
himself to be Courageous: to withstand the lettes which may hinder him in
this his will of ^uture fructifying.

Religion is a thing though inwardly sweet and comfortable, yet outwardly
sharp and bitter: Like John the* Baptist whose inward mild virtues, were
clothed, with an outward rough vesture, not better then camels hair. Math. 3.
4. Many difficulties will affright him, dangers repress him, crosses
discourage him, snares entangle him, afflictions encounter him, persecutions
affront him, winds shake him, and floods threaten to oppress, and all to
defeat the intended course of his Perseverance, unless he shall fight under
the colors of the Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Apocal. 5. 5. him self bold and
confident as Prou. 28. 1.
a Lion: void of fear, full of courage? Richard the first of this Kingdom was
styled Ceur de Lion, not so much because some say of him that he did tear out,
but because he bare about with him the heart of a Lion: Such hearts must we
also have if we look to win Gods heavenly Kingdom: as he thereby vanquished
the holy Land. For we must look to have combat; conflict and battle with
them which are first mighty principalities and powers, and strong ^oloss. 2.
15. 2 Cor. 10. 4.
holds: secondly, many not a principality, a power and a hold as of one, but
principalities and powers, and holds as of many: thirdly, which are so bloody,
barbarous, malicious, as they have (as it were) the hearts of an Adamant not to
relent; faces of b^asse not to commiserate, and hands of iron to make havoc
of all things. This has God appointed us, and this must we embrace as a
necessary point of our calling; A thing is it that God himself has in some
measure typed out unto us; in that he has joined the Cherubins and the blade
of the sword shaken together: to show unto Genes. 3. 24.
us that if we mind to come to the Cherubins in his kingdom, we must pass by
the blade of the sword shaken, in this life: Which though it shall be shaken
against us, yet must* we remain unshaken still; being in the midst of al
tempests and turmoyles, as the Rock in the midst of the winds and floodes
neither moved nor moue-able: for it becomes yea it behooves us to be
fruitful not fearful still.

This has bin the estate of Christ, of his Apostles, of his disciples, and of
Millions of his Martirs who have not with the slothfull-one suffered
themselves to be turned out of the way: because (as he alleges a Lion
stands in the way and heee shall be slain in the street. Prou. 22 13. but
have themselves become, as Judas Maccabeus of whom it is said that. In his
acts he was a Lion. 1* Macca. 3. 4. fearing nothing, but going on still, like
a Tree, yea the Moller. (...) Psalm. 1.
Palm Tree meant in this place: Which the more it is pressed the better it
prospers, so they the more they seem to be hindered, the better are they
fructified, not only constant for the present, but resolved for the time to
come, will bring forth fruit

The third branch of the fructifying of this Tree it is Propriety: Her fruit.
This Tree then expects not to be bettered and benefited by the fruits of
another, but for the good of her self and others, brings forth her own
fruit.

The Doctrine of the works of Super^rogation, which the Church of Rome
stands upon, whereby an holy man may (as they say) not only do that which
he ought to do, but more then is required at his hands; as the word it self
implies; the Surplussage whereof as a Churchtreasury Supererogati^ quasi super
id quodreogatur:
becomes an ^duantage to others which are more defective, may as by other
many, so by this Text of Holy Scripture be convicted to be etr^neous; that
the Godly man is as a Tree which will bring forth her fruit.

This Doctrine of works of Supererogation stands upon a double impossibility.

Whereof the first is, that no man (Christ only excepted) can in good duties
do more then sufficient for himself, when as (alaffe) no man was ever able
to do that which is sufficient: Which if any man be able to do, he does it
either by that sufficiency, which is of Nature, or of Grace.

First he cannot do it by that sufficiency, which is of Nature: because we are
al by nature as the Canaanites. Ezech. 16. 3. that is given as that people, to
sin and ab^omination: Polluted in our own blood. verse. 6. that is steined
with Original, and prone to Actual corruption: cast out into open field to
contempt. verse. 5. as of whom there is no further hope to be expected.

For which cause Saint August. moves this question: August de nature. and
grat^a. cap. 52.
Why is the possibility of nature so presumed on? When alas it is wounded,
maimed, troubled, lost, and needs rather a true confession, then a false
defense.

Secondly, he cannot do it by that sufficiency which is of Grace, because the
measure of Grace which we receive in this life, is imperfect, and that even in
the best. David makes his supplication unto the Lord: Enter not into judgment
with thy servant O Lord! for in thy sight shall none that lives be justified.
Where David asks favor for Psalm. 143. 2.
himself, being in the state, not of Nature, but of Grace, because he says,
with thy servant, which David could not be, considered as a man merely
natural.

Upon which words writes holy August. ne intres. etc. August. de Temp. ser.
49.
Enter not with thy servant into judgment. What is that enter not? But stand
not with me in judgment, requiring of me all things which thou have willed,
which thou have commanded, for thou shall find me gui^ty if thou enter into
judgment with me. Esaias also including himself in the number (who no doubt
stood in the state of Grace) Esaias, 64. 6.
witnesses that all our righteousness is as a filthy cloth. Paul in like
manner, who could say, that by the grace of God he was what he was. 1. Cor. 15.
10. yet in the greatest measure of this grace found he, A law in his members,
rebelling against the Law of his mind and leading him capti^e into the law of
sin, which forces him to cry out. O wretched man that I am who shall deliver
me from the body of this death. If then David, Esaias, and Paul, which have
been as tall Cedars in the Church of God, have been def^^tiue in doing that
which they ought to do: I hope it may be granted as an impossibility
concerning others, being but baser shrubbes in comparison of them, that they
do so far exceed them, as they have done and do more then they ought to
do. The first impossibility both in Nature and Grace. The second Impossibility
whereon this Doctrine of the work of Supere^ ogation stands, is, that if we
should grant that any man could do more good works then are required, which
is a t^ing that can never be Proved: yet could it never become avaylable unto
us: both because it wants Warrant and Means.

First it wants Warrant, as that which the word of God (which must be the
rule of our direction) does no where, either by express word or by way of
consequence affirm Noua omnia quae Christus non docuit, iure damnamus, quia S.
Ambros.
fidelibus vita Christus. says Saint Ambrose. All new things which Christ has
not taught do we of right condemn, because Christ is life to the faithful.
This doctrine of the benefit which may come by the works of Supererogation is
a new thing which Christ in his holy word has neither by express testimony,
nor by way of consequence taught, and therefore by the judgment of reverend
Ambrose, is not only to be rejected, bu^, which is more condemned: iure
damnamus. etc.

Secondly it can never be available unto us because it wants means. Indeed
it is true concerning Christ that (...) Righteousness is become our
Righteousness. 1. Co^inthians. 1. ^0.

In which sense we are said to put on the LORD JESUS CHRIST. Romans 13. 14. that
so being araied in the garments of our elder brother Christ we may obtain the
blessing of God our Father: as Jacob clothed in the raiment of his elder
brother Esau got the blessing of Genes. 27. 15.
Isaake his father.

But all this is done by the means of faith, which in this matter serves as
an hand to apprehend, apply, and gird about us the saving roabes of our blessed
Redeemer: but that this hand should apprehend and fix the handfast upon any
creature besides him, it were to make another name under heaven, whereby we
look to be saved, then by the name of JESUS; contrary to that the Apostle
confirms, Act. 4. 12. It were to putt our confidence in Ierem. 17. 5.
man and to make flesh our arm, and to withdraw our heart from the LORD.
Ierem. 17. 5. and so to deserve to be punished with that curse which the
Prophet Jeremy in the same place denounces against such, etc. There is no
application of Righteousness without Faith, which Faith in a right of
propriety belongs unto CHRIST only. If then it shall be fastened upon any
creature, it must of necessity be much deragatory from him; and so become as a
whet-stone to set an edge on his wrath; to punish it, to avenge it: For, shall
not the Lord visit for these things: Shall not his soul be avenged on such
an act Ierem, 5. 29.
as this.

Sithence then, this doctrine of the works of Supererogation appears to be
impossible, both in regard of our insufficiency by Nature and Grace, and also
that it wants Warrant and means. Let us not I bes^ech you build our hope
upon such floating and sandy foundations: Let us not which a^e Christians, in
looking after works of Supererogation from others, perform that which may be a
derogation from Christ: Let us know that if we have any imputed
Righteousness, it must be only Christ's.

Concerning any other righteousness, if we will have it auayle-able for us,
it must by the grace of GOD, be wrought by our selves not brought from others.
As another man's meat cannot nourish me, but mine own, another man's garment
cannot warm me, but mine own, another man's eye cannot guide me, but mine
own, another man's strength cannot enable me, but mine own, another man's
health cannot make me sound, but mime own, so to conclude another man's works
shall not avail me, but mine own. Therefore must we all in general, and
each one in particular be like a tree which will bring forth her fruit in due
season. etc. not the fruit of another.

The fourth branch of the fructifying of this Tree, is Opportunity in due
season. A word spoken, (much more a deed done) in due season is like apples of
gold with pictures of silver. Proverbs. 25. 11. bring forth fruit in due
season is, so to bring forth fruit (as it may seem best to be interpreted)
as the foyson thereof may do most good, and that not for our selves alone but
for others, even yielding our fruit as Trees do, whereunto we are compared,
which fructify not for themselves which are rather burdened then bettered
thereby, but rather for others who shall gather them.

For this cause has God made us his Stewards, that we should dispose of his
blessings to the good of others; the Magistrate by governing, the Minister by
teaching, and every particular man in his particular calling by doing that he
does not, as the Machiauell and Politician of this world to his own private
good: but if he be the Son of GOD, ought he to be like the Sun of the
World, which having received that rich portion of light without which all
things should remain in darkness, shines not for it self which sees
nothing, but to and for others, and those not the good alone, but the bad also?
So is it the duty of us to do good unto all. Especially to them Which are of
the household of faith: From whence we may observe that more specially and with
a more tender care we must do good unto them, which are of the household of
faith: but in a more general acceptance unto all men, not unto our friends
only, but to our enemies also. For if we love them which love us, what thank
have we? Do not the publicanes even the same? If then our enemy hunger we Math.
5. 46.
must feed him, if he thirst we must give him drink, Romans 12. 20. As they
which must not be overcome, malo culpae, with the evil of the fault: but
must overcome malum paenae, the evil of the fact with goodness. Romans 12. 21.
Judas was Christ's enemy, and that in the highest pitch of emnitie: A Wolf in
sheep clothing, an enemy under the mask of a friend, yet when he gave him
that kiss wherewith he betrayed him, as notes S. Hilarie, Dominus non respuit,
etc. The Lord refused it not; to teach us, says that S. Hilar in Math. Cano.
32.
Father. Inimicos omnes, eos^ quos sciremus maxim in nos desaeuituros
diligire: To love even our enemies, and those whom we should know y^ they will
most rage against us. The further we profit in this point, the nearer we come
to God himself: for as to do evil for evil, is a bestiall thing: to do
good for good is a moral thing: to do evil for good is a devilish thing: so
to do good for evil, is a divine thing; wherein certainly we do in good
measure express the nature of GOD himself, who is so Maximus, the Greatest:
as he is also Optimus, the best.

By thus doing shall we either winnne our enemies to their head CHRIST: or
heap coals of fire on their head; Romans 12. 20. And for our selves (in Gods
due season, for bringing forth our fruit in due season:) we shall be
dignified with our Head Christ Jesus, having crowns of glory on our own
Heads, for all euerlastingnesse.

Having handled the sanctifying of this Tree, I am in the fourth place to deal
with the flourishing of it [Whose leaf shall not fade.

By Leaf in the Scripture is understood, as it may in this place also be
taken, the Outward show and appearance of man.

Thus the Tree which Nabuchadnezzar dreampt off, which was indeed himself,
was said to have Leaves, that is outward state and countenance, in that they
were said to be fair. Dani. 4. 18. And these outward leaves of external
appearance consist, either in Speech, as S. Jerome Ierom, in Psalm. 1.
takes here Leaves to be interpreted: or (...) in Gesture and Behavior,
that is outward Gravity, Modes^y, Sobri^ty or the like.

This Leaf, is twofold: of Hypocrites, of Saints:

First the Leaf of Hypocrites, is that which always is to be found alone
without fruits: whose Speech is feigned without sincerity: and whose Behavior
is counterfeite without integrity. In both of them are they as Tombs painted
and gorgeous without, but full of rotten bones within: not unlike the
Alchymists gold which appears in color to be Gold, but when it is brought
either to the touch of the stone, or to the stroke of the hammer, it is proved
to be but Adulterine by the one, and is easily broken by the other.

A disease there is, called, Noli me tangere, which becomes speedily
contagious unto others, but cannot endure to be touched it self: so the
Hypocrite in outward speech is ready to find fault with the Moate which is in
the eye of another, but will not permit that the Beam which is in his own eye
should once be meddled with. Math. 7. 4. like them who have the Dropsy, who
for get the tumorous swelling of their own belly, to blame the smaller bounth
of their neighbors finger.

The Workman makes the face without the heart* God makes both the face and
the heart, the action of the Hypocrite may be compared with the act of the
Workman, which consists only in the outward face, as leaves alone without
fruit.

The action of the Saints may be likened unto the work of God, which stands
not only in the composition of the face, which is as the leaf; but of the
heart, which is as the fruit.

The Saints then are like Nathanaell, whom Christ saw under the Fig Tree: a
true Izraelite, in whom there was no guile: But the Hipocrites like the
Fig Tree it self, which Ioh 1. 47. 48.
Christ found, having nothing, but leaves, Matthew. 21. 19. Izraelttes only
without, Romans 2. 28. within nothing b^t guile. A brood of Vipers, Matthew. 3. 7,
which though they outwardly seem to hiss with zeal, and to delight with the
variety of their painted skin, yet within have they nothing but poison,
nothing but venom.

This leaf of the hypocrite stands not in that happy estate, which the leaf
of the righteous stands in: for whereas the spirit of God testifies in this
Psalm, that the leaf of the righteous shall not fade: the leaf of the
Hypocrite, cannot but fade. Whose leaf. shall become as the leaf of the Oak
which shall fade away. Neither shall Esaias. 1. 38.
the leaf only fade, that is, the outward appearance shall perish: but even
the Tree it self which bears such leaves, shall wither from the roots. It
may be they may Math. 21. 19.
flourish for a time, but the continuance of such Hypocrites will prove like
the growth of a Rushe which is withour mire, and therefore soon waxes ^eare,
as the Grass without Water which cannot hold out; and their trust, that is
the thing wherein they have most affiance, is but like the house of a Spyder,
which is both subtle and brittle, soon brooken down; and though their leaf
be green, and not yet cut down, yet s^all it wither before any Job. 8. 11.
12. 13.
other herb.

The second leaf is the leaf of Saints, which is always accompanied with
fruits, whose words are outwardly unfeigned with inward sincerity: and whose
whole behavior is outwardly incorrupt with inward truth, in both which may
they be likened to Salomons Temple whose outward gate was beautiful, and
inward courts were more beautiful. Act. 3. 2.

In an Hypocrite the Leaves are great but the fruit none at all, but in a Saint
the leaves are small and the fruit great. The Saints indeed are not altogether
without their Leaves there outward show, ye^ are they but little in comparison
of there fruit their inward comfort; like the Kings Daughter who no doubt was
beauteous without in that her clothing was of broydred gold, but nothing
answerable to that she was within, for she was first Glorious, second all
glorious within. Psalm. 45. 13. These Leaves these outward and extreme
appearances, because they are accompanied with fruit, therefore, (as Laban was
blessed for Jacobs sake, and Pharaoh prospered for Iosephes cause) shall these
Leaves be so established for the fruits sake, as neither Fruit nor leaf
shall fade.

O then how fearful a thing is it to be Trees, bringing forth Leaves without
fruit, with the Hypocrites! for then not only the Leaves, but the Trees also
themselves, by the fearful yet most just judgment of God, as proud Iesabell,
and her painted face, shall both of them perish together. On the otherside how
bliffull a thing will it be? to bring forth Leaves with fruit, as the Saints
use to do for then not only the Fruit, but the Leaves also, by the favorable
provision of Gods most merciful protection, shall both of them flourish
together, even as he which dies in the Lord and his works go both of them to
heaven together.

Oh let us then, seeing it is the pleasure of G O D S spirit to call us by the
name of Trees, not become such Trees as have a show of Leaves only without
the substance of fruit, therein as Hypocrites, least that God meet with us in
the extreme rigor of his sharpest judgment, not only to shake of our leaves,
Jeremy. 8. 13. but even to lay an Axe to the roots of such trees to cut them
down, Matthew. 3. 10. But let us rather strive with the best strain of our
might, to prove our selves such trees, which shall produce Leaves of show,
coupled and accompanied with fruits of substance, therein as Saints: that so
God may deal with us in that loving kindness, which may not only conserve
our fruit, that it may become living like the fruit of the tree of life: but
also, that our very Apocal, 22. 2.
Leaf may not only be durable to continue, but medicinable also to do good,
as the Leaves of that Tree there mentioned, according to the truth of this
Text; whose leaf shall not fade.

The second part in the similitude, it is the adiection, or part subsequent,
[So whatsoever he does shall prosper.

Wherein there is contained: First, a further Declaration, or Dilatation of
that Blessedness promised as a recompense of the virtuous labors of the godly
man, verse. 1. in that it is said of him, that he shall prosper.

Secondly, how he shall prosper, [So, etc. that is even as the tree planted by
the rivers of waters, which will bring forth her fruit in due season, whose
leaf shall not fade.

Thirdly, wherein he shall prosper in his doings, [Hee shall do, etc.

Fourthly, in what doings, not in some, but in all his doings; Whatsoever he
shall do, etc.

First then, touching the further Declaration or Dilatation of the recompense
of the Blessed man, He shall prosper. He shall be in the house of God, as
Joseph in the house of Putiphar, so assisted by the Lord, as what-so-euer he
does shall prosper in his hand. Though the World labor Genes. 39. 3.
to procure him adversity, yet shall the Lord bless him with prosperity. This
was the estate of David, who though he were a man of war, not only because
he made war against his enemies; but also because an army of troubles made
war against him: as the Bear, the Lion, the malice of his Brethren, the
persecution of Saul, the strength of Goliath, the railing of his Subjects, the
insurrection of his own Son, together with many other calamities, yet was
he not under the burden of all these crosses depressed and quenched; but
rather as one that prospered and grew. And no marvel, for the reason thereof
in the same place is added, because the L O R D 1. Chro. 11. 7.
was with him.

The second thing is, how he prospered, So, etc. that is: as the Tree planted,
etc. Whose very leaf shall not fade, that is, the very outward deportment and
carriage of his actions, sh^^l not perish, shall not miscarry. Gods mercy is
over all his works, who will pardon all our misdoings, if we be penitently
faithful, and will reward also all our we^l-dooings, if we be rightly
fruitful. What smaller thing can there be, then a cup of cold water? or a
couple of mites, both which ^aketh but a quadrin, that is, about half a
farthing? yet the one goes not away without his Matthew. 10 42.
reward, and the other by the estimate of Christ himself, a^e so highly
prized, that being with a good affection bestowed, they are said to be more,
then all which beside them, were ca^t into the treasury. Mark. 12. 42* 43.


The third thing is, wherein he shall prosper in his doing [hee shall do. The
state of a godly man then it is, not a state of standing still idle, but of
doing. If we will have Christ to be our guest, as he was to Martha and Mary,
Luke. 10. 38. two sisters. These two (as Sisters) ought to be linked together
in us. Meditation as Mary, which sat at Christ's feet to hear his ^reaching.
Action as Martha, Luk, 10. 3^.
though not in temporal matters, as she was yet in spiritual imploiments
busied about many matters. Luke 10. 41. We must profess the life spec^ulatiue
and active, theoricall and practical, joined both of them together. We must
have, not saying only, but doing, if we would prosper. Hearing and Saying
are but as the face: but Doing and Practicing are the true life of religion.

Hearing and Doing must go together, like unto those couples, Genesis 7. 2. male
and female. Hearing ought to go before, as the male to beget, and doing ought
to follow after as the female, to conceive, bring forth, and be fruitful.

If we would be holy Children, we must, first, hear; Secondly, bring forth
fruit: Thirdly, as the planted Rose. Fourthly, by the brooks, not of our
enclosed and private Gardens, but of the open and public fields, where the
profitt may redound, to the benefit, not of some, but of Eccle. 39. 13.
many.

To hear the Word gladly, is to commence no higher degree in the School of
Christ then Herod did, Mar 6. 20. But if we will be proficients, graduates
indeed: so as we may come home with true joy, which Herod was never acquainted
with: we must bring our sheaues, that is, our Fruits with us. We must not
only practice to Psalm. 126. 7.
hear, but here to practice. Hearing, without practicing, what else will it
do, but add more number to our stripes? That servant which knew his Masters
will, and prepared not himself, neither did according to his will, shall be
beaten with many stripes. What else will it do, but add more Luke 12. 47.
weight unto our condemnation? to this end our Savior breaks forth into this
denuntiation of judgment. Woe he unto the Corazin: Woe be unto the
Bethsaida, for if the works which were done in you, had been done in Tire and
Sidon, they had repented long since in Sackcloth and Ashes: but I say unto
you, it shall be easier for tire and Sidon in the day of Judgment, then for
you, Matthew, 11. 20. 21. On the other side: Hearing to practice, brings with
it a member of true Blessedness, the prosperity here spoken of. His doings
shall prosper.

The fourth and the last thing is, what doings of his shall prosper, not some,
but all his doings: Whatsoever he does shall prosper: whatsoever, etc.

Which, that it may the better appear unto us, we must know, that the doings
of a Godly man, are such as he vnder-taketh, faciendo, by action: or such as
he undergoes, patiendo, by passion or sufferance.

The doings of the godly which he vnder-taketh in Action, they be either his
Virtues or his V^ces.

First, he may be said to prosper in his Virtues. These be they which will
cause God to lift up the height of his countenance upon us; a thing prayed for
by David. Psalm. 4. 6. performed on Daniel: who while he was praying and
confessing his sins, and the sins of his people, had the Angel Gabriell (a
token of Gods holy acceptance of his Dan. 9. 20.
action) sent unto him, who among other things, told him, that he was greatly
beloved of G O D, Dan. 9. 23. Virtue is a fruit, whose prosperity G O D so
greatly tendereth, as if there had been but ten righteous persons in Sodom
and Gomorrah, he would not have destroyed it Genesis 18. 32.
for tennes sake.

G O D for the sakes of ten righteous persons, would have spared five whole
Cities: the stenche of whose sins were grown so loathsome and detestable,
as they cried to heaven for vengeance. Genesis 18. 20. But what speak I of ten
righteous men, the odor of whose virtues should have appeased G O D S wrath,
and conserved Sodom? when one virtuous Lot in regard of his righteousness,
was such an impediment to this action, as the Angel willed him to make have
unto Zoar, which should be reserved in safety for him, because he could do
nothing until he came thither. Genes. 19. 22. He could do nothing, etc. As
if Gods Judgment had been enthralled, where his mercy was engaged. Lotts
righteousness had that interest in Gods mercy, that it procured (as it were) a
supersedeas for his Justice, I can do nothing until, etc. Seeing then the
Virtues of the righteous are wholye stated in the mercies of G O D, their
doings (as in this place) must needs be prospered. Let holy Job further
exemplify this point unto us, who before it pleased God to try him (as for
their good he deals with all his children) is said so in his just courses to
be prospered, as that, an hedge was made about him, and about his house and
about all that he had on every side, and that God had blessed the work of his
hand, and his substance was increased in the land. Job. 1. 10. His virtuous
actions, as the virtuous actions of the righteous were prospered.

Secondly (which happily may seem strange) he shall prosper in his Vices. This
prosperity accrueth unto the righteous man from his Vices; not simply but
respectively: not in regard of the being or existence of the Vice, but of the
dependence or consequence thereupon: not in respect of the act, but of
something derived from the act. For be it far from the heart of any man to
think it: from thetongue of any Pastor, whose lipp^s God has touched with a
coal from his Altar, to publish it: for the ear of any Christian to listen
unto it, which certain men, whom the God of this world has blinded. 2. Corin:
4, 4. namely the Libertines, Swenck^eldians, but most especialy the Familists
have broched and maintained, that when GOD is Hominified in man, and man
Deified in GOD: whatsoever man does, yet is it accepted with GOD, alleging for
themselves Scriptures, to no better purpose then the Devil. vidz. All things
shall be clean unto you. If all things say they shall be clean, then our
sins Math. 4. Luke 4. Luke 11. 41
likewise.

Again there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus. If no
condemnation, say they, then let them do whatsoever they will they shall be
saved. An interpretation of Romans 8. 1.
Scripture, with like unto the vipers brood eats out the bowels of the text: by
taking y^ which may serve their turn: omitting that which may make against
them: whereas they should have well scanned, that which our Savior Christ
speaks, who is so far from admitting that darkness should become light, as
these men would have it, in that they would make vice virtue, as he^ (...)
v^geth this caveat: that we should Take heed, that o^r ^^ght does ^o^ become
darkness. Likewise the Apo^^l^ S. Paul in the forealledged Luke, 11. 35.
place, that, there is no condemnation to them which are in Christ Jesus,
Annexeth that which must of necessity be imply^d to them which walk not after
the flesh, but after the spir^t. These men therefore if they walk after the
Romans 8. 1.
flesh stand not in the state of salvation: but are to be sentenced with dome
of condemnation.

But where I affirm that, that the doings of the godly man shall prosper as
well in his Vice as his Virtues, my meaning is not as I formerly distinguished
simply in the existence and act of sinnne, but respectively in the dependence,
or something deriuatiue from the act thereof. The Godly man no sooner falls
into sin, but he forthwith rises again. How many fallings, so many
risings: how many ^rrors, so many returnings into the way: how many pollutions
and defilements by the sin of Adam, so many bathings, and cleansings by the
blood of Christ: that as his Offenses do abound, so his Repentance may
superabound. Lead thy captivity captive thou son of Abinoam. Iud. 5. 12.
The Godly man has been led captive by sin: but so, as afterward, he also
leads this his captivity captive: though sin causes them on whom it
ceazeth, both in the affections and actions to be Bestiall, Beast-like; yet
uses the Godly man repentance as the Priest used the sacrificingknife to kill
those beasts, in mortifying of his earthly members. Coloss. 3. 5.
Though his sins be as Tares in his conversation, yet his Repentance as
tears in his eyes, sueth and sobbeth for remission. He indeauoureth for that
perfection, which may occasion him truly to avouch with David, Psalm. 6. 6. 7.
that he does not only shed tears, but in that abundance which 1, waters
his couch. 2. causes his bed to swim. 3. not some, but every night. 4. so as
his ^ie was dimmed: yea as it is in the Original, his eye was eaten (as it
were) with worms. He rises from the Grave of sin: as Christ arose from the
grave of death, 1. betimes. 2, never to return thither again. He provides
all that he may not to sin at all: but because it cannot be avoided but he
must sin, when he has sinned he husbandeth his sin to the best advantage,
and will not continue in it but as speedily as may be deliver himself from
it, answearing therein as writes. Saint Augustine, to the August. praesat. in
lib. retrecta.
Greek (...) and (...), fore-wit and after-wit: (by which name (...) or
after-wit, repentance is also called) His offending of God causes Godly
sorrow, this Godly sorrow, leads unto repentance not to be repented of. 2 Corinthians. 7. 10.

The effect of that is in him to be found which is witnessed by Saint
Chrisost. Peccatum dolorem peperit, dolor Chryso. hom. de p^nitent.
peccatum contriuit. Sin has brought forth sorrow, and sorrow has crushed
sin a sunder; even (says he) as the worm which is bred in the wood
perishes the wood that breeds it, so sorrow which is borne of sin proves
sins destruction. In which sense even the doings of the vices of the GODLY
man may be said to be Prospered.

Moreover we may observe a twofold fruit, which the GODLY man reapeth by
repentance, and by consequence, by sin which causes repentance, whereof the
former is, that he is made more wise in his knowledge, the other more wary in
his carriage: and through them both by occasion of his vices prospered.

First, after his repentance for sins committed is he made more wise in his
knowledge, for hereby is he taught that. In his own strength no man is strong,
but it is the Lord which keeps the feet of his Saints. 1. Sam. 2. 9. That
God deals with his chosen as mothers deal with there children, who let them
go of themselves till they wave and reele, and then lay they hold of them to
keep them from falling: or as Christ dealt with Peter walking upon the sea
whom he first suffered to size, and then stretched forth Math. 14 30. 31.
his hand and saved him from sinking.

Secondly, hereby is he made more wary in his carriage, that after the first
he may not fall into the second shipp-wracke: that after the first he may not
be tainted by the second venom: that after the first he may not receive the
second wound of his spiritual enemy. Indeed the wicked leave sin as the
Letcher the Stews, with a mind to return thither again: But the godly man
as Amnon did Thamar, never to regard her again.

The wicked deal with their wickedness as Chiurca (a certain Joseph. Acosta.
nature. moral. hist. East^ and West Indies.
beast in Brasilia among the West-Indians) with her young ones which she
whelpeth a thousand times and as often receives them into her womb again. But
the godly in his repentance deals with sin as Iael^ with Siserah. who Iud. 5.
26.
not only pierced his Temples, but cut off his head, that he might never
revive again. He does with S. Bernard, labor Bernard in cant.
and strive, and so near as he can take a bond of himself that he will
present himself unto God rather, indicatum judged by himself; then
i^di^andum to be judged by God. In which acceptance the very actions of a
godly man (in his vices) may be said respectively or effectiuely to be
prospered.

The second kind of actions of the godly man is such as he undergoes,
patiendo, by passion or suffering. Which though they be Passions in regard of
the carriage of the burden of them; yet in respect of the godly man's carriage
of himself under this burden may they be reduced to the head of Actions.

Herein all crosses, losses, afflictings, persecutings, torturings,
tormentings, (...), etc. fire, gallows, renting of wild beasts, ripping up
of bowelles, distraction and contrition of bones, bruising of members, binding
^gnatius ^pist. (...).
of the whole body yea, (...) the punishment of the Devil himself. Which
holy Ignatius speaks off, shall become an advantage to the Godly man, and
therefore under them, in regard of his carriage toward them shall he prosper.
The whole body of bloody persecutions consist of Tortures; Whereof the one is
of that nature, that it takes not suddenly our life from us, but lingereth it
in torments for a time. In this the action of the Godly man does prosper,
because there-vnder he betaketh himself to God by Grace, as children then
^unne most to the Parents when they are in most peril. The other kind of
torture is of that condition that it speedily and forthwith dispatcheth us and
makes a separation of our soul from our body. In this also the action of the
Godly man does prosper, in that calling on God, and saying with Stephen Lord
Jesus receive my spirit, he shall be brought to God in glory, like Eliah who
with a whirlwind and fiery chariot was mounted up into heaven.

Oh then how blessed? how happy a thing is it to be A Godly Man? the lease of
whose outward appearance, joined with his inward truth shall not perish, and
whatso-euer he does it shall prosper. Whether it be his actions, either in
virtues or in vices; also as they lead him to speedy repentance, and make him
for the time to come more wise in knowledge and more wary in his carriage, or
whether they be his passions and sufferings, as means to bring him near unto
God in this life by Grace, and to cause him to dwell with God in the life to
come in Glory, requickning or reviving him (as the Phaenix out of her own
ashes) so out of the ashes of the fiery trial of bloody persecutions, not with
the Phaenix to a life of five hundred years: but to an age of Millions: yea
Millions of ages, everlastingly. No marvel though Ignatius despised, (...).
The ends of the world and the Kingdom of this age in comparison of this most
glorious a^^heiuement. Where the Apostle says of Godliness, that, it is great
gain. 1. Tim. 6. 6. He might well have said, that it is the greatest gain,
which brings with it such profits, such privileges, such praefermentes.

The second general part of this Psalm is that which concerns the wicked.
verse. 4, and 5.

Wherein we may please to be advised of two points: Frst the Introduction
into the matter of it, in the beginning of the forth verse. The wicked are not
so.

Secondly the Declaration of the matter it self, first by way of Similitude,
But as the chafe which the mind scatters away. Second by way of Sentence
from thence derived ver. 5, the particular branches whereof shall in there due
place be opened and handled.

First, must be assumed unto our handling the Introduetion into the matter.
The wicked are not so. The speech is negative and excludes the wicked from all that which the spirit of God in the foregoing part of this Psalm has
witnessed concerning the Godly, both touching the Evidence of their Virtues,
and the Recompense for there Virtues.

The Evidence of the Virtues of the Godly in the Negative part of it was, that
they walk not in the counsel of the wicked, stand not in the way of sinners,
sit not in the seat of the scornful, but it is Affirmative in the wicked
which is Negative in the Godly, because, they walk in the counsel of the
wicked, stand in the way of sinners, and sit in the seat of the scornful.

The Evidence of the virtues of the Godly in the affirmative part thereof, was
that there delight was in the Law of the Lord, and in his Law do they
meditate day and night, but it is Negative in the wicked, which is Affirmative
in the Godly; for there delight is in nothing less then in the Law of the
Lord. Neither do or will they meditate therein, either night or day. From the
Recompense for the virtues of the GODLY, the wicked are also excluded by this
Negative testimony. Blessedness is the reward of the GODLY, but, Cursednesse
is the wages of the wicked: cursed be the man which obeieth not the words of
Gods Covenant. Ierem. 11. 3. The Godly man is said to be A tree planted of GOD
himself, by the rivers of waters, which will bring fo^th her fruit in due
season, whose very leaf shall not fade: But the ungodly man is as a wild tree
planted not by God, but growing of himself: not by the Rivers of waters, but
in the waste and barren Wilderness, not that will bring forth her fruit, in
due season, but which will bring forth no fruit at all in any season, and his
leaf, of outward show, of pomp and vanity, otherwise then the leaf of the
godly shall fade.

To conclude: as it is said of the godly, VVhat-soeuer he shall do it shall
prosper. So is it to be an indubi^able and undeniable speech touching the
wicked: [The wieked are not so. But what-soeuer he does shall not be prospered.

For the better understanding hereof: Let us (I beseech you) draw the Actions
of the ungodly to those heads; unto the which we have formerly drawn the
Doings of the godly: and we shall undoubtedly find, that as the actions of the
godly, shall, are, and have been prospered, So the doings of the ungodly
neither have been, are, or shall be prospered.

These doings or actions consist (as before we have heard) either in that
which they undertake, faciendo, by doing, or else in that which they vnder-go,
patiendo, by suffering.

Those actions which the wicked undertake faciendo, by doing, let them be
observed, in their Virtues (so abusiuely called) and in their Vices.

First, for their Virtues. They are as August* speaks of the words of
Infidels, but, spendida peccata, glistering August.
sins. The beauty whereof can no more dispense with them to be no sins;
then the sweet which it may leave on the palate can warrant poison to be no
poison.

The virtues of the wicked they be no virtues but the Image of them, as the
Image of David was showed by Michol to delude Saul her fathers messengers, for
David himself. 1. Sam. 19. 16.

These their virtues are done by the wicked first, for show, as Hypocrites,
like a dunghill covered with snow, white without, but full of stench and
pollution within. Hypocrites though they be, as fire without, whot and bright:
yet be they as water within, first cold as water, secondly (as we use to say
in a proverb) Weak as water, They have (it may be) the color, and
appearance of salt, but not the smacke and relish of it. What taste is there
(...) the white of an Egg? Job. 6. 6. so may we say what taste is there in the
salt of an Hypocrite?

The spirit of GOD witnesses of an Harlot, that Prou. 5. 3. 4.
her lips dropp as an hony-combe, and her mouth is more soft then oil, but the
end of her is bitter as worme-wood, and sharp as a two-edged sword.

That which there is said of the Harlot, may also be verified of the
Hypocrite: that the sweetness of honey, and smoothness of oil, is in his
outward countenance, and appearance; but within lurketh even the bitterness of
worme-wood, and the dissembling of a double heart, like the wounding of a
two-edged sword.

How can then even the virtuous actions (if it be lawful so to call them) of
such as mas^ke under the vizard of Hypocrysie be prospered by GOD? who will be
worshipped not in show, and doubling, but in spirit and truth, John. 4. 24. Yea
how shall he not rather not only defeat and dis-prosper them? but also even
utterly avenge and confound them? to give these Hypocrites their portion With
Hypocrites where there is weeping and gnashing of teeth, Math. 24. 51. Weeping
which comes of heat; and g^ashing of teeth, which comes of cold, to them
which are Lukewarm, neither whot nor cold, as it is said of the Church of
Laodicia.

S. Basil likeneth the hypocrite unto the Idol Bell, externe quide^ habenti
aes, lutum vero sub aere, falgente absconditum: Basil H^mil. in a^quo. Script.
locos.
Having br^sse without, but clay hidden under that shining brass within: Of
this also may we be sure, that the lot of the Hypocrites shall become, by the
just judgment of God like unto the lot of Bell, who being delivered Dargon.
Hist. Bell and
into the hand of Daniell (which signifies the judgment of God) was by him
destroyed.

There-fore in regard of these virtuous actions of the wicked, varnished over
with the gloss of Hypocrisy, cannot they be said to be prospered, but rather
as the Scripture imports, to be confounded and ouer-whelmed The wicked are
not so.

Secondly, these their virtues are done by the wicked, for praise of men, Like
vaine-glorious-ones, who may, deservedly be censured to have hunted after the
wind, and when they have caught, and as they think possessed it, yet do they
but inherit the wind. Prou. 11. 29. Vaineglory is a limb of pride, and God,
which resists the proud. 1. Pet. 5. 5. resists also these vainglorious
actions (...), The gifts of enemies are no gifts: so the virtues of the
wicked are no virtues: virtues in name, but not in nature, pretending great
matters in title, but not in truth, like Absolon whose name signifies the
Father of peace, yet disturbed he his fathers peace, and himself became the
son of rebellion.

Absolon to get himself a popular applause among men, and a name on earth,
reared up unto himself A pillar in the Kinges-dale to keep his name in
remembrance because he had no son, which he called after his own name 2.
Sam. 18. 18. So the wicked exercise their virtues, even as the old World
builded their Babell, to get them a name and a renown amongst men. But as
Absolon was not prospered in his intendment, for as much as what he purposed
one way, God disposed another: his end being to be hanged by the hair on an
Oak; to be pierced through with darts: to be cast into a pit in a Wood,
and to have a mighty great heap of stones laid upon him. 2. Sam. 18. 17. So
these vaine-gloriously virtuous actions of the wicked shall be dispersed not
prospered, as the true virtuous actions of the godly shall be prospered, not
dispersed, [The wicked are not so.

Thirdly, these their virtuous actions are done by the wicked for their own
good, consisting either in Profit, or in Praeferment, like Politicians.

For their own good, consisting in profitt, like vserers forbearing the
present principal, for future advantage.

Thus the devil himself may be said to be a Welldoer, who will as,
experience teaches, benefit and help the bodies, to the end he may gain and
swallow up the souls of men.

The wicked do also virtuous actions, for their own good, consisting in
Praeferment, to get men's hearts, to the end that men's hearts thus gotten may
give them high place and advancement. This was the Devils case, who when he he
had Christ up into an exceeding high mountain, and showed him all the
Kingdoms of the world, and would have given them him also; but not of simple
charity and true bounty; but upon condition, that he might gain the greatest
honor that ever yet was yielded to any creature, namely that CHRIST the Son of
God, yea a GOD himself (at whose name every knee should bow: of things in
heaven: the good Angels of things in earth: Men, and of things under the Earth
Devils: Phil. 2. 10.) Should bow the knee: yea which is more Luke, 4. 5.
Should fall down and worship him. This likewise is the case of all the
wicked, which are of their Father the Devil, Who will help up somewhat
(inwordly policy) the state of them which are down; to the end they may help
their own estate up. But these virtuous doings of these ungodly dooers cannot
be prospered: because Christ will ouer-throw such Mony-changers themselves,
which change small, that they may gain great sums of money; as some-time he
ouer-threw the ^ables of the Money Changers in the Temple. John. 2. ^5. and
make a scourge for the backs of such Merchandizers of Profit. And for them
which by this means affect preferment. There exaltation shall prove like an
Exhalation, mounting aloft, and forthwith turned into lightning, which shall
be cast down; the estate of Satan himself, and the lotte of his followers,
who was seen to fall as lightning from Heaven, Luke 10. 18. Therefore though
the Luk, 10. 18.
virtuous actions of the godly shall prosper, yet may it be said of the
ungodly, The wicked are not so.

Secondly, the doings of the wicked, are those which he vnder-taketh,
faciendo, by action, respecting his Vices. Seeing his virtues have been found
to have no better success, his vices can much less be expected to be
prospered. The vices of the godly, not simply but respectively, were said to
prosper, because they lead him to a speedy, wise, and wary repentance. But with
the ungodly it is far other-wise: he knows not what repentance means.
He may say of repentance (the work of the Holy Ghost) as those Disciples of
Ephesus said of the Holy Ghost himself: that they had not so much as heard
whither there were an Holy Ghost or no. They know well Act. 19. 2.
what belongs to the returning unto sin but are wholly ignorant of that
which concerns the turning away from sin. Therefore these actions of the
wicked, Oh how can they prosper! Yea alas, how can they be but defaced,
disprospered!

In them is rather to be found bitterness, then sweetness; disprofit then
profit, as may appear unto us by a summary view of these particulars:
Arguments that they cannot prosper.

The first is, that the Vice of the wicked by the continual practice of it,
hardens the heart of him that practices it. Hence it is, that they which
would be called, (though they deserve it not) the Children of Abraham, become
as stones hardened, as Matthew. 3. 9. we read of stones, whom God is able to
raise up, that they may be the Children of Abraham. This makes the fleshy
tables of their Exodus 34. ^.
hearts, to be as the tables of stone, in which were graven not the sweet
comforts of the Gospel, but the affrightfull terrors of the Law. It makes
the ground of their heart to become as stony ground, which causes the seed of
the word Matthew. 13. 5. 6.
sown thereon to parch and wither. A stony heart, which being thoroughly
hardened by the custom of sin, proves more impenetrable then the stony
rock in the wilderness; because the Rod of Moses smiting this rock, so
mollyfied the stiffness thereof, as it became as a living Fountain, to yield
water to the thirsty Israelites: but, not the Rod of Moses, but the Scepter
of God himself, Exodus 17. 6.
smiting not once, but often, not on the stony Rock of Horeb, but on the
rockie stone of our hearts, is so far from mollifying it, as it rather
proves like the Adamant, of which some say, that the more it is beaten upon,
it is still more and more hardened.

The second point, whereby the bitterness and disprofit of the wicked (which
comes by the actions of their vices) may appear unto us, is the guilt and
galling of Conscience, which continually records and suggesteth unto them
their sin committed, Gods law violated, his Majesty offended, punishment
deserved, etc. And are in the soul, as Antiochus worms were in his bowels,
continually gnawing. The Whippe with which CHRIST drove the buyers and sellers
out of the Temple, was but for a John. 2. 15.
time: but the scourge of a bad conscience is incessant, perpetual, yet hidden
and secret. Occultum quatienti animo tortore flagellum. Iuuenal.



The Tormenter shaking an hidden whippe in the soul of the tormented. This is
a dampe that puts out all the light, and a pang which takes away all the
delight of the wicked: so that their vicious actions cannot prosper.

The third point, whereby the bitterness and disprofit of the wicked (which
comes by their actions of vices) may appear unto us, is the Angering of GOD
thereby. Sins be the cause of Gods anger, because they be the only Vanities
which prouoake him to anger. An anger which (because sin is both the fuel and
the bellows of it) shall burn even to the hottome of hell, and s^all consume
the earth with her increase, and will set on fire the foundation of the
mountains. Deuteronomy. 3 2. 21.
It is much to consume the earth, and the increase of it: more to set on fire
the foundations of the mountains: most of all, to burn to the bottom of
hell. As there is a depth of Gods Wisdom, so is there of his Wrath, which
descends from the surface of the earth to the foundations of the Mountains,
and from the foundations of the Mountains, to the bottom of hell: a Wrath,
which in the 42. verse of that Chapter is called by the name of Arrows and a
sword: of Arrows which kill, eminus, a far off, and of a sword which
wounds cominus, near hand. These Arrows are not ordinary Arrows, but
Arrows which are made drunk with blood. This Sword, not a sword Ibid.
of common use, but a Sword which shall eat flesh. Seeing then the vicious
actions of the wicked, do provoke such and so great a Lord, to such and so
great an anger, though it be said of the Godly, that whatsoever they shall
do, shall prosper: yet * The wicked are not so.

The fourth point, whereby the bitterness and disprofit of the wicked, which
comes by their vicious actions, may appear unto us, is, that they are no
true possessors, but vsurp^rs of the outward blessings of this life: for they
of right and due claim, belong only to the godly, as the blessed Apostle
witnesses, speaking of, and to the Saints: All things are yours: which
general title he after opens by the particular members of it, not only
Paul, or Apoll^s, or Cephas, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
come, but even also the world it self. The wicked then 1. C^rin 3 21 22. 2.
C^rin. 4. 4.
may be said to be Lords of the World, as the Devil to be God of the world,
by forged Evidence, Intrusion, usurpation. Therefore as in a possession euilly
gotten, unjustly holden, with the Godly they cannot be prospered. The wicked
are not so.

The fifth point, whereby the bitterness and the disprofit of the wicked,
which comes by their vic^ous actions, may appear unto us, is that they shutt
them out of Gods kingdom; for whereas there is a blessedness for them which
do Gods Commandments, by entering in through the gates into the City: the
wicked, which are as Apoc. 22. 14. 15.
Dogs and Enchanters, and Whore-mongers, and murderers and Idolaters, and
whosoever loves and makes lies, shall stand without. Apocal. 22. 15.
Therefore [the wicked are not so.

The sixth point, whereby the bitterness and disprofit of the wicked, which
comes by their actions of vices, may appear unto us, is that they Press
them down (without repentance) to hell. A notable testimony, concerning which
point is set down, Esaias. 5. 14. In the former part of which chapter, the
Prophet having set down, not only the barrenness of the wicked to good, but
their pro^enesse, yea greediness to evil, as their oppression, which caused a
cry among the people, verse. 7. covetousness in joining house to house, and
field to field, till there be no more place but that they may be placed alone
in the midst of the earth verse. 8. drunkenness, which men rose up early to
follow, and continued at it till night, until the Wine did inflame them, verse.
11. In verse. 13. denounces he a temporal punishment against them consisting
of Captivity, Shame, and Famine. But verse. 14, comes he to the most heavy
and insupportable spiritual judgment it self: that therefore: that is, for
the cause of these vicious actions, Hell has, first, enlarged her self
within: Secondly, least the passage should seem to be too straight or
intercluded, has opened her mouth without. Thirdly, both within and without,
in entrails and entrance, spacious* without measure. Fourthly, not only that
the multitude of the wicked, but even, their glory and pomp, and he that
rejoices therein, not may, but shall descend into it. Therefore as the godly,
can they not prosper. The wicked, etc.

The second sort of actions of the Wicked, be those which they undergo,
(with the Godly, not as the Godly) patiendo, by suffering. Wherein we may find
the carriage of themselves, under the carriage of their burden, to be
diverse, yea adverse from that of the Godly. For be it that their necks once
be yoaked, or their backs burdened with losses, crosses, afflictions,
persecutions, torturings, tormentings, fire, gibbet, renting of members,
racking of bones, etc. forementioned in the Godly. What does it I beseech you,
beget and produce in them? but among other disapproueable, yea reprooueable
effects, as they which are utterly destitute of the fellowship of that spirit
which is called the comforter, these two furies rather then fruits, Impatiency
or Desperation.

First, it begets and produces in the wicked Impatiencie. It fares with
them, under this manifold burden of the Cross, as it did with Issachar, who
is said to be an Ass, strong indeed (as the Text there speaks) as those men
also seem to be in the outward view of the world, yet, couching betwixt two
burdens, Genesis 49. 14. so under many burdens, not able to sustain them.

From the bitter fountain of this Impatiency flows a twofold unwholesome and
untoothsome stream:

The one of Pining away of the wicked themselves: the other of Repining
against God their maker.

The Pining away of themselves cannot be avoided, forasmuch as their
darkness is without light, their sour without sweet: their sorrow without
solace, their crosses without comfort. For any ease they can find, within,
without, above, beneath, before, behind, on either hand. or round about them,
may be said to be (alas) a miserable comfort, as Job said of his friends,
that they were miserable comforters. Their trouble is like fire in a Furnace,
which Job. 16. 2.
finding no vent, waxes furious in it self, increasing the measure of the
own heat, beyond all measure, so these finding from no means, or place, the
desired issue of any consolation, rage against and within themselves, like
Saul, who no doubt, when in his moody Melancholy, the evil spirit was upon
him, was, ipse suum cor edens, as one 1. Sam. 16. 1^
that did eat his own heart, or as them, Esaias 9. 20. who eat the flesh of
their own arm. Pining in themselves.

The other stream of this Fountain is Repining against God their maker: not
only in thoughts, but in words: an Instance, we have in those Israelites, who
having forgon the flesh-pottes of Aegipt, to the which they were accustomed,
Exodus 16, 3. and being pinched in the wilderness, Exodus 16. 3.
forthwith repined and murmured against Moses and Aaron, verse. 2. and by
consequence, against the Lord himself, verse 7.

Julian the Apostata, may be an other Instance hereof, who being mortally
wounded in battle submitted not his heart to his redeemer, but turned his face
against heaven, defiling the air from his mouth with blasphemies, from his
hands with blood, uttering these opprobrio^s terms of grudging and fearful
repining, Vicisti tandem Gal^l^e, calling Christ in contempt a Galil^an, and
telling him in scorn, thou have overcome. A most terrible, and memorable
example of this matter is also recorded in the French French Hist. in Hen. 4.
History even in the beginning of the King now reigning, Henry the fourth, of a
certain Duke called Duke Ioy^use who in his rebellion, against the King his
Master being overthrown in the field, was heard repining against G O D in his
distress, and vomitting forth these words of blasphemy, I run this day an
high fortune, farewell my great Cannons: Ha I renounce God.

The second Fury rather then Fruit, which by suffering and crosses, etc. is
begotten and produced in the wicked, is Desperation, as in Saul, Judas,
Achitophell, with diverse others alleged in Histories, both Ecclesiastical
and Political, may appear unto us, who bearing the cross on their backs,
have impatiently run a desperate race, the goal whereof have been the
wrack of their own lives, wrought by the work of their own hands.
Persecution, and tribulation, falling on diverse subjects, produces diverse
effects. As excellently writes Augustine, Sicut sub eodem igne aurum rutilat,
et palea fumat. etc. Saint Augustine in Psalm.
As under the same Fire, gold brighteneth, and dross smoaketh: under the same
^^aile the Chafe is bruised, and the corn purged, and with one motion the
spice is ^rayed, and the sent raised, Ita vna tr^bulatio irruens, etc. so one
tribulation falling on us, does purge those which are good, but does reprobate,
exterminate, annihilate the badde. The reason of all which is, that as the
Godly is prospered in all things he does or suffers; so, The wicked are not
so.

The second point is the Declaration of the matter it self: both by way of
Similitude and of Sentence.

First, by way of Similitude, in these words, [But as the Chafe which the
wind drives away. Wherein there be two limbs: First the matter whereunto
the wicked are likened, unto Chafe; Secondly the condition of the Chafe which
the wind drives away.

First, the matter whereunto the wicked be ^^kened is Chafe. The wicked and
ungodly may be compared vn-Chaffe, both as Chafe is Naturally and
Accidentally to be considered.

First, as Chafe is naturally considerable, are the wicked and ungodly as
Chafe, whose nature is both light and unprofitable.

First Chafe is light, containing in it not solid and weighty matter, but a
slight, and froathy substance, so the wicked and ungodly, they are not solid
in there purposes, and weighty in there carriage, and courses, but slightly,
easily wrested, froathy, easily tossed, and blown away.

This, that it may the better be manifested unto us, let us not wrap up this
matter in general tearm^s, but unfold the particulars thereof wherein we may
cl^ar^ly see that the wicked be as Chafe, because they be light as the
Chafe is light.

First, it may appear unto us that the wicked be as Chafe Light, because
they be Light of bele^fe; to give too light an ear, and to speedy a credit to
those windy, uncertain and sclanderous reports, which be brought vnthem
against there neighbors, which may either impeach there credit, or give an
occasion of jar betwixt them. The ear of such, is not the ear of the wise,
which seeks Prouer. 8, 15.
learning and understanding, because it proves and discerns not words, as
the ear of the wise does, Job. 34. 3. where it is said that the ear tries
words even as the mouth tastes meat. How (I beseech you) does the mouth taste
meat? but so, as if it finds it to be untoothsome and unwholesome it
forbeareth it and casts it forth again, but if it finds it to be
loue-some and nourishable, it conuayeth it further into that place which nature
has ordained to be as the source and fountain of nutrition and strength to
the whole body in general, and every singular member thereof particular. But
on the other side the care of the wicked become as the Sponge which sucketh up
all, both good and bad, or rather as the Sieve which lets go the good and
keeps the bad. As therefore we read of a Fools mouth. Proueb. 18. 7. so
may this be said to be a Fools ear. A Fools mouth speaks any thing: so a
Fools ear hears any thing but a Fools mouth speaks ever, or for the most
part, that which is bad: so a Fools ear hears seldom or never that which
is good: as Flattering is to the ears of the great: so are the words of a tale
bearer to the ears of the great: so are the words of a tale bearer to the
ears of the wicked they go down into the bowels of the belly. Pro. 18. 8.
They go down by light credence, deep, even unto the bowelles of the belly,
by malicious Remembrance, because the wicked are as the Chafe light of ear,
as that is light of substance.

Secondly it may appear unto us, that the wicked are as Chafe light, because
they be light of there Word. They have not there mouth in there heart like the
Wiseman that they may be constant: but they have there heart in there mouth
like the Fool that they may be uncertain, wavering, mutable. Eccle. 21. 26.
The certainty of the word of the wicked is like the grows of a Mushrom, which
comes up in one night and is gone in another. It is said of words that they
be as wind: so may it be said of the words of the ungodly that they be more
light then the wind, and also more flitting: Do they promise any thing? there
promises are but as Esdras visions which proved but as vanishing apparitions:
for he which is Wiced is also Unwise and a lie is often in the mouth of such a
one. Do they Vow any thing? which is more then an ordinary Ecc. 20. 23*
promise because it carries a Protestation with it, yet keep they there vows
no better then they did which Act. 23. 12.
vowed Paul's death, which they never performed: the difference is, that the
vowers of Paul's death performed it not, because they could not: but these
perform not there vows because they will not. Do they swear and bind the
matter with an oath? yet be there oaths like Belles or Bubbles in the water
which swell and break in a ^erom.
moment. As the Godly swears in Judgment, verity and righteousness, as is
praescribed. Iere. 4. 2. whereupon Saint Jerome writes in Judgment, in
respect of themselves, least they should do it rashly, in Verity and in
regard of justice of the cause they swear for; in veritate, ne falsa sit; in
verity least it should be false; in iusticia ne illicita, in justice least it
should be unlawful, as also it is alleged by Thomas Aquinas: so the wicked
and ungodly do neither Tho. Aquin. Sum par. 2. 2. q(...)t. 89. A^ti. 3.
swear of judgment in respect of themselves, but rashly, inconsideracely:
neither in Truth and Justice, touching the cause: not in Truth, because, be it
true or false it is all one to them: not in Justice; because whether it be
lawful or unlawful, they regard not: As therefore they swear lightly, so
likewise forswear they as lightly, in Promise, Vow, oath, and by consequence
in their word, light as the chafe is light.

Thirdly, it may appear unto us that the wicked a^e as Chafe, Light, because
they be light in their minds, entertaining and excluding, admitting and
rejecting, receiving and repelling hundreds, yea thousands, not of variable and
changeable, but of varied and changed interpretations determinations, courses,
purposes, whose councels and intentions hang no better together then if a man
should wreath (as the proverb says) a rope of sand; velut ^gri somnia vana:
as the vain dreams of a sick man. That which one while pleases them,
forthwith discontents them: that which one while affects them with mirth,
forthwith surprizeth them with sorrow: that which one while lifts them up with
pride, forthwith casts them down in baseness: They now sing, now sighe: now
leap, now languish: now laugh, now weep, Caereus in vitium flect^, may Ho^ace.
be the ungodly man's Motto, because like Wax he may be wrought and brought
into all shapes and forms, by a very sudden mutation; but in all things
tending unto Vice, like a certain creature called Nabis which cosisting of
many shapes make but one monster. Neither does this Pli^^y.
lightness in their minds concern their Moral intents only, but also their
religious courses. For were there as great variety of religions in the world as
there is of faces and countenances (whereof never were two found that in all
respects were like each other) yet could they be content to be of them all,
so as from them all, they mough^ reap any advancement or advantage at all. But
while they take all religions, in all they, have none; even as the water, which
receaueth the semblance of all coulors, indeed has none.

He that is without religion is at the sayrest, but immortale pecus: an
immortal beast: Immo^tall, in respect of his soul which cannot dye: a Beast
because he labors rather to stain that soul by Sin, then to save that
soul by Grace. The Religion of such stands (if it stands at all) only in
outward appearance, not like unto the Sacrifice which God approves, Leuit. 1.
9. whose Inwardes must be washed. The Confession of Peter was his Religion,
Math. 16. 16. which our Savior, Verse. 18. calls by the name of a Rock: If
religion be as A Rock, it ought not to be (I will not say) easily, but at all
removed or altered, but stand firmly and unchangeably grounded and rooted.

Gregor. Nazian. witnesses concerning Constantius Grego. Nazian. orat. funeb.
in Laud. Athanas^i.
the Emperor when he was ready to dye, that he complained that there were three
evils which chiefly happened to his Empire, while he reigned: the one was the
slaughter of Gallus his son in law; the second was the setting at liberty of
^ulian the Apostata, the third, the innovation of religion. But that which
Constantius deemed and doomed to be a maine evil to his whole Empire, viz: the
change of religion, the wicked supposes to be no indamagement to his
particular self; for he is in his Mind, and by consequence in his religion,
light as the chafe is light.

Fourthly, it may appear unto us that the wicked are as Chafe, Light, because
they be Light of their Bodies; by committing of manyfold adulteries and
fornications; A sin which is committed by them with greediness of sinning:
by which they do not only offend, but defend it, when they have once offended
by it: calling it by the name but of a Trick of Youth. But tell me, you,
against whom there is A woe denounced even by the mouth of the Prophet,
because you call sour sweet, light darkness, evil good, tell me (I say)
is that but a trick of youth* For which even* David the servant and beloved of
the Lord was threatened, that the sword should never depart from his house. 2.
Sam. 12. 10.

Is that but a trick of youth for which Hemor and She^chem the father and the
son, and many other both men and women, and children were murdered by Simeon
and Leuy old Jacobs sons? ^enes. 34. 25. That, for which the Lord flew Hophni
and Phinees the two sons of Ely the Priest in the battle with the
Philistines, is that (...) Sam. 4. 11.
but a trick of youth?

Does a man by being light of his body, beside the damnifying of his soul,
first Sin against his own body? 1. Cor^^th. 6. 18. Secondly, against his
goods? For, it rooteth out all his increase. Job. 31. 12. Thirdly, against his
name? because he shall find a wound, and dishonor, and his reproach shall
never be putt away. Prou. 6. 33. Fourthly, against his wife? if he be yoaked
in the holy estate of matrimony, because, he gives his body which is not his
own but hers, from her to another. 1. Cor^n. 7. 4. Fifthly, against his
children? The sword s^all never depart from his house, as in such a case it be
fell David, 2. Sam. 12. 10. because he had done so and so to the wife of Vriah
the H^ttite. And shall this sin then that scandalizeth and damnifyeth in so high
a degree our bodies, goods, names, wives, children be accounted but as a
trick of youth? Oh, it is an assertion not to be holden in the Courts of the
Lords sanctuary, but to be thought to be set abroch and a fl^ate only in the
Synagogue of Satan: not among such as make the Lord to be their rock and
fortress with David. Psalm. 18. 2. But among such as make the Devil to be
their Anchorhold, as writes S. Basil. (...) (...); Adultery or uncleanness
wherewith Bas^^.
men become as Chafe light of their body is the Devils hook which haleth men
to destruction.

Fifthly, and lastly, it may appear unto us that the wicked are as Chafe
light, because they be light even in their ver^ues and good things,
counter-ballanced against their vices and evils. For let their virtues be
placed in the one, and their vices in the other scale of the balance: and
their vices shall be found many and weighty, when their virtues shall declare
themselves to be but froathy and light. So that it may be said of their
virtues as it is reported concerning Belshazar: Tekell, thou art weighed in the
balance and art found too light. Dan. 5. 27.


Seeing then that the wicked are Light of belief, Light of their word both in
promise, vows, and oaths, Li^ht in their minds and that in their most
religious purposes: Light of their bodies by incontinent motions and passions;
Light in their virtues and best parts, counterpeized with their vices and
evils, which are in them: well may they be termed, as here by the Holy ghost
they are cen^ured to be As Chafe, light as the Chafe is light.

Secondly, the nature of Chafe is to be unprofitable, good for no use: but as
unsavory salt is to be cast forth, So unprofitable Chafe is to be burnt up.
Math. 3. 12. The portion of Chafe unprofitable is to be burnt up with fire
unquenchable.

The wicked may be found to be as Chafe unprofitable: 1. in regard of matters
Temporal, wherein though they happily have ability, yet have they no will to
do good with them. 2. ^n regard of matters Spiritual, wherein though happily
they may have will, yet have they no abillity to benefit others by them.

First, they are as Chafe unprofitable, in regard of matter Temporal; in
which for the most part, they have ability enough, if not too much: yet want
they will, to regard the afflictions of Joseph.

First, because either their Will is wholly bent upon coue^eousnesse,
pinchingly to gather all, to no other use, then to look it up in their
co^^ers with one lock, it may be from others, but with a hundred, yea a
thousand loc^es from themselves, because every covetous thought, which
infinitely spring and ri^e in their hearts, is as a spring and ward, to lo^ke
both it from them, and them from it.

Such have less Interest in their own wealth then others have in it. For as
much as others neither possess it, nor are possessed by it, therein remaining
at liberty: but, themselves do so not possess it, as they are possessed of it
therein enthralled by slavery. These are among their golden treasures, as the
Griffons among the Indians are reported to keep their mines of go^d, so as
neither they enjoy the benefitt of them themselves, neither yet suffer other
to approach near them.

O then, is it not a Sickness, yea as it is called an evil sickness, when
men have, first Riches: Second those R^^ches which are not only for the
present, but in that they are said to be Reserved, treasured up for the time
to come: yet to no other end then to the evil of their owners. Eccles. 5. 12.
To the evil of their owners, indeed, first, because they become slaves unto
them: second, because they are ^^rmented with the carke of evil keeping of
them: third, because they are but Stewards and must give account for them; if
they shall be found in the day of their account to have been unprofitable, as
Chafe is unprofitable, then must they assuredly expect no other sentence then
that which was denounced against the Unprofitable servant. Cast therefore that
unprofitable servant into utter darkness, there shall be weeping and
gnashing of teeth, Math 25. 30.

Secondly, the wicked have Ability and yet no will to do good in matters
Temporal, because their will is wholly bent upon prodigality, profusely to
spend all in abuse, which also makes a man become as Chafe unprofitable in
matters Temporal. For while man has so many insatiable Le^ches sucking upon
him, as the Leech of Gluttony, Luxary, Apparrel^ings, Buildings, Riotings,
Gamings: He becomes as a S^arce, which having many ventes, and holes, how
much water socuer is powered into it, forthwith remains em^ty and dry. The
fire consumes and (as we say in a Proverb) has no mercy; so the Prodigal
one consumes all on himself, and has no mercy on others: by reason of his
prodigality, As the chafe unprofitable.

Secondly, the wicked may be found to be as Chafe unprofitable in respect of
matter Spiritual, because though they therein it may be have a Will (which is
also rare to be found) yet want they ability to benefit others by them.

How can a man give that which he has not, or speak that which he knows
not? First, they have not a spiritual blessing to give, as they which are
only carnal, as yet altogether borne of the flesh, and therefore nothing but
flesh, John. 3. 6. As Peter could give a Spiritual gift, saying to the Criple
at the beautyfull gate of the Temple, Such as I have give I unto thee, in the
name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, rise up and walk, but could give no
Temporal alms: Silver and gold have I none: so the contrary is to be found
with the wicked, for when Act, 3 6.
they have ability, yet want they will in temporal guists, concerning the
bestowing of silver and gold: but be it that they have a will, yet want they
ability in giving of a spiritual blessing, because therein themselves are as
cripples to be healed, not in case to heal cripples. Moreover they know not a
spiritual blessing to utter it, a man's knoledge is his (...) his wisdom, and
the natural minded man (...) s^uo^^th not, non sapit, r^hsheth not, has not
sapientiam, that is as writes Augustine, sapidam scientiam, S. Aug^^^. 1 Cor.
2. 14.
of those things which are of Gods spirit. 1 Corinthians: 2. 14. How (...) they
^p^^ C^rists c^u^sell, which know not Ch^^^^s voy^^? a ^uality not in^ident to
these Coats, but a proper^y belonging to Christ's s^e^pe only. O these John.
10. 4.
wicked ones are for the most part most el^quent in worldly discourse, but
Infants which are so called, a non s^^^^, of not speaking in heavenly precepts,
Children are they, but not in malitiousnesse, for in that they are men grown:
1. C^^. 14. 20.
but in knowledge contrary to that counsel of the Apostle. Be you not
children in understanding, but concerning maliciousness be you children: and
therefore in spiritual matters are they unprofitable as the Chafe is
unprofitable.

Hitherto has it appeared what Chafe is, and that the wicked are like the
Chafe, naturally considered: Now are we (in a word) to advise what this
Chafe is, and how the wicked resemble this Chafe, accidentally obse^ued.

In Chafe accidentally observed, there be two estates or conditions, whereof
the former is, as it is preserved for a time, while it is in the field with the
good corn, least both of them should perish together. A care which God had,
who would not suffer the Tares to be plucked up by his servants, least they
should pluck up the good wheat with them: so Matthew. 13. 29.
the bad are (it may be) while they are with the good, spared for the good
sake; as the tares while they were intermedled with the wheat, were spared for
the wheates sake.

The other estate or condition of Chafe, accidentally observed, is the sifting
and separating the same from the good corn or wheat, which shall be at the
harvest of Gods judgment spoken of, Matt. 13. 30. when it shall (as appears
by the second limb following) be driven away with the wind.

The second limb of this similitude, is the condition of this Chafe. [Which
the wind drives away.

Wherein, may it please us to be given to understand of two members.

The former member is what is meant by this wind.

The other member is what is done by this wind. Namely, the driving away of
the wick^^ as Chafe. Concerning what is meant by this wind, no doubt but ^t
signifie^h and sets forth unto us the Judgment of God.

This Judgment of God is in the holy Scriptures expressed by sundry things: by
Fire, a Swo de, Arrows, a Stone, whereon if we fall it cannot be ^uoyded, but
we shall be fore bruised, but if it falls on us, it will grind us to
powder; by a Sickle, a Fan, and he^re in this place it is called by the name
of a Wind. But that we may not superficially view the face, but somewhat
more inly look into the heart of these words. Let us ca^l to mind these
principal considerations, wherein Gods judgment may resemble the wind.

Three chief and maine considerations may we be remembranced of, in which
the Judgment of God is, and may be deemed as the wind.

The first is, the place it comes from: the second, the place it comes too:
the third is the quality of the wind.

The first consideration in which the Judgment of God is and may be deemed as
the wind, is the place it comes from. The wind comes from above, even cut
of the Lords own treas^re-house, who may be said to be the great Lord
Treasurer of the winds, which at his pleasure brings forth the winds out of
his treasures. The four Psalm. 1357.
maine and primary winds, whereof the residue are compounded, because they
come from heaven, are called the four winds of heaven; so does Gods
Judgment, likened here to the wind, come from above, even from heaven: Dan
7. 2.
which whether it be i^flicted upon us, either by A^gels or Men, good or bad,
yet are they but Gods instruments, for if we call the matter to mind in
capite, as it originally springs, it arises from God: In which sense we
must know, that as it is said, that there is no evil in the city but it
comes of the Lord: so we must distinguish, as the godly Fathers have done
before us of evils. There is a double evil: malum culpae, an evil of fault;
and malum paenae, an evil of punishment. From the evil of fault the Lord is
wholly to be excluded: but touching the evil of punishment may the Lord be
admitted, that there is no evil in the city, but it comes of him. Gods
Judgment therefore is like the wind, because it comes from above, the place
from whence the wind also comes.

The second consideration, which may remembrance us, that the Judgment of God
is as wind, it is the place it comes to, even the center of the world we
dwell on, and the round globe of the earth we live and move in. Such a one was
that wind, which as a swift Arrow of Gods judgment, came flying from above, so
as it made the banqueting house of Jobs children, to be the mark it shot at,
Io^. 1. 19. and so smot the four corners of that house, being on earth, as it
self on them, and they dyed: so the Judgment of God, here likened unto the
wind, has terminu^ a quo, the bound from whence it came, from heaven. Has
also terminum ad que^, the bound to which it goes, the earth; yea the more
earthy-minded and muddily affected, a man is on the earth, so much the more
subject is he to the tempest of this wind. Pharaoh, Adonibezeck, Saul,
Jeroboam, Ahab, Antiochus, Herod, etc. great men, whose greatness consisted in
earthly dignity, had so the wind of Gods Judgment, as earthy subjects the
rather borne unto them, and bent against them, as Pharaoh, which had formerly
drowned the males of the Izraelites in the river, was himself ouer-whelmed by
Exodus 1. 22.
the wind, with the waves of the Sea: as Adombezeke had the thumbes of his
hands and feet cut off, as he had served Exodus 14 27
seauenty Kings before: as Saul, who would have fastened Judge 1. 6. 7. 1. Sam.
18. 11. 1. Sam. 31. 4.
David to the wall with his I^uelin, slew himself with his own Sword on
mount Gilboah: as Jeroboam, which had defiled the Religion and house of the
Lord, should himself become, as that which is most defiled, even as doung. and
he which had made molten Images to dishonor GOD; himself should not have a
living Image or 1. R^g. 14 1^. Ibid.
Child in his posteritye, to continue his name: and he which lived as a plague
to the Church, dyed plagued by God: as Ahab, who had shed Nahaoths innocent
blood, 2. Chr. 13. 20 1. Reg. 21. 13.
had his blood also shed, and dogs licking up the same: as that Antiochus
which despised GOD, and Herod which 1. Reg 22. 38
took that honor upon him, that was due unto God, were consumed of worms.
Against these, the rage of the wind 2. Macch. 9. 9 Acts. 12. 23
of Gods judgment has been carried, as against men of an earthy affection,
inclination, disposition, which were not in their time, as it is said of the
Saints of God, (...), that is, as the word signifies, men singled, (as it
were) and sifted from the earth, but like the old Giants, terrae fil^i, the
sons of the earth, who as they have fought against heaven, so has heaven
fought against them by this wind of Gods judgment.

The third consideration, which may remembrance us, the Judgment of God is as
the wind, it is the quality of the Wind, wherein we may take sundry
observations. First, the quality of the wind is to be invisible to the eye, so
comes the Judgment of God inuisibly, when men are least aware of it; for
when men shall say, Peace; yea, when in a double confidence, they shall double
their security, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 3.
and say, peace, peace, then shall sudden destruction come on them. Gods
judgment is, securis in securitate inflicta, an Axe laid to the root of the
Tree to cut it down, when the Tree thinks her-selfe furthest from the blow,
a stroke which is fealt before it is seen, even as of the wind.

Nabuchad-nezzar was swollen up with the wind of his vain heart, boasting in
the height of his pride, concerning his Babylon. Is not this great Babel which
I have Dan 4. 27.
built, for the house of the Kingdom, by the might of my power, and for the
honor of my Majesty. Where we may observe, that of the manner of his speech,
he utters it by way of interrogation, or asking of a question, examining (as
it were) himself therein, that so the great thoughts of his proud heart,
might with a secret Affirmative, make answer unto him; by means whereof he
might further glory that it was so. But while he was thus puffed up with the
wind of vanity, the invisible wind of Gods judgment seized on him; a wind
indeed, because as a wind, it was heard and felt, but not seen; He saw
nothing, but he heard a voice from heaven, saying, O King Nabucchad-nezzar, to
thee be it spoaken, thy kingdom is departed from thee, verse. 28. Yea and felt
also a stroke, which even the same hour caused that alteration in him, that
he was driven from men, he did eat grass as the Oxen, his body was wette
with the dew of heaven, till his hairs were grown like Aegles Feathers, and
his natles like Verse. 30.
Birds claws. We read of the beating of the earth with the sound of GODS
thunder. Thunder is not seen but Eccle. 43. 17.
heard and felt; because it has a sound and beats the earth; so is it with
the wind of Gods Judgment, which was both felt and heard of Nehucchad-nezzar,
but not seen, because it came as the wind, invisible.

Secondly, the quality of the wind is, to be swift in his course, so the
Judgment of God comes swiftly, when it comes, for it is as a winged book
which comes flying. Zacha. 5. 1. as the wind it self is said to have wings.
Psalm. 18. 10. Fierceness and swiftness they go together, as therefore the
wrath of the LORD is a fierce wrath, so must it also be a swift wrath. The
Iere. 4. ^.
coming of Nabucchad-nezzar against the people of Izraell for their sins, is
likened, for the speedy assault thereof, unto the most swift things, as that
for his person he shall come up as the Clouds: for his Charrets, there should
be as a tempest: for his Horses, they should be lighter then Aegles. Ierem.
4. 13. And Ierem. 4. 11. 12. is this his coming compared: First, to a wind,
Secondly, to a dry North Wind, whose force is most swift and boisterous.
Thirdly, to a mighty wind, to show unto us that the Judgment of God, here
called by the name of the wind, is and must be accordingly. An Arrowe driven
out of the bow of some Archer among men goes very swiftly: much more swiftly
of necessity must the arrows of Gods judgment fly which he sends out of
the bent-bow of the clouds. In which place God by Solomon is described as an
armed Champion who purposes to avenge himself on his enemies, whose armor is
jealousy. verse. 17. breast plate righteousness, helmet judgment. verse. 18.
invincible shield, holiness. verse. 19. sword, wrath, and the whole world the
abetters of his quarrel against the wicked. verse. 20. arrows, thunderboltes
which shall not vainly roue in the air, but, fly to the mark out of the bent
bow of the clouds. ver. 21. Arrows which wust needs be most swift and
peircing, being such arrows delivered out of such a bow by such an Archer:
further as if all this were too little it is added verse, 22. agreeable to this
of my purpose that a mighty wind shall stand up against them, and shall scatter
them as a storm: like the wind then is Gods Judgment, because swift as the
Wind.

Thirdly, the quality of the Wind is to be unequal, not bearing at all times
one and the self same force, but Intended and Remitted in his strength: so
fares it with the Judgment of GOD, which sometimes alighteth on our goods,
which be near, some-time on our Friends, Children, Bodies, which be nearer
then they: sometimes on our Lives, which be nearest of all. We wade in the
waters of troubles which GOD has allotted for us even as Ezechiell passed
through the waters that issued out of the Temple. First up to the ancles, then
up to the knees, after up to the loins, and in the end it became a river
impassable. Ezechi. 47. ^. 4. 5. Gods Judgment is as a cup mixed with wine
and dreggs, to show that as the Wine is better then Psa. 75. 8.
the Dregs, and the Dregs worse then the Wine, so there be degrees and
distinctions in the execution of Gods wrath, who raineth from heaven upon the
ungodly, snares, fire, and brim-stone and stormy tempest, not snares alone, nor
fire and brimstone alone, nor stormy tempest alone, Psa. 11. 6.
least there should seem to be an equality of his punishment: but snares,
fire, and brimstone, stormy tempest mixed together, a compounded potion to
become the wickeds confounding portions, this is the portion of then cup. Ibid.
stormy tempest is ill, it blasteth and wastes their cattle and substance,
etc. a snare seems worse, because it en^hralleth their liberty: but fire and
brimstone questionless be worst of all, for they shall burn up and consume
themselves. As the Wind, therefore is Gods Judgment not always of one
strain, but inaequally, either intended or remitted, as the wind is.

Fourthly, the quality of the wind is to be impatient of resistance: for
where it finds it self most oppugned, there the power of the wind is most
opposed, viz. against the high Mountains, tall Cedars, lofty Pines, and spyred
Turrets or Pinnacles, etc. Which things as they be most exalted against the
wind, so are they also more assaulted by the wind. So the Judgment of God in
this kind, answers to the wind. For the higher a man be (if he be high
minded, because he is in high place) the more open lays he to the wind of
Gods Judgment, as Luke 1. 52.
those mighty ones which he puts down from their seat.

Excellent examples we have of this matter in holy Scriptures, in Pharaoh,
Antiochus, Herod, Corah, Dathan, Abiram, etc. In Ecclesiastical Histories also
almost infinite, One for all, Gregory Nazianzen reports, that when the Jews
were set a work by Julian the Apostata, Greg. Nazian. ora^^. 2. in Julian.
Aposta,
to build again the walls of the Temple, therein to resist God to his face,
by insringing his truth, in that it is said, that, not one stone should not be
left upon another, which should not be dissolved in the temple. While they were
about their labor, the wind of Gods Judgment finding so great a resistance,
by so perverse, and contumatious, rather contempt, then attempt, enforced it
self with the greater force, to the defeating of this their impious
enterprise, in so much as Thunderings and Lighnings (as that Father mentions)
wrought the confusion of there work, and fire from heaven (in a most ruful and
fearful manner) consumed the worke-men, so as they were constrained to desist
from there work, As the Wind therefore is the Judgment of God, most
Impatient, where it finds most Resistance.

Fistly the quality of the Wind is, though it be Actually fearful and
furious, yet to bring good effects Accidentally with it. The Wind though in
the strength of it, it breaks and bears down all things before it: yet
accidentally purges and cleanses it the air, causing the same to become more
pure and wholesome, so Gods Judgment, howsoever it wracketh and overthrows
them against whom it is bent, yet by Accident (as we say) it brings the
benefit of a manifold good with it for, first, it gets God glory as in
Pharaoh, Secondly It purges Romans 9. 17.
the whole world of Monster^: thirdly, It tendereth an example to other that
they tread not in the Step, least they drink of the Cup of the wicked,
that they follow not there example whom they find to be made so fearful
examples, that they deal not in the acts of them, the last act of whose
Tragaedy they observe to be so bloody, together with many other wherein the
Judgment of God, is as the Wind, fearful in act, but fruitful by accident.

Sixthly and lastly the quality of the Wind is to bring (as we say in a
proverb) a Calm after a Storm. so Gods Judgment (that I may close up the
bitter Cup of his Judgment with a cordial) always continues not in the
extremity of it, but yields a making alive after killing, a raising again
after the grave, exaltation after humility, and riches after poverty, as Hanah
the Lords Hand-maide sings by her own experience. 1. Sam. 2. 6. 7. herein
like the spear of Telephus which became a plaster to the wound it first made.
This Judgment of God by S. Basil is S. B^s^ll H^^^^^ omil 5.
compared to the Fig Tree, which has a very bitter root but ends in a most
sweet fruit.

Be it that the Judgment of GOD is as a great ^lowd and fire, and not only A
Wind, but A whirlewinde, yet Amber (a representation of mercy) is said to
Ezechi. 1. 4.
come out of it. Ezech. 1. 4.

That GOD which has appointed the Day to follow the Night, Light to follow
Darkness, Heat cold, the fruitful Summer, the barren Winter, has also
ordained the insuance of a Peace-full calm, after a windy storm, Mercy after
Judgment.

Hitherto have we seen in what and how many principal respects, the
Judgment of God resembling the Wind, may as in this place be called the
VVinde: and what is meant by this VVinde.

Now according to the second propounded member am I to handle what this Wind
does. [Driueth away. If you would know what this Wind drives away, even the
ungodly, which before we heard to be like unto Chafe easily dispersed.

It is a Metaphorical or borrowed speech from that Husbandry which concerns
the reaping of the grain of the earth.

The Hu^band-man we know, reapeth and carries into the barn the Grain and
the Chafe both together, which so continue until he comes, after the
threshing of them with his slayle, to the winnowing of them with his fan,
which for the most part is performed by him in a windy-place, that while as the
waightyer corn remayueth still, the lighter and unprofitable Chafe separated
therefrom may be blown away. So GOD calls, which is like to reaping, and
brings and arraigneth at his Iudge-ment-barre which is like to the bringing
into the Barn, the good and bad, like unto the Corn and Chafe, which so
continue till they pass the slaile both together, of some more light or
particular judgment, it may well be: But when they come to the fan of GODS
more heavy Judgment, called in the book of GOD so often by the name of A
burden, if not inflicted in his world, yet to be at that general doom
expected at the end of this world, then shall the good, as good Wheat be
severed and conserved, but the bad as empty Chafe shall be sparsed and
scattered by the Wind of Gods most just wrath.

Behold then the estate of the wicked, what place or preferment soever they
have, what port or pomp soever they bear among men, yet their hope (which
when it fails all things seem to fail with it, as that which is the last
refuge of a distressed soul) their hope I say, is but like the dust which is
blown away with wind, and like a thinn scumme which is scattered abroad with
the storm, and as the smoke dispersed with wind. Wise. 5. 14. As the desire
and pleasure of the wicked have consisted chiefly in three things while they
flourished in this world, in Covetousness, which is like unto Dust, in
Incontinency, like unto Froath, or Scumme; In Ambition like unto smoke, so
their confusion consists in the blowing away of the same dust, froath, and
smoke, by the wind of Gods judgment.

Oh then how may the wicked and ungodly justly Wisdom, 5. 8. 9. 10. 11, 12.
complain with those wicked Ones. What has pride profited us? or what profit
has the pomp of riches brought us? All those things are passed away like a
shadow, and as a post that passed by, or as a Ship that passes over the
waves of the water, or as a bird that flies through in the air, or as an
arrow that is shot at a mark, so that the passage of worldly vanities of
themselves is very swift, compared unto the most swift things, as a Shadow,
Post, Ship, Bird Arrow, and in regard of their punishment ordained for them
made most swift, taken away as with a wind, as we may read of taking such a
Way as with a flood. Oh then let it Psalm. 90. 5.
not be scriptum in glacie, but sculptum in aere, not written in the fleeting
Tables of our weak fantasy, but in the living Tables of our never dying
remembrance: that sin is not only a breach of the law, a wound in the
conscience, a bellows to kindle the brand of Gods burning displeasure, a lepry
of the soul, a wearisomenesse to the body, but also that it causes a Wind
that quite riddeth and takes us away! It may bear a kind of pleasure for a
time, like Iesabels painted face, which bare an outward face of beauty, but was
no true beautiful face: but in fine will it prove like Lamia, a certain
monster having a beautiful face, and beautiful breasts, so fair, as no
Painter can Dion Hist. Li. hiae. sieve Affri. cae.
imitate with his pencell, but from the middle downward is a Serpent, wholly
given to prey and rauin: see sin inticeth (as experience proves) with the
bait of her face and the beauty of her breasts, but atrum desinit in p^scem,
virgo formosa superne, she is a stinging Serpent behind and swolloweth Hora^e.
dea^. poetic,
up both bodies and souls of men so into the bowels of her, as into the
bowels of Hell, from whence there is no redemption: for Hell is the Draught
which such meat passes into, through such a panche, never to be recovered.
Let us therefore by all possible endeavor, avoyde to be wicked as the wicked
are, least with the wicked we be like unto an house builded on the sand,
which when the rain fell, and the floods came, and the wind of Gods judgment
(here mentioned) blow and beat upon, it shall show it self, to be before the
whiske of that wind, as the chafe here spoken of, not able to resist it, but
so to fall by it, as the fall thereof is great. But let us rather labor with
al^ diligence, to be godly, as the godly are, that with ye godly we may be as
an house builded on a rock that when the rain falls, the flood comes, and
the wind of Gods judgment M^^t. 7. 26. 27. 28.
(here intended) blows and beats upon it; we with it may be like the sound
and good corn, rather sifted then scattered, secured from falling. The
Declaration of the matter concerning the wicked, being now handled in that part
thereof, which contained Similitude, am I to assume that part of it, wc is
expressed by Sentence from thence derived. verse. 5. Therefore the wicked shall
not stand in the judgment, nor sinners, etc.

This sentence passes against the ungodly by two names: First, as they are
Wicked, they shall not stand in the judgment: Secondly, as they are sinners,
they s^al not stand in the assembly of the righteous.

In the former of the two are we to be informed of two points, first, what is
meant by Judgment in this place: secondly, that, the wicked shall not stand,
or as it is in the (a) Original, not rise up in that judgment. Jerome.


For the better understanding what is meant by Judgment here, we must know
that GOD (whose judgment is here intended) has a twofold judgment. The
former it is a particular judgment to be found even in this World; the other
it is the general judgment; which we believe and expect shall be at the
consummation of the world.

GODS Particular-iudgement, is either more Large and Universal, or else it is
more Strickt and Singular.

GODS more large and universal, Particular-iudgmen, is that which in this life
concerns the extirpation even of whole Countries, Cities, Families, etc. for
their sins.

Of whole Countries: So the whole Country of Samaria, people which the King of
Ashur had brought from Babell, Cuthah, Aua, Hamath, Sepharuaim, and placed them
in the Cities of Samaria; among whom for as much as they feared not the LORD
Lions were sent from the Lord which slew them, even the whole nation 2 Reg. 17.
10.
or Country of them.

Of whole Cities, as may appear by those Cities of Sodom and Gomorah, who
for that they fostered among them, pride, fullness of bread, and abundance of
idleness, therefore Ezech. 16 49.
were they consumed with fire and brimstone from heaven. Genes. 19. 24. 25.

Of whole Families, a notable example hereof we have in Corah, Dathan and
Abiram, who for that they resisted Moses and Aaron the Magistrate and the
Leune: and therein resisted God himself, had the judgment of God bent so
both against them and their families, even the^r wives and their sons and
their children, Numb. 16. 27. That the earth opened her mouth and swallowed
them up with their families and al their goods. Verse. 32.

Achan may also exemplify this point unto us, who for that he had caused the
Lord to be so angry with his people that they fell before the men of Aye, by
reason that he had taken an Excommunicate booty, contrary to the Commandment
of the Lord of of the spoils of Jericho, as A goodly Babylonish garment, two
hundred sickles of silver, and a wedge of gold of fifty shekells weight, and
covered them in the earth in the midst of his tent, had the judgment of God
not only upon himself in person, but also on his whole family and sons
and daughters, and his oxen and his asses, and his sheep, and the silver, and
garment, and the wedge of Gold; and his tent, and all that he had, for they
all Being brought into the valley of Anchor, were stoned Josh. 7. form verse.
24. to the end.
by stones, and burnt by fire.

The second particular Judgment of God to be found in this life is more
strickt, or singular, as it alighteth upon some one particular and singular
person. Thus betides it to Jeroboam for his Idolatry, who dyed plagued by God,
2. Chro. 13. 20. To Senacherib for his blasphemy, in that by his messengers he
had rayled against the living God, the holy one of Israel, 2. Reg. 19. 22. in
that nature that as he had rayled against God by his Messengers, so was he
slain by his sons; and he which had rayled against the true God, was
slain as he was worshipping of Nisroch his false God, Verse, 37. mingling
these passionate words with the blood of his mortal wounds (as Histories do
mention) (...), He that beholds me let him become godly. To the man who
contrary tot he law of God gathered sticks on the Sabbath day and was
therefore Stoned with stones without the host. Numb. 15. 35.

To Absolon for his unnatural disobedience to his most natural father, in
that he would have taken the Crown from the head of David his father; without
whom, himself should never have had an Head to wear a Crown, nor body to
bear an Head: But Gods singular judgment so met with him, as the very hair
which he would have circled with a Crown, was entangled with an oak; and those
locks which (no doubt) he esteemed for none of his meanest ornaments, were
made his haltar: and a branch of the Oak became a gibbet to so graceless a
branch of so good a stock: I mean so bad a Son of so good a Father; And he
which would have betrayed a Father, a King, a Saint, whom he ought in these
three regardes to have reuere^ced, which is worthy the marking, himself was
betrayed by three things, the Oak, his Locks, and his M^le, which went from
under him, until that Ioab also made an end of him with three darts, 2. Sam.
19. 14 and his burial also consisted in a threefold disgrace, A Pit, a Wood,
and A great heap of stones cast on him. Verse. 17.

To Ahab for his murder of innocent Naboth, in so much as himself was also
slain, and the dogs licked up his blood, 1 Reg. 22. 38. To the Unclean even
by the Testimony of the Apostle, that Such a one sins against his own body,
1. Corinthians. 6. 18. To False-witnesse bearers, An excellent instance is yielded
us by the Ecclesiastical History which mentions three wicked men. suborned
to confirm a lie by false witness against Nars ^usebius ^^cles. Hist. lib 6.
cap. 8.
cissus the good Bishop of Jerusalem: Whereof the first said, If I lie let me
be burnt with fire. The second, If I speak not the truth let my body be
consumed by some fearful disease. The third, If I bear false witness let me
lose mine eie-sight: whereof the first, a spark upon some unknown cause
alighting upon his house in the night taking fire, was burnt in his bed,
together with his house to ashes. The second was in his body from top to to^
surprised with such a disease as he wish^d for. The third perceiving the
vengeance of God on the other two (his conforts) and fearing the like judgment
on himself, bewrayes the whole perfidious and false complotte against
Narcissus, and shed such plenty of tears in the sorrow of his heart, as he
lost his eyes and became blind. This is but the particular Judgment of GOD in
this life only, which is not a thing so much here intended, where it is said,
the wicked shall not stand in the judgment, etc.

There is a second Judgment of GOD, which we expect shall be at the
consummation of this world. This we do not only confidently look for, as a
matter of civil credit among men; but necessarily believe, as an Article of
Christian faith. This Judgment is here principally meant.

A Judgment is this which the two Te^taments both Old and New are able with
most authentic and absolute testimonies to prove unto us.

In the Old the Prophet Jeremy says: The LORD shall roar from above and
thru^^out his voice from his holy habitation: He shall roar upon his
habitation and cry aloud, etc. The sound shall come to the ends of the Earth
for the LORD has controu^rsie with the nations and will enter into judgment
wi^h all flesh. Ierem. 25. 30. 31. What means it that He will enter into
judgment with all flesh, but the testification of General Judgment? The
Prophet Danyell speaks of this Judgment to come, as if it were already
present. When he mentions his own Beholding the sitting up of thrones,
and the ancient of days sitting thereon, whose garment was white as snow, and
the hair of his head like pure woole, his throne like the fiery flame, and his
wheels as a burning fire. Afrery stream issued and came out from before him.
Thousand thousands ministered unto him, and ten thousand thousands stood
before him, and the judgment was set, and the books were open. Dan. 7. 9.
10. Where-out I may note, first, the certainty of this judgment, because it
was a matter which as Daniell said he then beheld: Second the Wisdom of the
Judge, because when age brings experience, and experience wisdom, the Judge
is said to be the ancient of days: Third, a most magnificent and maiesticall
judgment, having for seats Thrones; for attendants, such as are by nature
Spirits: and by office Archangels, Angels, Thrones, Dominations, Power^. etc.
by their number, thousand thousands, and ten thousand thousands, indeed
infinite: Fourth, a most just judgment because it shall be done according to
the Evidence of Records and Books, which are opened: Fifth, a most merciful
judgment for the good, betokened by those garments, white as snow, and by that
hair white as woole: Sixth, and lastly to the wicked and ungodly, a judgment
most fearful, wrathful, wrackfull; for the Throne is like fire, and the
wheels as burning fire: and least that any man should think that this fire
should contain it self only within the compass of this Throne: or the
circle of these wheels, so as it should never break forth, as the sword of
many a careless Magistrate, so always dwells in the case of the scabberd,
as it is never drawn out; it is added also that a Fiery stream issues
therefrom: no doubt to deal with the wicked and ungodly, As the fire that
came from heaven dealt with the two Captains over fifties and their fifties,
that is, to consume and burn them up. 3 Reg 1. 11.


In the new Testament also be their very pregnant proofs that there shall be
A general judgment. Among and before others our Savior Christ, Merueile not
at this, for the hour shall come, in the which all that are in the grave shall
hear the voice of the son of man and shall come forth, they which have done
well to the resurrection of life, and they which have done evil to the
resurrection of Ioh. 5. 28 29
condemnation.

The Apostle Paul follows his Master; in that speech of his to the men of
Athens. God has appointed a day, wherein he will judge the world in
righteousness, ^y that man whom he has appointed, whereof he has given
assurance to Act. 17. 31.
all men, in that he has raised him from the dead. From which speech of the
Apostle we may chi^fly obs^^ue six points. First, that the day is appointed,
before which it cannot be, and after which once accomplished, it cannot but
be: Secondly, who has appointed it? God, into whose hidden counsel no man
can look: it is appointed only by him, and known only to him: Thirdly, whom
God has appointed to be the Judge in this judgment, by that man, that is
Christ his son, both God and man. Fourthly, whom he has appointed to be
judged, the world: Fifthly, How? in righteousness: Sixthly, and lastly, the
reason to confirm the truth of this whole matter, in that God has given an
irreuocable and indissoluble assurance of it, in that he has raised his son
from the dead. He has quickened him being dead, to the end he may become
the Judge both of the quick and the dead.

It is sufficient for us to believe certainly, that there is a time, when this
Judgment shall be: we must not search curiously after the particular time of
this Judgment. But let us be assured of this, that it cannot be far of, but
even hard at the doors.

We read in Histories, that Cato a grave Roman Senator, Plin. lib. 15. cap.
18:
by a green Fig Tree which he brought into the Senate House, that had
grown but three days before in Carthage, the seat of their mortal enemies,
took oc^asion to discourse unto them, the danger the Roman estate was in,
which had men of such hostile affections against them, within three days
journey of their City. The Signs like unto the budding of the Fig Tree,
Matthew. 24. 32. may much more admonish us, of that Summers approachment, in the
which shall be the harvest of Gods judgment, that it is near, even at hand.
For if since the time of Christ, then now, most chiefly, hear we of wars and
the rumors of wars, nation rising against nation, realm against realm,
pestilence, famine, earthquakes. This last age of the Church has been, and
is, the time of afflicting, killing, hating, betraying one another, of the
rising of false Prophets, deceiving many: Now if ever does iniquity increase,
and the love of many wax cold. Has not (I beseech you) the Gospel of the
Kingdom been preached to all nations, through-out the whole world, beginning
like the Sun in the East, and setting in the West thereof?

Has not since that time, by reason of corruption of the truth, the
abomination of desolation, spoken of by Daniell, stood in the holy place, a
place where it ought not? has not the Sun been darkened, and the Moon
turned into blood and the stars fallen from heaven? Whether we understand by
the Sun (as some will have it) Christ, who has been darkened by Atheism,
by the Moon the Church, which has been turned into blood by persecution: by
the Stars, the Pastors, which may be said to have fallen from heaven, by
reason of their Apostatizing from the truth, Or whether we interpret, as
others, the Sun for the Magistrate Ecclesiastical, who is darkened by
contempt: the Moon for the Magistrate civil, who is become bloody, though not
(God be praised) among us, yet in other our neighbor countries, by murders,
and by the Stars (the Common People) which have fallen from heaven, some by
Schism, some by haeresie, some by Apostasy. Or whether we do expound, as
other-some do think by the Sun, Faith, which gives light to other virtues,
and is now hardly to be found in the earth: by the Moon, Charity, which is
now waxen cold: by the Stars, other virtues, which are so choked with vices,
as the small remnant of the elect may say, Come Lord Jesus, come quickly because
unless, Those days should be shortened, there should no flesh be saved.

O then, what can we now but look for this day of judgment! that it is near
even at hand. S^thence all signs else be fulfilled, but even that one sign
that remains, the sign of the son of man in heaven, coming in the clouds
with power and great glory, and that he should even now send his Angels with a
great sound of a trumpet to gather together the elect from the four winds,
and from one end of the heaven to the other yt so they may come to this
judgment.

The second point is, that the wicked shall not stand, or as Matthew. 24. 30. 31.
it is in the original, rise up in this Judgment.

But may some ungodly one say: This is the thing we look for, we wish for,
long for; that we may not appear before the angry countenance of that
displeased Judge, whose presence is to us so intolerable, punishment
unsupportable. What more blisfull thing and more to our hearts content, then to
have glutted our selves with sin? to have ^ulled our benumbed spirits asleep
on the bed of iniquity? to have pampered our flesh, to have st^fled our spirit,
to have disglorified God, to have despised his truth, to have cast off every
yoke of dutiful obedience, to have loved our selves, so as we have hated all
besides our selves, to have drawn unto us sins with cart-ropes, and iniquity
with the cords of vanity? to conclude to drunk as it were) an health to
Satan, in the strumpets cup of abomination, and never to make a reckoning for
it, never to make an Apoc. 17. 4.
account concerning it, never to be called to the judgment?

But that I may cut (as it were) the sinew of this ob^ection, and abate the
crest of these proud vanters, Qui torquent textnm ne ipsi torqueantur, which
rack and torture the text, that they may not (as they deserve) be racked and
tortured themselves. We must know that the wicked and ungodly shall, and that
vnauo^^ably both rise and stand in this judgment, and yet in some acceptance,
cannot possibly (as this Scripture witnesses) rise or stand in this Judgment.

They must vnescapably rise and stand in this Judgment: First, in regard of
their appearance there, The Lord will enter judgment with all flesh. If with
all slesh, Iere. 25. 31.
then with them, as a species of that genus, and chiefly with them who are so
flesh, as they are nothing but flesh, not borne of the spirit, to be spirit;
but borne of the flesh to be flesh, Ioh. 3. 6,

Secondly, they must rise and stand in this Judgment, in respect of their
arraignment at the Judgment bar, for we must not only appear in Judgment,
but, before the Judgment seat of Christ, that is, we are to be arreigned 2.
Corin. 5. 10
at the Judgment bar.

Thirdly, they must rise and stand in this Judgment, to be indicted, for God
will bring every work of theirs unto judgment, not only those things, which
are so notoriouslye done, as the world takes notice of them, but every secret
and hidden thing, whether it be good or evil. Eccl^. 12. 14


Fourthly, they must rise and stand in this Judgment, to hear the sentence of
the Judge pass against them Depart from me you cursed into euer-lasting fire,
which is prepared Matt. 25. 41
for the Devil and his Angels. A thundering sentence is this indeed, uttered
by him which is (...), the glorious Psalm. 29. 3.
God that makes (...) thunder, whereof every word seems to be as a boltte,
to cause the children of the spiritual Babylon, Hell, to become as the
children of the temporal Babylon dashed a sunder. The first is, what they
should Psalm* 137. 9
do, depart. Secondly, how they should dapart, as cursed. Thirdly, from whom,
from me, that is from Christ, to be sundred from whose presence is the
pouring out of the full Vial of Gods wrath upon them, the accomplishments of
all woes and infelicities. Fourthly; whether, into fire. Fifthly, what manner of
fire, everlasting fire. Sixthly, by what right appertaining unto them, as their
due desert prepared for them, to become their merited portion. Seauenthly, and
lastly, with what company, with the Devil and his Angels. Hitherto the wicked
must and shall rise and stand in this Judgment, but after this sentence once
given they neithe: ought nor ^ay, nor can, rise or stand in this Judgment. But
to make this matter more plain. The wicked as this scripture sp^aketh, though
they shall both rise and stand in this ^ud^ement, in respect of the praemissed
considerations, yet shall not be able either to rise or stand therein, partly
before the ^entence given, if Judgment be taken as Tremelius t^ansl^^eth ^t,
in ^llo iudicio, that is the Judgment of the Godly forementioned, because
with the Godly they shall neither rise nor stand in the Judgment in the state
of Gods favor: partly also, which is chieffly to be admitted, after the
sentence given shall they not be able to rise or stand therein, in regard of
the weakness of there own power. That the evidence of this point may be yet
more cleared unto us, The wicked shall not be able to rise or stand in this
judgment, first in respect of the wrath of the Judge, second of the wrack of
the Judgment, thirdly, of the weakness of themselves.

First, they cannot rise or stand in this Judgment, in respect of the wrath of
the Judge Who has wrath, anger and indignation. Wrath that breaks forth as a
stormy Eze. 13. (...)
wind; anger that is a great shower, and indignation which shall bring with it
haile-stones and those not ordinary ones, but hail^tones that shall consume,
consuming haile-stones, like those which God in the furiousness of his wrath.
Psalm. 78. 49. brought among the Egyptians mingled with fire which seemed to
run and walk on the ground, Exodus 9. 23. Such and so vehement is this wrath
of God, as when it is said only to be begun, and to be but gone out from
the Lord, it consumed 14000. and 700. men before Moses and Aaron, making all
the speed they could, with the fire of the Altar with there censer and incense
could ^sswage it. So fierce (above measure) is this wrath of the Lord, as al
nations in a wondering recordation may accord together in the foot Deu 29. 2^.
of that song. O how fierce is his great wrath! If Jeremy makes it to be one
of the passionate notes of his mourneful song which he sings and sigheth
together in the book of his Lamentations, that the Lord has poured out his
wrath like fire in that particular judgment which the Babylonians brought upon
the Jews in there captivity. Oh! how much more may it be said concerning the
general Judgment of fire which God himself shall bring at that day on all
the world, that then and there his wrath shall be poured out like fire? A
wrath of a Judge not tolerable by the judged; who in being wicked and ungodly
no doubt shall not be able to rise or stand in this Judgment, Secondly the
wicked and ungodly shall not be able to rise or stand in this Judgment, in
regard of the wrack of the Judgment. When the very powers of heaven shall be
shaken Math. 24. 29. If the powers of heaven shall be shaken, what then shall
become of these plants of the earth? in whom the heavenly spirrit has rather
become earthly, like there body, then the earththy body, heavenly like there
spirit? How shall not these earthen vessels be dashed and crushed a sunder,
with the iron Maule of Gods omnipotency, at that time when the Heavens
themselves shall pass away with a noise? Shall not the wicked being but a
parcel of one earthy element melt away. when not one, but all the Elements
shall melt a way with heat? Shall not those earthy moules which have builded
themselves nests even in the bowels of the earth, be burnt together with the
earth? and these earthlyworkers Perish with the earthly works? 2. Peter. 3.
10. If Holy Chrysostom though he wear a good man, yet protests that it
makes him to tremble so often as he S. chrysostom in Mat. Ho. 77.
thinks of the Judgment. O! how much more shall it bring not only trembling
fear, but also tearing confusion upon the wicked and ungodly to undergo it,
to feel it? They wear Soldiers, and therefore men of the best courage, armed
Soldiers, and therefore with greater difficulty to be abashed, unto whom
when our Savior Christ spoke a little before his passion. John. 18. 6. using
only these words, I am he; they fell to the ground, O! how much less shall,
not soldiers in respect of their office, quorum membra, arma, whose members
be Iron Cicer^.
and steel, but men only in regard of their natutes, whose whole composition
is but dust and ashes, be able to endure the lightning of Christ's countenance,
in his Majesty? the thunder of Christ's words in his judgment? the execution of
Christ's wrath in the fierceness of his indignation? but that they being wicked
and godless, of necessity must be so far from rising and standing, as
themselves shall wish to fall and lie buried, under the ruins of Mountains
and Rocks falling on them, Apo. 6. 15.

Thirdly, the wicked and ungodly shall not be able to rise and stand in this
judgment, in respect of their own weakness. Man how-so-euer at the fist
other-wise created; yet since his fall by sin, has he become weak in
himself, simply considered, by means whereof we find him in holy Scripture
to be compared to dust, ashes, grass, smoke, a bubble, and vanity it self,
etc. but far more weak is he comparatively esteemed in collation with this
Judgment. As the children of Izraell seemed Number. 13 3^*
but as Grasshoppers compared with the Anakims, being Giants of a matchless
stature, so these Anakims the Giants themselves, shall be less then
Grasshoppers, in comparison of this Judgment.

The sum of that has been delivered, is, that there is a tw^-fold Judgment
of God, one particular, the other general. That ^n this place is meant the
general judgment. That the wicked shall rise and stand there, so far as
Appearance, Arreigament, Indightment, Sentence: but either in regard of Gods
favor, proper only to the godly, before these, or in regard of their own
estate after these, can they neither rise up, nor stand there, for as much as
the Wrath of the Judge, the Wrack of the Judgment, the Weakness of
themselves, will in no case suffer them.

GOD therefore give us grace, that we may become righteous, that so we may
rise and stand in the fiery trial of this judgment, because we are as gold
and silver, and precious stones, builded on the foundation of Christ Jesus, and
that we may not be as the wicked, who being but hay and stubble, are
speedily consumed, and cannot stand in this Judgment. 1. Cor. 3. 13. 13.


Secondly, this sentence passes against the ungodly, as they are Sinners [Nor
the sinners in the assembly of the righteous. There be herein likewise offered
unto our observation two points.

First, what is meant by the assembly of the righteous. Secondly, that the
Sinners shall not rise nor stand there.

For the better understanding, what is meant by the Assembly of the righteous,
we must learn that thereby is to be understood, the true Church of God, Mount
Sion the city of the living God, the caelestiall Jerusalem, the congregation
of the firstborn. Hebrew. 12. 22. 23. Which Church of God, the true Assembly
of righteous, just and perfect men, consists of two parts: whereof the one is
Militant here on earth: the other Triumphant in heaven.

The Church Militant may be known by two badges here in this world, whereof
the former is Affliction, the other Imperfection.

First, the Church Militant is under Affliction; and wears that estate for
her badge here in this life. The Church of God is the house of God. At which
his house it is Gods ^. Tim. 3, 15.
pleasure, that the Judgment of Affliction should begin. 1. Pet 4. 17.
According to the lot of it is the name given unto it: for it is called the
Church-Militant, which is as much as the Warre-faring-Church, because under the
bloody colors of the Cross of Christ, she fights against infinite crosses.
The righteous ought and do walk in the Lords way, which is the way of the
whirlwinde and the storm, to intimate unto us, that as Eliah was rapt to
heaven by a Naum, 1. 3.
whirle-winde; and Christ himself entered into glory by a Storm of many
tribulations; so we must not expect the exemption of any privilege, but that
we also must pass the Kings highway, to the Kings Palace, even that way
which the King himself has appointed: A whirle-winde and a storm.

We ^^st by Gods own ordinance do the work of Hirelings before we can come
to the wages of Heirs: to which purpose God has here appointed our life to be
as the life of an hireling. Job, 7. 1. S. Jerome. Epist. 26.


Saint Jerome speaking of the name of Jerusalem, says that in Scripture there
be three names given thereunto, Iebus, Salem, and Jerusalem. In tribus quidem
nominibus trinitatis demonstratur fides, etc. In the three names is there
declared the faith of the Trinity. The first name Iebus does signify that
which is Spurned at or despised: The second name Salem betokens Peace: The
third name Jerusalem is interpreted, the vision of peace:

Paulatim quippe peruenimus ad finem.

For by little and little come we to the end.

After Conculcation and treading upon an Image of the Church Militant; arrive
we at, and attain we to The vision of peace A lively resemblance of the
Church tryumphant.

It is then the certain and undoubted condition of GODS children, to be
troaden upon, before they can triumph; to be wholly bereft of peace, before
they can see any peace: To wear the badge of the Cross, before they can come
to the price of the Crown: The former badge of the Church-militant; this
Assembly of the righteous.

The second badge of the Church-militant; (...) Assembly of the righteous, is
Imperfection. This Imperfection consists both in sinners to be found in this
Church Accidentally, and in sin also which it has Personally.

First, this Church is imperfect here in this life, because it has sinners in
it, and with it, Accidentally. It is as a floare where chafe and wheat be
mixed together before the winnowing, it is as a mine where dross and gold be
confounded together before the purifying: it is as a garden where weeds and
herbs grow together, before the Weeding. A mongthem of the Church indeed, be
these sinners but not of them, as the forementioned Chafe and Dross and
Weeds are among the Wheat, and Gold, and Herbs, but not of the same
substance with them. These sinners if they could be found out are to be
censured and punished, how beit because they are not ever to be discovered they
are necessarily to be tolerated, until they may (as time shall give occasion)
be justly proceeded against. Ouer-heady therefore is the zeal or rather
hea^e, of them, like unto that of James, and John when out Blessed Savior told
them that they knew not what spirrit they were of. Luke. 9. 55. Who can not
away with the Moon because she has her spotes, with the Church because in this
respect she has her blemishes, but will forthwith make a schime and rent a
separation? How much better wear it for them if they would be truly holy
children to embrace concerning this point) the counsel of an holy Father? In
ecclesia nonnullos toleramus, quos corrigere vel punire non possumus. etc. We
tolerate some August Epist. 48.
in the Church whom we cannot correct or punish, neither yet for the Chaffes
sake do we forsake the threshing flore of the Lord, nor for the bad F^sh sake
do we break the net of the LORD, nor for the Goats, which are to be
severed in the end, do we leave the fold of the LORD, nor for the vessels
made to dishonor do we fl^t out of the house of the Lord.

Secondly this Imperfection consists in sin, personally, to be found in the
Church her-selfe, the Assembly of the righteous here spoken of. The Church
while she is in this vale of misery cannot certainly expect that she is or
can be without the stain of iniquity: who confesses of her self that she is
black by reason of her i^perfections. Whosoever therein shall say that he,
has no Cant 1. 4. 1 Job, 1. 8.
sin deceives himself and there is no truth in him: and thereby at
leastwise, because he lies becomes he a sinner.

As there was the Tree of knowledge of good and evil in one Paradise. So as
well evil as good will be found in Gene. 2. 9.
one man. The knowledge of evil was in Paradise, the best place: so the
practice of evil will be found in the righteous the best men.

Where was this Assembly of the righteous at that time else to be found but in
the house of godly Jacob? Yet even then therein were many imperfections. Ruben
his eldest son incestuous: Simeon and Leui murderers: Dinab his daughter a
wanton; and all betrayers of their brother Joseph.

The Church of God, Cant. 6. 9. is compared to the Moon, the Moon first
receives her light from the Sun: so does she from her Husband Christ the sun
of righteousness. Secondly, the Moon (of all those heavenly bodies) is Mala.
4. 2.
citima terris, most near the earth: so the Church of God, said to be Militant
here upon, Earth, cannot avoid, but thereby become somewhat earthy.

Thirdly, the Moon is eclipsed by the interposition of the earth betwixt the
Sun and it: so the Church of God (no doubt) is som-what blemished by the
interposition of the eatrthhy members of our fleshly concupiscence, between
the graces of Christ and it. Fourthly, the Moon has her spots; so has the
Church of God her blemishes.

The Moon then (we may see) for one benefit that she has received, in that
she is made glorious with ye beams of the Sun, has a threefold inconvenience,
that she cannot but som-what be tainted by the earth being the nearest
caelestial body unto the earth: that she is eclipsed and obscured by the
putting between of the earth betwixt the Sun and her: that she has her spots
in her, to show, that if the church here siguified by the Moon has any good,
she has it not from her self* but from Christ, as the Moon has her
brightness from the Sun, and for that one good with the Moon she has a
threefold euil^. Imperfect therefore is the Church in this life, as she that
wears this badge of imperfection.

We must further know that this part of the Assembly of the righteous, the
Church militant which groneth under affliction and ^mpeth by imperfection, is
congregate and met together chiefly to exercise a threefold duty first to
hear the word: secondly, to be partakers of the sacraments: thirdly, to beg
what we need, and to offer up the sacrifice of praise and thanksgiving. A
thing anciently used by the Church, and perpetually to continue in the church:
this may appear to have had an ancient use in the church, by those three
thousand souls whom Peter by one Sermon had added to the Act. 2. 42.
Church, which first Continued in the Apostles doctrine there is the assembly
of hearing the word. Secondly in breaking of Bread: there (...) receiving of
one of the sacraments: Thirdly, In prayer, there is begging that was needful,
and the tendering to GOD the sacrifice of thanksgiving.

This is one part of the Assembly of the righteous, which how-soeuer it is not
wholly to be excluded, yet is not so directly intended in this place, where it
is said, that the sinners shall not ^^se or stand in the Assembly of the
righeous.

The second part of the Assembly of the righteous, is that which is tryumphant
in heaven; which shall then be accomplished on Gods chosen, when they which
suffer here with Christ shall in heaven be gloryfied with Christ: at Rom, 8.
17.
which time, the affliction and imperfection which have been annexed unto
their Cross, shall be turned into triumph and perfect^on, necessarily
accompanying their Crown. In the Church militant (as one speaks) mala
pers^quntur, evils do persecute us: But in the Church tryumphant, bona
sequentur, good things shall follow us. The euer-flowing, and indeed
ouer-flowing abundance of which happy estate causes Saint Augustine August.
to say that therein we may more easily tell, quid non sit, quam quid sit,
what there is not, then what there is. For of this we may be well assured,
that in this glorious Assembly of the righteous there shall be no weakness, no
sorrowing, no calamity, no corruption, no death, no grief, no coffeehouse.
But the things we shall there enjoy, are first, for their quality, joy and
pleasures: Secondly, for their quantity, fullness of them: Thirdly, for their
Constancy at Gods right hand, from whence it is impossible they should be
removed. Fourthly for their continuance for euer-more, even in the presence of
God. In whose presence there is fullness of joy, and at his right hand Psalm.
16. 12.
there is pleasure for evermore.

This is the Assembly of the righteous here principally meant, which the
Sinners shall not rise nor stand in: because they shall never attain to this
triumph, never to this perfection, never to this pleasure, this presence, this
right hand, this joy.

The second point offered, unto our observation, having learned, what is the
Assembly of the righteous is that the sinners shall not rise nor stand there.

But may some man say, this is a hard saying, Ioh. 6. 60. Who then can be
saved? For we are all sinners. The authority of the Apo^^le excellently
proves this point, Romans 5. 12. As by one man, sin entered into the world,
and death by sin, so death went over all men, for as much as all have sinned.
The Apostle in that place intends to Mark, 10. 26.
show the entrance of death into ye world in four points. First, from whom:
from one man that is Adam* Secondly, by what, by sin: Thirdly, to whom, to all
men. Fourthly, the reason of it, because, All men have sinned. If there wear
any man which had not sinned, that man could not dye; But all men dye (as we
say in Shooles) either Actualiter, or Potentialiter, in Act, or in Power,
because though Henoch and ^eliah where taken away before their death, yet had
they sinful bodies subject unto mor^ality: therefore must all men of necessity
be convicted of sin also.

The earth is the most vn^elane Element, as that which settleth it self in the
bottom of this glorious frame or fabric of the world, as the dregs do in
the lowest parts of their vessel: of this earth is every man composed. If then
the heavens themselves, whose Curtains are spread out with more glory then
those of Solomon. Cant: 1. 4. be unclean in Gods sight. Job. 15. 15. how much
more man, which is but dust and earth? If God has found no stedfa^^nesse, no
not in his Saints, which are so named of holiness: What is man that he
should be cl^ane, or he Ioh. 15. 14. 15
that is borne of a woman, that he should be just Man may be considered in
two estates: in the estate of nature: and in the estate of grace. In the estate
of nature, whereby a man is merely man, and borne of a woman, in which respect
he mu^^ be said to be unclean and unjust. In the estate of grace, by which
a man becomes a Saint; yet in that estate also in the fore-a^eaged; ^lace,
God finds no stedfas^^esse in him. In neither state then can man be cleared,
but in both estates condenmed to be sinful. The Heathens themselves have not
been unacquainted with the truth of this matter: among whom one says, Cebes
in tabu.
(...), ^^e^y man co^mi^g into this life dri^keth from the cup of (...),
e^^or, and ig^orance. ^^^ery man then be a sinner, and no (...) shall rise
(...) stand in the assembly of the righteous: what (...) ^^vs. but ^x^ect that
se^^^nce which Christ^ (...) ag^^^st sinners: Depart from me yea Matthew. 7. ^3.
that work iniquity.

That I may the better answer this objection: we must know tha^ there is a
twofold Sinner. The former so sins, as he (...) with ^is^th from his sin,
having (because he has sinned) con^rition in his soul and spirit, con^ession
in his heart and tongue, and newness of life in his ^eeds and manners: neither
does he only repent, solicit. carefully, but mature speedily, as writes S.
Ambros: S. Ambro^. de (...) lib. ^. cap. 2.
^east that (says he) that husbandman in the Gospe^^, which planted a
sigg^-^^ce in his vineyard, coming to (...) ^r^ite and finding none, says to
the keeper of the v^^eyarde (...) it aowne, for what does it combri^g the
ground: He does (as says ^aint Augustine) accuse himself Aug. de ver^,
Inuocatie.
that he may be excused in the presence of the just and merciful Judge, to
whom he is to become accomptable As sin does assault his soul when it is
weakest: so does he oppose himself against the same where it is strongest,
that he may by that means root it out.

This has been the practice, as it may appear by their writings of the
famous ancient Fathers, and Saints of the Church, Athenagoras, Clemens,
Justinius Martyr, Arnobius, Minutius, Lactantius,, and diverse other, who made it
the first thing they did after their conversion, from gentilisme to the truth,
to denounce war most chiefly against that sin unto which they have found
themselves most inclined.

These were, pecatores, sinners, but because they speedily shaked off their
sin as Paul did the ^^per, they wear Hilar. Enarre, in Psalm. ^.
not impii, Godless ones, as Samt Hillary makes a distinction. ^hese are not
the sinners here spoken of which shall not rise nor stand in the assembly of
the righteous.

The second kind of sinners be such as so sin, that they may add sin
unto sin, as the these adds lying to theft, and perjury to lying.

These by their custom of sinning have made s^nne habitual, yea, rather
perpetual unto them. It is impossible for them not to sin, as it is
impossible for the fire not to warm. In them has sin gotten the color of a
Blacke-Moore, which cannot be ^^tered: and the spotts of a Leopard which
cannot be washed away. At the door of whose heart the grace of GOD knocks
(...)all, or if it knocks, it is but in vain: for there is (...) opening. As
they are flesh, John, 3. 6. so this flesh is (...) dead flesh altogether
incurable, neither is it to be^ (...)led with sharp Corrosiues of the law,
neither (...) be salued by the more gentle Lenitiues of the (...)pell. These
are not contrite for their sin, that so ^^ey may confess and amend it, but
they pallia^e their sin^e that they may still keep it, and commit it. Oaths
(say they) are but sparks of courage; Blasphemies, but as ordinary speeches:
Covetousness frugality: Prodigality bounty; Tyranny fortitude: Curiosity
honesty: Adultery a youthful sport: Symony a common trade of merchandise: And
as in these, so in every sin have they a fair vizard to put over a foul
face, that they may veil and cover it. To whom their sin is like Iesabell
which made Ahab to sin, whose face was painted: and themselves like Ahab do
sell themselves to work wickedness in the sight of the Lord. These be the
sinners meant in this place; where it 1 Reg. 2^. 25.
is said that the sinners shall not rise nor stand in the Assembly of the
righteous.

The sinners of this desperate kind shall not rise nor stand in this assembly
of the Righteous.

First, in that part thereof Militant, upon earth, which consists of that
meeting, which stands in hearing the word read, or Preached: in receiving the
sacraments and in prayers. Because how-soeuer they are (it may be) among the
righteous in their Assemblies, yet are they not of their Assemblies: they be
(it may be) as one of y^ assembly: but for as much as they are unrighteous,
they cannot be of the assembly of the righteous. For how can it otherwise be?
considering that they hear the word as Sinners, not as y^ Righteous; receive
the Sacraments as sinners, not as the Righteous: tender up their prayers unto
God as Sinners, not as y^ Righteous: as Lucifer was among the Angels, Caine in
the house of Adam, Ismaell in the house of Abraham, Esau in the house of Isaas,
Cham in the Arc, Saul among the Prophets, the Tares with the wheat, the
Goats with the sheep, Judas among the Apostles: so are these in the Assembly
of the righteous as Ciphers, which signify nothing, not as figures which have
both a number and power with them. They bear a show (happily) of religion, but
are furthest from it, as Athaliah being her self the only usurping
traytresse, cried out Treason, treason, 2. Reg. 11. 14. They are in comparison
of the righteous, but as Waspes compared with Bees, which as Tertullian writes
Tertul.
make Combs as the Bees do, but neither are Bees, nor work so profitably as
the Bees. They are within this Assembly of the righteous, by hypocrisy, but
not of it in Sincerity, considered in that part of it, Militant here upon earth.

Secondly, they can much less rise or s^and, in that part of the assembly of
the righteous, which is triumphant in heaven, because they shall never come
thither, much less stand there.

If Moses neither could nor might stand in the presence of God in that holy
land, which is but a Type of this triumphant assembly* until he had taken his
shoes from Exodus 3. 5.
his feet. Oh how much less shall these sinful and reprobate ones, stand in
the most glorious presence of the Lord in the true holy land the true Canaan it
self! being not only holy, but the holy of holyes, of God the holiest, having
the feet of their affections, shod with nothing else but defilednesse and
pollution?

Hell must be their prison: for, the wicked shall be turned Psalm. 9. 17.
to hell, and the people that forget God. Heaven cannot possibly become their
palace: for such must stand without the heavenly Jerusalem, the city of the
great King. Apoc. 22. 25.


Art thou then a Sinner of this nature? unto whom, sin sits as near as
the graft to the stock, which concorporateth and becomes one with it? Behold
then the fruit of this thy sin; which is not only shame and reproach, but
also everlasting ruin and con^usion. He which Rises in the great thoughts of
his own heart, and Stands as high in his own conceit as ever
Nabucchadnezzar did, Dan. 4. 27, yet if from the crown of the head to the
soul of the foot, there is nothing to be found but wounds and swellings and
sores full of corruption. Esa^. 1. 6. then shall he neither rise nor stand in
the assembly of the righteous, not only, that part thereof which appertains
to the Church Millitant here on earth, but also that part thereof which
belongs to the Church Triumphant in heaven. For what reason may be alleged
why he should be admitted into heaven, whose m^^d has been wholly fixed upon
earth? why he should triumph as a conqueror in heaven, which ^euer warred as
a soldier upon earth, fighting against the Soldiers of the Devil, the lusts
of our flesh, the enemi^s of our souls? Our loss is greater hereby then there
could have come advantage by Herodes gift to her to whom it was promised:
Herodes gift was but Hal^e a Kingdom, for a vain pleasure Mark. 6. 22. 23.
But we do lose a Whole Kingdom for a sinful pleasure. We lose a kingdom
but not an ordinary kingdom: but most rich, most honorable, most ^oyfull most
constant, most durable.

First it is a most Rich Kingdom, The riches whereof may appear unto us by
that description of the principal and royal city thereof. Apocal. 21 Whose
shining is as Iaspar and as clear as Crystal, and the City it self of pure
gold and like unto clear glass: the twelve foundations a^e twelve precious
stones, and the twelve gates, twelve pearls. Silver is there reputed but as
base metal, for it is not so much as mentioned: but Precious Stones, and
Pearls, and Gold only spoken of.

Secondly it is a most Honorable Kingdom. It was a right honorable report
which Cyneas the Ambass^dour of Pyrrhus King of the Epirottes, gave concerning
the Senators of Rome; being demanded at his return from thence of his Lord,
what he thought of them: to whom he made this answer, that they seemed unto
him a Senate of Kings. But far more honorable is that which may be reported
concerning this Kingdom ^ that all the members thereof, not seem, but are
Kings, even an innumerable multitude of most honorable Kings, Aug d^ver^
in^oc^n^^ cap. 19^.
and yet as Saint Augustine witnesses, The Kingdom shall not be streightened
by the multitude of Kings.

Thirdly, it is a most joyful kingdom, where our joy shall be perfect joy,
unto the which nothing can be added: even full joy. 1. John. 1 4.

Fourthly, It is a most constant Kingdom; because it has no mu^inye within*
no conspiracy without to shake it.

Fifthly, and lastly, it is a most durable kingdom, being indeed the end for
which we were created, but having no end it self, as writes Saint Augustine.
Quis alius noster est finis nisi peruenire ad regnum, ^uius nullus est finis?
Aug. de ^iu^^, de^. lib. 2^.
What other end have we, but to come to the kingdom, whereof there is no end.

For as much as then Sin, by bereauing us, of this triumphant part of the
Assembly of the righteous, despoileth us also there-with-all of a kingdom, not
of an ordinary sort, but of a supereminent condition, as that which is most
rich, honorable joyful, constant, durable. Oh! how ought it to stir up our
secure, and to set an edge to out duil spirits? that we may banish sin, and
obtain this kingdom* not retain sin that we may be banished this
kingdom? There is no man so sinful, but God will be merciful, if man can
be truly s^rrowfull. The Justice of GOD (says Saint Augustine) has looked
Aug^^ Psalm, 84.
down from heaven, saying. Let us spare this man, because he has not spa^ed
himself: Let us acknowledge him, because he has acknowledged himself: He
is turned to punish his sin, and let us turn to deliver him from sin. By
this means shall we not sincke and fall, but rise and stand in the assembly of
the righteous.

This Psalm at the first entrance there-vpon, suffered a threefold division.
The first concerned the state of the godly in the three first verses. The
second, the state of the ungodly in the fourth and fifth verses. The third and
last, the condition of them both^ in the sixth and last verse of this Psalm.
Which sixth verse as an Epiphomenia or acclamation, answers to the precedent
matter of this Psalm, [For the Lord knows the way of the righteous, and the
way of the wicked shall perish.

In which words, there offer themselves, unto my further amplification and
handling, a double branch.

The former is the branch of Gods favor toward the righteous, [The Lord
knows the way of the righteous.

The other, the branch of Gods rigor toward the wicked, [The way of the wicked
skall perish.

The branch of Gods favor to the godly, first comes to my hand and handling.
This contains in it two points.

First, what the way of the righteous here spoken of means. Secondly: that,
the Lord knows it.

That we may the better understand, what the way of the righteous means, Let
us be advertised, that the righteous have a threefold way. The first natural,
and of Generation. The second, civil and of Profession. The third Spiritual
and of Regeneration.

The first of the three is of necessity for their being: the other two, de been
esse, for their well being. The one, for the well being in the Commonwealth
against Idleness and want, The other for their well being in the Church,
against Sin and Punishment.

The way natural or of generation of the righteous, necessary to their being,
is that which is both of their birth into this world, and life in this world. A
thing is this common to them with all men, not only with them, who live under
the happy and blessed awe of Magistracy and government: but even with
Barbarians and Savages themselves, never yet swayed or ruled by the Scepter or
Sword of any Magistrate. In this acceptance way may be taken, Genesis 6. 12.
where it is said, All flesh have corrupt their way upon earth: their way, etc.
that is, the way of their life and being. That though GOD at the first had
created them in holiness and integrity: yet have they turned away to froward
ways, Eccles. 2. 15. that they might weary themselves in the way of
Wickedness, Wisdom. 5. 7.

The second way of the Righteous, is that which is civil, or of some
profession, of necessity to their well-being in the commonwealth. Or this the
prophet David speaks: Psalm. 36. 4.
They Imagine mischief in their bed for they have set themselves in no^ good
way. Where the prophet makes it the original and fountayne-head of sin and
mischief in the ungodly, because they want the good way of the godly: that is
a good calling of civil profession, or conversation among men. This thing
affirm I to be necessary among the righteous, to their wel-beeing in the
commonweal: first in regard of Idleness thereby to be avoided: secondly in
respect of want to be shunned.

First Idleness by the Righteous is hereby to be avoided, Idleness is a
fault which becomes a grave of a living man, and must needs belong unto him
which is not in the way of some calling or profession.

The Idle then becomes toward himself as Raguell to Tobiah, who made a grave
for him before he was dead: Tob. 8. ^.
A sin of Sodom, not of Jerusalem; to be found in the reprobates, not the
righteous: a badge of Satan's sluggards, not of Gods servants. nunquam otiosus
^ei seruus (says Saint Bernard:) the servant of God is never idle in the way
of his well-beinge in the commonwealth, least Bernard.
he should be in Cities, as Drones in hiues, rather to be banished then
cherished.

Secondly, Want by the Righteous is here-by to be shunned: where such a Way is
Wanting, a Calling is Wanting ^ where there is no Calling, there is
Sluggishnesse: where Sluggishnesse and idleness bears swaye, there Poverty
and Want comes on. First, suddenly, because it comes as one travailing by
the way. Secondly, strongly, as an armed man, which by the suddenness cannot
be prevented, and by the strength cannot be Prou. 6. 11.
resisted.

It is ordained for man, to eat his bread in the sweat of Genesis 3. 19.
his brows, as if it were Gods will, that where there is no sweating of the
browe^ There should be no eating of bread. Where eating of bread is
prohibited, there want must needs be infer^ed. Would we then shun this
necessity? then must we provide, that we may have bread, not only in a
literal sense; but also as it is taken for all the necessaries of this life.
Would we have this bread lawfully ministered unto us? then must our hands
minister unto our necessities: that is to say, our feet must walk: our
fingers must work: our browe, in every vocation and calling, Ecclesiastical
or Civil, Libera^l or Mechanical, must sweat for it*

Every man must say, and the godly will say, as sometime that famous Alphonsus
King of Arragon did, who being reproved of one Matthaeus Siculus, for that he
would now and then, set those hands of his to the Spade, which were ordeigned
to swaye the Scepter, made this answer. Cogitas deum and naturam nequicquam
mihi has manus dedisse? Think thou that God and Nature has given unto me
these hands in vain? Whereupon the Godly man, that he may shun want,
does not shun work: but he sets himself in some good way, in regard
of this Civil profession, in the Commonwealth, necessary to his Well-being
therein, that Want may be shunned.

The third way of the righteous, is, that which is spiritual of his
Regeneration necessary to him, for his Well-being in the Church. This is the
way chiefly aimed at in this place.

This as it is the Way of God, so is it also the Way of the Godly, A perfect
way appertayning only to just and Psalm. 101. 2. Hebr. 12. 23.
perfect men.

The necessity of which Way concerns the R^ghteous, both against Sin, and
also the punishment of Sin.

First, this necessity concerns the Righteous in regard of Sin; which by
continuance in this Way is mortified.

While they continue in this way, they neither have acquaintance with sin, nor
sin with them: the^ are strange the one to the other. Sin may be in them, but
cannot reign in them. Romans 6. 12.

Secondly, this necessity concerns the Righteous in reregard of the
punishment of sin. For until we be trauailers in this Way, are we Children of
Gods wrath: Upon Ephess, 2. 3. Apocal, 15. 7^
whom, the Vials of his wrath were to be powered out: but this way of our
new birth or Regeneration, is become a better security to us then the blood of
the Lamb sprinkled Exodus 12. 22.
on the door posts of the houses of the Israelites. For that was the material
blood of the Typical Lamb, to be as a token to God, at that time to preserve
them from Temporal destruction of the Aegiptians. But in this way is found the
omni-sufficient blood of the True lamb of God John. 1. 29.
Christ Jesus, who takes away the sins of the world: which being sprinkled on
the tables of our hearts protecteth and sheildeth us from the spiritual
destruction of Satan.

This way is called, A new and living way. Heb. 10. 20. New, because therein
we are Renewed and changed in our mind, Romans 12. 2. not putting off leisurely,
but casting off speedily, the old man which is corrupt through the deceiuable
lusts, and putting on the new man CHRIST ^phes, 4. 22. 24.
JESUS, which after GOD is created in righteousness toward man; and true
holiness toward God himself.

A living way because we which were Dead in trespasses and sins, before we
entered into this way, quickened again in this way. Ephesians. 21. quickened unto a
twofold life of grace in present possession in this world: of glory, in
undoubted expectation in the world to come.

It is a worthy speech of Saint Hilarie, who compares the man unregenerate to
an Egg: the man regenerate Hilar^^ Mat* can. 24.
unto a Chicken. Christ says concerning Jerusalem. How often would I have
gathred thy children even as a h^n gathers her Chicken^ under her wings?
Mat. 23. 37. whereupon writes that Father. Alia pullis nascendi alia viuendi,
ratio. To Chickens there is one reason of birth, another* of life. First they
are contained in certain shells of Eggs, as it were in a prison, after that
being cherished by the diligence of there dame under the couerture of her
wings they come forth and in time fly abroad. Christ (says he) after the
manner of this familiar foul, would have gathred them together, that they
which wear yet as the Egg brought forth by the condition of nature, being
borne again by a new spring of regeneration cherished by heat, might (as it
wear) by there winged bodies fly up into Heaven.

Thus to become Chickins brooded and fostered under the wing of our Blessed
Savior, is to hold this way of regeneration and quickening being dead and
cherishing being made alive by the warmeth of the spirit of Christ, according
to the warrant of the word of Christ, wherein we must not suffer the warmth of
our zeal to go before the warrant of our knowledge, but as speaks. Saint
Basil, Quemadmodum coera sculpturae typo tradita. etc. As S. Basil* de (...).
wax set upon the shape of any ^eale or grauing does exactly represent the
figure which is in that seal or grauing so we delivering our selves wholly to
Euangelical doctrine are both informed only, and conformed according to the
form thereof. This is the way of the righteous principally here to be
understood vid. there way* spiritual and of rege^^tion, necessary to there
well-being in the Church, both against sin and the punishment of sin.

The second point of the former branch, the Lords favor toward the godly is,
that [The Lord knows this way, etc.

The LORD knows it, both by the knowledge of his Apprehension, and also by
the knowledge of his Approbation.

The knowledge of the Lords apprehension* it is the knowledge of wisdom
whereby every thing lay open unto him; nothing is hid from him. For which* cause
as the number of Seven is the number of perfection; there be ascribed unto
the Lord seven eyes. Zacha. 3. 9. under the name of y^ stone there spoken off*
to intimate that he sees al things. He that has given thee an eye to see any
thing, shall not his eyes see all things? He which has furnished thee with
knowledge to understand any thing, shall not he understand all things.

The Poet Pindaru^, could say to this purpose (...) Pindaru^.
(...). The storehouses of al our actions are in heaven. These actions of our
have been everlastingly laid up in the everliving treasure-house of Gods
omni-science or power to know all things.

These be those Idea, which Plato speaks off being certain Essential
impressions in the mind of God, of all Plato.
things which according to that form should be, and without such a form
praecedent could not be in the world. A Sparrow is but a vile thing, two of
them are sold for a farthing: Math. 10 29.
yet God so knows them, as he has a special care of them, that not one of
them fall to the ground without him. The grass or flower of the field seems
to be a viler thing, as Math, 6. 30.
that which is to day and to morrow it is cast into the oven: yet God not only
knows it, but regards and beauty fieth it so, As Solomon in all his royalty
was not arrayed like one of Verse, 29.
these. The have of a man's head is without compare the vilest thing of al, yet
God so knows it, as he has numbered it. Math. 10. 30. God who has made all
things in weight, measure and number, knows the weight, measure and number of
all things. This moved Plotinus though he were but a Platonist and no
Christian, as witnesses Saint Augustine, to say that Gods apprehensiue
providence does Aug. de ciui, de^. ^^. 10. c. 14
extend it self ad ipsos floscul^s and foliorum pulchritudinem, to the very
flowers and beauty of leaves. On which flowers and leaves, if we would
somewhat seriously contemplate and meditate with our selves, the wounderous
variety and color of the one, and the natural art or artificial nature (as
I may so say) of the enterfolding and embroydering of the stringes, iunctures
and twistes the one of them with the other: In the other we may well break out
into that Patheticall exclamation with the Prophet David. Psalm. 104 ^4. O Lord
how manifold are thy works? in wisdom have thou made them all. If God made
them, then must it be also granted, that he knew them: and as witnesses Holy
Augustine. If God made all things with Aug de ciui. dei. li. 11. c. 10
understanding, he made those things also which he knew. Ex quo occurrit
animo quiddam mirum tamen verum. etc. Whereupon comes to mind a certain
woundrous but a true matter; that this world could not be known unto us
unless it were, but unless it were known unto God, could have no being at
all. Which as it is true concerning the whole world, so is it as true
concerning every singular member of it. This is the knowledge of Gods
Apprehension or Wisdom.

The second knowledge of God it is that which is of his Approbation and Favor.

The knowledge of Gods Apprehension as it did extend it self to all things: so
also did it comprehend, whatsoever does or may apperteyne to the way natural,
and of generation, civil and of profession of the righteous, which as it is a
way merely natural and of generation civil and of profession, the Lord
apprehends it only, approves it not. Because it may be found among the
Turks and Heathens, which have both natural being and civil trading: and yet
because they are not become members of Christ and to be found in the way
spiritual and of regeneration or known therein unto God, not in the knowledge
of his Approbation but Apprehension only.

Would we the^ be certified what knowledge is here meant?

It is no doubt the knowledge of Gods Approbation. Would we also be informed
what way of the righteous it concerns? verily there way Spiritual or of
Regeneration: the way of there new birth, the way of there ingrafture into the
vine Christ: of becoming the mystical members of there head Christ, of there
in^ouling into the assembly of the heavenly Denizens, and of their intitling to
the inheritance of Gods Kingdom. This, oh! this is the way of the righteous,
which God so knows as he acknowledges, so acknowledges as he approves.
The other ways in his children, God respectively (it may be) approves, for
the cause of this way: but never allows he therein any place, at any time,
among any people without this way.

This me thinks that God thus knows the Way of his righteous ones,
Servants, Saints and Children, not only so as he apprehends it in his
wisdom, but approves it in his mercy, should move and egg on the righteous
ones, the Servants, Saints, and Children of God, in Gods School to take forth
a twofold lesson. Whereof the one is of Patience in afflictions: the other of
Practice of good actions.

The former is the lesson of Patience in afflictions, for GOD sees, knows,
and approves there way herein.

Some great Prince or mighty Statesman upon earth apprehends the more in his
thought and loves more in his heart that champion of his, which so with
Fortitude fights his battle, as he also with Patience bears the wounds
of his Adversary, whereby as the love of his LORD is inkindled toward him: so
like-wise he knowing that the eyes of his Lord looks upon him, increases his
courage, and inlargeth the manlynesse of his hardy combat.

This world, indeed, it is the appointed Acheldama or Field of blood, wherein
God is our King and we be his champions, to fight the battles of his truth
against the Princes of the darkness of this World, and spiritual wickedness
in high places. God our King so beholds us as he knows us, so knows us
as he approves us. Oh how ought then this to animate us with courage, and
arm us with patience against all the troops of of afflictions, against all
the assaults of our enemies! That we may stand against all the waves of
troubles, as a Rock against the billowing surges of the raging sea, cleansed
it may be, but not moved, much less removed That we may become like
Athanasius of whom Gregor: Nazia^z Greg. Nazian. oration. ^un^b. in Athanas.
reports that he was Dissidentibus magnes, percutientibus adamas: A
Lodestone whose nature is to draw iron the hardest matter unto it, to them
which were at variance: An adamant which is very hardly broken with strokes to
them which smote him: winning the affections of men by the one; bearing
afflictions from men by the other.

The conquering captain does triumph (says S. August) because he conquered,
but he had not conquered but that he fought, that by how much his danger has
been the greater in the battle, by so much his joy may be the more in the
triumph. We expect a greater triumph then this, not in earth among Men, but in
Heaven among Angels. And shall we think that we shall triumph without a
conquest? or conquer without a battle, or remain in the battle without
patience?

A tempest tossing the Maryner threatens wrack of his vessel, all wax pale
for fear of death: on the sudden the Heaven is calmed, the Sea assuaged:
whereupon their joy is the larger because their fear was the greater.

We are as Mariners, sailing in the Ship of the Church, on the Sea of this
world, it (hapyly) is the will of God, that a tempest for a time should toss
us; that the fear of a wrack should affright us. But when we least expect
it, this tempest shall be dispelled; this sea calmed, this shipp secured, this
wrack escaped: Shall we not then undergo that trouble with patience? the
consideration of the fierceness whereof, brings our rejoicing, by our escape
from it, to a greater fullness?

Is a man sick? and is there by the advice of the Physician, no other way for
his recovery, but the opening of his vein, and the letting forth of his blood?
Surely he will patiently suffer his flesh to be ^ut, and his vein to be
opened, and his blood also to be drawn forth, that he may recover his bodily
health.

O^ we are those sick patients, sick indeed by the occasion of sin, in our
bodies, but, O! ^arre more sick by the contagion of sin in our souls. God
himself becomes our Physician, whose counsel is for our recovery, that
we should let out the corrupt blood of our sinne-sicke souls, with the
Launcer of afflictions: and shall we not then possess our souls with
patience? that so we may possess our souls in peace, in purity, in health, by
the benefit of it?

GOD, which in the Rose has joined the flower and thorn together, has
coupled in the Church, sorrow and joy, affliction and consolation together.
Sorrow and affliction goes before, joy and consolation follows after, as in
the gathering of Roses, the thorn first pri^keth the hand, before the flower
contenteth the nostrills. And as the light is more comfortable after the
darkness, then if there had been no darkness at all: so joy, and consolation
is more acceptable after sorrow and affliction, then if there had been no
sorrow or affliction at all; even as (says Saint Augustine) Edendi et bibendi
volup^^s nulla, Aug. lib. confess 8. cap. 13.
nisi praecedat esuriendi, and sitiendi moles^ia: there is no pleasure at all
of eating or drinking unless the trouble of hunger and thirst go before.

Seeing then triumph praesupposeth a conquest, a conquest a battle, a bat
tail patience. We must be patient that we may ^ight, fight that we may
conquer, conquer that we may triumph.

Seeing then that our greater joy depends upon our deliverance from our
spiritual ship-wracke, the deliverance from this wrack, a former being in
danger in this wrack, and our danger in this wrack, patience to bear it, we
must be patient, that we may bear the danger, be in danger, before we can
be delivered; and be delivered before our joy can be enlarged.

Seeing then comfort for the recovery of our health fore-argueth sickness, and
sickness patience. We must be patient to undergo this sickness, that this
sickness patiently borne may expect the renuall of our health, that our health
renewed may store our hearts with comfort.

Seeing then to conclude, that GOD has so mixed the sweet and sour together,
that the one cannot be without the other: yet the one is the more enlarged by
the con-comitancy and propinquity of the other, as the Stars shine more
clearly in the black night, then in the bright day

Oh! how ought we to be the more patient in the one, that we may be the more
pleasured, profitted, and perfected by the other? Especially aduising that
beside and above all this, our patience is done in the sight and knowledge of
GOD, who sees and knows it, as a path of the way of the Righteous, which he
loves and allows.

The second lesson which the children of GOD are to take forth in GODS school
is of practice in good actions, because what-soeuer good they do, it is done
in the sight and knowledge of GOD who loves and approves it: piety toward
God; charity in instructing the souls, and releeuing the bodies of the
ignorant and poor brethren, and purity in themselves, God looks on it, God
likes it.

The godly is ever to be doing. As the Idle does nothing at all: The evil
nothing but that which is bad: so the godly is ever to be practicing that
which is good. He that the spirit of God vouchsafes to call the man of God,
he must flee these things. If you would know 1 Timothy 6. 11. Verse. 4. 5. 10.
what things: envy* strife, raylings, evils, surmisings, vain disputations of
men of corrupt mind. Cou^tousnesse also: and not only so: but he must follow
after, Righteousness, godliness, faith, love, patience, and meekness:
godliness and Verse. 12.
faith toward God; love and righteousness among men: patience and meekness
in himself. All which Timothy was to do as charged in the sight of God. Of
necessity Verse. 13.
must this be done in the sight of God, because to lead an upright life as
this is, is to walk with GOD. Genes. 5. 22.

There is much strife who should be a True Catholic. But he indeed is the
true Catholic christian, which as the Catholic Church consists in the
vn^uersality of all sexes and persons, so has in him (as near as may be) an
universal perfection of all goodness and virtues. Let us therefore in
walking before God, labor to be perfect Children of Abraham, like Abraham
himself, whom God wills to walk before him, and to be upright or
perfect. Genes. 17. 1.

The second branch that comes to my handling is of GODS rigor toward the
wicked. And the way of the wicked shall perish. Wherein, as in the former, my
proceeding must be in two points: First, the interpretation of the meaning
of, the way of the wicked: Secondly, the confusion of it. Shall perish.

Concerning the Interpretation or sense of the way of the wicked. Be it known
unto us that the wicked have a double way. The one, the way of their being: the
other, the way of their doing.

Touching the Confusion, or end of the way of the wicked, let us be
advertised of two members. 1. how it shall be confounded or end by Perishing.
2. when [Shall perish.

The Way of the being of the Wicked comes first to handling. This is the Way
of their living and breathing. Genes. 6. 12. but my mind is not to stand on it.

The other way of the wicked it is the way of their doing: which compriseth in
it, both their Civil doing, and their Evil doing.

The Civil doing of the wicked, is that which concerns their special calling
and vocation in the Commonwealth as being several members of the body
Political, whereof the chief Magistrate is the head.

The evil doing of the wicked is that which is called, The way of wickedness.
Psalm. 1^9. ^4. The way of darkness. Prou. 2 13. The way of Hell. Prou. 7.
27. because ^t leads from wicked ^esse, by darkness, into hell.

The second point of my proceeding, it is the Confusion, or end of this way. ^
^^^ll perish,

Wherein we were first to be advertised how this way should be confounded or
brought to an end, by perishing: 2. When [Shall perish.

Touching the confusion of the way of the wicked by perishing: as it may be
understood of all the ways of the wicked; so principally concerns it the Way
of their evil doing, and the way of their being, which ch^^^ly by this
cen^u^e are appointed by GOD, to perish.

First the way of there euil-doing shall perish, that is the way of there
sin: the way of transgressing the law and violatinge the will of God. By
which they neglect, yea cast a ^ay there duty toward God in the first, and
there love toward Man in the Second tables of the Law. They admit more Gods
then one; they worship images, they blaspheme Gods holy name, they profane his
Sabaothes, against the form^rtable of the Law; therein piercing (as it were)
directly and immediately the sides of God himself by the fiery darts of there
sinful actions. They disobey there parents, whether they be by Nature,
Office, or age; they shed blood, commit adultery, practice theft, bear false
wit-nesse, covet that which belongs not to them, therein bending the bow of
there mischievous misdoings, against the very faces of there brethren and
neighbors, A way which howsoever it seems for a time to flourish, yet shall
undoubtedly in due time Perish. Thus perished the tyranny of Saul, the
oppression of Ahab, the pride of Nabucchadnezzar, the theft of Achan, the
rebellion of Corah, the couetu^^snes of G^hezi, being as the grass on the
house top which withers, before it comes up. Psalm. 129. 6. Be it that
sin bea^eth the head so high, as it is advanced even to the Tops of the
houses yet is it then and there, first, but as Grass which of it self is but
a fleeting and brittle thing, secondly as Grass that is Withered: thirdly not
as Grass Withered in the (...) thereof when it sprouteth forth and (...) but,
before it comes forth, that is in the very root or rather seed of it, which
being gone, all hope is the^ewithall removed of being prospered, and a certain
unavoidable principle already concluded of the Perishing of it.

Though then the sins of the Wicked, be as cords, whereby they are willing,
if they were able to pull down God from Heaven, against the first table of the
Law, whereby they labor to bind their neighbors in the misery of an
everlasting thraldom upon earth, against the second table of the law. Yet to
show that these are no lasting but perishing cords, they are said to be cut
asunder Psalm. 1^9. 4.
by the Lord. When our sins are grown up and become ripe for the vintage
then has the Lord a sharp sickle to put into them, to cut them down, and to
cast them into the great Wine Press of the wrath of GOD, Apocal. 14. 19.

Oh woeful condition of us sinful men! We be-take our selves unto the Way of
sin, not as they which will walk therein for a time, but as such as purpose
to travail therein for ever. We make it our Lord, and we become slaves and
vassalls unto it. We drink it down as a delicate Wine: as the bread of our
nourishment do we feed of it. We stay our selves on it, as the staff of
our strength, and as our garments, do we girde it about us, and trusse it
close unto us, as the girdle of our loins; that as Christ was said to be
written in the heart of Ignatius; so sin, and nothing but sin, is not
written, but graven in the rebellious hearts of the godless persons of these
vicious times. But if it would please God to open the eyes of our souls, by
the working of his spirit, as he opened the eyes of Paul, by the means of
Ananiah, Acts. 9. 18. then should we see and perceive, that sin is not a
thing to be valued at so high a price of us, as it is: for it is not of a
lasting, but a perishingnature.

If we be about to purchase an house to harbor us, or to buy a garment to
cloth us: we will be sure as near as we may, to purchase such an house,
whose foundation may be firm, walls solid, beams and rafters, strong, etc.
We will have a care also (to our utmost endeavor) to buy such a garment, as
shall not be gone in a day or a week, but which shall last and continue (if
it may be) for many years together.

Are we then so careful not to lay out the price of gold and silver, which
is but a corruptible matter for a rotten building, or a sleightye garment? and
shall we then (alas) be careless in laying out the price of our souls for
the purchasing and practicing of sin, whose nature is flitting, because the
Way thereof is Perishing? Meat, without all comparison, is better then sin,
because when meat nourishes the body; Sin becomes rather a death, then a
diet both to Body and Soul: Does Christ counsel us not to labor for the meat
which perishes. Ioh. 6, 27.
And shall we labor for sin which perishes? Manna was the food of Angels,
which the children of Israel loathed, because it was but a^^ght meat, which
lasted not. Number. 11. 6. Sin is not the food of Angels, but the brood of
Satan, as light yea far more then Manna was, which (as in this Scripture) by
Gods own appointment Perishes; and shall we not despise it? loath it? abhor
it? abandon it? Let me then beseech you, that as you will be heedfull to
avoid that way which will fail you before you come at your iourneies end, so
you would be as careful, to decline and shun this way, even the way of
sin, which will prove defective in the midst of your iourny therein; even
as the way of Pharaoh both deceived and destroyed him in the sea, when on the
sudden it stopped his passage, assailed him, overthrew him.

Secondly the Way of the being of the wicked Shall perish, both Temporally in
this life, and also everlastingly in the life to come.

First the way of the wicked shall perish, Temporally in this life: even by
some sharp stroke of Gods particular judgment in this world taking away
their lives from them.

As God reserueth most men to the General Judgment which shall be of al flesh:
so does he cut off many men by y^ dint of his particular judgment in this
there uncertain pilgrimage. Sometime he futurely deferreth the vial of his
wrath, least he should seem to be without Mercy. Sometime he presently powers
it forth, least he might be challenged to want Justice.

As Godliness has the promises both of this life, and the life to come. 1.
Tim. 4. 8. even the promises of mercy, both here to be inioyed, and here-after
to be expected: so ungodliness has the menacings both of this life, and also
of the life to come: both here in some measure to be tasted, and here-after in
a fuller cup of Gods wrath to be dr^nke down.

To this end, those heavy cursses are charged upon the heads of the ungodly;
and those deadly cups are made the portion of the wicked to drink. Deuteronomy. 28.
even in this world temporally. That if they ^^ey not the voice of the Lord
their God, to keep and do all his commandments and ordinances, that then
they must look for it, as for the lotte of their inheritance: to be ^ursed in
the town, in the field, in their basket and dough, in the fruit of their
body* the fruit of their land, the increase of their Kine and flocks of their
Sheep, in their coming in, and their going out. The Lord shall smite them, not
only with a consumption, and feuor, and burning ague, and a fer^ent heat, with
blasting, with mildewes, with the botches of Aegipt, with the Emeroddes, and
with the scabb, and with the itche incurable, shall not only cause the heaven
that is over their head to be brass, and the earth which is under them Iron,
giving them for rain, dust and ashes: but also shall make the pestilence
cleave unto them, until he has consumed them from the land, shall smite them
with the sword* so that they shall fall before their enemies, and their
^arkasses shall be meat unto all the sowles of the air, and unto the bea^ts
of the earth, and none shall fray them away, etc. A mortal whippe in that
chapter described, which consists of many other stringes to be inflicted, to
the fatal perishing, or final confusion of the wicked, even in this life
corporally. And shall we prize a drop of the Sea at an higher rate, then the
whole body of the m^ine Ocean? shall we think that one man can be more dear
unto God then the whole world of men has been? If the whole world of men have
sinned: the whole world of men have perished. And shall but one man ^latter
himself to Genes. 7, 21.
bear^ an impudent forehead in his sin, and to harden his face against
heaven as an Adamant, and yet to be privileged?

Behold there have been in the world four principal Monarchies; and sin
has loosened the sinnewes of them all, and caused their loftye pride to lie in
the dust. Lust and disolutenesse ouer-threw the first Monarchy of the world
among the Assyrians. Prodigality supplanted the second of the Persians.
Ambition and Discord dismembered the third of the Grecians. Impi^ty, hidden
hatred, and private profit, wracked the fourth of the R^maines. Has sin
then ouer-turned Kingdoms, yea Monarchies, which are (as it were) kingdom of
kingdoms, even in this world? and shall we think that the wisdom of GOD is
ecclipsed, that he may not find out, his Justice diminshed, that he will not
punish: his arm shortened that he cannot smite, and curb the sins of
private men, even in this life? Oh! let us not suffer our selves to miscarry,
by the misleading windings of our own errors. For as God will be a witness
against the Soothsayer, the adulterer, the false swearer in the world to come.
So becomes he also many times a swift witness against them, even in this
present world: as Iehu was appointed to root out the house of Ahab, in this
life Malach. 3, 5
temporally.

Secondly, the way of the wicked shall perish, in the world to come
everlastingly. A thing which is begun, in all the race of the wicked in this
life, increased after this life; consummate and fully accomplished at the day
of general audite and judgment, both upon the subject of their bodies and of
their souls.

First, it is begun even in this life by the hellish dread of a galled
conscience, which fore-runneth the fire of hell, even as a smoke goes before
the flame. A worm is this bredde in the bosom of the ungodly, which eue^
gnaweth, an harbinger of the worm that never dies. Mark. 9. 46.
A fire is this kindled in the bones of the ungodly tha^ ever burns, a
necessary introduction to that fire that never goes out. A worm, I say, it is
which ever gnaweth, Ibid.
because though it seems some-time to cease, yet is it as a Gangraena or a
Canker, which fretteth the soul, as that secretly eats the flesh, and
some-time also like the gnawing of a ravenous beast, breaks forth into open
tortures. As a fire like-wise which ever burns, for though it may for a time
lie smoothered, as under a pile of green wood, yet when it has maistered the
moystnesse thereof, it sends forth by so much the greater flame, by how much
it has had the greater resistance. Sin is as a fired thorn, which causes
the conscience to boil and broyle by the hellish heat of restless
di^contentments. Hence comes it to pass, that as a patient, which has
Mercury, or some such eating Corosiue, applied to his raw flesh, can never
continue in one place, but turns and tosseth himself up and down, wearying
every place, and himself also, and yet finds no more comfort then Job did
among his friends, when he phrased them by the name of miserable comforters.
So the Job. 16. 2.
tooth of a torturing passion, being fixed on the wound of a galled
conscience, affects it with that hell upon earth, as it causes the person so
affected, to seek for refreshing in variety, and after many tossed and turned
sides, to complain of redreslesse and vnstinted sorrow, like the evil
spirit, which going out of the man, whom it formerly possessed, walked through
dry places, seeking rest and finding none. Matthew. 12. 43


The insufferable pangs of this private hell have moved some with the foolish
fish, to leap out of the pan into the fire, (as says the Proverb) and to
lay violent hand upon themselves for the riddance of one representative hell
within them, thereby euer-lastingly to be swallowed up of the true hell
without them: not unlike unto them, who being in danger of drowning in a
shallow creek, think to find security by casting themselves into a deep
whi^le-poole. Men of this mind, see^e to be more willing to go to the fiends
to be tormented, then to have the fiends to come to torment them.

Seeing then in a word, sin makes an evil conscience, and a^ evil
conscience brings an hell with it, we must repress sin, that this evil
conscience may be shunned, that the shunning of an evil conscience, may be a
remoouall of this private hell, the beginning of our everlasting perishing.

Secondly, this everlasting perishing of the wicked, is increased after this
life, which shall then be, when the soul shallbee separate, from the body.
This separation unto the Godly brings life, unto the ungodly death, and
perishing, in that place and manner which God has allotted to it. A dreadful
(no doubt) share and portion of the wrath of God upon the wicked, to have their
souls so separate from their bodies, as they are also separated from God; so
deprived of light, as they shall remain in darkness, so bere^t of joy, as
they shall taste of nothing but torments: so sundred from peace, as they shall
always be distracted with discontentments: so deuoyde of hope as they shall
continually be inuironned by, and swallowed up with desperation. Yet is this
but the beginning of their sorrows, to be fully accomplished at the
resurrection of their flesh, and the reunion of their bodies and souls
together, the full complement and perfection of this their perishing.

This shall be the utmost bounds of Gods wrath and indignation, to be imposed
on the wicked: when God, to whom vengeance belongs, shall fully repaye it,
sharing out to all these children of reprobacie, their due and full reward,
even their portion with hypocrites, where there shall be weeping and gnashing
of teeth,

This portion, as it is monstrously compacted of many hideous and affrightfull
limbs and members, so, to let pass the rest, we may insist upon these three.

First, that there is a patternlesse extremity of it. An extremity in the
utmost extent of sorrowings and torturings, which because it go^th beyond all
extreamities, is the extremity of extremities. Wherefore the spirit of God in
the holy Scripture, does set about it a fearful guard (as I may so say.) of so
many terrifying titles and attributes, In which it is called Anger to come,
Matthew. 3. 7. A prison. 1. Pet. 3. 19. a dungeon of that depth and profunditie,
as it is said to be (...), a pit that is bottemlesse, Apocal. 9. 2. A pit
not only bottomless, for the depth of it; but also comfortless for the
darkness of it, therefore is it styled by black darkness, 2. Pet, 2. 17, A
fire, Iam. 3. 6. A furnace of that fire. Matthew. 13. 4^. Which of it self is
everlasting, and will not go out. Matthew. 18. 8; from others, is unquenchable,
and cannot be put out, Matthew. 3. 12. And no marvel, for it is a Lake of fire
which burns with Brims^one. Apocal. 19. 20. If the fire which has been
given by God unto Man, for his use and comfort, be so whotte and insufferable
in nature, as it deserves the highest place of torments: what then shall we
think that that fire is? which not Man, who is able to devise much, nor
Angels, which are able to find out more, but God himself, who is infinitely
able to invent most of all, has in the largest compass of his wisdom sought
out, to be not for use, but for a curse: not for the comfort of man, but for
his torment; I say, what shall we think that fire to be? dolorous no doubt
without limitation, and insufferable above all conceit. Phalaris Bull, in
comparison of this may be said to be but as the burning coals, which that
holy confessor Tiburtius walked upon with his naked feet, which he deemed and
affirmed to be but as so many roses. 4. It is a bitter and uncomfortable thing
for a man to lie si^ke upon the hard ribs and iron sides of a grediron, more
bitter and uncomfortable if it be upon a burning grediron. But far, oh! far
more bitter and uncomfortable to burn in the flames of hell, the entraylls and
bowels of whose ^urious burning, is far more tormenting and torturing, then
can the sides and ribs of any grediron be. If the disionting of one only
member does affect us with more pain then we can with patience undergo. O!
how shall we be able to undergo and suffer it when the whole body shall be
tormented, and the whole soul discomfitted? If a man has a pain in one only
member how he bemoneth himself and complains? But these gnawing greeuances
shall be in every part and parcel, joint, sinew, vain, muscle, artery,
universally, and singularly, possessing at once, head, eyes, tongue teeth,
throat, stomach, back, belly, heart, sides, in that misery that all the
Logitians of the world cannot argue it: in that manner that all the
Rhetoritians of the world cannot utter it: in that number, that all the
Arithmeticians in the world cannot sum it; in that content that all the
Geometritians of the world cannot measure it. This caused rich Dives to be
clothed with Purple flames, as he some-time was clothed in Purple: to be
compassed in with Black Darkness, as he sometime was apparrelled with Fine
White: to sue for a drop of Cold Water, with more torrentes of tears, then
ever Esau sought for his blessing, Luke. 16.

A drop of cold water, why? even to cool his toungue. He which showed not so
much mercy toward Lazarus necessities, as some of the Dogs had done to his
Sores, in that they licked them with their tounges, has his tongue burning in
hell. He which denied Lazarus a crumme of bread to ^lacke his hunger, when he
begged it obtained not so much as a drop of cold water to cool his toungue,
though he sueth for it. But be it (miserable Dives) that thou had
obtained thy drop, and with thy drop, not only the rivers of the South,
but all the waters of the South and North seas, yet should thou have found
less ease in the burning fit of an hellish torment by all these waters; then
the sick patient does in the burning fit of an hot ague after a draught of
cold water, whereby his malady is rather increased then aswaged. Or be it, that
thy tongue should find ease: yet thy heart, thy liver, thy lunges, thy
bowels, thy arms, thy legs, should burn and broyle, fry and flame still.
The extremity therefore of this perishing everlasting is patternlesse.

Secondly there is an endless perpetuity of it. A fire that never goes out.
Mar. 9. 46.

When, as many millions (not of years but of Ages) be expired, as there be
stars in the firmament, yet will there still by an infinite computation be
as many more to come.

Be it that a man should once only in an hundred thousand years, take a drop
of water out of the maine Sea. How many millions of ages would be spent before
he should empty it? yet sooner should this vast deep be exhaust and dried
up, by thus taking a drop out of it, then this time ended.

Be it that a man should live not the age of Mathewsalem (the eldest liver)
but from the creation to the resurrection that is the Age of the world, and
should spend all that time in setting together the greatest numbers he
possibly can, and in the end* should sum them altogether: yet is it less to
this number then a grain of ^^nd to the whole shore of the sea.

Suppose that the whole circumference of the Heaven; from the East to the W^^t,
and from the West to the East, again were filled wi^h figures, set according
to the art of Arithmetike, yet cannot it (I will not say) match but touch the
account of the infinite times, wherein these torments shall be suffered. The
reason of all which may be this, because if a man should substract a hundred
thousand thousands of millions from a number that is infinite, it remains
infinite still.

But may some man say, how may this stand with the equity of Gods justice? to
punish the finite sin of man, with an infinite punishment, the boundless
perishing, in hand.

The answer hereunto shall not be mine but S. Gregory's, Gregoy. Picus
Mirandula: Apolog. quest. 2.
alleged for this purpose by Picus Mirandulanus, who says: Peccator punitur
paena aeterna, quia peccauit in suo aeterno, id est sine fine. A sinner is
punished with an everlasting punishment, because he has sinned in his
euerlastingnesse, that is without end.

In his euerlastingnesse, that is, either because when he lived he never
ceased to add sin unto sin, as one lincke is in a cheyne coupled together
with another, without any intermission, for as much as he never brake off his
sin by repentance: or else in his euerlastingnesse (which comes more home
to the matter) because if he had lived longer he had sinned longer; if he had
lived ever, he had sinned ever: unto which consents Tho. Aquinas cited in the
same place Tho. Aqui^ Sentent. 4.
saying, ideo durare paenam damnatorum in aeternum, quia culpa durat in
aeternum: that therefor the punishment of the damned do last for ever, because
their fault remains for ever. It stands therefore with the justice of God
that he which has a will ever to sin should ever be punished for his sin.
neither tormented, nor consumed.

But me thinks, I hear some man say, how can this stand with the infirmity
of the body of man? Ever to be perishing and burning in these flames, never to
be perished and burnt up with them? Because I do, and still wish I may
ascribe more to the judgment of other orthodoxal writers of the Church, then
to mine own shallowness; Let holy August. lose this knot, and satisfy this
August. de Ciuitat. d^i. lib. 21. cap. 4.
objection; who in his book of the City of GOD brings many examples for the
illustrating of the truth of this point unto us.

The Salamander (says he) lives in the fire: the Mountains of Civilie for a
great long continuance of time are burnt with flames and yet remain whole.
The sodden flesh of a peacocke (as that father speaks by his own experience
at Carthage) corrupts not for some years together, chafe is of a cold
nature to keep snow from melting, and yet of a wh^t operation in ripening the
fruits which are therein laid up: ^oales which (...) broken with the least
pressure of the foot; yet in moist places a^^ conserved for a very long
season: Lime which is cold to them that touch it, Miraculum apud nos si quod
apud Indos. A miracle with us if any be among the Indians, waxes whot, not
with the infusion of oil which is of a whotter nature upon it, but of water
which is of a colder temper; The Lodestone draws iron to it, but in the
presence of the Adamant loses that virtue; Adamas nullis malleis comminutus
hir^ino sanguine emollitur, The Adamant Which is broken which no hammers, yet
is softened with Goats blood.

If the wisdom God does thus dispose of these matters in nature, how much
more shall the power of GOD produce more miraculous effects in causes
supernatural, to cause the bodies of the wicked to be in the fire of hell,
tormented and not consumed? As it made the bodies of the three Children to be
in Nabuchad^ezzars oven neither tormented nor consumed.

Thirdly there is a Remediless misery of it. If all the Angels in heaven; if
all the Saints which have been upon ^a^th: Abraham, Isaac, Jacob, all the
Prophets, Apostles, Evangelists, Martyrs, Confessors* etc. should become
perpetual Sollicitors and Intercessors to God, for a release of this
perpetual punishment, yet should they not be able to do any thing therein;
but should be like those whom God sends empty away. Luke, 1. 53. If the
Father should make request for the Son, the Mother for the Daughter; they
must have the repulse, for the sentence of Christ cannot be reuersed; his
decree not repealed.

Oh! how ought we then to labor to avoid this patternelesse, endless,
easelesse, perishing? In the torture whereof the tormented miscreant would (if
it wear in his power,) give the whole world for one minutes releasement, to
leave off to be wicked, to endeavor to be godly: that we being not found in
the way of the wicked, with the way of the wicked we may not perish.

The second thing which we are to be advertised of concerning the confusion of
the way of the wicked, is the time when: In that it is not said that it
presently does, but that it futurely [Shall perish.

The act of perishing does testify Gods judgment: The time that it is not
yet, but shall be, does proclaim his mercy, Gods Mercy goes coupled with his
Judgment; even as our sweet Savior and his bitter cross were joined together.

Judgment and mercy in God be, as two hands in man: Judgment as the left
hand, Mercy as the right hand: and as man is wont to use his right hand more
then his left; so is God delighted rather with the use of Mercy, then of
judgment.

A course of God which shall be the Close of this Psalm, that as it begins
in Blessedness, so it may end in mercy; intimated unto us in this; that as it
is a part of his judgment, that the way of the wicked perishes: so it is an
argument of his Mercy that it does not presently perish, but that it futurely
Shall perish. God give us grace that we may not with the wicked ones feel of
his Judgments, but with the godly feed of his mercies; and that for his son
Christ Jesus sake, to whom together with the Holy spirit, three persons and
one God, be ascribed all Honor, Glory, Praise, Power, and Dominion, both now
and for ever. Amen.


