A SERMON PREACHED AT Paul's Cross, the second of November. 1606.

By Richard Stock, Preacher of Al-hallowes, Bread-streete, London.

LONDON, Printed by T. C. for Edmond Weauer, and William Welby. 1609.

TO THE RIGHT REVErend Father in God, James, by Gods providence, Lord Bishop of
Bathe, and Wells, R. S. wishes all Grace, true Honor, and Comforts in this
life, and the Crown of glory, in the life to come.
Right Reverend in CHRIST, Saluia: Massil. de gubernat. Dei.
the anger of God, and his fearful punishments (for Iradiuinitatis est poena
peccantis) has been heavy upon us for the space of these almost six years.
The cause doubtless is the sins of the time, which have defiled the Land,
and provoked God to send such plagues as may purge the land of us, when we will
not purge it, and our selves from our sins. Which sins, what they are, as I
have touched diverse in the Sermon following, so none seems to me to be more
offensive to the eyes of God, then that popish Idolatry which is committed in
the land, wherewith every place, country and City is horribly defiled;
though as the prophet speaks, Ezekiel. 8.12.
it is but in the dark, and in the chamber of their imagery. Which was an
occasion to me, being called to the stage of the land, to act this part I have
done in this Sermon: namely, to persuade every man to judge himself; and
them, to whom the sword of justice is committed, to judge other malefactors,
specially Romish Idolaters, and to execute the just laws upon them; because
God will not judge when man does judge before: as the Judges of assile will not
censure again those malefactors, whom the Justices of the sessions have
formerly punished. But when this is neglected, God will, and can not, for his
justice, but he must bring this and the like fearful judgments upon the
land. Which as they were the occasion of my preaching of this doctrine, so they
are some causes of my publishing of it in writing: to try if I might by any
means provoke every man in his several place and condition to this preventing
course of Gods judgments; At the least, I shall have my own discharge by it.
Now I have presumed to bring it forth into public under your name and
countenance for diverse both public, and private reasons and respects:
Public, first you are now advanced to a special place of government in the
Church, and have that authority in your hands, that you may cause and effect
great reformation of manners and redress of many things, which are highly
displeasing to God. To which if I might be any occasion to excite your
Lordship, I should think I had effected some great good: because your example,
as it might provoke others in authority, both in Church and common wealth to
do the like; so it might animate them to go forward, with hope it would be
well accepted of his highness, when they shall see you, (who have been so
continually in his presence, and so daily conversant with him, and can not but
know his heart and affection) take some round and constant courses in
reforming of abuses both in manners and doctrine.

Secondly, your place you yet enjoy so nigh unto his Majesty's person; whereby
you have done hitherto good offices to the Church, The English desence of the
Popes Breeues, and Bellar. Letter.
(her enemies being witness) in justly and wisely exasperating his Majesty's
heart against these foxes, who would destroy her vines. Now if I might be any
means to further your willing mind to be constant in this duty, I should
judge it in me a good service to the Church, as in your self it will be a
glorious service to the King of Kings; honorable to his highness, profitable to
the Church, comfortable to all her friends, and bring you great honor from
God and good men. Which point I will not here much press in the particular,
seeing I have in the treatise following don it in the general; though to use
Bernards words in another case, De dilige^do Deo.
Non prout dignum rei, sed prout datum mihi. Yet let me entreat your Lordship,
or rather adjure you by that honor and savor which God has given you with
your Sovereign, and by that account you must give for the employment of it,
before the great King in that great day, that you would go on in this so
religious and profitable a work, namely, to excite his Majesty to wake^ his
sleeping laws, that as he has long sung mercy, he would at length tune
justice; and command indeed that his laws may have their course, Psalm. 101.8.
that betimes he would destroy the wicked of the la^d, and that such workers of
iniquity may be cut off from the city of the Lord. It is not unfitting your
Lo. (beei^ng called to be a reverend Bishop, a governor of the Church) to
incite him to this, since it was the consecrating of the Levites hands to the
Lord, for every man to slay his brother, Exodus 32.29.27.
his companion, and his neighbor, who had defiled the land with Idolatry. And
it is no less then necessity requires of his Majesty, both for the good of
himself, Thomas Worthingtonus presbyter.
his posterity (those hopeful plants) his whole people, and the church of
God. Since they boast not at home only, but a broad, of the great increase of
this Idolatrous brood amongst us. There is one who has lately published two
Tomes of Bristowes the Jesuit, written in Latin, called Motiua Anti-haretica,
who in his Epistle Dedicatorie, speaks thus; Post diuturnas in Anglia
ingrauescentes, pro fide Catholica, persecutiones, ita plus solito crescat
Catholicorum ibi mumerus, ac zelus, vt spes effulgeat (Diuina praestante
misericordia) totum illud amplissimu^ Regnu^, ad sanctaematris Ecclesiae
gremiu^ breuirediturum. Is it not then more then need and high time, that his
Majesty's former lenity should be turned into just severity? lest he may seem
to succeeding ages to forget both his God and himself, his posterity, and
people. Which may easily be prevented, if his laws may be at length with some
rou^dnes executed, specially against the seeds men of treason and idolatry,
by whom this popish superstition is nourished and increased in this land. For
so says the former author in the same place, commending the founders and
vpholders of their Seminaries, as the fountains of those waters which have
watered these weeds till they be fit for the fire, adding, that His enim in
collegijs Sacerdotes initiati, and inde in Anglia^ missi, tu^ paruas ibi
religionis reliquias co^seruerunt, tum easde^ (vt nu^c videamus) in immensum
propagarunt. These then by confession being the preseruers and the increasers
of this Idolatry among us, there is no way to prevent the continuance and
increase of this, ^^^^by ^^^ing off such at least who husband this Idolatrous
work: least (...) should grow to that, they would have it, the ^ar^s to (...)
more then the wheat; when without great danger and disturbance to the whose,
and hazard of the Church, they cannot be dealt withal. Now that your Lordship
has such an opportunity to further this business of the Lord, who knows
whether you are come to such a place for such a purpose? etc whether, when some
would have cast you out, you have yet but God been kept in, to such an end? The
sanour God brought you first into, with your Sovereign, and his upholding of
you in it to greater advancement, seems to re^iui^e no less of you. Without
which, I should doubt, you can neither perform thankfulness to God, nor
faithfulness to his Majesty.

Pardon, I beseech your Lordship, my plainness and boldness; which I excuse
with that of Bernard to Eugenius: Attendo celsitudinem honoris, and e vicino
periculum reformido: and with that of Hieroure to Salvina, Absit vt sinistrum
quicquam mihi de te suspicari liceat: sed ex abundantia lubricam aetate^
(dicerem ego, Epist. 9.
lubricum statum and gradum) monuisse, pietatis est: imo amoris non vulgaris.

Now the private reasons which have moved me to make choice of your Lordship,
under whose name this slender labor of mine might appear in the sight of men,
is your ancient favor which you bore to wards me in the University; and
that good respect, though undeserved, which you had of me, for my good and
preferment there: as also since, the renewing of the same many ways toward
me, even now when you are advanced to honor and place of dignity. So that I
could do noe less then return a bare and naked sign of my good will and
hearty affection, for so great favors. Now, the Lord of glory make you
faithful to himself, and your Sovereign, to the Church in general, and your
own whereof you are made ouerseer; and that for the furtherance of Gods glory,
the advancement of Christ's holy Gospel, the comfort of his glorious spouse
the Church, the confusion of the Popes glistering Concubine, Nos iustitia^
nostra^ and Ecclesiae Sponsae nostrae noletes negligere. Bonifac. 8. de
immunit. Eccles. c. quoma^ in sexto.
the seat of Antichrist, and to the discharge of your conscience in this life,
and your account in the great day.

Your Lordships, in the Lord to be commanded, Rich. Stock.

To the Reader.
CHristian Reader, thou have here from me a Sermon, as the Sea in a storm
has the Merchants goods, willingly against my will. When I preached it, many
were very instant with me to print it: but I was then as peremptory in the
denial, and thought never to have brought it again into view and sight of
men. But the iniquities of the times are such, that some men for their gain
care not what prejudice and injury they do unto others. Whereupon some having
copies of this slender labor of mine, though very imperfect, and of some
other things of far greater quantity in themselves, and of labor to me,
and those things, whose impression would have cost them a great sum; yet have
gone about to seek the allowance of them without my priuitie and knowledge: and
had I not had a friend in place, they had at the least obtained an allowance of
them, though happily I might have got knowledge of it, before they had printed
much of them.

Now this thing, being short and small, might happily some have passed and
been speedily printed, before I should have had notice of it, and that with
such imperfections as would have been small to my credit, and as little to thy
contentment. Wherefore I resolved, being importuned by some, to seek forth my
own Copy; which in probability is like to have less imperfections then any
which they had. Which as in speaking, so in printing. I purpose not to make any
pleasant illurement or inticement, but a remedy and medicine rather, which
should not so much please the cares of the idle and curious, as profit the
minds of the sickely and weak: which if I can compass, I shall account it a
great fruit of my labors. But if it happen not, I shall not think I have
labored in vain; seeing I assayed and endeavored to have profited. For happily
with men, but certainly with God, De duplici Martyrio.
it is as Cyprian speaks, (if Cyprian) Deus non aestimat quenqua^ ex eventu
rerum, sed ex affectu. Not the fruit of their labors, but the affection of
men's hearts gets them respect with God. To whose blessing I commend thee: and
this poor mite, I offer to the treasury of the Lords temple.

Thine, in Christ Jesus, Rich. Stock.

A SERMON PREAched at Paul's Cross, the second of November, 1606.
Esaias. 9 14. Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel, head, and tail,
branch, and rush, in one day.

Esaias. 9 15. The Ancient and the Honorable man, he is the headland the
Prophet that teaches lies, he is the tail.

Esaias. 9 16. For the leaders of my people, cause them to err: an I they that
are leddely them, are devoured.


Our Savior Christ compares a minister to a saithfull and wise Steward, Luke.
12.4.
whom the Master shall make ruler over his household, to give them their
portion of meat, in season. Where are two things approved: First, his
faithfulness: Secondly, his wisdom. His faithfulness appears in disposing
of that he had received from his master, for his honor, and utility, and not
for his own gain: his wisdom in giving unto the household of God their due
portion of meat, and that in fit time and season, for all meats are not for
all persons, but that which is nourishment to some, is poison to others,
neither is that fitting at one time which is at another. So farech it in
Spiritual food, where many things are suitable to times of judgment, which
would be unfit for the day of mercy, and on the contrary. Now I having obtained
this mercy of God, to be, though unworthy, a minister and disposer of his
mysteries, and by authority called to this place: In that measure of
fidelity, I have received, I began to think what might most glorify God, and
in the small degree of wisdom, God has given me, what portion was fittest to
Gods household, whereof this auditorie is a part, but especially what was
fittest for this time, which is as Hezechiah said, Isay 37.3.
A day of tribulation, and a day of judgment: I at length resolved upon this
place and these verses of the Prophet Isay, as both sitting this time and this
assembly: out of which I intend not to gather every thing that may be
gathered, as if I would immitate those who dig for treasures, who as
Chrysostom. says, though they have taken much riches, yet leave not till they
have taken all their care being not to take much, but to leave nothing. But I
will only choose out some principal things, which I discern to be of most
necessity, and profit, seeing the length of the text, and the limmit of the
time will not suffer me to run through all.

The dependaunce of these words upon the former, is thus: Coherence.
In this chapter are contained two things: First, comfort and consolation to
the godly, from the first verse to the eighteenth: Secondly, judgment and
threatenings menaced against the wicked and obstinate, from the eight verse to
the end, but so as before he threatens the rod, he tells them in the eight
verse, that he had sent his word unto Jacob, and it had lighted upon Israel,
and having called them by his word, and they would not be gathered, and
having endeavored to bring them in order, and they would not be reformed, then
according to that in the prophet, Hear the rod, and who has appointed it:
Mich. 6 9.
In the eleventh, and twelve verses of this chapter, the Prophet threatens a
heavy, and grievous judgment that God should bring upon them, an enemy that
should devour them with open mouth, and because they profitted not by that
judgment, he says in the twelve verse; The wrath of the Lord is not turned
away, but his hand is stretched out still; the reason of it is given in the 13.
verse, and iusinuated in the 14. verse, because the people have not returned to
the Lord that sinit them, neither do they seek the Lord of hastes, therefore
he will cut off head, and tail, branch, and rush, etc.

Herein we may observe 2. things: 1. the denouncing a Judgment: 2. the causes
why the Lord would bring it upon them. In the judgment are 2. things to be
considered: 1. the generality of it, 2. the impartialitie of it. The
generality, because the Lord vvil cut off head, and tail. The impartialitie
is double: 1. because he will as well smite the head, as the tail; the
branch, as the rush; the great, as the small: 2. because he will
principally smite the heads, as those that were the cause of all the
corruptions that were in the body. The 2. is the causes: and they are 2.
First, is general, because the people had not profited by former judgments and
less afflictions, therefore they should have a 2. and 3. vvoe, in the first
word, Therefore:

The 2. is a particular cause in the 16. verse: because the leaders of the
people caused them to c^re, and the people were content to be misled by them,
therefore shall they be devoured all together. So much for the coherence and
division of the words. And now for the meaning of the words: Therefore the
Lord will cut off, etc. That is, because the people have not benefited by the
former judgments, and afflictions to turn to God by repentance, many of them
only seeking the Lord by mourning and fasting, and sackcloth, in outward show,
which is but as much as hipocrites may do; but few or none of them were sound
to forsake their sins, and turn to God by true repentance, therefore says
the Lord, I will cut off head, and tail, etc.

The judgment is, God will cut off and destroy with a general judgment and
consusion, the whole state, and the whole land, for this sin. For to imagine
as some do, that the magistrate is called here the head, because the head is
the seat of sense, and beginning of motion; I take it, it is besides the
intent of the Prophet in this place: and that he merely intendes to note a
general consasion and plague that should spread over the whole body from the
top of the head to the sole of the foot; and (...) one should be spared. And
not only so: but as it is saul that his judgments are general, so they
should be without partiality, God would out off as well the head, as the
tail, the weak and feeble rush that hangs down the head, and the strong
branch that is high and mighty, and therefore in the 15. verse he tells us
whom he means, by head, and whom by tail: The head is the ancient and
honorable, and the tail is the Prophet that teaches lies. Here is another
part of Gods impartialitie observed: whereas the magistrate and the minister
were the cause of the corruptions and cuill manners of the people, therefore
the Lord will smite them both, and because these too conspired together, the
magistrate deceived by the false Prophets slattering, and fauning upon him,
telling him of his insinite majesty, his absolute greatness, and power to do
what he list, where he list, and punish whom he list: and being so persuaded
by him because of his power, he thinks any thing is lawful for him to do:
and on the other side, the lying Prophet because he had gotten favor, and
countenance with the magistrate, he thought that he should settle his neast so
sure, that he should have no hurt whatsoever came: thus says the Lord, because
they have agreed together, the one to deceive, and the other to be deceived;
herefore they shall be destroyed both together.

The leaders of my people cause them to err, etc. Here is the particular
reason why God would destroy them, because there was deceivers amongst them and
they were willing to be deceived; as if he should say, I set ministers over my
people, that they should lead them and teach them in the right way, that they
should learn knowledge out of the word, and then teach it to others, and teach
them what they ought to do, and reprove them when they do that which is not
fit, and which they ought not to do, but on the other side they have set their
faces, to get the applause and liking of the people, preach only pleasing and
foothing things to please the care, only to get favor and a name, they
therefore have caused the people to err, and they that were lead by them are
willing to be seduced, therefore they shall be devoured together: so much for
the meaning of the words.

Therefore will the Lord cut off from Israel, etc. The first thing is the
general cause of the judgment that should come upon this people, which was,
because they had not sought the Lord, nor turned to him, nor profited by their
former afflictions, There the Lord would cut them off?

Deuteronomy. 28. Deuteronomy. 28.45
Chapter, and in verse 45. after the Lord had threatened a great many plagues
against his people: he says further, that if this should do them no good:
then, All these curses shall come upon thee and overtake thee, to destroy thee;
because thou obeyest not the voice of the Lord thy God. And in verse 58. etc.
The Lord says, If thou will not obey and do all the words of this law, that
are written in this book, and fear this glorious and fearful name the Lord
thy God, then the Lord will make thy plagues wonderful, and the plagues of thy
seed, even great plagues and of long continuance: moreover, he will bring upon
thee, all the diseas^s of Egypt whereof thou wast afraid; and every sickness,
and every plague, that is written in this book of this (...) will the Lord
heap upon thee, till thou be destroyed. Levit. 26.21.22, 23 24.
Like to this is that in Leuiticus 26. where the Lord says: If you walk
stubbornly against me, and will not obey me, I will then bring seau^n times
more plagues upon you according to your sins; I will send wild beasts upon
you, which shall spoil you, and destroy your carttell, and make you f^we in
number: yet if by these you will not be reformed by me, but walk stubbornely
against me, then will I also walk stubbornly against you, and I will smite
you yet seven times more for your sins. This also made the Prophet Esaias in
this chapter to repeat three times these words; For all this, the wrath of the
Lord is not turned away, but his hand is stretched out still, as in the 12.17.
and 21. verses. And in the Gospel our Savior Christ said to the man that had
been sick 38. (...) 5.14.
years: Go thy way, sin no more, least a worse thing happen unto thee. Out
of which places, it is apparent that the Lord brings heavier and greater
plagues upon men, nor right in it, that the Lord should go away, as overcome
with the stubbornness, and obstinacy of the people. That were, as if a Prince
having a rebel standing out against him, and being norable with a few to
subdue him, should give over, and gather no more forces against him; which to
him were too much indignity, and dishonor: So no reason the Lord give over his
arms til his rebels are brought in. 2. Sam. 20.22.
As Ioah would not give over his siege against Abell, till he had the head of
Sheba thrown over the wall: So the Lord will not give over his siedge against
men, till he have the heads of their sins cut off and cast away. The second
reason is, that as it is a dishonor to God, Because sentence is deferred, and
not executed speedily, therefore the hearts of the children of men are fully set
to do evil. Eel. 8.11
If deferring of a sentence do harden men in their sins; then much more, if
God should remove his judgments, and not renew them again: therefore lest he
should harden them, he will undoubtedly renew them, that he may reclaim them.
Thirdly, the Lord must do it, and a settled disease they double the doses of
their medicines, and use more violent means: So the Lord will deal with his
own when he sindes them obstinate: but if they be not his own, then must he
do it, that he may show his power, that he is able to abate and destroy
whosoever stands out against him, for these reasos or the like, it is that the
Lord when he deals with obstinate men: if less afflictions do them no good,
he will bring greater, and heavier plagues upon them: now hence do arise many
several godly considerations and uses.

First, Even from the pestilence that walks in the darkness, and the plagues
that destroys at noone day, Psalm. 91.6.
(save that he has a little returned to this City where he begun, yet are
there more heavy and fearful plagues, and judgments at our doors, ready to
break in upon us, for this that is here said is true, and as it were spoken to
us by Esaias. For this is yet the state of the City, refractary and obstinate,
as if they had conspired against God, that do what he will, they will still
be always the same, wicked as they have been: I (speak generally, for I
doubt not but some few have well profited by it.) Hosea. 4.1.
The Lord has had a controversy with the inhabitants of this City, and he
has followed it hard, almost for the space of these four years. But why did
he thus trouble us, complained he without cause? No assuredly, For will a Lion
roar in the forest, when he has no prey? Amos. 3.4.
For those sins which made him contend with Israel, have been the cause of
his controversy with us; Cap. 41.
Hosea says, the Lord had a controversy with the inhabitants of the Land,
because there was no truth, nor merey, nor knowledge of God in the land, by
swearing, and lying, and killing, and stealing, and whoring, they break forth,
and blood touches blood: There is no man who dare deny these, least he
reprove the Lord, for conte^ding causeleslie: but some will say indeed these
sins were amongst us, but since so many of us fell the last plague, we are
fallen from them. I would to God it were so, then might we well hope the
controversy would end, and that God would remove his plagues from us, and
renew them no more; but alas who sees not the contrary, when that in Jeremy
may well be verified of us, that the bellows are burnt, Ier. 6.2.29.
the lead is consumed, and the founder has melted in vain, for the wicked are
not taken away. How should we then not fear greater judgments? But to go a
little further, there are four sins which brought the judgments of God upon
Sodom first, and after upon Israel, and made the Lord take away that people at
his pleasure, and sweep them away as the dust of the earth; and they were,
Pride, Idleness f^lues of bread, and contempt of the poor: which sins in
this land, and in this Citre have (...) the cause why God has swept away so
many thousands of us. And if these sins be still in the land, and not
removed, what hope is there but that there are more fearful plagues hanging
over our heads? These sour sins are the begetters one of another. Pride
commonly begetts idleness: Pride, and Idleness hegette Fulness of bread, for
that is one part of Pride to have a table richly decked and furnished: and
whereas labor would be satisfied with a little, yet idleness is a deuourer:
now pride, idleness, and fulness of bread, breed Contempt of the poor: for
where these are, there can be little relief for them. For if the rich man fare
deliciously every day, and go in purple and fine linen, there will be hardly
any scraps left for poor Lazarus: seeing all is too little to furnish the
table, to pamper the back, and the belly, for the service of sin and Satan.
Then if this pride be spread through the City and through the land, what may
we expect, but greater plagues to come upon us? If any man will put me to
prove it that it is to be sound, he shall pardon me, I will add no light to
the sun; because if a man do but look through the City, in every place, in
every family, in every man, and woman, in every Church and assembly, he shall
see how the pride of Israel, and of England, does testify it to her face. Now
to these I will add this special one. 2. Chron. 36.16.17. where was a sin
that brought the wrath of God upon the prople without remedy: which was, that
they misused the messengers of God, despised the word of God, mocked the
Prophets of God, therefore the Lord gave them into the hands of the Galdeans,
who slow their young men with the word, and spared neither young man nor
virgin, ancient, nor aged. And are not these rhinges thus with us? were ever
the ministers of God in more contempt? Nay, are they not all in extreme
contempt, either justly or unjustly? whether such as do conform themselves
according to the custom of the Church, and will of his majesty, or they who
refuse? Whether such as be gluttous or drinkers of wine, and friends of
publicans and sinners, as they falsely said of Christ, or they be of an honester
life, and carriage, coming neither cating nor drinking as John: whether they be
either negligent and idle in their places, and will hardly preach in any season
but vnsauourly, or they be diligent, and painful, preaching in season, and out
of season: whether they be plain dealing Amoses or slattring Amaziahs: all are
in contempt, some of one and some of another. Is there the^ any remedy, but
that heavier wrath must come upon us, then yet any we have felt? Ezech. 22.
When the Lord had reckoned up many sins which were in that people: He says,
I have smitten my hands upon thy covetousness. A similitude, from those who
encourage dogs to pull down and devour, showing with what desire and
earnestnes, he would contend with them, and bring judgments upon them: if such
sins be found among us not lessoned, but increased, since the height of our
plague, that cruelty and blood be in our streets, as verse. 7.8. etc. In thee
have they despised Father and Mother, in the midst of thee have they opposed
the strangers: in thee have they vexed the fatherless, and the widow. Thou
have despised my holy things, and have polluted my Sabboaths, etc. What can we
expect but the Lord should clappe his hands upon our covetousness, and bring a
fresh and sierce reply of some fearful judgment?

To conclude this with a speech of Chrysostom. in his 5. Homily to the people of
Antioch: after the Emperors wrath was asswadged toward that City, Chrysostom.
Ho. 5. 2d Pop. Ant.
he said; We have made a happy change: yet this I dare say, if you reform not
your corruptions and sins, though this cloud be over, we shall see and
suffer worse things: for I have ever been more afraid of your security then
of the Emperors wrath. So say I, we have a happy change in respect how it was
with us this time three years, a happy change in respect of that which our
cruel and bloody papists did design us unto this time twelue-moneth: But this
I dare say; If we do not reform our corruptions and manners, though this
cloud be over, yet we shall see and suffer more fearful things, for
whatsoever other men's opinions are, for my part I have ever feared more the the
security of the land, then the wrath of God; because the wrath of God (if we
were not secure) were to be expiated, and appeased by our repentance, and
turning unto him: but we being secure and settled upon the dregs of our sins,
there is no hope that the wrath of God should be removed, but that he should
do to us, as is spoken here: Cut off head, and tail, etc. and that these
should be but the beginning of sorrows.

Secondly, Psalm 42.1.9.
here is instruction for all christian magistrates, who are called Gods, and
are so by their office, and the communication of power and authority; that
they deal thus with wicked and obstinate malefactors, when their lenity or
their smaller corrections will not make them relinquish the former corruptions,
and return to better manners, they ought to take them in hand, and to use more
severity, and sharpnes toward them; amongst many I would press this,
concerning one kind of offenders, who are the greatest enemies of the kingdom
of Christ; the grossest idolaters of all the kingdoms of the world, and the
most pestilent enemies of this kingdom and state; I mean our seducing and
seduced papists. In whom I rather instance, because this day reuiues the
memory of their cruel designement, seeing they purposed that it should have
been the last day, when any should have spoken against them out of this place:
pretending, they meant to to be the Lords executioners of this judgment here
set down by the Prophet; when they intended indeed to have bin the devils
instruments to have cut off from Jrael. from England, head and tail, branch,
and rush, in one day. Concerning these I say, when neither lenity of the
state, nor smaller means, and mildenes, will serve to reduce them from their
heresies, and Idolatries, to make them conformable to the laws of God, and the
land; there ought now more severity to be used. Psalm 119, 126.
And as David said to God; It is (...) for thee Lord to lay too thy hand for
they have destroyed thy law: So it is time for you gods to lay to your hands,
else they will destroy both the law and the land. That such may, and ought to
be severely dealt with, especially such as are seducers, and obstinate, I
think no man will put me to prove, neither do I intend it; being that which
I once manifested out of this place: since which, the whole state in the
honorable court of Parliament, have manifested, their persuasion of the truth
of this point; else why have they enacted, established and confirmed more
severe, yet most just laws, against them: for the execution of these laws it
is that I now speak, and do urge upon this ground, that if you love them, if
you love the Church and truth, if you love your selves and the State, do not
the work of God and of the king negligently. I say, if you love the^ you must
execute: for if that be true of Hierom. Ille haereticum interficit, etc. he
killes an heretic who suffers him to be an heretic: Cont. Pelag. lib. 3. c.
6.
but a just punishment of them, is the quickening and putting life into them,
that dying to their heresy, they may live to the Catholic faith; what more
love can be showed, then to execute the laws with severity against them? And
that of Augustine, De verbis Dom. secund. Iows. ser. 59.
Qui phreneticum ligat, and qui lethargium excitat, ambobus molestus est, ambos
amat. He that blinds a man possessed with a frenzy, and wakeneth another
oppressed with a lethargy, is indeed troublesome to both, but loving and
profitable to both. Now when as many of them are possessed with a spirit of
frenzy, seeking to subvert and ouerturne all, though they and their friends
perish with it; some with a lethargy, or a spirit of slumber, having drunk of
that golden Babilonish cup, and being laid asleep like Sisera with the milk
of that harlot; you can not show more love then in binding such madmen, and
bringing them to their wits, and in wakening such sleepers by the due execution
of your most just laws; for this will be the means to win the seduced;
because, as fire softneth metal and makes it fit for the hammer, and for to
be easily wrought to any form, so the rod and correction works the same
effect in men's minds; and as Elihu in Job, of Gods corrections: So I, Job.
33.16.
of your corrections. They will open their ears; and make them both more
tractable, and teachable, by which many may be gained that else must perish.
But if you love not them, yet if you tender the good of the Church, you must
execute that you have decreed: for how can it be well with the vineyard, if
the Foxes live or be at liberty, which destroy the vines? how can it be well
with the flock and the Lambs of it, if the wolves be not taken and cut off?
How with the field of Gods corn, while that Sampson of Rome (if I honor him
not too much, or disgrace the other extremely, in making the comparison) may
have such foxes to tie tail to tail, and put fir bra^ds in them to send into
our church? how can Israel enjoy the land of Canaan in quiet, if those cursed
Cananits be not subdued as servants to the congregation, or subverted as
enemies? What greater love can you show more to the Church, Christ's vineyarde,
his flock, Gods field, and the whole land, then in taking these foxes, in
abandoning these moules, in abasing or destroying these Cananites, proceeding
according to your just laws, to consiscation of goods, to imprisonment,
banishment, or death it self, according to the quality of their offenses. But
if you neither love them, nor tender the good of the Church (as be it far
from me to think you should not) yet if you love your selves and the peace of
the state, you must execute with some roundnesse, and severity. For consider I
pray you, and call to mind, how that when they enjoyed all lenity, the laws
being laid a sleep for the space of six years, or thereabouts, in the latter
days of our late Sovereign of happy memory, and for almost 3. years space
in the days of his sacred Majesty, and being in hope that they would not be
wakened against them in haste; yet for all that, they hammered, and hatched
that cursed and more tisen barbarous designement against the state: and so that
they might be at once avenged of them, for their light yoakes and rods, they
provided for them in former times, though it were to the perishing of many of
their friends, they cared not; What think you now that you have made their
yoakes heavier, and prepared scourges, and scorpions for them, when they are
defeated of that, whereupon they had set their rest, when they are thus
exasperated, and made raging, as bears robbed of their whelps, what think
you? Nay can you think, that they are now idle, and not plotting, or devising
some new revenge; and if it may be some more strange and hellish mischief:
which if you prevent not by due execution of the law, to diminish, and weaken
them, they will execute their cruelty, to the ruin and confusion of you and
the whole state, if they be but suffered a while to gather strength, and get
power, answerable to their cruel minds. For who sees not this, is more then
blind; that popery and cruelty, go hand, in hand, if they have power in
their hands. Therefore if there be any love to those seduced souls, that they
may be reformed; If any love to the Church of God, that Jerusalem may prosper:
If any love to your selves, and state, that it may continue in peace, and you
enjoy your lives, and livings, your wives, and children, your comforts and
contentment: as you are Gods, so show it in being like to God: to deal justly
in severity, with these; when you see lenity will not recover, nor smaller
punishments work any correction with them, to move them, or remove them, from
their heresies, and other corruptions. It is reported of Grosthead the renowned
B. of Lyncolne, that a little before his death, complaining of wicked courses,
holden by the Romamsts, whose scourge he was; he said the Church should never
find any ease, from the oppressiue burdens laid upon her, nor be delivered
from the Aegiptiacall bondage she was holden in, til her deliverance was
wrought, In ore Glady cruentand^, In the mouth of the sword, all bathed in
blood. Which I allege, not to persuade cruelty and barbarism, and hellish
massacring; which those cruel Romanists use in all places, when they can
prevail: but to persuade Justice, and the execution of justice; being
persuaded in my self, (as I think thousands more are besides) that as he
thought no deliverance could be wrought, but by the sword: So no preservation
of us from those burdens, and bondages, but In ore Glady Iustitiae, In the
mouth of the sword, executing Justice upon such as would draw us that way.
Weapons they say hoade peace. but if it be known that trauailers; either
cannot, or will not use them; it will bolden cowardly thieves, and will make
them dare to practice any thing; either against their lives or goods. Laws are
good things for the peace of a state: and are the very weapons of their
defense: but if offenders either find some not willing that have power, or
those restrained, that have will to execute; they will dare to do any thing.
For the particular; If Courtiers for money will procure pardon for such as have
offended (abusing the lenity of his Majesty) or else some dispensation for
the time to come; to suspend the laws against some greatones: If Judges favor
them in their trialls, and Justices in their commitments, one set at liberty,
when another has committed: If Sheriffs, and other officers, be remiss in
their searching for them, and informing against them: If when information is
given, and the Jury has found the indictment, Clerks and Officers both know
how to do it, and do practice to smother of 20. or 30.5. or more of the
principallest, and most dangerous: If I say they may sinde this savor, and
remission of the laws by these means: how bold will they grow, and how will
they insult, that though the face of the law be against them, yet the edge is
turned from them? how unlike shall this government be to that which God uses
in adding, and using more severity, when the smaller corrections prevail not?
how prejudicial to the peace of the state, and preservation of his Majesty,
his posterity and people, both in respect of their inueterate malice, and
exasperated stomachs? and in respect of Gods justice, who cannot endure such a
sin, without severe judgments: when neither the love of the truth, is
expressed; nor the hatred of heresies, and his enemies pursued. When Ahab had
let Benhadad the King of Aram escape his hands, whom the Lord had delivered
into his hands: even then when he had fully resolved to destroy him, and the
whole kingdom, there came unto him a Prophet of the Lord and under a parable
made him accuse himself, and then uttered the Lords message. Thus says the
Lord: 1. King. 20.42.
Because thou have let go out of thy hands, a man whom I appointed to die, thy
life shall go for his life, and thy people for his people. The Lord has
delivered into your hands, men, who^ he has appointed to punishment, some
after this sort, some after that, according to the justice of the law; and some
to die, which are their principal seducers: If you let them go, out of your
hands, what can you expect but that Judgment, your lives for theirs; and your
people, for their people; your goods, liberty, and peace, for theirs? But to
prevent this: as you are Gods, so show it in time, in using more severity,
and yet but just, against al who are irreconciliable, and irreuotable;
specially against their seducers, the seedes-men not of heresies only, but of
horrible treason, and confusion of state. The french story reports, that
Sa^anorola, P^^l^de Co^^. lib. 8. cap. 2.
holden by many, for a Prophet (but sure he was a renounned man, for piety
and learning) told the french King Charles the 8. he should have great
prosperity in his voyage into Italic, and that God would give the sword into
his hand; and all this, to the end he should reform the corrupt state of the
church: which if he did not perform, he should return home again with
dishonor; and God would reserve the honor of this work, for some other: and
so it fell out. I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet; yet out of Gods
dealing in former times, as the sacred, and Ecclesiastical Histories show, I
may be bold to speak thus much; that seeing God has put the sword into your
hands, to reform things amiss, and withstand corruptions that would grow by
cutting off such as seek to bring them in: If you do it, well and good; 1.
Sam. 2.30.
I will honor them that honor me: But if you do it not, you shall return
with dishonor to your long homes. For they who despise me, shall be despised:
and God will reserve the honor of this work to some other. There is a speech
in Lactantius to this purpose: If says he, De Ira Dei.
a master of a family, shall have his children massacred, his wife murdered,
his house burned over his head, and all by a leawd servant: and if he should
spare that servant and let him go without severe punishment; what do you
think of him? Were he to be accounted mild, merciful, and clement; or
unnatural, and cruel? doubtless every one would condemn him of cruelty.
Then what may be thought of your sparing of Papists; for though (Blessed be
God) they have not done any such thing to us; yet there wanted no will nor
intent in them: no endeavor was lacking to have effected it: So, no thank to
them, we yet live and prosper; for if they might have had their wills, long
since our wives and children had bin murdered before our eyes, our houses
burned before our faces, our whole state brought to confusion. Then judge
whether pity, and lenity to them, be not cruelty, to all our state. But as
the Apostle Paul having reproved the Hebrews somewhat sharply, says; Heb.
6.6.
Beloved, we have persuaded our selves, better things of you, and such as
accompany salvation, though we thus speak: So, Honorable, and Reverend, I
have persuaded my self better things of you, and such as accompany the
safety of the state, the peace of the Church, the prosperity, and
preservation of his Majesty, and all his royal issue; and the good and
comfort of your selves and your posterity, though I thus speak.

Thirdly, have the greater: and seeing God will do this, he ought by that he
has felt, to harken to the prophet Ames, Prepare to meet him with true
repentance, and (...) to him that has smitten him, Amos. 4.12.
least his hand be stretched out still. The physicians have a potion against
the plague, which consists of three ingredie^ts: but it is but the rich man's
physic, it is too costly for many, the medicine is called flying, the
ingredients are these; Cito, long, Tarde. Cito, flee soon enough: Long, flee
far enough: Tarde, make no haste to return, but return slow enough. Many
take this preservative, and many are kept all together from this, though
overtaken with another: many have it adiourned for a time, but yet are met
withal afterward, either with that or a greater: Amos. 5.19.
As Amos says; As if a man did sly from a lion, and a Bear me^^^ him, or
went into the house and leaned his hard against the wall and the Serpent bit
him. But the prophets have another preservative not against this only, but all
other, either to make them not touch him, or else to turn to his good; and
this they call not flying, but returning. The ingredients of this medicine are
two, laid down every where in the Scriptures: Cease to do evil; learn to do
well. Eschew evil, and do good. And this is both restoratiue, and
preservative, that by which men may remove the present, and prevent greater to
come: for if men would turn from their wicked waves and put away their
drunkenness and gluttony, their chambering and wantonness, their horible
oaths and blasphemy, cease profaning of holy things and the Sabbothes of God,
forsake their covetousness and oppression, usury, injustice, adultery, theft,
and such like and give themselves to practice sobriety, to refrain their
tongues, to honor the Sabbothes and holy things, to follow chastity, to be
just and faithful, to seek judgment, relieve the oppressed, judge the
fatherless, and defend the widow; then as Esaias says of sins, Isay. 1.18.
though your sin were as crimsin, they shall be made white as snow, etc. So for
the punishments of them, if they were never so great he will remove them, and
the evil that is feared shall not come, as Chrisost. urged the people of
Antioch. with the example of the barbarous Niniuitos. Hom. 5.
Quomodo non admirabile. What an admirable thing is it, says he, That when the
Judge had pronounced sentence, the guilty persons should by repentance
dissolve it: they did not flee out of the City as we now do, but abiding at
home did disannull the sentence: they heard their houses should fall upon their
heads, but they did flee from their sins, none of them did forsake his own
house as we do now, but every one departed from his wicked way: They said
not, the walls have brought, and begotten this anger; we who are authors of
this wound, let us prepare the medicine: therefore they trusted not for safety
to the change of place, but to the change, and mutation of their manners. These
things the Barbarians did; and are not we ashamed to do the contrary? If any
of us were angry with his servant, and he should not seek to appease our
anger, but get him into his chamber, and begin to gather his clothes and stuff
together, and make a pack of them, and prepare to flee away; would we easily
bear this contempt? And shall we think God will take it at our hands? Let us
then imitate the Ninevites, Jonah. 3.9.
who upon vneertainties repented: for all they had, was but this, Who can tell
whether God will turn, and repent; and turn away from his sierce wrath, that
we perish not? For they knew not the law and the Prophets: but we have a
certainty; namely, a most sure word: even the certain promises of God. Let
us, as we have more encouragements then they, turn to God. But to conclude
this point, I would say as the Prophet Gad said to David, when he had
delivered Gods fearful message unto him, touching the choyee of his plague:
Will thou that seven years famine come upon thee in thy land? Or will thou
flee three months before thine enemies, 2. Sam. 24.13.
they following thee? Or that there be three days pestilence in thy land? Now
advise thee, and see what answer I shall give to him that sent me. So say I,
advise your selves, and see what answer I shall give to him that sent me.
Let me not say, that you will not return, for that is not profitable for you,
nor joyful news for me to carry: But if I shall say to God, you will return,
then as Moses said, Ezod. 8.29.
Let not Pharaoh deceive any more: So let not England deceive any more: For, Be
not deceived, God is not mocked: Gal. 6.7.
for, whatsoever a man sowes that shall he reap. He that sowes repentance,
shall reap mercy; and he that sowes obstinacy and hardness of heart shall
reap confusion: for God shall multiply his plagues still upon him, and his
wrath shall not be turned away; but his hand shall be stretched out still.

So much may suffice for the general cause of this threatened judgment.

In the next place, as they are here placed by the Prophet, follows the
judgment it self. Whereof I have many things to speak: but the time passing
so fast, and being much spent already; I shall be forced to imitate cunning
painters, who having in a great story many pictures to express in a little
table, only draw the chiefest and most principal at large, and in their full
proportions, the rest they express by the heads, and the halues only: So I
shall be constrained to touch many things briefly, that I may handle the
chiefest more fully; then by the halues, that I may follow these somewhat at
the full. The next thing then which is to be handled, is the generality of
the judgment, in these words; The Lord will cut off head and tail, branch,
and rush. Whence, for our instruction, I observe this point. This is the
dealing of God when he comes to visit; Genesis 6.5.7.
and the Imaginations of man's heart was only evil continually: then the Lord
brought a general deluge of water and destroyed all, save Noe and his family:
Genesis 1 8.
when sin covered Sodom, Gomorrah, and the five Cities about it, so that
not ten good men could be found in all those Cities: there came a common fire
from heaven and destroyed all; when sin in the days of David covered the
people, and David left to his own corruption, numbered the people, 2. King.
21.12.13.
and provoked the Lord, there came a common plague upon them from Dan to
Bersheba: Also when Manasses and the people corrupted themselves with
Idolatry, the Lord threate^s he would bring a common plague upon them, that he
would stretch over them the line of Samaria, and the plummet of the house of
Ahab, and would wipe Jerusalem as a man would wipe a dish, and turns it
vpside down: by all these it is manifest, that where sin is general, there
Gods judgments shall be general.

The reason of this is, sins, the punishments must be great and heavy
plagues; so when they are generally spread over all, proportion requires the
judgments also should be general. Secondly, because by this, to save with few
as well as with many. 1. Sam. 14.6. so to destroy many as well as few: and
though David spared Ioab because he was weak and but newly anointed King, and
the sons of Seruia were too strong for him; 2. Sam. 3.39.
yet God is King from everlasting, yea none is too strong for him: but as well
when hand joins in hand, the wicked shall not be unpunished, as when they are
single.

Now upon this ground, and from hence may I teach our earthly gods, that seeing
the heavenly God will deal thus: Lib. 3. Co^t. Parmeu. Cap. 2.
and common peace. Indeed Augustine has a rule, that it is not safe punishing
of him, who being corrupt has a multitude of companions: but when many are
corrupted, nothing remains to the godly, but Dolor and Gemitus, Mourning and
groaning: That by this figue they may be found fit and worthy to escape their
destruction: as Ezeke. 9. But this by himself is expounded, that it is either
of the censure of the Church or else of the Magistrate, when he cannot do it
without prejudice to the common good; for so he manifests it, out of Matthew:
Concerning the Tares, the Servants said unto him, Will thou that we go and
gather them up? But he said nay: Math. 13.28.29.
least whilst you go about to gather the Tares ye pluck up also with them
the wheat: so that when the Tares come to be plucked up, and the fear of
hurting the wheat is removed, and that it is in no danger, and the iniquity
either has not defenders, or no such defe^ders that such a dangerous schism
and rent may follow; then says he, Ne Dorm^at seueritas discipliuae, Let not
the seucritie of the law sleep. Now among us there are no such malefactors,
but the power of the state may well deal with, though in many sins many are
combined: therefore ought they not to suffer them unpunished for their
multitude. Truth it is, our pope-holy Catholics, who are combined in
Idolatry and treason, are many, and they let not to brag of their multvde, as
if they would dare the state to deal with them: nay plainly daring the state,
as D. Bishop does in his Epistle to his Majesty, before his answer to M.
Perkins; Telling the state, what a multitude they are, and what necessity may
compel them unto: yet blessed be God, the sons of Seruia, or of the three
headed Cerberus, are not too strong for us; howsoever they may grow by the
conniuence, and lenity of the state, and the pronenesse of our people to that
natural religion, or idolatrous superstition. Therefore ought you earthly gods
to imitate the heavenly; and let your punishments be general, because they
confess this iniquity to be very general: especially seeing this time
twelue-month they thought to go generally to work, both with you, and us all;
yea, seeing we have a voice from heaven speaking this to us, and commanding
that you should do so, Reward her even as she has rewarded you, Reu. 18.6.
and give her double, according to her works: and in the cup, that she has
filled to you, fill her the double. If any will say, All are not such; and it
is against charity, so to judge of all: I answer him, I have learned to put
a difference betwixt popishly affected, and grounded papists: howbeit, it is
apparent that they that are only popish, are so blockish, that without the
severity of the laws, they will hardly harken to any instruction. And as for
grounded Papists, which are indeed Atheists, and traitors; howsoever it may be
thought all are not alike cruelly minded; as some have showed themselves more
then barbarous: yet if they might have but a little schooling, of a Jesuit, or
a secular Priest (for if there be one good, there is never a bad) they will
easily be hardened: and they that now seem to be most pitiful, if they had
had that they looked for, (but let their eyes fall out, before they see it)
they would have been like the Edomites that Obadiah speaks of, Obadiah.
Verse. 12.13.14.
They would have beheld us in the day that we should have bin made strangers;
they would have rejoiced over us in the day of our destruction; they would have
spoken proudly in the day of our affliction; they would have entered into our
gates in the day of our destruction; they would have looked on our affliction
in the day of our destruction; in the day of our destruction, they would have
laid hands on our substa^te; in the day of our destruction, they would have
stood in the cross ways, to cut them off that had escaped, and have shut up
the remembrance of us, in the day of our affliction. Therefore blessed shall
that hand be, Psalm. 137.13.
that in the way of justice, rewards them as they would have served us.

Secondly, from hence, and by this, may I admonish al men, head and tail,
branch and rush. Usually such is the corruption of men, that the corruptions of
the time they take to be a sufficient cover for whatsoever sins they lie in;
and while they compare themselves with others, they neither are afraid, nor
ashamed of sin. For where the number is so great, there is every thing more
tolerable: as, in the region where all are borne black-mores, it is no shame
for any to be black; and in those regions where al are drunkards, it is no
shame to be drunk: So where wicked men are so many, and sin so familiar, it
is neither feared nor avoided. But alas, see the folly and madness of these
men; that they make most for their security, will soonest bring their ruin;
because that when sin is general, then comes the general judgment: while
there are but few particular offenders, God uses long patience to men; but
when they are once grown to be banded in sin, and all to consent in
wickedness, then God cannot but assemble al his armies against them; as a prince
when he has one rebel up against him with a small power, little regards him:
but when they are grown to a multitude, he mustereth and sends his forces
against them. We see how God has dealt with us, and he threateneth to deal
with us further: for are we better then David and his people and others? And if
this seem not to be general enough, because the noble, the worshipful and
the rich, are but a little troubled, and touched with it, seeing they can take
the Physicians preservative, so that this has only been the plague of the
poor, and of the servants, not of the masters, and the rich: Let us know that
the Lord will yet punish us, more generally. And if we turn not as the
Ninevites, with one heart as one man, that our repentance and humiliation may
be general as our sin and corruptions have been, he will punish us yet
more, as he is able, and most just; and he will stretch over us the line of
Samariae, and the Plummet of the house of Ahab, and he will wipe us clean; as
a dish that is wiped, and turned vp-side down. And thus you have the
generality of this judgment. Now I come to the impartiallitie of it, that it
is to the head as well as the tail; and to the branch, as well as to the rush:
whence observe,

That when God comes to judge, ^rou. 11.^1.
Hence is that of Solomon; Though hand join in hand, the wicked shall not be
unpunished: So, though head join to head, and all the means be winded and
knit together that may be had, yet shall nothing free them from the judgments
of God. Such are the vehemency of the Lords arrows, when he shoots them
abroad; ^ing^. 2.31.
though Achab be in the midst of his host, companied with all his men of
arms, yet one of them shall give him a deadly wound. Though Nabuchadnezzer be
in his lordly palace, built for the honor of his majesty, counsel, yet
another of them shall smite him, and drive him to banishment. Though Belshazzer
his son be in the midst of his cups; even as it were in despite of God,
drinking healthes in the vessels of Gods tabernacle: yet another of them shall
be like an handwriting upon the wall, and shall make his countenance to
change, Daniel. 5.
his thoughts to be troublesome, his joints to loose, and his knees to beat
one against the other. Though Herod be arrayed with his royal robes, set upon
his glorious seat, making his eloquent oration, and enjoying the applause of
the people, Acts. 12
The voice of God and not of man: Yet shall another of them smite him, that he
shall be eaten with worms, and make him as loathsome to the smell, as ever he
was delectable to the ear. If the Lord smite the Cedars of Libanus, how shall
the shrubs escape? for says the Psalmist, The voice of the Lordsh tketh the
Codars of Libanus, as well as the shrubs of Cades, whereby we plainly see, that
there is no earthly thing can be a writ of protection, to protect a man from
the wrath of God, when he comes to judgment. And good reason there is, why
it should not.

First, because the Lord is no accepter of persons, as Peter thought in his
error; Acts. 10.34. And the reason of this, is partly the justice and
vprightnes of his nature, and partly the greatness of his majesty: the
uprightness of his nature, because it is immutable, and he always the same;
the greatness of his majesty, because nothing is great in comparison of him,
as Ambrose gives the reason; though the things be great in respect of man, yet
nothing is great in respect of God, seeing that as Esaias speaks; Isay. 40.22.
He sits upon the Circle of the earth, and the inhabitants thereof are as
grasshoppers. The earth is but as a point, or mote in comparison of the heavens:
though a little hill in respect of man, is a great thing. A little grain turns
the goldsmiths scales; when as a great matter will not change the scales at the
Kings beam.

Secondly, Solomon speaks of the thief, that he steals for hunger,
therefore men pity him. Prou. 6.30.
But they sin of contempt, as Pharoh did: Who is the Lord, that I should
fear him? partly, because by their example, many are drawn and imboldened to
the like sins: therefore no marvel if God smite them principally.

Now from this point, Iehosaphat speaks, Who execute the judgments, not of
max, 2. Chron. 19.6.
but of God; They ought to do as God himself would do, whose deputies they
are, and whose person they represent; who also is in the midst of them, not
to spare any malefactor, for any outward respect, whatsoever: they ought to
punish the Noble, as well as the base, the rich, as the poor, the great as well
as the small. It was not for naught, that Iethro advised Moses that his
magistrates should be men of courage, and hating Couetonsnes: because, Exodus
18.21.
they that are fearful, and that love money, desiring to finger it, will
sin for a little thing; a small thing will easily turn them, and one grain
will make their scale weigh heavier, or lighter. They will soon be like the
fishermans Angle, as one says, that though it have but a little fish it will
bend somewhat: but when it has a great fish, it will bow to his hand; but
these things should not be so. But as the law, which is the dumb magistrate,
was penned without respect of person: So the magistrate which is the speaking
law, should execute without any affection; as well punishing a Noble
adulterer, as a mean one; as well laying the law to a great idolatrous
recusant, as to a small one; as well to such as is his friend, as to him that
is a stranger; as well to him that has many friends, as to him that is
destitute of friends; and not only to those that openly profess that gross
idolatry, but to such as underhand further that pestilent superstition. How
dangerous such are, may appear by that which Socrates writes: that certain
Arians, Socrates. lib. 1. Cap. 10.
supposed to be conuerts, abusing the lenity and credulity of Constantine the
great, insinuated themselves into his favor; and obtained offices, and
employments, in the commonwealth: these publicly professed the doctrine of
the Nieene Creed; but secretly, and underhand they kept their old corruptions
in their hearts: and by all means they could, collaterallie with slanders, and
Injustice, through the sides of the godly, they wounded the holy and innocent
cause. If there be any such among us, possessing any such places; and if there
be any branch of the law against them, these as most dangerous ought to feel
the weight of it: but if there be no law, blessed be his mouth that will
speak for such a law, that there may be more and longer trial made of them,
before they be admitted to any place; and if they be in any, that they may be
speedily removed when their windings are discovered: and blessed he his hand
that shall execute such a law. And as against them, so against all other
malefactors, executions ought to be without partiality: and then if they
prove like unto Leui in execution, Deuteronomy. 33.9.
That said unto his father, and mother, I have not seen him; neither knew he
his brethren nor his own children: for they observed thy law, and and kept thy
covenant: If any deal so, then shall come upon them that blessing, The Lord
shall bless their substance, and accept the work of their hands, and smite
through the loins of them that rise against him, and of them that hate him,
that they rise not again. But if any be partial, let him look for the
recompense of King Saul, who was put out of the calendar of the Kings, as if
he had reigned but two years: so shall they, out of the number of the worthy
Judges of God.

Secondly, this may admonish all those that are great, Pharoh, as well as the
country of Aegytt: he slew the first borne of the King, as well as the
pezants of Ham: Pharoh was destroyed in the red Sea, as well as the common
Soldier or subject. That which David sent as a comfort to Ioab after worthy
Vriah was slain (Let not this thing trouble thee, 2. Sam. 11.25.
the sword of the Lord destroys one as well as another) I may se^d as a
cooling card to those that are at ease in Sion, and secure in England; lifted
up, upon the wings of their wealth, or other privileges: but yet with this
charge; Let this thing trouble you; for the sword of the Lord deuoureth one as
well as an other. The judgments of God are upon us: they have little profited
those, that have any of these privileges; partly for that they are seduced
with a conceit, which is, that we neither read of, nor see any men of their
quality touched with any such plague: but do they think so indeed? Why then
did they fly from it? What a vain action is it to fly, when there is no
fear? But, have not as great as they bin smitte^ with it? What, was not
Hezekiah smitten to death with it? And was David's fear a vain fear, when the
Angel approached toward Jerusalem? But if this should not be, has not the
Lord variety of judgments? and has he not smitten others as great as they,
with as fearful as this? If Pharaoh could not be preserved with all his iron
Chariots, if the goodly buildings and houses of Nabuchadnezzar could not
preserve him from his beastly banishment, nor the praise and the great applause
of the people keep Herod from the devouring of the worms, nor all the full
barnes of the rich man in the Gospel, could keep his soul in body for one
night; What can your great power, or goodly buildings, or honors, or
admiration of men promise safety unto you? and yet if they do promise, how can
they perform it? And if they could in this life, yet should they not in the
life that is to come: where if God would respect persons, yet there should not
be any thing to be respected, because every one shall appear stripped of all
worldly privileges; Princes of their Crowns and dignities, Nobles of their
Coronets and honors, the rich of their wealth, the magistrate of their
Scarlets and of their ensigns of honor, and every one shall appear more
naked then he goes out of the world. In this world indeed there is a
difference, but none in the world to come: but as it is with merchants
counters, that all the time the account lasts, one is better then another,
one stands for a thousand, another for a hundred, and another for a cipher; but
when the account is ended, all is alike: So it is in these things. Let no man
then for his greatness, honor, worship, wealth, or any other thing, flatter
himself in his sins, as if the hand of God should not find him out here in
this present world: seeing he will cut off head, as well as tail, branch as
rush; much less let him harden himself, in respect of the time to come. For
whereas riches and these things when they are had, will not deliver their
owner in the day of wrath; he cannot expect, but falselie, deliverance, by
them, when he shall appear without them.

Now further out of this, that God will destroy both head, and tail, the
deceived magistrate, and the deceiving Prophet, as it is interpreted in the 15.
verse, which is the uprightness, and the equity of Gods judgment; I observe
this doctrine:

That wicked magistrates and ministers, flattering and bolstering each others in
their wicked courses, shall certainly be punished, and oftentimes together. So
it is manifest by Balaam and the Kings of Midian: Nomb 3 1. Kings. 18.22. 1.
Kings. 13.33.23. Ier. 3.49.
also by Ahab and his sour hundred false Prophets: by Ierohoam and his hedge
priests: by Zedchia and his false prophets, when as Jeremy, and other the poor
people were reserved. And why this?



Secondly, aequalia aequalibus, punishing alike them, who sin alike; and
power, in manifesting that no strength is able to withstand him, but that he is
able to confound all that combine themselves: Nahum. 1.9.10.
even as Nahum says, They shall be but as thorns folden together, as
drunkards in their drunkenness: they shall be devoured as stubble fully dried.

Now if these things shall be thus; First, magistrates may learn to know who
are their friends, and who their enemies. Solomon speaks, Pro. 29.5.
spreads a net for his steps. And such are flattering ministers, who smoth them
up in every thing, magnifying every thing that they do, and is in them; as if
no mote were at al in their garments; as if they could not sin, or that which
is sin in others were no sin in them: these are they who bring destruction
unto them. There is a kind of Serpent, that by stinging of men, casts them
into a marvelous sweet sleep; who if ever they once wake, they presently
die: such verily are these flatterers; and the like will be to these who are
flattered, if they could, or would foresee and know it. If Ahab could have
seen it, Micha was not his enemy, but Zidkiah and the whole company of false
flattering prophets. If Jeroboam could have seen it, plain dealing Amos was
not his enemy, but flattering Amaziah, the priest: So generally to all
princes, such ministers, are enemies, who compose themselves to their
countenances, and seek not to frame them to the laws of God; who are like to
some pictures that will look on a man which way soever he look, on the right
hand, or on the left; before him, or aside of him. The Lord keep all Christian
Kings, from such enemies. And easy were it for them to be freed of them, if
they would countenance those that would deal plainly with them, with
discretion, Prou. 25.23.
and discountenance all such smoothers and flatterers. For the^ as the
Northwinde drives away the rain: so would an angry countenance, the
slandering tongue; yea, the flattering tongue. I suppose that Alexander was a
long time after free from flatterers, when as Aristobulus, having read unto him
many things that he had writ of him surpassing the truth, as the was passing
the river Hydaspis; he took the book from him, and threw it into the river,
and said, he was almost moved to do so with Aristobulus himself, for his
servile dealing: with such kind of entertainment, they might easily rid
themselves, of such destroying flatterers; least they be forced to say as
Adrian the Emperor, when he was a dying (having delighted in Physicians all
his life, who administered nothing but pleasing things unto him,) said; that too
many Physicians had killed the Emperor: so too many flatterers, have caused
their destruction.

Secondly, ministers may learnes, not to be partial in the law, Mal. 2.11
least God cause them to be despised, and in the end destroy them, as here is
threatened. They may live in a time, when such prophets as will speak of wine,
and strong drink, Mich. 2.11.
and pleasing things, shall be most desired; and among such as are like those
in Esaias, Isa. 30.10.
which say unto the seers, see not, and to the Prophets, prophecy not unto us
right things, but speak flattering things unto us, prophecy errors: and such
as will tell them if they deal faithfully, as Balacke told Balaam, I thought
surely to promote thee to honor, but the Lord has kept thee back from
honor. Numb. 24.11.
And so it proves that this is the way to earthly honor, preferment, and
living for a season and a little while: but the Lord threatened it shall not
prosper long with them, he can in a night take all from them as he did Jonas
his gourd. But if they enjoy it longer, it is but for a while; Job. 17.5.
for the eyes of his children shall fail, that speaks flattery to his
friends. But if no such thing happen to them in this life, what have they
gained to gain the whole world, to get all honor and preferment, and lose
their own souls, and to answer for so many souls as have perished through
their unfaithfulness? For what can they answer when God shall come to judge?
will they pretend the greatness of those, whom they endeavored so to please?
certainly it will not benefit them. Hom. 28. ad pop. Antio.
Chrysostom when he had spoken somewhat which seemed to offend the rich and
mighty of his audience, spoke to the^ thus; Ne quis miht dives. etc. Let no
rich man, nor no great or powerful man, swell against me, or knit his brows at
me; I account of all these as fables, shadows, and dreams: for none of those
that are present shall be able to defend me at that day, when I shall be
challenged and reproved for not delivering the law of God with sufficient
sharpnes; 1. Sam. 2.4.
this was, even this was the ruin of that admirable old man, who himself
lived a blameles life: it destroyed him with his sons; what then can any
flattring Amaziahs or fawning Zedkiahs expect? that any man's greatness should
excuse them? it will not defend themselves: how then their flatterers? nay as
is said before; they then shall have none of their greatness to defend themselves
or help others.

Now in the 16. verse follows the particular cause of the judgment, which is
the governors and Ministers misleading of the people, making them to err:
whence it must needs be that they themselves erred and teached errors. Whence I
gather this.

That the gouerners, rulers and Ministers of a particular visible Church, of
faith, and manners, doctrine and life, which is manifest through the whole
book of the Scriptures; First these things were foretold: for howsoever the
people made a brag, Come let us imagine some device against Jeremiah, Ier.
18.18.
for the law shall not perish fro the priest, nor counsel from the wise, nor
the word from the Prophets: Yet the Lord he threateneth it should come to pass
clean contrary: Ezekiel. 7.26.
as it is said in Ezekiel. Calamity shall come upon calamity, and rumor shall be
upon rumor: then shall they ^^^ke a vision of the Prophet; but the law shall
perish (...) the Priest, and counsel from the ancient: and Micha. 3.6.
Therefore night shall be unto you for a vision, Mich. 3.6.
and darkness shall be unto you for a divination; and the sun shall go
down over the Prophets, and the day shall be dark over them. Secondly, it is
manifest by that which is in Esaias, The watch men are all bl^^^, they be
asleep, Esaias. 6.10.
and delight in sleeping: and by that in Jeremy; I have seen foolisimesse,
Ier. 23.13
in the Prophets of Samariah, etc. If the exception be, that this was Israel
and not Judah, then see that which follows; I have also seen filthiness in
the Prophets of Jerusalem. If it be said, Verse 14.16.
that these are prophets and not priests; Thirdly, I manifest it by the event.
All the chiese of the priests also and of the people, trespassed wonderfully,
2. Chron. 36.14.
according to all the abominations of the heathen, and polluted the house of
the Lord, which he had sanctified in Jerusalem. And if it be said, that this
was in the Synagogue and not in the christian church (as they absurdly speak)
that all the cheise of the priests and of the people trespassed, etc. We will
follow them whither they call us: and see the Apostles how they erred: when
Christ spoke unto them of his sufferings, in Luke, Luke 18.34.
it is said; They understood none of these things, and this saying was hid from
them: neither perceived they the things which were spoken: which not
understanding of the speech of Christ, grew out of an error, which their minds
was forestalled withal before, that Christ should reign as a temporal king.
But it may be that this was before Christ's resurectio^; see therefore his
disciples asked him, Act. 1.6.
saying; Lord will thou at this time restore the kingdoe to Israel? as dreaming
of an earthly kingdom; as if he should have had one: but though he now were
risen, vet was he not ascended; neither had sent the holy ghost. The to say
nothing touching certain of the Church, and those in like lihood not a sewe,
who erred, concerning the calling of the Gentiles, so that Peter was feign to
make an Apology for his going to Cornelius, Acts 11; Let us come to Peter the
head of the Church; Acts. 10.14. he was ignorant that by Christ the ceremonial
law was abolished; I have eaten nothing that is unclean or polluted: yea
himself was ignorant of the calling of the Gentiles: doubt not but go;
therefore he was ignorant before: and verse 33.34. Of a truth, now I know
there is no respect of persons with God. And as he erred in faith, so also in
manners. Gelat. 2.14, Paul reproved him before all men, that being a Jew, be
walked as the Gentiles, and not like the Jews: and yet compelled the Gentiles
to dee like the Jews: Is it not then manifest they may err, and have erred?
but see this confirmed.

1. Cor. 3.9.
We know in part, and we prophecy in part: and the common speech is, Maexima
pars eorum quae sci^^us, est minima pars eorum quae ignoranuts; The greatest
part of those things we know, is the least part of those things we yet are
ignorant of. Now ignorance is the mother of error, says Bernard: seeing al men
the^ are in partignora^t, they may err: the^ the Priest may err in part.

Paul, who had so far proceeded in sanctification, as that he was not
inseriour to the very chiese Apostles, 2. Cor. 11.5.
had yet the remnants of the old man. Now then it is no more I that do it,
Romans 7.17.24.
but the sin that dwells in me: O wretched man that I am, who shall deliver
me from the body of this death? Therefore they may partly strive against
their own judgment, and be drawn by temptation to defend an error against
conscience; for howsoever error in judgment, comes from ignorance: yet
error in act, as in teaching, defending, and maintaing of some untruth, is
joined often with knowledge; and arises not out of ignorance, but out of want
of grace, and sanctification.

John. 14.26.
He shall teach y^^ all things, and bring all things to your remembrance: and
again, John 16.13.
He shall lead you into all truth. By which is meant, not an absolute
illumination of all truth; for that the Apostle had denied before, 1. Cor. 13.9.
We know in part: But an infallible suggestion of the truth, as occasion was
offered. And that this was promised only to the^, I prove, because of that,
Ioh. 16.13. And he shall show you all things to come; which never any Pope or
Patriarch durst challenge: and therefore seeing they are both in one grant,
and that this will not pass by virtue of that promise; then why the other,
seeing they are both in one and the same promise?

Now this being so certain a truth, part may fall into gross errors, and
things in a council are carried by the most voices, shall we think they may
not then err? for suppose a council be collected of them, is it not likely
they will be the same in the council when they meet together, that they are,
severed, and alone? for Coelum non animum mutat, etc. They may well change the
heavens and their places, but not their minds and affections. But to instance
in some, see a council erring, 1. Kings. 22; 400. false prophets with one
consent aduising king Ahab. flat against the mind of God, and the word of the
Lord, by the prophet Michaiah. But happily Bellarmine will say, they were a
council of prophets, not priests; gathered by the King, not by the high
priest. See therefore councels of priests gathered by the high priest, and yet
erring; John. 9.22
In John we have a council, which met and decreed to excommunicate whosoever
professed Christ: did they not err? And in Mark, there is a counsel which
condemned Christ of blasphemy, Mark. 14.64.
and that he ought to die for it: Think you they were in the truth, or in
impious error? But Bellarmine will say, that a council of priests could not
err before Christ's coming; but he being come, they might err: but for what
reason? must it not be, because they were not priests, and their high priest no
high priest, seeing Christ was now come? But this is false: for the priesthood
of Aaron was not abolished, till Christ offered up his sacrifice, and so had
established an cuerlasting priesthood: yea further, the argument of the
Rhemists, which is common to them, and other popish writers, how should it hold
good? when John. 11.49.50. because Caiaphas spoke the truth, they would prone
the Pope could not err, be he never so wicked: for if he were not a high
priest, then there would be no consequent in this argument. But he was the high
priest, and they all priests, and yet they erred: and so a council may err.
But more ingeniously deals Hosius and Canus, Hosius in lib. 2. Corara
Brentium. Prolegom. Canus lib. 5. cap. vlt. in respons. ad Secund. argum. In
action. 16.
who affirm directly, that that council did pronounce a right sentence, and
that the spirit of God was with them, and that it never left the council of
priests, till Christ had offered up his bloody sacrifice: yet that council
condemned Christ of blasphemy: and is not this the mouth of blasphemy, that
dare speak such things? But see other councels: the council of Calcedon. not
demed to be a lawful council, equalled the Biship of Constantinople, with the
B B. of Rome, in authority, honor, and other privileges; save only in
precedence. Canon. 19. de baeret. rebaptiz.
I hope they will say, this council erred. The first council of Necce
established rebaptization, of those heritiques who sollowed Samesatenus. The
second council of Niece, Action. 5.
established worshipping of Images, decreed that Angels had bodies, and that
the souls of men were corporal. If a council cannot err, August. de baptism.
Co^tra Donatist. lib. 2. Cap. 3.
why did Augustine appeal from the Affrican council, where Cyprian was
present, to the Scriptures? Affirming that we may not doubt of the Scriptures:
but of them it is lawful to doubt; saying, that Concilta plenaria, full
councels may err. If the question be of the authority of the pope, whether it
be greater then of a council, Hterome answers; Si authoritas quaritur, or
his mayor est vrbe. If you question about superiority, the whole world is above
one city. But ask the counsel of Consta^ce, which deposed John 23. and chose
Martin. 5. If they say the counsel erred, they grant as much as we desire; If
they say that the council did not err, then the authority of the council is
above the Pope. But why should I contend so long about councels, seeing
themselves have brought it to a narrower scantling? for they confess that all
particular Churches may err, except the Church of Rome, and the Church of Rome
too, Bellarm. de po^tifice Romans lib. 4. c. 4. Idem. lib. 4. Cap. 3. Bellarm. de
pontif. Romano. lib. 4. c. 3.
if the Pope should translate his seat from Rome, as Peter did from Antioch;
and for councels, that all general councels may err, not confirmed by the
Pope. So that if it be proved that the pope, who is their virtual Church, can
err, then all is granted. And first before I show you that they have erred in
particular, I will let you see the strength of some of their Reasons, whereby
they would prove he cannot err. Luke. 22.32.
Bellarmine reasons out of the Gospel of Luke, thus; I have prayed for thee,
that thy faith fail not. Here says Bellarmine, Christ obtained 2. privileges
for Peter: one, that he could never loose true faith, though he were tempted of
the diucll. Another that he, as he is high priest, could never teach any thing
contraric to faith; or that in his seat never any should be found which should
teach contraric to the true faith. The first of those, says he, perhaps does
not descend to the successors of Peter. Very well then, by Bellarmines
confession, the Pope perhaps may loose true faith; nay I would for their own
sakes it were but perhaps: and yet I think it is without all perhaps that he
cannot; for a man cannot loose that he never had. Popes, as Popes, never had
true faith; For antichrist cannot possibly have it; then it is without perhaps
he cannot loose it, but this but by the way: but the latter, says he, is
without all doubt derived to them. Is it indeed, and why I pray you? What
reason can you give that these words should convey two grauntes and privileges
to Peter, and but one to his successors? Doubtless none is give by him,
neither can be given: but yet he will prove it: by what? As impudent and
shameless as he is, to wrest Scripture to his purpose, yet can he find none
with any color to offer this violence unto. But do not the Fathers so affirm.
Though his Use be to make fathers speak what he would have them, yet they
cannot be sorced by him here; how then does he prove it? only by certain
sentences of seven Popes, and some sewe late writers. But is it equal that
parties should be witnesses or Judges? or are we now without Scripture, or
antiquity, to take any thing for truth which a few popes or some new writers
shall affirm? at least must we take them in so maine a matter, as this is? I
take it, none can justly reprove us if we reject them, especially when we have
so good reason out of the text, that it can carry no such thing. And that I
prove thus; Because that by faith here is not meant an historical faith, or
the says of doctrine; but a justifying faith, or the faith of the heart: not a
general faith, but a particular; not that by which we belecue God, but in God;
which fails not by error, so it be not sundamentall: for so we should have
condemned all whosoever have lived; but when a man does fall wholly from grace,
and ccaseth to be a member of Christ. And that it is so, appears, first from
those words, That thy faith should not sail: not vanish away or be extinct as
Chris. says; which cannot be understood of any other says, but of that by
which we stand and are saved: for, the other faith may fail, not once, but
often; and a man be saved notwithstanding. 2. From those words, When thou art
converted strengthen thy brethren: that is, after thou have repented and art
converted, strengthen thy brethren, and sustain their faith; namely, their
saving faith; of which they confess some of theirs may be destitute. 3. Out of
the drist and scope of our Savior Christ: for his drift was to arm and
protect Peter, against that try all and temptation, that he then foretold him
of: not against error in teaching the Church, but against apostasy in time of
trial; therefore faith Thcophilact, he shows him the particular temptation:
for our Savior would not arm there where he was not to be hurt, where there
was no danger, nor put a helmet on the head, where the heart and breast was to
be smitten. And thus much Bellarmine confesses, when he makes Peter's fall to
be a matter of fact (to cast utterly off his former profession) and not of
says, and therefore it was perseverance in the habit of justifying faith, not
infallibility in the matter of his historical faith that Christ prayed for:
which so differs, that a man may have the one, that is, justifying faith, and
yet hold an crrour, not fundamental, to the death; as Bellarmine contends, for
the Fathers diverse of them: and the other, that is, a right belief of the
general points of religion, and yet not have justifying faith, nor saving and
sanctisiing grace; as Bellarmine confesses the Pope cannot err, and yet
professes he may want saving grace. 4. Pro^ the 31. verse, where Christ
affirms that he praved for other of the Apostles as well as Peter, seeing
Satan opposed them, and sought to winnow them as well as Peter: Now for these
Christ questionless prayed, unless we shall think that one was not as dear
to him as another: not John the beloved, as Peter: nay he loved all with a very
great love, and so prayed for them. 5. It is answered, that the thing he prayed
for here, was a thing not proper to Peter, but common to all the Apostles, yea
all the Elect; and if the gift and grace be common to all, and the same person
made the same prayer in effect for all, as he does, John. 17.9; I pray for
them which thou have given me out of the world. And verse 11. Holy Father keep
them in thy name: and verse 20. I pray not for these alone, but them also which
shall believe in me through their word: what can they make out of it for their
particular? for by virtue of this prayer, not only not Pet. but none of the
Apostles, yea none of the faithful can fall from that faith there spoken of.
Upon which ground, the ancient Fathers apply this place to all the Apostles, yea
all the elect: and if to al, then helps it them but a little. The second
proof, he cannot err, is Math. 16.18. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock
will I build my Church: and the gates of hell shall not overcome it. Whence
they first reason, that the foundation and rock of the Church cannot err; such
as Peter and the Pope his successors: I say nothing: it is not yet proved that
the Pope is Peter's successor; Nay, it is manifest that he succeeded rather
Simon Magus, then Symo^ Peter. But I say, that Peter is not the rock: In the
words says Augustine, there is a difference between Petra and Petrus, both in
the Greek and Latin. Again, the rock here meant, is not Peter but Christ;
which is affirmed by Samt Paul, 1. Cor. 10. They drank of the spirttuall
rock, that fall nved them; and that rock was Christ: and Chap. 3. other
foundation can no manlay then that which is laid, which is Jesus Christ:
whereunto agree the Fathers, and their own writers, and also late writers;
whereby all color of argument, taken from this place for the Pope, is utterly
quashed: but grant that they beg, then must it be either in regard of his
person; but that cannot be, for the Church cannot be built upon flesh and
blood: or in regard of some superiority and place above the rest, but as it
cannot be proved, so the contrary is manifest, 2 Cor. 12.11. For in nothing
was I infer iour to the very chief Apostles: or of his doctrine taught by him,
and of this faith of Christ confessed by him; so it is true: now this was
common to him with all the rest: for as John is called a pillar, Gal. 2.9. so
was James as well as Peter, and all the rest: as Reave. 21. Rev. 21.14.
The wall of the Citic had twelve foundations, and in them the names of the
lambs twelve Apostles, to which is that, Ephesians. 2.20. Built upon the
foundation of the Apostles and Prophets, Ephesians. 2.20.
with whom the Prophets are joined, because they wrote the Scripture, which is
indeed the soundation of our faith, they being put for their writings; but of
all this, nothing will follow for the Pope, or nothing in especial manner.
Now that you have seen the strength of some of his reasons, by which you may
conjecture of the rest, I will show you how this challenge of the never erring
Pope, is an impudent error; by producing many of them, who have erred, and
leave you to judge of the rest. I am not ignorant, that Bellarmine endeavors to
excuse all or most of these I shall produce: time will not permit to let you
see at large how slenderly he has done it; yet a little will I show you and
leave you to judge the Ox by his hoof. The first shall be Peter, whom though
not proved yet we will confess that he was B. of R^^^e: did he not
apparently deny Christ? was he not ignorant of the abolishing of the
ceremonial law, yea of the calling of the Gentries? Whom Bellarmine excuses
for his denial of Christ, that he was not then Summus Pontifex the high
priest: and why not? because Christ gave him that in the twentieth of John,
when he said, Pasce oues, feed my sheep: he has garned much by his answer;
for if he was not made chief priest till then, then was he not, when Christ
said to him, Math. 16.18.
Thou art Peter and upon this rock will I build my Church: and I have prayed
for thee, that thy faith should not fail: Luke 22.32.
which was spoken long before: and so has he at one blow deprived himself of
two of the strongest arguments, he has to prove the Pope cannot err. Ne there
can we admit of his shift, that these were promises, that Christ would make him
in future time the foundatio of the Church, but not performances; for that we
have the whole college of Jesuits agamst this one: who upon the place
assirme, that Christ gave Peter now to be the foundation. He does not, say
they, so much call him by the name Peter or To ke, as he does affirm him to be
a Rock. Thomas in 4. Seatent. did. 4.9.
And T. Aquinas says; that in these words, now first was given to Peter power
over all the Apostles. And if these be not weighty enough against him,
because his head is listed above them, see one a step at oue him. Vist. 21.
Pope Anacletus in his second Epistle writes, that to Peter first the
prelateship was given, the Lord saying: Thouart Peter. Now I add, that seeing
Bellarmine, and they all contend, that Peter is a rock and foundation, and
here Christ says to him: thou art Peter, not thou shall be Peter: he here
performs, that he ever gave him, and does not barely promise. Finally, by the
future-tense, is not nere noted a promise, but a perpetual, permanent, and
continuing to the time following: as the Hebrew Grammarians do note unto us.
Again he answers that that he did, was Ore, not Cord: as if we should judge
an heretic by the thought of his heart, and not by the words of his mouth.
That it was not with his heart, it serves to extenuate, and make him more
capable of remission. but it serves not to take away the offense. Now
Bellarmine answers nothing touching the other two, of his ignorance of the
abolishing of the ceremonial law, and the calling of the Gentiles; which
errors he certainly had, after he was Summus Pontifex, if ever he were: for
they were after the resurrection of Christ; yea after his ascension, and so
after that, Feed my sheep.

The second shall be Marcellinus, who offered up Sacrifice to Idols, and was made
by the counsel of Sessa to recant it. For whom, Bellarmine says, that he
taught nothing against faith, neither was he an heretic nor infidel: but in
the external act, and for fear of death. But I answer, it is not likely, but
that the same fear would have made also his tongue to have spoken as much if
he had been compelled to it, and to have taught the same; and for the excuse
that Bellarmine makes, that he did it for fear; It is false: Aadrad. lib. 2.
de defens. Trident. Council.
For Andradius says, he confessed in the Synnessan Council, that he was
corrupted with money, Judas like. Further it is false, which Bellarmine says,
that he taught not against faith: for he taught by deed, though not by word.
Now Bernard says, Essicacius loquitur vox operis, quam sermonis, Deeds teach
more effectually then words. And by this, Marcellinus drew many to offer
sacrifices to Idols: yea and by it, did more hurt to the Church, then if he had
taught by word. The third Liberius, who as Htecome and Athanasius write of him,
Athanas. its epist. ad solitar. vtta^ agentes.
denied the deitte of Christ. How excuses the Jesuit him? for sooth he was
not an heretic, but only in the outward act, and that not expressly, but by
implication; because he condemned Athanasius whom he knew to be persecuted for
the true says. But Athanasius cotradicts Bellarm. who hued at the same time,
banished for the same cause; who says, that Liberius after he had lived two
years in hanishment, relented, and by the treatning of death was brought to
subscribe, namely to the Arrtan heresy. But to add no more testimony, I
would know of Bellarmine, if Liberius were not an herticke, how Foelix the
second could be Pope, and the Church honor him and worihip him, as Pope; even
while Liberius was aline? and the Roman Clergy chose him Pope as he
consesseth. The fourth shall be Foelix. Liberius his successor, an Arrian also,
as Ierom writes. For him, whereas Hierom says he was an Arria^, when he was
chosen Pope, Bellarmine says, that that word Arrian was thrust into the text;
or if not so, that he was an Arrian only when he was not true Pope, being
chosen before by the Arrian Bishops, and not by the Roman Clergy. Because
faith he, Liberius was not yet deprived: but some two years after, when as
Liberius fell into his heresy, the Roman Clergy deposed him, and chose the
other: not that Bellarmine allows the Clergy, in that action; howsoever he
defends that he was no heretic. As for Felix, Bellarmine confesses, that he
communicated with the Arrians, that they chose him Bishop: which is a great
argument that he was an Arrian; And if he was not then right and true Bishop,
then was the Church of Rome not only without her own Bishop, he being sent
into banishment, but without any Bishop at all; and that for two years space:
which how it will advantage them to grant, let them look to it. The fist
Siricius, who held, that matrimony was uncleanness, and pollution of the
flesh, which God had made honorable. Touching whom, Bellarmine says, that
Calvin after his manner, impudently lies, for that Siricius spoke not of
lawful marriage, but unlawful conjunction. But he that gives the lie, has
more right to keep it to himself; and in this very thing, for whosoever shall
read his Epistle the 5. and 7. chapters, shall find no such thing: for he
commands single life to priests, and calls their marriage pollution, and
wickedly for his purpose (which is that, Calvin reprooueth) abuses the words
of S. Paul, saying; Sirius in Epist. ad Hispan. cap. 5. and 7.
And they who are in the flesh (witness the elect vessel) cannot please God;
but you are not in the flesh, but in the spirit, if so be the spirit of God
dwell in you. And where can the spirit of God dwell, but (as we read) in holy
bodies? Does not this apparently show, that he accounted marriage uncleanness,
and pollution?

In the sixth place, Vigilius; who cursed them that held that Christ had two
natures. Which Bellarmine cannot deny, but plainly confesses, that he writ
such an impious Epistle, unworthy the name of a Christian, wherein he condemned
all who affirmed Christ to have two natures. But says he, he did not defend
any thing publicly; neither was an heretic in heart, but secretly in a private
Epistle, which he did for desire of authority. Again, that he did, was then
when he was not truly and lawfully Bishop; for Syluerius was yet living, who
was Pope, though in banishment. To the first I answer, Whether it was
publicly or privately, it is not to the matter; he did it and heresy
private, I hope, is heresy; whether it was in the heart or no, that was known
to God: and we may judge truly of his heart by his writings. If these shifts
would scrue, no body should ever be known or determined to be an heretic. To
the second, I answer; that Liberatus his words, Liberat. in brcuia. cap. 22.
in the end of the chap. are these; Vigilius writting these things closely to
the heritikes, permansit sedens, did still keep his seat; namely, after the
death of Syluerius, who dyed as Sigebertus writes, the same year he was
banished.

7 Honorius the first, who denied that Christ had two wills, and two operations;
as Melchior Canus and diverse other Popes and counsels have written. Bellarmine
would gladly answer, that those epistles of Honorius were fained, and falsely
imputed to him: but, that he will not greatly stand too; but tells us in the
second place, that Honourius did hold no such thing, in those Epistles, but
only forbids the using of the words of one or two wills, and operations. And
being pressed with it, that in those Epistles, he has these very words; Vnam
voluntatem fatemur domini We confess one will of the Lord: he answers,
that he speaks there of his human nature, only; and would say that in the
man Christ, there were not 2. contrary wills, one of the flesh, another of the
spirit; but one only of the spirit. I answer, that whatsoever he would have
said, it is apparent what he did say; it may be Bellarmine would he had said
thus: but the words are plain; and not to us only who may be thought
partial, but to 3. Synodes, as Bellarmine confesses, and to 2. or 3. Popes.
Now Judge whether it be equal that we should believe Bellarm. before so many
Fathers, and such authority; as if he had better understood him, then all they
did. August. cont. Iul. Pelag. lib. 1. cap. 2. and al^^^.


8 So Innocent the first, holding that Baptism and the Eucharist, was
necessary for children to salvation, as Augustine writes the latter whereof
was consuted by the council of Trent, 5. Session under Pius 4. whom Bellarmine
seeks to defend from other errors, and heresies, and not from these; passing
them over in silence: and so we take him for consenting to our accusation of
him; for, that he held such things, Bellarmine could not be ignorant, seeing
Augustine speaks of them in many places.

9 Behold Stephen the 6. abolishing all the Acts of Formosus his predecessor,
and decreeing that the Sacrament depended upon the virtue of the Prtest.

10 After him comes John the ninth, who disannulled all the Acts of Stephen,
and established whatsoever Formosus had done.

In the 11. place, Sergins the third disannulled whatsoever Formosus and John
had done, and reestablished the Acts of Stephen. It may well be, that all these
may be in an error: but sure it is, they all could not be in the truth.

For the defense or excuse of these three, he says, that touching Formosus,
the question was, whether Formosus was true and lawful Pope: Stephen thought
be was not. John the ninth, after, round the contrary, and condemned the Acts
of Stephen. As if the holy Ghost did err more in judging of a fact, then in
judging of the right: he is God and knows all things. They say the spirit of
God is given to their Church, and as it were tied to their Councels, being over
them, to lead them into all truth: But to condemn him, that was not to be
condemned, is far from the truth, and cannot come from the spirit of God. But
he says, John sound out that which Stephen did not, that Formosus was a true
Pope: by what means did he find it? sure by the spirit of God: and could the
spirit find it out in the council of Raucnna, under John the ninth, and not
find it in the council of Rome, under Stephen the 6? Nay not only not find it
out, but judge the contrary? Are then the judgments of the spirit of God
contrary one to another? But grant John did find out things thus, was this
then the decree of the holy Ghost? By what spirit then did Sergius the third,
succeeding John. condemn Formosus again, and abrogate all his acts and take
him the second time out of the grave, and cut off his head, and cast his boly
into Tyber? which being found by fishermen, was brought into the cathedral
Church at Rome, where the Images did worship him, believe it if you will. What
probability and truth is like to be in these excuses, you may easily
conjecture. To make up the dozen, See John 22. called as some say the 21. who
if he denied not the immortality of the soul as Calvin affirms, and
Bellarmine denies; yet held he, that the souls departed, never came into the
presence of God till the resurrectio of the body. Which error the University
of Paris opposing; by the help of Philip King of France, they made him recant
with the sound of a Trumpet, for fear of loosing his Popedom, as John Gerson
affirms in his Sermon of Easter. Bellarmine excuses him, that though he held
such an opinion, yet he might do it without danger of heresy: for the Church
had not yet defined it to be an error; a very sriuolous excuse. For it there
had not been, before, any definition of the Church, (which he falsely
affirms) yet had we the difinition of the Lord, in the Scripture; which he
has appointed to be the rule of faith to his Church, and not the Church to be
a rule to others. She may declare something to be an heresy, but her
determination cannot make it an heresy: and if she had never defined it to be
an heresy: yet had it been an error; and he had therein manifestly erred,
who either then or now shall hold it.

13 To give you the advantage, see John the 23. who denied both Eternal life
and the resurection of the body. Concerning whom, First, the Jesuit says it
is uncertain, whether he were true Pope, because there was at that time two
Popes more; Gregory the 12 and Benedict, the 13. each cursing other: so that
if he erred, it is nothing to the erring of the Pope; because it was not known
who was Pope. Observe a monstrous body, with three heads, or a body with no
head; but his excuse is but a shift: for Platina (who makes him, John the 24.)
affirms, that he was created Pope at Bononia, with the consent of all:
Platina in John 24.
but secondly, he answers that at the council of Constance, 53. Articles
were put up against him, and proved by substantial witnesses, and those were
all for matter of manners; but as for this and some other Articles of faith,
they were proved by no witnesses: therefore says he, it is probable, that by
reason of his vicious life, the opinion of the people was, that he thought
there was neither life everlasting, nor the resurection of the body. So by
excusing of him from error, he has stemed him, and made him stink in the
nosthrils of all honest men: And if the head was so bad, all the body was
worse. But the council obiecting it to him, and he not clearing himself of
it, nay his life gave testimony of it, why should we believe Bellarmine,
before all the Fathers of that council? But leaving these things, I hasten
toward an end, and come to apply this, for our more particular benefit.

This then may teach every man, to judge of all falsehood, and error, and may
not be carried away with the error of one or many, be they never so great or
learned. Certain it is, that because they know but in part, they may err
though they be never so learned; and err often times they do, because they are
not wholly sanctified. It is certain that the greatest part of a visible
Church is ever unsanctified: and the best part that is sanctified, is but
sanctified in part, and so subject to partiality and error; and may both
err, and defend error against their knowledge; some violent temptation, of
pride, pleasure, or profit, carrying them thereto. Seeing none are now governed
by the infallible guidance of the spirit of God; then had men need of
knowledge, that they may be able to try the doctrines that are delivered. It
is a certain truth, and not to be denied, because stories of all times do
manifestly prove it; that error, and herefie, have oftentimes so much
prevailed, that they who have holden and possessed the places of office, and
dignity in the Church of God, either for fear, slatterie, hope of gain, and
honor, or misled by their own ignorance, and simplicity, or fallen into some
error, given over of God, have departed from the soundnes of Faith: so that
the sincerity of religion was vpholden, and the truth defended, and
maintained, only by some few, that were molested, persecuted, tra luced as
turbulent and seditious persons, and enemies to the common peace of the
Christian world. This were easy to be showed in the times of Christ, and of
the immediate successors, the Apostles. This was manifest in the times of
Athanasius, when in the council of S^leuci^, and Arminium, the Nicene Faith was
condemned, and all the B B. of the whole world sell from the soundnes of the
Faith, save Athanasius, and a sewe confessors that were banished with him; So
as Ierom writes against the Luciserians saying, Ingemuit totus orbis and
miratus est, se faclum esse drianum. The whole world groned, and is amazed to
see how she was become an Arrian. So Hilarious, against Auxentius Bishop of
Millan, complains, that the Arrian faction had confounded all; and therefore,
admonished men to take heed how they were led by any outward appearance or
glorious shows. Now as there is no new thing under the heavens; but that that
is now, has been before: so there is no old thing, but it may be renewed, and
such times may befall the Church again. Therefore it is the wisdom of every
man that is not careless which end goes forward, 1. Ioh. 4.1.
and retchlesse of his souls health, to labor for knowledge, that he may be
able as S. John says, to try the Spirits; for many false prophets are gone
out into the world. If any man will say, how shall not we err, when so many
great learued men have erred and may err? The answer is, as Salmon says,
Pro. 28.11.
The rich man is wise in his own conceit; but the poor that has
understanding can try him: So, oftentimes meaner men may found the depth, and
see more then great scholars; especially, seeing that he that was truth has
said it; God reucaleth that to suckelings and babes, Math. 11.25.
that he hides from wise and prudent. Let us then account of that doctrine of
popery, as damnable, which commends an Implicit faith, and be suspicious of
those who think it is not good for men to have knowledge; as if they mea^t
either to make a pray upon them, or to broach some gross errors, and
therefore deal with them as Chrysostom says, Thieves do; First put out the
candle, and then fall a spoiling: and as deceitful Merchants, that would utter
their wares by obscure and deceitful lights. And let us again labor for
knowledge, that we may be able to try the spirits, and not be deceived, by any
seducers; especially, when it will not go for current before God, that we have
been so taught and misled, by our guides: for if the blind lead the blind,
they shall both fall into the ditch and be devoured together. Which that we
may escape, let us follow men, though they be Apostles, no further then they
follow Christ. And that we may be able to discern others steps, whether they
tread right or no; Let us embrace the Apostles exhortation, or command; Cot.
3.16.
Let the word of Christ dwell plentifully in us. By which, we may be preserved
from error; being the special antidote against this poison: yea and abiding in
it, we shall walk in the truth, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.
and in the end be saved, by the truth. Now the God of peace and truth,
sanctify you, throughout: and I pray God that your whole spirit and soul and
body may be kept blameless, unto the Coming of our Lord Jesus Christ.

FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by T. C. For Edmond Weauer, and William Welby. 1609.


