A TRVE DECLARAtion of the straight siedge laid to the Cytty of Steenwich, and
of the Skirmishes and Battles which happened on both sides, very strange and
aduenturous.

Hereunto is also annexed, in what manner the Enemy besought to parley with
Count Maurice his Excellency, conserning the yielding up of the City into his
hands.

Together with the yielding up of the same.

Printed first in Dutch, and truly translated into English, by I.T.

fleur-de-lis

LONDON ^^^^^ed by John Wolf, and are to be sold (...) his shop, right over
against the great South door of Poules. 1592.

The Translators Preface to the Reader.
GEntle Reader, as you may by this present declaration perceive the miseries
and calamities which are daily suffered in the Low Countries by the people
there, so can you not but withal acknowledge how greatly you are bounden unto
almighty God for all the benefits wherewith it has pleased his Divine
majesty so many years to bless our country for these four and thirty
years and more, what age has seen a more happy estate than ours? What
Nation has had so well guided a government as this? what people have inioyed
the free disposing of themselves and their goods more than we? what country
under the vale of heaven has been more adorned with the ensigns of peace than
England? O England! England! Peace has been thy bliss, Take heed it be not
thy bane. For if through peace you become so put out of memory of war, that
the remembrance thereof is not able to put you in mind how ingratitude and
wickedness will be punished by war, then undoubtedly as you grow by Peace,
so by Peace you shall fall. Wherefore let us beseech God of his mercy to give
us grace to eschew sin; the cause of war and all misery, for so the cause
being avoided, the effect will take no place. Which God grant for his glories
sake, and the good of all Christian people.

Farewell.
Tudor rose
A True declaration of the siedge laid to the Cyttie of Steenwich, and of the
Skirmishes and Battayles which happened on both sides, very strange and
aduenterous.
Here is also annexed, in what manner the Enimye besought Count Maurice to
parley with him, concerning the condition of yielding up the City into the
hands of his Excellency.
IT happened, that our Noble Prince Count Maurice of Nassaw Governor general
of the united Provinces, and the valiant Prince Count William governor of
Friesland, having assembled a great power of men and soldiers, on horse and
foot, as well by sea as by land, being well provided of all kind of munition
appertaining to war, joined their forces together and brought them before the
City of Steenwich, upon the xxviii. day of May, being Corpus Christi day,
about nine of the clock in the morning, where they besieged the said City
very straightly and strongly, parting their powers into four Camps, and
planting them in four sundry places about the City.

Parma had sent into Steenwich sixteen companies, of all kind of Nations and
people mingled together, among which were diverse freebuyters and merchants,
that had been dealers in the betrayeng and selling of Gertruynberch.

Also diverse others that had been at Deuenter, and had sworn not to serve
against Count Maurice in three years: with many more that had revolted from
Count Maurice to the enemy, and for some crime or evil act committed, run
from their captains to escape deserved punishment.

The Enemies seeing that they were so straightly besieged, the Maiestrates and
chief officers called all the Soldiers unto them, where they all swore very
solemnly both Soldiers and Citizens to stick one to the other, and not to
forsake one another, but to stand to the full trial of their fortune, and
rather to die enerye man, then to yield to their enemy.

Whereupon they began to resist the assaults which were by us made upon
them and valiantly to defend themselves to the uttermost: insomuch that in the
very beginning they slew and spoiled many pioners and Englishmen.

The fourth day of June did they of Steenwich make an issue upon us, at which
time they slew many Englishmen, and the most part of Olthofs soldiers,
besides many whom they wounded, and five whom they took Prisoners, one of
them being an Englishman, whom they hanged: but we drove them into the City
again so speedily, that they were forced to shut out two of their soldiers,
whom we slew under the gates of the City.

After this they planted their field pieces on the top of their town house
steeple, whence they shot stones, chains, and iron bars, into our Camp,
which much hurt our Soldiers: although we were told that they had but seven
Cannon shot in all.

The sixth day of June, Count Maurice, caused all the great shot to be
discharged upon the City, which made such a terrible and fearful noise,
that the very earth seemed to shake above three miles from the place: beginning
at four of the clock in the morning and continueng till nine: insomuch that
there were above four thousand shottes displaied upon the Cittye. But the
rampire which our men had made, was something to low, by reason whereof the
bullets flew over the City into Count Williams Camp, whereby we were
compelled to cease the play of the Cannon.

After which storm they of the City came with broomes to sweep the walls in
a mookage, least forsooth the dust of the shot should have fouled the walls,
making so light of the matter, as if they had no harm by the cannon that had
so furiouslye barked at them all that while, but only that the walls were
something strewed with the fragments of the bullets, that being broken into small
pieces, might be sweeped away with a broom.

The eighteenth day of June being Saturday at night and eleven of the clock,
they issued again out of the City into our camp, with white linen shirtes
over their armor: having Axes, Demye-pikes, two hand swords, and Dagges, but
no pieces at all with them. Olthof with his company having drunk well,
although he was advertised of their coming yet made light of it, and feared
not the Enemies at all: who fell upon him very furiously and taking him, not
making great preparation to withstand them, slew Olthof himself, his
lieutenant, his Corporal, and some of his Soldiers. But our men having
intelligence thereof, speedily forced them to turn their backs and run to
their hold.

Our Lord the Count Maurice caused a kind of warlike engine had in such ca^es
to be made higher then the City with their loftes, which each of them could
hold an hundredth men, insomuch that no man could by day peep out of his
house, but he was shot through.

The tops of all the housen in the city were broken down, and nothing could
be seen except the steeple: and by reason that no body durst come into the
streets for fear of our shot, they broke down the side walls of their houses
and made a passage through their houses to come by one another, and to take
order what should be done: for they began to faint and wax discouraged with
the great loss of the people, and the want of powder: and especially because
our men had won one of their skonses or fortresses, called the half moon.

Within the City of Steenwich is a great square Market place, which they had
so strongly fortified, that the City being taken, yet it would be scarce
possible to drive the enemy out of it without loss of men.

The 24 of June there were about two hundred Spaniards, Wallons, and Germans
together slain and taken, who were sent from Kaeuerden, each having a little
bag of Gunpowder about his neck, and thinking by some subtle slight to have
entered into the City, and in that manner to have furnished it with provision
of powder.

In the end the enemy perceiving how they lost their Fortresses, and seeing
their forces woonderfully empaired, their provision sailing, their soldiers
slain and wounded, and all the people astonished with the misery of their
present estate, and terrified with the calamity which they were like to
sustain if they rendered not in time, began to beseech his excellency to take
them to his mercy, promising that they would yield up the City upon condition
that they might save both their life and goods.

His Excellency promised unto them, that he would according to the law of
war suffer their free soldiers to pass without any hurt or harm any way
done unto them, but as for the Merchaunts of the Berch and certain other
Soldiers that had taken oath in Deuenter not to serve against his Excellency
within three years after, those he would in any case have delivered into his
hands to deal with them according to his own good liking.

This stirred up a great and sudden mutiny in the City between the said
Deuenter soldiers and the Merchaunts of Berch against the Citizens, saieug
that they had great wrong offered them, considering they had adventured their
lives and spilt their blood in the behalf of the city upon their promise to
do the like for them, and that now they would in their greatest need leave
them, yea give them up into their enemies hands, and therefore they were
resolved to fight while they could breath against the Citizens themselves, and
so die in revenging the injury offered them, rather than to suffer themselves
to be hanged by their enemies.

Whereupon they sent a drum unto Count Maurice to know of him whether it would
not please his Excellency to let his mercy be generally granted unto all
that were in the City; for that then the would without delay render up the
city unto him? which he would not grant.

Then our men presentlye blowed up the Mine which they had made under the earth
with gunpowder, which being raised on the walls, caused many of their Wallon
Captains Ensigns and other Soldiers, to fly up into the Sky as black as
crows, which so daunted the courage of the enemies, that they presentlye
compounded with Count Maurice, and rendered the City upon promise that their
life and goods should be saved. In so much that his Excellency took them to
his mercy, and gave to them all as well Soldiers as Citizens both life and
goods, suffering no violence or injury to be offered them by his Soldiers,
whereupon they promised that they would not serve against him within six
months after on that side of the river Rhyne. And so they passed with their
Rapier and Dagger through out Camp out of the City, carrieng whatsoever they
would with them, and were conducted with his Excellencies Horsse-men nine miles
off, having carts and waggins allowed them to convey away their baggage, and
maimed persons with them. For which merciful and gentle dealing, they all
greatly thanked his Excellency. Only the Merchants of the Berch and Deuenter
soldiers were driven into the church where they stood at his mercy to be
dealt withal as he should think good.

Thus may we thank almighty God for his great goodness toward us, in
granting us so great a victory against our enemies, in the enterprise
undertaken at the City of Steenewyke. The 4 day of July 1592.


