A BEWAYLING OF THE PEACE OF GERMANY. OR, A Discourse touching the PEACE of
PRAGVE, no less unhappily than unjustly concluded at PRAGUE in BOHEMIA, the
30. of May, 1635. Wherein the subtilties and practices of the Austrians, the
weakness of the Saxons, the dangers of the Protestants, and the justness of
the War, deservedly set on foot by the French and Swedes, are most evidently
declared.

Written in Latin by Iustus Asterius, otherwise Stella, a Germane, now one of
the Advocates in the Court of Parliament of Paris, and Historiographer to the
French King.

Faithfully translated out of the Latin Copy.

Whereunto is prefixed a brief Summarie of the Treaty of Peace concluded at
Prague, as aforesaid, etc.

Published by Authority.

JEREM. 6. v. 14. and 8. v. 11. They have healed the hurt of the daughter of my
people slightly, saying, Peace, peace, when there is no peace.

LONDON, Printed by I. L. for I H. and are to be sold in Paul's Churchyard, at
the sign of the golden Lion. 1637.

THE CHIEF HEADS AND CONCLVSIONS OF THE TREATY OF Peace held at Prague, are
contained in the three Extracts ensuing.
I. A Summarie Extract out of the Treaty of Peace made and concluded betwixt
the Emperor and the Elector of Saxony, at Prague, the 30. day of May, 1635.
II. An Extract of the Agreement made betwixt the Emperor and the said Elector
of Saxony, touching the joining of their Arms together. III. An Extract
translated word for word out of the said Treaty, touching the Palatinate in
particular.
I. An Abridgement of the Treaty of the Peace.
THE Revenues of th Church, which were possessed by the Protestants, before the
Treaty of Passaw, shall remain entirely in the same state they were settled in
by the said Treaty of Passaw.

The Church-Revenues possessed by them since the said Treaty, shall be left
unto them for the space of forty years, upon the conditions more specially
contained and expressed in this agreement, as well for the Spiritual, as for
the Temporal.

And ten years before the expiration of the said Term, the best endeavor
shall be used to make a final accord, for so much as concerns the said
Possessions of the Church, and that which depends of them: But if that cannot
be done, it shall then be in the power of the Emperor to make a decision of
the difference: And in the mean time, there shall no more Church-Possessions
be taken away from the Catholics.

The Archbishopric of Magdebourg shall remain to Duke Augustus, son to the
Elector of Saxony, during his life, upon such conditions as are expressed in
this agreement as well for the Temporal, as for the Spiritual.

The Elector of Saxony shall have the Seignories and Bayliwickes of Querfurt,
Iuterbock, Dama, and Borck; which Pieces he shall hold in Fee of the
Archbishopric of Magdebourg.

The Marquis Christian William, shall have 12000 Rix-Dollars given him by the
year out of the Revenues of the said Archbishopric, during his life, for his
entertainment.

The Archduke Leopold William, the Emperors son, shall have, amongst other
things, the Bishopric of Halberstadt.

The Nobility and Gentry of the Empire shall be left to their free exercise
of the Confession of Auspurgh; as shall also those Imperial Cities, which
shall conform themselves to this Treaty: But those which before the
conclusion of the said Treaty, shall have accorded already in any other
manner with the Emperor, shall hold themselves to that accord.

The City of Donawerth shall remain in the hands of the Duke of Baviere,
until he be re-embursed his charges.

The free exercise of the Confession of Auspurgh shall no more be tolerated for
the time to come in the Kingdom of Bohemia, nor in the other Hereditarie
Countries of the Emperor.

As for Silesia, the Emperor has given his resolution by it self, and has
made a particular accord with the Elector of Saxony, for Lusatia.

The propositions made by the Elector of Saxony, That the Imperial Chamber
may from henceforth be divided, and composed of persons of both Religions,
equal in number; are put off unto the first general Assembly, which shall be
holden hereafter: In the mean time, the order shall be observed which is
practiced in the said Imperial Chamber. But because there has been no
Visitation since the year 1600, there shall be one as soon as possibly may be
extraordinarily.

The instruction of the Assessors and Presidents of the Court Aulike, or of the
Council following the Emperors person, shall be submitted to the advice of all
the Electors but the said Assessors shall not be of both Religions, in equal
number.

The Protestant Electors, Princes, and States, shall be permitted to have their
Agents and Sollicitors in the said Aulike Court.

The Palatine Electorate, and the Countries belonging to it, shall remain unto
the Duke of Baviere, and to the Line of Duke William his father, according as
the Emperor has ordered: And that which his Imperial Majesty has decreed
touching the estates of some of the Palatines servants, shall remain entire as
it is.

The Widow of the Elector Frederick the fourth, Count Palatine, shall enjoy her
Iointure, for so much as she can make appear to be due unto her.

An entertainment of a Prince shall be given to the children of Frederick the
proscribed, if they do in due manner humble themselves toward the Emperor:
But this not to be done as a thing due, but of his Imperial grace.

The heirs of the Count Tilly deceased shall have 400000 Rix-Dollars out of
the Revenues of the Duchy of Brunswick, payable in eight years, with interest
after five in the hundred, until it be fully paid: and in the mean time, they
shall keep that which is morgaged unto them.

If the Dukes of Meckelburgh do accept these Articles of Pacification, they
shall be received into the Amnestia, according as is contained in the
particular Order made concerning that matter.

The Electors, Princes, and States of the Confession of Auspurgh shall restore
to the Emperor, and to the Catholic Electors, Princes, and States, his
assistants, as also unto the Duke of Lorraine, their Countries, Lands,
Seignories, Cities, Towns, Castles, and all that belongs unto them. Yet
nevertheless, they shall not be tied to make restitution of the Revenues
received, nor of their charges expended in the War; but they shall not carry
away the Ordnance, nor their moveable goods, out of the places which they shall
give up.

Aid and assistance shall be given, by a conjunction of Arms and Forces, to
recover that which the Crown of France, the Crown of Sweden, and the States
of the Empire, which will not conform themselves to this present Treaty, do
possess within the Empire.

The Emperor and his assistants shall restore the Elector of Saxony, and
those of his party, their subjects, vassalls, men, and servants, to the
possession of their estates, if they accept of this Treaty; excepting those,
whom the Emperor has expressly excluded from it: And the Elector of Saxony,
and those of his party, shall do the same reciprocally to the Emperor and his
assistants.

The places possessed by the Catholics, since the year 1625, (amongst which,
Wolfenbottle and Newburgh are intended to be of the number) shall be restored
to their proprietarie Lords, without restoring them the Revenues of them, and
without carrying away the Ordnance.

The Elector of Saxony shall restore within ten days, that he yet holds in
Bohemia; and shall give aid toward the dislodging of the Soldiers of the
other party, which shall be found within that Kingdom.

The said Elector of Saxony, and the rest of the Protestants of his party,
shall aid the Emperor and his assistants, for the recoverie of their
Possessions, in conformity to this Treaty: And the Emperor, with his
assistants, shall aid the said Elector and his, in the recoverie of that which
belongs unto them.

If the Elector of Brandenbourg, who is not excluded from the Amnestia, will
accept of this Peace, he shall be invested in the Duchy of Pomeranie.

All labor and endeavor shall be jointly used, to deliver Pomeranie, the
upper and nether Circle of Saxony, and the whole Empire in general, from
strange Soldiers.

When this shall be done, and the House of Brunswick shall have accepted this
Treaty, rid away his Soldiers, and shall have conformed it self, then
Wolfenbottle and other places shall be restored unto him.

When the Emperor, the Catholics, and the Duke of Lorraine shall be restored
by the Protestants to that which belongs unto them, in the upper and nether
Circle of the Rhine, and in the Circles of Suaube, Bavaria, and Franconia, so
as they may fully and peaceably enjoy it; the said Protestants shall also fully
enjoy and have the benefit of this Peace.

If the Emperor does still entertain Garrisons in some places within the said
Circles; that shall not prejudice the said Protestants, nor shall hinder them
from returning thither, and enjoying their Right.

And as it is provided, that the Duke of Lorraine shall be restored to the
possession of all his Countries, and the appurtenances; so it shall not be
suffered, that from henceforth any thing more whatsoever be taken from him.

The Emperor reserveth unto himself the Fort of Philipsbourg, to dispose of
it hereafter, as shall seem good unto himself.

The Prisoners, and their Principalls, to whom they belong, which shall
conform themselves to this Treaty, shall be released within one month after
the publication of the Peace: Yet nevertheless, those who have already
promised their ransom, shall pay it, with the charges which they have expended.

There shall be a general Amnestia betwixt the Emperor, the Catholic
Electors, Princes, and States, his assistants, and the Elector of Saxony, and
those which have been of his party in this War; in such manner and sort,
that all which has been done and committed hostilely, since the year 1630,
until this time, shall be abolished and forgotten, if they do accept of this
Peace within ten days: Which Amnestia shall be extended also unto their
Heirs, Lands, Countries, People, and Subjects, their Officers of War,
Soldiers, Counselors, Servants, and Ministers.

The Emperor has excluded out of this Amnestia, the Affairs and Differences
of Bohemia, and of the Palatinate: For since that his Imperial Majesty, for
the quieting of them, has been constrained to put himself to very great
charges; he will seek for reparation of his Damages upon them, who have been
the causers of them, and upon their Promoters and Assistants.

He does also exclude from this Amnestia, all the persons and estates, which
are specified in a Schedule, which has been exhibited of them unto the Elector
of Saxony: Which exclusion and exception of the said persons and their
estates, expressed in the said Schedule, shall be held as firm and availeable,
to be effected and put in execution, as if the specification of them were here
inserted word for word.

The States, which have already made their accommodation with the Emperor,
shall hold themselves to their agreement, and shall have no power to make any
pretense to any further matter, by virtue of this.

Those which have hitherto remained Neuters, and will accept of this
Pacification, shall enjoy the said Amnestia.

The foreign Potentates, which have interessed themselves in this War, since
the year 1630, shall be also comprehended within the said Amnestia, if they
will conform themselves to this Treaty.

The Emperor will take it to his charge, to publish, notify, and also to
advance, promote, and confirm by his Edicts and Commandments, this present
Treaty, and that which depends of it: He will exhort and stir up every one
to join his Arms to those of his Imperial Majesty, and to signify in what
state, condition, and posture he finds himself, and what his Forces are:
Which signification, or advertisement, every man shall give, either to the
Emperor himself, or (if he cannot do that, by reason of the dangerousnesse
of the Ways) to the King of Hungary, or to the Elector of Saxony, or to the
Electors of Mentz, Collen, Bavaria, or to the general and principal Officers.

The end or aim of this Pacification, is, to restore the Empire to her ancient
tranquillity and liberty: And to this purpose, the Emperor shall continue
armed; and the Elector of Saxony, and the other Electors, Princes, and States,
shall join their troops to those of his Imperial Majesty: And of all their
Armies, shall be made one principal one, which shall be called, The Army of
his Imperial Majesty, and of the sacred Empire.

The Elector of Saxony shall command the fourth part of the said Army, in a
Body by it self; and the King of Hungary shall command the other three parts,
in another Body, or in diverse, as it shall be found expedient.

The said Army shall be employed against all those that shall oppose this
Treaty of Pacification, or that shall not be willing to give use that they
possess.

All the Bodies of their Armies, and all their Generals and Officers, shall
swear allegiance to the Emperor.

Yet notwithstanding, the King of Hungary, and the Elector of Saxony, when
they shall command in person, shall not be summoned to take their corporal
Oath; but it shall suffice, that they engage their Word, Honor, and Dignity,
Royal and Electorall, respectively.

The Emperor will cause the Instructions and Capitulations (Articles brief)
to be framed, as near as may be conformable to the Laws and Statutes of the
Empire.

The whole Body of the Empire shall contribute to the entertainment of the said
Imperial Army; and the States shall make no difficulty to furnish and pay,
presently after the publication, 120 months of the contribution of the Empire,
called Romertzug.

The charges and expenses of quartering the Army, shall be defalked out of the
said contribution, in such sort, that those who have been at the charge of
quartering and lodging the Soldiers, shall abate out of their taxation so much
as they have expended that way.

The Emperor will call an Imperial Diet as soon as possibly can be, as well
for the settling and advancing of the said contribution of the Empire, as for
the other public affairs of the Empire.

When the Peace shall be fully re-established, then all lodging of Soldiers
and all sorts of arming shall cease.

No foreign Forces shall be suffered to enter into the Empire, for any cause
whatsoever, nor for the difference concerning the Palatinate.

By virtue of this Pacification and Agreement, all other Unions, Leagues, and
Alliances within the Empire, shall be disannulled and made void; except the
Agreements and Contracts of Families, made betwixt Noble Houses.

The Emperor will hold good intelligence with his neighbor Kingdoms, which
do no oppression upon the Empire.

His Imperial Majesty will reign and govern the Empire with mildness and
clemency.

On the other side, the Electors, Princes, and States, will render him all the
respect and obedience they owe him.

Also good amity shall be maintained betwixt the parties.

For the advancement of the Peace, and of Justice, the Electors, Princes, and
States shall hold good correspondence with the Emperor.

The Constitutions of execution, and that which is ordained by this Treaty,
shall be observed against those that shall keep themselves armed, in prejudice
of this Pacification.

Whatsoever shall be done and committed against the tenor of this Treaty,
shall be held void ipso facto, and of no validity.

The Emperor does promise, by his Imperial Dignity, to observe whatsoever is
concluded by this Treaty; and the Elector of Saxony does the same.

If then the Electors, Princes, and States of the Empire, or the greater part
of them, do accept this Pacification and Agreement; it shall be held for a
common resolution, and fundamental Law of the Empire: in conformity
whereunto, the Judges of Courts of Justice shall give sentence against those
that shall infringe the same.

The Emperor and the Elector of Saxony have called to mind, that a
conclusion of so high importance, which concerns the whole Body of the
Empire, ought not to have been made, but in a Diet of the Empire, or in an
Assembly of Deputation: But for as much as the urgent necessity hereof, could
not give leave to stay for the occasion of such an Assembly; it is by way of
precaution declared, that this resolution shall not prejudice the right and
liberty of the Empire, for the time to come.

Three several Exemplifications in Parchment have been made and signed of
this present Treaty, and all of one and the same tenor: whereof, one was
delivered to the Emperor; the other, to the Elector of Mentz, as
Arch-Chancellor of the Empire, to register it amongst the public Acts and
Records of the Empire; and the third, to the Elector of Saxony.

Given at Prague, the 30. of May, 1635.
II. An Extract out of the particular Accord made betwixt the Emperor and the
Elector of Saxony, touching the joining together of their Arms.
ALL the Forces shall be reduced into one Armade, which shall be called, The
Armade of his Imperial Majesty, and of the sacred Empire; and a good part of
it shall be left to the Elector of Saxony, to be commanded. The proportion
shall be this: If the Army do amount unto 80000 men, the Emperor shall have
60000 of them; which he shall cause to be commanded by the King of Hungary,
his Son: and the Elector of Saxony shall have 20000 to command; and if the
said Elector have four or five thousand over and above that number, he shall
be suffered to have them. All these Soldiers shall be entertained with the
contributions of the Empire; and the Receivers general shall be tied to
furnish to every General his rate, according to the proportion of the Body of
the Army which he shall command. If the Emperor happen to depart this life,
the King of Hungary, his Son, and he whom it shall please him to ordain,
shall continue the command of the Body of his Army. And if the Elector of
Saxony happen to dye, his Son, who is to be his Successor in the
Electorate, shall succeed his Father also in his place of General. If the said
Elector, or his Son, do desire to be discharged of the Body of his Army,
he shall be so; and the Emperor will entrust the Command of General of that
Body of the Army, to some other of the Confession of Auspurgh; such as the said
Elector, and the Elector of Brandenburgh shall advise him unto. When any
execution shall be commanded, and committed to one of the said Bodies of
Armies, it shall be obedient, to undertake it; without any disturbance to be
given unto them, in the said execution, by the other Bodies of Armies: and if
that Body be not found sufficient for the action, the others shall readily and
willingly assist it: To the effecting whereof, the Generals and Directors
shall hold a careful correspondence together, and shall direct all their
actions to one and the same end. They shall as soon as possibly may be, and at
the furthest, within four or six weeks after the publication hereof, take
their Oath of Allegiance unto the Emperor and the Empire, as is mentioned in
the Treaty of Pacification. In the places where Catholics and Protestants
dwell, the quarters shall be equally distributed, without any distinction of
Religion. If any War do happen to be made in the Circles of high and low
Saxony, and the Elector of Saxony, as being neighbor unto it, have a desire
to do execution rather then another, or to quarter himself there, the
Emperor will grant him leave to do it, before another. In case, that the
Elector of Saxony, or his Son, should not be in person in the Camp, and
that necessity did require, that they should join the Bodies of the Armies
together; then the King of Hungary shall have the direction of the Body of the
Army of the said Elector: and the levyes of Soldiers, and their quartering,
shall be proportioned according to the Bodies of the Armies. The Receivers
general of the Empire shall be bound by Oath, to pay and deliver the
contribution-Mony to each Body of the Armies proportionably, that is to say, to
the King of Hungary for 60000, and to the Elector of Saxony for 20000 men.
When it shall please God to re-establish the Peace, and that the Troops shall
come to be disbanded, this proportion shall be observed; That as the Elector
shall disband 2000 men, the King of Hungary shall disband 6000. Whatsoever is
not found to be comprehended nor expressed in this Schedule or Addition to the
Agreement, is to be sought for in the Contents of the Treaty of Peace at
large, which ought to be inviolably observed.

Of this Schedule there have been made two Exemplifications in Parchment, of
one and the same tenor: The one, for the Emperor; the other, for the Elector
of Saxony.

Given at Prague, the 30. of May, 1635.
III. An Extract out of the said Treaty of Peace, for so much as concerns
the Palatinate.
TOuching the business of the Palatine, as being that for which in these
years last past many horrible Commotions, Troubles, and Oppressions have been
raised; His Electorall Highness of Saxony did very stiffely insist upon it,
to have it fully settled and accommodated, as well in point of the Electorall
Dignity, as for that which concerns his Countries: But for as much as it is
notoriously known, (and the most laudable College of Electors judged it to be
so at Mulbausen, in the year 1627) that the proscribed Palatine, Frederick,
has been the Author and Promoter of all the Mischiefs happened in Bohemia,
an Hereditarie Kingdom of his Imperial Majesty, and immediately after in the
Empire; and that his Imperial Majesty, together with his most honorable
House, finds himself to be in debt for this occasion many Millions, and to
have sustained diverse other great Damages; and namely, that he has been
constrained to leave some part of his Hereditarie Countries in arreare, to
furnish the expenses of the War: His Majesty would by no means depart from
his resolution, although his Electorall Highness of Saxony did seriously
bestow his labor therein. And therefore that remained firm and settled, which
his Imperial Majesty had ordained and determined, touching the said
Electorall Dignity, and his Countries; as well on the behalf of his
Electorall Highness of Bavaria, and the Line of the late Duke William his
Father, as otherwise; and also, touching the estates of some of the Palatines
Servants. Yet nevertheless, the Widow of the late Elector, Frederick the
fourth, Count Palatine of Rhine, shall have her Iointure allowed her, so far
forth as she can make appear what belongs to her. Also the entertainment of
a Prince shall be ordered to be allowed to the Children of the proscribed
Palatine, if they will duly humble themselves toward his Imperial Majesty.
And all this to be done of his Imperial grace, not as any thing of due.

Below.
HIS Imperial Majesty does expressly exclude and cut off from this Amnestia,
the Affairs and Differences of Bohemia, and of the Palatinate. And because,
for the appeasing and quieting of them, his Imperial Majesty has brought
himself and his House into great and heavy Expenses; and that he has (as
has been formerly said) been constrained to leave in Arreare some part of
his Hereditarie Countries, of the profits whereof he remains yet frustrate,
and unsatisfied; his Majesty has reserved unto himself the seeking of
restitution of the Charges expended by him, and the reparation of the Damages
sustained by him, from them who have been the causers thereof, and from their
assistants and promoters; and especially from as many of them as can be found,
that have not yet by other Accords accommodated and reconciled themselves to
his said Imperial Majesty.

The Translation of the Authors Epistle Dedicatorie to the French King. TO
LOVYS XIII. THE MOST CHRISTIAN KING OF FRANCE AND NAVARRE, I. A. D. wishes
Victory, and eternal felicity.
SIR,
I Present unto your Majesty a defense of the common Quarrel and Liberty,
which the whole World expects and waits for, from the happy success of
your designs: Her Cause can more justly be consecrated to none, because it can
more powerfully be defended by none. This Controversy, touching a matter of
singular excellency, is public; and therefore ought not to be agitated, but
before them, upon whom the public safety relyeth. The security of the
Christian World is invaded; and therefore assistance is to be craved from Him
alone, who only can when he will, and will when he can, restore peace and
tranquillity to the World. The ambition of the Enemies, is insatiable: whilst
it is preparing a War for Europe, it published a counterfeit Peace to the
Germans. To the end, that it may openly deceive, it does secretly make an
agreement; that it may more safely beguile men unarmed, it does in name only
banish War out of the Empire: This fraudulent agreement has been rejected
by the valor of the Swedes, repelled by the fortitude of the French, and
despised by the constancy of the Protestants. For this cause, they are
proscribed as Enemies of the common peace, and disturbers of the public quiet;
and although they do with force of Arms endeavor the common Concord, yet
being left desolate and innocent, they bear the blame of the continued War.
By this Work, we answer that Calumny, and turning back the points of the
Darts upon our Adversaries, we show, that they only are the Confederate
Enemies of Peace, who carrying ordinarily in their mouths the name of Quiet,
do meditate in their hearts perpetual Wars and Discords; and masking their
Tyranny with the name of Liberty, their Invasion with Piety, and their
Conspiracies with public Security, with a counterfeit show and specious
color, do attribute most honest names unto most dis-honest actions, and most
dis-honest actions unto most honest names. As if your Majesty, and yours, did
of your own accord take Arms against them, and not by compulsion repel
Arms, voluntarily taken against you and your Confederates; or, as if they did
ever offer any Peace unto you, but an unjust one, or you ever refused any just
one; or, as if they can hope for any firm tranquillity, as long as they
retain to themselves those estates of other men's, which they have, and lay
claim to those they have not. But men, who have no color of title to possess
things belonging to strangers, have need to betake themselves to fallacies of
words, thereby to deceive those that will believe them, as well by words as by
deeds. You, SIR, who have Justice for your Companion in all your doings, need
no cases, or outsides of words; but you do express in words the sincerity
which you practice in your life. For you keeping a Watch over the public
tranquillity, and not over your own private benefit, do so defend that which
is your own, that you covet not that which is another man's; you do so protect
your friends, that you do not oppress them as your enemies; and though your
self do injury to none, yet you revenge the injury done to your
Confederates; and do advance the bounds of your Empire rather by the glory of
your brave actions, then by the extending of your Territories. Whereupon it
falls out, that as there can be no comparison of peoples, or parallel of
strength betwixt your subjects and friends, and your enemies, so there is also
a vast dissimilitude of causes. They professing a horrible ambition of ruling
over all, out of the private and greedy desire of Soveraigntie, do pick a
quarrel against the Church, and do raise the Arms of the Empire unprovoked,
in a most violent manner, against those that would oppose them; they do
compel the people, by enticing and drawing them on with specious shows and
names of things, to serve their ambition; and endeavor to bring all Germany
under their yoke merely through necessity of despair; having been for many
years past pitifully oppressed with a most grievous War, and exhausted of
all her strength and wealth. Your Majesty being content with the Territories
of your forefathers, and your own triumphs, does never take Arms, but
against your will; never lay them down, but willingly; and having used them
only for the defense of your subjects, your friends, and common right, does
maintain the liberty of all, the security of every one, and the safety of
Europe, with no less clairitie then you go ^^^ne them with equity. Whereupon
it comes to pass, that whereas the captivity of the Empire seems to be
greedily gaped after by them recoverie of liberty is endeavored and effected
by you; the World is troubled by them, pacified by you, and Germany, oppressed
by them, is relieved and restored by you. And let all things be so subject to
the Laws of Heaven, that Justice, Virtue, and Felicity fighting on your side,
and Treachery, Cowardice, and Calamity taking part with your Enemies,
Providence may confess, that she owes Victory to the one, and Vengeance to
the other. Therefore, Most Christian King, be pleased to entertain this
Opening and Pleading of the Public Cause, and to take knowledge of the
Innocence of this continued War, presented to you in writing, as you do
defend and countenance it in action. Let your Majesty's protection be open to
the defense of Liberty, who even from your tender age have ever been a
Sanctuary to the banished, a Refuge to your Confederates, a safeguard to the
afflicted, and a most certain comfort to all people. Your friends relying upon
this, will not fear any War from their Enemies, and will hope for a Peace
from you, that shall uphold Law and Justice: Which Peace, when you shall have
redeemed the Right of common Liberty, you will resolve upon; having resolved,
you will give it; and having given it, you will preserve it for ever.

A Breviate or short View of the whole WORK.
The Treaty of Prague, concluded by the Emperor and Duke of Saxony, against
the Protestants, Swedes, and French, is proved to be of no validity, void, and
unjust, by five several Chapters, or general Nullities.

The first Nullitie, on the Emperors part. Page 1.
1. BEcause a Treaty or determination concerning Church Lands, exceeds the
power of the Emperor. p. 6 2. Because it is founded upon the Transaction of
Passaw, which is of no moment with the Austrians. p. 8 3. The Emperors
themselves do confess, that it belongs not to their power, to determine any
thing in matter of Religion. p. 15 4. (...) by any (...) p. 17 5. Because the
Treaty of Prague it self is very ignominious to the Emperor and to the
Catholics. p. 2^
The second Nullitie, on the part of the Duke of Saxony. Page 25.
1. Because, though he account himself the chief of the Protestants, yet by
this divorce and separation from them, he utterly ruineth both his own
strength, and the strength of his Allies. p. 26 2. Because the treating of a
common Peace, exceeds the power of the Duke of Saxony. p. 28 3. Because this
Transaction of the Duke of Saxony, is hurtful and deceitful to the
Protestants. p. 31 4. It springs from a fountain of foul ingratitude, and
horrible treachery. p. 35
The third Nullitie, on the part of the Protestants. Page 43.
1. Because the Protestants being instigated by the Duke of Saxony, made War
against the Emperor. p. 43 2. Because they are enforced to consent, not to a
Peace, but to a new War. p. 48 3. The Kingdom of Bohemia is unjustly made
Hereditarie to the House of Austria. p. 55 4. Silesia being innocent, is
stripped of her rights. p. 64 5. Lusatia is unjustly dismembered from the
Kingdom of Bohemia. p. 66 6. The Electorall dignity of the Palatine, is
unjustly translated to the Bavarian. p. 73 7. The Bavarians anciently had no
right to the Electorate. p. 84
The fourth Nullitie, on the part of the Swedes. Page 95.
1. Because the Swedes making War in their own name, ought also to make the
accord in their own right. p. 98 2. Because the Duke of Saxony in his own
private name owes revenging imprecations to the Swedes. p. 101 3. Because the
Swedes cannot basely abandon their Leagues, nor their Troops: Nor dare they
make any agreement with the Austrians, under the faithless undertaking of the
Saxon. p. 104
The fifth Nullitie, on the part of the French. Page 110.
1. Because the most Christian King, by right of protection, preserved the
Catholic Faith in the Empire. p. 111 2. The protection of the Princes and
States of the Empire, cannot be charged to be the French Kings fault. p. 116 3.
The most illustrious Elector of Trevers (or Trier) did justly and seasonably
obtain the protection of the French. p. 120 4. Because the Emperor
endeavors to make the private quarrels of the Spaniards with the French,
common to the whole Empire. p. 124 5. Because the cause of Lorraine does
nothing at all belong to the Emperor. p. 127
And therefore the conclusion is, that this Triumvirall conspiracy ought to be
rejected, and a true, honest, and universal Peace to be fought for, and
defended with the common Arms.

Upon the birth or deliverie of the Transaction of Prague.
Ungodly Prague, which to the World
a bloody War has brought,
From her false Womb, how ever could
a faithful Peace be sought?
Or,
Ungodly Prague has to the World
a bloody War projected,
From Prague a Plague, and no firm Peace
could ever be expected.
THE PREFACE.
MOst venerable is the name of Peace; the plenty it brings, is comfortable;
and the happiness of it, most desirable; the possession of it, is ever
blessed; and the granting of it, at all times to be labored for. Certainly, I
cannot imagine any mortal man to be so void of humanity, that he would envy
a Rest so necessary to the Empire, so beneficial to the Country; as being
that, without which neither private families, nor public Laws, nor the right
of common society can subsist. I cannot suppose any man to be so barbarous and
savage, that, all other circumstances and conditions being alike, will prefer
a Soldiers Coat before a Gown, War before Peace; when as in this change and
vicissitude of affairs, by business and labor, is begotten ease; by
troubles, rest; and by Arms, love and concord. But where liberty and the
safety of the Commonwealth is pretended, and servitude and destruction
intended; where a most unjust and treacherous Combination, is veiled with the
glorious name of a Peace; where, under a pretext of Rest, the restless
Soldier does ransack and spoil men's habitations; and lastly, where a
deceitful Condition of Mercy is a Bait to draw on insulting Power: every wise
man will prefer even a doubtful War, before a (...) Peace; uncertain
safety, before a certain destruction; and an unsworne condition of slaverie,
before a (...) usurped Soveraigntie. I confess, that nothing can happen to
miserable Germany, either more certain, for her safety, more noble, for her
glory; or more to be wished, for the recoverie of her former felicity; then,
if by consent of the Princes, and Pie^ie of the Nobles, it may be restored to
her ancient concord, and now almost quite forgotten tranquillity: And that no
less Honor should be gained to that Emperor, who with the sweet Bond of
Peace should reduce to unity his Country, exhausted with slaughters and
butcherie; his peoples, enraged and made furious with the injuries of former
times, and like Savages exercising their Cruelties upon their own Bowels; then
there was Divinity ascribed to him, who first joined together in one Body so
many Nations, no less different in manners and disposition, then in situation
of Climates; and by communion of Laws and Customs, made them the most
flourishing Commonwealth of Europe. But lamentable experience proclaims, that
by that agreement or transaction of Prague, hatreds were not mitigated, but
inflamed; Arms not laid down, but doubled; proscription and confiscations not
diminished, but extended beyond all Law and right. For after that, in the very
frontispice of the business, foreign Princes were at the first excluded; in
the progress thereof, most of the Castles, Cities, and Countries of Germany,
were divided amongst the great men; the rest, that were weaker in strength, not
in cause, being proscribed, were stripped out of their Hereditarie
Jurisdictions; the spoils of the Provinces, the booty and pillage of the
banished, and the goods of the slaughtered, were distributed to such as did
applaud the action. Next after that, for the confirming and maintaining of
these Usurpations, and Army of do Regiments was imposed upon Germany; and, as
if the Laws and Courts of Justice did abhor this Pacification, the
Businesses of the Imperial Chamber and holy Consistory were left altogether
undecided. No comfort or ease at all appeared from this Peace, nor the last
fruit of a public Tranquillity; but in stead thereof, an unappeasable War
is denounced against all, that had or should dare to complain of the injuries
offered, or so much as to whisper of the unjustnesse of this Conspiracy.
Nothing was here done, that was fit to be done in a lawful Peace: the former
Contributions of the States, the pilling and spoiling of the Countries, the
burdens and oppressions of the subjects were not taken away, nor so much as
mitigated, but excessively increased, established by public Edict; and of
Soldiers pays, that were extraordinary, and without order, were made
ordinary taxations. Barbarous Nations were not carried away, nor cast out of
the Empire, but made to overflow it like a deluge, and let in by multitudes at
the gates, set wide open. And I need not stick to say, that Cities were emptied
of their Citizens, the very Deserts filled with fugitives, the goods of men and
Cities, of a known and well-approved innocence, confiscated, their persons
degraded, and their lives rated at high sums of money. So that it is more
clear then the Noonday, that in this foresaid transaction, it was not so
much labored to relieve the sinking fortunes of the Country, as it was by all
means endeavored, that the remaining States of the Empire should be deluded
with the name of a Peace; that the remaining strength of the Protestants should
succor then afflicted condition of the Austrians; that the common Arms should
with their whole power be turned against Rebels (as they call them) and
Strangers: and so in stead of concord, to have discord; in stead of truth,
treachery; and in stead of a just War, a most wicked and detestable one to be
undertaken: and that so much of Germany as was alive, or had a being left,
after eighteen years troubles; should be quite brought to ruin, by a four
months pacification indeed, the fates of the House of Austria growing now
toward a declination, fortune could bring to pass no greater thing for them,
then the discord of their enemies. Nothing could happen more acceptable to the
Eagles, a good while since beginning to stoop, then to be enabled to break
those in pieces, being separated, whom they stood in fear of, being united;
and now to beguile, with the pretext of a deceitful peace, those whom hitherto
they could not conquer with force^ Arms. And it was an act of no small merit,
with one dash of a Pen to disband such huge Armies; to dissolve so many Leagues
made with Protestants, and so solemnly sworn; to turn the mightiest Enemy
they had, into friends; in stead of adversaries, to get assistants; to cause
the Germane Faith to be traduced amongst foreign Nations, and esteemed
perfidiousnesse: and in a word, to bring matters to that pass, that whilst
they should singly fight, they should be singly vanquished; and that those who
were mightier then others, should enjoy no other privilege, but that of
Ulysses, to be the first, to be saved for a time, and the last to be devoured
in the end.

The most illustrious Duke of Saxony was taken in, to have a part in this
Treaty, as one though superior in strength, yet inferior in honorable
achievements; who, whether through some kind of emulation, or rather envy of
the Swedish Victories, I know not, when he saw he could not attain an equal
share of honor with them, chose rather to be an Enemy, and an Vndoer, then a
fellow-sharer and a Debtor to those that were his defenders: And by this
means, this League was tempered with so much the more disadvantage to him; in
regard, that howsoever things fell out, he was sure, that by helping and
assisting others, he should derive the whole weight of the Germane War upon
himself and his subjects. Certainly, nothing could happen more satisfactorie
to the Emperors desires, then to withdraw that massy burden of War, under
which his Countries did long since even gasp and groan, and to lay the
greatest part thereof upon the shoulders of the principal Elector; making this
undoubted inference to himself, that whether he were conquered, or did
conquer, he should both ways triumph over his Enemies. So the Pacification
long labored for, being at the last obtained, to the end, that he might oblige
all the particular Princes by private benefits, and by participation of
spoils turn Enemies into friends, he bestowed upon the Elector of Saxony
(besides the Revenues of the Church, usurped by him for the space of above an
hundred years) the Marquisat of Lusatia; and upon his son, the
Archbishopric of Magdeburgh; upon the Duke of Bavaria, the Prince Palatines
Electorship, and the City of Donawerth; upon the Prince of Brandeburgh, the
reversion of the Inheritance of Pomeranie; and upon the Prince of Lunenburgh,
that of the Duchy of Brunswick; and has granted unto the Dukes of
Mechelburgh, peaceable possession of their Country, which they had formerly
obtained by the Swedish power. He has taken unto himself the hereditarie
right to the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Provinces united to it, Silesia,
Moravia, etc. as also the Supreme Authority, in judging Controversies of
matters Spiritual and Temporal, and the particular Dominion of Philipsbourgh.
He has retained in his hands for the King of Hungary, the absolute command
over all the Armies of Germany; and for his younger son, the Bishopric of
Halberstad: And for the other Princes, as they seemed inferior, though not in
right, yet in power (as the Palatines, the Hassians, and those of Wirtemberg)
he commanded, that some of them should prostrate themselves as humble
suppliants, to obtain mercy; and others he put into the secret List of
proscribed men, and excluded from all hope of pardon, or benefit of the
Amnestia; induced thereunto by no stronger motive then this, that with the
estates and spoils of the dispossessed, he might reward those who had either
formerly done him, or lately promised him their faithful service. The forces
of the Empire being by this means united, he denounced a most deadly War
against the French, under pretense of recovering Lorraine; and against the
Swedish, under color of vindicating the Germane liberty: moved thereunto by
no other consideration, but because those two Kingdoms had hitherto cast in
the way fatal rubbes, to hinder the Austrian Greatness and Spanish Monarchy.

They say, that the Roman Triumviri, Dion. Histor. lib. 46. p. 335.
to the end that they might purchase the favor of the people unto their
proscription, (a thing before that time not heard of) did draw on the great
men, partly by the Possessions of the slain, partly by the great Offices and
Priesthoods of the dead; that they obliged the Soldiers with the Patrimonies
of the conquered, and with provisions of Victuals to be supplied from the
Cities, without Money: that they fined the Citizens at a Tenth of their
Country Manors and Farms, and at a half part of their other Revenues;
reckoning it as a special favor done to those, of whom a tenth part of their
Revenue was so exacted, though they had not so much as a tenth part of their
estate left.

But this fury was confined within particular Walls; the bounds of one City,
did prescribe limits to these slaughters; and the safety of all, was redeemed
with the butcherie of a few. Here, all the Citizens and Subjects, all the
Provinces are in the same danger; no City, no Country, no Citizen is exempt
from the misery of War; no corner of all Germany, where the Rapines of
Soldiers have not access: The Confederates, as well as the Enemies, are
oppressed with excessive Contributions; and as if in this eighteen years
War, blood enough were not yet shed in Germany, the Arms that are still
bloody with the slaughter of our friends and allies, are transported into
France and Sweden. And yet notwithstanding, what labor soever had been used
by man's industry, and whatsoever Envy can endeavor for the destruction of
Innocents, the justice of the common Cause remains invincible; there has
hitherto neither wanted success to things ill designed, nor an expected event
to things very ill undertaken; but the execution of this Peace remains as
unhappie, as the Treaty thereof was unjust. So perpetually true is that Maxim
of Providence, That fortune is answerable to the designs, the issue
conformable to the inventions, and ill counsel the worst to the counselor.
Neither is it to be thought strange, that so unluckie and so unjust a
Pacification has rather kindled a War, then quenched it; when as the authors
of it aimed only at this, to prefer their private ends before the public
good, to purchase their own security with the ruin of others, and make
havocke of the safety of all, for the quiet of a few. And so factious spirits
being drawn into contrary ways, in stead of an universal Peace came forth a
particular transaction, dishonorable to the Emperor, disgraceful to the
Saxon, treacherous to the Protestants; to them that were excluded, void; and in
the censure of Strangers, most shameful; and as well in regard of them that
contracted it, as on their behalf against whom it was contracted, of no force
or validity at all.

CHAP. I. The first Nullitie of the Treaty on the Emperors part: first,
because treating concerning Church Lands exceeds the power of the Emperor.
FOr first, to let that pass, that a few Princes of Germany, who in the common
Cause are not Judges, but parties, cannot at any private Meeting determine of
the affairs of the Empire, nor debate at their pleasure, in a Conventicle at
Prague, Controversies which are only to be decided in the general Assemblies
of the Empire, nor to conclude upon a Peace concerning the tranquillity of the
Christian World, within the secret Chambers of one City: and in a word, out of
a corner of one Kingdom, to denounce a deadly War against so many Princes,
Dominions, and Kingdoms. Certain it is, by the opinion of the Doctors of the
Austrian side, That the Emperor cannot establish a lawful and firm League
with Heretics upon such a condition, as to grant unto them the Lands and
Rights belonging to the Church, lately usurped by them, and free exercise of
their Heresy in the Empire: So, amongst others, did Iacobus Simandra, Tractat.
tom. 11. p. 11. p. 181.
Bishop of Pace, teach a good while since, in his Book of Catholic
Instruction, cap. 46. n. 52. where he says, That this does also appertain to
the punishment and hatred of these Heretics (meaning the Lutherans) That
faith or promise made unto them is not to be kept, notwithstanding it be
confirmed by oath: And a little after: There can be no commerce nor peace with
heretics, and that therefore faith given unto them, though confirmed by oath,
ought by no means to be kept: And he adds further, This is often said by
us, and yet it is necessary to be uncessantly itterated, and not to be
silenced as long as that name of peace is pretended. So Conradus Brunius
professor of the law, and Chancellor of Otho Truchsesius Bishop of Auspurg at
the same time, when the transaction of Passaw was established in the Empire, in
his third Book de Hereticis c. 15. puts this question. Tractat tom. 11. p. 305.


Whether contracts, agreements, laws and rescripts, whereby heretic, do
obtain peace and security, be of any force or validity, so as if any man
shall offend them, be be guilty of the breach of such a peace? Also who they
be, that are permitted to reform Churches, administer and dispense, to
possess lands and estates belonging to Churches, and Ecclesiastical
Jurisdiction to be suspended against them? And he answers expressly, that
such contracts, agreements, etc. are of no validity: And that it is an unjust
and blasphemous condition, whereby permission is given to Heretics to teach
their doctrines: And in the end of the same Chapter he adds, At this day no
peace can be of force which is made with Heretics, upon this condition they
are not to be offended. That, that peace is abominable and to be abhorred,
which is is made upon this condition that those which offend them should be
condemned to have broken the peace: That on the contrary, all Divine and Humane
laws would have them utterly distinguished. And so lately Martinus Becanus
Doctor of Divinity and Professor at Mentz, in a disputation concerning faith
to be held with Heretics, c. 10. p. 88. and so forward teaches, That, Set
forth at Mentz. 1607. and reprinted, 1619.
that Liberty granted, or Accord made touching Religion, whereby it is freely
permitted to a man to be a Catholic, or a Lutheran, or a Calvinist is
altogether unlawful, and repugnant to Gods Commandment; And is not to be
tolerated otherwise then for some time, and for the avoiding of some greater
mischief: And p. 94. Let all men know, that although such kind of men may have
obtained some such thing by some special Rescript or Contract, yet it is of no
force.

And so a Book very lately set forth touching the conclusion of a peace made
betwixt the Catholics and the Adherents, to the confession of Auspurg,
published by the Commandment and Authority of the Superiors at Dilling, 1629.
and approoved by the Doctors professing the Law in the Archdukes University of
Freiburgh, and added by way of Commentary to that Edict of Restitution of the
sixth of March 1629. does in many places professedly teach, That such
trans-actions or agreements of Catholics with Heretics and Lutherans, are by
the Law it self void, unlawful, and unluckie:

And he alleges diverse reasons of this assertion, whereof for brevities
sake I will only point at the chief.

His first is, That such a Treaty exceeds the limits of secular, yea, even of
Imperial Jurisdiction: So he teaches, c. 5. q. 25. n. 20. p. 114. in these
words: The Emperors neither would nor could decree by their authority, that
certain Ecclesiastical Benefices possessed by the Confessionist, ought to be
left unto them: And p. 122. It exceeds all secular, yea, and the supreme
Caesarean power, to determine that Church lands and benefices being translated
from lawful Ecclesiastical Prelates and beneficed men to Lay persons incapable
thereof, and averse from the Catholic religion, ought to remain in their
possession: the Jurisdiction over their estates and persons, being taken away
from the rest of the Bishops and Prelates, as to the use and exercise thereof.

His second reason which is, because a Catholic Prince cannot by any promises
bind himself to tolerate Heresy, is declared in the same Chapter, q. 26. n.
27. p. 133. in these words: To speak absolutely (case of necessity excepted)
it is unlawful for a Magistrate, and injurious against God to tolerate
Heresy: And a little after n. 30. If in some case and some time it may be
lawful to tolerate Heresy; yet it is not lawful for any man to bind himself
by promises or oaths to tolerate it; because by the law l. 5. ff. de pactis,
That contract and agreement is void whereby any man is invited or drawn on to
offend: And n. 31. Though at some time a Catholic Magistrate in a case of
extreme necessity may prudently bind himself to tolerate his Heretic
subjects for a certain time; yet that such a promise should be made
perpetual, it can scarce at any time be lawful: An express reason
immediately follows; Because a Magistrate cannot permit or promise a
toleration of Heresy in his Country, unless it be to avoid a greater
mischief from the Common Wealth: But there can no mischief happen more
grievous and pernicious to a Common Wealth, then if Heresy be so brought in,
that it may at no time be lawful to prohibit, or remove it.

A third reason is there alleged, q. 28. n. 47. Because the authority and
approbation of the Pope ought to interpose before a league can be lawfully made
with Heretics for the tolerating of their Religion. For whereas such a league
does tend to the detriment of the Church, and does indirectly concern
spiritual matter, that is to say, permitting of a false religion, therefore
nothing ought herein to be determined the Pope not being first consulted with:
Now the Treaty of Passaw, and the Pacification of Prague were never approved by
the Pope, and therefore by the Judgment of the Austrian Doctors are of no
moment and validity: 2. Because this trans-action is founded upon the Treaty
of Passaw.
Which ought so much the more to be considered, because the Pacification of
Prague in the principal parts thereof is founded upon the Trans-action of
Passaw: for so says the first Article in the frontispiece expressly: As for the
possessions of the Church mediately depending of the holy Empire, let the
constitution of the Treaty of Passaw remain unviolated. But by the doctrine of
the same Doctors, in the Preface of the book formerly cited, etc. v. q. 25. p.
115.

The peace of Religion concluded with the Lutherans at Nurenbergh, 1552. and
confirmed at Auspurg, 1555. is no final accord, no general or pragmaticall,
nor perpetual sanction or trans-action, but only a temporary contract,
agreement, and constitution; which as it was introduced and established by the
Emperors authority, with the consent of diverse States of the Empire, so by the
like power of a succeeding Emperor the greater part of the Princes of the
Empire giving their votes thereunto, it may be repealed. Yea, and even in it
self it is of no great validity, being by force of arms extracted from
Charles V. and upon urgent necessity granted to the Lutherans by Ferdinand I.

For so the agreement of peace often cited c. 5. q. 24. p. 109. Anno 1554.
says: When Charles V. did make a pacificatorie transaction with the
Confessionists, the State of the affairs in the Empire was so troubled, that
the Emperor knew not what counsel to follow; and therefore confessed, that he
being pressed with adversities and hard conditions, did grant peace to the
Heretics, and did commend the desperate state of the Catholics in Germany to
Gods good pleasure, until a a more fortunate time and occasion did offer it
self. Johannes Paulus Windeck taught the same doctrine a good while since, in
his deliberation touching the rooting out of Heretics, printed at Colen with
the leave and privilege of the Caesarean Majesty, art. 3. in the answer to
the 4. Objection p. 324. That which the Emperor did by this agreement of peace
grant to the Protestants, he was compelled to do it by extreme necessity:
For the Turk at that time hovering over Austria, it was necessary for him to
gather together al his strength from al parts round about him. Besides,
although the Ttrans-action of this peace had been most free, yet according to
the opinion of the foresaid Doctors, there was no interest in the possessions
of the Church granted by it to the Lutherans, but only a suspension of the
Bishops interest in them. And so does the Book of the conclusion of the peace
expressly teach, c. 6. q. 30. n. 4. 5. 6. 7. When it says: That by the
transaction of Passaw no right or authority was granted to the Heretics of
detayning or usurping the possessions of the Church, or teaching the confession
of Auspurg in the Empire against the Catholic truth; but they only obtained a
suspension of Episcopal Jurisdiction and of actions belonging to Catholics.

And yet more expressly n. 5.

The Catholics do possess the Churchlands, and the exercise of their Religi-
by their proper and ancient right; but Confessionists who have no just title to
them, have interest in them only by detaining them; and besides, and contrary
to all right and justice do enjoy that permission and indulgence granted unto
them, not without the prejudice and damage of the Catholics: Yea, and they
hold the exercise of their Heresy only by privilege, and a special or
extraordinary kind of right: for it is manifest that the confession of Auspurg
was received in the Empire by such a special and extraordinary right, L. Quod
vero C. de legibus. Ius speciale in consequentiam non trahendum.
and by favor and indulgence, whereas it is rejected every where else.
Whereupon he instantly infers by way of Corollary, That the Lutherans do
without cause complain, that the Catholics do call the Confession of Auspurg
a mere toleration; when as it is certain, that it has been diverse times
condemned in the Empire, never approoved, but only tolerated; and that no
injury is herein done to the Lutherans, who can show no title or evidence for
their possession or detention, but only force and intrusion: When as on the
contrary side the Catholics, though they be safe enough by the Prescription
of a most ancient possession, yet for the more abundant justification of their
right, they can make their titles and evidences appear to all.

Moreover, although the Treaty of Passaw were of undoubted authority, yet by
the opinion of the Catholics, the Protestants have very many ways violated
that sanction, and as much as in them lay, have utterly abrogated it: In regard
that not only after the publishing of it Anno 1552. and 1555. they did by
force and intrusion, throwing out the Catholics, take possession of three
Archbishopricks, fourteen Bishoprics, and above three hundred Church Livings
and Monasteries (amongst which the Dominicans alone are said to have lost above
seventie) as that Declaration of the Peace of Religion concluded betwixt the
Catholics and Protestant Princes, and Nobles of the Empire, printed as it
seems at Munchin 1629. in Quarto. particularly shows; but also by very many
new Doctrines brought in touching the Vbiquitie of Christ's Body, Free Will, the
Mass or Eucharist, they have so altered the Confession of Auspurg set forth in
the Book of Concord 1580. That at this day there are no Protestants found in
the world, who do still Adhere to the true Confession of Auspurg, as it was
presented by their Ancestors to Charles V. Anno 1530. Besides that, many
Protestants leaving the Doctrine of the Confession of Auspurgh, have in very
many Articles embraced the opinions of Calvin, and Zvinglius: From whence it
appears as clear as the Noone day, that since the Peace of Religion 1552. was
only granted to those that profess the true Confession of Auspurgh, and that
all the Protestants are in many points departed from it; and many of them have
declined to the Heresy of Calvin: They have by the judgment of the
Catholics, long since deprived themselves of all grace and privileges granted
unto them by the Peace of Religion; and have made themselves unworthy of any
further toleration: as the Book of the Conclusion of Peace prooveth every
point at large c. 10. and 11. q. 81. and 82. p. 574. 581. etc.

Neither indeed did the Austrian Emperors ever deny, 3. By the confession of
the Emperors themselves.
that it was out of their power and jurisdiction to determine any thing in
matter of Religion, against the Decrees of the holy Canons, or Councels. So
without doubt did the Emperor Ferdinand. I. confess expressly at the breaking
up of the Assembly of Auspurgh, Anno 1559. the 13. June, in these words: It is
beyond the compass of all Secular power, yea, even the Supreme Imperial
Majesty it self, that the possessions of the Church should be translated from
lawful Prelates and devolved unto Lay and Heretical persons, and remain in
their possession. So also Rodulph. II. When he granted liberty of Religion to
the Protestant States of Hungary and Austria, in his declaratory Letter of the
sixth of August 1606. That as well those Articles which belong to Religion and
the Ecclesiastical Order, as the rest, are thus to be understood, so far
forth as they be not contrary to his Oath given to the States at his
Coronation, for the defense of the Catholic Religion, and extirpation of
Heresy. And for this cause the Emperor Charles V. published a general
revocation of all those things which he confessed, he sometimes granted to
Heretics against his conscience, dated at Bruxels 19. September, Ferdinand I.
at Nurenberg and Auspurgh; with no other intention but this, that at one and
the same time, he might willingly by himself disanull that liberty, which
being compelled by his brother, he had formerly published. Which they do at
this day suppose to be made the more sacred and solemn, because after the
publication of the Council of Trent 1564. Pius the fourth, which revoked all
things that were granted in prejudice of the said Council: All Contracts,
Agreements, and Ordinances, in those points wherein they are contrary to the
Decrees of the Council, are by Law revoked, made void, and disanulled; and
reduced to the rules and limits of that Council, and so are judged to be. 4.
Experience of things past.
And this is the reason why notwithstanding all cautions, assurances, and
Capitulations whatsoever made to the contrary, the Austrians ever have
proceeded, and still do in the reformation of Religion, and extirpation of
Heresy with open force, in the Palatinate, Bohemia, Hungary, Austria, etc.
because they believe all such Agreements and Capitulations to be frustrate,
and void in Law; and that they can be confirmed by no Oath or Contract
whatsoever. And that we may not depart any further from our intended discourse.
Ferdinand II. then Archduke of Gratz, now Emperor, although at his Coronation
Anno 1599. Auspurgh, and the Subjects of the three Hereditary Provinces of
Styria, Carinthia, and Carniola, liberty of conscience. Yet presently upon it,
in the very beginning of his Government by a public Edict, he drove all the
Heretics out of his Dominions, and in a solemn resolution given unto the
States of those three Provinces at Gratz, the last of April 1599. he openly
professed, That those Heretics could allege no privilege either in holy
Scriptures, or in any Law of God or man, for the Exercise of their Religion.
And the same Emperor although by the sacred Charter of Rodulph II. Anno 1609.
sufficient provision was made for the States of the Kingdom of Bohemia, to
have free Exercise of their Religion of both kinds; yet as soon as he took
upon him the Government of that Kingdom, he demolished diverse of the
Protestants Churches to the ground, and shut up the Inhabitants in prison:
Whereupon soon after arose those woeful troubles in Bohemia. And not long
after that, Anno 1621. though, Silesia, by a solemn agreement made betwixt
them, that if they would leave the Party of the Prince Palatine Frederick, he
would religiously preserve all their Rights and Privileges, both
Ecclesiastical and Temporal: Yet for all this, when the Prince Palatine was
dispossessed, he did presently after with all the strength he could, contrary
to his covenants and promises, every where abrogate the Profession of Auspurgh.
And although in the year 1619. Franckford by a new agreement, amongst other
Articles of the Emperors Capitulation, he had bound himself to the Electors
and Protestant Princes of the Empire, by a particular Oath for the defense of
the Peace of Religion in Germany: yet notwithstanding, when he had gotten the
upper hand in the Empire, Lutherans jurisdiction, and prohibited the Exercise
of the Religion of Auspurgh in them; which gave the occasion of this most
bloody War in Germany. And though now,

Yet has he not laid aside his former purpose of casting out all his
adversaries under the name of Heretics, and of stripping them of all their
strength, under the color of restoring the possessions of the Church, and of
preserving no other Peace in Germany, but amongst Catholics; holding himself
to this resolution, That Catholics can hold no firm Peace with Heretics.
That this was the intention of the Sacred Imperial Majesty, it was in
public show declared by a Book made by his commandment at the Diet of
Ratisbone, and published a little after at Auspurgh, in the year 1630. The
foundations of the Peace happily laid in the sacred Roman Empire, by the
approbation of Pope Urban 8. and by the assent of Ferdinand 2. Caesar Augustus.

That is to say, That no firm Peace can be hoped for in Germany, but by the
restitution of Religion, and the possessions of the Catholics into their
former state and condition: But if at any time for the avoiding of a greater
mischief, Peace had been granted unto Heretics by the Austrians, it was done
but for a time, to the end, that some better occasion being shortly after
offered, the whole burden and weight of a War might be turned upon them. So
did Iohanne, Paulus Windeck clearly confess not long since in the
Consultation above cited, p. 414. in these words, The Trans-action which
Catholics have sometimes made with Sectaries, they have made them aiming at
this end, that other businesses, being dispatched in the mean time, afterward
they might make and manage this War wholly against Sectaries, and turn the
whole Weight thereof upon their backs.

Peter Ribadeneira teach, that Christian dissimulation is to be used, in his
Book de Principe, lib. 1. cap. 26. p. 178. If great dangers be feared; and
Becanus in his disputation of keeping faith with Heretics, c. 10. p. 89.
says, If the Lutheran Religion cannot be conveniently hindered, or driven out
of a State, but with a greater damage to the Commonwealth, then it may be
tolerated for some time, until a more fortunate season, or occasion do offer
it self, as that Composition of Peace teaches, n. 1609. And that this
consideration of concluding a Peace for a time was observed in that Transaction
of Prague, the business it self declares: 5. Out of the Treaty of Prague it
self.
For that Trans-action though at the first appearance it do seem somewhat the
more ignominious, and disadvantageous to the Austrians, as being that, whereby
not only that Sacred Edict of the Emperor, touching the restitution of the
possessions of the Church of the sixth of March 1629. being published against
the Lutherans, is wholly abrogated, but also very many grievances of the
Protestants exhibited at the Diet of Ratisbone 1630. Lipsich are reformed,
according to their own desire, Bohemia and Hungary, the free disposition of
the College of Electors, and Imperial Chamber; absolute command over all the
Armies of Germany; and in conclusion, a plenary cognizance of all suits and
controversies, which should hereafter arise touching matter of Religion, and
this pacification. So that what he seemed to grant with his left hand, he
presently takes away with his right, and whilst he promises a Peace of a few
years to the Lutherans, he graspes into his hand all the Forces of the whole
Empire, being ready to employ them against the Lutherans at his pleasure, upon
the first occasion, as has been done heretofore.

CHAP. II. The second Nullity of the Treaty on the part of the Duke of Saxony:
First, because that by this means the strength of the Protestants is utterly
ruined.
THerefore the Princes of the smaler States being excluded from the Amnestia,
he concluded a League with the most powerful head of the Protestants, by which
he did not only join the greatest part of the great men to his Party, but
also (which was the Principal thing of all) he disjoined and separated the
most powerful of his enemies; using this as a most certain subtlety to elude
the strength of his adversaries, if he might be able to destroy those being
drawn asunder, for whom he was too weak being gathered together. That forces
united are stronger then divided, and that a common danger is to be kept off by
concord, reason has dictated to all men, and experience has confirmed to the
Protestants.

The Emperor who has hitherto been too weak, when their Armies were joined
together, could find no surer remedy then the separation of them; and whilst
he does with mutual slaughters destroy his adversaries, he being now grown
mightier by the divisions and discords of the Lutherans, turns the faults of
his enemies into the hope of a Victory. This is the ancient cunning of the
House of Austria, having been with happy success practiced a good while since
by Charles V. and Ferdinand I. Johannes Paulus Windeck, is a domestical
witness hereof in his deliberation touching the rooting out of Heretics, p.
412. and so forward: whose words ought to be to the Princes of Germany
decretorie, when he says: For the driving out of Sectaries is required. First,
a league and association of Catholic Princes. Secondly, the occasion is not to
be neglected, and that is, when the Protestants money is exhausted. Thirdly,
that the Catholics may the more easily suppress the Sectaries, let them by
the invention of diverse causes and pretenses, pull them asunder one from
another, and that was practiced by Charles V. very much to his benefit.
Fourthly, let Catholics get in foreign aides to their assistance, for the
vanquishing of Sectaries: and on the other side, let them use all the caution
that may be, that the Sectaries get no assistance from forrainers. All these
things were most exactly observed, in the Pacification of Prague; When as the
League of Catholics being in name taken away by it, under the Title of Empire
was framed an association of most of the Princes with the Austrians; and
presently after, the strongest of the Protestants, the Palatines, the Hessians,
and they of Wirtemberg, etc. were drawn away from the rest. And least
hereafter they should call in aid from Forreiners for the defense of their
cause; under pretext of Peace, War was denounced against the French, and the
Swedes, with a most calamitous delusion of the Saxon: Who, whilst he seeks a
private Peace rather then a public; whilst he labored for the friendship
of one man, neglecting the friendship of all; whilst flying from a War,
hitherto unhappy unto him, he labors to transfer it to Forreiners and his
friends; he not being wary of it, did (as the Historian long since reported of
Marseilles) for fear of a War, Florus Hist. lib. 4. cap. 3.
fall into a War: A War so much the more unjust, because undertaken against
Brethren, against Allies, against Fellow-professors of the same faith and
belief; by him who had no rightful power or command over them. 2. Because the
Treating of a common Peace exceeds the power of the Duke of Saxony.


For I pray you, By what authority does the most illustrious Duke of Saxony,
who in this business is neither Vicar of the Empire nor Procurator for the
Protestants, nor Vmpire for Forreiners, alone by himself take upon him to
determine the controversies of the whole Empire? By what power does he
endeavor to alter, or abrogate in a private corner, things long since
determined in the public Assemblies, touching both the Religious, and
Temporal Peace? By what right can he limit to the space of forty years, the
liberty of Religion granted to all the Protestants for ever? Why does he alone
make an accord touching the disposition of the College of Electors, touching
the reformation of the Imperial Chamber, touching military affairs, and the
contribution of all the States of the Empire, to the prejudice of most men, and
against the Will of all? By what license or power does he presume to
transfer Cities, Provinces, Principalities; Subjects neither to himself, nor
any body else, and to bring them under the private command of the Emperor?
Does it belong to his charge to make Bohemia, Silesia, Moravia Hereditary to
the Austrians? And Lusatia to himself? To take away the Palatinate and Duchy
of Wirtembergh, from their proper Lords, and Philipsbourgh, which was in all
sacred right belonging to her own Bishop? And in a word, to arm all the
forces of Germany against the French, for the recovery of Lorraine? As if he
had any authority over foreign States, or as if he being circumscribed and
limited himself, could prescribe laws to them, over whom as being his
equals, and his betters, he has no command: Let him rather blame himself for
being so ill advised, as under a pretext of Peace, to approove all the former
Injuries, and usurpations of the Austrians: And for that he alone has by the
connivence of a four months Treaty established those things which they were
not able to persuade the world unto by almost twenty years War. The truth is,
to the end that the forepassed actions of the Emperor might have some title of
right, they must be confirmed by a Triumvirall pacification; and that things
done contrary to law and right, L. 54. D. de regulis juris. Nemo plus juris ad
alium transfere potest, quam ipse haberet.
might carry some show of Justice, they were to be established by a public
conspiracy: Wherein nevertheless the Emperor had no addition at all of
authority, nor the Duke of Saxony the least increase of profit.

For by this Trans-action of Prague, 3. Because this Treaty of the Duke of
Saxony is unprofitable and hurtful to the Protestants.
neither was his Dignity increased, nor his Jurisdiction honorably enlarged;
nor the Religion whereof he takes upon him to be a Prince, and a Defender, any
where propagated, much less firmly established: But on the contrary, of a
free Prince, and one that has so often triumphed over his enemies, he is made
a Commissary of the House of Austria. His Territories are become as a bulwark
to the Bavarians, and Hungarians; the profession of the Confession of Auspurgh
under so noble a Protector, was thrust out of doors in the most and best
Provinces of the Empire, and was sent away and confined within the bounds of
Saxony and the Ocean. Himself, the most miserable of all, who did formerly
draw from the Victories and toiles of the Swedes, his life, and safety of his
Dignity and Country being afterward brought so low, that not being able to
pay, he had rather turn bankrupt, then be indebted, does at this day alone
bear the whole burden of a most calamitous War, as being not only shut out
of the principal part of his Territories; but even doubtful and uncertain of
his life and safety. Surely by the most just law of requiting like for like, he
ought to impute unto himself, the prejudice, he feels through his own
fault; and he that had provoked the Swedish Arms to be enemies unto him, being
almost quite spent and tired with them, does faint and sink under them.

But is that so? Are the liberty of Germany, and those glorious Titles of Peace
made a color for a wicked conspiracy? Surely amongst perfidious and perjured
persons, it is an ordinary thing under the pretext of confidencie to foment a
War: Neither did any man ever covet another servitude, or his own dominion,
but he would use those fair and specious names. For if the Duke of Saxony did
intend to establish a true Peace in the Empire, or a peaceable tranquillity in
his Country; Why did he unworthily suffer so many Princes, so many States of
his own party, partners in one and the same cause, and rebellion, to be
excluded out of the Amnestia? If he had a purpose to restore the Majesty, and
Dignity of the sacred Empire, together with the Liberty of it to the ancient
splendour and glory: Why did he so shamefully reject so many Kingdoms and
Kings so valiantly defending the German Liberty, as well within the Empire as
without, from having their part in the common pacification, and send them away
out of the bounds of Germany like slaves or drudges, without any manner of
mention of the least honor at all? If by this sacred Transaction he
endeavored to bring this to pass, that Justice being restored to her
integrity, and made to flourish again throughout the Empire, all the States
and Citizens thereof might enjoy their equal right and common quiet. Why did
he leave the affairs of the Imperial Chamber and holy Consistory, from whence
all the troubles and dissentions have hitherto sprung, undecided, and to be
decided merely at the Emperors pleasure and determination? If he intended by
this Trans-action to redeem the Peace of Religion, the Liberty of teaching
the Confession of Auspurgh, throughout the Empire, and the salvation of so many
souls (as he pretends.) Why did he permit the free exexcise of their
Religion to be prohibited to so many thousands of men in Bohemia, Sylesia,
Austria, the Palatinate, and the Bishoprics of Halberstad and Auspurgh, so
many Ministers and Citizens being banished for their beliefes sake, to endure a
perpetual exile out of their native country? If his purpose were to establish
an honest, solemn, and public peace, and such a one as should be profitable
and honorable to himself, and all his confederates: Why did he begin with
ingratitude the worst of all vices, in turning his perjured Arms against his
allies, by whom he had been once and again delivered from certain
destruction and ruin long since sworn against him by the Austrians? The
monstrous ingratitude of the Saxon.
For with what title of right can so detestable a treachery, so horrible a
treason be excused? with what show of Justice can it be cloaked, in which
those same men, whom you called to your party for their safety, are delivered
over by you to them that are saved to be totally destroy: And those men of
whom you (though unworthy) obtained life and preservation, the same being most
unworthily proscribed, are by you robbed of their life and honor: and so you
make your friends most angry with you not only after, but even because of the
benefits received of them by you. Seneca de beneficiis. lib. 3. cap. 1.
He is commonly judged to be an unthankefull man, who either denies himself
to have received a benefit, or having received one, concealeth it; he is more
unthankful, that requites it not; but he is most unthankefull of all, that
has forgotten it: For the former although they repay not, yet they remain
debtors, and are often brought in time to requite a favor received: This
latter can never be made thankful, who refuses to be a debtor for, much
more to requite that he has received: But these things, as they are effects
of an ancienter crime, so are they of less note and infamy: A new kind of
ingratitude here discovers it self, an abomination to God, an amazement to
posterity, and a thing to be owned by Adrastia her self, which does not only
not acknowledge, not requite, not thankefully esteem a benefit received, but
for good deeds return mischiefs, for good deserts Injuries, and for favor
destruction. The most renowned King of the Swedes, Goths and Vandals, ever of
a most venerable and triumphant memory, did revenge private Injuries by a
peculiar War against the Austrians: The Elector of Saxony, then the
encourager and leader of the Protestants, now the forsaker and betrayer of
them, though he feared the common Enemy, yet he refused a mutual joining in
arms, and by his unhappy delaying of time suffered Magdeburgh to be destroyed.

Soon after that, Austrians, when as being in a manner shut up in Dresden he
saw himself far too weak for his Enemies, being then made more wary by his
own danger, then by another man's; Upon a public Trans-action made at Torgaw
the first of September 1631. The Transaction of Torgaw. 1. September. 1631.
he called for aid from the most renowned King of Sweden, he entered with him
into a society of arms and Counsels, he delivered up to the Swedes the
passages and forts which were upon the river of Elbe, he offered pay,
ammunition, and provision of corn necessary for his Soldiers, making an
Inviolable promise and oath, that he never would accept any peace without
their consent. And so by this Conjunction of arms being delivered from the
present danger of death, by the Valor of the Swedes (for his own forces did
now begin to gasp) he obtained that most famous Victory of Lipsich and the
preservation of his rights and territories, The battle of Lipsich. 7.
September. 1635.
and forthwith to show his due thankfulness, he appointed public
supplications to be made for the preservation of the King, who was now become a
triumpher over his Enemies, a defender of his own and a recoverer of the
Germane liberty; he ordained the seventh day of September, being as it were,
consecrated to the memory of that Victory, to be solemnly observed in all
Churches of the professors of the Gospel; and he did celebrate the Protestants
day of deliverance, gotten by the Swedes in Books published through the whole
Empire. Shortly after, as the spirits of those that are most fierce in
slaughters are many times tender; Mercur. Gallobelg. tom. 18. lib. 4. p. 32.
when the Marquess of Caderet the King of Spaines Ambassador under a pretense
of an ancient amity between the Houses of Austria and Saxony, endeavored to
draw away the Saxons from the Swedes, he answered his Agents nobly and
courageously, That he could not recover the desperate condition of Germany, nor
save his Country being now in a languishing distraction by any particular
accords; that diverse examples have heretofore shown, that such accords would
not effect an universal Peace in Germany but rather work greater mischiefs;
Neither if he should make any such, that any color of excuse could be left
him before the King of Sweden and the Protestant States: But after that
glorious King did at the battle of Lutzen even by his very death triumph over
his Enemies, The battle of Lutzen. 11. November. 1632. The skirmish at
Nordlingen. 27. August. 1634.
and that at the skirmish of Nordlingen the affairs of the Swedes did seem by
little and little to decline. The Duke of Saxony, who before had stirred them
all up to arms and rebellion (as he now called it) began to revolt from his
Confederates; and shortly after by secret messages, and after that by public
trans-actions to make an accord with the Common Enemy; and to purchase his
own establishment with the ruin of his allies, and his domestical peace with
making War upon strangers. So being circumscribed within the transaction of
Prague, The Transaction of Prague published the 30. of May. 1635.
he denounced hostile arms against them by whom he had twice or thrice been
delivered from present destruction, and who by the death of their own King had
preserved his life, and by the effusion of their own, saved the shedding of
the Saxons blood. This great office of exceeding favor was utterly lost upon
them, being bestowed upon the most unthankful of mortal men, who esteemed it
as the highest merit to deserve worst of those that had deserved best of them.
All good offices came to be interpreted as so many wicked acts, all loving and
friendly deeds as so many crimes, and the blood of them was not spared for whom
blood was to be shed. Good turns are requited with sword and haltars; it is
the honor and Dignity of the Austrian Commissaries to fly at the throat of
their defendors, and to set their feet upon the necks of those they have
conquered. The armies sent from the Protestants are turned against them, and
the Saxon Generals Exhortation is this: The very words (within a very little)
of that sanguinary proscription, published by the Duke of of Saxony against the
Sweds, in the Camp of Schuskenburgh. 19. October. 1635.
Fight against your brethren, against your Allies, against the Lutherans,
against those that are governed by the same law, and Professors of the same
Religion with you. Set upon the Churches, the Altars, and the dwelling houses
of your friends with force of arms: Imbrue your selves in the blood of your
Kinsfolks and take away by violence the benefit of their native Country from
those that be but half right, suck and spoil them with your troops. Let
them, who brought life and safety to us, be like banished men excluded from
the use of fire and water: Let them, who purchased our Liberty with their
blood, be banished and scattered far and wide out of the Empire, as sworn
Enemies to peace, and disturbers of the public tranquillity.

Whosoever shall relieve his friend, his patron, his defender with bread or
water, let him be proceeded against as guilty of treason. Whosoever shall kill,
betray, or corrupt his protector or preserver, let him receive impunitie, money
and a garland: (only not such a one as was give to him that saved a Citizen:)
Let Liberty be no more mentioned amongst military banners, and let that
people the conqueror and preserver of nations, confine it self within the snow
and ye of their own Ocean: and there their Wars being laid aside and put
far enough from them, and all fear and terror of them being repressed; let
them live in awe and horror of our Eagles. These are the requitalls of those
savers and preservers; this is the reward of those defenders: these are the
thanks and the bounties, whereby a vast benefit is recompensed with more vast
Injuries.

CHAP. III. The third Nullity of the part of the Protestants. First, because
they made their War against the Emperor being stirred up to it by the Saxon.
NOw if these Treaties of the Saxon against the Swedes can by no title or
color of right be defended, as himself lately confessed: much less can his
negotiations entered into with the Austrians against the Protestants, carry any
show of excuse at all. For what did he? When as the Emperor Ferdinand II. had
published that fatal Edict of the 16. of March 1629. touching the restitution
of the possessions belonging to the Church, and bitterly execute it against so
many supplications, appeals and protestations of the States: The Duke of
Saxony (as chief of the Protestants) summoned all the States, The Diet of
Lipsich ended in March. 1623.
addicted to the Lutheran faith, to the Diet of Lipsich: and declared unto them
how the liberty of Germany was oppressed, and the Princes of the Empire robbed
of their rights and dignities, and incited them to the gathering up of
Soldiers through all precincts, and to the arming of the Country people.
Shortly after, as one that would by his own Example lead the way to the rest;
he levied an army of 20000. men: and did in the name of himself and of the
Protestants make known to the Emperor, that unless the grievances, exactions
and oppressions laid upon the people by his Commissaries and the Soldiers,
were forthwith taken away, he and his Allies would with armed power resist and
repel such heinous and continual injuries. So the Protestants being compelled
to rebellion, when Tilly did invade his territories with hostile cruelties, he
took up arms against the Emperor and his Leaguers: and by the valor of the
Swedes he overthrew the army of them both, with a glorious Victory at Lipsich.
And presently upon, Bohemia, the greater part of Silesia, and all Lusatia.

But he did also with persuasions and threatenings, 5. April. 1634.
involve in the public trouble the States of Silesia, who had hitherto been
of neither side. In the months of February and July. 1633.
And in the Convention of Hailbrun and Frankford, exhorted all the Protestants
to a firm concord and continuance of a War of Allies and Confederates. Yet
nevertheless after that by the overthrow at Nordlingen, the forces of the
Protestants being by little and little enfeebled, and those of the Austrians by
degrees increased, Amnestia. And so, to the end, that he might free himself
from uncertain dangers, he involved his confederates in a certain
destruction; and that he might turn away from himself, the punishment of
rebellion and treason; he delivered up his friends and Allies to be punished
at the pleasure of their enemies. With a treachery so much the more odious, in
that he turned his hostile arms against those whom he had not only incited,
but in a manner compelled to take arms against his Enemies. Dat veniam corvis
vexat censura Columbas.
Therefore by what Justice can a common crime be pardoned to the authors, that
it may be punished in the abbettors? By what equity is a public rebellion
commended in the kindlers of it, that it may be punished in the furtherers? Why
are not all the Protestants being partners in one and the same mischief;
recompensed with the same rewards, or chastised with the same punishments. Why
does the same crime advance some unto new honors and Dignities, and strip
others out of the dignities of their Ancestors, and the habitations of of their
Predecessors? Why is the head of treason adorned not with Laurel wreathes
only, but with Elegies or testimonialls of honor? and the members which have
unhappily joined themselves to him, boasting himself both in the Justness of
their cause and strength of arms, cut off from the body as rotten limbs? Let
such changeable and fickle friends take heed, least shortly in their turn they
have experience in themselves of the same punishments which they have approoved
in their Confederates: and least they in succeeding times do to their own
damage, pay dearly for those things which they suffer to be punished as
crimes, in their Confederates.

2. Because they are not forced to a peace, but to a new War.
For it does not necessarily follow, that if equal pardon, and common liberty
do seem to have been granted to some of the Protestants, by the Transaction
of Prague; they do presently enjoy a comfortable peace, and a full
tranquillity and quiet of their territories. Nay rather these enticements of
Peace, are incitements to a more cruel War: that pleasing name of pardon, is
an oath to engage Soldiers, neither can any man make use of this pacification,
but he must at the same same instant lead on bloody arms: not against
strangers alone, but against his own Allies and Patrones. To the end that
War may be rooted out of the Country, the Soldiers are entered into their
pay, under new laws: To the end that Peace may be restored to the Empire a
most bloody War is denounced against many States of the Empire; which made
the condition of all the Princes, so much the Worse, that they do not as free
States and Commonwealths, make a War upon the common Enemies, at their own
will and pleasure as heretofore they have done, on the behalf of the
Commonwealth for the Liberty of their own Country, and for their Religion
and private Estates; but are rather compelled as hired servants and slaves
destinated to slaughter, to bear arms against their Allies, fellow Citizens
and defenders; to waste their strength and substance with extraordinary
contributions, and to lend their own blood to the supporting of foreign
Soveraigntie; with most severe punishments adjudged against those, who have
been or should be found negligent in gathering in the Soldiers pay in
supplying them with provisions, or in polling and vexing the Subjects even
far beneath the value of their substance. So that the War was not
extinguished, nor the exaction taken away, nor depopulations prohibited; but on
the contrary, the War being before particular, is made general; the
Contributions which were extraordinary, are made ordinary; and the oppressions
of Cities and Countries are carried on under the title of military Justice: and
as all things decline toward the worst, are like to go on in a more rigorous
manner hereafter. Let us interrogate the actions of former times, and to the
end that we may know things to come, let us run over those that are past; and
(which is the most certain way of conjecture) let us call to mind things done,
and compare them with things to be done. For if the Emperor has in his own
Hereditarie Countries undone some Citizens with feeding 20. or 30. soldiers in
a day a piece: if he has taxed his own Subjects at a high daily rate toward
the payments of Soldiers; if he do continually lay new burdens upon his
Hungarians, besides the old pay, tributes, and taxations: What can we hope
will become of the Protestants, who having been lately enemies, and now
friends; rather out of necessity then any will of their own, have embraced a
Peace, safe for their adversaries, but disgraceful to themselves. Certainly
as long as provision of corn shall be hard to be gotten (and so it will be, as
long as an Army of 80. Regiments, such a one as all Europe never set forth
against the Turks, shall range up and down Germany) the highest and lowest
will be oppressed with excessive pilling and ransacking; they will be
compelled to harbor and feed at their own charge, Soldiers armed at their
charge; and both Horse-boyes and Horses belonging to their carriages, that were
bought with their money; and will be in the end, consumed with the rapines,
fire and sword, of those Soldiers upon whom they have bestowed infinite
favors. The free Cities of the Empire (as has been often done) will be
compelled to feed, cherish, and recover, the all-most famished armies, the
povertie-peined Regiments, and dispersed troops; and to do all that is to be
done, to relieve and piece them together, even to the new arming of them. And
to the end, that they may defend themselves from those most rigorous exactions,
poverty shall be desired by them as a happiness; and that they may avoid the
Executioner, they will desire to fall into the hands of him that is to beg or
compound for their confiscate estates. And in vain alleging their rights and
immunities before an Army that carries all before it; they shall hear that
most insolent speech of Pompey to them of Messina when they made the like
excuse: Plutarchus in Pompeio.
Will you not cease to tell us that are girt with swords, of your laws and
Privileges? For certainly whilst Mars is in his fury, laws are silent;
necessity is a perpetual patronage to an enormous power; neither are the
Soldiers pillages practiced under any other title, then that of common
indigency. Violence defends whatsoever it has compelled unto, and by a pretext
of necessity: of things unlawful and shameful, make things lawful and
honest. But that which is the most miserable thing of all, the unhappiest men
will not dare to complain of their calamities: miserable men will be forbidden
to show their condition; the oppressed will be compelled to feign themselves
happy: and when as in the most secret part of their house they shall by
stealing a tear, disclose their grief to their wives and children, they shall
appear in public with the countenance of another fortune. It will be a crime
so much as to make a show of sadness in their fashion or carriage, to give
ease to their hearts with justly deserved sighs, and to be more willing to
seem miserable, then to be so. It will be judged a great favor for a man to
grant life to them he has brought to poverty; to leave a son to him, whose
brother or wife he has slain; and when he has robbed men of half their
goods, to vouchsafe to restore him a third part: Neither will it be lawful
for them to lament the loss of the most part of their estate, for fear least
all they have should be taken away from them. For where shall poor souls sue
for Justice from their superiors? Where shall they complain of injuries,
offered them? By what law shall they recover their goods taken from them?

When as the whole Commonwealth being in disorder, the Emperor alone shall
compel the rest of the Princes, being daunted with fear, to be obedient to
his ambition; when as the Judgment of the Imperial Chamber being neglected,
all laws shall be at his pleasure alone; and finally, when the equity of the
States being overthrown, and the liberty of the Germans taken away; the power
of life and and death of all afflicted persons shall be only in his power. 3.
The Kingdom of Bohemia not Hereditary.
Let the sometime most flourishing Kingdom of Bohemia, and now the public
Theater of the miseries of the world, stand for an example; the State whereof,
when as amongst other rights they had preserved unto themselves the entire
liberty of Electing a King, and had maintained it both by word and deed,
against Ferdinand II. he being instantly grown the stronger in arms; of a
party became a judge, and decided that domestical controversy by his own
private arbitrament; and did put to most cruel tortures all those, that did
moove against him the controversy, touching the Hereditarie succession: And
soon after to the end, that he might establish that special act by a general
ordinance; he publicly declared, that the Kingdom was not won by valor;
but due to him by succession: When as nevertheless the Customs of all ages,
the rescripts of many Emperors and Popes; and the Coronations of all their
Kings, do manifestly prove, that the Bohemians have hitherto had free
suffrages in the Election of their Princes. Joan. Dubravius Episc. Olomucensis.
Wenceslaus Hagecius. Cosmas and Pulcava in Historiis Bohemia. 1197. 1212.
For, that we may seek no further, when as Primislaus in the year 1197. was
crowned King of Bohemia at Mentz, by Phillip the Emperor; the Emperor
Frederick, II. did by three several Letters Patents of the years 1212. 1216.
and 1231. confirm the Election; and did by a sacred rescript declare, by what
title, and in what manner the Kings of Bohemia should for the time to come
obtain the Kingdom, in these words: Declaring our pleasure to be, that
whosoever shall be chosen King by the Bohemians, do repair to us and our
Successors to receive his Royal ornaments after the due manner. And the
Emperor Charles the Fourth did so openly confirm this suffrage of free
Election in the Diet of the Empire held at Norimberg in the year 1356. Chap.
7. that all the secular Electorships should by lawful succession be devolved
to their Heirs; yet he did particularly except the Kingdom of Bohemia as an
Elective Electorship in these words: Saving ever the privileges, rights, and
customs of our Kingdom of Bohemia, upon an Election to be made of their King
in case of vacancie, by the Inhabitants of the Kingdom, who have the right of
choosing the King of Bohemia, according as it is contained in their privileges;
and according to their continually osberved Custom: which we do decree, that
it shall now, and in all future times, hold his undoubted force and vigor in
the whole tenor and form thereof. Neither ought the private declaration of the
same Emperor Charles the fourth, made in favor of the House of Lutzembourgh,
to be opposed against the public constitution of the Diet: both because it was
made without the consent of the States of Bohemia in the year 1348. Charles,
before he was Emperor, and when he had not so much respect to the
Commonwealth, as to his own domestical Interests: and also because all the
succeeding Kings of what Family soever, did by their reversall Letters, framed
after the usual Bohemian custom, solemnly profess, that they attained the
Regal Dignity by the Decree, and free Election of the States. Even Ferdinand
the First, although he were the son in law of Ladislaus his predecessor; and
brother in law to Lewis his predecessor; and grounded his title upon the
public disposition of his Father in law by will of the Hereditarie succession
of Anne his Wife, in the year 1510. he freely protested: That the Barons,
Nobles, Cities, and the whole Commonaltie of the Kingdom of Bohemia, did of
their free and good will, according to the liberties of the Kingdom choose him
King of Bohemia, not of any due, etc. And although he being afterward induced
to it by the Counsels of the Spaniards, in the year 1545. Prague, in the year
1549. Maximilian might be designed King by them. And Maximilian again in the
year 1575. Rodulph might only upon some certain conditions succeed him in
the Kingdom of Bohemia: And he himself by a Trans-action at Prague,
established in an Assembly there, in the year 1608. Matthias I. upon
condition, that the States of Bohemia, and of the united Provinces, should
approove this resignation: yea, even Ferdinand II. himself in the year 1617.
Matthias in an Assembly at Prague unto the Nobles of the Kingdom; and by their
consent crowned King of Bohemia; giving (as their manner is) his reversall
letters, did amply commend that free Election. What was it needful for him to
desire more, if the Kingdom were due unto him by right of birth? What reason
was there for him to gain those things by suite, and laboring for voices,
which the right of his own birth and title of lawful succession freely gave
him? Besides, why has there been none of those Kings children hitherto found,
who after the usual manner of Hereditarie States, would either call himself
Prince of Bohemia, or suffer himself to be so called by his father? Why did
so many foreign Princes at such times as the government of the Kingdom was
often vacant, send Ambassadors to the Bohemians, and by entreaty, laboring,
promising, and offering of gifts sue, that in that Election consideration might
be had of them and theirs? as it appears in histories that the Emperor
Albert did for his son Frederick, in the year 1307. the Emperor Henry VII.
for his brother Walram, in the year 1610. The Emperor Sigismund IV. for his
son in law Albert in the year 1437. to omit many others: Who, if they had
believed that the Kings of Bohemia were made by succession, would never in such
an abundance of bloud-Royall, in the sight of the whole World have lien in
wait for another man's inheritance against all right and justice. Why was the
Scepter by the most free suffrages of the States, often translated to other
families, although there were many Heirs left alive of the precedent? as was
done both in the year 1306. when Wenceslaus the Third, being slain; and Henry
Duke of Carinthia his son in law who was a Competitor, being put by, Rodulph
the First, son of Albert the Emperor, was chosen; although the Barons of
Suihoven and Hasemburgh, descended of the Heirs male in a right line, were
ready to have succeeded; and also in the year 1458. when Ladislaus being dead,
George Podicbradius having no manner of affinity with the House of Austria or
Luxemburgh, being freely chosen by the States was confined by the Bulls of Pope
Pius the Second, and by the rescripts of Sigismund the Emperor, Casimire King
of Poland, and William Prince of Saxony, whereof the one had married the
younger, and the other the elder sister of Ladislaus, did with most earnest
solicitation labor for the Kingdom. Why did the younger Princes often obtain
peaceable possession of the Kingdom, when the brethren and eldest sons were
put by it? as when in the year 1324. Henry Duke of Carinthia who had married
Anne the elder daughter of Wenceslaus VI. being rejected, John I. son to the
Emperor Henry the Seventh, founder of the family of Luxemburg, and husband to
Elizabeth the younger, was designed and accepted for King by the States. For by
the law of nature, and lawful custom of succession, males are preferred
before females, and the elder of the same sex, before the younger. But I
forbear to hold a candle to the Sun at noonday, since his Imperial
Majesty would have this cause, to be decided not by reasons, but by arms; and
does found his principal title to the Hereditary possession of the Kingdom,
Ius hereditarium in regno Bohemiae Ferdinandi II. editum Viennae. 1620 in 4.
rather upon the recovery or conquest thereof, then upon their acceptance;
having in the beginning of the book that is published touching his Hereditarie
right to the Kingdom of Bohemia, clearly professed. That although his
Hereditarie right were doubtful, and the Bohemians have hitherto had some
right of free Election; yet now, since the whole Kingdom is come to him by
force of arms, and has received him for their lawful Heir all of due, not
at their pleasure; it is in vain to hold any further dispute touching the
right of Election; since the Kingdom it self being reduced under his power,
did now acknowledge the hereditary right of the House of Austria thereunto. 4.
Innocent Silesia is stripped of her rights.
I come now to Silesia, and the united Provinces of Bohemia: who, where as
heretofore, for the defense of their rights and liberties, they did unite
themselves to that Kingdom; are at this day by this trans-action of Prague;
not only deprived of all rights and immunities, but also by Hereditary right,
made subject to a foreign power. The unjustnesse of which Article, that it may
be prooved from the very original of the matter it self; it is to be
considered that the Province of Silesia was anciently subject unto Poland,
Ioach. Cureus in Annal. Silesiae. editis. Wittebergae. 1571.
and divided by diverse Dutchies amongst the Princes of the Sarmatian blood:
Afterward in succeeding times they disdained the pride of the Sarmatians,
after experience had of the faithful and friendly offices of the Bohemians in
many of their affairs, of their own free will and voluntary inclination,
rejecting the Imperious command of the Polonians, in the year 1331. John I.
King of Bohemia: and for this cause, Silesia being assaulted by the Polonians
with a most grievous war, Bohemians, did deliver it self up wholly into the
patronage and protection of the Kings of Bohemia, upon this covenant and
condition; that all their rights, liberties, and privileges, should be
preserved safe and entire. Whereof amongst others, one notable testimony has
remained until our times, that the States of that Province do not swear
alleagiance unto the King elected, until till he have bound himself unto
them by giving a caution for the ratifying, and maintaining of their lands,
rights, and honors; and by the confirmation of them by the signature of his
Reversall letters, and by a solemn oath. And according to this agreement, the
Emperor Charles IV. by a special Charter given at Prague, the seventh of the
Ides of October, Moravia and Lusatia, Both these are extant in the
Constitutions of Goldastus, Tom. 4. p. 345. 1356.
unto the Scepter of Bohemia: which Incorporation the Princes of the Empire did
afterward approove, at the Diet held at Norimburgh in the year 1356. and did
also confirm it by the Rescript or Declaration of Gerlac Archbishop of Mentz,
and Lord High Chancellor of the sacred Roman Empire. And in pursuance of this
right, the Silesians have ever so lived under the King of Bohemia, that they
did not only give their free voice at their Election; but also at their
Coronation obtained most ample Reversall letters; which it appears that even
the Austrian Kings themselves did most freely grant; namely, Ferdinand I. the
fourteenth of January in the year 1527. Maximilian II. in the year 1557.
Rodulph II. in the years 1577. and 1609. and even Ferdinand II. in the year
1617. Nay further, Bohemia, the Silesians assisted the Bohemians their
Confederates, and they were over thrown in the battle of Prague; yet the
Silesians would not lay down their arms until Ferdidinand the Second at a
solemn Transaction made at Preslaw the one and twentieth of April, in the
year 1621. Palatine Frederick, he would preserve all their rights and
privileges unviolated; which promise being confirmed by oath, and a sacred
Charter; the Duke of Saxony being then the Emperors Commissary, and Mediator
for the States, did undertake by caution given, by himself to see observed.

And although the States of Silesia did forthwith abandon the Prince Palatines
Party; yet nevertheless, the Emperor in the years 1628. Saxony conniving
thereunto. And the Duke of Saxony himself, when as being provoked thereunto by
the Emperors Edict, and unjust dealing; he had stirred up generally all the
arms of the Protestants throughout the Empire; Bohemia; did stir up the
Princes and States of Silesia, (which till then had been of neither side) not
only by letters signed with his own hand the fifth of April 1634. Arnheim
with a huge Army, compelled the Dukes and Cities which till then stood
doubtful; partly by threatenings, and partly by open force unto rebellion, and
put Saxon Garrisons into the chief Cities and Fortresses. Silesia (who relying
upon his authority, and assurance, and justice of the Common cause, did not at
the first take arms, but joined their arms to the Saxons) shamefully to be
excluded out of the Amnestia; being innocent, and deserving no ill, and
delivered them over to be punished at the Emperors absolute will and pleasure;
and did by his answer given the fifteenth day of June, to beg his pardon. And
so having deserved singular well of Silesia, he expiated the crime of his own
rebellion, with the punishment of his innocent friends: and not content to have
wasted the most noble Province of Germany with War and rapines; he exposed
the innocent Inhabitants, and such as had not been offenders, but by his
instigation, to the pleasure of their Enemies. And for a reward of this his
notable service done to the Empire, or rather of his egregious treachery, he
has upper and nether Lusatia bestowed upon him; Bohemia, the Emperor had
engaged unto him by way of morgage, for the charge of the Bohemian war. In
the collation of which Province, the unjustice of both seems equal; as well
of the Emperor in being profuse of another man's estate; as of the Saxon in
making an unlawful purchase. For to repeat shortly the original proceedings
touching this Province also; when as Lusatia in the year 1075. Henry the
Fourth, upon Vratislaus the first King of the Bohemians, together with the
Crown, for a reward of his valor, was shortly after assigned by Wenceslaus
with the one eye, in the year 1191. Otto of Brandenburgh, as a dowry with his
Daughter Beatrice: After the death of the Marquess Walderam (who died without
issue) in the year 1312. John the First, King of Bohemia, in the year 1319.
Lewis the Fourth, in the year 1328. Charles the Fourth, did afterward by a
public Edict confirmed in the Diet of Norimbergh, in the year 1356. Bohemia;
could never be transferred to a foreign government, without the assent of the
States themselves. Therefore Wenceslaus the Eighth, Sigismund the Emperor, in
the year 1414. being entreated thereunto by the four States of the Province;
did by special privileges and Cautions for ever provide, that it should never
after by any title, be alienated from the Kingdom of Bohemia. Which right and
privilege the Inhabitants themselves have been so careful to maintain; that
when as King Laudislaus Nephew to Sigismund, had sold the same for a valuable
price to Ferdinand the Second, Elector of Brandenburgh: when he was dead,
George his successor being moved with the money and suite of the Subjects; did
in the year 1470. Ferdinand the Second, Bohemia, together with their rights:
when he had cut the sinews of the body, he tore in pieces the feeble
members, he purchased the oppression of the Laws and Immunities of the whole
Kingdom; by the dissipation of the Provinces anciently united to it. And as
one not so much liberal of another man's estate, as prodigal of that which was
none of his own; he sold a portion of the Elective Kingdom, that he might
make the whole, Hereditary to him and his.

But to come to that which is the chief point of the whole business. 6. The
Electorall dignity unjustly conferred upon the Bavarian.
At this conspiracy of Prague, the chief of the secular Elector-Princes; and
the Prime member of the Empire next unto the Emperor; being not so much as
called: unheard, unconvicted, is stripped out of his Hereditary rights; and his
Territories and Dignities are distributed to the Bavarians and Spaniard, for
the service they had done to the Emperor against him; and that expressly
contrary to the fundamental laws of the golden Bull Chap. 3. and against the
Emperors own Capitulation, in the 36. Article, which ordaines, That the
principal member of the Empire, and the bases and pillars thereof, the
Electors; and especially the seculars, should remain unshaken. Neither is
there any other color given for that, unheard of proscription; then the
unhappiness of the Bohemian War: In which, when the Prince Elector
Frederick the Fifth, had engaged himself as in a particular quarrel, betwixt
the States of Bohemia, and their King Ferdinand the Second. Ferdinand in the
mean time, his good fortune favoring him, being advanced to the Empire; out
of a private cause, devised a public crime; and so far traduced all the
actions of the Prince Palatine, undertaken against him as King of Bohemia; as
to bring them within compass of treason against his Imperial Majesty; when
as he had committed no offense at all, neither against the Empire, nor
Emperor: nay, on the contrary in the Assembly of Frankford, Ferdinand the
Second with his voice; and did desire that the Controversy, touching the
Scepter of Bohemia, might be decided by an ordinary trial, all hostility laid
aside. Nevertheless, Ferdinand being grown the stronger not in right, but in
power; and having overthrown the Bohemians at the White Hill, commonly called
Weissemberge: did not only proscribe the Prince Palatine unheard, and his
cause never understood: but also having divided the Palatinate betwixt the
Bavarians and Spaniards; did upon his own private pleasure, the States of the
Empire being never consulted with; grant unto Maximilian Duke of Bavaria, the
Electorall Dignity, which he had promised unto him, upon a league made
betwixt them at Munchen, long before the Bohemian troubles: and only through
private and domestical hatred, 1619. Henricus Stero Altahensis in Annalibus,
A. 300. Aventinus lib. 7. Annal. Boior. p. 587.
deprived him of all his rights and Territories; unto whom of ancient right it
belonged to take cognizance of causes moved to the King or Emperor of the
Romans. As if the Austrian Emperor could by any right transfer the most
noble Fees and Seignories of the Empire, according to his own private fancy;
and bestow them upon such as have deserved well of the House of Austria,
merely at his own pleasure: who, as it appears by the 28. Article of the
golden Bull, cannot dispose so much as of a County, or any other estate or
fortune being devolved to the Empire, without the consent of the States of the
Empire. The Electorships, Dutchies, and Counties, be Fees of the Empire, not of
the Emperor; but as he is the Head, Minister, and Vicar of the Empire: and
therefore he does not receive the Oath of Alleagiance of the Princes in the
name of himself, but of the Empire. And at the breaking up of the Diet of
Auspurgh, in the year 1555. Henry the Second, King of France, in the year
1551. Charles the Fifth, his cause not being heard, and his right neglected;
had bestowed upon his son Philip the Duchy of Milan and Vicarage of Siena,
without their consent, or approbation. And the Emperor Rodulph II. in the
year 1598. Spanish Admiral demanding the Vicountie of Besanzon in the name of
the King his Master, That the Fees of the Empire could be taken away from no
man, nor be transferred upon any other, without the consent of the Electors and
States. Certainly, according to the ancient custom of the feudall laws, the
Controversies concerning Fees ought to be determined by the Judgment of the
Peers. And if a question do arise between the Lord and his Vassals
concerning any matter of Fee, it must be decided by the Peers of the Court,
lib. 1. de feud. tit. x. sec. 1. And they ought to determine Controversies
touching benefices, who do hold benefices of the same Lord, lib. 1. tit. 26.
And although the Emperor did desire to have such an apparent injury approoved
by the States of the Empire, Ratisbone, yet the Electors of Saxony and
Brandenburgh, and many other Princes of the Empire did by their Ambassadors
make protestation, and allege; That the Translation of the Electorall
dignity upon the Duke of Bavaria, was contrary to the Constitutions of the
golden Bull, to the fundamental laws of the Empire, to the declaration of the
Emperor Sigismund the Fourth, to the customs of feudall right; and in a word,
to the accords and covenants agreed upon betwixt the Houses of the Prince
Palatine, and Bavaria, long since established, by the providence of their
forefathers; and strengthened with the proscription of almost 300. years: That
the Prince Palatine was condemned, being never summoned, never heard, and his
cause never opened: When as he nevertheless was not the author of the
Bohemian troubles; and many that were partners in the same crime, obtained
pardon of the Emperor; and that therefore they could not consent to such a
precipitate proscription, and stripping him out of his Estate. And therefore
also, when as the Emperor rejecting all these exceptions, oppositions, and
protestations of the States, bestowed the Fee of the Electorate upon the Duke
of Bavaria: the Ambassadors of Saxony and Brandenburgh, refused to be present
at the ceremonies of his Investure; least by their presence they should seem
to have approoved so enormous an act of injustice. And a little after, the same
Electors did by their letters sent to the Emperor from Amburgh; complain of
the violation of the right of their College of Electors; and by a public
instrument under their own hands, did confirm and make good all that had
been said and done by their Ambassadors. And although the year following, the
Duke of Saxony being drawn on by the cunning of Ludovike Landgrave of
Darmstadt, Schleufingen receive the Duke of Bavaria, into the Septemvirall
College for a time; persuading himself, that that College being made
complete, an universal Peace would be established in the Empire. Yet that
admission being made upon certain conditions; he protested, he intended not
that any thing done should prejudice the rights of the House of the Prince
Palatine, nor the protestations exhibited by his Ambassadors at Ratisbone:
Which afterward both in the Convention at Mulhausen, Ratisbone; and in
several Declarations and resolutions, sent unto diverse Princes of Europe; and
even in that league made at Torgaw, in the year 1631. Sweden and Elector of
Brandenburgh; he did ever constantly acknowledge and affirm: having protested
in all places, and before all men; that no Peace was ever to be hoped for in
the Empire, without restitution of the House of the Prince Palatine. Therefore
with what conscience dares he at this day publish that Trans-action to have
been just, sacred, and most profitable to the Empire: Whereby, it is not only
certain, that the equality of voices being taken away amongst the seven
Electors, the Protestants will ever go down the wind; but also, so long as
there shall be one drop remaining of the Palatine blood, from which this
dignity if not regal; yet certainly next to it, is so violently taken away
against all right and Justice; it is manifest, that Germany will be
perpetually infested, with new troubles. For be it admitted, not granted, that
the Prince Palatine has by such heinous crimes deserved proscription, and
stripping out of his Patrimony: By what law or right, are his children,
brother, and all his Kinsfolks, as innocent and giltlesse as himself, though
differing in cause, involved nevertheless in the same punishment: When as both
his sons before their Fathers offense had the Electorall dignity, belonging
to them by right of succession; and also by the Common law of Fees it is
manifest, That the offense of one of the Heirs of the Fee does not prejudice
the rest, lib. 2. de feud. t. 78. and yet the act of a brother does not hurt
his brother in his Hereditary Fee. tit. 93. Yea more, if a vassal shall commit
so enormous a crime, that he or those that descend of him, ought to be deprived
of his inheritance; yet his kinsfolks in the fourth degree are to be restored
to the possession thereof, lib. 2. tit. 26. And therefore very wisely the Duke
of Neuburgh being nearer of kin to the Princes Palatine, Bavarians, obtained
of the Emperor reversall letters, whereby provision was made, that this
Trans-action of Electorall Dignity upon the Bavarian should at no time, nor in
any sort prejudice the right of himself, or of his, founded upon a nearer
degree of blood.

Neither does this appear to be a less argument of so barbarous an injury,
that the whole Electorate being transferred upon the Bavarian; yet the
Territories are divided amongst diverse Princes; and the upper Palatinate is
assigned to the Bavarian, and the lower to the Spaniard, for the charge and
expense of the German War. Whereas by the Constitution of the golden Bull,
Chap. 25. (the title whereof is, Electors) Those Illustrious and magnificent
Principalities; that is to say, the Kingdom of Bohemia, the County Palatine of
the Rheine, the Duchy of Saxony, and Marquisat of Brandenburgh, and their
Lands, Territories, and all other things belonging to them, cannot, nor ought
upon any condition whatsoever, be cut in pieces, divided, or dismembered.

7. The Bavarians had anciently no right to the Electorship.
The Bavarians perceiving the cause of translation to be entangled with these
difficulties; and having many ages since sought for some pretext for their
ambition, do devise most ancient titles for their new usurpation; and do
affirm that the Electorall dignity was not so much conferred upon them by
Ferdinand the Second, Gewoldus de S. R. Imperii Septemuiratis c. x. Fabius
Hercynianus Cancellariae Anhaltinae. P. 11. p. 83. 1215.
of his grace and favor to them, as recovered for their due by force of arms;
and if it being most unjustly taken away from the House of Bavaria by Charles
IV, in the year 1354. was in respect of affinity translated to the Family of
the Prince Palatine of Rhyne: And that therefore the Princes Palatine unjustly;
but the Bavarians most justly did complain of the alienation of the Electorall
right; and that they may therefore lawfully commence their suite for the
recovery of the profits thereof, which have been enjoyed ever since Charles
the Fourths time. Therefore to the end, that the impudence of this Imposture
may be made manifest to all men; it will be necessary to open the state of the
whole matter from the beginning. Ever since the first institution of the
Electors; the right of electing the Emperor has been in the power of the
Counts Palatine, which were also Dukes of Bavaria, as is manifest by the
ancient Histories of those times. And in the year 1215. Otho Duke of Bavaria,
with Agnes, daughter of Henry the last Count Palatine; the Palatinate of Rhine
was united with the Dukedom of Bavaria, and Otho himself the first of the
Family of the Bavarians, in the right devolved unto him by his wife, became
Elector: So the dignity united with the Seignorie, Bavaria until the year
1295. At which time Lodovike the Third being dead, his sons divided his
inheritance in this manner: that Rodulph his eldest should hold the Palatinate,
with the right of Electorall power; and Lodovike the younger, the upper
Bavaria; and after his brothers death, he should hold the power of Election
for term of his life; as appears by the Trans-action made betwixt them at
Munchen, 1313. Extat apud Gewoldum de S.R. Imp. Septemviratu. p. 224. 1314.
in the year 1313. But Lodovicke the younger, following the fortune of the
Wars; whilst he bore arms against the Austrians, in the year 1314. was
declared Emperor by the Major part of the Electors; his brother Rodulph and
the Electors of Saxony and Collen, bestowing their voices upon Frederick III.
of the House of Austria. Whereupon grew a civil War in Germany; Lodovike of
Bavaria being the stronger in arms, stripped his Brother Rodulph, taking part
with his enemies, out of all his Territories; and having proscribed him, forced
him with his children to retire into England; where, a little while after,
Frederick of Austria being taken prisoner and deposed: Lodovike the Fourth,
moved with commiseration of his Brothers children, did by the Trans-action of
Norimburgh, Rodulph the Second, and Rupert, Extat imperfecta apud Gewoldum. p.
218.
sons of his Brother Rodulph the First, their Hereditary Seignories and
dignities, upon this condition; that they yielding up the prerogative of the
Electorall right, should divide the Septemvirall Suffrage, with his sons
Lodovik and Stephan; and so both of them in their turns should Elect the King
of the Romans; which Transaction, though extorted from him by force, he did
yet cause to be published in the Diet at Franckford, Emperor Lodovike the
Fourth, being excommunicate and dead; when Charles the Fourth, King of Bohemia,
son in law to Rodulph the First; Palatine Princes, came to sway the Empire;
Rodulph the Second, and Rupert the Palatine Princes; complained to the Emperor
their Kinsman by marriage, of violence and injury offered them; and
challenging the entire right of Election to belong unto them, as being the
eldest sons; did sue to have the Trans-action of Norimburgh, touching the
alternative Election betwixt the House of the Palatines and Bavaria; abrogated,
as being most unjust, and extorted from them by force. So Charles the Fourth
favoring the most just cause, caused the business to be brought into debate;
and having obtained the consent of all the Electors and States, Rupert I. the
Palatine Prince (for his elder Brother Rodulph a little before, Lodovike and
Stephan Dukes of Bavaria, published an ordinance touching the right and
succession of the Counts Palatine, in the voice and election of the Roman
Emperor; and caused it to be sent unto all the Electors. Yea, and about two
years after, in the year 1356. in a Diet held at Norimbergh, 1356. Extat
utrumque Mandatum and Diploma apud Goldastum. Tom. 4. Constit. Imper. p. 345
caused a public Charter, confirming the same, to be approoved and signed by
all the Electors. Which he the more easily effected; because in the same Diet
he had conferred upon Lodovike the Roman, son to Lodovike the Fourth
Emperor; the Marquisate and Electorate of Brandenburgh: as a recompense for
the right of the Palatine Electorate.

Whereby it appears, that it is a most false calumny of them that affirm
that the Counts Palatine did by the connivence of Charles the Fourth, take away
from the Bavarian, the ancient right of voice and Electorall dignity. When as
on the contrary, it is manifest out of authentike records, and all the
Histories of those times; that the Princes Palatine did in no sort invade any
right of another man's, and that was not due to themselves: but did recover
their Hereditarie rights which was extorted from them by Lodovike the Fourth,
by force and fraud; and did unite it for ever to the House of the Palatines of
Rhyne; by the consent of all the Electors and Princes of the Empire. And
consequently, that the Bavarians before their late intrusion, had never any
right at all to the Electorate: nor were ever like to have, otherwise then by a
violent detention. For, let both the translations be compared; that of Charles
the Fourth, upon the Prince Palatine Rupert: and of Ferdinand the Second, upon
Maximilian of Bavaria: and the Justice of the one, and the injustice of the
other will appear more clear then the noonday. In the one, Charles the
Fourth, did not so much out of grace bestow the Electorall Dignity upon Rupert
the Prince Palatine, as of due restore it being taken away from his Uncle by
force. In the other, Ferdinand the Second, granted the Dignity, being taken
away from the Prince Palatine Frederick the Fifth, without desert, unto the
Bavarian: who can pretend no right at all unto it. In the one, Charles the
Fourth having formerly obtained the consent of all the Electors, did in the
public Assembly of the Empire restore unto the Prince Palatine the Suffrage of
Election: even Lodovike the Roman, Marquess of Brandenburgh, assenting
thereunto. To whom it most properly belonged, to perpetuate so great an honor
to his Family. In the other, Ferdinand the Second, upon the league made at
Munchen; for sending of aid against the Bohemians, sold the Palatinate to the
Bavarian, before the Prince Palatine had set a foot in Bohemia: and against the
public exceptions, oppositions, and appeals of all the Protestants, thrust
Maximilian into it by force. Lastly, in the one, Lodovike surnamed the Roman,
son to the Emperor Lodovike the Fourth, having received the Electorate of
Brandenburgh, in the year 1352. Lodovike the first: did by a solemn
renunciation yield up the right of the Palatine Electorate, to his Cousin
Germane: In the other, the Elector Palatine did neither in his own name, nor
in the name of his Brother or Kinsfolks ever renounce his so lawful right:
but rather chose to undergo all extremities, and even a ten years banishment;
then he would suffer himself to be so unjustly deprived of so illustrious a
dignity. For, as for that which by the Trans-action of Prague, is offered to
the Princes Palatine; that if laying aside the right of the Electorate, they
will come like humble suppliants, and beg pardon of the Emperor: lands and
revenues, competent for their family and descent, should be assigned unto
them: it is much like to the pleasant devise of the Triumvirie in Rome, wherein
this favor was granted unto him, Dion Cassius Histor. lib. 47. p. 336
that should willingly yield up the possession of his whole estate; that he
might afterward be repossessed of a third part of it. And that was (says the
Historian) to receive just nothing at all; and besides, to loose all their
labor and travail. For they who were stripped by open violence of the whole
two parts of their estate, how should they receive a third part back again:
especially when their estates were sold to the soldiers at so cheap rates?
Besides, this Injury done to the Prince Palatine, threatens the like to the
rest of the Princes: and the exclusion of the chief of the Princes, draws
with it the ruin of the inferior States. For if the Austrians, being
conquerours, be not ashamed to deal so shamefully with the Head of the
Electors, what can we hope will become of the rest of the members of the
Empire: who neither in power, nor dignity, nor amity of strangers, are to be
compared with him? Certainly, whosoever of the Protestants shall apply
themselves to their party: they will according to the example of the Duke of
Saxony, be bereaved of their strength, their fortresses, and their own
troops: and being by that means made naked, feeble and disarmed; shall only
bear the empty name of the Austrian Commissaries. And whosoever shall refuse
presently to yield his neck to the yoke which heretofore the Germans have bin
unacquainted with; and shall not with closed eyes accept of any Articles
whatsoever: they shall forthwith, after the examples of the Dukes of
Wirtembergh, be proscribed as enemies of the Empire; and guilty of treason
against his Imperial Majesty, and be stripped of all their Patrimonies. The
Imperial Cities, which were anciently free after the example of Donawert,
Ratisbone, and Auspurgh, shall be delivered up to their Allies for the
expenses of the War: and under the name of being morgaged, shall be inslaved
in perpetual servitude to usurping Lords. But for Germany, enough; and perhaps
more then was fit, has been said of it. I would to God there had not been
more and more odious things done, then has been said: and that worse
mischiefs were not to be feared, then are to be related.

CHAP. IIII. The fourth Nullitie on the part of the Swedes.
IT remains, now, that we should in a few words declare the Injuries done to
Princes, and foreign Kings by this Conspiracy of Prague. And first of all;
it was no small thing strange, that our Triumvirs have so shamefully excluded
and rejected from the benefit of the Common Treaty, the Princes and States of
Germany: whose strengths and territories they had already swallowed in their
most greedy hopes. But this seems unto all men very absurd; that the same men
having neglected, and prostrated the right of Majesty; have remooved out of
the Council of public like pacification so many Kings and Kingdoms, having
no dependence upon the sacred Empire: whom it principally concerned that
tranquillity should be restored to Europe, and liberty to Germany; and have
as it were, with the power of a Dictator denounced a most deadly War against
all those, that should oppose their Triumvirate.

For, to say nothing of those renowned Princes; the King of Great Britain,
whose Sisters Children, after so many windy and dilatory promises; are so
cruelly kept out of their possessions, and Hereditary rights. The King of
Denmark; from whose son, without hearing or understanding his cause; the
Archbishopric of Bremen, with the Suffragane Bishoprics were taken away in
so judicial a manner. The united and Confederate States of the Low Countries
against whom, under the title of restoring the Germane liberty; arms joined
in conspiracy with the Spaniard, are taken up. That is against all manner of
reason, and deserves not so much as any show of excuse; that the King and
Kingdoms of France and Sweden, being engaged in Common arms, and united in a
joint War with the Chief of the Protestants; are so disgracefully proscribed
against the law of Nations: and are commanded like slaves and vassals, to obey
the Commands of the Spaniards: and if they do otherwise, they are not to be
rowted (forsooth) but to be swallowed up quite withan army of 80. Regiments:
As if they were not able to obtain their common peace, as a reward of their
own valor; but only as the gift of another power: or that they ought rather
to beg their public safety, as of the good will and pleasure of their
enemies; then by conquering Armies to wring it from them, being brought upon
their knees; or as if they were ignorant, that the friendships of enemies are
false hearted; and that peace voluntarily offered is more deceitful, then rest
purchased by strong hand. For, what can be more unjust, or more senseless;
then for foreign Kingdoms, over which, neither the Emperor, nor the Empire
have any command to accept at the pleasure of the Austrians, and Saxons, a
disgraceful, dishonorable, and uncomely Peace; and no less calamitous, 1.
Because the Swedes making War in their own name, ought to make an agreement
in their own right. 1626.
then ignominious to themselves, and their Allies. Especially, when as the most
renowned King of Sweden had in his own name denounced. War against the
Austrians, for particular injuries done to himself; and set it on foot, the
Saxon at the first laboring against it. For indeed, when as in the year
1626. that great Gustavus set forward with his Army in Prussia, against the
Polonians: the Austrians being never so much as provoked, sent forth the Duke
of Halsatia, with the Imperial forces and badges, against the Swedes. And in
the year 1629. Stralesand, contrary to their faith and promise given: they
shut up the commerce of the Baltike Sea: and cast the Dukes of Meckleburgh out
of their Hereditary Estates; being proscribed, and their cause never heard.
That glorious King being justly instigated by such notorious Injuries; did
endeavor to recover the safety of himself and his friends, by Arms; Germany;
did in his own name; and under his own conduct, make war upon the Emperor:
and intimated the causes of this revenge, being as necessary as lawful, unto
the College of Electors. But having over-runne many places with conquering
arms; he did in his own particular name, and in the right of his own
Majesty; make diverse accords with the Emperor, Electors, and Commanders of
his enemies Armies: and shortly after joining the Protestants to him, Leipsich:
he either made, or attempted to make public Confederacies. Not with the
Emperor and Leaguers alone; but also with the Principal States and Circles of
the Empire: the Saxon not only conniving thereunto; but also granting to that
most prudent King, full authority and power to make peace. Therefore with what
Justice can he at this day exclude the Swedes, from having their part in the
Common Treaty; who do still prosecute the same Injures: and those that be
more grievous ones then they, with a war no way mittigated; but rather more
incensed? With what conscience can he envy the according of a public Peace
to them, who have undertaken a War upon private and particular causes; and at
their own particular charge? Why does he forbid those to negotiate, for the
remedies of their mischiefs; whom it chiefly concerns to have those
mischiefs remooved? The quiet, peace and liberty of all are indivisible, as
their war and injuries were: neither can any better endeavor the reparation
of their lost tranquillity; then they that labor to purchase peace, with the
hazard of their own lives.

Now if this exclusion of the Swedes, 2. Because the Duke of Saxony in his own
private respect owes revenging imprecations to the Sweds.
do at the first sight appear to be unjust; it is made much more unjust, by
the person of the Saxon. For when the most renowned Gustavus did revenge his
private Injuries, by a particular War against the Emperor; the Duke of Saxony
having for another cause, stirred up the Protestants to a rebellion: he, and
his being besieged and lost, did according to the league made at Torgaw,
Swedes: and entered into a society of Arms and Counsels with them; and so
being delivered from the present danger of the particular cause of the Swedes,
he made the common cause of all the Protestants; and turned this private war
into a public defense. And though now as a perjured man, against his faith
given, and confirmed by his oath and signature; he does revolt from his
Confederates, and labor to purchase the amity of his Enemies, by a
Triumvirall conspiracy. Yet the Swedes will not therefore presently follow
that most wicked example, and renounce their right; and basely laying down
their Arms, desist from revenging their private Injuries. Which, as before
their unhappy Society entered with him, they had valiantly begun to do: so
after his infamous divorce from them, they will no less happily execute. For
having amongst them so many domestical examples of virtue, they will not be
imitaters of other Princes in frauds, and perjuries; but in valor and brave
actions: as certainly knowing, that hitherto, perfidious cruelty, cowardice,
and calamity, have been on the Enemies side: and on their side fidelity,
assistance of their Confederates, valor, and therefore also fortune. And as
becomes brave spirits, they had rather in a good cause die valiantly, then
fly cowardly. Therefore the Duke of Saxony, is so far from being able out of
his imaginary plenitude of power, as the Protestants Dictator; and Austrian
Commissarie, to command the Swedes to accept of a peace, whether they will or
not; or to make an accord with the Emperor in their name: that on the
contrary, although the Emperor would have granted all their petitions, and
righted all their Injuries: yet notwithstanding, they have reason, to set on
foot, a new and more heavy quarrel against the Saxon. And to bring against
him a charge of perfidiousnesse, perjurie, breach of covenant, forgetfulness
of good turns; and violation of the law of Nations. Let him therefore first in
his own name, make an accord with the Swedes, for the Injuries done by
himself: and afterward by the Emperors Commission, he shall decide the
Controversies of the Empire. Let the perfidious man purge himself; and let him
first excuse his own crimes, before he defend other men's.

3. Because the Swedes cannot basely forsake their leagues and their troops.

See the Acts and Treaties betwixt the Sweeds and Saxons, conceived in the
year 1635. n. 17. 19. and 28.


Neither is this of less importance to be considered; that the Swedes, after
they had once undertaken to defend the Cause of the Protestants, and the
Liberty of Germany; they made reciprocal leagues with many Princes and States
of the Empire, for the defense of the public Weal. As with them of
Stralesund, the fifteenth of July, 1628. With the Duke of Pomerane, the tenth
of July 1630. With the Elector of Brandenburgh, the first of September 1631.
With the four higher Circles, in the Assembly of Frankford, in the year 1633.
And with the States of the Lower Saxony, in the Convention at Halberstadt. And
so having called in most parts of Europe, to the defense of their liberty;
they gathered together most puissant Armies out of many Nations: and having by
their valor put their enemies to the sword; at their own great charge, and
greater toil; they took many Cities of Germany, and much Munition: and
defended them with the inestimable loss of their King. And therefore they
cannot with the safety of their honor and reputation, cowardly abandon places
valiantly gotten; unless they restore all things unto their entire condition:
nor frivolously disband an Army no less famous, then noble, without giving
them their means. For it would be wonderfully ridiculous, that they should
have gotten so many most strong Forts, with huge expenses and dangers: to this
end, that they should presently after restore them again at the pleasure of
their Enemies: and that they should have bound so many most choice, noble, and
brave men, with a Military Oath, to the end, that they might casheere them
again, when their bodies were maimed, their means spent, and their wounds yet
gaping, miserable, naked, and unarmed: and as banished men forbidden the use of
fire and water. This is the property of the Saxon, and his Confederates, to
value the bodies and souls of the soldiers at a farthing: to relieve his
starved Armies with the oppres^^on of the subjects; basely to abandon things
rashly gotten, to alter or change his friendships and hatreds, according to the
inconstancy of Fortune: and in a word, to interpret the Triumvirall
prescription, by the name of a general peace. The Swedes being as noble as
famous for their laurel wreathes, as for their traffic: do reverence valor
as well as Constancy; and as they are wise in a gown, so are they courageous
in a soldiers coat. When the loss or hazard of honor is in question, they
had rather have a bloody war, then a fruitless peace; and do rather choose
to redeem their Confederates by an honorable death, then to forsake them by
disgraceful flinching, and secret turning their backs. As people that have
well learned, that whatsoever does any where concern their friends, does also
concern themselves, and that a part of the common detriment reaches unto them
as particular persons. Wherefore they will never be induced by any reason or
force to be so unworthy; as by a base neglecting of the war, to delude their
Confederates; prostitute their friends; and rather to admit of peace upon what
conditions soever, then to treat for it. And rather with readiness to embrace
the friendship of their enemies, then to deserve it. Especially, since they do
assuredly know; that no length of time, no oblivion, shall ever wipe away the
sense of that danger, whereunto the House of Austria saw it self exposed by
the Swedish forces; and even brought as it were, to the last gasp. He does
not well know the condition of that nation, that does think that any such
thing, can fall from them. The nature of Spaniards is long to remember
offenses, but quickly to forget good turns. And howseover that Caesar of old
time would often say, that he could remember all things saving Injuries: the
disposition of this present Caesar is not so; who does not only never forgive
nor forget the injuries, which he imagines to be offered to himself and his
House: but also watching for a fit occasion for a whole age together, does
revenge it upon the innocent Children, and grandchildren. It can therefore by
no right or reason be required of the Swedes, that as persons content with the
suretiship and undertaking of the Saxon, who has often so perfidiously
deceiyed them; they should carry away their conquering armies out of the
Empire: that they should abandon a public war without good security of an
universal peace; and commit all the forces and fortunes of themselves and
their Allies, to the uncertain will and pleasure of most merciless enemies.
As if after their war so valiantly and so happily managed; they were to carry
away no other Trophyes* but the immortal hatred of the Austrians: no other
Triumphs, but the everlasting threats and heart-burnings of the Spaniards. But
I cease further to impair or blemish the most renowned acts of that Victorious
Nation, with my weak and poor lines. Which, as in time past, when the Roman
Empire was destroyed; it did restore the West part of the World to her
liberty: so at this day having her intentions bent upon the restitution of the
Germane safety; The defends her own cause better by arms then by pens; and
desires not so much excuses for her actions, as praises and acclamations.

CHAP. V. The fifth Nullitie on the part of the French.
I Come to the French, a people breathing liberty, by the very derivation of
their name. Who, when as by very good right, and with a most pious purpose,
they had engaged themselves in the common War: by the decree of the
Triumvirate of Prague, against all right, and contrary to all piety; were not
only rejected from the public pacification; but also proscribed as enemies
of the Empire; favorers of Heretics; instigators of Turks, and disturbers of
the Christian Common wealth. And under color of a War against Lorraine, are
commanded to be destroyed with the whole power of Germany joined together.
Indeed, 1. Because the most Christian King by the right of Protection has
preserved the Catholic Faith in the Empire. 1631.
when as in the year 1631. the most renowned King of the Swedes having
overthrown the Forces of the Austrians, and of the Leaguers; did run through
the Empire without resistance, (the Emperor being afraid of him; the Bavarian
flying; and the Spaniard not so much as whispering against him) and took
possession of the best Provinces and Cities of Germany: and by that means
brought the affairs of the Catholics into grievous straights* and to most
imminent destruction. The most Christian King being ever heretofore a subduer
of Heretics; and a defendor of the Catholics; fearing least by the progress
of this civil war, the cause of Religion might receive prejudice: did not
only by sending Ambassadors to that victorious King, obtain for all the
Catholics, which were brought under his command; a full liberty and exercise
of their Religion; but also offering to the rest the remedy of Neutralitie,
took into his Royal defense and protection, the Archbishopricke of Triers,
the Bishoprics of Spire and Basil: and very many other Dukes, Counts, and
Cities of Germany. And through his moderation no less pious then prudent, he
stopped the unavoydable ruin of the Catholics in the Empire; and kept off
imminent destruction from the Protestants. So the Religion of his Ancestors
being preserved, and established; he seeing Princes unjustly cast out by the
Austrians; Cities deprived of their liberties; and his neighbors either
oppressed, or ready to be oppressed with the Spanish yoke: joined his
Confederate arms with the Swede; restored the Princes to their Territories,
and the Territories to their Princes; Cities to their privileges; and the
Empire to his ancient rights and dignities: and delivered all his neighbors
and friends from the tyranny of the Spaniards. And yet notwithstanding for all
these his good merits toward Religion and the Christian Common wealth; he is
only not proscribed by the Austrians, but accused by them to be the kindler,
fomenter, and advancer of the whole Germane War: and is also with most false
calumnies exclaimed on; as if he had conspired with the Lutherans for the
extirpation of the Catholic truth. And even the Emperor himself unto whom
the zeal of Lewis the thirteenth, cannot be unknown, by so many wars as
have been made by him against Heretics; yet in his Declaration touching the
benefits and commodities of the Peace of Prague, set forth at Baden the 8th day
of June, 1635 he does plainly profess: That if happily any man shall conceive,
that in the Treaty of Prague sufficient provision is not made for the good of
the State, and of Religion; that the cause thereof is not to be imputed to him
and his Confederates; but to the most Christian King. Who though he be
commonly styled the eldest son of the Church; yet he was not only not
ashamed in the beginning of this War, to sue for the assistance of Heretics;
to call in the King of Sweden a stranger to aid him; to make a solemn League
with him; to feed and re-enforce both their strengths being joined together;
and of his own proper motion, without any cause, and contrary to his promise
given, to invade the Provinces of the Empire: but does still daily endeavor to
stir up the Princes and States against him, being pulled away from the
Emperor. Yea more, after that by the Victory of Nordingen, very many were
added to his party; he with arms in his hand, took possession of the Cities
which were brought under his Command: cast the garrisons of the Catholics out
of them; restored those of the Heretics; and as much as in him lies, does
endeavor to stop the progress of peace and Catholic Religion in the Empire.
Insomuch, that he took the boldness to promise the Duke of Saxony, if he
would range himself on his side; he would not only procure him the better
conditions of peace; but that he would labor with tooth and nail, that the
Heresy of the Lutherans, with the rest of the Sects might be publicly
established in the Kingdom of Bohemia, and the Provinces united to it. Good
God, what a thing is this? the most Christian King, who, when the rest turned
their backs, did by his intercession alone made to the Swedes, preserve the
Catholic faith in most of the Provinces of Germany: did he with the utmost of
his strength stop the progress and increase thereof! He that delivered diverse
Bishops out of the fires of their enemies; did he add flame to the War
against the Catholics! He that stripped the Heretics of France out of all
their strength, and laid them on their backs was it his care, to raise up the
Sectaries of Bohemia to their ancient power! These are frivolous devices of his
adversaries; who, when they cannot cloak their invasions by a title of civil
right, they betake themselves to the counterfeit vizard of oppressed Religion:
and as if the war were made in Germany for the destruction of Religion, not
of Tyranny: they traduce all those that stand for the liberty of the Empire,
as Heretics; or at the least, favorers of Heretics.

2. Because the Protection of the Princes, and States of the Empire, cannot be
charged to be the French Kings fault.
The true and principal cause of this quarrel and indignation is, that the
most Christian King when things were, in regard of any other help, in a
desperate condition; he received the Archbishop of Triers, being oppressed by
the Spaniards, into his patronage and protection: but when he had cast the
Spaniards out of the City and Territory of Triers, he restored the Prince
freely to his rights and dignity. Swedes: he delivered diverse other States of
the Empire; as namely, the Palatines, the Alsatians, and the Westrasians, from
the pillings and pollings of the Austrians, and the Lorraines. That he did by
no new nor unheard of example; but such a one as was laid down before him, and
delivered to him from his Ancestors; set limits to the ambition of his enemies,
and stoutly defended the Germane liberty. The protection of people in
distress; the raising up of the afflicted; and the restoring of them that are
cast out; is natural to Kings: and does not belong unto them so much by the
right of their Scepter, as by the law of humanity. It is the duty of a good
Magistrate to govern his subjects, and to protect his Allies: neither is there
any greater instrument or testimony of good government; then when neighbors
are preserved from the hands of their enemies. And if by common right it be a
fit thing for all Kings to succor those that be afflicted; yet none did ever
more justly, and happily practice it; then the most glorious Monarchs of the
French: who, for this last age and more (to lay aside those things which are
more ancient, and more foreign) have sent frequent aides unto the Catholic
and Protestant States of the Empire, against the Invasions of the Spaniards.
Francis I. in the year 1534. joining his arms with Philip Landgrave of
Hassia, restored Vlricus Duke of Wittembergh after 15. years banishment, being
cast out by those of Swawben, through the faithless dealings of the Austrians,
to all the rights and Territories which Ferdinand I. had formerly possessed
under the name of an Imperial Fee. So Henry II. making a League with the
Protestants, in the year 1552. John Frederike Elector of Saxony, and Philip
the Landgrave of Hassia, being like slaves shut up in prison by Charles V. for
above 5. years together; contrary to his faith and promise, and restored them
to their former liberty. So in the year 1620. Bohemia, the affairs of the
Catholics were brought into great streights; and the Emperor himself being
then in a manner besieged in Vienna, ran a hazard not only to lose the
Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary, but even his own Hereditary Provinces: Lewis
XIII. being as well moved with the zeal of preserving the Catholic Religion;
as with the often iterated entreaties of the Austrians; sending Ambassadors to
the Assembly at Vlme, dispersed the forces and Councels of all the united
Princes, procured a truce betwixt both Armies; persuaded the Prince of the
Transilvanians to peace, and so giving the Emperor liberty to breath;
delivered the House of Austria from most certain ruin. Now if the Emperor
abusing so many favors done him, do turn his victories obtained against the
Heretics and Rebels, into a slaughter of innocents, and oppression of his
neighbors; and do trans-ferre the fortunes of the Empire to the private
benefit of his own Family: no man ought to think it strange, if the most
Christian King having been the author of all those Victories, do endeavor
to moderate his enormous usurpations; and to reduce them to the equality of
the ancient right: especially, since he well knows, what difference there is
betwixt the Commonwealth and Religion; and will not so advance the rights of
the Empire, or of the Allies thereof; that he will depresse or hinder the
cause, 3. The most illustrious Elector of Trevers (or Trier) did justly and
seasonably obtain the protection of the French. M. M. Author (...) pro Domo
Austriaca. Bruxellis editi. 1635. Richard. Wasserburgh. in Antiquit. Galliae
Belgicae lib. 1. p. 12. and lib. 7. p. 102. 943.
or exercise of the Catholic Religion. And whereas that Bundler of calumnies,
that Pamphleter of Brussels, does traduce this protection of the neighbor
Princes; and make it as an invasion of foreign Provinces: that is easily
refuted, by the vanity of the lie it self. For as it appears by the ancient
and Authentical Stories, the Archbishopricke of Triers, with the neighbor and
suffragane Bishoprics of Metz, Toul and Verdun, being very anciently united
to the Kingdom of the French; were at length, in the year 943. by the
misfortune and imprudencie of Lewis VI. called the Transmarine, transferred
unto the Emperor Otho II. Yet they ever after flourished and continued under
the amity and patronage of the French, though Cities subject to the Empire:
and the Prelates of those Cities, desired and obtained the aid and protection
of the French; without any prejudice to the Empire, or detriment to their own
liberty. As amongst others, in the year 1337. Henry of Aspremont, Verdun,
sued to King Philip of Valois. In the year 1450. Conrade Bayer, Metz, sued to
Rene of Anjou Duke of Lorraine: and in the year 1467. Lewis of Bourbon Bishop
of Liege to Lewis II. the French King; and to Charles the Bold, Duke of
Burgundy. All these desired and obtained of these Princes, support and
protection against the Rebels, or invaders of their Ecclesiastical rights:
without any prejudice to the Majesty of the Empire. And whereas that mercenary
scribler aledgeth; that by a most ancient League made between the Bishops of
Triers, and the Counts and Dukes of Lutzemburgh; the Archbishopric and Cities
of Triers, is and has been under the protection and Advocacie of the Dukes of
Lutzemburgh; and that therefore the most illustrious Elector of Triers, ought
rather to have sued for the protection of the King of Spain, who at this day
is in possession of the Duchy of Lutzemburgh, then the foreign patronage of
the French; is a frivolous and a foolish allegation.

For we know, that some few ages since, the Counts of Lutzemburgh did
voluntarily offer their protection to them of Triers: Guilielmus Kyriander in
Annalibus Trevirorum. p. 158. and 194. 1374.
and that the Emperor Charles IV. who was of that House; to the end that he
might purchase the Empire for his most stupid son Wenceslaus, in the year
1374. did not only pay unto Cuno Archbishop of Trires, a huge sum of money
for his Electorall voice; but also promised him a mercenary protection against
all enemies of what condition soever. And that soon after, called in question
by the Citizens. But we know also, that this protection did not deprive the
Archbishop of his absolute right; nor that it did of one under the protection
of the House of Lutzemburgh, make him a slave unto the Spaniard: and that a
Free Prince when the Patronage of his former Protector fails him, may justly
obtain the Protection of a new Patron: especially when such a necessity hangs
over his head, that he cannot be preserved, but by a most present remedy.
Which, since the most illustrious Elector of Triers did; when he was in danger
to be utterly destroyed by the Swedes being hard at his back; there is no
reason, why the Spaniards should be offended at it: who at that time were so
far from being able to give aid to others, by right of protection; that on
the contrary they being engaged in a most perilous War with the Hollanders,
did lose whole Provinces and Cities of their greatest strength: as Venlo,
Ruremond, Mastricht and Limburgh.

4. Because the Emperor endeavors to make the quarrels of the Spaniards
common to the whole Empire.
Neither is the cunning of the Austrians here to be passed over; who whilst in
the peace of Prague, they make a show to take care of the tranquillity of
Germany; yet neglecting all the respects of the Empire; they only provide for
the particular benefit of their own. For whereas there have been of old time,
many controversies and some Wars betwixt the French and Spaniards, touching
the Kingdoms of Naples, Sicilye, and Navar; and touching the Duchies of Milan
and Burgundy. The French justly laying claim to those things from the
Spaniards which had been unjustly taken from them: The Emperor denouncing
public War against the French, makes the quarells which were particular to
him and his; common to the whole Empire: ties and engages all the Princes to
his own domestical interest; and the better to maintain the Tyranny of the
Spaniards, entangles all the Germans in a foreign War. A subtlety long ago
attempted by the Austrians; but ever strongly rejected by the States of the
Empire. For so in the year 1492. Extant apud Goldastum Constitut. Imper. Tom.
1. and 4. 1526. 1542.
Maximilian I. in the Diet at Coblentz; and Charles V. in his Epistle to the
Electors, dated at Madrid the 29. of November 1526. and again, in the year
1542. in the Diet at Spire: did traduce Charles VIII. and Francis. I. the
French Kings, as disturbers of the Christian Common Wealth; invaders of other
men's Principalities; and favorers of the Turks and Heretics; and did in
vain desire, that the Wars made against them out of private respects, might
be revenged by the power of whole Germany; as injuries offered to the Empire.

After the same manner, their successors have omitted no means of endeavor;
that they might by some public device of the Diet, proscribe the Confederate
States of the Low Countries, as Rebels to the Empire, and gilty of high
Treason, for shaking off the yoke of the Spaniards. Which, nevertheless the
States of the Empire in the Diet at Wormbs, in the year 1578. and in the late
Diet at Ratisbone 1630.

5. Because the cause of Lorraine belongs not at all to the Emperor.
And the cause of Lorraine, is most vainly aleaged to be a motive for this
War: Because that Austrasia many ages ago united to the Scepter of the
French, and a principal Patrimony of the Kingdom of France, under both the
races of their Kings; 980.
at length, in the year 980. it was taken away from the French by the King of
the Germans, Aimoinus Hist. lib. 5. c. 44. p. 510. editionis Freherianae.
Continuator Chronici Flodoardi, qui extat To. 2. Hist. Gall. editorum a V. C.
Andrea Duchesnio. 1636. p. 626. Extant ibidem. p. 797.
under a pretense of a right of homage to be done to them for it: and so it
was by Lothaire the French King conferred upon the Emperor Otho the Second, as
a Fee; against the will and liking of the Princes and Peers of that Kingdom.
Unto which things, Gerbert, afterward Archbishop of Rheims, and at the last
Pope of Rome, has reference in his 35. Epistle, where he says: That Adalbero
Archbishop of Rheims, took hostages of the Nobles of the Kingdom of Lorraine,
and compelled them to do homage unto the Emperors son, but under the
protection and Signorie of the French King.

Now if in the succeeding times the Dukes of Lorraine being situate in the
confines of both these great Princes, and through the changeable condition of
their fortune wavering betwixt both, have been faithful to neither, but have
withdrawn their homage from both. Certainly it does no more belong to the
Emperor, to mingle the interest of the Empire with the cause of Lorraine; then
it was fit for the Duke of Lorraine with Clandistine marriage and open arms, to
disturb be peace of France, and with most injurious calumnies to scandalize
the Majesty of the French Empire.

But I cease to press and obtrude a defense, to a most just cause; The
Conclusion.
which having been often approoved from heaven, has left more ignominy then
glory to the enemies of it. And from those things that have been hitherto
declared; I gather, that the only scope of the Trans-action of Prague, was to
advance the greatness of the House of Austria, whether by right or wrong; to
make the Empire together with the Kingdoms of Bohemia and Hungary hereditary
to him: and in a word, by bringing under the rest of the Kingdoms of Europe,
to establish every where the Spanish Monarchy. And so almost in every article
of this conspiracy; whosoever are either adverse to the Spaniards, or
suspected to be so; (as the French, Swedes, and Hollanders) are excluded out
of the Peace, and assaulted with the common arms: and whosoever are friends,
neighbors, or Allies unto them, are most bountifully rewarded out of the
spoils of the proscribed. Indeed, to the end, that the House of Austria might
absolutely rule over Germany; the Eelector Palatine (the principal Pillar of
the Empire) should first have been proscribed: whose forces, alliances, and
affection to his Country, have been long since adverse to Spanish Counsels.
Then when the Palatine was stricken down, his Territories and Diginities must
be bestowed upon the Bavarians and Spaniards: not only because the Countries
of the Bavarian do lie as a bulwark unto the Emperors Patrimony, to defend
it against the Heretic Princes of upper Germany; but also because by this
means the Austrians will always have voices enough in a readiness in the
College of Electors. To conclude, to the end that the Emperor might make use
of all the strength of Germany at his pleasure; an Army of eighty Regiments to
be levied and paid by the Princes themselves; is committed to the absolute
command of the King of Hungary: by which, not only the Dukes and States that
be refractory, may be chastised; but also that power, which is left to the
Protestants may be cut up by the roots. So Germany being subdued and brought
under, and Lorraine recovered; it seemed afterward an easy matter to invade
France, to conquer Holland; and to bring Britain under the yoke, as being
their due long since by a marriage with Spain; as the Emperor confesses in
his Declaration of the causes and benefits of the Peace of Prague, set forth at
Baden the eighth of June 1635. That Peace being on this manner settled, his
Nephew the King of Spain will very easily reduce the Hollanders to obedience.
Therefore it is so far off, that by this Trans-action Peace and public
tranquillity has been sought; that on the contrary the light of peace being
every where put out, war has been kindled throughout all Europe; and all
the Princes whether they would or not, have been entangled in the fatal arms
of the House of Austria. Miserable is the Peace, which is commanded by open
force! a most doleful Tranquillity, which troubles al things! a most
treacherous security, which every one has cause to distrust! Certainly,
fear and terror are weak bonds of love; which when they are removed, those
that cease to fear, will begin to hate. It is certain, that a faithful
Peace can be only there, where men are willingly reconciled; and that it
cannot be hoped to be of any long continuance in that place where servitude is
aimed at. Certainly, no mortal man will continue longer than needs must in
such a condition, as is irksome to him; and evermore in an uncertain quiet:
though concord do in show continue, yet the opening and remembering of offenses
past; will still be feared. That is a true tranquillity, which all men
approve, and every one desires; by which anger is turned into friendship;
hatred grows into leagues of amity; and an equality being observed among
all, and the Amnestia extended to all, the enemies either by greatness of good
turns, or forgetting of injuries are turned to friends.

FINIS.

