FRIDERICVS STAPHILVS
FRIDERICVS STAPHILVS STAPHIL WAR ERST EIN LVTTRISCH MAN DARNACH NAM ER DAS
PAPSTVM AN VERLEVGNET CHRISTVM VND SEIN WORT KAM AN ISCARIOTES ORT TETS
CRISTENTVM SCHANTLICH VERLIG IS IT SEIN STAFFL IN DIE HELL ESTIGN

1565

BY



THE APOLOGY OF FRIDERICVS STAPHYLVS COVNSELLER TO THE LATE EMPEROVR
FERDINANDVS, etc. Entreating Of the true and right understanding of holy
Scripture. Of the tanslation of the Bible in to the vulgar tongue. Of
disagrement in doctrine among the protestants.


Translated out of Latin in to English by THOMAS STAPLETON, Student in Divinity.

Also a discourse of the Translatour upon the doctrine of the protestants
which he tries by the three first founders and fathers thereof, Martin
Luther, Philip Melanchton, and especially John Calvin.

Matthew. 24. Videte ne quis vos seducat. Take heed that no man deceive you

Matthew. 7. Ex fructibus eorum cognoscetis eos. Ye shall know them by their
fruits.

SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS ^


Imprinted at Antwerp by John Latius, at the sign of the Rape, with Privilege.
Anno. 1565.

REgiae Maiestatis Priuilegio permissum est Thomae Stapletono Sacrae Theologiae
candidato vti per aliquem Tipographorum admissorum impune ei liceat imprimi
curare and per omnes suae regionis ditiones distrahere librum inscriptum The
Apology of Fridericus Staphylus etc. and omnibus alijs inhibitum ne eundem
absque eiusdem Thomae consensu imprimant vel alibi impressum distrahant sub
poena in Priuilegio contenta.

Datum Bruxellae. 17. Nouembris. Anno. 1564. Subsig. Facuwez.

THE PREFACE OF THE TRANSLATOVR.
THe blessed apostle S. Paul (good Chri sten readers) not without the instinct
of the holy ghost and a sure foresight off the troubles to come in Christ's
church, writes unto the Corinthians these words. 1. Cor. 11.
There must be heresies, to the intent that they which are perfyt among you,
might be known. In which weighty and grave prediction of the Apostle two
things I see especially to be notised. The one for our comfort, the other for
our instruction. For our comfort it is, that we be not dismayed or over much
offended when we see in the holy profession of our Christen religion, heresies,
sects, and schisms to arise: that we forsake not therefore the field of our
faith. 1. Cor. 9.
Wherein we warfare to god and ru^ne not as at an uncertain thing, and fight not
as one that beats the air, but ru^ne to obtain, and fight to win the
reward: that we let not go the holdfast of our hope Which we hold as the sure
and steadfast anchor of our soul: Hebr. 6.
but rather with the patience of Abraham, Romans 4.
We believe in hope contrary to hope, continuing and cleaving steadfastly to the
rock of our faith, against the which, Hell gates shall never prevail. Matthew.
16.
For as we see by the verdit of the Apostle, There must be heresies. It is now
sithen the time that the Apostle spoke these words a thousand five hundred and
odd years, Yet never was there aage sense that time but that in some part of
Christendom heresies have been sturring. In the very first offspring of the
Apostles there lacked not such evil wedes among the corn of Christ's church
yet grene. 2. Tim. 2. Apocal. 2.
Simo^ Magus, Hermogenes Philetus, Hymeneus, Alexander, Nicolaus, and such
other are mentioned in holy writ to have swarued from the faith and after the
knowledge off righteousness to have turned back from the same. 2. Petri. 2.
Beside holy writ we read in the ecclesiastical histories of Ebion, of
Cerinthus, of Marcion and diverse other pla^ters of heresies in the Apostles
time. After whom how from age to age heresies being always cut of and
destroyed have yet spronge up again and flourished for a season as the venomous
heads of Hydra. I remitt you (to avoid prolixite) to the writings of
Epiphanius, S. Augustine, Philaster and others, I report my self also to the
Chronographies of Alexander Sculteti and such other: which deducting the estat
of Christ's church from the beginning hitherto, setting forth in tables
severally the Popes and supreme vicars of Christ, the Emperors, the general
and provincial councels, the heresies of al times, have in no time nor age
left us bare the leaf of the heresies. The figure of this calamite in Christ's
church we see to have gone before in the law of Moses. For at what time the
children of Israel had by the mighty hand of god entered in to the land of
promis, chased out Idolaters and were settled in quiet possession, yet god of a
just indignation conceived against them suffering the Cananites to dwell among
them pronounced by his Angel that he would not therefore cast Iud^. 2.
those Idolaters out before them, to the intent they might have them as enemies
among them, and their gods should be as asnare unto them. And thereby the
children of Israel were tried as now the Christians are, they by Idolaters, we
by heretics. Though therefore his our present time be so entangled with
schisms, severed in sundry sects, and embrued with heinous heresies as never
at any time sense the first preaching off the ghospel: Yea and though it have
so ouerrunne the small plat of Christe^dom that remains, as ever any heresy
did (except that of the Arrians) yet because we see the holy ghost suffers it
so to be, and warns us by the mouth of the Apostle that is behooves so to
be, we must yield to the providence of almighty god. and say with the prophet
Daniel. Dan. 3.
We have sinned with our forefathers. Yea thousand fold more then our
forefathers, and therefore no marvel if the dreadful wrath of god have
fallen upon us that we may well cry and lament with the prophet Hieremy.
Hierem. 5
Consider and see o Lord our confusion: our inheritance is turned to
strangers. 1. Joan. 2.
Such surely as have departed from us but were not of us: for if they had been
of us: they would no doubt have continued with us.

An other lesson in the words of the Apostle for our instruction is this, that
heresies therefore are suffered to be, to the intent that they which are perfect
among us might be known. For by heresies the church as gold by the fire is
tried, and as the river or sea by trouble and tempest casts his froth and
filth away (the pure water keeping his bonds and course) so the church in
time of tribulation and storms of heresy voideth away the foul and unclean
members of her, The duty of a Christen man in time of heresy.
the sound and faithful remaining under her roufe and abiding in the received
faith and belefe. For in time of schisms and heresies the part of every good
Christen man is, to do as the good souldyars in the ca^pe when a civil sedition
arises, or as the quiet passan ger when the sea stormeth: for even as the true
and faithful souldyars in such a case run all unto their Capitain and
General, looking to be of him directed where, how, and when to strike, and as
the wise and sober passanger when the tempest and storm disordreth the
passage, suffers quietly the master to rule the stern, meddling not with that
he has no skill of: right so when preuy rebels or open apostatas of Christen
religion sow seditious schisms and preach heretical doctrine, troubling
thereby the quiet and settled consciences of true and upright beleuers, every
Christen man, especially such as are of the lay and inferior sort, ought to
cleave unto their heads and rulers in Christ his church meddling not with the
determination of any point called then in controversy: but look to be directed
as they have allwaies ben by their catholic pastors and overseers to whom
they are commanded by the Apostle to obey and submit them selves: Heb. 13.
truly no less then the soldier to his Capitain or the passanger to his
master.

Therefore our Savior bids the people to beware and Take heed of false
prophets, Math. 7. ^. Joan. 4.
nor to believe every spirit, but try and discern whether they be of God or no.
But this lo how may it be? How shall the ignorant and lay man try false
doctrine from the true? It has been put in to men's heads of late years that
every man for this purpose ought to read holy scripture, and thereby to try
and discern truth from falsehood. It were perhaps to be wished (if it had so
pleased God) that as holy scripture is the true trial thereof, so it were open
and evident to all men that seek the trial therein: Scripture hard to be
understood. Lib. 2. de. doctr. Christi. Cap. 6.
but what have learned men judged in times past of holy scripture? Many things,
says S. Augustine, are dark in scriptures, and it has so ben provided of God
to the intent that our pridemight be tamed by trauail and our knowledge not
cloyed with facilite: which quickly contemns that easily has been learned, In
Ezech. Cap. 45.
In like manner S. Hierom. All prophecy or interpretation of scripture
contains the truth in darcknes and obscurite, to the intent that the
scholars and lerners within may understand, but the rude people set without
may not know what is said. Orels we shall cast precious stones before hogs
if we open the treasure of holy scripture to every man. In anchorae tu.
Epiphanius likewise. The Scripture, says he, tells all truth: but we have
need of good intelligence and perceiuerance to know God and his word. There is
in the gospel, Lib. 7. in Leuiticum.
says Origin, the letter that kills: for the destroying letter is not only
in the old Testament, but also in the new Testament to him that understands
not spiritually that which is said. Tertullian speaks yet more vehemently
hereof. I am not afeared, I^praescrip. haeretico^u^
says he, to say that the scriptures them selves have been so disposed by the
will of God that they might minister matter unto heretics: seeing that I read
that heresies must be which without scripture could not be. This is the
judgment of the learned fathers who have travailed more in holy scripture then
any new preacher of our time, and yet can epsy no great facilite in it, but
rather do complain of the maruailous difficulte thereof. 2. Petr. 3.
And does not S. Peter write plainly that in the epistles of S. Paul Certain
things were very hard to be understood which the unlearned and inconstant
depraved even as other parts of scripture to their own destruction? Does not
S. 2. Cor 4.
Paul write that The gospel is veiled and covered from those that perish?
Joan. 5.
Are we not commanded to search holy scripture? does not this serching importe
a diligence and difficulty more then lay men can either attend upon or
attain unto? Act. 8.
The Eunuchus understood not the prophet, until the Apostle had expounded it
unto him, And Christ after his Ascension opened the understanding off his
disciples that they might understand the scriptures. Luc. 24.
And think we our selves able to understand all that we read?

This then being so how shall the lay and unlearned man perform the
commandment of the gospel bidding him, To beware of false prophets and to
discern the sprits whether they be of god or no? Math. 7. 1. Joan. 4.
Every sect now a days chalengeth the word of god and the right
understanding thereof. The Catholic likewise by prescription out of memory
stands in possession thereof and will not be brought from it for all the
bragges the heretic makes. How then shall the unlearned man hearing both
tales conclude with him self which to follow? Were it not now good readers
much to be wished that some clear and evident doctrine were taught, by what
means and how the holy word of God may rightly be under standed, and the
false prophets, preachers, and protestants of our time might be avoided? Truly
as the sauegarde of the soul passes all worldly interest, so every Christen
heart ought above all things tender the same: and with all diligence possible
procure spedy remedies for the pestiferous venim off heresy which crepeth on
like a cancre, 2. Tim. 2.
and corrupts the whole estat of our salvation.

Having therefore seen and perused a certain book of Fridericus Staphylus,
written first in the Allemain tongue, and after translated in to Latin, wherein
he first teaches the unlearned lay man how to beware of false and wrong
interpretation of holy scripture which is no less necessary then the reading
off scripture it self, secondarely detecteth certain false translations of the
Bible by Luther in to his mother tongue: last of all declares the maruailous
dissension and variaunces of the Lutherans in their doctrine and chiefest
articles of our faith (which is a most evident argument of the sprit of
dissension (the devil him self) speaking in the^ and a clear proof of
heretical doctrine, for the truth is but one) I have thought good to
translate the whole in to our mother tongue, trusting in almighty God to profit
hereby many a Christen soul of my dear deceined countremen which (as God is my
witness) was my only respect in this small labor.

The first part of this book is a very necessary lesson for the unlearned lay
man. The contents of the Apology.
For without the true and right interpretation of holy scripture such as the
church teaches he can have no right faith, and so hazardeth his soul and
everlasting life which he ought above all worldly respect tender and procure.
For as our Savior says, What avails it a man to win the whole world and
lose his soul? Lucae. 9.


The second part is a good admonition for all such as are not seen in the
tongues to beware of new translations of holy scripture falsely forged for a
vauntage. Our english bibles set forth these last years lack not such
foisting in of false terms. In the epistles of S. Paul as often as the word
Idol is found in the greek and latin text, so often they turn it Image as
though (...) and (...) in greek, idolum and imago in laten or idol and image in
english were all one. When God says in holy scripture. Genes. 1.
Let us make man according to our image, will these men say that God has an
idol according to the which man was made? and how be they not ashamed to call
covetousness worshipping of images when that S. Paul calls it idolorum
seruitus, Ephesians. 5.
that is, service of idols because the covetous man makes his money his idol?
But this shift served them to dig up again the old carren heresy of the I
conoclaste, image breakers, condemned in the seventh general council and
second off Nice, and to throw down images out of churches setting in their
places their own and their wives, as in some part of Germany it is practiced.
Likewise to take away the sacrament of holy Orders, Epiphanius li. 2. co^trea
har. and August. ad Quoduult.
and to renew the old heresy of the Arrians and the Pepuziani denieng
priesthood above a thousand years past, as the Sacramentaries and zealous
Lutherans do now, for (...) in greek and presbiter in laten, they turn
allwaies elder, not priest, as though every presbiter in S. Paul were an
elder. 1. Timo. 4.
then Timothe was no lawful bishop being but young and far from the account
of an elder, onles by these men's doctrine a bishop may be young, but the
priest may be only an elder. And these men mark not that this word priest is
the very proper etimology of the word presbiter. For of presbyter in laten
comes first the french word prebstre and the dutche word priester. Out off
which two languages we (as in thousands of other words) shortning yet more the
term, have made of prebstre and priester, priest. So for church they turn
allwaies congregation, and that of a very wicked intent, meaning thereby to
disanull the authorite and estimation of Christ's church, making it to be
every peltinge congregation of private heretics: or as if that which we call
the church, were naught else but the stones and mortar it is made of. But as
touching the corrupted text of our common translation now used, it is beside
our purpose to make any special note thereof: and in our Discourse we shall have
occasion to specify some other places of more importance: As for these false
and heretical foistinges of Luther here noted by Staphylus, though in the
common translation of our country (thanked be God) they are not readen, (one
excepted) which when I come to the place, I shall in the margin note you, yet
it may serve to the Lutherans of our country for a most evident argument of
the sprit of Antichrist speaking in Luther, and of a wicked and detestable
archeheretike. For what is more convenient for Antichrist, or more proper for
an archeheretike, then to corrupt gods holy word, and give us instead of it,
his own poisonnous and heretical word? Neither may the sacramentaries of
our conntre think that this touches not them. For they are of Luthers brood
no less the^ the other: Beside that their master, Calvin, is not behind hand
for his part, as in our Discourse we shall by occasion declare unto you in
diverse textes and passages of holy scripture by him corrupted.

The third part of the book is an evident and sensible detection of the
abominable schisms of these protestans (what soever smothe countenaunces they
bear to the world) not only profitable for the lay and unlearned common
people, but right worthy to be read, waighed and considered of the rulers and
higher powers: to the intent that seeing evidently before their eyes the
horrible schisms, division, and disordre, that these protestants have caused
in Christendom, and do foster up and bread daily, where they may have their
full swaie and course, they may think upon some spedy remedy for the
restitution of unite and agreement among them, and the church of Christ from
whence they have parted. And truly by the example of this confusion in Germany
(where heresy has had his free course in a state of liberty these forty
years and more) we may see as in a glass the like inconveniences to be feared
among us, if it should continue many years (which God of his tender mercy
forbid) as also it would ere this have showed it self among our protestants
at home, if worldly policy had not refrained their unruly liberty. Disagrement
in doctrine among our protestans.
And yet among the pretended bishops of our country it is well known that
some allow the order of priesthood, as the civil Lutherans do at Wittenberg,
some preach openly that all men and women are priests, as the Illyricans do
in Saxony and all the flock of the zealous Lutherans. Again some in the matter
of the blessed Sacrament are very Zuinglians, as the Apology and their
articles at the last Co^uocation declare: some yet and that not the smallest
stars of the realm, Caunterbury. Chichester. Gloucester. Rochester.
are in that point Lutherans, as the trouble of certain of them after the end
off the last parliament witnesses. Notwithstanding (according to the counsel
of Melanchthon in his book against Fridericus Staphylus they pretend outwardly
agreement and unite among them selves, to the intent that like the people of
Creta (whereof such protestans are called Syncretisantes) they may with more
joined force set upon their common adversaries the Papists, and overcome them
the sooner. The late suppressed abominable book of Bernardinus Ochinus the
Apostata, Peter Martirs companyon lately printed, defending stoutely among
other strange heresies the pluralite of wives (which began to be openly
practiced in Polevntel the King banished him thence) may give us to
understand, what ioyly new doctrines and heresies the scholars of Peter Martyr
which are not few, nor of the basest sort in our country, would plant and
preach among us, were it not that matters being not yet ripe, nor thouroughly
settled, they were like to mar all the game, if they kept not well their
countenaunces. Where in they follow well and wisely the counsel of Nicolaus
Amsdorffius, which he writes in his book entitled Publica co^fessio purae
doctrinae eua^gelij and confutatio praesentium Suermeroru^. In the which
complaining that Brentius and the masters of Wittenberg being at a conference
and diet held at Worms would not condemn Zwinglius and Osiander whose
doctrine utterly repugneth to their Confession of Augspurg, In the year. 1557.
he writes these words. In this doing they have departed from the Confession
of Augspurg although they pretend to remain in it, they have also caused
dissension and taken away all means of agreement, for if they would (as we do)
condemn the errors of Zuinglius and Osiander, then might we al agree together
against the papists. These be the very words of Nicolaus Amsdorfius a famous
Superintendent among the Lutherans well and truly observed of our protestant
preachers and Ministers. And is this the pure word of the gospel, so to bear
two or rather twenty faces in one hood? For although among our protestants
because of the estate of our country (where not whatsoever lists them is
lawful also to set forth) there seems in this new religion an apparent
vniformite of doctrine, yet they vary not only among them selves, as we have
before touched, but also from their own doings. The order of communion now
practiced in England differs as much from the first order of communion used
in King Edwardes time, The difference of the present communion from the first.
as the Lutherans do from the Zuinglians, and as the Illyricans do now from the
Melanchthonistes. For the first both allowed the real presence in the
Sacrament as Luther did, and used also many old ceremonies of Christ his
church as the Melanchthonistes, and the civil Lutherans do yet in Wittenberg in
Misnia in Franconia, at Norimberg, at Vlmes (where passing by of late we saw
in the church the holy Roode, and aultars of stone yet standing) in the
Dukedom of Wirtenberg, at Breslaw at Briga in Silesia and in many other places.
The last and present order off communion denies the real presence, as
Zuinglius, and Calvin do, and rejects the ceremonies of the Mass, as the
Zuinglia^s and Caluinistes do in the five Cantons of Suitzerland Basil, Zurich,
Berna, Schafusa and Clarona, at Geneua in Sauoye, in Scotland and among the
seditious rebels in France. Now Luther in his little confession De caena
Domini condemns Zuinglius and his co^plices for heretics. Tomo. 6. fell. 60.
So do Nicolaus Amsdorfius in the book above alleged, and Nicolaus Gallus in
his book entitled. Theses and hypotyposes etc. Likewise Melanchthon
conde^neth Illyricus and his fellows as in diverse writings, of Illyricus it is
to be seen. By the judgment then of Luther, of Melanchthon, and of all the
civil Lutherans, yea and by the judgment of all the ghospellers in King
Edwardes time, and of the stinking martirs of that age, our communion now
practiced in England is heretical, and against the pure doctrine fo the
ghospel. It were over long to recite here all the variaunces in doctrine among
our protestants. I remitt you to the daily experience which you may see better
at home then we which are abroad. And thus much of the argument of this book.
What remains then for our part to do, but as S. Paul commands us that we
be Solliciti seruare vnitatem spiritus in vinculo pacis, that is, Ephesians. 4.
careful and diligent to keep unite off mind in the bond off peace, being
one body and one mind, as we be called in to one hope and vocation? For there
is but one lord, one faith, one baptim, one God, and father of all, that we
hence forth be no more children wavering and carried about with every wind of
doctrine by the wilynes of men, and craftines laying wait to deceive us. It is
truly a world to see what labor and toil, what posting and running, what
pains and charges, men sustain for their right in temporal traihe, in
worldly commodites and present pleasures, which we have renounced in our
baptim, which with care being gotten with sorrow is kept, and yet soon lost,
and how cold, negligent, and careless we are, about the true and sincere
worshipping of God, which we have promised and professed in our baptim, and
which only has his sure, certain, and everlasting reward. We spare no labor,
no cost, no trauail for the one, we move not a foot, nor will not depart
from a penny for the other. but nodding and sleping in wilful ignorance,
fuffer our selves to be lead by the noses with every tinkard and cobbler prating
in pulpets, and planting poisonnous doctrine. If rebels arise against their
Prince, they are with all speed possible and force brought down again. Well
and worthily. And shall we wink at the rebels of Christ's holy word and his
church? The thief that robs and pilleth our temporal riches, is hanged: and
worthily. and will we not labor to epsy out and auoy de heresies which
bereue us of the treasure of eternal life? If we be thus recheles and careless
for our salvation, we perish worthily, and the plage of god ligh teth upon us
for our deserts. if we will not wittingly be deceived but have a care of our
soul health, and think upon the life to come, let us in this perilous ti mes
of schisms, and abundance off iniquite harken to such as can teach us to
discern the true and right in terpretation of gods word, from the perverted
persuasions of heretics. let us beware of such guides in matters of
conscience, as stick not to corrupt the ve ry text of gods word, against all
honesty and conscience. Let us behold for the better assurance of our Catholic
faith, which is but one, the horrible schisms of the Luthera^s,
Sacrame^taries, Anabaptists, Co^fessionistes, and other among them selves,
all the which are here lively and expressly set forth by Fridericus
Staphylus. and we shall I trust gladly keep our selves under the wing of our
mother the Catholic church and give no more ear to every new forged fantasy
of seditious schismatikes.

As touching the Author of this book Fridericus Staphylus, in his life time
(for within these few months he departed the world to the great grief of all
good men) he was a virtuous, learned, and wise, Noble man. His virtue well
appears not only in the fervent zele of gods word and the truth, for the
setting forth of the which, he took such trade of life as both empaired much
the health of his body, and procured also greatiosse of his substance (as he
writes in the first part of this work) but also in the great patience and
modesty that he used always against his adversaries writing pasquils, libels,
and famous epigrams, against him, calling him Judas, runneagat, traitor and so
forth (as the modesty of this new ghospel uses) because he forsook their
abominable heresies after a thourough knowledge of them, and detected their
iuggling deceites to all the world as especially he does in this work
following. And this only were they able to object against him, which declares
well the innocency and vprightnes of his life, For as herein they spared no
kind of rethorike to exaggerat his departing from them (which was a singular
grace of God and most in him to be commended) so if they had had better matter,
it should not have lacked the telling on their part. Smidelinus, one that of
all other to his perpetual shame and ignominy took upon him to encounter with
Staphylus laboring to fasten upon him some great blow of reproach and shame,
at the le^ghth for lack of better advantage, In Apologia absoluta page 78.
entuiteth him his natural behavior that he used commonly to look down to
the ground as he walcked, thinking he had thereby raught him a great rappe.
Which how light a philip it is, every wise man sees. And that gre at
ghospeller and doctor of Gopping had forgotte it was written of our Savior
that Non secundum visionem oculorum iudicabit He shall not judge according to
the eye sight. Esa. 1^.
Truly it is no small argument of his innocence that his most adversary could
lay no greuouser matter unto him.

His lerning well appears in this and other his works as in his Absolut
apology, his epistles and orations against Melanchthon, Flaccus, and other:
where he shows him self no less learned Divine, then eloquent orator and
expert of the tongues. But of his education in lerning and prospering in the
same, of what estimation also he was among the protestants them selves you
shall understand by his own words, being forced to declare the same by the
impudent reproaches of Smidelinus his adversary. In his Absolut apology written
in the year 1562. thus he writes. Whereas Smidelinus obiecteth to me that I
was Luthers and Melanchthons scholar, I deny it not, for I lived in the
university of wittenberg ten years of my own costs and charges studying
there under Luther, Mela^chthon and others. At that time also being a young
man rash and unskillful, I was infected somewhat with the poisonnous doctrine of
Luther. Howbeit that was not so rooted in me, but that it was soon driven out
again. And that I never consented thoroughly to the fifte gospel of Luther,
many things do evidently prove. First that whereas the Masters off Wittenberg
would needs persuade me to proceed Doctor among them, Staphylus refuses to
be Doctor because of the oath.
I would never do it. And that only because I would not take the oath of the
university and make open confession of my belefe in that place. And this
Doctor George Mayor who yet lives can bear me witness of. Secondarely because
I would never take upon me the Lutheran Ministry in any church: though few
years past I have been required of certain Princes to high dignites: as to be
Superintendent in sundry places: as at Augspurg, at Lubeck and at Brunsuick.
Thirdly this may declare how little I fancyed in my heart the doctrine of Luther,
that being called and chosen of the Duke of Prussia to be a Reader in his
dominions (at Coningsberg) and a Counselor, I caused in the write of my
stipend this condition expressly to be put that I would be compelled to no
religion or doctrine that in any point repugned with the doctrine of the
primitive, Catholic, and Apostolical church, and of this my condition I am
able to show if need shall require sufficient testimonies. By these words ye
may see off what reputation and opinion of lerning and virtue this man was at
Wittenberg, Augspurg, Lubeck and Brunsuick the most famous cytes of the
Lutheran profession.

His wisedo^ and other noble qualites he well declared first in the service of
a counselor to the Duke of Indefensione contra Musculum
Prusia from whom he was forced to depart and that (as he writes) to the
loss of some thousands of marks, because like a worthy and faithful
Counselor he freely advertised eftsoon the Duke to beware of the cursed
heresies of Osiander and his fellows. Secondarely in the like service under the
Catholic and virtuous Duke of Bauaria, under whom he was in such credit that
he was made ouerseer and Chauncelour of the university of Ingolstad jointly
with the Bishop of Eistat. Thirdely for his wisdom, lerning and virtue he was
of long time and many years Counselor to the late most worthy Emperor
Ferdinandus. under whom he has done noble service as well in the diets and
conferences in Germany as in embassages of Liflande, Pole, and other countres.

As for the great labor, and diligence he bestowed to shift him self out of
the captious and contentious controversies of this time (wherein he was
nouseled in his youth) it may well appear in that (as he writes in the first
part of this book) He employed only the study of Divinity and matters of
Controversy about two and twenty years: not meddling in all that time with any
worldly or civil matter. And what thinck you after so many years study and
labor, after so great experience and lerning, was the chiefest argument and
reason whereupon he forsook the Lutherans and claue unto the Catholics?
forsooth he declares it in the very same place last alleged: and it is right
worthy to be noted. This says he, was the chief and principal cause why I
acto^pted the diverse doctrine of Luther and his fellows to be heretical and
for such do utterly forsake Why Staphylus forsook the Luthe rans.
it and detest it, this again is the cause why I esteem the doctrine in all
Christendom (which they call the Popedom) received, to be the only true and
holesom doctrine, because this doctrine is the Catholic and vniuer sally
received interpretation of holy scripture, but their doctrine is only their
private opinion and their private deprauation of holy Scripture. This lowas the
principal reason that drew this wise, learned and virtuous man from the sects
of his Masters, Luther and Mela^chtho^: and brought him home to the perfect
unite of the Catholic faith. for he saw by long experience that all the
doctrine of the new ghospellers, was naught else but their own traditions,
their propre inventions, and private imaginations: for ging upon the word of
God such sense as them listed, and telling then the people that the same was
the very word of God: whereas the Catholics followed such sense and meaning of
the written word as by the learned fathers, continual tradition, and universal
consent of Christendom was received and allowed. And truly this only reason may
be sufficient both for the unlearned and deceived protestants to reduce them
home again to the Catholic church of Christ, and to keep also within the same
such as by the grace of God, virtuous education, and good instructions have not
yet swarued from the same. Which I beseech almighty God it may so do.

And thus much hitherto of this present Treatise and the author thereof. Many
other things there are which I would gladly advertise the Reader of. But
because we have (I fear) ben ouerlong already and the Author him self has
prefixed a long but a learned and profitable preface and therefore not to be
omitted, I will here break of, and after the end of the Authors whole
discourse, put for conclusion the rest of my meaning, aduertising in the mean
season the reader of this one thing, that this our labor being an
interpretation, and bound to the invention of the Author, we have not, ne
could not use the like eloquence as the free style gives: beseching the
notwithstanding, gentle Reader, to take our pains in good part.

Farewell. At Louain the 12. of November. 1564. Thomas Stapleton.

THen (says Nicephorus of the time of Constantius Lib. 9. cap. 46. histor.
his empire under whom the Arrians flourished) new devises were commended and
increased daily growing to a strange alteration, so far that every man
setting light by all ancient laws and ordonaunces, forged him self fresh of
his own. And yet their doctrine ( he means the Arrians) was not of all such
received: but each one imagined new opinions, heaping up ever doctrine upon
doctrine. Then Aetius, Eunomius, Eudoxius ( each one diversely) Uttered their
blasphemies against Christ. Then Macedonius also blasphemed against the holy
Ghost.

Gregory Nazianzen reasoned against those new doctrines in this sort.
IF our faith be but yet thirty years old four hundred years being now
passed over sense the coming of Christ, Epist. 2. ad Clidonium.
then our gospel has been so long in vain, our faith also has been to no
purpose. Then so many Martirs have invaine testified their faith in Christ.
Then so many Bishops and pastors have in vain so long fedd the flock of
Christ. If prescription of four hundred years served then this learned father
against the thirty years of the Arrians how much more may fiften hundred and
twice thirty years serve us for a most strong presciption against the
protestants of our country who have not yet half thirty years among us ben in
possession of this their pretended religion in such sort as it is now
professed.

TO THE RIGHT REVEREND FATHER IN GOD PRINCE AND LORD, HIS SINGVLAR GOOD LORD,
the Lord Martin Bishop of Eystat, FRIDERICVS STAPHYLVS wishes health.
Whereas you are This epistle was written in laten by the author him self.
(most Reverend Prelat) as you forefathers were by orderly vocation placed as
Patron and protector to this university of Ingolstad, sithen that also the
right honorable Prince Albert Duke of Bauaria has set me ouerseer and
gouuerner of the same, it had becomed me long ere this time to have offered unto
you my service: especially having certain matters committed to my charge,
whereof I should before this time have conferred with you. But whereas our
voluntary deliberation by trouble of time was defeated, being constrained, not
as I would but as I was forced, to yield to necessite, and therefore must
omit the one, and do the other: Yet in this business to be somewhat occupied,
and in the principal by the way to be doing, I have not suffered such leisure
as at times happened, to pass without some fruit of public commodite.
Whereof having long thought, it seemed me, I could not by the way more
profitably be doing then if (at what time other play or banquet) I labored
upon some such thing as might inform the poor deceived people, and not
offend rulers and magistrates. And to this end truly, these dark winter days
as leisure served me, I have compiled this book, framing my style after a rude
and simple sort, that the unlearned might understand me, but letting pass no
jot of the truth, to cure and remedy the falsehood. Although therefore the
learned by this book shall not perhaps be much instructed, yet the good wit
shall find herein that is right worthy to be known. and truly in medecines
the wise Phisician will not so much regard that they be pleasant or fair to
the eye as that they be wholesome.

This is therefore my meaning and the mark I shoot at, The intent of the
author in this work.
that the good people may be admonished of their salvation and advertised of
the dangerous deceites of heretics by whose craft and guile we see the noble
Romain empire much weakened and empaired even now to fainte, and thousands of
Christen souls other where daily to perish. But the deceites of these
heretics being spredd so far and so diversely in Christendom, that the
unlearned can not comprise them and the learned scant epsy them, it shall be
inoughe for the people to learn to know them selves to be people, that is to
understand that it is enough for their part to learn of the spiritual
magistrate, how to do their duty to God, and of the civil or temporal
magistrate to learn their duty to their prince, and in all things rather to
learn then to teach, rather to obey then to command.

For these two estates the spiritual and the temporal have of God him self
ben ordained, duly received of us, confirmed and established by laws: and have
served us as two walls by the which the power of the Romain empire has been in
Germany stayed up and continued all most these eight hundred years. And truly
as long as matters appertaining to God were by the spiritualty, and the common
welthe by the temporalty gouuerned, and the laws off both estates ordained
were inuiolatly observed, the^ Germany might contend in wisedo^ with the
greeks, in stoutnes of courage with the Romans, in godliness with all Christen
nations: then it might more surely of us then of the Romans be said.

By ancient laws and men does stand
Thestate of Germany and Allemain land.
Then it could, when laws ruled men, not men the laws maintain peace abroad,
and rest at home: keep out their enemy valiantly and gouuerne their people in
all felicite.

But Satan not abiding the repos of this country, stirred up Martin Luther a
German borne, pricked him with furious rage: and drove him so forward, that he
overthrew all ancient laws, by the which this Empire hitherto has stayed and
continued: and placed for them new by the which it should perish and fall.
Luther iolted and enraged by this rider Satan, began with a fury to set upon
the two said walls of the empire, and in short time, as well by his
battering the walls were sore beaten, as by the sound sleep of the rulers the
ward and watch was forsaken: And that in such sort, vntel one of the walls,
the Spiritualty, was utterly overthrown: the other, the Temporalty, was put in
great hazard: For so it proves in deed. when that (as the poet says)

The sore dissembled does fester and grow C^or. 3.

While the idle shepeard taking his ease,
Sercheth not spedely the wound to know,
But asks the Gods to cure the desease.
But this negligence being ones committed and done it can not now be undone:
Yet although of things past we have the remembrance only, consultation or
deliberation we have none, truly I can not forget with what a perpetual
ignominy and shame we are to be noted, that could suffer a lewd friar, and
that neither craftily cladde in his shepes cote, neither excellently learned, to
work so foul and so pernicious a mischef against all Christendom, that
having first all most overthrown the Spiritualty, he has so shaken and
weakened also the Temporalty, that it seems rather already fallen down then
liekely to fall.

But what entry made Luther? How began he to overthrow these two estates? His
beginning was surely vain and foolish, and stuffed all with lies. The
principles and growndes (says he) of the papists are the traditions of men
not expressed in holy write, the pope of Rome, doubting and vncertainte of the
grace of god. But who says this? Luther every where. What witness has he?
Ihon Brentius in his book of the causes of dissension: But how proves he it
to be true? for none other reason forsothe but for that Luther is (as he
says) an Evangelist, and Brentius is an other S. Ihon. I think the thirtenth
Apostle. But as for these principles or grounds, there was never Catholic
that so much as dreamed them. so far is it that any man affirmed them or
defended them.

The true principles of Divinity with us are and have always ben these. The
principles of the catholic religion.
first the word of God to wit the doctrine of the prophets and the Apostles,
and brefely all the holy Scripture which we call the Bible. The second
principle is the right and Catholic sense and understanding of tbe word of
God delivered by the Apostles to their successors and by them spread through
the whole world, declared also in many Councels of the holy fathers and
brought in to Canons. For this Catholic exposition of the holy scripture,
because it was delivered unto the Apostles by Christ him self, and by them
left unto their lawful successors with the very text of the scripture,
therefore it is commonly called the Tradition of the holy fathers, and
oftentimes, the unwritten verite in respect of the written text. And because the
truth off the text and of the right understanding of the text must needs be
all one, truly our adversaries do slander us, fayning that in trial off
controversies we would beside the word of God set as judge the traditions of
men directly against the word of God. The third principle is that holy
continual succession of the Sea Apostolic and other bishops in the Catholic
church. For if we be able to prove by order of continual succession that all
bishops as well before us as now have allwaies expounded the holy scriptures
even as the first Apostles did, can there be any more certain way for the
understanding of scripture then this is? I would gladly hear what can be said
against it. The fourth principle is the unite and consent of the Catholic
church, Whereby it is made that the like truth be in every part that is in
the whole, and so contrary wise. These are (most Reverend Prelate) the right
principles of Christian doctrine: these are the foundations of all truth:
these as four quarres or corner stones hold up the Catholic church: and
therefore it is called One, Holy, Catholic, and Apostolic church. For of
these principles depends the Authorite of the councels. Of these the holy
Canons have their beginning: and of these, all laufull and laudable rites of
the church take force and strength.

These then being the principles of our religion, not those which Brentius
falsely charge us withal, Princes and rulers ought to look more nerer unto
the doings and sayings of their preachers. But now Bretius to make an
oppositio^ of the foresaid forged principles, our principles are (says he)
the word of God, Christ, and an assured certainte of our confidence in
Christ, But what is I pray you, this your word of God? This it is, that all
manner of folk, me^ and women, cooks and cobblers, baudes and buchers, tinkers
and tailers, pedlers and poticaries, minstrels and mummers, and all such like,
be priests, be bishops, be doctors, and pastors, and have authority to
administrat the Sacraments, to interpret Scripture, and what interpretation
each one by the drifte of his brain draws out of scripture, that to be the
pure gospel off the Lord, and the express word of God. This is not (right
Reverend father) the word of God, but the word of the devil him self,
inverted of Luther, not inspired by the sprit of God. For that man entending to
pervert all that appertained to God or to man, labored, travailed and
endeavored by all means possible, that there might remain no spiritual
magistrate which might by authorite discern between leper and leper, Leuit. 13.
maintaining the right doctrine of the gospel and removing the bastard. And
this labor of Luther being well liked of Satan, he imagined an other word of
God, as that among Christen men should be no civil magistrate: for all princes
were fools tyrans and men of no religion. In his book de seculari potestate.
to thentent that, if perhaps the heresies of Luther were condemned by the
Spiritual magistrate and so forth with committed to the secular sword princes
thereunto might have no authorite. Hereuppon he forbids Christen men to keep
war against the Turk, In a book against the two commau^dements of the
Emperor.
and commands subjects to rebel against their princes. Strait upon this
arose an other word of an other God, that all laws of chaste and single life
should be taken away, teaching among a sort of maids and young men that
Man was no more able to refrain his fleshly lusts then not to spet when
nature provoked. In lib. de Matrimo.
Again that fasting and abstinence from flesh nothing helped prayer, In libel.
de matrimo.
nothing furdered devotion made nothing to sobriety. These smaller points
being first all most conquered, he reaches to higher and diuiner matters.
First because he teaches that sin is not by the grace of baptime taken away
in deed, In Assertion ad Leone^.
but is said and fained only to be taken away, hereof he savve it would
follow that me^ ought not be esteemed righteous and good in deed, In his
sermons at Smalcaldium.
but only accounted and imputed for such. Then because he made no difference
nor degree of grace, he admitted no increase in virtue, and therefore could not
abide the Sacrament of Confirmation. Fardermore because if sin be not rooted
out if there be no increase of grace nor goodness, but al is only by manner of
acco^pte and imputing, the^ must he also infer, that the presence of Christ's
body may not be in earth, that no sacrifice be admitted, and (which followed
thereupon) no priesthood nether. And of this point the Zuinglians picked out
one word of their strange God and the Luthera^s an other. of this spring also
arose the doctrine teaching man to be justified by only faith: hope, charity,
repentance and other good works being pernicious and hurtefull to salvation.
what fruit then think you proceeded hereof? This sothely and many other. Calvin
in his institutions.
For if God does compel man to sin, as Luther and the Caluinistes do write,
how can God require good works or by what law can be punish sin, seeing
that he works sin in us, and good works are thought to be pernicious? And
truly if there be no reward for virtue there shall be no punishment for sin.
And then there is no hell nor place of punishment: as in the seacoste towns of
Germany it is taught: there is no devil to execute that punishment as Osiander
teaches.

This word not of God but of the devil being laid, Abominable heresies of
the Lutherans touching Christ.
this principle being put, an other principle concerning Christ ensued: as that
the humain nature of Christ is god, as the Swenckfeldians will have it, or
contrairely that Christ is not God as the Seruetians teach and Mathias
Flaccius, (...)
affirming that the word in the first of John is not the son of God.

Lo how fertile and abundant was this principle of Luther and Brentius. There
were in times past and are also now a days which openly deny Christ to be
the son of God: affirming him to be the son of Joseph and Mary. Which Mary also
had (as they say) many other children beside Christ. Other there be now which
teach the gospel of S. John to be a tale of Plato, baptim to be the
invention of the devil. And that there is not in God the Trinite of persons,
some other doubting whether this Trinite be man or woman. So taught even this
winter a certain new ghospeller in Sternberg a town of Morauia, Detestable
heresies concerning the Blessed Trinite.
and that with the favor of the people, but much against the will of the
Bishop of Omoluke their diocesian. There be now in Hungary also, which in
their baptim leave out clean the name of the Son. There be in many places the
Seruetians, which call the blessed Trinite by the name of the hellhownd
Cerberus whom the poets fained to have three heads. With like horrible
blasphemies two other ghospellers daily preach, the one in the hills of
Gutni, the other in Zary a village of Silesia. In Pintzou a town of Poleone
George Brandat and Peter Statorius teach openly that there is not one, but
three Gods, and each of them of diverse and distinct natures no less then three
diverse men. So that there is not one substance of the godhed but three, and
three different operations three diverse wills. And that the Son is less then
the father. As for the creed of Athanasius that it ought rather be called the
creed of Sathanasius the devil him self. And these fellows Brandat and
Statorius being admonished of such blasphemous doctrine, and required by what
authorite or whose persuasio^ they durst sow such blasphemies, they
answered, they were moved thereunto first by the authorite of Calvin, of
wolfgangus Musculus, of Peter Martyr of Bullinger and such like masters, then
by the evidence of the holy truth, which hitherto has layen hidd and now was
from God unto them reveled: These things to be as we say, Stanislaus a Baron
of the realm of Pole, Mathias Stadnitzky, and Franciscus Stancarus do write.

But because this parted confusion of so diverse opinions can not well be
perceived and is hard to be tried or discerned of such as gladly receive al
novelties, Luthera^s in Bohem teach the soul to die with the body.
there is vpsterte this very winter in Bohem a new Sect. The which to take
away this confusion, and to set forth a brefe and compendiouse way of the
Lutheran doctrine, teaches openly and affirms, that all other opinions and
doctrine of God, of the worshipping of God, of faith, of good or evil works,
and to be short of any salvation of man, be but old wives tales and fond
inuentio^s. This only to be a sure and infallible law and the true sincere
doctrine, that man both body and soul after this life utterly perishes, no
sense or life remaining after death here. Lo to what point the preachers of the
new ghospel have brought their doctrine unto. Lo the mark and scope of all
their doings.

The third principle of the Lutheran gospel is, says Brentius, an assured
certainte that every man has of his faith in Christ. But for the love of God,
what is this assured certainte of faith? May we not as well call day night and
light darkness? No certainte of faith in Luthera^s.
But what I pray you is this so assured and undoubted certeinte of faith
among the Lutherans? It is peraduen^ure that certainte of faith which for the
clerenes and evidence of it, has so surely and with such constant consent
and maruaylous agreement joined together the Lutherans, that in all their new
gospel no dissension can be found, no variaunce in any article of their
faith, no heresies at all in their doctrine may be espied. For if constant
certaynte bredeth true concord and agreement (as a certain philosopher wittely
reports) then surely vncertainte and wavering in opinions must needs bread
strife. Hereof then we may clearly gather how true this third principle of
Luther is: for such is the certaynte of their faith as the agreement of their
opinions is. The which how great and of what manner it is, they have them
selves declared, See the third part of this book.
and we will not dissemble it. These are the principles of the reformed
gospel laid by Luther, repeted by Bre^tius, and admitted of the whole swarm
of sectaries. Now because in the principle all is contained and many labels
depend thereof, what roufe think you will the devil buyld upon these
foundations of Luther? For the effect never excels the cause. Truly these
consequents and labels depended of such holy principles. the labels of the
Luthera^s pri^ciples.
To make of chaste members of Christ filthy members of an harlot, of devout
and well disposed Christians, wicked and unruly subjects, of sober and
temperat, glutons and Epicures, yelding to all filthy lust and pleasure, whose
belly is their God, whose faith is perfidiousnes and no faith at all. And to
this butte and scope of Luther many have preuily aimed at, but those of Bohe^
have now openly shot at it and stricken the very mark, preaching in open
pulpits that the soul dies with the body. But because Epicure him self
taught, that to get pleasure, a color of virtue must be cast, and the devil
perceauing well that public magistrates could better be changed the^ utterly
taken away, he thought better to train this herd of Epicures, fleshly and
worldly me^, to the yoke of Mahometa^s doctrine, being so sure they should be
his own, the^ to leave the^ under the roufe of the Catholic church where he
stood always in doubt to lose them. The devil therefore has so directed
allwaies and trained all contentions and variaunces in religion, that all
heresies end in the Alcoran Mahomets law.

All historiographers that write of the first beginning The law of the Turks
compiled by heretics.
of Turks affirm with one assent that the law of Mahomet written in the
Alcoran was compiled by one Sergius an Arrian, and Ihon a Nestorian both
ancient heretics, and of a certain Jew of the Talmudistes. Now although the
heresies which have in our unhappy time spronge up be many and diverse, yet if
the chief of the^ and most received were examined and co^ferred diligently
with those three sects above mentioned, we should plainly and evidently
perceive that the drift of the devil is no other now a days, Note the end
of present heresies.
then by the mean of these heresies to train us unawares from the faith of
Christ to the cursed infidelite of Mahomet. Petrus Statorius charge
Franciscus Stancarus with the heresy of Nestorius, and he again the other
with the heresy of Arrius. And because Stancarus is a famous Jew and
Talmudist, and Statorius is by profession a Caluiniste, parts has so hotly
and earnestly be^ taken on both sides, that now not only in Pole and Hungary,
which are Realms nighe unto the Turks, but also in Silesia, in Morauia, in
Bohem and other provinces more remote, great contentions have been kindled
thereupon and be yet hot. And what other thing (o merciful God) can we
look for? If Christen men call the faith of Christ in doubt, if they deny it
openly, if they embrace the abominable doctrine off Mahomet, is it likely that
whose doctrine they allow, his power and rule they will refuse? no truly. But
these may seem paradoxes and beyond all credence. Would God they were so. But
I fear me they are as true as the gospel. The causes be evident and open.
surely the event of all likelihood will be correspondent. Let them enquire that
be ignorant, and those that see and know the things to be as we say, let
them well waighe them. But I will not make so evil abodement. I will rather
wish and hope well. and much more rather would I be counted a liar and
improvident, that it might not so prove, then true and wise, that they should
so prove.

But now to couple more closely and to strike more directly our adversary
whom I labor here to save, I say, the only remedy for the mischef that
hangs on us, the only means to escape this utter destruction of Christendo^,
is to come back from whence we departed, to return to the unite and consent
of Christendom and all Catholic people. For why? be we Germans Christian men?
So are other nations and countres also. If then we be not the whole corpse off
Christendom, we are yet a part of it. But that part is foul (say the S.
Austen) ^ib. confess.
which agrees not with his whole. What then? surely this is the only medicine
for our desease, the only remedy for this mischef, the only hope of amendment,
if that we being not the whole corpse of Christendom but a part of it, suffer
not our selves to be persuaded, that any one part of the body can be saved:
when the whole perishes. The nature and property of a general council is, to
cure every part of Christendom, neglecting none. Such a council now
therefore being called and prouulgated we are al called, The council being
now ended we ought with other Christen countres conform ou our selves
thereu^to.
no man is excluded. Truly no man's greafe or desease can be so great, but that
the Counsel is able to remedy it. Nor none is of such virtue and perfection but
that by the council he may be more commended. Will we therefore avoid in time
ths paganism of these Epicures? let us all embrace the wholesome rule of
Christen faith, submitting our selves to the holy Council. Will we cast of
the yoke of Mahomet? Will we fly the idolatry of the Alcoran? Let us seek
unite, let us come unto the Council, and (all force of arms laid aside) let
us quietly and with leisure debate our cause, let us in all softnes and love
deliberat and co^sult of the public weal of us al. 1. Cor. 13.
For Charity as S. Paul teaches is patie^t, is gentle, Charity strives not,
it does not frowardly, it is not proud, not ambitious, it seeks not her own
interest. it is not provoked, it thinks no evil, it reioyseth not of iniquite
but is delyted in verite. it suffers al things, it believes al things, it
hops al things, it abides al things. If Chatite were in protestants they
vvoulde never refuse the Council.
Let this law of the Apostle and rule of Christian Charity be the foundation
of the proclaimed council, the manner of ordering it, and the intent of
debating in it. But you will say. We are grievously offended with them. Truly
that is great pity. But Charity is patient, suffers all things, is not
provoked. Our aduersaires be unlearned: Charity strives not, is not proud not
ambitious Our adversaries be rich and keep that is not their own. yea they
have that is ours. Charity seeks not her own interest, it does not
frowardly. It seems the council will deceive us and not keep promis with us
Charity thinks no harm, but believes al things, hops all things. But what
if peradventure we be there cast and condemned Charity reioyseth, not of
iniquite, but is delited in verite. Truly I am fully persuaded that if we
would all with this mind and intent come to the Council, we shoude seking
all for the truth quickly see an end of controversies, and seeking all unite
return home in perfect agreement.

But you require to know the judge and order of this council? In good time.
for the protestants would one of their flock to be judge and likewise the
Catholics of theirs: again they desire one order and these an other. For
private affections are on both sides feared, lest the true judgment be thereby
corrupted. How shall we then do to have a Judge void of all suspicion that
may uprightly judge? The Catholics desire no other judge of present
Controversies
Let the word of God and the Catholic and right interpretation of that word
be judge: in the which interpretation there is surely no less truth then in
the very text of the word of God. For what can be more impudent and
unreasonable then to embrace the text only and reiecte the right and Catholic
understanding of the same, (...).
to admit that is spoken, and refuse that is me^t, to urge the letter that of
it self kills and fly the spiritual meaning which gives life? Herein
therefore the greatest point of our debate consists when the Catholic shall
interpret holy scripture otherwise then the protestant or the protestant
otherwise then the Catholic, to know which of these two brings forth the
more Catholic, more right and more received interpretation. And in this debate
the end must needs be, that they be judged to have brought the righter, the
more Catholic, and the more received interpretation, which are able evidently
to show their interpretation alleged to be Catholic and Apostolical, that
is, to have proceeded from the Apostles, to have been received of their
successors, delivered from hand to hand by continual succession, and spread
through the whole corpse of Christe^dom, and so to have come and reached even to
us. They again must needs be thought to have alleged the false and bastard
interpretation of holy scripture; which are not able to deduct it from the
Apostles, nor to prove it universal.

As for example. A clear example off debating a controversy.
Let us suppose, that now in the council with these new Arrians of our days
this question were to be debated: Whether Christ be in deed, the Son of God and
of aequall substance with the father, or no. where as the Arrians deny this,
the Catholics do affirm it, and the Arrians for their part allege that
place of scripture where it is written, Pater mayor me est, The father is
greater then I am, Joan. 14. Joan. 10.
again the Catholics allege an other place, Ego and pater vnum sumus, I and
the father be alone: and each of them interpreting their place alleged, but
both of them diversely, what can now help the very written word of God and bare
text of the scripture to terminat this debate? the written word is on both
parts express and of both admitted. Wherein then stands the controversy?
truly not in the text but in the right understanding of the text. Not in that
which is spoken but in that which is meant. Is not this I pray you agreeable to
the word of God? stands it not with all reason, that the same interpretation
and understanding of an alleged text be judged right and lawful, which can
evidently be proved to have been derived from the Apostles and so received and
used in the whole corpse of Christe^dom? I verily can imagine no better. And with
this my judgment, agrees well that Noble and wise Emperor Theodosius, the
first, who in this very question of us propounded, chose for judge in that
controversy the Catholic and received interpretation of holy scripture. For
thus we read in the ecclesiastical history of Socrates, of one Sisinnius who
gave the Emperor this council to aswage the great contentions that were then
in the church, through that heresy of Arrius. This Sisinius was, Socrates. li.
5. cap. 10. Sozomenus li. a. ca. 17 Nicephor. libro. 12. Cap. 15.
as Socrates writes, an eloquent man, a man of much experience, very well seen
in the old writers expounding holy scripture and a good philosopher. This man
therefore perceauing that by disputations and conferences with heretics, the
schism grew on more, and wexed more co^tentious, he advised Nectarius then
Patriarche of Constantinople in this manner. The old writers (says he) teach
all ways the Son to be coeternall with the father, wherefore they never would
affirm that the Son had any beginning of substance. Good Counsel of Sifinius
to defeat heretiker.
Let us the^ leave these Logical disputations, and look unto the expositio^s
of the old writers. Put it therefore in the Emperors head that he call the
heretics before him and ask the^ what account they make of such doctors and
fathers, as wrote before their heresy began: and whether they judge them to be
Christen men or none of the church. If they mislike the^, let them (if they
dare) condemn and anathematise them. If they so do, the very people will
ouerrunne them. And so truth shall over come. But if they do not repel the
old doctors, it shall the^ be our part to bring forth their sayengs, and by
their testimonies confirm our doctrine. This being told of Sisinius,
Nectarius goes forth with unto the Court, and declares unto the Emperor the advice off Sisinius. who liking it very well, and going wisely about the
matter, called the heretics before him, and dissembling his purpose demanded
them only whether they made any account of the Doctors of the church which
lived before their heresy began or no. They not rejecting those writers but
calling them their masters and fathers, the Emperor asks them again whether
they would admit them as worthy witnesses of the Christen faith. The chief
masters of that heresy, hearing those words, doubted much what they might
answer. Whereupon they striued among them selves, some thinking the
Emperourment well, some mistrusting the issue of his demaundes, and perceauing
they made little for their purpose. For they were not all of one mind touching
the writings of the old fathers, differing in that point not only from other
religions, but also from them selves who professed all one religion. Thus their
wicked doctrine was discovered and confounded, as the buylders of Babel by
their variaunce in language. For the emperor preceauing their disagrement, and
seeing they trusted only upon contentious disputing, regarding not the
exposition of old writers, Old heretics despise the holy fathers as our
protestants now.
he took an otherwaie with them commanding that each religion should in
writing shortly comprise the effect of their doctrine and opinion. Thus far
the history of Socrates. That Sisinius though good not to dispute with
heretics, it was not his first devise. The holy canons had commanded the
same. In prescript
Tertullian and other holy fathers had written the same.

And the cause why they think it not expedient to try by disputation matters
of our faith is, why it be houeth not to dispute with heretics.
that all heretics do utterly take away the true principles off Christen
religion, which are the sure grounds off good disputation, and place in their
stead false and forged which are all uncertain: and may serve (as we see in
cou^ting) sometime for more, sometime for less, sometime nothing at all. For
he that takes away the general and the whole, how can he be sure of the
parts? Or if ye deny the substance, to what purpose were it to dispute of the
accident? To none at all. Therefore he that lists dialectically and schole
like to reason with an heretic, if he agree not first with him for the
principles, he shall fight he woteth not against what, nor to what purpose. and
sooner shall ye take a hare with a taburin then conclude a suttell heretic
with an argument. For he has no certainte in his doctrine: but is ready to
deny that he granted the last word before, and likewise to grant that he
last denied flitting and flieng as vauntage serves.

Brentius affirms the only text of the written word to be the first principle
of Lutheran religion. But in such sort that it may be lawful out of this
written text to cut of the epistle of S. James, Vide praefationes Lutheri in
hoslibros primae editio.
cast away the epistle to the Hebrews, refuse the Apocalypse of S. Ihon, and
condemn the books of Machabes. This principle serves also to reject any
other part of the whole Bible. for if any sentence evidently expressed in
sctipture be brought against him, strayte Brentius cries. The Hebrewe text
reads not so. The greek copies have otherwise. And this principle of the only
text serves so fit for these heretics purpose that for conference with them
no way can be made, nor end can be found. Then the Catholic and
Apostolical understanding of holy Scripture which is every where one and
allwaies agreeable with it self, which is derived from the Apostles, which is
the present judge in all controversies, they utterly refuse, and very rudely
and impudently appeal unto Christ, whom in earth present judge we can not
have. In Bohem and in the seacost towns of germany.
Whom yet some of them deny to be God, some to be man, and some other say he
is but a tale of Plato. And yet forsothe they boaste of the certainte of their
faith, which in deed is most uncertain, as their most manifest dissension well
declares.

A very vain and childish crake it is, to cry allwaies that their Confession
of Augspurg is grounded upon the doctrine of the prophets and of the
Apostles. For who says so, but they them selves and of their only fecte,
which first invented it and would impudently compel all Christendo^ to receive
it? But if you ask them how they prove it, they will say unto you, All the
articles of our Confession agree with the prophets and the Apostles, and differ
from thence in no point. O the madness of our country. That which is called in
question, they lay for their grou^des, bringing for proof that which ought to
be proved. What child in logic would so fondly reason? For if you deny again
that the articles of this their confession is grounded upon the doctrine of the
prophets and the Apostles, what have they then to say? peradventure left they
may seem to be put to silence they will begin to interpret and co^fer
Scripture together, after their manner. But is not this the foul fault in
logike called Petitio principij, that is, to ask that which ought to be
proved? For when we blame the Confession of Augspurg we blame nothing else but
the false and wrong interpretation of holy Scripture used in that Confession.
But you will say. We may as well refuse the interpretation that the Catholics
do bring of their own. Well truly and worthily. For who will hear the
Catholic doctor if he bring forth nothing, but say only that the doctrine
of the Catholic church is grounded in holy Scriptures? This must not be told
but be proved.

What then will the Catholic bring that the heretic shall not be able to
bring? He will surely bring and declare first the interprerarion of Scripture
which he uses to be universal, to have been derived from the Apostles, to be
received and allowed in all Christendom. Then he will show that every article
and principal point of our faith has been confirmed by miracles. Last of all
he will teach you that all matters of the Catholic church, which be proper of
the new testament, are found expressed by evident figures in the old
Testament: The difference between catholics and heretics.
What difference then is there between the right Catholic and the deceived
heretic? Truly herein heretics agree with the Catholics, that both embrace,
allege, and defend holy scripture as the very word of God, hut herein differ
all heretics from the Catholics, that these bring the Catholic and
universal interpretation of holy scripture, they bring their own private and
heretikall. These are able to prove their doctrine by miracles, they are never
able: Last of all, that these are able to show the matter of the new
Testament by the figures of the old law (as in the sacrifice, in the
s^craments, and ceremonies) they can not.

These two different ways being by just balances indifferently pondered, and
tried, it will soon appear which ouerwaieth the other. And in deed if they
bereue us of the common and received judgment of the whole church, wherewith
all things in the church are judged, why may they not in like manner take away
all the rest? For as if ye plucked out a man's eyes and yet would say that ye
bereued him not of that which might be seen, even so it is, if heretics grant
us the text of the bible and yet take from us the true understanding thereof.
If it forces not whether we understand holy Scripture rightly or no, how
shall we then discern fashood from the truth? Whereby shall we try the
truth, or what judgment shall the church have of the truth? And who would
follow such teachers of religion which confounds truth and falsehood
together, which spoileth us of all judgment of the truth, which leaves us no
means to try the truth, which blinds and blereth our eyes of all
intelligence? Yet in better case were the Cimmerij, who although they had lost
the light of the Son, yet might use the fire. But these men that take away
from us the consent of Christendom and the judgment of the church, which
mock and scorn at the miracles of God, which refuse the doctrine and figures
of Moses, do leave us in such horrible darcknes, that we have not so much as
one sparckle of light remainin^ Even in the time of the Apostles heresies
sprange up, Actor. 8.
as of Simon Magus, of Hermogenes, of Philetus, and such like. 2. Tim. 1. The
mark of the heretics of the primitive church.
But by what mark trow ye was the doctrine of these heretics known from the
doctrine of the Apostles, but that the Apostles and all, that followed them were
Of one heart, one mind, and one belefe? And this only touchestone left Christ
to know the church by: Actor. 4.
that whereas two or three be gathered together in his name, and agree in any
matter, Math. 18.
there he is to be found in the midst of them. This consent then and
agreement in any matter, as in the Apostolical doctrine, and right
understanding of holy Scripture, being uniform and all one in all, how can it
not be the sure and certain judgment of the Apostolical doctrine and of the
church? Beside as in Christ him felse, so in his Apostles it happened that
such as believed not their words through infirmity, were yet forced to believe
their miraculous works, they being an evident proof from God of their
doctrine. Farther such order of the church, as the Apostles began to frame, and
left to their successors to be perfited and thoroughly poolished: they thought
it to be shadowed in the figures of Moses law, and expressed in the light of
the new law. But what like to these marks of the true church did Simon Magus,
Hermogenes, and Philetus bring? even so much as now of late, Luther,
Melanchthon, and Calvin. For these new doctors be not of one heart, one
mind, nor one belief, The same marck in our heretics.
and much less such disciples as followed these false preachers. For these
dissent in every point, agree in no point: and therefore Christ the author and
God of unite is not among them, but the devil the master of all dissension.
Calvin very childishely and vainly going about to excuse him self, says
that the Luthera^s are no more to be blamed for that so diverse and so horrible
heresies spring up now a days in every place, then the Apostles were in
their time, under whom many haeresies also sprange up. A notable testimony of
the Caluinistes against Luther.
This makes nothing for your excuse, Calvin. You deny flat Master Calvin and
so do al your companyons of Zurich that Luther was any prophet at all or in any
point like to the Apostles. But you say the devil spoke in his mouth, not
the holy ghost. In the third treatise of the church of Zurich against Luther.
The which testimony of your church of Zurich the truer it is, the more ye
prove the very same devil to speak in your selves. For the very same Luther
in diverse points of your doctrine you follow, whom you write and affirm to
speak by the instinct of the devil. All nevve sects have begone of Luther
And what new sect is now in any place of Christendom which has not drawn
the first act of his tragedy out of Luthers schole? whence took Munzer the
beginning of that great rebellion of the commons in Germany but of Luther? In
a book against the two co^mau^de^ments off Caesar.
For He forbad men openly to obey their princes and condemned al war again
the Turks whom he writes to be tenfolde better then our foolish and mad
princes. So he terms them. Whence dug out the Anabaptists that carre^ of
the old heresy of the Donatistes? Out of a certain epistle of Luther ad
Walde^ses, in the which he writes, That it were better not to baptize children
at all then to baptize them without faith. Whence took Carolostadius occasion
to renew the heresy of Berengarius? Out of his commentary on S. Ihon and the
translation of these words (...) The flesh profits nothing. Ican. 6. See
the 3. treatise of the church of Zurich and The ^eauenly prophets off Luther.
I reaken here up the notable and principal sects only of our time. I could
say as much of the baser sort, if it were needful, which are so diverse and
so many, that we see almost as many sects as families among the Lutherans.

For these therefore and other weighty considerations, which all to recounte
were now out of time, If I might be credited or bear any authorite among
princes in this matter, (most Reverend prelate) I would give the^ that advise
that Sisinius made unto the Emperor Theodosius. That is. They should charge
and command their preachers and ministers to accept and acknowledge for right,
that sense and understanding of holy scripture, which is Catholic and may be
derived from the Apostles, and approved by the testimony of miracles: and that
to be false which is private, of their own forging, and whereof they be not
able to show any further evidence. And truly unless this advise other by my
suggestion or by some other ma^s be not put in to the head of princes and
persuaded them, we shall never live in quiet: the church will be ouerrunne,
and we of Germany shall other become slaves to the Turks as the greeks are, or
to the Moscouites, as the Liflandmen are, or (which will be more miserable) we
shall be utterly in perpetual thraldom as the Jews, the Hungarians, and many
other countres are now. But I will leave (as I said) these evil abodements.
and will pray unto God, that it will please him rather to bear down our
sins with the balance of his mercy then to exact them to the rigor of his
justice: granting to our adversaries the love of Christian and Cathol^ke
concord, and to us the amendment to a perfi^ life.

The wrath of God is slow, and although allwais just, yet never without
mercy, if at lest we labor rather to try it merciful then just. For it
inuiteth us first to acknowledge our sin and expects our repentance before
it pronounces sentence to condemn us. And what may we thinck of the
providence of God, taking away the ancient and aged princes and leaving alive
the young, which for their tender age and small experience are like to swerve
and miss in many matters? Within the co^pas of these three years or there about
what number of princes, kings and Queen's, have departed this world? And to
begin with the most principal, The Emperor Charles the fifte died the last
year. The death of many great Princes in a short time.
About that time died his two sisters, Leonore wife unto Frauncis the^ french
king, and Mary wife unto Loys king of Pannonia. Mary also Queen of England
married unto king Philip his son. About that time also died Ihon king of
Portugal, Bona wife unto Sigismunde king of Pole, and Isabell his daughter
married unto Ihon king of Hungary. Not long after also died two kings in
Denmark, Christern and Christian son to king Friderike which had long kept
the other in prison. Shortly afther these Harry the French king died, and a
little before him Paul the fourth B. of Rome. What shall I now talk of the
death of inferior princes? In the compass of a short time died four of the
Princes Electours of the Empire, Moguntia.
the bishops of Treuires, of Ments, and of Colonie, and Ottohenricus, Count
palatin of the Rhene, and in Italy the Duke of Venis. But what shall I speak
of those which died this last month, In No^th. An. 1560
Gustanus king of Suethland, Frauncys the second, the french king, and
Ernestus Duke of Bauaria? Michael also Archbishop of Salisburg a virtuous and
learned bishop, the bishops also of Frising and of Eystat your predecessor have
about this time ben taken out of this world. And although it be true that
Euripides says. (...) al me^ are borne to die, and that Eschilus an other
poet writes (...). To search out the cause of death is in the secrets of
fortune, yet the like is not of such strange and rare manner of chances. True
it is and by a most just order of nature has allwaies ben a constant and sure
ratified law that which Horace the poet writes. Pallida mors aequo, and cae.

With like force and foot, death strikes at the door
Of the princes high palais and the cottage of the poor.
But that so many kings, so many Queen's, so many Princes in so short a compass
(as of three years) should all depart this life, it is a rare matter: the like
whereof has in few ages happened. And may we think this to be a mere chance
and casualtie, or rather to have proceeded of the infallible providence of God?
Truly as the first I can not think, so the last I must needs believe. For does
not God by the mouth of his prophet Esaias declare us his divine providence
herein? Esaiae. 3.
For Lo (he says) the Lord God of hosts does take away from Jerusalem and
Judah every valiant and strong, abundance of bread and of water, the mighty
and man of war, the judge and the prophet, the wise and the aged man, the
prince of fifty years old and the honorable, the Senators and me^ of
understanding, the master of crafts and the well spoken wisema^. And I shall
give the^ children to be their princes, and the delicious, and wa^ton shall
have the rule of the^, the people shall be ouerru^ne, and one man shall be set
against an other, every man against his n^ighbour. Tbe boy shall presume
against the elder, and the vile person against the honorable, and so forth.
Thus the p^ophets in times past did so pronounce of the Jews, that it may well
seem to be me^t also of us Germa^s. The truth of the prophet concerning the
Jews the event declared. And that he will not lie touching us, it is not need
to declare in words, the daily experience does show it.

But seeing that this mischef is so far grown, Non nisi (...).
that by only repentance we may escape the rod, better it were for us to
amend our selves quietly, then to reprehe^d other sharply: seeing that so it is
now, that if as an inferior you do brotherly advertise men, you avail nothing
by entreating: and again if as a superior you command you get nothing by
forcing. Peradventure therefore (as S. Basile says) in the like cause of a
common vice (...) Better a man to hold his peace then to speak, In orat.
aduers. ebrios
Being the part of a good orator as well in time to keep silence as when
occasion serves to talk. For as by doing the one he profits much, so by
neglecting the other he hurts sometime. And this the nerer I considre, the
more loathe I am to set upon this enterprise. And truly if I followed herein my
own private quarrel, I might worthily seem vndi^cret and rash, which would
prefer my private commodite or incommodite before the public and common, or
would esteem my private displeasure more then the profit and instruction of
many. But the love of truth shall here ouercom. which as it is oppressed by
silence, so being discovered takes force again. I had rather therefore, if I
must needs somewaies offend, smarte for telling the truth, then for
dissembling by flattery. Therefore if I declare that which I have perceived,
if I advertise men to beware of the mischef that I have incurred my self, I
trust in so doing I shall offend no man. I know there are among the rulers
and noble men, which if they plainly perceived the deceites of these heretics,
and knew what mischef arises thereby to them selves, to theirs, and to the
whole common welthe, they would not slowly and slackely as I did very unwise,
but with speed as wise men return to the trade of ancient and Catholic
religion.

Therefore writing this book (most Reverend) I have eftesoones joined tears
with prayers beseching almighty God as well for my enemies as for my friends,
that it will please him of his goodness to give us all one mind, and one
understanding, that we may know no other thing, 1. Cor. 2.
nor think our selves wise in any other point, then in Jesus Christ and he for
us crucified, For he is the shoot anchor of all Christian religion, he is the
only port of our salvation. Who so straieth from him, he leseth God and life
everlasting. And to this end have I directed both all other trauaill of my
life, and this my present labor, that the unlearned might hereby charitably be
admonished, and the learned might have occasion better and depelyer to consider
these matters. In the mean season I have endeavored that in such things as I
bring out of stories and factes of our time I might content all men, offend no
man. But if there be any man that thinks him self offended with this my
book, other because I have spoken more plainly then he would I should, other
because he takes my words otherwise then I meaned, him I beseech most heartily
that he call upon me and hear what I can say for my self. Surely I shall not
be so froward nor so unkind, but being better instructed of any man, I will
with all courtesy thank him therefore: and much more will I be glad to
submitt my self to the lawful and Catholic censure of the church. Which
being most reasonable, if I can nether by entreating, nether by any right
obtain of my adversaries, I will patie^tly suffer, by God his help, all that
may happen, and will defend notwithstanding according to my power, the truth
of God his word as long as I live. Contenting my self for all reward of my
pains, if I may by this small trauaill either call any one back thas is gone
astraye, or confirm any man that has hitherto remained in the truth.
Especially in this your Diocese, most Reverend Praelat to whom this university
of Ingolstad is subject. Wherefore I most humbly commend unto you both this
schole, especially the study of Divinity therein, and me and all mine.

Fare you well.

Written on Christmas eve, in the end of the year. 1560. To your most Reverend
highness the most affectioned FRIDERICVS STAPHYLVS Counselor to the Emperoures
Majesty, etc.

TO THE CHRISTIAN READER GRACE FROM GOD AND PEACE.
IT is an old and much received, but a very evil custom, that such as can
not abide the truth told them, De^ost. proc^ro^a.
use to slander, backbyte and rail at other, especially for that by instinct
of nature (as a wise ethnike writes) men are more busy to epsy other men's
fautes then virtues. And although this wicked custom has always from the
beginning ben practiced, proceeding of the corrupted nature off man: yet never
in any age it has so much be^ used as now sense Martin Luther brought out to
light the fifte gospel, and sent abroad in to the world these unhappy and
vnghostely ghospellers, which all Christendom now almost to their great lost
and destruction, is stuffed and stifled with all. For where as this ghospel can
neither be proved by any evidence of truth, neither (as the true gospel was)
be confirmed by operation of miracles, these new preachers of our days have
turned all their force and power an other way, A charitable shifte of the
protestants.
laboring to the and nail, by right and by wrong, and by all means possible
to bring the old Catholic doctors, and al such as follow them in infamy,
obloquy, and reproach to all the world. And this lesson our adversaries have
very perfitly learned of their Master Luther, and have practiced this precepte
all ways having to do with me or any other Catholic man. Neither will they by
any means be brought from this their charitable custom while they live,
perceauing well that by this crafty means they get more ground and deceive
more the people, then ever they were able to do by plain and upright dealing.
Truly as for my part, I confess before God and his divine judgment, my sins
to be great and many, which can rejoice in no other thing, nor otherwise
pray, then that good king David, using these words. Psalm. 141.
Lord hear my prayer: hear me in thy righteousness, and enter not in to
judgment with thy servant, for no living man may be justified in thy fight,
to the which that notable sentence of S. Austen also agrees, saying. Lib.
confess. 9. cap. 13.
Woe even to the commendable life of men, if thou o Lord do examine and try
the^ without thy mercy. And thus must every man (be he never so holy and
perfect) judge of him self, if he respect the terrible judgment of almighty
God, wherewith no man can stand without his mercy through Christ Jesus. But in
civil policy and trade of this world, where the good a bearing of subjects
is required, every man ought so to order his life that he may without groudg
of conscience say. I can be charged with nothing, howebeit I justify not
myself herein. 1. Cor. 4.
And that saying of the prophet. Psalm. 7.
Judge me o lord according to my righteousness. For this is our glory, 2. Cor.
1.
as the Apostle says, the testimony of our conscience. Although therefore as
I said before, I acknowledge my self for a great sinner, yet not with
standing all days of my life (be it not spoken for any pride) I have allwaies
endeavored to have the testimony of an upright conscience, that I might give a
count to such as required it of me, both of my belefe and of my conversation.
For this is the straight commandment of almighty God, and the doctrine of S.
Peter the Apostle, saying: Be ye ready allwaies to give an awnswer to all that
shall ask you a reason of the hope that is in you, 1. Pet. 3.
and that with mekenes and fear, having a good conscience: that whereas they
backebite you as euilldoers they may be ashamed that falsely accuse your good
conversation in Christ. The which weighty precepts of holy scripture
commanding expressly every man to be ready to geueaccompte of his hope and
conversation, I being so bitterly and roughely provoked of my adversaries,
could not but purge and defend my self as reason required: For as S. Hierom
^aieth: He that neglects his good name, is cruel and unnatural toward him
self, Lib. de bono viduita it is. cap. 22.
and as S. Austin says, Our life we maintain for our own sakes. our good
name for other men's. The wise man also says. Better is a good name then much
riches, and to be loved is worth better then gold or silver. Prou. 22.
And the common talk tells us, who has lost his good name, is more the^
half hanged. For these reasons therefore and diverse other, I have thought
expedient to write, and set forth this brief and short Apology to the^te^t
that according to the duty of a Christian man (because other ordinary means of
trial our adversaries admit not) I may declare to the world my innocence
herein, and remove the heinous flawnders of my adversaries, which they lay out
continually against me in pulpits, in grammar schools, in their writings and
in famous libels.

To suspend therefore no longer the Godly and Christen reader, we will now
enter our Apology being divided in to three parts. The first is of the true
and right understanding of the word of God and the gospel which they say I
did before embrace and follow, but now, I abhor and persecut. The second part
is of the translation of the holy bible in to the vulgar German tongue. whereof
they babble that I go about amd devise to make an inhibition against the reading
of the german bibles. The third part is of certain articles in controversy,
which the Lutherans partly for shame deny, partly go about to reconcile with
the rest of their doctrine. To the end that hereby they may persuade the
world that I belied the^ hitherto, affirming such to be their articles, and
charging them with dissension among themselves.

With these three points, by the grace of god, I shall defend my simple
conversation and give due information of my belief, using herein a plain and
familiar style of our vulgar tongue: that the simple lay man may also
understand me, declaring sincerely and with all modesty, the truth in all
points, without railing, biting, or any other uncivil demeanor. For so it
becomes well meaning men to do. Although my adversaries to bring me in infamy
and reproach omit no such kind of rethorike, laieng on great lode of lies
and reproaches, whereby they have cut away all honest means of reconciliation,
avoiding al manner of judgment and civil trial. Being yet from god commanded
by Moises, That all controversies and debates should be tried by the lawful
Magistrate. Deute. 17.
For this has always ben my only desire and is yet, that my adversaries
which either privily or in open libels cease not to backbite me, co^ue^t me
before my ordinary and lawful magistrate, and there make their complainte: not
making them selves the party plaintiff and defendant, yea and judges in their
own cause: as against all order and law, both spiritual and temporal they
have hitherto most impudently done. Truly as I haueben allwaies, so am I now
ready and desirous to present my self before my ordinary Magistrate, and to
abide the whole order and process of the laws against me. For thanked be God I
know my life and conversation has been such (be it not spoken for any pride)
that I am not ashamed nor afeard to show my face before any man a live. The
cause of the protestants grief against Staphylus.
And sure I am that if I had not labored with the Emperors Majesty and other
Catholic princes for the maintenau^ce of the Catholic religion against
heretics, my life should never have be^ touched of the^. But seeing that the
Catholic doctrine it self (praised be God) can not by any good, reason or
color be impugned, they lay at my person, and fight against me, letting the
doctrine it self alone. Using this argument that I against my own conscience
only for honor and riches sake, defend the Catholics, whereas yet they know
well them selves, that I have sustained the loss of some thousands of crowns,
and empaired much the health of my body, in the quarrel of the Catholic faith.
But howsoever the matter goes, 2. Tim. 2.
Our Lord knows who are his, and he tries the hearts of men, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
Lib. 5. st^matum.
and (as Clemens Alexandrinus writes, Math. 16.
No man is so great but God passes him, nor no man so small but God espieth
him, and he shall give to every man according to his deserts. If I therefore do
against my conscience herein, woe is unto me, For only God knows the
conscience of man. But if I do vprightely herein, woe is unto you that take upon
you the secret judgment of God. And thus far off my self enough. Let us
now come unto the matter.

OF THE TRVE AND RIGHT UNDERSTANDING OF HOLY SCRIPTVRE.
AS touching the first part, whereas they lay to my charge that I labor to
oppress and tread under foot the holy gospel and word of God, having before
professed the same, etc. To this I answer plainly that herein they deal
very discourteously with me, and do injuriously slander me. And I am very sure
they have not one jot to prove this their saying by. But to remove this their
vain, and forged opinion with sure and undoubted reason, I would gladly know
of them what is that they call the holy gospel and word of God. Here if they
awnswer me that the word of God is no other thing, then the holy scripture,
commonly called the Bible, that is, the old and new Testament, the^ again I
awnswer the^ they do most injuriously slander me. For they are never able to
prove that ever I rejected or persecuted any one little peace or parcel of the
gospel or of the law. But I embrace and reverence all the holy Bible, the
law, and the ghospel: and take it for no less the^ the very word of Gods
mouth. Yea and I grant, that sooner heaven and earth shall perish then any one
jot of that word. Mar. 13.
Which I dare say not only for my own part, but in the name of all Catholic
Christians: The Catholics have the word of God no less then the ptotestants.
which hitherto even from the Apostles time almost these thousand six hundred
years without any intermission have read in churches, song always in public
service of the Mass, and taught openly in pulpits, and have also in the common
breuiaries and portyses of the Roman use comprised almost the whole corpse of
the Bible: and that in such order, that the priests are bound wekely to read
over the whole Psalter, and yearly for lessons almost all the gospel and
epistles, and prophets, as the most ancient custom practiced so many hundred
years past, of the Canonical hours, the Prime, the Third, the Sixth, the
Ninth hours, Euensong, and Complin does well declare. which disposition and
order of times, Actor. 3.
was off the Apostles them selves (as it may appear in the Acts and other
where) so well and diligently appointed, that to every day for the hours of
our lords passion, psalms, lessons and ghospells do correspond, with a
reverent and devout remembrance of Christ's benefits. whereby the church from
the beginning unto our time through out the whole world, would testify and
teach unto us, that all holy scripture ought to be construed and grounded on
the passion of our Savior Jesus Christ, as in the true corner stone for the
salvation of our souls, as hereafter we shall in his due place by the
scripture most plainly prove. It is therefore a wonderful slander that these
men say of the Catholics. That hitherto the gospel and the word of God
has been bannished from the church, A lovvdlie of the Luthera^s against the
Catholic church.
kept in hucker mucker, and at the length under the pope to have been utterly
extinguished: but now is revoked unto light: therefore those that embrace this
new gospel, to be worthily called men of the gospel, but that we which
follow our sweet parents and forefathers with the whole Catholic church, keeping
and maintaining the old Apostolical doctrine must be called wicked papists.

But here, Note well.
he that has eyes to see, let him open them, and he that has any regard of
his salvation, let him here take heed. for this is that suttell deceit of these
protestants, and the mist wherewith they dim the eyes of the simple people,
making them believe that they only profess the word of God. And yet these new
preachers and masters know very well them selves the contrary: as Luther him
self in his book against the Anabaptists and the Zuinglians witnesses,
saying that among the papists, that is, in the church of Rome, the holy
gospel and all holy scripture with all the books, sentences, words and
pricks thereof has remained in continual succession of time, uncorrupted
whole and perfect. which makes me more to maruaill, what wicked and malicious
sprit moved these protestants, to term them selves only ghospellers and
professors of Gods word, calling the Catholics papists, and enemies of the
word of God: seeing that both now and in all ages, we read the gospel in
our churches, we preach the word of God in our pulpits, and interpret it to
the people: we express it by outward ceremonies, rites, and gestures, such as
we have received of our forefathers, even from the primitive church and the
Apostles time. And this Luther knew him self well enough. But why dissembled
he it then? forsothe to deceive and entrappe the easier the simple people in to
his pretended religion. For Luther and all his ministers know very well that in
the ghospel and word of God two In the word of God two things are to be
considered.
things are to be considered. First that the text be sownd and not corrupted:
then that the same text be expounded Catholikely and not heretically. For as S.
Bernard says, look with what sprit the scriptures were written, Ad fratres de
monte Dei.
with the same must they be read and understood. Seeing then the text by the
instinct of the holy ghost has been given us true and perfect, the understanding
also and interpretation thereof, coming of the holy ghost must be true and
perfect: so that one shall be as true, and of as much force as the other. It is
not enough therefore to read holy scripture perfitly, but to understand it
well also. Aduers. Luciferianos.
For (as S. Hierom says) The scriptures consist not in reading but in
understanding. All this Luther was not ignorant of. But to deprave and corrupt
the right interpretation of holy scripture, and to bring in place his own
heretical and forged expositions, he makes no mention off the text, but
cries still the word of God, calling the dreams of his brain, pure and holy
scripture. For if ye ask of the Lutherans when they preach that God
co^straineth men to do evil, Lutherus inassertio. Mela^chtho^ in Paulu^ ad
Romans Caluinus i^institut.
that God was the cause of Judas his reprobation and obstinat desperation, that
good works are hurtefull to salvation, and such like matters, what manner of
doctrine that is, they will incontinently awnswer you, that This is the pure
gospel, the sincere word of God, and holy scripture it self. But then if ye
go farther, and desire them to show you these very words and propositions in
holy scripture, there they hush. Yet will they tell you, that the words in
deed them selves be not in the Bible, but the meaning of them is there. To the
which if ye reply again, and urge them farther it will soon appear, that the
controversy between the protestants and us, is not of holy scripture it self,
but of the true understanding of the same. And so S. Hilary having to do with
heretics in his time pronounced. Lib. 2. de Trinitate.
Heresy, says he, is in the understanding not in the scripture. And truly all
heretics never cried other thing the^ the holy scripture, the word of God:
and we that are Catholics also have holy scripture allwaies in our mouth.

Now then a man may maruaill and ask, how comes it to pass that the
Lutherans and the Catholics, the protestants and the papists strive and
contend so one with an other, where as yet both have the gospel, both love
and embrace it, both cleave unto it, and both are ready to spend their good
and their life for it? Here I beseech the, Christian reader mark and perceive
well: Note well
that this is not the controversy, whether the Catholics or the Lutherans
What is all the co^trouersy between the catholics and the protestants.
have the word of God, but which of them, does truly, rightely, and sincerely
expound that word off God. For this is the Lutherans common saying: The
papists understand not the Bible, but we have found the right interpretation
thereof and the kaye of all truth. And to set a good color upon this holy
protestation they say farther. That all bisshops, prelates, priests and Monks
be all without lerning, all incontinent, all of evil life, geauen to
covetousness, to pleasure, and to the belly. But they the^ selves, that is, the
Lutherans be learned, chaste, sobre, liberal, deuowte, and of perfect life, and
such as have done great miracles and yet do. Neither are these impudent
heretics ashamed of these loud lies, although all the world well knows it
is nothing so: while they see Churches, Remember the state of germany of
Scotland and the late spoil in France.
hospitalls, religious houses of all sort, colleges, and bishoprics, of
these men partly clean overthrown, partly rifled, all taken into their
hands, and converted into palaces, armories, barnes, cole houses, shops of
Marchaundrise, yea and in some places, in to stables. The miracles of the nevve
gospel.
These lo be the miracles of this new gospel abundantly practiced all this
forty years. As for other miracles, not one of these new ghospellers was ever
able so much as to cure a lame colte, or a halting biche. so far is it, that
these me^ could ever cast out devils, heal the lame, cure the blind, restore
the deaf, or raise up the dead. all which miracles many holy fathers of the
old gospel (as I may so speak) which these men call Papists have wrought
from time to time in Christ his church, as right approved histories do
manifestly declare.

Now as for the good and perfect life of these men, and excellent lerning, all
the world sees it. An old sort of heretics called Donatistes objected in
times past to S. Augustine the very same argument, saying that their church only
was upright, holy, pure and learned. But the Catholic church was nothing so.
And therefore the doctrine of the Donatistes was undoubtedly sou^de and perfect,
but that of the Catholics false and untrue. But what awnswered the^ here S.
Augustine? In lib. de vnitate ecclesiae.
The argument (says he) that proves men's doctrine by their life is false.
But let us suppose that these holy protestants passed all the universal
Catholic church of Christ sens the time of the Apostles, both in godliness of
life, and excellency of lerning. Which I think in good sothe they will not al
together affirm, But if it were so, it will not yet thereuppon ensue, that only
the Lutherans understand holy scripture, and the Catholics never understood
it. Difference between life and doctrine.
For if the right intelligence of holy Scripture be only to be sought among
such, as will stoutely affirm of them selves to pass all the rest of men, in
vprightnes of life and excellency of lerning, then in very deed must we needs
leave this great treasure of the right meaning of holy scripture unto
heretics. For in all ages heretics allwaies craked of their great lerning and
perfect life: as the ecclesiastical histories well declare of the Arrians, the
Man^ches, Luther in parua Confessione co^tra Zuinglianos.
the Pelagians and such like. And what other thing does Luther in many of his
works, especially in his book against the pope, Then call the old Catholic
writers and holy fathers, fools, asses, Libr. quod Papatus supra infernu^
exstructus sit.
rude and unlearned, babes of the pope, hermaphrodites, and such like. Neither
contemns he only the Catholics, Libr. co^trae coelestes prophetas.
but even his own companions and fellow heretics also as Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius, and other of that batche. The pride of Luther.
Yea this man father of all this bessed brood of protestants, so highely
extolleth him self, In sua Apologia co^trae postremam Lutheri co^fessionem.
so presumptuousely dispiseth all the world, like an other Lucifer, that the
protestants them selves of Zurich write plainly, that now no more the holy
ghost, but the spirit of pride and presumptuousnes speaks in M. Luther.
Illiricus also and his companions crake they not likewise of their virtue, and
great lerning? especially Illiricus, how boasts he that he was perfitly seen
in Aristotle, and had written maruailouse much upon him? But what does holy
scripture speak to these proud boasters? S. Peter says. God resists the
proud, 1. Pet. 5.
and gives grace to the make and humble. And the prophet says of god. Psalm.
103.
Thou art he which poorest out the fountains in the low valleys. not in the
tops of hills. Again in an other place. Every vallie shall be exalted,
Esaiae. 40
and every high hill shall be plucked down. It is therefore a great vanity
of them to judge and pronounce so proudely of the^ selves, seeing that the
Apostle of such men says. Romans 1.
Saying them selves to be wise they have proved fools, and their foolish heart
has been darkened.

But now touching the integrite of life and virtuous behavior of the
Lutherans, I would be loathe to report thereof my self. Surely I see Luther to
doubt very much thereof. For in his great postill upon the gospel of the
first Sunday in Aduent, he cries out and complains. That by his gospel men
were become far worse then they were before A notable testimony of Luther of
the life of his scholars.
under the Pope. For wickedness and vice had so far grown in his ghospellers
that they seemed almost become devils. And truly this is a sure token of false
prophets. For Of thorns who gathered grapes or of brambles who gathered figs
at any time? Math. 7. Luc. 6.
For look what the tree is, such is the fruit. such master such scholar, such
doctrine such living.

Now where as they again object unto us the evil and disordinat life of the
prelates of the church and of the clergy, as that they be gloutons, dronckards,
ambitious, horehunters, and so forth, I will not here presently defend them,
that are such. It is surely much to be lamented, that the life and behavior
off the reverent priesthood awnswereth not to their godly and high profession:
but is very scandalouse to the world, even in such places as the church is by
heretics corrupted and persecuted. Notwithstanding I doubt not although in
many of the clergy it be found true that the Lutherans say of the^ touching
evil life, yet there are a great number of virtuous and learned bishops and
priests, of deuowte and perfect religious men, such as among the Lutherans
were hard to find. But it were better in this case and more semely for
Christen charity, that each part looked in his own wallet, Math. 7.
and first Took out the beam of their own eyes, for so shall they see better
to take out the mote off their neighbors eye, 2. Timo. 2.
And herein whatsoever the judgment of man say, God knows who are his, and
who are in deed virtuous or contrary. Wherefore our faith and belefe must not
be pinned to the life of the clergy or preachers. Again repetau^ce of the
most wicked may be soden and secret.
For by this reason we are not sure of the due administration of any Sacrament,
neither can we trust any preacher of the word of God, seeing that we are not
able to judge whether the priest or the preacher be a man of upright life or
otherwise. But our Savior Jesus Christ to take away this doubt, and to assure
unto us the verite of his Sacraments duly administered by the clergy thereunto
chosen, A perfect rule to discern fall se preachers.
and the preaching of his holy word by their mouth, he has left unto us a
sure and certain rule to know the false preachers and prophets from the true,
and to discern the doctrine from the person that teaches. And this rule has
three parts.

The first is when the doctrine is good in it self, but the life of the
teacher is evil and fauty. The second, when the life of the teacher is good
and virtuous, but his doctrine false and vicious. The third is to know how
the doctrine may be tried by the life off the teacher, and how the life of the
teacher may be tried by his doctrine.

As for the first part, Christ gives us a very good lesson what to do, The
first part.
when the doctrine is good and the life is naught, saying The scribes and
pharisees sit in the Chair of Moises. Matthew. 23.
What soever they shall say unto you, keep it and do it: But do not according
to their doings. By the which words of our Lord, we see that the lerner ought
not so much to regard the life of the teacher as the doctrine. For it may be
that his doctrine be sownde and good, wose life is evil. For although that as
well in the former ages, as now a days we find many of right good lerning,
which have preached and taught the word of God sincerly, yet some of such
live not accordingly. Neither is there at this day any point wherein the
people more grudgeth against the clergy then that many of the^ lead their life
clean contrary and repugnant to their own Canons and constitutions. For many
of them can tell a trim tale in the pulpit, exhort the people very demeurely
to a sobre and perfect life, but will not ones move a foot to live well them
selves. And now (alas) it is to true that our lord says by the prophet of
his church. Esaiae. 5.
I have long looked that my vineyarde should have brought forth grapes, but lo
it has brought forth brambles, and a little after. Woe be unto you which rise
up early to follow dronknes, and to drink vntell the evening, that they be set
on fire with wine. In your companies are harpes and lutes, tabrets and pipes,
but ye regard not the work of the lord. Can this be denied? it is, alas, to
true. But what then? is this their living accounted virtuous? is this
Catholic? No Catholic nor Christen man will say so. The doctrine of our
religion utterly forbids these things and the Catholic church condemns
them. Neither ca^ all this preiudicat in any point to the doctrine of the
Catholic church. For (as our Savior said) Do all that they shall say unto
you, Math. 23.
but do not as they do. and again. First cast out the beam of thy own eye,
Matthew. 7.
and then thou shall see to cast out the mote of thy brothers eye. And in an
other place. Joan. 8.
Who so ever of you be without sin let him cast the first stone against her.
Again. Galat. 6. Romans 2.
We must carye one an other his burden that we may be all saved. We must not
rashely judge other, least we be judged to.

The second part now is clean contrary to this: The sco^d part of the ruie.
as when men of good and sobre behavior preach false and heretical doctrine:
of these our Savior gives us warning, in these words. Matthew. 7.
Take ye head of false prophets which come unto you in shepes clothing, but are
within ravening wolves. Did not the Picards clothe them Heretics of great
virtue in appare^ce.
for they suffer not among them selves any usurers, dronkards, aduouterers,
thieves or any such heinous offenders. The Anabaptists also have they not
(think you) fair sheep chasten their body they drank no wine, abstained
Encratitae likewise abstained utterly from wine to follow their books the
better. Cathari, (so called as men of pure life) abhorred all pleasures and
pastimes of this world, never contended with other. Can any man deny but that
these were gaye fruits, and ioly sheep skins? Therefore if doctrine and
religion were to be tried by the appearance of virtue and holiness, who can
condemn these men for heretics? truly no man. And why? because their fruits
are good. And therefore it seems thetre can not be evil. We see the simple
sheep skin, we see no looks nor tokens of the wolf. Of the outward show
therefore of good life, doctrine can not be tried.

But then a man may here ask. What means Christ when he says, Matthae. 7.
by their fruits ye shall know them. For if false prophets must be known by
their fruits, how can I mislike the Anabaptists, the Waldenses, The third part
of the rule. How to know doctrine by the fruits.
and such other, whose life and behavior can not be reprehended? yet their
doctrine is and seems detestable. What shall I here do? for so the now the
third part of this rule shall instruct you, how you may try the doctrine by
the fruits and how the fruits by the doctrine. Wherein you must first
diligently mark that the doctrine is not tried by the only fruits, but so that
the doctrine and the fruits be all alike and correspondent. For undoubtedly
where the doctrine is like the fruit, and the fruit like the doctrine, one must
needs try the other. Whereupon our lord has given a yery good note and rule,
in S. Matthew teaching after this sort. Matthew. 12.
Other make the tree good and his fruit good, or make the tree evil and his
fruit evil, For by the fruit the tree is known. And by this rule Christ
reasons against the unbelieving Jews, when he says If ye will not believe me,
yet believe my works. Joan. 10.
and why so? because the works and doings of Christ did agree very well with
his doctrine, and the doctrine with his works. So was the life and the
doctrine allwaies agreeable of the prophets, the Apostles, the Martirs, and all
other holy men. Whereof it will well be concluded that seeing their life was
holy, virtuous, and perfect, their doctrine also was sound, good and wholesome.
And why may we so conclude in them? because even as they preached and taught so
they lived: and what they taught other to do, they did them selves: and again
as they did so they taught. Therefore of them it is well said. Math. 7.
Of their fruits ye shall know them For their fruits being good in deed, the
tree could not be evil.

The like reason is of evil doctrine and wicked life: The fruits of the
Luthera^s doctrine.
for one follows allwaies the other. It is the doctrine of Luther. In libro.
de Matrimonio Tom. 6
That a man can no more refrain from satisfising the filthy lust of the flesh,
then from spetting. Of this tie what fruits proceeded? For so the these: that
because to live chaste is an impossible thing, then no man, no woman must live
chaste or single. But if occasion serve not to mary, they may lawfully seek
after baudes and hoores. Which is now a common thing in Germany: and has
proceeded of this doctrine of Luther. Luther teaches that if the husband can
not do his duty to his wife, she may in this manner speak unto him. You see
good husband that you can not do your duty unto me. Luther in the 6. tome
libello de matrimo.
Let me with your good leave mary privily with your brother or next kinsman, so
that allwaies yet you bear the name of my husband, lest your goods come into
other men's hands: etcae. To this request of the woman (says Luther) the man
ought to accord and provide: or else she ought to go privily from him. Is not
this (think you) a blessed graffe? but what buddes trow ye brought it forth?
Truly these that now the brother may mary his brothers wife, he yet living, as
Herod did, Marc. 6.
as it is much now practiced among the Lutherans Again that one woman may
have many husbands, and one man many wives, as the Turks use: and as we see
in germany, not only in the cite of Mounster, but in many other places also
openly practiced. And do not these fruits agree well and just with the doctrine?

In Luthers doctrine we read: If the wife will not, In the 6. tome of his
works printed in the year 1553
let the maid come. Out of the which wholesome tree this goodly fruit is
spronge, that nothing is more common now among the Lutherans then wanton
baudery and aduoutery, so much that the Lutherans them selves are ashamed of
it, and affirm that it was never so badde under the pope.

Again this is the doctrine of Luther. Lib. de christiana liberate.
Fasting is but man's invention: Christen liberty abides not any fastinges or
difference of meat. Of this noble tree has grown the excellent fruit of
banketing, riot and drocknes a hundred fold more in our time then ever before
in Germany.

Luther teaches there is no magistrate can force Christians to obedience,
Contra du^ Caesaris ma^data.
that it is not lawefull to fight against the Turks. And what were the
branches of this stock? First the rebellion of the commons under Munzerus, then
the civil wars of the Swicers, the enormous usurping of the Anabaptists in
Mou^ster and many such like, which I had rather pass over by silence: Remember
the late rebellion in France.
speaking nothing of sundry private conspiracies against public magistrates.

The doctrine of Luther is, In Captiuitate Babilonica.
That Christendom ought not to be gouuerned by civil laws and ordinances,
that no Prince, no nor angel of heaven has authority or power to make any
law against Christen men. Lacked this tree his fruits? no surely: For hereby
all justice has quailed: and that either by preuy corruption, or open and
violent oppression. beside that among the nobles of this sect, that is
accounted most right which can best be maintained by force of arms. Lnther^s
in 3. ca. ad Gal. and Illyricani mul^is lib.


An other lesson of Luthers schole was. That the love of God and our neighbor,
repentance also for sin, were not necessary to salvation but (as the
Illyricans do write) both these and other good deeds were very pernicious to
salvation. And what fruit proceeded of this tree? for sothe that men of the
Lutherans gospel were of a far more enormous life, Above in the 36. leaf.
as Luther him self withnesseth, then the when they were under the pope.

Luther and Calvin do write that God forces me^ to sin, and all sin
committed of man is not done by the permission of God, Caluinus in instituti
onibus. cap. 14. In assertio nibus. art. 31.
but by his propre will and operation: yea and whenever men labor to do
well, that then they sin deadly. Of this tree have grown all mischef,
fornication, aduoutrie, riot, dronknes, extorsions, robberies, rebellion,
periuries, deceites, lies, all contempt of honesty and virtue, procliuite to all
vice, beside blasphemies of Gods holy name, backbiting, slaundering, reproaches,
injuries, and all kind of wickedness freely and without grudge of conscience
practiced. Be not these noble and fair fruits of Luthers gospel? May not
well the rule of Christ here take place? Matthaei. 7.
By their fruits ye shall know them. Note the difference between the evil
life of the Catholics and the Lutherans.
For look what the tree is, such is the fruit and look what the fruit is, such
is thetre.

Although therefore we can not deny, but among us Catholics much enormite
is, and much evil life, yet no man can say that we teach and allow these
vices: or that our doctrine is the cause off our naughty living, no man I say
can charge the Catholic doctrine to prescribe any thing against holy
scripture, against civil policy, or public magistrates as the new forged
gospel of Luther does. Exacting therefore the Lutherans unto this rule of
Christ, we worthily judge them of their fruits to be false prophets and
dangerous deceivers. Note.
The like they ca^ not do of us, for that the evil fruits that are in us
proceed of our selves not of our doctrine, of swaruing from the precepts and
godly constitutions off our faith, not of observing them. But the Lutherans
naughty life proceeds even of their doctrine, as we have in some certain
points for example before declared.

Yet as touching the life of spiritual teachers and rulers, god has
prescribed to the laity and common people a perfect and absolute rule to
discern true doctrine from the false, saying. The scribes and Pharisees sit in
the Chair of Moses: Matthew. 3.
Do as they command you to do, not as they do the^ selves, in the which
saying of Christ, every Christen man that regards his soul health, ought
diligently way two points. First to know which is the lawful chair of
Moses, How to discern true doctrine from the false.
and which is not. then how the lay and common sort of people ought to bear
them selves toward the evil life of the clergy. Let us then first speak of
the first point.

Sithen the time that these new doctrines of Luther has been putin the peoples
heads, and so many, diverse and contrary opinions has been taught, that the
simple and unlearned, know not all most which way to turn them selves, many
are brouht to that point, that they reject all religion at ones: and think our
Christen faith to be but pretty policies of men's invention or rather old wives
tales to fear children, and with this imagination are become worldly Epicures,
terming their felicite in present pleasure, as a great number do now in
Germany. Whereof truly we have great cause to fear (unless these cursed
heresies be spedely extinguished) that almighty God of his dreadful justice,
will stir up the Turk or some cruel tira^, to rippe up the belies of these
fleshely swine and gredy gloutons, destroying also with the wicked (which God
of his tender mercy forbid) the good and virtuous. But to thentent that all
good and virtuous people may beware of such infidelite and wi^ked cogitations,
despering utterly of all religion, S. Paul has forewarned his scholar
Timothe, and in him us all: 2. Tim. 3.
writing, All scripture inspired from God, is profitable to teach, to improve,
to amend, and to instruct in righteousness, that the man of God may be perfect
and prepared unto all good works. These are not men's imaginations, but the
very words of God, pronounced by the holy ghost in the mouth of the Apostle.
And this is an expres commandment of God, that we believe undoubtedly in holy
scripture, that we seek our salvation therein, walking and continuing uprightly
in the paths of that holy write, It is not ^ough to read scripture with o^t
the true understanding of the same. 2. C^r. 3.
not swaruing either on the right hand, either on the left. But that we may
so do, it behooves us not only to read the bare and literal text of holy
scripture, but to enquire also for the true and right understanding of the
same. For the letter kills but the Spirit gives life. Wherefore our Lord
speaking to the Jews, says, Search the scriptures: for in them ye think to
have eternal life. Joan. 5.
But it is one thing to read, another to search.

They are therefore much deceived, which cry now a days that nothing must be
received but holy scripture, that all other interpretations, being but the
imaginations of man, are not to be believed. If the protestants speak herein as
they think, I wonder why the Lutherans, and the Zuinglians have written so many
and so large interpretations upon the old and new testament, and caused them
to be printed abroad, yea why make they such continual sermons to the people,
wherein they recite not allwaies express scripture, but talk much beside the
text, adding their interpretations and expositions unto it? commanding also
and charging the people to take those their interpretations for the very word
of God. And is not this a maruailous impudent and proud presumption of these
protestant preachers?

When we on our part allege the expositions of the holy fathers upon holy
scripture, they as if it were in a rage, cry out incontinently. A dangerous
deceit of the protestants.
The holy fathers were but men, the church has erred in many points, the
expositions of those fathers are but their imaginations and devises, not the
word off God. And therefore we need not give any credit unto them. But when
they them selves preach unto the people, the commau^de and persuade the
people, that if they tender their soul health, they must undoubtedly believe,
that which is there preached unto them and the interpretation of holy scripture
which they bring, is the pure and sincere word of God, the gospel it self.
Is not this as I said, a a maruailous impudent and proud presumption of these
protestant preachers? Is it not an horrible arrogancy to term their own
fantasies holy scripture, their imaginations the gospel, the meaning and sens
of their own invention, Note.
the very word off God: condemning withal and rejecting the uniform, true
and received interpretations of all old holy fathers and writers approved
hitherto in the Church of Christ, by whom the same church has been from time to
time gouuerned, directed, and instructed in all truth sens the time of the
Apostles, this thousand five hundred years and more: under whose doctrine and
godly instructions, so many blessed martirs, holy confessors and infinite
thousands of other Christen souls have attained to everlasting life? Whereas
contrary wise by the expositions and interpretations of these new preachers,
horrible schisms, diverse and heinous heresies, dissolute and licentious
living, strifes, contentions, and rebellions, have spronge up and all most
ouergrowen the garden off Christ's church, well planted before and tended by
the holy fathers, rulers thereof? what can be more impudently and arrogantly
presumed?

Yet these new preachers to wrappe and entrappe the people more and more in
their former snare, they patche on an other dangerous deceit, using this guile
with them. An other dangerous deceit of the protestants.
You must good people in deed believe the only written word of god, but to the
expositions of the preachers ye ought so far to believe, as their expositions
agrees with the written word, that is, that the simple and unlearned people
must judge of their own faith, and be able to try whether their preachers
teach false or no, whether their expositions agree so just with the word of
God, that they may be bold to believe them even as the very word of God. If
this be true that the poeple must now judge their preachers and teachers, then
was S. Paul to blame, describing the providence of Christ toward his church to
say these words. Ephesians. 4.
Christ ascending on high, lead captivity captive, and gave gifts unto men.
These gifts were undoubtedly his holy word. and to make it out of doubt what
manner of gifts he means, it follows strait upon And he has given some
Apostles, some prophets, and some Evangelists. For by these three sorts of
men, by the prophets, the Apostles, the Evangelists inspired of the holy
ghost, holy scripture was written. but because in the written word many
mysteries lie hidden, therefore Christ left not to his church only Prophets
Apostles and Evangelists, but (as it follows in S. Paul) He gave pastors
and doctors, shepeards and teachers which should feed the people with the true
intelligence of the holy write, and teach them the true understanding of the
same. Now then either the Shepeardes and teachers must instruct the people,
and interpret holy scripture unto the^ as S. Paul prescribes, or else the
people him self must take upon him the person of a judge over his shepeards
and teachers, as the protestants will have it. Chose here good reader whom thou
list to follow. Surely I must needs obey and believe the blessed Apostle
whatsoever these men babble. Therefore I say again, the people ought to learn
not to teach They ought to obey those that have charge off their souls, Heb.
13.
their sheaperdes and teachers, not to judge or instruct them in matters of
religion. Contrary wise the pastors and teachers ougth diligently to instruct
their flock, and expound unto them the right meaning of holy scripture, that
they may with the kaye off truth bind and loose the sins of the people
accordingly.

Now whereas in cytes Mayres and scholemasters, The strange order of serving
the church in germany.
in villages the gentlemen, and in the courts of princes the Chauncellers
prescribe and appoint unto their parish prestes and vicars, the manner of
interpreting holy scripture, the order of ministering the sacraments, the form
of common prayer at the pleasure of every lay magistrate and Temporal Lord,
what will become of this strange fashions, the time will ones declare. For
nothing is so preuy, Matthew. 10.
but that it will ones come to light. Every wise man may easily cast what is
likely to follow, when every magistrate or secular ruler utterly unlearned, and
but of mean abilite, yet do at their pleasure appoint ministres and put down,
prescribing what docrine they list to the poor people, or what sect likes
them best. hereof it happens that if the Mayre, scholemaster or gentleman be
a Suenckseldian, then the preacher of that parish must follow only the doctrine
of Suenck feldius, or if he be a Zuinglian, an Osiandrin, an Anabaptiste, an
Illyrican, a Wittenberger, a Maiorist or of any other sect, the poor simple
people must learn the new faith of the Maire, scholemaster, or gentleman: and
utterly renounce his old: nor may not be so bold as to hush to the contrary.

When this new strange order was first taken in hand, that all spiritual
Magistrates, constitutions, and ordonaunces should be disannulled, Lutherus
lib. de Christiana liberate
some there were that thought it not reason that men should be forced to
embrace this opinion, or that, but it should be left free to every man, to
believe whatsoever the sprit moved him unto, without any let to the contrary.
The fruits of Luthers liberty.
So wrote Luther in his book De Christiana liberate and in an other De capti
uitate Babilonica in the which books he so embrued the hearts of men with the
love of licentious liberty, that al Christen constitutions, laws and decrees
of the church were utterly abolished and trod under foot. Out of these books
also Thomas Munzer took occasion to lib. Contra. 2. ma^da. a Caesaris. and in
literis ad ducem Sax^uiae.
make the insurrection of the commons in Germany wherein perished more then a
hundred thousand off our dear countremen, as Sleidan notes in the fifte book
of his story. Of this licentious doctrine off Luther also one Bernard Rotma^
began the heresy of the Anabaptists, and that by these words of Luther. that
no man could be compelled to any faith: that al Christen men are free, and
taught of God him self immediately: that there needs no interpretation of
scripture, but it is al plain and perspicuous. that a simple man of the
country can more readily expound and understand holy scripture, then any
Doctor in divinity.

But after that Luther espied this untoward course of his doctrine, and that
now his own scholars Mu^tzer, Rotman, Carolstadius, Zuinglius, and diverse
other bette him with his own rod: he invented strait a new shift, or rather
succored him self with the old practice of the Catholic church, Vide
scriptu^ Philippi ad Com. Palatinum aeditum an no. 1560. Heidelbergae.
as the folowers of Melanchthon and Brentius do now a days, who seeing the
people carried away daily in to new sects by other ghospellers leaving their
former new masters, do call their fellows renagates and apostatas, compelling
them by ecclesiastical censure and force off pretended excommunication to
return home again. When Luther first began to write and set forth books, his
scholars murmured and said, The inco^ stancy of the Lutherans.
it was against the Christian liberte, that Christen men might not freely read
what books they listed. But now when the Luthera^s them selves do swerve from
their master, and write one against an other, they run to the refuge of the
Catholic church, and make inhibitions forbidding all such books, as their
fellows write against them to be read or sold: banishing out of their towns
and countres with all the power they can, all such ministres and preachers as
dissent from them. so it is now true among these heretics that Athanasius and
Tertullian wrote of the old heretics of their time, In decret. Synodi
Nicenae. Lib. praescrip.
that is, what they approve to day they reprove tomorowe. What they preach as
the word of God this year, they condemn as heretical next year: wavering
like the read with the wind, and framing their faith as occasion serves.

Melanchthon seeing that the licentious liberte planted by Luther gave occasion
of much suaruing and departing of one from an other among them selves, he put
a new cote upon his religion: and whereas before he acknowledged but two
Sacraments, Baptim, and the Supper of our Lord, Melanchthon acknovvled geth
iiij. sacraments Philipp. in annot in epist. Pauli and in postrema edi^^one
Loc. Com.
now he adds two more. Penance and holy Order. Penance he added to bring
again in order the dissolut consciences off his brethern, to set up
excommunication, and to erect in Wittenberg, the new Lutheran Papacye. Holy
order he added to the intent that the Masters of Wittenberg sending abroad
their preachers, might bind them with an oath, to preach and teach no
otherwise then they had learned of their masters, as the tenor of the oath (set
forth in the Ordonnaunce of the university of Wittenberg) declares. Lege
scholae VVitten bergensis ordinationem.
Although therefore the Lutheran protestants rail and inueigh without measure
against the Pope, because under him doctors and other be sworn to the
obedience of the Catholic church, and uniform consent of doctrine in the
same, yet they them selves swear and charge by oath against all reason their
scholars for the mainteaunce and upholding of their heresies, and abominable
doctrine.

Notwithstanding these Masters of Wittenberge could not obtain their purpose.
Amsdorfius and Illyricus, Illyricus li. contra lustu^ meniu^.
two great masters of Luthers schole would never agree unto them. but provoked
to the former writings of Melanchthon and Luther, wherein they plainly teach
that all lay people, men and women are priests, may minister the sacraments,
may baptize, expound holy scripture, teach and preach. This Illyricus lately
wrote against Menius who had objected him the saying of the prophet, Ierem. 18.
that he ran being not sent, that is, that he took upon him the high
vocation of a bishop, that he interpreted scripture after his own pleasure,
corrected his brethen, condemned them of heresy, ruled the church not in one
place only, but through out the whole state of Lutherans, (whereas yet
Melanchthon and the masters off Wittenberg never permitted him, but had decreed
against him) finally that he was never called to the ministry like a Lutheran,
nor never ordained priest as a Catholic: but from teaching of a grammar
schole, had taken upon him the authorite of a bishop.

Thus in this belly fest kingdom of Lutherans, you may see how soon visards
be changed, and how easy a matter it is to come a lofte. For when Menius and
Mayor two great masters of the Lutheran ghospellers object unto Illyricus, that
he was never called to the ministry, never appointed to the word, nor sent to
preach, and therefore he should be ashamed to play the bishop in the church
of Luther, and to condemn all other Superintendts, and Ministers that would
not agree to his propre and several doctrines, he awnswereth them again, that
according to the doctrine of our father Luther, Every man was a priest, as
cacthepolles, millers, barbers, Phisicians, vshers and scholemasters:
especially such as professed the Hebrewe grammar. But consider here I beseech
the gentle reader, how soon this wether is ouercast. Now fair, now foul, now
clear now dark. For here as you see, while Illyricus has to do with the
masters of Wittenberg, the Scripture says that Every man is a priest and fit
to teach in the congregation. But a little after, the same Illyricus having to
do with Osia^der and his co^panio^s in Prussia, curses and banneth them crying
and writing, that to dogged Phisicians (naming so the Phisicians of the prince,
who then were preachers of Osianders doctrine) Matters of religion and ruling
of churches ought not to be committed. Illyricus li. co^tra Ou^an drina
iustiluta.
for that Phisicians were not called nor appointed to any such function. Be not
these trim preachers and masters of the new gospel? is there not a ioly
vniformite in their doctrine? Mayor and Melanchthon when they fight against the
Catholics, Note the disorder of these Archeprotestants.
if then you ask them what authorite they have with their new reformation to
comptroll the whole corpse of Christendom, and the church of Christ, being never
called nor ordained of the church to any such office, by and by they will
awnswer you out of Luthers books, De Christiana liberate and de Captiuitate
Babilonica that every man is a priest, every man has authority to read the
Bible, to discern true and false interpretation of holy scripture. But even in
the same moment before they move a foot further, you may see them accuse and
cry out at Illyricus that he being another priest nor called to the ministry,
behaueth him self very seditiousely in Germany taking upon him to comptroll
the masters of Wittenberge and of Lipsia by his own private and proper
authorite.

Notwithstanding all these enormites and aburdities ensuing of the bare text of
scripture, the Lutherans seeing them selves on every side entrapped and
cou^icted, yet ever they play fox to the hole, and ru^ne to this impudent
shift to say that. The next of holy scripture is sufficient for all
instruction and doctrine, that it may be understood of all men, and need no
gloses nor expositions. Is not this I beseech the good reader, a captious and
subtle shift to thrust only the written text to the people defrauding the^ off
the true meaning and interpretation of the text? Eue^ so did the Sadduces
heretics of the old law before Christ's time, as Josephus in his Chronicles
witnesses. So did after Christ, To clean unto the written text only is an
old heresy
the Arrians, Dimeritae, Apostolici, and many such other heretics as it is to
be senein S. Basil, Epiphanius and S. Augustine. If the text of holy write
needs no exposition, what meaned our Savior, Scripture needs exposition.
when after his resurrection, He expounded to his disciples all such scriptures
as were written of him, beginning with Moses and so all the prophets? Luc. 24.
What meaned Philippus to ask the Eunuche of the Queen of Candace sitting
upon his chariot, whether he understood that which he read in Esaie the
prophet Act^. 8.
and (after the Eunuchs awnswer, saying, how can I, if some expound it not
unto me) to expound him the text declaring the right interpretation and
meaning thereof? Again what will they say to that which the Apostle writes
That the holy ghost divides and distributeth to every one his gifts, as it
pleases him? so that all men have not all gifts but every man certain and
several. 1. Cor. 12.
as some the gift of healing, other the gift of diverse tongues and other the
interpretation of tongues. Every man is not a Phisician, divine, or lawier, as
S. Paul to the Corinthians largely declares, taking a comparison of the body
of man, where are many me^bres, and every membre has his propre and several
function. for what could be more absurd then if the feet would play the
hands, or the hands do that which belongs to the head? The like reason is
to be considered of functions, offices and gifts in the gouuernement of
Christen religion. to the setting up whereof God has appointed diverse and
sundry ministeries, especially for the instructing and teaching the right
understanding of holy scripture, that we might thereby know his will and
pleasure in all things without doubt or controversy. Which if every private
and mean man without a teacher and interpreter were able to understand, to
what purpose has the holy ghost given in his church unto some the gift of
interpretation?

But what need we spend herein many words? let us read the books of Moses,
the psalms and the Prophets. see we not there a number of high and secret
mysteries which before the coming of Christ none almost understood? And what
meaned our Savior when he said unto his disciples, Lucae. 8.
It is given unto you to know the mysteries of the kingdom of God, but to the
other in parables, that seeing they see not and hearing they understand not?
What meaned our Lord in these words? Truly this, that it is a special gift
of God to understand well holy scripture: and that this gift was especially
given unto the Apostles and to their disciples and successors, which should
after the^ bear their room in Christ's church. Again that it was enough for
the people, that (as much as is necessary for salvation) they might learn of
their pastors, preachers, and curates the exposition of holy scripture, by
similitudes and parables agreeable to their capacite. which may farther be
proved by diverse places of holy scripture.

But I would here gladly ask of our new Masters when they say that the text
of scripture is sufficient, that there needs no exposition nor gloss, why
write they so many commentaries, such long gloses upon scripture, so many
books and that without all measure? if we need no exposition, then surely all
the Lutherans books and writings be utterly superfluous, vain and to no
purpose, but only crafty snares to catch the simple and unlearned withal.

But to tell you plainly what the protestants mean by this sutle shifte to
cleave to the only written word, Why the protestants cry upon only Scripture.
surely this it is: they would not have the scripture utterly not expounded,
they mean nothing so (for that in deed nothing serves their turn) but they
would have their expositions, their manner of expounding to be received and
believed as the very word of god. But contrary wise, when they have to do with
us, rejecting all interpretation of scripture they ring their old song in our
ear, The word of god is clear, perspicuous and plain, it needs no
exposition, it requires no interpretation of the old fathers or of the
Church. wherein you see what is their impudency and contrariete: And this
much have we said to show that Scripture ought to be expounded, that the bare
text suffiseth not.

But here rises now agreat question and worthy to be waighed. A question what
interpretation of scripture is to be so lovved.
Seeing that holy scripture must be interpreted, and that we see abroad many and
diverse interpretations thereof, and yet in one thing there can be but one
truth, and as scripture it self is undoubtedly true, so the interpretation
thereof must be undoubted and certain, whether of all these interpretations or
what manner is to be accounted the right, proper and undoubted. As for example.
No Christen man denies but that these words of the last supper, Take eat,
Lucae. 22.
this is my body be the very words of God Christ him self. And what could be
said more plainly, more distinctly, more directly then these words of Christ
are? Vide Luthe ri Confessi onem. de Coena.
yet what happened? All the sects and heresies that reign now adays
acknowlegde them for the words of God. No sect denies the^. Whereupon then
rises these great and horrible dissensions? surely not whether sect has
the word of god, but whether of them well expounds it. And see how diversely
these few words are expounded. Zwinglius says these words. This is my body
This significeth and betokens my body. Oecola^padius thus expounds them.
This is the sign or token of my body. Carolstadius Herein sits my body.
Swenck feldius This is my spiritual body. This is my natural body in natural
bread. The Catholics have allwaies thus expounded it. What the unlearned
shall do in perplexite and variete of interpretations of scripture.
Under the form of bread, it is the true boly of our Lord. Now what shall
here a simple and unlearned man of the country do, hearing so diverse and
contrary interpretations of so few words? Truly if he will here of his own
head confer scriptures together and search the true meaning of these words in
scripture and the written text, he shall be as wise herein as these men above
mentioned: who all by conference of scripture you see how swetely they agreed
upon the truth. But if there were any certainte in conference (as sometimes it
helps much) yet the simple unlearned man, by common order of wit shall never
find it out. For how can the unlearned and ignorant judge of that, which he
never learned? no more truly then the showemaker is able to judge of the
goldesmithes work, which he was never practiced in. And were not that
showemaker to be accounted very impudent and indiscreet, who seeing two
goldesmithes contending of the fines of some piece of gold or silver, would
step in, and take upon him to determinat the matter between them? much less
ought the unlearned meddle with or determinat matters of Divinity, or take upon
them to expound the meaning of the holy ghost, seeing that in worldly affairs
there can no waightier matter, of more difficulty, or of greater importance
be taken in hand. what then shall the unlearned man do in this case? If he may
cleave to no part at all, then must he be of no church, but make him self a
new sect, forge him self a new faith, and so at length lose all faith, and
become a very painim: which god forbid that ever any man should persuade the
unlearned. If he cleave to any part, yet is he in great danger. For almighty
god commands straightly by his Apostle, Tit. 3.
that we avoid the heretic. Here truly the lay man ought to take good
advise. Matthew. 7. and 16.
For he is bound him self to take heed of false prophets, lest being blind
him self and not able to understand holy scripture, he suffer him self to be
lead of a blind guide, such as the heretic is. But how can the blind man
see whether is guide be blind or no? Truly of him felfe he ca^ not see it,
unless he has learned of such as see well, some certain token how to know
it. Is there then any such toke^ or sign, or where may a man seek it? verily
the merciful providence of almighte God has not failed in this point, but
has left unto the lay, simple, and unlearned man a certain and infallible
token, whereby he may (if he regard his own salvation) beware of all false
and heretical corruption in interpreting scripture.

There is no Christian man so rude or ignorant that knows not perfitly his
Creed, A toke^ to know the false interpretion of scripture from the true.
and can rehearse it from the beginning to the ending. In the which though every
article ought diligently to be marked and borne away, yet in this time none
more, then the article where we say Credo sancta^ Catholica^ Ecclesiam. I
believe the holy Catholic church. For in this word Catholic, is the very true
token and mark to know the right interpretation of scripture by, for that is
called Catholic (as S. Austin teaches) What is Catholic. Cotra Gau den^iu^
Donat. lib. 3.
which every where and at al times is and has been. The^ this word Chatolike
attributed to the church, is that which has continued from the Apostles time
to our days without any breach, division, or intermission. For such a church
did God the Father promis to his only begotten Son, speaking by the prophet
David in this wise. Thou art my Son; Psalm. 2.
this day have I begotten the: ask of me and I shall give the nations for
thine inheritance, and the utmost parts of the earth for thy possession.
which place all holy fathers have so expounded, that God the father has given
to Christ such a church, as should be spread through out the whole world, not
only in Suethelande, Denmark or Germany. So the Son of god taking upon him
the nature of man, after he had here in earth purchased our salvation, sent
abroad the holy Apostles as Ambassadors through out the whole world to take
possession of the foresaid inheritance, charging them in this wise. Matthew. 28
All power is given unto me in heaven and in earth. Go ye and teach all
nations, baptising them in the name of the Father, and the So^ and the Holy
ghost: teaching them to keep al those things, whatsoever I have commanded
unto you: And behold I am with you all ways even to the end of the world.

In this high and weighty embassage of our Savior Jesus Christ two things
are especially notised. First that his Apostles should go and preach trough
out the whole world. Secondarely that he will tarry with them vntell the end of
the world. In which two points Lib. de vni late ecclesi.
(as S. Augustine at large disputes against the heretics of his time) this
artikle of our Creed is comprised. I believe the Catholic church. In the which
words we confess that the church of Christ must be universal, and spread
through out the whole world, and that from the time of the Apostles forward
it should continewe by the continual assistaunce and presence of Christ. And
in this consideration the Apostle calls the church, 1. Tim. 3.
the Pillar and ground of truth. signifieng by the word ground the largenes
of Christendom: by the word Pillar the continual, smothe, and not
interrupted succession of the Apostles and their scholars, upon whom al truth
is builded. And this interpretation of the word Catholic S. Augustine teaches
in many places against the Donatistes, especially in his book de vnitate
ecclesiae. Therefore to deny it were to become a Donatiste and to take the
part of those detestable heretics. And this much of this question.

But to return now to the true exposition of holy scripture, every Christen
man ought not only believe this article of the Catholic church, but be also one
of the same, and believe what so ever it believes, expound and interpret the
scriptures, as it expounds and interprets them: condemn and reprove all
such things as it condemns and reproves. And what surer token or more
certain mark could God give to discern false expositions of scripture from
the true, then this article of our Creed, I believe the holy Catholic Church?
For when three contrary opinions, three diverse interpretations of holy scripture
are brought forth, whereof two are fresh and new, never taught nor heard of
before our time, the third is ancient, accustomed, and received of our
forefathers, derived even from the Apostles time and continued hitherto, what
lay or unlearned man is in this case so rude or ignorant, but (if he list, as
he professes in his Creed, to believe the Catholic church which is allwaies
and in all places) may easily judge this third interpretation to be the right
meaning off the holy ghost, the other two to be false and heretical?

For the more declaration of this matter I will recite here a story, A pretty
story of false interpretation
which I learned being a boy, and happened at Lubek. In Lubek there dwelled a
rich man, whose family and kindred was of Turing. This man being in Lubeck at
point of death and having no child to be his heir, bequeued his goods to
certain of his kinsfolks at Turing. They shortly after this man's decease
coming to Lubek bring with them a Proctour, open the will, and found there
that the widow of the departed man beside other goods bequeued, should deliver
them a thousand and two hundred shipbordes, commonly called there Wagenschoff.
But the Proctour and heirs of Turing cauilling upon the word Wagenschoff
required a thousand and two hundred great pieces of artillery: saying that in
their country the word so signified. Neither would these men of Turing be
brought from their challenge, vntell at the length the matter must be tried by
judgment. Wherein their process being long debated, and both parts heard,
it was found that the interpretation of the word Wagenschoff alleged by
those of Turing was a new and strange interpretation never heard of before in
that country: whereas the widow by the consent of all the people and the whole
country proved, that of old time the word Wagenschoff signified nothing else
the^ shipbordes which are commonly brought thither out of Lifland and Pole.
Whereupon the interpretation of the proctour of Turing was rejected and
laughed to scorn as new, curious, superstitious, and strange. Much more
ought we that are Christians do the like in these new and strange expositions
of Gods word invented by proud and presumptuous heretics, detesting and
auoidinge them as present poison. For surely such new forged interpretatio^s
ones spread abroad, 2. Tim. 2.
do crepe like a cancre and infect daily more and more, as we see now by
experience in sundry places.

Every man now a days calls upon scripture: every man demands the expres
word of God. And what I pray you can be more express then that the Apostle
S. Peter says So that ye first know this that no prophecy in the scripture
has any pri^^t interpretation? 2. Petri. 1.
In the which words it is to be noted that S. Peter will have us first and
before al other things know this, that no prophecy in the scripture has
any private interpretation. Therefore it must needs be very perilous to believe
straight this or that interpretation, whatsoever we here. For it is a common
saying, it is evil toying with the eye, with maydenhood, and with our faith.

But many there are now a days, Avvicked persuasio^ of vvorldly careler men.
which when they hear contrarietes in doctrine, and diverse interpretations of
scripture, they comfort them selves carelessly in this sort. What need we pass
for the contentions of preachers, and controversies of Divines? Although they
miss in certain points, and disagree in some certain articles, yet our faith
and belefe is not broken or empaired. We in the mean season will say our
Pater noster, bear away our Creed, and the ten commandments, and
peradventure the catechism of children. As for other matters, let the learned
contend among the^ selves as long as they list, we pass not upon it. But
alas, o merciful God, what a vain comfort and pernicious persuasion is this?
For what says S. James the Apostle? Whosoever, says he shall keep the whole
law, Iaco. 2.
and yet fail in one point, he is guilty of all. So is it in our faith, who
denies one article, denies the whole. This vain comfort teached first the
Zwinglians. Vide Ious. Lascy co^tra episcopum Hosium, et Lutherum in vltima
Co^fessione suade Coena Deu^i^.
against the which Luther in his last confession written against the
Sacramentaries, says, that faith is like to a bell, which as long as it is
whole keeps his true sound, but when it is anything crased or cleft, it
iarreth and leseth clean his proper tune, like as an ear then vessel as long
as it is whole and sound is called a pot a crocke, or some like thing, but
ones broken or cleft it leseth his name and is called a potsheard. Let no man
therefore comfort him self with this vain hope, that although their
preachers and ministres err in some points, yet are good Christians in other
points, for that avails nothing. You must be saved within the ark of Noah or
be drowned with out it. There is herein no middle way. Therefore you must take
very good head that you be not deceived: lest that while wanto^ly and
negligently you harken to every new doctrine and forged interpretation of
scripture that one or two new preachers teach, you lose your souls in good
earnest. Remember rather what the prophet says. Every man is a liar. Psalm.
115
He means not al men together. For I for my part, and you for your part, and
every man a part, may lie, err, and be deceived. But all good men together,
that is, the whole Catholic church of Christ can not err in any article of
faith. Matthew. 16. 1, Timo. 3.
For it is builded upon the rock of truth, and upon that consideration is
called the pillar and ground of al truth. Therefore when the simple and
unlearned man hears sundry and contrary expositions of holy Scripture, let him
have recours to his faith and fully determinat with him self (for that he is
not learned in holy scripture) not to take any other way or follow any other
guide then the article of his Creed, I believe the holy Catholic church,
persuading him self undoubtedly that to be the only true interpretation of
scripture, which is Catholic. That is, which together with the written text,
has by the Apostles and their successors ben spread trough the whole world,
and continued uniform and uncorrupted even to our time.

And this only rule may serve as a buckler for the unlearned man, A buckler for
the unlearned against nevve preachers.
that as often as new preachers set a broche any new doctrine and strange,
then to think this with him self. I am a man unlearned, I can not perceive the
drift of their disputing, I can not judge of their controversy: But seeing that
my Creed teaches me to believe nothing, but that which is Catholic and has
allwaies ben kept and received in Christe^dom, what shall I do to know whether
these new preachers doctrine be Catholic or no? Here this unlearned man must
remember the counsel of Moses, saying. Ask of the days that are past, which
were before the, sense the day that God created man upon the earth, Den. 4:
and ask from one side of the heaven unto the other, and in an other place.
Deuteronomy. 32.
Remember the days of the world that is past. Consider the years from time
to time, ask thy father and he will show the: thy elders and they well tell
the. For this is the true guide of a blind man, and ignorant, to ask and
enquire, what his forefathers, what his neighbors, what the towns and
countres about have allwaies observed and believed, sense the time they were
first traded in Christen religion, and have so many years continued in. This
is the faith of that cooliar: which being at point of death, A very good faith
of a Coolyar.
and tempted of the devil what his faith was, awnswered. I believe and die in
the faith of Christ's church. Being again demanded what the faith of Christ
his church was, that faith, said he, that I believe in. Thus the devil getting
no other awnswer of the simple man, was ouercomed and put to flight. By this
faith of the cooliar every unlearned man may try the spirits of men whether
they be of god or no, by this faith he may resist the devil, judge the true
interpretation of scripture from the false, and discern the Catholic preacher
from the heretical Minister, the true doctrine from the forged.

But to set this whole matter before your eyes as it were in a glass, A ready
way to try out an heretic.
take this example. Suppose there came to some great cite five different and
contrary preachers, as by name, Calvin a Zwinglian, Longinusa Swencfeldia^,
Functius an Osiandrin, Illyricus a Luthera^, and some Catholic doctor:
suppose the magistrates of the cite granted these five every one to preach
and defend openly his own private doctrine. what shall the unlearned lay man do
here, that he follow not a blind guide and so fall both in to the dike? Matthew.
13.
surely as we have said before, so must he do. he shall ask first of Master
Calvin whether his doctrine be the pure and very word of god when he writes
that in the Supper of the Lord not the true body of Christ, Caluin^s libr.
contra Ioachimu^ VVestphalum.
but only the figure of his body is there, and is given. Again that original
sin is but a natural infirmity of the mind, Zuinglius lib. de baptismo
co^tra Vrbanum Regium. Caluinus li. de praedestinatione.
not guilty of eternal damnation. Or else that God is the cause of the sin of
man, that god compels and forces men to wickedness, blasphemies, horedome,
theft, lyeng, deceites and such other. Here of Calvin awnswer that all this is
the pure and clear word of god, let him ask him again in what place of the
Bible he reads expressly these words: In the Supper is not the true body of
Christ but the figure only: Original sin is but an infirmity not guilty of
eternal damnation, last of all that men are constrained of God to sin. To
this Calvin will surely awnswer that although this his doctrine be not found
in scripture expressly in these words or terms, Theodorus Beza in defensione
Caluini.
yet that this sentence and meaning is there. Mark here then that the doctrine
of Calvin is not the express word of God, but the meaning and interpretation
of it. And this lo is their first deceit. Let the lay man go yet farther with
Calvin, and ask whether this his interpretation be Catholic, whether that
Christen religion began with this doctrine, in Germany, France, Italy, England
or any other where, whether this his doctrine was preached of the Apostles and
their successors, received and used in the Catholic church, and derived from
our forefathers to us, through out al these countres. For I (may the lay man
say) have asked here of my elders, which deny they ever heard any such thing.
I have enquired of the cytes and countres here about, they know it not, but
say it is new and very strange unto them. And here Calvin can not deny but
that it is so ( and our men are not ashamed to sai^ that these thousand years
all truth has been lost) therefore the unlearned man may here boldly say unto
him Well Sir if it be so, fare you well. I entend not to meddle with you nor
your doctrine any more. Epiph anius lib. 2. co^tra hereses. Tit. 3.
So Athanasius writes to Epictetus the bishop, that it is enough to awnswere
an heretic after this sort. The Catholic Church never taught this: the holy
fathers never received this. Wherefore it is written. Avoid the heretic man.

In the like manner shall the unlearned and lay man behave himself with the
Suenck feldian, demanding of him, whether this be the pure word of God, when
he teaches. That Christ as touching his humain nature is not a creature, but a
begotten thing conceived and borne of the holy ghost, Suentfeldius lib. de
dup. statu Christi and mulnis alijs tractat.
and that afther the ascension of Christ in to heaven, his humanite was made
God or rather was changed in to God. Again that, the same power and operation
which is in the word of God preached, is the only begotten everlasting Son of
God. Last of all, that all the gifts and graces of God be parcels of the
divine nature. For when Longinus the Swenckfeldian shall say that these
doctrines are the very sincere word of God, the lay man may ask of him
again where holy scripture does clearly express this doctrine. To this
Lo^ginus ca^ make no other awnswer, then that although it be not there
expressed, yet it is there mente and understood. here if to the lay man
asking whether this meaning and understanding be Catholic, and planted by the
Apostles or their scholars in Swethen and Silesia, and from thence derived unto
our time, Longinus do awnswer ye: then must he prove in what place of Silesia
and under what bishop that happened. Which being not able to do, he proves
him self a vain follow and a liar. But if he say, that this doctrine vntell
this time was not received in Silesia, because our forefathers were not of
capacite to conceive these high mysteries, the lay man may roundely say unto
him. Auaunt heretic, and take this f^r a final awnswer. The Catholic church
never taught this: the holy fathers never received this: Wherefore it is
written, Avoid the heretic man.

After the same order also may the lay man ask of Functius the Osiandrin,
Osia^der lib de Confessi one doctrinae suae. Hiorem. 23. and 33.
when he teaches upon these words of Hieremie, God is our righteousness, that
man ought to be just by the essential justice of God: again that Christ does
justify us with his only divinity, the humanite being excluded, and such like
doctrine, which he calls the very express word of God, in what place of
scripture it is read. When he awnswereth, that word for word it is not in
scripture, but it agrees well with the meaning of scripture, let him be asked
again, whether this his meaning agree with the Catholic exposition of
scripture derived from the holy fathers and successors of the Apostles, and
observed hitherto continually in the church of Christ without contradiction.
Here if Functius (his conscience forcing him) do confess that this doctrine
was of late planted in Prussia by Andreas Osiander, and although it was not
vntell now reveled, yet according to his judgment it agrees very well with
the word of God and the gospel, the lay man may give him the final awnswer
of Athanasius, The Catholic church never taught this, the holy fathers never
received this. Tit. 3. Vide Amsdorsium de ha^ propos^^one. Luther. in 3. cap.
ad Gal.
Wherefore it is written. Avoid the heretic man. The like awnswer also may be
made to the strange doctrine of Illyricus the Lutheran writing, That good
works are pernicious to salvation: that God does justify men by words and
not by deeds. And truly this awnswer is of such force, and so mete for a
Christen man, that unto all heretikall interpretations, to all erroneous
doctrine, yea though an Angel from heaven, if it were possible, should bring
any new gospel, it might with these words be awnswered. A way false
prophet, the third Elias, the fifte Evangelist. For The catholic church never
taught this, the holy fathers never received this. Wherefore it is written.
Avoid the heretic man. Last of all the unlearned lay man may well also
demand of the Catholic doctor or preacher, how he likes the opinions of
these new ghospellers. whereunto he will awnswer, that he has perceived
these new and strange interpretations of holy scripture, and after long
waighing and considering the^, has found that they are all ancient condemned
heresies: See out discourse.
which now certain braynsicke men by the instinct of the devil raised up
again, to the utter destruction of the Roman empire and our dear country of
Germany. Therefore he is ready to show by good grounds of holy scripture,
by the right and Catholic understanding of Scripture, that the old religion
hitherto received, is grounded upon those two pillars, and upon them has been
sustained from the Apostles time vntel our days through out the whole corpse of
Christendom, and maintained sound and perfect, against al busy barking of
heretics and cruel bytes of pagan princes. And is not this most agreeable
both with religion and with reason, that we should embrace and accept that
interpretation of the holy Bible for the true and sincere, which in all
churches, of all people and countres has been received, confessed, preached,
maintained, and sense the Apostles time hitherto continued? as by the
testimonies of ancient doctors we are able in all points evidently to
declare? Contrary wise may we not worthily esteem these new doctrines broched
so lately, proceeding of old condemned heresies, and renewed by wild worldely
men, to be heinous heresies and detestable deceites of the devil?

Surely this was the chief and principal cause why I accounted the diverse
doctrine of Luther and his fellows to be heretical, Why the author forsook
the Lutherant.
and for such do v^terly forsake it and detest it: this again is the cause why
I esteem the doctrine in all Christendom (which they call the Papacy) received,
to be the only true and wholesome doctrine, because this doctrine is the
Catholic and universally received interpretation of scripture, but their
doctrine is only their private opinion and their private deprauatio^ off holy
scripture. I confess I have employed the study off Divinity, and labored
matters of controversy, about these two and twenty years, not meddling with
any other worldely or civil matter in all that time: nor I can not deny but I
have been a scholar of the Lutherans, and have so far learned their mysteries,
that within these fourten or fiften years the divines of Witte^berg would
almost have constrained me to be a doctor of their university. Again I have
bestowed much time that I might thoroughely and substantially be learned in the
Catholic doctrine, conferring allwaies the sayings and writings of both
parts. And allthough that I had much a do to shift my self out of their
crafty, captious, and contentious controversies, yet as soon as by the help of
God I attained thereunto, espieng the erroneous and heretical doctrine of the
Lutherans, and perceauing the true and sound doctrine of the Catholics, The
duty of a converted Catholic.
I labored not only utterly to rid my stomach of that poisonned doctrine of
Luther, but also to avoid all company and familiarite of heretics, that I
might neither see them, nor hear of them. Which lack of my old acquaintance
and manner of living, both empaired much the health of my body, and procured
also great loss of my substance. And is like to do daily more and more,
unless God of his mercy stretch forth his helping hand. Howbeit whatsoever
befall of me, I am ready to lose body and life, honor and goods for the
furderaunce of the ancient Catholic religion. And I wish to my dear country
of Germany that mind also. For sure I am, whosoever is no Catholic, he must
needs be an heretic. Seeing therefore that holy write aduertiseth us to fly
from heresies even as from present poison, I be seche all good men to mark well
this example which I know to be true, and will here recite, to show what it is
to be ones fallen in to heresy.

A certain young man of my acquayntaunce, A notable example of the sun dry
sects in Germany.
very well learned and sometime preacher in Misnia, being according to the
doctrine of Melanchthon and Mayor an Adiaphoriste, that is, of that sect of
Lutherans which take good works and constitutions of the church to be things
indifferent, etc. departed in to Saxony upon hope of some ecclesiastical
living there. Being then demanded of what religion he was, he awnswered that
he was of the opinion of Philip Melanchthon and Georgius Mayor. Then says
unto him the Illyrican Superintendent, it seems thou art an apostat heretic.
And withal asked him whether he thought good works to be pernicious unto
salvation, Whereunto this poor preacher awnswering, he believed that they
helped rather then hindered salvation, the Superintendent strait says unto
him, Seeing you are an heretic of the gospel, you may not abide in this cite
nor country: and therefore get you hence. With this awnswer he departed and
went in to Prussia, where meting with an Osiandr in Superintendent, and
desiring some ecclesiastical service, he was demanded, whether he believed
That man ought to be made just by the essential justice of God, and whether
he judged those for heretics which thought or taught the contrary. Whereunto
awnswering that he could not so think, seeing that Melanchtho^ and Illyricus
interpreted the scripture otherwise, incontinently he was thrust back like an
heretic, and commanded to depart out of all the dominions of that country.
After this he came in to Pole, and meting with certain Caluinistes, being of
the^ examined, and found that he agreed not with the Zuinglians, he was
repelled also of them for an heretic. Seeing then he could not speed there,
passing on further by the way he came to the Picardi, hoping that he might be
received in to their sect. But when he refused to abjure all other sects and
religions and believe only them, he was feign to depart thence also. After
which he came to a Noble man of Silesia requiring service, of whom being
required how he liked the doctrine of Swenck feldius, whether he believed, That
the external ministry or preaching was but superfluous, and that the
internal word or rather the power and operacion off the word being preached
were the Son of God him self, he awnswered that this doctrine seemed unto him
an old heresy confuted thouroughly of Illyricus, Melanchtho^, Calvin and
diverse other writers. Which awnswer nothing pleasing that Noble man, our poor
Minister was forced to get him packing. Seeing therefore that he lost his
labor and spent his time in vain, he stroke over to Morauia where the
Anabaptists bear rule. Not that he minded to tarry and abide with them, but to
try and know their religion. But they craftily preue^ting him, asking him
first of what religion he was, though he went about the bush with them,
thinking to color the matter, yet they perceauing that he liked not their
rebaptising, he was also chased from thence as an heretic.

At the last after long and weary trauail and trouble, this poor Minister came
unto Vienna, where he happened upon a Catholic learned man, unto whom he
declared his trauaill, aduersites, and diuersites off heresies that he chanced
upon, beseching him for the love of God to help him and instruct him, how he
might attain to some sure and certain doctrine, and interpretation off holy
scripture. A necessary lesson for deceived protestants.
Then was it told him, that he should follow such doctrine and embrace such
interpretation of Gods word, as was Catholic and universally received in all
places, and at al times, casting away all private opinions and propre
interpretations of this sect or that sect. For it was impossible that any
private sect could admit the Catholic exposition of scripture which is common
to all, or that the sects could ever agree among them selves, each one setting
forth his own opinion and condemning all the rest. As it is written in the
prophet Ezechiel, Ezech. 13.
Woe be unto these foolish prophets which follow their own sprit and see
nothing. Therefore if he would be a Christen man, and in all places be taken
for such, he should embrace and follow the Catholic understanding of
scripture, such as in Catholic doctors and writers we find. From the which
Catholic and uniform exposition of scripture although many in diverse countres
have failed, and departed, yet before our time, it was in all places without
contradictio^ or gainesaieng received and believed, and many thousands of souls
have in that belefe ben saved. Beside that there are also yet diverse Christen
Countres and kingdoms, diverse nations and people, which acknowledge no other
doctrine or interpreation of holy scripture, then the Catholic and old
accustomed: which they have received of the Apostles and their first founders
of religion. Wherein if any doubt now a days arises, or any contrary
interpretation be brought, it is most expedient to seek of the first and most
ancient teachers of Christen religion the truth thereof. For so Scripture
wills us to do, and all ancient and approved doctors, as in S. Irenee a
writer very nie unto the Apostles, you may see, whose words are these. These
things then being so evident, we ought not to seek the truth at other men's
hands, Lib. 3. cap. 4. co^tra hereses.
which we may easily have of the Church. A Godly instruction of Ireneus.
For the Apostles left unto the church and laid up in her as in a rich
aumerie all truth, that whosoever lists, may draw of her the drink of
life. For the Church is the gate of life, all other are thieves. therefore we
must avoid them, but love all that the Church teaches us and embrace the
tradition of truth. For what if there were but a small matter called in
controversy, ought we not to have recourse to the most au^cie^t Churches, in
the which the Apostles have lived, and enquire of them the truth and certainte
of our doubt? And what if the Apostles had not left unto us scripture at all?
ought we not to have followed the order of tradition which they delivered
vntothe^, whom they left to gouuerne the Church after them? the which order
many nations of Barbarous people such as believe in Christ, do follow: having
their salvation without paper and ynke, by the holy ghost written in their
heart, and keeping diligently their old traditions. Thus far S. Irenee. With
this good lesson and information the Lutheran Minister being somewhat amended,
afterward in short time utterly detesting all sects and heresies, becomes a
right good Catholic. And surely so it happens, that who so ones departs
from the church, if he enter but a little with other heresies, he is accounted
an heretic of the heretics them selves. From the which our Lord of his
tender mercy preserve us always. Amen.

Our forefathers the ancient Germans were ever accounted men of grauite,
constancy, and of a settled judgment: not light brayned, inconstant or
wavering with every wind as peradventure some other countres were noted for.
For lightness in deed in men of wisdom is a great blotte. But what can be
more light or more vain, then to believe every light person without any sure
ground of his doctrine? Eccle. 19.
He that believes quickly, says the wise man, is light of heart. These
preachers and new ghospellers that now a days run from country to country,
be vile vagabondes, light and wild persons, men of no grauite, nor whorthy of
any authorite. The outvvarde be hauiour of the Lutheran in Germany.
And that their outewarde behavior declares. Their bearde they let grow only
upon the upper lip, like the Turks, their cotes be cut short at the
buttokes, with large wide sleues, as the sergents or catchepolles in times past
were wont to have, and thus like frogs they leap in to the pulpit, crieng
and creking there. Our Confession of Auspurg is grounded upon the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets, A vain crake of protestants.
and has endured these thirty years. Behold good Catholic reader a
wondrous matter. The Confession of Augspurg is thirty years old. Is not this
a maruailous long continaunce? and yet these fellows will not be a known that
our Catholic religion has continued these thousand five hundred years and
above twice their thirty, without breach or interruption.

Now where they babble that their Confession is grounded upon the writings of
the Apostles and Prophets, does not every sect and every heretic crake the
same? Do not the Anabaptists cry, it is written, in the xxvj. of Mark. He
that will not believe, shall be condemned. Every heretic all ageth the
scripture.
But children have no faith and can not believe, ergo they can not be saved nor
ought not be baptized ^Like wise the Zuinglia^s cry they not that it is written
in the vj. of Ihon. The flesh profits nothing? and therefore they will have
it but bread in the Sacrament? Again the scholars of Osiander allege they not
the saying of the prophet the 23. of Jeremy. Jehovah is our justice? Who can
deny but all these allegations be the writings of the Apostles and prophets?
why the^ do the Luthera^s abhor the Anabaptists? why condemn they Osiander
and his fellows? why does Luther call Zuinglius an heretic? Do not they cry
that their doctrine, as well as the other cry that their Confession is
grounded upon the writings of the Apostles and prophets? yes they cry truly
so, even as loud and as truly as the Lutherans. What the^ lacks in this
matter? Truly not who alleges Scripture, for that every heretic does, but
who can prove his doctrine in deed not only in words by Scripture. For who ca^
abide the preacher, be he never so Catholic, that cries only that his
doctrine is grounded upon the writings of the Apostles and Prophets. It is not
sufficient to allege and hudle up many places of scripture, which the
heretics do, as roundely as the Catholics, but you must by good reason and
sure ground prove that those your places be well and duly alleged and
expounded. But by what ground and reason may this be proved?

By three manners of ways. First the teacher of any doctrine or preacher ought
to prove and evidently declare, How interpretation of Scripture is tried true
that his doctrine or interpretation of holy Sripture is Catholic, derived
from the Apostles, received through out whole Christendom, and continued unto
our time. Secondarely that all the order, manner, and disposition of the church
of Christ in the new law was figured and shadowed by other obseruaunces and
doings in the old law. Thirdly that every principal article of our Catholic
religion has be^ confirmed with some miracle, whereby the verite of it has
vnuincibly ben warranted. As for example.

Among us Catholics it is a sure and undoubted The body of Christ un der one
kind per fit and whole.
point in our religion that in the blessed Sacrament of the altar, under one
kind the whole and perfect body of Christ is contained as well as under both.
This point we first prove by the express word of God, uttered by the Apostle
saying, that Christ can not be divided. 1. Cor. 1.
Now that this saying of the Apostle is well applied to the one kind of bread
in the Sacrament, the common practice of Christ's Catholic church these many
hundred years does abundantly witness. Again it is proved by an evident
figure of the old law. For we read in Moses, Exodi. 16.
that although some gathered more, some less of Manna (which undoubtedly as S.
2. Cor. 10.
Paul witnesses was the figure of our Lords supper) yet he that gathered
less, had as much as he that gathered more. So Hilarious pope of Rome decrees,
De Co^secr. dict. 2. cap. vbi pars.
saying. Where part of the body is, there is the whole, for the like is in the
body of our Lord that was in Manna, that figured it. For not the visible
quantite is to be considered in this mystery, but the spiritual efficacy and
virtue of the Sacrament. Last of all this has been confirmed by so sundry and
strange miracles wrought from God, that who so has any sparckle of Christen
faith remaining in him, can never doubt, but that the body of Christ is as well
under one kind, as under both. The stories of the Jews may testify clearly
this matter, which happened in diverse places, as at Passau, Breslau, Bedurum.
Vratisluia Ratispona.
Regenspurg and Tekendorph in Bauaria, in the year of our Lord 1337. and
afterward at Berlin in the Marchise of Brandeburg in the year 1512. In the
year. 1556. Vide Pontanum li. 5 fol. 432.
and now lately in Pole in the dyocese of the Archbishop of Gnesna. In which
all places it has been seen, that out of the Host of our Lords body, foined
in with daggers by the Jews, blood has gushed out, and many other miracles
have befallen. The which all surely, almighty God of his mercy has wrought
for the confirmation of his church in this article, that under the form of
bread is fully contained his precious body and blood, and for the conuicting
also of the damnable heresy of the Maniches, who above a thousand years
agone, affirmed that under the form of bread was the body without blood.

This I have brought in for an example, to show how the Catholic doctors are
able to prove every article of Catholic religion: That is, by the Catholic,
universal, and received exposition of holy scripture, by the figures and
shadows of the old law, by the operation of miracles Surely who can thus
prove his doctrine, he may boldly say that it is grounded upon the writings
of the Apostles and prophets.

Now if the Confessionistes speak as they think, when they say their
doctrine is grounded upon the Apostles and prophets, and that they will prove
it to be so in deed, let them try their Confession and Apology also by these
waightes. Let them from the first article unto the last, show first that their
doctrine is the right and Catholic exposition of Gods word, then whether they
can confirm it by any one miracle, last of all let them show the manner and
order of their Lutheran church to have been prefigured and shadowed in the old
law. If they can so do, I will warrant them, that all Christian people will
gladly subscribe to their articles and believe according to their doctrine. But
if they are not able to perform this, then let them not object to us their
Confession or Apology. let them suffer us quietly and freely persevere in our
Catholic and ancient religion, and we will not let them to cry, to swear
and forswear that their Confession is grounded upon the writings of the
Apostles and prophets.

And thus much hitherto have we spoken as touching that which our Lord said.
Upon the chair of Moses sit the scribes and pharisees, Matthew. 13.
do all things that they shall bid you to do. For hitherto have we talked
how to try true doctrine, and how to know such as sit in deed upon the
chair of Moses. It remains now to speak of the later part of Christ's
saying. But do not as they do. Why the protestants bark at the evil life of
the clergy.
Which we must also no less discuss then the former. For in this our
miserable and unhappy time because heretics can not overthrow by any good
reason the very chair of Moses, the doctrine of the church, they take hold
of the evil life of the clergy, and bark at the dissolute living of those
that sit in the chair, making the people believe that their doctrine is no
other then their life and behavior is: inferring very absurdely, that the
doctrine and the life is all one and can not be diverse: which wicked opinion
has bred much strife and caused much trouble in the Christen commonwealth: as
in the writings of the fathers we may read treating of the heresies of the
Donatistae, Encratitae, Cathari, and Apostolici: But we have in holy scripture
marks inoughe and that evident, to discern heresies which proceed of evil
doctrine, Mat. 18. Tit. 3.
from the evil life, which proceeds of men. For heresy being a very plage
and poison of Christen religion, S. Paul bids us avoid and fly from the
heretic after the first or second admonition. Because he is subverted that is
such a one, and offends being condemned by his own proper judgment. And our
Lord bids us to account him for an hethen and publicane that hears not
the church. And publicanes were a sort of me^ with whom it was not lawful for
the Jew to keep company withal. S. Antony also that holy and famous ermite in
his last words spoken before his death unto his scholars, left the^ these two
godly and wholesome lessons, and most necessary for our time, Two good and
godly lessons of S. Antony.
as that notable bishop Athanasius writing his life reports. the first was.
Avoid ye the venim of al schismatikes and he retikes. and follow hardly the
hatred that I bore always against the^: for they are the enemies of Christ,
and you know I never had soft or paisible communication with them. The second
lesson is this, Keep above al things your upright faith in Christ: and the
religious tradition of your forefathers, which you have learned by the reading
of holy scripture and by my poor aduertisme^t from time to time. This
commandment of avoiding and shunning heretics is not made for the learned
only, Math. 7.
but also for the simple and unlearned. Matthew. 15.
Which is readely proved by the sayings of our Savior. Take ye head of false
prophets. and again. If the blind lead the blind, both fall into the
ditche. and such other. The church must not beforsaken for the evil life of
me^ in the church.
But to forsake the church and the Catholic doctrine of the same by reason of
the disordinat life of priests and other prelates, Christ not only never
commanded it, but also very straitely forbad it: declaring the parable of the
husband man which forbad his servants to wede out the darnell from the corn.
Lest peradventure says he, gathering the darnell ye pluck up also the corn.
let them therefore grow both together vntell the harvest time, Mat. 13.
and then I will say vnot the ripers, gather first together all the darnell
and bind it up in bundles that it may be burned, but the good corn gather in
to my barn. For as it becomes not the servant to take upon him the
correction of such matters in the family, as the master upon some weighty
consideration would have reserved to him self, so much less in the church of
Christ may the lay men (whose part it is to obey and follow, not to
prescribe laws and orders) take upon the^ the rule and dominion which
appertains only to bishops and rulers in the church. Farther that this is the
true meaning of our Savior in the place above alleged, he declares by an
other similitude of the shrowde servant, which said in his heart. My Master
will not come of a long season, Mat. 24.
and thereupon begins to strike his fellow servants, eating and drinking
and making good chere. But the Master of that servant will come (says Christ)
in the day that he looks not for, and in the hour that he knows not, and
shall cut him of, and put his portion with the hypocrites. there shall be
weping and gnashing of tethe: Our Savior has here plainly and roundely (I
trow) warned the lay people, not only not to meddle with, chasten, or correct
their bishops, pastors and Curates whom Christ (as the Apostle says) has
appointed and set over them, Ephesians. 4.
but also not to trouble instruct, rule or reprehend their fellow lay folk.
though now a days (alas) nothing is more common then clouters, cobblers,
sadlers, taylers, cytezens, and men of the country, gentlemen and noble men to
take upon them in the church of Christ the part of Masters and rulers to
interpret holy scripture, to prescribe their Curates how and what to preach,
how to administrat sacraments, setting them up and down at their pleasure,
whereas they ought by the express commandment of S. Paul obey and submitt
them selves unto their curates, vicars and bishops. For thus he writes unto
the Hebrews. Obey them that have the oversight of you, and submit your selves
unto them, Hebre. 13.
for they watch for your souls, even as they that must give account. that
they may do it with joy and not with grief. For that is not expedient for you.

But you will say. These papiste bishops and priests be men unlearned,
incontinent, dissolute, given to riot, ambition, to covetousness, to pomp, and
to all vice. If you say this of some certain among the clergy it may be true.
But if you speak of the whole clergy, it is very false and untrue. For not
only among the lay people, but among the clergy also (praised be God) there
be right virtuous, sober, and godly men, upon whom the fautes of the rest can
not be fathered. Yet if perhaps all these vices and abominations were found in
the whole clergy and rulers of Christ's flock, notwithstanding the
commandment of Christ must remain in his full force and effect, Matthew. 13.
That the darnell be suffered to grow. Mat. 23.
that the scribes and pharisees sit in the chair of Moses: do as they
command you to do, but do not as they do themselves. Again. Heb. 13.
Obey the^ that have the oversight of you for they watch as those that must
give account for your souls. Matthew. 7.
And every man must pluck first the beam out of his own eye, and then take
the mote out of the priests eye, Let us therefore, good Christian reader,
suffer the church to stand and continewe in his former and most received
course. For without doubt she is so surely grounded upon the Rock, that hell
gates shall never be able to overthrow her or prevail against her. Math. 16.
As for the life of the clergy God is their judge. For as of virginite so of
priesthode man can not judge. Yet we discharge not here the clergy of the
Ecclesiastical censures and punishements. For as it is said to the lay men,
Mat. 13.
touching the evil life of the clergy, Let the darnell grow on, so is it
said to the bishops, (as S. Augustine declares against the Donatistes) 1. Cor.
5.
Take away the evil from among you. Wherefore we read of that notable
Emperor Constantinus the great, at what time certain bishops offered up
certain co^plaintes to be determined by him, to have awnswered in this sort.
God has ordained you priests in his church: Eccl. histor li. 10. ca. 2
and has given you authorite to judge us: and therefore we are well judged of
you: but you cannot be judged of any men. It were surely very expedient that
some reformation were had, to correct and chasten the corrupted clergy
according to the prescription of their own Canons, to thentent that such
offenses as rise in men's hearts against the clergy and the church through
their inordinat life, might be remedied and taken away. But this is not in the
hands of the laite or temporal rulers, whose part it is to suffer and obey.

OF TRANSLATING THE BIBLE IN TO THE VVLGAR TONGVE.
ANother thing that the Luthera^s object unto me, is, that they say, it has been by my means and counsel procured that the Bible is no more read in the
vulgar tongue: especially as Luther translated it. Now although I remember not
that I ever said or wrote that the lay men ought not to have the Bible in
their vulgar tongue, yet if I had so done, Lay men are not commanded to
read Scripture
it had been no great trespass. For surely I could never yet find in holy
scripture, that the common people ought of necessite to read scripture. But
that of the reading thereof much schism and the destruction of many souls
has proceeded, daily experience teaches us. And holy write warns us, where
our Savior thus speaks. It is given to you to know the mystery of the
kingdom of God, Luc. 8.
but to the rest in parables, that seeing yet they see not, and hearing they
understand not. Who are these unto whom our Lord says, To you it is given,
etc? Surely the Apostles and their successors the rulers of Christ's flock.
Vide Theo philactu^ (...) Luc. cap. 8
And who are they that should learn by parables? surely such men, as were
better not to know the mysteries, lest misusing them they procure them selves
a greater damnation. Math. 7.
For precious stones ought not to be cast before hogs, and such of all
likelihod are the lay ignorant people. Beside our Lord in that his former
saying may seem very well to have alluded to the.xij. tribes of Israel: which
figured the twelve Apostles, Exodus 24. Number. 11.
and to the threscore and ten elders chosen out of those twelve tribes, which
also did represente the threscore and twelve disciples that were beside the
Apostles. These threscore and ten elders of the Jews had only the power (as
stories declare) to read and and understand the mysteries of the Scripture.
The hebrew text could not be readen of the common Jews.
For at that time the hebrewe text used of the Jews, had no vowels in all the
text but only consonants. And this manner of reading without vowels was known
only to the threscore and.x. elders: the other Jews knew it not, lest
peradventure the precious mysteries of that old law should be cast before
hogs, the rude and curious people. Vide Iosephum, Iusti number mart. in suo
paraenetico. I renaeum lib 3. cap. 25. Cleme^. Alex. lib. 1. Stromatu^.
Hilariu^ in 2. psalm. August. de ciuit. dei. lib. 18. cap. 42 and 43.
These threscore and ten elders also very miraculousely translated the Hebrew
Bible in to Graeke, before the coming of Christ, they only having the knowledge
of the text. So in like wise because the threscore and twelve disciples were
chosen to read and understand the mysteries of holy write, unto whom priests
have succeeded (as in the principal seas and Bishopriks in Christendom by
stories we are able to show) thereof it is evident, that unto Priests,
Pastors and Bishops (who^ God has placed to ouersee his church) the grace of
the holy ghost allwaies assisteth to interpret and expound the mysteries of
holy scripture by parables unto the people, as far as for them is requisite.
Wherefore the unlearned lay men may well be admonished to refrain from all
curious and gredy reading of holy scripture. First, lest rashely and
unadvisedly they take upon them the office committed by God to the elders, to
priests, and bishops: which presumption we see has been greuousely punished in
the examples of King Ozias of Core, 2. Par. 26.
Dathan and Abiron. Number. 16.
The^ also because experience of our time has taught, how dangerous it is
that every lay man, crafts man, labourer, or otherwise, all without
discretion, should read and examine scripture at their pleasure.

The sects of the Picardi of the Anabaptists of the Swenckfeldians and diverse
other heresies proceeded off no other cause, The dangers proceeding of the
laities reading Scripture
then that certain unlearned lay people took upon them to read, interpret, and
expound scripture. And what text do these unlearned men read? surely such as
Luther him self or some other archeretike has translated in to the vulgar
tongue, and corrupted partly with false additions and preuy foisting, partly
with heretical gloses put in the margin. Again they come all to reading of it
with a certain prejudice that Luther has appointed them, teaching that he
which will read holy scripture, ought not to bring with him any judgment,
but seek it in the text. Which is as much to say, that the unlearned lay man
nothing informed before in the faith of the church, nothing prepared with
devotion and humilite, nothing instructed by what means to understand holy
scripture may rashly and roundely set upon it, as if it were Beuis of Hampton
or a tale of Robin hoode. The well spring of heresies now a days.
In this case if the unlearned man suddenly imagine an exposition of some place,
that likes his brain, and serves well his humor, be it never so contrary
and repugnant to the true understanding of holy scripture, yet he will not be
brought from it, but cleaving unto it tothe and nail forgeth him self a new
religion, frames a faith of his own, and sets up in his heart a new idol,
in the defense whereof he will spend his body, his goods, his life, and his
soul. And this is lo the well spring of sundry heresies now a days.

Wherein me thinks it fares, A similitude worthy to be noted.
as if the common crafts men of a cite, upon a stomach of private presumption
would suddenly displace all phisicians and remove poticaries from their shops,
persuading themselves to know as well as they the virtue of their medicines,
balmes, drogges, waters, ointme^ts, roots, herbs and other such ware: and
hereuppon would take upon them to minister both to them selves and unto other,
potions, purgations, and all kind of medicine. Were not these men think you,
likely to do much good in short time? especially if other would be so mad as
to believe them? would not experience quickly teach them to call home again
their old Masters, Phisicians and poticaries, and set these men to their
crafts again? Surely so it is of the holy scripture translated in to the
vulgar tongue and so made common for all men. For the lay man may so read
them, and pick out metsons mete for his appetit: but for lack of skill (as
experience has tried) he will cast him self down being whole before, and so
(as they say) shall pay for touching. For in very deed the unlearned man is
not acquainted with the phrase of scripture, he knows not the language of the
holy ghost, and although he hear the sound, yet he sees nothing, nor
understands not to what end or purpose this or that be spoken. For it fares
in scripture as in medicines, which although they are ordained of God for the
health of man's body, and are the gifts of God, yet if they be not used in time
and place as the desease requires, and as the learned physician appoints,
they may be mischef instead of a remedy: and serve to kill man being made to
heal man. By this similitude the unlearned may gather, how dangerous it is
for him to read the scripture in his mother tongue: especially with the intent
to interpret it as he shall think best him self.

Now whereas I have in deed found fault with the translation of Luther, and
have withdrawn men from reading of it, How and where Luther has corrupted
the text of the Bible.
I have don it upon good reason and weighty considerations. For it is evident
that Luther in his translation has both corrupted the text omitting and
altering the very words, and also has depraved the sense of the text by false
and heretical gloses partly added in the margin, partly foisted in the text it
self. So by clipping away the terms of the text, and patching on the subtle
shifts of his own brain, he has gaily colored his pernicious doctrine with
the painted shethe of pretended scripture. I will here bring you for a taste
some few examples of his liegerdemain, giving you to understand, what
conscience he is likely to have in other doctrine, that fears not to iugle,
to cogge, and to foist in holy scripture it self.

S. Paul writes thus unto the Ephesians according to the Latin translation.
Ephesians. 6.
Which also word for word agrees with the graeke text. S. Paul corrupted by
Luther.
Wherefore take unto you the whole armor of God that ye may be able to resist
in the evil day, and stand perfect in all things. These words of S. Paul
the honorable and learned man George Gienger one of the preuie counsel unto
the Emperoures Majesty, translated after this sort. Darum ergreift den
harnisch Gottes / auf daffir andem boesen tag widerstee^ kundt / vnd in all len
dinge^ / als die volkommen / vesteen mijghr: that is Therefore take on the
barnis of God to the intent, that in the evil day you may resist, and in all
things stand as the perfect But Luther clipping the text translated it thus.
Omb des wegen so ergreifft den hamisch Gottes auff daf ir widersteen kundt an
them bosen tag / vnd in allen ewren thun besteen mijgt. which sounds thus.
Therefore so take on the barnis of God to the intent that you may resist in
the evil day and stand in all works, In the which sentence Luther omitteth
the word perfecti in laten, als die volkommen in dutche, perfyte in english.
which deprauation of the text in this place, and cutting away the word
perfyte, served his turn very well to raise up again the stinking heresy of
the Maniches. For he writes that. Sin is part of man, and a thing guilty it
self. which cleaves also so fast unto man, that it can in this life, be taken
a way by no virtue of the grace of God or of the Sacraments, and therefore that
man remains allwaies in sin: nor is not able to attain to any point of
righteousness in this life. The manner of he retikes.
And herein Luther as the manner and custom of heretics is, fights against
scripture with scripture it self. For S. Paul says: Not because I am
already perfyte, but I follow if that I may comprehend. Philip. 3.
and a little after. Let us therefore as many as be perfyte be thus wise minded.
Here he makes mention of two sorts of perfection. One which consists in
hope and is looked for in the life to come of the which the Apostle in an other
place speaks By hope we are saved. Romans 8.
an other, which Christ speaks of saying. Be ye perfyte as your father of
heaven is perfyte, Matthew. 5.
and again. Be merciful as your father of heaven is merciful which perfection
is, Luc. 6.
as for example, that our glory be the witness of our own conscience, 2. Cor.
1.
which we are bound to have in this life, and therefore ought to labor, as S.
Paul before exhorted us, Ephesians. 6. Lib. de seruo Arbitrio. Caluiaus de prae
destruat.
that taking upon us the armor of God, we may stand perfyte in all things.
Now Luther admits no perfection in this life, but teaches, that man is so
far from being perfyte in this life, that God does compel him to sin. S.
Paul uses often times the word perfection: but so that he confounds not
the perfection of the life to come, with the present: which in this life as
procliue and subject to sin, may and ought be kept of us as far as our
infirmity bears. Yet this perfection as little as it is, Luther to the intent
he might utterly take away, he sticks not as you see, to clippe the coin of
Gods word, and bereue the text of the word perfect, lest any man perhaps
would labor to be honest and virtuous.

The like slight used he in an other place of the Apostle, for the like purpose
and intent. For whereas the Latin and Greek text both do read, By the law we
have knowleadge of sin. Romans 2.
Luther corrupts it, translating after this sort. Durchs Gesetz is it nur
erkantuus dee Sijnden. that is, By the law is nothing but knowledge of sin.
For as before he clipped away the word perfyte, Lib. Saxonice ecclesiae
contra Geor. Maiore^. Amsdorffius in libello, Bona opera saluti obesse.
so here he foisteth in the word Nur (nothing but) to build again the
former heresy upon this text. But although Luther (as by his writings it is
manifest, and as the Illyricans and Antinomi his scholars do yet teach)
professed at the first, that the law nor before nor after justification is
necessary: and that good works were pernicious to salvation, yet afterward
writing against the Antinomi his scholars, he corrected his former doctrine
after this sort. That the law before justification is in deed necessary for
the knowleadg of sin, but afterward is utterly unprofitable. For the
maintenance therefore of this Pelagia^ and Manichean heresy, the shifting in
of the word Nur (nothing but) fitted his purpose maruailous well. For by this
only word he has planted again two notable and ancient heresies. Vide
Nileuitanum et Arausicanu^ Co^ciliae
The one of the Pelagians, which said that the law auailed nothing, but for
the knowleadg of sin, teaching what we ought to do and not to do, and that by
the gospel we have no grace given us to perform that which by the law we
learn to be good and godly. An other of the Maniches which teach (as Luther
does) that the law is made for wicked men not for Christen men: which can be
held in by no law, nor are not bound to any good works.

In an other place where the Apostle according to the Latin and Greek text, 1.
Cor. 9.
has thus. Have we not power to lead about a sister a woman? Luther thus
tra^slateth it. This place is also corrupted in our English tra^slations
printed in the years 1549. and 1551.
Haben wir nicht macht ein Schwester zum Weib mit vmbher zu fijrn, that is,
Have we not power to lead about a sister for a wife? Here again like a false
foister he shifteth in counterfaited droges among the sweet spice of holy
scripture: adding thereunto of his own these words zum Weib. that is for a
wife. which is far different from the meaning of the holy ghost: and was
never written by the Apostle, nor read in holy scripture from the beginning of
the church by any Christen Catholic man. But what intended Luther by this his
addition? surely to root out of men's hearts all love off chastity and
virginite. (lest perhaps if S. Paul and the rest of the Apostles had carried no
wives about with them, some would be content also by their example to lack
them) yea he makes the blessed Apostle a liar, whereby he might remove him
clean out of the Bible. For the Apostle say the in an other place. I would
have allen^n be as my self. 1. Cor. 7.
That is (as he expounds himself) that all priests and preachers off the
word of God should abstain from matrimony and all pleasure of the flesh, to
the intent that they might study rather to please God then their wife. As also
again when he says. Ibidem.
He that marieth his virgin does well, and he that marieth her not does better.
meaning thereby that both are right good, both to mary and to live single.
Yet whem one of the twain and the better must be chosen, certain it is that
the Apostle prefers single life before marriage. But Luther by iumbling in
only these words, Luther adds to the text.
Lum Weib, that is, for a wife has taken away the meaning and godly intent of
the Apostle not only out of the scripture, but also out of thousands of men's
hearts, Luther enemy to Varginite and wedlock.
not without great loss of many a soul. He has beside hereby not only
disgraced the excellent virtue of chastity and virginite, but also brought so in
contempt the holy sacrament of wedlock (as if it were in invention of man) that
nothing is now more common then (as Luther him self teaches in the sixth tome
of his works) If the wife will not let the maid come. And there be yet extant
certain epistles of Luther and Melanchthon, and aduises given by their letters
wherein they do openly permit and pronounce it to be lawefull, that one husband
may have two lawful wives. Luther and Melanchtho^ teach pluralite of vviues.
I could also allege and note with my finger diverse examples hereof agreeable
to the doctrine of these blessed ghospellers.

Neither may any man here thinck that this false and deceitefull translation of
Luther is any new invented trick of him self: it was practiced also in the
time of S. Augustine, who co^futeth it with these words. For upon this respect
( says he speaking of relief made to the Apostles) Lib. de opere Monachorum.
cap. 4.
godly and faithefull women having wordly substance, went about with the
Apostles and ministered unto the^ of their substance, that they lacked nothing
necessary for this present life. Which S. Paul shows he might lawfully have
done, as the other Apostles did: but he says afterward he would not use his
power and authorite herein. And this point certain men not perceauing,
expounded not asister woman, where the Apostle says, have we not power to
lead about a sister woman, but a wife. These men seem to be deceived by the
ambiguite of the graeke word. (...).
For that in graeke one word signifies both a woman and a wife. Allthouh the
Apostle so placed that greek word, that they might not be deceived. For
neither he said a woman only, but a sister woman: nor to mary, but to lead
about. but other interpretours were nothing deceived with this ambiguite,
translating it a woman not a wife. Thus far S. Augustine, very plainly and
roundely confuting the fond interpretation or translation of Luther. Of the
Canonical how resvsed in the church.


There is in the church a laudable custom, and godly institution of the
Apostles to apply holy scripture to the passion of Christ. So that Lessons and
other prayers in the church, especially of priests and other in holy orders,
be so divided and distributed in to certain hours, that both the story of
Christ his passion and the rest of holy scripture may by that orderly
distribution more conveniently be understood. Hereof (as we have before
touched) were instituted the Canonical hours of Matins, of Prime, of the
iij.vj. and ix. hours, of Eue^song and Co^plin. And that all this is not by
man's co^stitutions or traditions, it may by diverse places of holy scripture
evidently be confirmed. David in a certain psalm writes. Psalm. 118.
Seven times in the day have I said lauds unto the upon the judgments of
thy righteousness. And that this was done at certain hours and prescribed times
it appears by an other place of the same psalm. I arose at midnight to
confess unto the upon the judgments of thy righteousness. And in an other
psalm he writes. Psalm. 54.
At evening: at morning and at none day I will pray and he shall hear my
voice. Morning prayer in the church is counted the Prime. None day, the ix.
hour after Mass. At evening the Eue^song. In the Acts we read of the Sixte
hour. Where it is written that Peter ascended in the upper parts to pray
about the Sixte hour. Acto. 10.
The iij. also the vj. and the ix. hour areme^cioned in Daniel. at the which
hours he prayed with tears over against Jerusalem. Da^. 6.
Complin time of prayer appears by that which S. Luke writes of our Savior.
It happened in those days he went up in to the Mou^te to pray alone, Lut. 6.
and continued all night in, prayer to God. These hours also by Gods
institution are so distributed for the remembrance of Christ's passion, that
every hour contains the remembrance of some special act of the passion.
For at Matins time which is in the night Christ was borne, taken, beaten,
mocked and scorned. At the prime which is in the morning, he was presented to
Pilate and falsely accused. At the same time he appeared after his resurrection
unto Mary Maudelen. At the third hour he was whipped, Actor. 2.
crowned with thorns, mocked, condemned, and bearing his cross, was lead to
the place where he should be crucified. At the same time also the holy ghost
was given to the Apostles. At the vj. hour he was crucified, given to drink
with gall and vinegar, and reputed among thieves. At the ninth hour he rendered
up his Spirit in to the hands of the Father. At Euensong he was taken down
from the Cross: at last in the Complin time he was anointed and buried.

This laudable, godly, and devout custom of daily setting forth the passion
of Christ by seven distincted hours of prayer, the Apostles and their
successors have allwaies from time to time reverently observed. But Luther to
the great reproach of Christ's church, and inestimable do^mage of Christen
souls, has in many places utterly extinguished and abolished it: placing for
it the old cursed heresy of Vigilantius. Which his purpose lest it should in
any point be stayed, such express scripture as declares this manner of prayer,
he thought good by his false translation to deprave. In the acts of the
Apostles according to the graeke and latin text, thus we read. Actor. 3.
Peter and Ihon went up in to the temple at the ninth hour of prayer. In all
languages these words ( at the ninth hour of prayer) be so translated, that
they signify some certain determinat and appointed time of prayer: which
Luther being desirous to abolise, interprets that place thus. Petrus vnd
Johannes gieugen hmauff in den Tempel vmb die neund stund zu veten. that is.
Peter and Ihon went up in to the temple about nine of the clock to pray. as
though that the Apostles had by chance, and not of a set and prefixed order
prayed at nine of the clock. And as though it were all one to read in
scripture, Great co^ fusion in the church by small alteration of the scripture
the hour of prayer, or in some hour to pray. But if a man list to see what
great desolation and confusion has ensued of so little an alteration of the
text in churches and other place of godly fou^datio^, let him remember with him
self the number of religious houses, Monasteries, Nunneries, Chapels,
Hospitals, Alms houses, yea and cathedral churches, where God has in times
past ben honored and served at distinct and sundry times for the continual
remembrance of his blessed passion, both day and night: and now no service
there at all: but are become either profane dwelling places, or schismatic
conuenticles. And all this under pretense of abuses, which though they had
crepte in and blemished that most godly institution and order of Christ's
church, the abuse should have been corrected: the good use should have remained.

In the same chapter of the Acts of the Apostles, S. Peter when he had healed
the same man, he spoke thus unto the people. Acto. 3.
Ye men of Israel why marvel you at this, or why look ye so on us, as though
by our own power or virtue we had made this man go? that which the Latin text
has pietatem the Greek has (...) and is well translated virtue or godlynes,
Luther has translated it merit, as though the Apostles had denied merit. But
there is great difference between virtue or godlynes, and merit or desert. Yet
Luther to take away all love of virtue and good works, labored all that he
could to persuade men, That good works have no merit, dejert or reward before
God, and that they procure nothing but gods wrath. Wherefore all merits
seming to Luther vain and superfluous, for the maintenance of this his
heresy, scripture must be corrupted: seeing directly it would not serve him.

In like manner behaved he him self in the Sacrament of holy Orders, to the
intent he might take away all priesthood out of the church, and set in their
places rennagat prentices, and unthrifty servant, such as had spent their
own and robbed their masters, to gouuerne the new church by him erected. For
this his purpose scripture must be wrethed and perverted: lest the holy
ghospeller might perhaps seem to say somewhat without scripture. Therefore
whereas S. Pause admonishes his disciple Timothe whom he had then ordained
bishop of Ephesus, to use well those gifts and graces of God, as had been given
him with laying on of the hands of the priest hood, that is, in taking his
holy Orders, vising to him these words, 1. Tim. 4.
Despise not the gift which is in the, which was given the thourough prophesy
with the laieng on of hands by the authorite of priesthood, for the word
priesthood, Luther has translated, Our English tra^slations printed in the
years 1549. and 1551. have corrupted this place also.
Der altisten, that is. of the elders. Persuading thereby the people that holy
orders is no Sacrament, and that it is not necessary that those which must
minister the Sacraments, preach, and gouuerne churches, be ordained of
bisshops which have the authorite of priesthood, but that it suffiseth to be
called to the ministry by the elders of the people as of the mayre, the
shrifes, and other temporal rulers. The Lnther ns Ministres
Whereof we see it has happened that in Cites, towns, and Villages, where the
Luthera^ ghospel takes place, show makers and sadlers, poticaries and
pedlers, taylers and tinkards, butlers and bakers, and such other rif raf,
never admitted to holy orders, men of no lerning nor sobriety take upon them
the holy office of priesthood, preach their pleasure to the people to the
utter destruction of many a soul, and ministre the Sacraments without
authorite thereunto.

But Luther and Melanchthon perceauing at the last this confusion, proceeding by
reason of this false interpretation to grow on so far, that every light and
seditious knave, as for example Thomas Muntzer in Turinge, Bernard Rotman in
Westphalia, Matthias Illyricus in Saxony and diverse other in other places took
upon them (not being called nor ordained, nor admitted by the masters of
Wittenberg) to preach and gouuerne the people, sowing new heresies and sundry
schisms in the congregation: Luher and Melanchtho^ chaung^ their language.
suddenly they changed their tune. For Luther to refrain a little his evil
translation that it may serve for the Sacrament of order, in his last edition
of the Bible, upon the word Altisten of the elders, he made this gloss in the
margin. So do also the later English translations printed in the years. 1^52.
and. ^502.
That is, of the priests or of the priesthood. Melanchthon for the like
consideration, though at the first he counted all the Sacraments to be but the
invention of man, and forged deceites, yet in his book of common places, he
reakeneth holy Order among the Sacraments, charging expressly that it should be
taken and used for a holy Sacrament.

But this recantation of Luther and Melanchthon neither served then to any
purpose, The sch^clers of Luther disobey their Master.
nor is now off any force. For the brethern stand stoute^ in that which
Luther and Melanchthon taught first, that holy order and priesthood was no
sacrament at all, that every man and woman were priests. Although this be an
old condemned heresy of the Aerians of Aetius and Vide lib. 2. Epipha^. de
haeresibus and Bernardum.
Pepusius raised up now again of Martin Luther by changing the word
Priesthood in the word Elders contrary the meaning of S. Paul and the common
received interpretation of all Christendom hitherto. Yet has it pleased Master
Luther to renew and preach to the world and old detestable heresy under
pretense of S. Paul's doctrine, and the express word of God.

Now although these few examples might suffice to declare the honesty of
Luther and upright dealing in translation of the holy scripture, yet for the
more declaration thereof, I will add yet one place notably misused and
wilfully corrupted of Luther. The Apostle writes thus to the Colossians.
Coloss. 2.
Beware lest any man deceive you by philosophy or vain deceites after the
tradition of men, after the elements of the world and not after Christ. Thus
reads the greek and the latin text. But Luther drawing after his fashion the
scripture for his purpose, where it is in the text, After the elements of the
world, he turns it, Nach der welt satzungen. So has our english
tra^slatio^, anno 1552. and 62. Vide Lutheri prefaetionem in annotat. Philippi
in Pa^um.
that is, after the laws and ordinances of the world. It is surely a
strange case to see how variabel and braynsicke these ghospellers are. At the
first broching of this new ghospel, while Luther (as the rumor was) lived yet
in his Patmus, Philip Melanchthon, taught that sithen Christen men were all
(...), taught immediately of God him self, no man should study philosophy. For all the writings of Plato, Aristotle, Cicero, and such other were but frivolous
tales and dangerous deceites, and to be burned and destroyed (as in deed in
many places so they were) but only the Bible ought to be read and studied. For
by these the holy ghost would minister all knowledge both to serve God, and
to live in this world, both for everlasting salvation and for this temporal
estate. That a Christian man should not live a studious quiet life, Genes. 2.
for that it was written, In the sweat of thy brow thou shall eat thy bread,
that is (as they expound it) thou must be a plowema^, a showemaker, a bucher,
a tailor, or some such handy crafts man: and so with thy own labor get thy
living.

This foul error, beside other occasions ministered thereunto, was of Luther
in sundry places of his works stoutely maintained and defended. One of such
places I will here at large allege. Writing unto the Nobilite of Germany he
has these words. The universities also have need of an earnest and sharp
reformation. Tom. 6. fol. 589.
Truly I must speak as I think. let him be angry that lists. Whatsoever was
instituted or ordained under the pope, tended only to the furderance of vice
and increase of errors. for the universities if they be not otherwise ordered
then they have been hitherto, what other thing are they then (as it is noted in
the Machabees) schools of children and of the greek glory, where is all
licentious dissolutnes? holy Scripture and Christen faith is not taught. but
that blind ethnic philosopher Aristotle rules above Christ him self. VVhe
refore by my advise the Phisicks, the Methaphisiks, Luther condemns good
lerning.
the books de Anima, the Ethikes should utterly be abolished with all the rest
of his works which profess to teach the natural causes of things. Although
therein nether natural nor spiritual knowledge is to be got. Beside that they
are of such obscurite, that few have hitherto understood them, good wits
lesing both labor and time about them. I dare well say that every coblar
has as much knowleadg of natural things as is to be got in those books. It
greueth me even to the heart that this cursed, and crafty proud ethnike could
so long a time abuse and deceive the learned men of Christendo^. With this
scorge have we ben whipped for our sins.

This much wrote Luther in the year of our Lord 1520. out of these and such
other writings of Luther, Carolostadius and Melanchthon first sucked out the
contempt of philosophy, and all good lerning being so moved by the authorite
of this german prophet, Luther. And by the year 152^. they furdered the matter
so far that in many famous universities and cites all study of philosophy
utterly decayed. And although this doctrine of Luther and Melanchthon taking
away from Christen men ( as Julian the apostat Nicephorus li. 10. cap. 26.
histor. eccles.
Emperor did) all honest discipline, liberal sciences and good lerning,
whereby the estat of Christe^dom has always ben in knowleadg and virtue
directed, and to drive all men to handycraft works and husbandry only, by a
rude and bestly doctrine, yet it so served that time, and was so well liked,
that at Witte^berg many scholars burned all their books, and became crafts
men, sheaperdes, husband men and so forth. And Melanchtho^ becomes a baker.
See the Table following. Vratislauis.
Carolostadius him self ( being before Archedeacon of Wittenberg) getting him
to a village thereby became suddenly a ploweman, tilled and sowed the ground
him self, and brought wodde to the market of Wittenberg to be sold. Beside,
many other cites, especially Breslau did shet up clean all schools, and for
the space of certain years suffered their youth to roue abroad without any
education or instruction. Which if a man had asked them why they did so, the
text of S. Paul served them for a cloak of their folly where it was written.
Beware ye that no man deceive you by philosophy and vain suttelties after the
tradition of men. Coloss. 2.
But now Luther perceauing afterward that this served nothing his purpose,
retourning from his Patmus to Wittenberg he corrected Melanchthon and drove
Carolostadius out of the dominion of Wittenberg, professing then openly and
declaring, that without grammar, logic, and philosophy, his gospel could
not be spread abroad conveniently.

Therefore in the year. 1524. Luther chau^geth his hoode.
writing to the Magistrates and cites of Germany of setting up and main
taining schools, he labors very ernestly to have restored again, such as
had decayed or were neglected: making yet no mention of Carolostadius or
Melanchthon by whom that enormite was committed. To quench therefore and
appaise the tumultes stirred up by his former doctrine and by Melanchthon,
letting pass the foresaied text of S. Paul, he teaches, that philosophy is
good in it self, if it be well used and not abused to deceive me^. Which in
deed had been of him well said, if he him self had not much abused philosophy
to set forth his fleshely gospel, and to persuade his wily and subtle
opinons. But seeing that he could not without philosophy and help of schools
utter the wicked wares of his fresh and new lerning, letting pass (as I
said) the former text of the Apostle, he took hold of the words that
followed. The elements of the world, turning it, the laws and ordonaunces of
the world. For philosophy hindered not so much his purpose, as the
Magistrates and and laws of the country did. Whose authorite unless he first
overthrew, drawing men from due obedience unto their superiors, he perceived
right well, that his purpose could not be brought about, being to abolish old
and ancient religion, and to plant a new of his own invention. To color
therefore this his intent and fetch, he forces me the Apostle to speak for
him, and to utter his doctrine in the vulgar tongue, putting in for the words
of the Apostle after the elements of the world his own words, after the
laws and ordonaunces of the world. As though the Apostle had commanded, that
because the civil laws and decrees be not word for word expressed in the
prophets or the Apostles, but instituted for a policy and worldy gouuernement,
therefore that no man was bound to obey them. And this pageant so pretely
entered of Luther proved not amiss: especially for the trim tricked
translation, or rather transposing and altering of S. Paul's words.

In an other book entitled Of the secular power he writes that among
Christen men there ought to be no superiorite, no power, nor no Magistrate. In
the very same book, and in an Epistle against the two edictes of the Emperor
he writes. Luther vvriteth against obedience to magistrates.
That our princes of Germany be liars, obstinat, men without reason, very
bestes, and to use his own words wild pret in himel, that is, like wild dear
in the element, that we ought to pray to God that the subjects obey not their
magistrates, nor go not to war being pressed, nor give any thing toward
battaill against the Turk: for that the Turk him self, is ten times better
then our Princes. In the book of his assertions against Leo the pope, he
affirms that. To fight against the Turks is to resist God, punishing us by
the Turks tyranny. In his book de Captiuitate Babylonica he says. Note the
liberty of Luthers gospel.
There is no remedy to be hoped for onles the liberty of the gospel (he
means his own) being restored, and all men's laws utterly extinguished, we
judge and rule our selves. For no Magistrate (says he) no nor angel of heaven
has the authorite to prescribe any law over Christen men, other then they
will be content them selves to follow. For Christen men are fre from al
subjection. Again in a little book against the Collectours of worms, he
writes, that no commonwealth is well ruled by laws Last of all in his awnswer
against Ambrosius Catharinus, he stormeth like a mad man and cries out, that
the Church of Christ and the gospel, ca^ in no wise acknowleadg or suffer any
Magistrate or jurisdiction. For all these things be but torments and cruel
inventions of men against Christians. Luther then having by this false and
foisted interpretation of S. Paul, found the means to burn the Canon law,
to bring in contempt the Civil law, to raise up the commons against their
princes, beside many other seditions and rebellions hereby procured, I trust
men will take heed and beware off such false, forged, and foisted
interpretations. For who sees not that there is great difference between The
elements of the world and the ordonnau^ces of the world? Chrisostom,
Theophilact, Theodoret, and other holy fathers interpreting this place of the
Apostle, teach us that the word Elemen^s do mean that we should avoid the
Astronomicall predictions, which are seldom without enchanteme^ts and
coungering. And this is not only forbidden by scripture, but also by Canons of
the church, and by the civil laws (as in Codice de Iudaeis and Mathematicis a
man may se) is greuousely punished. yet Luther will have no other thing meant by
those words of the Apostle (whatsoever the holy fathers say) then politic
and civil ordonnaunces, which he lowdely and lewdely curses. And Melanchthon
in despite of the fathers and Canons maintains at Wittenberg most above other
sciences Astrology, so that in no place it is so much followed and practiced as
there.

I could bring here diverse other false and corrupted tra^slations of Luther,
but that I fear me I should weary the reader with over long and superfluous
recital thereof. Notwithstanding who so loves the truth and will not
wilfully be abused, he may judge of these few examples, what trust is to be
given to the rest of Luthers translation, an such other heretics, especially
if he consider that he that is ones over the shows will not stick yet to wade
further.

But here peradventure a man will demand. Sir if it be so that the reading of
the Bible in the vulgar tongue be so perilous a matter, how shall the unlearned
lay man provide that he be not abused in this case? For many there are among
the laite that ca^ not refrain from reading holy scripture, taking it for a
great comfort, and instruction as well to bridle their passions, as to move
them to virtue. What part then of holy scripture might well be permitted them to
read? For the whole corpse of the Bible were it never so well translated, yet I
doubt whether it were expedient for the lay to read it. For it might be an
occasion of idle and light thoughts, if every girl or young woman should
read the stories of Lot, Genesis 19. Gene. 38. Number. 5.
and his daughters of Lia, and Rachel the wives of Jacob, of Judas, and Thamar,
and how aduoutrie may be tried in women. Which all in the old testament is
to be read.

Among the Jews it was a law that before the age of taking priesthood, Vide
Hieron. praefat in Ezechielem.
which was of thirty years no man should be suffered to read the beginning of
the Genesis, the Canticles, the end and beginning of Echechiels prophecy. And
that because although all this were the word of God, yet it was not thought
expedient that every one indifferently should lightely come to these secret and
high mysteries, which God would not have reveled to all, lest being common (as
it happens) they should the less be esteemed. Nor it has not ben without the
singular disposition and maruailous providence of God, that through all the
west church, the words of his holy Sacraments have among so many barbarous
nations ben kept so long time in the Latin tongue unknown and strange to the
common sort of men.

Yet that the laite be not utterly excluded from the mysteries of holy
Scripture, What parts of Scripture may be read of the laite.
but that they may as far as is expedient for them read and know them, this
our counsel were not paraduenture amiss. Because in holy scripture there are
many stories, and other things which are not necessary to be known not only
of the laite but also of the inferior sort of the clergy, certain bishops of
Rome many years past have piked out of the whole corpse of the Bible, certain
most necessary parcels thereof, and set it forth together in the form of a
Breuiary or portise, to be read of the clergy by duty, and of the laite such
as lists. This is so distributed in to the seven hours of Christ's passion,
that who so lists apply him self to prayer and deuocio^, can surely imagine
no better order then that is. The right Noble and excellent learned man George
Gienger one of the preuy counsel to the Emperors Majesty, well perceauing
the great commodite thereof has translated the Roman Breuiary in to the
German tongue in so handsome and pure style that the Psalter, the lessons and
the ghospels be as pleasauntely to be read in the German tongue as they are in
the Latin. It were therefore peradventure more expedient for the common and
unlearned lay men to have with them some such to pray and read in, then
rashely trust to every translation: or confusely read every thing they list.
Especially being so perilous a matter to swerve from the right understanding of
holy scripture, that the danger ensuing is no less then heresy.

It were also very profitable that certain Homelies and Sermons were gathered
out of S. Chrysostom, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Gregory, S. Bernarde, S.
Bid and such other holy fathers, which being distributed in to the Sondayes
and holy days of the year, and well and truly translated in to the vulgar
tongue, might safely and with great profit be read off the common people.
Beside where as many godly prayers for diverse necessites are to be found in
the doctors, they might serve also for common prayer for the people being
truly translated in to the vulgar tongue. Surely any lay man that desires to
read scripture not of curiosite, but to strengthen his faith, to increase his
hope, and to kindle his charity, may in such books as we have said satisfy
fully his desire and appetit.

OF DISAGREMENT IN DOCTRINE AMONG THE PROTESTANTS.
THe third matter wherewith the Lutherans charge me, is that I have alleged
falsely certain of their articles, whereby their enormous dissension appears,
partly have fathered some upon them which they never taught. As touching the
first point, doctor Smidelin preacher of Gopping sturreth up heaven and earth
against me, swears and affirms that the Lutheran preachers vary in no one
point or ground of their doctrine. But if there be any controversy among
them, the same is (says he) not of any article of their faith, or of their
Confession, made at Augspurg. Confessio Augustana
A man may verily in many places find light and impudent persons; which will
not stick to call chauke chese, and say white is black. But such an impudent
preacher as this James Smidelin of Gopping is, not this forty years has been
seen in Germany: which is not ashamed to write and set forth in printe, yea
that in books dedicated to men of worship, that among the Lutherans is no one
jot of variaunce in all their doctrine, nor no dissension in any article of
their Confession. In deed this argument troubles much the man, that where
division and dissension is in the chief points of Christen religion, Note the
ground of this book.
there must needs heresies be. But the Lutherans can not deny their enormous
dissension and open variau^ce in sundry points, yea in these articles of their
Confession made at Augspurg, Ergo there be heretics among the^ and heresies
great store. For whereas to the first proposition of this argument no man can
gainsaie, but if he be extreme impudent or very foolish, M. Smidelin shifteth
him self to the other part and denies stoutely that there is any one jot of
variaunce or controversy between them. Now then to prove the contrary and to
stop the impudent fellows mouth (who being oftentimes frendely warned
perseuereth yet in his folly) I will bring here certain of his fellow
Ministers and such as him self is, which may a little remove his bonet from his
eyes, and show him the glass, where he may see his own impudent face, and
shameless look that blusheth not at so loud a lie. The first testimony of the
Luthera^s disagreing.
Nicolaus Amsdorfius in his book entitled Publica Confessio purae doctrinae
Euangelij and confutatio praesentium Swermerorum vel factiosorum, writes thus:

The matter amendeth never a whit, but wexeth daily worse and worse: It is no
other wise likely but that we shall utterly lose the gospel and instead of
it have nothing but mere lies and heinous errors: and that for no other cause
then that every man follows his own wit: and desires not after the truth.
In the diet and conference had lately at worms. In the year. 1557.
Brentius and the Adiaphoristes would not condemn Zuinglius and Osiander,
because they were men learned in the tongues and liberal sciences. But hissed
us out of the company and laughed us to scorn because we refused to agree unto
the conference and diet onles those men were condemned. Some of our fellows (
the Lutherans) pretend that they condemn the Zwinglians, but Brentius his
praeface upon Master James Smidelins book testifies the contrary. For here
they go about to reconcile godly Luther and Zuinglius, which is impossible. For
who ever heard that two contradictories could agree? Such childish and
impossible matters they be not ashamed to affirm, which will be counted
teachers and Masters of Christen religion, as though we and all other were
stocks and blocks. But surely we can not embrace with quiet conscience the
heresies of Zuinglius and Osiander. Neither can we subscribe and yield to such
as have departed and severed them selves from Luther. The definition of a
zealous Luthera^.
Truly if they had consta^tly cleaued unto the word of God and Luther and had
not given them selves to alteratious, or yielded to them which first altered
from Luther, there should have been no dissension nor variaunce amongst us, and
al these mischefs which we see now hang over our heads had been escaped.
Farther although the Ministers which after our departure remained in the
conference at worms, wrote after and published it abroad that they would not
depart from the Confession of Augspurg, yet in deed they do clean contrary.
For while they will not condemn the Zwinglians and the Osiandrines, they can by
no means agree with our Confession off Augspurg: but in so doing, they be all
ready departed from it. So have they caused disse^sion and removed all means
of agreement. Our protestants have well marked this.
For if they would condemn with us the foresaid errors of Zwinglius and
Osiander, then might we agree together against the papists. But no we whereas
the Confession of Augspurg teaches that the Blood and passion of Christ is our
righteousness, and that the bread in the Lords supper is the body of Christ,
this can not possibly agree with the madness of Zwinglius and Osiander.
Therefore these two repugne, to say, they remain in the Confession off
Augspurg, and yet go about to defend Zwinglius and Osiander.

We therefore first and formest do condemn for heretics Caspar Swenckfeldius
and the Anabaptists which do contemn and refuse the external Our protestants
a-recondemned by the Luthera^s.
Thirdly we condemn the Sacramentaries, Zwinglius and his fellows, The master
Lutherans of Lipsia be Pelagians
Beside these five some there are (as D. Pfeffinger bishop of Lipsia and his
fellows) that teach man to be able and sufficient to dispose him self to
grace, and make him self meet to receive the holy ghost by the natural power
of his own fre will, as the same Sophistes Thomas and Scote taught. The schole
doctors never taugh so.
For this Pfeffinger in a disputation made about two years past of free will
rashely and boldly concludes with these words. A man may by his own
natural power assent to the gospel, apprehend the promis of Christ, not
withstand the holy ghost, etc. Thus far Amsdorfius. Here we see this
Lutheran Master condemns six diverse sects and schisms, which all (except
only the Swenckfeldians) do yet depend of the Confession of Augspurg, and
defend, and embrace even to this day their doctrine. For though some
peradventure do wene that the Swinglians be excluded from the Confession of
Augspurg, yet I find the contrary in Iho^ of lasky writing to the King of
Pole, Caluinus in vltima admonitione sua ad Ioach. VVestphalum.
and in Ihon Calvin. in the which places both of them affirm directly, that
the Confession of Augspurg teaches the very same touching the Sacrament of the
altar, that Zwinglius and the Sacramentaries do. Seeing then these foresaid
sects so bitterly vary one with an other in the chief points of our
religion, that each pronounces the other heretic, truly right it is, they be
taken for such as they pronounce them selves to be. In the mean yese by this
process of Amsdorffius how well and truly M. Doctor Smidelin affimeth and
makes him self sure that among the Lutherans is no dissension touching the
articles of the Confession of Augspurg. Yet to make this matter more clear, I
will add hereu^to some other testimonies of their own fellow ministers, if
peradventure their own conscience may touch them to acknowledge the truth.
Nicolaus gallus in Thesibus and Hipotiposibus. in the last leaf writes thus.

The altercations and contentions between us ( Luth^ran preachers) are not
light nor of light matters, The second testimony.
but of the principal articles of Christian religion, of the law and the
ghospel, Special articles of contradictions among tho Protestants.
of justification and good works, of the Sacraments and use of Ceremonies, so
great that they seem impossible to be brought at one. For some are plain
contradictions that ca^ not be reconciled. as. That the law must be Romans 6.
That no man has been saved without none to be saved by. That Christ is in the
Supper and is received there corporally under bread and wine both of the
beleuers and of those which believe not, and again that he is there only
spiritually and is received only of them which believe. Thus far Nicolaus
Gallus. who although he rehearse with no less stomach the contrary and
repugnant heresies of the Lutherans his fellows, then Amsdorffius does, yet
beside he confesses there are many more a coining and ready to come to light.
And no doubt but it is so: for not long sens the princes of Saxony and Countes
of Mansfeld, The third testimony
each off them has set forth severally great volumes touching this matter,
where they reaken up vnleuen sundry sects lately sprung up, condemning them
all for heresies to wit.

The Anabaptists. The Seruetians. The Antinomi. Although in very deed the
Jesuits are no more to be counted among these he retikes, then pigeons among
crows.
The Jesuits, The Osiandrins, The Melanchthonistes, The Maioristes. The
Adiaphoristes or Indifferents. The Swenckfeldians, The Sacramentaries.
Now where Smidelin denies that among the ghospellers is no heresy, no
dissension in religion, no variaunce in the Confession of Augspurg, I would he
told us what is it that those Superintendents, Amsdorfius and Nicolaus Gallus,
condemn in their former sentences? What meaned the princes of Saxony and the
Countes of Mansfeld? Do not all these fore named sects acknowledge the
Confession of Augspurg and belong thereunto? The Anabaptists in deed do not,
and much less the Jesuits. But all the rest walk under the winge of the new
ghospel and uphold them selves under the pretense of the Confession of
Augspurg. For Lasky in Pole, and Calvin in Sauoye labor continually to
persuade men, The Sacramentaries desire to be under the vving of the Lutherans.
thrt their sacramentary doctrine is express in the Confession off Augspurg.
Here I would demand of Master Smidelin whether the articles condemned here
and recited of the princes of Saxony, the Countes of Mansfeld, of Amsdorfius
and Gallus, and defended of those ten sects above mentioned, do properly
appertain to the Confession of Augspurg or no. Surely I see not what awnswer
this doctor of Gopping is able to make us: for if he say these articles
touch not the doctrine of tbe Confession of Augspurg. then would I desire him
to take the pains for his estimation sake only to affirm the same in one
printed leaf of paper, against those Superintendents Amsdorffius and Gallus
and against the princes and Countes aforesaid. Which if he dare not for his
life to do, then must he needs be an impudent fellow and past all shame and
honesty, to affirm openly that the Lutherans do all agree in the ground and
chief points of their Confession off Augspurg. Here I hold this wily fox,
and be he never so ssipper yet shall he not escape here my fingers. And
therefore yet we will lay hand on him more surely.

In the book of the Countes of Mansfeld against the vnleuen sects, fo. 179.
the Ministers say in this wise The reader need not to marvel that Osiander
to auouche his matter alleges plenty of scripture, but rather ought
diligently to mark how wickedly he wretheth and corrupts the right meaning
and understanding of holy Scripture. Thus much say they. In lib. contra
longiore^ Catalogu^.
But what now says Master Smidelin hereunto? In the book he made this year
against the long table, where he goes about to reconcile together the Masters
of Wittenberg and Osiander thus he writes. Then both parts prove their
opinions by holy Scripture, and truly with the very same sentences, but not the
very same interpretations, allthough yet not contrary. Let us harken I pray
you how swetely these bells agree. The Ministres off Ma^sfeld say that
Osiander wickedly wretheth and corrupts holy scripture: this man says, that
the interpretations of them both are not contrary. Again in the same book of
the Countes of Mansfeld thus we read. sol. 166.
Neither is this error of Osiander sightely to be passed over, by the which he
binds the benefits of Christ to certain circunstaunces, to bring men thereby
to desperation, while the mind of man hangs in doubt whether he be fit to
receive the benefits of Christ or no. Fol. 1. and 2.
But clean contrarely writes Smidelin in the book above named. If that
Osiander says he or his adversaries because of this contention inschole
points only are to be counted heretics what shall we say, I pray you, of
the old fathers? But how swetely agree the semen? The Ministers of Mansfeld
say. that the doctrine of Osiander has such a notable error annexed unto it,
that it forces men to desperation. Smidelin says, it is but a light
contention in schole points. But this fellow perceauing that such manifest
and diverse heresies can in deed by no means be reconciled together, he
brings in the old fathers for example, as though they had used to confute
heretics by false interpretation of holy scripture, which ca^ never be proved
of them. Yea it is impossible that heresies may be overthrown by false
doctrine. Li. 8. Top.
For as Aristotle teaches, it is impossible that of a false ground any truth
may be concluded. Fol. 152.
Farther in this book of Mansfeld the Ministres say. We ought to suspect the
doctrine of Osiander, Now Lutherans can abide no nevve doctrine.
because it is new and not heard of before in the church and we find nothing
in holy scripture that is anything like to the doctrine of Osiander. Let us
now here what says Master Smidelin in his book alleged. A child of seven
years old, which had learned but his cathechisme may evidently perceive that
both these doctrines, Fol. 1. 2.
of Osiander and of the VVitenbergers, disagree never a whit. If there were in
our Germain tongue any one word, that might thouroughely express an impudent
and shameless fellow, surely it would now serve well the turn to trick this
doctor in his terms. So impudently and so past al shame in the face of all the
world, he lies so lowdely, and boasts so bestly, that among them all, is
no difference in doctrine, no variaunce in opinions, but all smothe, all quiet,
all uniform and agreeable. yea and that so evidently so swetely so like pigeons
they agree and coll together, that a very child of seven year old would be
the better to see it.

But seeing this good man slepeth so soundely in the sweet concent and uniform
harmony of his brethern, that it seems he has forgot all the world, and
remembers not the pretty pageants they have played of late, and what notes of
discord has fallen amoge, I will be so bold as a little to wake him: and call
him to remembrance of the fourten Lutheran churches, The fourth testimony.
which all of late wrote and set forth in print their writings against the
Confession of Andreas Osiander, among the which the chief are, The Ministers
or divines of Wittenberge, the Ministres of the younger Lords of Vinaria, the
Ministres of Magdenburg. The ministers of Franckford on this side of Viader.
The ministers of Ihon of Costrin the Marquis, of the dukes of Pomerain, and of
the cites on the seacost of Saxony as of Lubek, of Hamburg, of Breme, of
Luneburg, and diverse other. Unto all the which churches and Ministres Osiander
in his book entitled Schmeckbier awnswered, Vide Ioannis Functij scriptum de
rebus Osiandri.
paieng them home with such coin as they laid out, so that now they are
both on fire one against an other cursing and charging each other with heinous
and abominable heresies. He that lists not to believe me, let him prove and
try the truth in their books that are abiode in all men's hands, let him
search the printers shops of Germany, and he shall find bitter contentions and
grievous controversies between the Lutherans and the Osiandrins. Yet Smidelin
winketh and noddeth still and will not see all this. But if he be an upright
and plain dealing man let him come forth, and prove in open writing that any
thing here said in false or fained.

Well Smidelin goes forth after his fashion, and labors against al reason
to make the world wene That among the Lutherans and the Zwinglians there is
no variaunce of any weight or force touching any articles of our faith of
Christian religion. But against this saying of Smidelin, The fifth testimony
Luther him self.
Luther him self directly pronounces, codemning the Swinglians in these
words. Tom. 2. I^o. 260.
I must needs eschew and avoid them as men condemned by their own judgment:
nether may I join with them in any means, nor by letters nor by writings,
Math. 18.
nor by word nor by deed, as the Lord has commanded, whether he be
Swenckfeldius, Zwinglius, or what soever he be called. For I account them all
a like (as in deed they are) whosoever believe not, that in the Supper of the
Lord, the bread is his true and natural body, which as well Judas and the
wicked man does receive as S. Peter and all the Saints. Whosoever will not
believe this, Luther excludes Suinglius and Svve^cfeldius from his grace.
let him not meddle with me, or in writing or in talk, nor let him not look
for any communion with me. For he shall but lose his labor. And a little after.
It shall nothing help the Swermers or Sacramentaries that they trifle about
the Sacrament of the spiritual eating and drinking of the body and blood of
Christ: and of the charity and unite of Christians, Fo. 263.
etc. It is in vain that they believe in the father, the Son, and the holy
ghost, and in Christ our Savior. All this I say nothing avails them, how
truly and sincerely so ever they pronounce this faith with their false and
blasphemous tongue, as long as they deny this one article, or reprove it as
false where Christ says of the Sacrament. Note.
Take (bread) and eat This is my body. For this is the manner of all
heretics, first to begin but with one article and then after to deny all
the rest, Luther did which he reproved in his scholars. Note how heretics
may be used.
even as a ringe if it be ones broken or cleft, it is unprofitable and vnfite,
and as a bell, if he be cracked, or crased in any part, he leseth his so wnde
and is worth naught. Thus far Luther Let us now on the other side here the
awnswer of the Swinglians of Zuri^h In the third treatise of their book made
against the last Confession of Luther thus they write. The protestants of
Zurich against Luther.
Luther craketh him self to be the prophet and Apostle of the Germans: which
never learned of any man but all other of him, that no man did any thing but
Luther has done all: and whatsoever he has not done, has remained undone.
Whatsoever he has said it must stand, and no man so hardy to gainsaie it.
If men speak not just as Luther does, then they are cursed and persecuted as
heretics. And a little before. Luther has forsaken god and all his honor
calling us a condemned and cursed sect. But let him take heed lest with this
teasty and wicked talk, he condemn not him self, and prove him self an
archeheretike seeing that he nether will nor can have the societe of such as
sincerely teach and confess Christ our Lord. And how wonderfully does
Luther here betray himself with all his fellow sprets, and devils? What foul
words uses he mete only for the devil? For he says that there dwells in
the Zwinglians a malicious devil, Ani^^um in sa^hanasiatum, super satha^a^atum
persathana, a^u^.
both now and ever, that their heart and mind has the devil dwelling in
them, raining over them, and percing thourough them. that their mouth is full
of all lies, and the devil him self is poored in them, poored over them, and
poored thourough them. Did ever any man hear such talk of any sobre or
reasonable man's mouth, yea or of any furiou^e devil or raging sprit? Again in
the same place. Luther seeks only after his own, he is obstinat, proud and
high minded condemning boldly and delivering up to the devil, all which will
not agree unto his mind. He raileth and curses like a devil. There is no
token of mekenes or benevolence in him. Here would I wish M. Smidelin to come
forth, and tell us what Luther means by such words of his, as we have here
alleged. I am very sure, he is never able to make accord between the opinions
of Luther and Zwinglius touching the Sacrament, although he labors much
about it. As when he writes in an other place. VV^e^ the one part ( says he)
teaches bread in the holy Supper to signify the body of Christ, to be the
figur^ of the body of Christ, to be the value of the body of Christ, to be the
pleadge of the body of Christ, yet all these teach, believe and profess one
doctrine and one opinion, the difference is only in the interpretation as
Luther Witnesses, and in the phrase or manner of speaking, not in the thing it
self. This says Smidelin. and Amsdorffius in his confession obiecteth it
unto him with these words. There be (Lutherans) which say they condemn the
Zwinglians, but the preface of Brentius upon Master James Smidelins book
testifies the contrary. For here they go about on gods name to reconcile godly
Luther and Zwinglius together, which is utterly impossible. For who ever heard
that contradictories could be made one? Such childish matters and impossible
things they are not ashamed to warrant which bear themselves for Masters of
Christian religion, as though al we were stocks and blocks.

Let here the Christian reader confer together these debates and contentio^s of
the two prophets of god, Luther and Swinglius, and set Smidelin as a pacifier
and arbiter to bring them at one. surely I doubt not, but he shall soon
per^eaue that Smidelin in this enterprise, other has lost some peace of his
brain, or has utterly cast away al honesty and shame. Luther says directly
and plainly that the Swinglia^s doctrine is not only contrary both in word
and in deed to his doctrine, but also that their opinion is so pestiferous and
execrable, that he doubts not to pronounce the^ al stark heretics that
subscribe and agree unto it. yea and this with such a veheme^cie he utters
that he affirms: who so ever swarueth in this artikle of the sacrament, he is
an heretic in all other artikles and points of the faith. Now comes Smidelin
and says, that the opinion of Luther and Swinglius touching the Supper is all
one, and that all the controversy remains only in words. And in his latin
book, set forth against me, he says of them. It is most certain that their
opinion and mind is all one, therefore they agree in doctrine.

And where as I noted that among the Suinglians were eight sects that
Smidelin denies also. and says Although Zwinglius varied and swarued some
what from Luther yet of their schism there were but two parts. Therefore in
his book against my table he raileth in this sort. Fol, 3. libri contra
catalogum.
Of these two parts this nightrauen (so terming me) has made eight sects.
The first part whom he calls Adessenarii, which believe the praesence of the
true body and blood of Christ in the Supper, he divides in to four sects as
the Significatiui the Tropistae, the Energici, and the Arabonarij. wherein who
looks nere to the matter shall see he has played the wicked and naughty man's
part. I know very well that the unlearned man reading these his words, must
needs suppose that I have iniuriousely slaundered the Swinglians, and done like
a false fellow, to charge honest men with eight diverse heresies, whereas the
Lutherans and the Swinglians, are divided only in two parts, and those two
parts also (as Smidelin says) consist only in the phrase, or manner of
speaking not in the thing or deed. What the^ have we here to awnswer? Luther
shall take the pains to do it for me. which in his brief Confession writes
after this sort. At the very first these men Luther against the Sacramentaries.
(meaning the Sacramentaries) were well warned of the holy ghost, when upon
that one text, they divided them selves in to seven sprits, each one differing
always from the Luther calls Svve^cfeldius by the name of Stencfeldius in
mockery, as one that stinketh.
The fourth Stencfeldius thinking to make his stenche to smell as musk,
brought us forth out of his holy sprit this rule. These words (This is my
body) must be removed from our sight: for they do let us of the spiritual
understanding, etc. The fifte holy sprit Corpus pancum. Of this mide was
Melanchthon at his later days. In iudicio Heidelbergensi.
This is my bready body or body of bread. Beside all these an other sprit
flies about (for the devil is an holy and a great sprit) which persuadeth
men, that herein is no article of our faith, and therefore we ougth not to
contend of this matter, but leave it fre to every man to believe herein what he
list. Thus far be the words of Luther. Is not here Smidelin an honest and an
upright man? is he not a kind scholar toward his Master, Luther? The master
says, There are among the Swinglians eight diverse factio^s or sects. The
scholar says. That the Zwinglians among them selves do perfitly agree: and
from Luther, they differ only in words and manner of speaking. Is not think
you Master Smidelin a trim pacifier? does he not by good reason reconcile these
protestants together? In the book against my table he raileth, and says, he
must needs be a wicked person which would say, that among the Swinglians
were eight diverse and several opinions: Doctor Smidelin proves Luther to be a
vviched man.
and who is so blind that sees not Luther him self in his words above
alleged to recite eight contrary opinions of the Swinglians? It follows then
by the judgment and sentence of Doctor Smidelinus, that Luther is a wicked and
pernicious fellow. Surely very well and as it should be. for such honor use
kind scholars to give to their masters. But truly they are both used
according to their deserts: while the Master proves his scholar a liar, and
the scholar proves his Master a knave. and now it happens as we commonly
see of a froward curre a peuish whelp.

But what will Smidelin say, if that among the Lutherans them selves,
Sacramentary sects and divisions among the Lutheraus. The sixth testimony
Melanchthon.
be sacramentary sects and schisms, and that not a few? This present year
1560. in the second of Octobre was printed at Heidelberg the judgment of
Philip Melanchthon, touching the Supper of our Lord, dedicated to the
honorable prince Electour Count palatin of the Rhene. where he writes thus.
It is not hard but somewhat dangerous to awnswer, yet I will declare that
debate and controversy which happened at Heidelberg, and admonish men as much
as I may at this time. I will also pray unto Christ our Lord that it will
please him prosperously to direct these our aduises and their doings. Great
and grievous co^tentions shall undoubtedly arise in the world, upon the
Controversy of our Lords supper for the world must needs be punished for
their idolatry and other heinous offenses Let us then pray that the Son of God
teach us and direct us. But seeing that many are yet in many places feeble in
the faith and not well instructed in this doctrine off the church, but rather
nouseled in many errors, it is mete that first we take order for such. I like
there fore very well the advice of the most honorable prince Electour that all
such as contend of the Supper of the Lord be put to silence, So in the Alcoran
of Mahomet all disputing of religion is forbed.
lest dissensio^ and variaunce arise in the church yet tender and weak,
whereby the feblei^ faith might perhaps be seduced and disquieted. And I would
wish also, that the contentious persons on both sides were some other where.
Which being sent away, the rest might agree into some form of words.
Melanchtho^ vvoulde have us change the institution of Christ in the Supper,
and say this is the participation of my body, whereas Christ said, this is
my body which is up and d^vvne Suinglians heresy.
And in this controversy me thinks it were best to keep the words of S.
Paul. The bread which we break is the participation of Christ his body much
also must be said of the fruit of the Supper to stir up men more to love
this pleadge, and the oftener to use it. Again the word Participation, is to
be declared and expounded. For S. Paul says not (as the papists do) that the
nature of bread is changed. nor that the bread is the substa^tiall body of
Christ as the ministers of Bremesaie. Nor as Heshusious says, that bread is
the true body of Christ: but that it is a participation or communion, that is,
by the which we are coupled and made one with the body off Christ. Which
copulation and making of one consists in the use: not without it. imagining
that mise could knawe that bread. The papists and such as are like them to
earnestly contend that the body of Christ is under the form of bread, or
included in the bread beside the use, and when it is not received. they will
have it adored also as Doctor Morlin of Bruns wicke says. Thou must not say.
Mum. Mum: But what is that which the priest has in his hands. Sarcerius would
have all the parcels that sal down, to be gathered up, and to be burned
together with the earth on which it fell. Two years past when we were at
worms, a quaestio^ was asked us out of the Court whether the body of Christ
passed down in to the belly and so forth. Such absurd questions ought not to
be moved better it is that the form of S. A question of the ghospellers
disproued ^y Melanchthon.
Paul's words be kept and that men be well instructed of the use and fruit of
this Sacrament. The form of words of the Supper ye may see in the ordinatio^
of the church of the Megapolians, where also advertisement is given of the
fruit thereoff. The Son off God in the ministry of the gospel is present,
and works also in those that believe. But he is present not for cause of the
bread but for man's sake, as he says him self. Tarry in me and I in you, Joan.
15. Joan. 14.
I in my father and you in me and I in you. And with this true Comfortes he
makes us his members, and testifies that he will raise up and quicken our
bodies. Thus do old writers expound the Supper of the Lord. but some term
this true and plain doctrine, buskins or shows mete for every foot. and will
have that the body is in the bread or in the form of bread: as though the
Sacrament were made for the breads sake or to be adored papistically. Then
other imagine that the body should be enclosed in the bread. some will have it
every where and in all places. Melanchthon dalieth here at his pleasure: The
words of Staphylus.
but all holy fathers and old writers, have continually hitherto taught the
conversion, transmutatio^, and changing of the creature of bread in to the
body of our Lord, that we may truly say with Christ, This is my body.
Heshusius says, he can not agree with Origin terming the bread and wine the
signs of the the body and blood. So he rejects Clemens Alexandrinus, ready
to do the like to Augustine, Ambrose, Prosper, O the impudency of Mela^chthon.
for these fathers do al teach the contrary.
Dyonisius, Tertullian, Bid, Basil, and Gregory, Nazianzen (which calls the
body (...)) to Theodoret which writes that the nature of bread remains. No
nor your authorite Mcla^chthon.
Is the^ the authorite of Heshusius so great, that we will rather b^leue him
the^ the old writers This is a lovvd lie.
which testify clearly that the church in their time had no adoration nor no
such doctrine as the papists no we teach? For seeing these are Is not the
doctrine of Melanchthon nevve? the felovve raueth.
new and strange in the church, we doubt whether it be convenient to bring in
new doctrine in the church. And I am not ignorant, that many allege forged
books under the name of old writers: but let the learned judge hereof. I will
not make any long debate of this matter presently. nor enter to dispute with
contentious men defending the idolatry and robberies of their forefathers.
Whose tyranny and cruel persecutions I feel also. I thought good only to
declare my mind herein what were best to be done in respect of our weak and
tender church. Ergo it is nevve.
Therefore I am still of that mind that both parts be put to silence, and
that one form of words be used. Which if some like not, Hoc videlicet est
Syn^retisare.
and will not therefore come unto the Sacrament, they may be permitted to do as
they see good, so that yet they stir up no dissension among the people. This
much Melanchthon. Melanchthon a dissembling ghospeller.
who although he would never before this time openly in writing profess his
mind of the Sacrament, yet he allwaies told his familiar friends and men of
worship, that in this point he condemned Luther, and claue unto Swinglius,
correcting yet a little his opinion. For where as Swinglius said, This
signifies my body, he will have it said This is the participation of my body,
which new interpretation is plainly a new Sacramentary heresy, and never
heard of among the rest of the Swinglians. And to maintain this his proper
and new heresy, he uses two points of sutteltie and falsehood. first when he
says the holy fathers taught no conversion or transsubstantiation of the
bread, which is a very impudent and loud lie. Se the x. article of D.
Hardinges avvnsvver to Master Iuells challenge fol. 124. Five sects among the
Lutherans of the Sacrament.
For the conversion of the bread and real presence of Christ his true body and
blood in the Sacrament may evidently be proved out of all the fathers above
named and many mo: and the contrary opinion clearly condemned. Secondarely when
he rebukes his own scholars, and charge them with five other Sacramentarie
heresies. For he says some be of Heshusius mind, some of Sarcerius, some
other follow the ministers of Breme, and some Ioachimus Morlinus, then he
alleges other whose opinion is that Christ his body may be in every place.
These five heresies, which (as Mela^chthon testifies) are among the
Lutherans, and the other eight which Luther shows to be among the
Swinglia^s, make all together thirten heresies. which al noweadaies upon the
Sacrament only are followed, Thirten heresies among the protestants touching the
blessed Sacrament.
professed, and defended among the protestants.

Here again we may consider the honesty and truth of M. Doctor Smidelin,
which is not ashamed to term such open schisms, manifest to all the world, a
sure and certain agreement of Catholic religion, who beside all this knows
well enough, what agreate and vehement altercation there was this present year
1560, at Heidelberg among the divines and ministres there, touching only this
point of the blessed Sacrament. of the which matter Guilelmus Klebicius of
Brandeburg has written very bitterly and sharply. And this much hitherto of
the dissension among the protestants touching only the point of the blessed
Sacrament.

The dissension and variaunce of the Lutherans touching the doctrine of
Penance, Nicolaus Gallus libr. cui titulum fecit, Fundamenta Nic. Galli
etia^numpersta^t and in Thematibussuis
I have noted before in a little book. For some of them put two, some three
parts of penance. But doctor Smidelin will accord all this discord with a
word: saing, it is all one to put two or three parts of penance. As though
that al other Superintendents and ministres of Luthers sect ought to couche,
and obey the pontifical authorite of Doctor Smidelin taking upon him like a
pope of protestants. But Illyricus will not abide that, persuading him self
that he is of as good metal to make a Lutheran pope, The seventh testimony
Illyricus.
as any other is. and therefore he will not grant to the Masters of
Wittenberg, no nor to his own Master, Luther, to define, divide and determinat
the gospel at their pleasur. For in the book, which he entitled, Fol. D. 3.
An information upon certain articles of Christen religion, he writes in this
sort. But not so much he (meaning Melanchthon) as his proctours do exasperat
this matter: although they agree not among them selves: for one interprets
the matter after one sort, and the other after an other, as it happens in
evil causes. One saieh that the word Penance signifies only sorrow or
contrition an other, that it signifies contrition and faith with all. One
says that the gospel preaches repentance of one sin The ghospellers
doubt what the gospel preaches
only, as of infidelite: an other says, of all sins. Some imagine this gloss,
that the gospel preaches repentance improperly, indirectly and by occasion
only: some say that consequently it preaches repentance. An other says by
a figure of contrariete: the fourth says, after a sort and in some point. The
fifth says, it does but argue men's incredulite or slacknes of belefe. The sixth
says that it rejects the small faith. The seventh says that it preaches
repentance not principally. Thus they disagree among the^ selves no less
then the Sacramentaries or Babylonians, or those builders of idols that Esaie
speaks of: where one thinks to hold up the idol with glue, another with
nails, Esaiae. 41.
and the third with chains. But all these gloses both destroy them selves one
another, and the definition also. Thus far Illyricus. Does not Illyricus
affirm here that Melanchthons divines vary one from an other, and set up
seven sundry opinions, never a true: and all repugnant one with an other, no
less then the sects of the Sacramentaries? and that they agree as the
builders of the tower of Babylon in old time? Says not directly all this
Illyricus? And what says Smidelinus? We in the principal articles and
ground of our doctrine do not vary. Which if it be true, then must we say,
that the doctrine of penance and of the Sacrament of the altar appertain not
to the ground of Christen religion, nor are not necessary articles of the
same. For Smidelin in his little book, which he set forth against me, stands
stiff in this mind. Libello contra trimem brem Theologiam. fol. 80.
That it forces not whether two or three parts of penance be taught: nor
skilleth any whit, whether you believe uprightly, or embrace that seuenfolde
heresy contrary in it self, in the matter of penance. Again in his book
against my table writing of the altercations between the Illyricans and the
Adiaphoristes, he says. Although one write bitterly against the other, yet in
their churches there is no alteration of doctrine, but they profess and teach
the pure doctrine of the gospel in perfect agreement with us and them selves,
even as before this altercation began. How sou^deth, think you, these
words of Smidelin with the saying of Illyricus? In like manner does he defend
Andreas Musculus. For where I write, that he teaches, the Godhead of Christ to
have as well died in the Cross as the ma^hood, Smidelin goes about to purge
him in these words. Fol. o. 3.
I have understood now that Staphylus does injuriously slander Andreas
Musculus. For Musculus in open writing published and printed has purged him
self against Staphylus. Thus says Smidelin. It is the nature and custom of
all heretics not to continue long in one mind. But to deny to morrow which
they said to day. So does Musculus. And although Smidelin, as he confesses
him self, be utterly ignorant of the debate between Musculus and Sta^carus
(wherein those words be uttered) yet he sticks not to write that I slander
Musculus. Truly because he would be counted a common pacifier of all
contentions, a physician for all sores, and a reconciler of all unruly
heresies. But what will both Musculus and Smidelin say unto me, if I bring
their own brethern and fellow heretics, witnesses against them? The eight
testimony.
The Lutheran churches of Pole sent to the university of Lausana for the
determination of this matter between Musculus and Stancarus, and the doctors
of Lausana sent them this awnswer. Although well beloved brethern, In epistolis
Petri Statorij Galli Pinc^^uiae aeli^is anno 1560.
we can never say enough against the opinion of Islebius and Andreas Musculus
teaching that Christ suffered in both natures of God and of man, and yet
bringing no argument against the contrary. Nevertheless seeing you desire to know
our judgment and mind of this opinion, we can not conceal it from you, etc.
Thus therefore you shall understand. We deny utterly that God can suffer any
mutation, and cae. Here thou may perceive, gentle reader, what kind of men
these Lutherans are. Sometime whot, sometime cold: sometime white sometime
black. And yet not withstanding Smidelin writes, It is a great lie to say
there is any difference among our divines, touching the articles of our
Confession of Augspurg. In praefatione libelli contra Staphylum.
It is a world to see how this fellow has hardened his face against all
shame, and how proudely he persuadeth him self to blind all the world,
seeing and feling that the Lutherans disagree in the articles and ground of
their Confession of Augspurg.

For the better Declaration whereof, let us yet a little more diligently waighe
and expend the articles of their Confession of Augspurg. Clear it is that their
chief and principal articles are, of the Blessed Trinite, of free will, of
Justification, of the law and the gospel, of good and evil works, of faith,
of Christ Jesus our Mediator, of the number of Sacraments, of Baptim, of the
Supper of our Lord, of Penance and such other. These are the principal and
chief articles of the Confession of Augspurg. Which if Smidelin deny, I
appeal to the printed copy of their confession: being very sure that all
these articles are there. But if he grant me they are all there, then I
demand of him as I have often times done before, whether he will confess or
deny that the Ministers and Preachers of this new gospel agree in all these
articles or no. A brief recapitulation of the schisines and dissensions among
the protestants. Epistola Illyrici ad M. VVerneru^ Barben. Caluinus de pre
destinatione et Illyricus in articulis ineundae co^ cordiae, etalij plerique
omnets. Illyricus in libro suae informationis. Gallus in exceptionum libro and
cae. Anisdorfius lib. opera bona esse perniciosa. Illyricus contra Mentum et
ali^i.
If (as he has done hitherto) he deny it, I must needs rest upon my former
sentence, and pronounce that surely his wits be not his own, he is
braynesicke and beside him self.

For he knows very well (as anon in the Genealogy of Luther or table of the
heretics we shall at large declare) that first as concerning the blessed
Trinite, diverse heresies have in a short space sprung up. As the heresies of
Seruetus, of Illyricus and of diverse other in Bohem, and in the upper Silesia.
Again evident it is that the Caluinistes and the Illyrica^s can not abide to
hear of fre will, whereas the Melanchthonistes and the Adiaphoristes contend
hereof bitterly against them. Nor it is not unknown what grievous altercations
be among the ghospellers about Justification. In so much that there have risen
fourten contrary opinions against Osiander, only upon this word of
Justification. And how terribly fight Illyricus, Gallus, and such as take
their parts, against the Melanchthonistes and the Adiaphoristes about the name
of the law and the gospel, how one differs from the other, and what each
one is? Now how the ghospellers like the brethern of Cadmus, rail and brawle
about good works, some saying they are profitable to salvation, and some that
they are pernicious, all the world sees and feleth. As touching faith, how
many years have the ghospellers had as thongh it were open war thereupon?
while some cry that Only faith justifies, some that faith for the more part
justifies, and good works for the less part, or as some other write, faith
principally and good works partly. What shall I tell how they storm and rage
in contradiction about Christ, Caluinus in institutione Christiana. Melanchtho^
in vltimis locis commu^nibus. Lutherus libro de capt. Babylonica
Zuingliusco^tra Vrbanu^ Regium de Baptismo. Lutherus in postrema co^ fessione.
Illyricus in suae informationis libro. Gallus in exceptionibus ^ontra acta
VVitte^ bergensium Professoru^.
how he is our mediator and how he does justify us? For some teach that
Christ justifies man only by his manhood, some only by his godhead, some
again teach that the godhead of Christ died in the Cross. About the number
of the Sacraments there has been a long time and is yet among them cruel
variaunce and dissension. For some say, there are but two Sacraments, some
three, some four, some none at all. The Caluinistes think otherwise of Baptim
and the virtue thereof, then the Lutherans do: but the Anabaptists differ from
them both. As touching the Supper of our lord, Luther has noted eight diverse
sects among the Swinglians, and Melanchthon of late five among the
Lutherans. About penance Illyricus reakoneth up seven contrary heresies
among the Adiaphoristes. But what should I recite all that may be said? Here
again I demand of Smidelin, let him tell me, whether those articles, by
reason of which the princes of Saxony and Countes of Mansfeld condemned the ten
sects of heresy, be of the Confession of Augspurg or no. Again whereas
Amsdorffius, Illyricus and Gallus in open and printed books do testify that
the Melanchthonistes and Adiaphoristes have swarued in six or seven principal
articles from the Confession off Augspurg, whether that altercation and
contention be not of the articles of this Confession or no. Howsoever Smidelin
here awnswereth, he can not escape, but he must buckle with the Illyricans. Yea
Gallus has of late set forth a great commentary, wherein he does not only
accuse the Melanchthonistes and Adiaphoristes, but proves plainly that they
have departed like Apostatas from the Confession off Augspurg in the most
principal and waightiest articles thereof. By these articles therefore above
rehearsed, and by diverse other which you may see in my table of heretics, it
is evident and can not be denied that very few articles of the Confession of
Augspurg remain, which are not distracted and torn in to sundry and diverse
heresies.

Surely any common lay or unlearned man if he desire to know the truth
hereof, he needs not much lerning of skill to epsy the contrarietes of the
protestants: only he may diligently read, waighe, and think upon the places
that I have alleged out of their own books and writings, and he shall find
to be (alas) to true, all that I have noted of the diverse, contrary, and
repugnant sects of the Lutherans. I ask then of Smidelin whether ever he read
in the Confession of Augspurg the articles above reakoned. Again whether they
belong to the ground of the same Confession. Or if these articles were clean
taken out of the Confession, what would be left? if he awnswer that the above
rehearsed articles be not of the Confession of Augspurg, every man that has
seen the books, can prove him a liar. For I appeal to the book of that
Confession: and I am very sure that the whole ground of that Confession lies
in those articles. If he grant that those articles are the chief points and
ground of that Confession, he must be driven to say, that the Lutherans in
those articles agtee very well and vary in no point, or that they vary not so,
that for that variaunce they may be charged of heresies. Now then let Smidelin
come forth and tell us, if he stand stiff in his opinon, how he estemeth the
Princes off Saxony and Countes off Mansfeld: Lib. contra 9. sectas. Li.
co^tra^. sectas.
whether he think that Illyricus, Gallus, Amsdorffius, Morlinus, Ioachimus
westphalus, be all liars, when they write and condemn their own schismatic
brethern and fellow heretics, and all professing the Confession of Augspurg,
of more then fiften sundry heresies: yea and that about the principal articles
of their Confession of Augspurg. And whereas Smidelin labors to color the
matter, and like a pacifier to reco^cile all that is a miss, surely he does but
utter his folly: and varieth from other him self. For Amsdorffius, Gallus and
Illyricus (pretended bishops of the Lutherans) write and cry out that these
debates and variaunces, are mere contradictories, not able to be justified
vntell the one part be cast. If Amsdorffius with his fellows say truly, then
doctor Smidelin lies. If they lie and say all untruly, let them try it
among them selves: and keep their estimation as well as they can.

We said in the beginning of this last part, The second part off this book.
that the Lutherans lay to my charge, as though I fathered upon them certain
articles which they never wrote nor taught. I have in deed gathered out (as
they may know, which have read my other treatises) above a hundred articles
of the Lutherans, De materia Lutheranae Theologiae.
partly directly false: partly mingled with falsehood: and have quoted the
places of their writings, where every article might be found. Now the Masters
off Wittenberge have picked out of the whole sum three or four fragments only,
and deny that these pertain any thing to their doctrine. Hoping thereby that
if under pretense of innocence, they could shake of those few, then their
other heresies and absurdites would the less be espied, or molested.
Theologiae Lutheranae trimembris epitome.
But this goes the matter. In my book offered up at the diet of worms, in
the which I gathered certain principal points wherein the Lutherans differ
and vary not only from us Catholics, but also strive bitterly among them
selves, Lib. de capt Babyl. titulo de matrimonio.
among other things I noted Luthers doctrine about Matrimony out of his own
book, where it is written, Let then Marriage be the figure of Christ and his
church, and a Sacrament not instituted of God, but invented of men in the
church, being lead with ignorance as well of the word as of the thing. This
the Masters of Wittenberg utterly deny, and therefore inueigh furiousely and
beyond all reason against me, Note here the modesty of protestants.
after this sort. Tell us thou wicked hipocrite, where ever it was said or
written of any man in our churches, that matrimony was invented of men by the
ignorance as well off the word as off the thing. Surely I think sobre and
wise men will not like this malapert and over hot talk of the Masters of Wit
tenberg, although I had injured them in very deed. But how may they now like
it, where as in this sentence I have nether added, nether taken away any one
syllable or jot, but have even so recited it, word for word, as it lies in
the second Latin tome off Luthers works printed at Wittenberg with the
preface of Melanchthon?

But a man peradventure may here object, that of these only words the doctrine
or mind of Luther can not certainly be gathered, for that in other places he
has otherwise written of Matrimony. Unto whom I awnswer thus. How constant and
sure Lu there and his scholars have allwaies ben, and are yet in their doctrine,
I have declared to the whole world in my little book entitled, Trimembris
Theologia. But what was the sure and settled opinion of Luther touching
matrimony, he has declared him self in a certain sermon of matrimony printed
at Wittenberg in the year 1522. And that no man may think that Luther ever
changed or recanted that doctrine (as he did diverse) the very same sermon,
even word for word was printed again at Wittenberg in the year 1553. and is
extant in the sixth Germain to me off Luthers works. Where thus he writes
word for word. Sexto Tomo germanico. Fol. 172.
Truly this I said, if a woman fit for the act of marriage have a husband
unfit thereunto nor can not openly mary any other, and yet would be loathe to
commit any dishonesty, A wholesome lesson for the Lutheran dames.
because the bishop of Rome requires about it many witnesses and much business
to no purpose, she ought with these words talk unto her husband. You se good
husband that you can not do your duty unto me, and you have disappointed my
youthely body, and brought me beside in danger of my good name with great
hinderaunce of my health: you se there is before God no marriage between us two.
Let me therefore by your good leave mary privily with your brother or next
Kinsman, so that always yet you bear the name of my husband, lest your goods
come into other men's hands, and suffer your self of your own accord to be
deceived of me, as you have deceived me against my will. I said also that the
husband ought to grant hereunto, and provide her the duty of marriage and
children. The marriages of nevve ghospellers.
which if he refuse to do, she ought privily to depart from her husband in to
some other country, and there mary an other. Such counsel I gave then, when I
was yet fearful. But now I would give freer counsel: and that husband that
beguiled his wife, I would handle more roughely: and likewise the woman that
beguiled her husband: although this happened seldomer in women then in men. In
such weighty matters that touches our body, our goods, estimation, and health,
it is not enough to compass slightely by craft our neighbor: Note the
justice of Luther.
a just and aequal recompense must be required of him. That is, the woman
lustely ought to play the hoore and commit aduoutry. Tom. 9. f^. 177.
And a little after. There be women so froward and so obstinatly set, that
allthough her husband fall ten times into incontinencie, A spiritual lesson for
the protestant husband.
she passes not upon it. Here it is time that her husband speak thus unto
her. If thou will not, an other will* if the wife will not, let the maid come.
so that yet the husband warden her twice or thrice before, and open the matter
to other, that her frowardnes be known and punished before all the
congregation. if she will not, Ester. 1.
then dimisse her from the. put a way Vasthi and take Hester, as king Assuerus
did. Thus far Luther. I know very well the Lutherans be angry hereat, and
would that there were no more talk of these matters. for that being discovered
and brought to light, they work them much shame and dishonesty. Unto whom I
awnswere that I am not the first that have discovered this their shameful
doctrine of matrimony. Diverse have done the like before me: and especially the
virtuous and Catholic Prince, of most worthy memory George Duke of Saxony, in
his aunsuer against Luther. Which if Melanchthon have forgotten, yet I trust
he remembers what he wrote him self generally of all the sacraments, in his
annotations upon the first epistle to the Corinthians the second chapter.
where he writes thus. There be in all two sacramental signs, baptim and the
Supper of the Lord, the other which are called sacraments are but men's
imaginations. Now what difference is there between the words of Luther
saying, that Matrimony is but the invention of man, and these words of
Melanchthon saying, That the rest of the Sacraments ( among the which
matrimony is counted) be but men's imaginations? And see the wicked doctrine off
these ghospellers, calling the blessed Sacraments, but men's imaginations.
Matthew. 19. Marci. 10.
for what says our Savior of holy matrimony? What God has coupled, let not
man separat. Is this now the invention or imagination of me^, and not rather
the institution and ordonnaunce of God him self?

When the gospel of Luther first sprange up, The inco^stancy of the Lutherans.
Melanchthon wrote that only faith justified, the Sacraments endued men with no
grace, baptim and the Supper were only Sacramental signs. In locis communibus
medijs and vltimis.
A little after he wrote they were true Sacraments and of two he made three, and
at length four, so that in the espace of few years that which he first
laughed to scorn and called imaginatio^s of men, suddenly they proved holy
Sacraments, and weighty ordonnaunces of the living Lord. I entend not here to
dispute of the number of Sacraments, what is the Catholic doctrine and what is
the heretical, it is not now our purpose.

Farther the Lutherans will not be a known, The Lutherans have corrupted the
Creed
that they have corrupted our Creed, scraping out the word Catholic in the
article, I believe the holy Catholic church. Thus I said before of them, and
say it yet again, reporting my self herein to their Confession of Augspurg,
where they describing their church, omit clean the word, Catholic. In the
Apology Melanchthon being accused thereof makes a little mention, but so that
he calls Catholic. that which heretics in corners do imagine. In his common
places and in his book Examen examinandorum he bableth and pratleth to no
purpose very much of the church, but the word Catholic, he can find in no
church. In the great and in the little Cathechisme of Luther, and in his little
book of prayers where he recites the Creed and expounds it, Children are
taught a corrupted Creed.
in every place for the Catholic church, he writes the Christian church. And
hereof it comes that through out all Germany where the gospel of Luther is
received, children allwaies learn their Creed and say it at table, even as it
is corrupted of Luther and Melanchthon. Who like crafty heretics labored by
all means possible that the word Catholic might by little and little utterly
be forgotten. And all heretics have ever shunned and avoided this article of
our Creed I believe the Catholic church. and that not without good cause: for
certain they are if their doctrine come to examination to be bulted out by
lerning, that this only word Catholic will cut their throtes.

Sithen then we see clearly and evidently by this which we have said,
Protestants are proved to be heretike^.
that among the Lutherans are not only diverse and variable, but pernicious and
heinous heretical schisms, divisions and opinions, as out of their own
saings, doings, and writings we have before declared, surely it must of
necessite follow, that the Lutherans be and remain pernicious and detestable
heretics. Smidelinus extrema part libri contra S^a phylum.
For doctor Smidelin him self and all heretics do confess this that whereas
in the doctrine of faith, that is, in the principal articles of faith are
heretical dissensions and schisms, that then the teachers and setters forth
of such haereti^all schisms, must needs be heretics them selves. But no man
can now deny that the Lutheran preachers do set forth, uphold and defend
heretical schisms. Wherefore it follows that these Lutherans, ghospellers,
protestants, or howsoever they call them selves, be pernicious heretics, and
for such are to be taken, and avoided of al Christendom.

And truly there is no better means, to reduce heretics to the right and
common high way of the Catholic church, then to put before their eyes their
heinous and heretical dissensions, wherein they have run a straie: one this
way, an other that way, but all out of the way of the Catholic and Christian
belefe. Or if heretics will be obstinat allwaies, and continewe wilfully in
their error and presumed opinions, the readiest way to bring them to naught,
is to beseech god to suffer them to continue in the sprit of dissension, that
being severed into diverse parcels, and scattered into sundry schisms, they
may the sooner perish and vanish away, Dissension destroieth heresies.
even as the builders of the tower of Babell, and all heretics yet hitherto.
For the only destruction of all heresies has been their mutual dissension and
schisms. This Luther him self testifies, writing thus upon the fifth psalm.
Every kingdom divided within it self shall be desolated: Lutherus in 5. psalm.
for heretics were never ouercomed by force or by art, but only by their own
altercatio^s and dissensio^s. Iudic. 9. Genes. 11.
Nether Christ by any other means overthrows heresies, then by suffering
them to fall in to the sprit of dissension and variaunce as the Sichimites and
buylders of Babell in the old law, and the Arrians, Pelagians, and Donatistes
in the new law. The Jews also were destroyed only by discord among them
selves. For as Hilarious writes, The war of heretics is the peace of the
church. Because by their contentions, they perish even bodyly, not only in
their souls. Thus far Luther. Dissension always accompaneth heresy.
And truly so it fares, when one heresy is ones spronge up, and that diverse
Masters profess it, strait upon many schisms and factio^s arise. Marcion
that archeheretike brought forth many absurd opinions, which ones being
scattered in to the wild brains of his scholars, his heresy incontinently
began to break in to sundry parts: so that of him proceeded Appelliani,
Seueriani, and Manichei, Again of the Manichei grew the Priscillianistae,
Encratitae, and diverse other, all horrible heretics, and yet almost in all
countres suffered. Epiphanius in the third book confuting the Hemiarite and
Arrians, writes of the Arrians thus. For we say the army of the Arrians is
divided into three bands, so that Eudoxius, Germanus, George of Alexandria,
Euzoius of Antioche be departed in to the first band, cutting them selves of
from their fellows. In to the second band Basil (not the doctor of the
church) Eleusius, Eustachius, Georgius of Laodicea, Syluanus of Tarsus, and
Macedonius of Constantinople have straied. In the third company (as I said
before) is Acacius, Meletius and Eutychius. All their doings be vain and
wicked. For that as any one taught, the other would not receive, but with
mutual hatred and malice they dissent and disagree each from the other. Thus
far Epiphanius. Vide historiam tripar titam. lib. 9 cap. 40. and Nicephorun
lib. 12. cap. 29. and li. 13 cap. 1. and lib 18. cap. 45 and 50.
Who lists more at large to see the schisms and diuisio^s of these and of
other heretics, he may read Eusebius and other ecclesiastical stories. S.
Augustine makes mention off dissension of the Donatistes, obiecting unto them
that Donatus his sect was distracted into son dry schisms. For thus he
writes in his first book* De Baptismo contra Donatistas, Cap. 6. This part of
Donatus is cut in to many small pieces, al which parcels reprehe^d very much
this great portion where Primianus rules, for approving the baptim of the
Maximinianiste* and each of all those parcels do stoutely affirm that the
right and true baptim is only among them and no where else. Thus much S.
Augustine.

But what need we be long in these old and ancient heresies, whereas (alas)
even now presently in our dear country of Germany such a plentyfull brood of
heresies grows and increases? for how sundry and how diverse sects has
that only brain of Ihon Hus begotte? Some of them are called Fratres
Waldensis, some Thaborite, some Picardi and some Grubenheimeri, with diverse
other names which were here tedious to recite. For among those wiche now call
them selves ghospellers, spronge up of the sede off Luther, there are (alas) so
many factions, so diverse sects, so soundry heresies, that they can scant be
numbered. Yea and many more (as Gallus writes) hang yet in the pen: but I
will somewhat shake the pen to see whether any will fall out. Truly this is most
evident. Such an archeheretike, as in our days Martin Luther has been, never
yet was seen in the church: and therefore God never so declared his wrath in
this our miserable time. Yet God of his mercy has given us clear tokens and
sure arguments to know and epsy out this heresy, suffering such strange
dissensions and horrible schisms to come to light: and that so clearly and
manifestly that every man may easily perceive, and surely pronounce, that even
as God is the author of peace and unite, so the devil has been the father,
inuenter, and setter forth of all this Lutheran discord and contentious
doctrine. If therefore any good Christen man desirous to save one, coueteth
evidently to see and behold what, and how great the schisms and factions of
these Lutherans are, all chalenging to them selves the truth and light of the
ghospel, let him read and peruse this table of sects that follows, which I
set forth before in latin, but now have augmented it in my mother tongue for
my dear countremens sake.

THE GENEALOGY, POSTERITE AND SVCCESSION OF MARTIN LVTHER THE FIFte
Euangeliste.
NOthing is more natural, says the philosopher Aristotle, then that every
thing bring forth his like, and that not only because the nature of things
should not be confounded, (wherefore the lion brings forth a lion, and the
man engenders man, and as the Poet says, (...). The rock Scylla brings
forth no rose) but also to the intent that every kind by it self should be
like in manners and disposition: wherefore of the valiant father comes not
lightely a cowardly son nor as the poet Euripedes says, Of an unthrifty
father comes a wise child. This then being a constant and perpetual law of
nature, it has pleased God by consideration of the natural course and issue of
temporal things, as if it were by a similitude, to lead us to the knowleadge
of spiritual matters: as for example, to know and discern the true prophets
of God, which are the right and natural brood of the church, from the false
prophets and preachers, which are as monstres or evil begotten children in the
church. therefore he says. By their fruits you shall know them. Mat. 7.
and why by their fruits? Because of thorns no man gathers grapes nor figs
of brambles. And this it is, which is commonly said, every thing follows his
kind.

What a prophet Luther was, his brood and issue has well declared. For as
soon as Luther pricked first with desire of promotion and praise, was strait
enflamed with the fiery lusts of the flesh, and that to accomplish this
matter, Apoca. 16.
Luther the false prophet and that seuenheaded best (whereof the Apocalipse
speaks) were joined together, the old Dragon (the devil) giving her to
wife, incontinently these three unclean sprits, of the Confessionistes, of the
Sacramentaries, and of the Anabaptists, creped out of their mouth like
frogs. And although these three unclean sprits, like the foxes of the
Philistians bear their heads far a sonder and distant, yet they are so tied
together by the tails, to burn up the corn of Christ's church, that now
in all Europe no heresy can be found, which has not the mark either of the
Confessionistes, or of the Sacramentaries, or of the Anabaptists. That you
may if ye list, evidently know to which of these sprits every heresy is
bound.

And to the intent you may epsy of out every and singular marks of these
unclean sprits, note what follows. God punishes the world for sin with
seven principal plages. But those especially he utters in three elements, in
water, Apocal. 16.
in air and in fire. For as it is written, Sap. 11.
Look wherewithal a man sins, by the same he shall be punished. This also
in an other place is notised. For there are three that bear record in heaven,
the father, 1. Joan. 5.
the word and the holy ghost, and these three are one. And there are three
which bear record in earth. The Spirit and water and blood, and these three
are one. This latter kind of bearing record Christ him self instituted and
confirmed in earth, especially ha^ging for us on the Cross, where he shed
water and blood out of his side, and yielded up his Spirit into the hands of
the father. And as Eve was made out of the ribbe and side of Adam, Joan. 19.
so undoubtedly the church took his root and beginning of the side of Christ,
as the Council of Vienna lernedly expounds it. For the church by three
Sacraments is specially holden by baptim, the Sacrament of the altar, and by
Penance. The seal of baptim is water. The mystery of the blessed Sacrament is
blood off wine, which is of the air. The holy Spirit, which Christ inspired
to his Apostles, gave the kayes of the church in penance. And the token of it
appeared, fire in the mouth of the Apostles. Now these three manner of bearing
record in earth which Christ has instituted, and by the which the church is
vpholden, are al at this present profaned, broken and corrupted. The
Anabaptists have corrupted the water of baptim. The Sacrame^taries, have
profaned the blood of our Lord. The Confessionistes have broken the kaies of
the church. And these heinous crimes have partly already ben punished: but the
end is not yet come: because the profanation, corruption, and breach of these
holy institutions cease not yet. Let him beware, that understands. Let him
fly that can escape. Let him shake of the duste of these heresies that fears
the wrath of God: But now to the table.

THE TABLE OF LVTHERS OFFSPRING.
THe Dragon, Apo. 16.
the Best, the false prophet (mentioned in the Apocalypse) Martin Luther, the
fifte evangelist, out of whom proceeded principally three unclean sprits, In the
year of our Lord. 1517. upon S. Martins eve, to wit, the Anabaptists, the
Sacramentaries, and the Confessionistes, which are commonly called protestant
preachers.

The first unclean sprit or tode Muntzerus and Bernard Rotman, son of Luther
and father of the Anabaptists began in the year of our Lord. 1514. out of
these proceeded.

Muntzerans, The late rebels in France are of this sect.
which are named of Thomas Muntzer. for when that man read in the books of
Luther De captiuitate Babylonica and contra duo mandata Caesaris, that, There
was no hope of remedy unless all men's laws being extinguished the people did
rule, and that we ought to pray to God, that subjects obey not their
magistrates, He sturred up the commons through out al Germany against the
nobilite. whereby after sundry battailles had, there perished more then a
hundred thousand of the commons. Read the story of Sleidan.

Anabaptists who first sprang up by reading in an epistle of Luther to the
Waldenses or Picardi, That it is better, baptim were omitted in children the^
that they should be baptized without their own faith. Of these arose diverse
sects, among the which these are accounted the cheafest

Adamitae, The sects of Anabaptists.
the Adamites, which profess to follow the innocence of Adam. they wander in
woddes, and sometime naked, as Adam and Eve did.

Stebleri, which teach that scripture forbids to carry sword or wallet.
item that it is not lawful for Christen men to accuse in judgment, that it is
not the part of a Christen man to repel violence by force, but to him that
strikes on the one cheke he ought to turn the other. This Luther taught in
his articles condemned of the Sorbon in paris.

Sabbataries, which observe the Sabbath day like Jews. despise the Sunday,
and do inuocat the father only, and seem to contemn the Son and the holy
ghost. See Luther in his book against the Sabbataries.

Clancularij, Close Anabaptists, which being asked whether they be
Anabaptists, think they may lawfully deny them selves to be such, supposing
it inoug to know privily what they ought to believe, and that it is not
needful to confess openly. And these be commonly in great cytes: they enter
in to no churches, they learn and teach at home in their houses, or else mete
in gardens. Such are commonly called ^arrenbrijder, that is, garden brethern.

Manifestarij. Open Anabaptists, which being asked whether they be
Anabaptists, think it a wicked thing to deny it. In Prussia this sect is
common.

Daemoniaci, which believe (as the Origenistes in times paste) that the devils
shall be saved after the enof the world.

Communia habentes, Commonholders, which are of the opinion, that wives,
children, and all other things in the common welthe ought to be common, as
Plato in his Common wealth taught, and in old time the Nicolaite, and off
late the ghospelling prophets off Mou^ster. The Sprit
They say one to an other. My sprit lusts after thy flesh: come therefore,
and let us do maruailous things. See Sleidan in the battaill of Mounster.

Condormientes, Byslepers, which command that for the vehement love of the
new ghospel, men and women; young men and maidens, ought to live in one place
and parler, and sleep in one chamber. So did other heretics of old time in
Burgu^dy, and afterward in Bohem the Grubenheymeri. which putting out the
candles, cried one to an other, Increase and multiply.

Eiula^tes, Howling Anabaptists, which think no devotion pleases God so
much as to weep and howl continually. great store of this sect are in the
upper Belgia.

Georogianidauidici, Dauigeorgians, which began in Friselande in the year of
our Lord. 1525. They say there is no devil, they deny the resurrection of
the flesh. See Sleida^. The Author and Master of this sect said him self,
he was the third David, as Luther that he was the third Elias, and Osia^der the
second Enoch.

Memnonitae, which deny that Christ took flesh of the Blessed Virgin.

Polygamistae Bernardin Ochin Peter Martirs scholar defends this sect by
scriptures Tom. 6. fo. 177. an. 53.
Many wiuers, which teach that one man may lawfully have two wives at one
time. Ite^ that the brother may mary his brothers wife, he yet living. So
practiced Ihon Leiden king off Mounster (Se Sleidan) and so taught Luther in
his sermon set forth of marriage. Where he says. If the wife will not, let
the maid come. There be many other sects of Anabaptists, which here to
avoid prolixite we let pass.

The Second unclean sprit, and tode, son of Luther and father of the
Sacramentaries, Carolstadius, began the year of our Lord 1521.

Carolstadius and Zwinglius took occasion to raise up again the old heresy
of Berengarius by these words of Luther in his assertions against pope Leo,
and in formula Missae. Nether kind (of the sacrament) is necessary to
salvation. And again in his Resolutions. Only faith of the Sacrament does
justify, not the Sacrament. These and other saiengs of Luther moved
Carolstadius and Swinglius to believe that the Sacraments were but bare signs,
as Melanchthon upon the epistle to the Romans teaches. These Sacramentaries
are many and diverse. First there are eight Sacramentary factions, which Luther,
him self in parua Confessione attributes to the Swinglians, as we have noted
and recited before. The^ Philip Melanchthon declares six other Sacramentarie
sects among the Lutherans, in his determination written a little before his
death unto the Count palatin of the Rhene, and printed at Heidelberg in the
year 1560. which we have also before touched. But these which follow, are the
most famous and most renouned sacramentarie sects.

Significatiui, Signifiers, which affirm that in the Supper of our Lord (for
so they call the Sacrament of the anltar) is not the true body, but only the
sign of the body. So Swinglius writes in many and son dry books set forth
De Caena Domini.

Tropistae, Figurers, which say that in the supper of our Lord is the figure
of the body not the true body. So taught Oecolampadius in many places.

Energici, Valuers, which teach, that in the Supper of our Lord, is not the
body it self, but the virtue and value of the body. so Calvin teaches in many
books: and lately in his last admonition against ^oachimus Westphalus.
Melanchthon also (as Calvin lays to his charge, and as it may appear in his
determination printed at Heidelberg) affirms the same.

Arrhabonarij, Pleadgers, which are of the opinion, that the Supper of our
Lord when it is given, is given as a pleadge of the body, as though it were
like the inuesting, or taking possession of a farm or any other thing which
is given. So Franciscus Stancarus teaches in Pole and in Transsiluania.
Sybenburgen.

Adessenarij, Presentaries, of whom there are sundry sects. For some write
that the body of our Lord is in the bread. Some about the bread: some with
the bread, some under the bread. see the assertions of VVilhelmus Klebitius
of Brandebourg against the disputation lately had at Heidelberg, in the year.
1560.

Metamorphistae, which affirm that the body off Christ after it ascended in to
heaven, was made god it self. And that it ought properly de said. The body of
Christ is God. Therefore if ye ask how the body of our Lord is in the
Supper, they awnswer. That the true body is there, but such a body, as is the
very substance of God and God himself: not flesh, which is of the same
substance that man's nature is of. So writes Swenck feldi us in many books:
but chefely in his book De dupli cista'u Christi.

Iscariotistae, Iudaistes, which deny that in the Supper of our lord Judas
Iscariot received the true body of Christ. So writes Swenck feldius in a little
book entitled of this very matter, and Calvin in his last admonition against
VVestphalus and other where.

The Neutres Sacramentaries, which teach that nether one kind, nor both
kinds are necessary, but that only faith suffiseth. Again that if the
Council should determinat, that all should communicate under both kinds, then
contrairely the lay men ought other communicate under one kind, or utterly
refuse both. they are the words off Luther in his book de formula Missae, O
hot communi cants.
ant it is the common practice of all Lutherans: where by it happens that
some not in ten years come to the communion, some never at all.

Iconoclastae, Imagebreakers, which cast out of the church the images of
Christ and all saints, putting up in their places their own pictures and
their wives maruailous finely and amorousely painted, as in times paste Simon
Magus and his bawd Helena did as Nicephorus witnesses. Our ghospelling
protestants practice it daily. The examples testify.

The third unclean sprit or tode, son of the false prophet Luther, is
Melanchthon: father of the Confessionistes in the year. 1530. off these there
are three contrary sects and factions. Zealous.
Some are roughe and zealous Luthera^s which without choice or exception defend
all the doctrine of Luther, be it never so absurd: taking all that Luther has
written filthy or carren as it is, for the holy and pure gospel of God. Next
are the soft, Civil.
gentle, Civil and moderat Lutherans, which have departed in many points from
the doctrine of Luther. And faining as if they would join nearer to the
Catholics, by making their Interim (that is a delay vntel a Council come)
have yet fallen from error to error the later contrary to the first, as
sometime of Maniches becoming Pelagians. The third sort of these
Confessionistes, we may call Extrauaga^ts, and unruly Lutherans, which although
they pretend to be Confessionistes, for because off the authorite of ^uch
Princes as have subscribed to the Confession, yet in deed they run and roue
farther from the doctrine of Luther, then the common sort of Lutherans do. But
now first of the zealous and rough Lutherans.

Antinomi, The zealous Lutherans.
lawles Lutherans, which so extol the gospel, that they affirm the law of
god to be utterly unprofitable, and nether before justification, nor after
necessary. That men of the gospel are not bound to the good works of Gods
law. So Luther taught in the beginning, and of him learned Ioannes Agricola as
he writes in his annotations upon S. Ihon. And Luther in his Antinomicall
disputations.

Samo satenici or new Arrians which deny that this term (...) the word, in
S. Ihon signifies a person of the blessed Trinite. The university of
Wittenberg witnesses that Mathias Illyricus is of that opinion. In a little
town or village of Silesia, called Zary there is an other Mathias Minister off
that village, which utterly denies that there is any Trinite. In Czeshau a
town of Boheman other Minister with like madness inueighed against the blessed
Trinite, preaching in the hills called Guttni, and diverse other in other
places. O blessed fruits of the nevve gospel.
Yea they are come to this fury and madness, that they call the Blessed Trinite,
the three headed Helhounde Cerberus, some other deny there is one God: and
affirm there are three Gods. So a certain Minister preached openly in Prussia.

Infernales, Certain Luthera^s deny an article off our creed.
Hellmasters, which deny hell, and that Christ descended in to hell, affirming
that every ma^s grave is called in hebrew hell. Therefore where our Creed says
that Christ descended in to hell, they say it must be meant of his grave. This
is a common doctrine in the seacost towns of Germany, as at Breme, at Hamburg,
at Lubek and such other places. It seems also to be the opinion of Brentius.
Read his great Catechism.

Infernales of an other sort (helltormenters) are, which affirm that Christ
not only descended in to hell, but also suffered the eternal torments and
pains of hell. So teaches Nicolaus Gallus at Ratisp^na.
Regenspurg in his printed Catechism: and James Smidelin preacher of Gopping,
and Calvin in his Institutions.

Antidaemoniaci, which deny there is any devil or evil sprits, or any
witchecrafte, or enchauntments wrought by the devils. So teach the
Dauigeorgians and Andreas Osiander.

Amsdorffiani which teach that good works are pernicious for man to
salvation. So writes Nicolaus Amsdorffius in his little book entitled, That
this proposition is true. Good works are pernicious to salvation. So the
scholars of Flaccius and many preachers of Saxony do teach and write.

Antadiaphoristae which admit no ancient cerinonies in the church, nor no
jurisdiction of bishops. so write the Illyricans and the Flaccians in many
books set forth against the Adiaphoristes off wittenberg.

Antosiandrini or Osiandromastiges, which deny that man is justified with that
justice, whereby God is essentially just: teaching that he is justified by
imputing of righteousness, that is (as Illyricus does gloss) he is called just
in word only: he is not so in deed. Fourten Lutheran churches have written
against Osiander: but each of them brings a peculiar definition of justice
and contrary to his fellows. Sethe writing of Ioannes Functius de origin
Osiandrinae litis contra Staphylum.

Antiswenck feldiani, which teach that by the external preaching only or
vocal ministry we attain to the Christen faith. Illyricus in diverse writings
set forth against Swenck feldius.

Anticaluiniani which although they do well affirm the real presence of
Christ's body in the Sacrament, yet they do falsely and wickedly deny
tra^ssubstantiation and adoration. Again they falsely hold that the Sacrament
consists only in the use off it. Ioachimus VVestphalus in his awnswer
against Calvin, and diverse other.

Manus impositorij, which will have that the layeng on of hands of lay men is
a Sacrament. This sect swarmeth in Saxony, in Pomerania, and in the seacost
towns. Se Illyricus against Iustus Menius.

Bisacramentales, which admit only two Sacraments. so teach Calvin and the
Flaccians.

Sacerdotales, which teach that men and women and all lay persons may preach
the word of God, in the church, may minister the Sacraments, may bind and
lose. For all men are equally priests. that holy order is but a tale and
imagination of men. This is the doctrine of Luther in his book De captitutate
Babylonica. and of Illyricus in his Apology against Iustus Mentus.

Inuisibiles, which teach that no church is visible because only God knows
who are his. So Luther and Melanchthon taught in the beginning, as it
appears in the Apology off the Confession of Augspurg. but allthough they
afterward secretly recanted this error, yet nevertheless the Illyricans, the
Swenck feldians, the Osiandrins, and the Anabaptists keep it still.

The Second Sect of the Confessionistes, in the which are (as we said
before) the soft Philosophers and Masters of Wittenberg: which will be counted
moderat, civil Lutherans.
meke and more civil then the rest (for the most part of these protestants
are hot and seditious) and after a sort keep unite and peace with all other
sects: as in times paste the heretics Meletiani (among the Arrians) and
Rhetorij.

Biblijstae, Scripturians, which affirm that nothing is to be admitted, read,
or set forth to the people in the church, or to the youth in schools, but
only the bare text, and holy scripture of the Bible* and that there needs no
interpretation, for that we be all instructed from God. So writes Melanchtho^
to Georgius Spalatinus in his preface upon the Canons off the Apostles. Again
that no part off Philosophy, is to be learned, Colloss. 2.
because S. Paul forbids us to follow vain philosophy. And again because
it is written of Moses that men ought to eat their bread in the sweat of
their browe. Ge^e. 3.
Therefore while Luther remained in his Pathmus, Carolostadius and Melanchthon
persuaded the scholars of Wittenberg, that burning their humanite books, every
man should get him to some ha^dry craft work. Many did as they were
counseled. Carolostadius in a certain Village by, in the ground of
Wittenberg (being before Archedeacon of the cite) Melanchthon is a baker.
became a laboring husband man. and Melanchthon getting him to a bakehouse,
learned to bake. This decree of so great divines was dispersed abroad in to many
cytes of Germany. And to omit the rest, it is well known, that in Silesia at
Breslau and Suidnicia, gra^mer schools were for the espace of two years shet
up and abolished. al which time the scholars of the Master ghospellers did
read nothing but the very text of scripture. There be at this day living
which can well testify all this. The same also appears well in two books
of Luther set forth in the year. 1522. written to the Magistrates and cytes
off Germany for the setting up again off schools.

Adiaphoristae, Indifferents, which teach that the lawefull constitutions of
the church and of Councels, also the ceremonies are things indifferent: which
to observe or to break is no sin. So teach the Masters or divines of
Wittenberge and of Lipsia, in their Interim made at Lipsia.

Trisacramentales, which admit only three Sacraments, Baptim, the Supper of
our Lord, and Absolution or penance. such is the practice in the Ordinance
of Lipsia.

Quadrisacramentales, which allow four sacraments Baptim, the Supper of our
Lord, Penance and holy Order. so is it observed in the Ordinance of
Witte^berg out of Melanchthons common places.

Lutherocaluiniani, which counterfaite that the Lutherans and the Zwinglians
accord smothely in the matter of the Sacrament, and would make men wene that
the contention is in words not in the thing. See James Smidelins book of the
Supper of the Lord. See also Nicolaus Amsdorffius in his Co^fe^sion: who
vehemently reprehendeth this guile and deceit of Smidelin.

Semiosiandrini, which against Osiander, taking the part of the Antosiandrini
teach that man in this life is accounted just and righteous by imputation
only* and again taking Osianders part against the Antosiandrins teach, that
in the life to come, man must in deed be justified with that very justice where
with God him self is essentially just. of this opinion are the divines and
Masters of Tubing. Read the duke of Prussia his book set forth upon this
controversy of Osiander, and the epistle of Brentius written unto his prince of
the very same controversy, and printed at Wittenberg in the year.1552.

Maioristae, which deny that any man (yea infants them selves) can be
justified, or ever have been saved without good works going before. Georgius
Mayor in many writings against Illyricus.

Poenitentiarij, which have corrupted the doctrine of penance with seven
gross errors. Illyricus accuses hereof the divines of Wittenberg and of
Lipsia in a writing set forth against the corruption of the gospel, printed
in Iene in the year.1559. and thus entitled. Beriche M. F. Illyrici von
ethliken artikelen.

Nouipelagiani, new pelagians which write that a man may dispose him self by
his own natural power to receive the grace of God: so Illyricus accuses
Melanchthon in the writing above named and Amsdorfius in his Confession.

Syncretisantes, politik Lutherans, which persuade and counsel al other
sects, that they pretend at least unite among them selves, seeing they can
not come to any true agreement: that like the people of Creta they may with more
yoined force set upon their common adversaries the papists and overcome the^
the sooner. This writes Melanchthon in his book against Staphylus.

The third sect of the confessionistes, wherein are the disorderly and unruly
Lutherans, although they manifestly oppugn and resist the doctrine of the
Confession of Augspurg, yet under pretext of the same Confession the main
flock of these sheep of Melanchthon bear them selves for Lutherans.

Swenck feldians, have hitherto ben all most all of one opinion, but now they
begin to scatter and swerve among them selves. For of the self same points in
doctrine those of Breslau have one opinion (approving one point and reproving
an other in Swenckfeldius) those of Suidnicia have an other, finding fault with
those Swenck feldians, which call baptim ein Sewbad / that is, Certain
protestants call bapti abathe for swine.
a bathe for swine: and those of Glogouia have yet an other, measuring by their
proper sprit the writings of Swenckfeldius. But the peculiar and special
doctrines, of that man are these. That the manhood of Christ is the begetting
of the holy ghost, not the creature of God (as other men are) but a middle
thing between God the Creator, and man the creature, but yet in such wise,
that the same manhood of Christ after his ascension in to heaven was made very
God. This testifies manifestly his legate at Augspurg and his books offered off
late to a certain friend off his there. Again that every man is endued with the
same righteousness, the same wisdom, the same charity, and all the same vertus
with the which God is essentially endued, of like worthiness and in like manner,
and by this very divine nature is God: Beside that the same virtue or operation
which is in the word of God preached, is the very son of God, (...) that is,
the word, as scripture terms it. Thus he writes in his book de duplici
statu Christi, de vero euangelij vsu, and in many other writings, which he
presented to a certain friend. Truly this man wrote many things not amiss,
but these and many other very evil: a man not so malicious as unlearned in true
divinity.

Osiandrini, which say that Christ justifies man by his divine nature only,
utterly excluding his humanite, again that a Christen man ought to be just
with that very justice where with god him self is essentially just. farther
that Christ the only begotten son of god according to both natures ( off god
and man) as he was in his mothers womb, is the very same image after the which
the first man was created. therefore when man in the sacrament of baptim
puts on Christ according to both natures (of god and man) that he is made
the very same image generally, not particularly as the learned use to speak.
And this is the meaning (says he) of the words of S. Ihon, 1, Joan. 4.
that Christ is come in to sleshe. Martin Luther in the year 1539 at
Smalcaldiu^, where the Leage (or rather conspiracye) was then made, preaching
unto the estats and orders of protestants, interpreted these words of S. Ihon
that Christ is come in to flesh, after this sort. That Christ came not
therefore in to flesh, that he might communicate unto us his own justice or
righteousness, but that he might accept us for just and righteous outwardly:
so that our inward man should not in deed be justified or made righteous from
unjust and unrighteous, but we should only be accounted for such before God
after the manner of acceptance: as in times paste the Lacedaemonians made and
decreed Alexander a God with these words. Alexander will be a God. let him he a
God, and let Alexander be counted and accepted for a god, though he be no god.
And Luther says that this doctrine was the sure foundation upon the which the
Leage of Smalcaldiu^ for the defense of the gospel might and ought right
worthily be builded, erected and absolved. But anon after when it came to
Osianders course to preach, he took the very same theme of S. Ihon that Luther
did. But leaving the interpretation of Luther, he interpreted it after his own
mind: in such sort that it directly repugned Luther: as, that the very
essential justice or righteousness off God, proceeding and flowing out of the
foresaid image off God (which he calls Christ) is planted in man. and at
the last, though preuely, he gave them to understand that this his doctrine
was the very jewel and treasure of the gospel: far better then that of
Luther: in consideration whereof both the Leage and the war of Smalcaldium
should be entered, made, and finished. And this sermon of Osiander was allmoste
the last that was made at that meting: as I am able to show by the hand of
Melanchthon. Thus Luther for the ground of his justification would have (as in
his own printed disputation it is evident) a kind of relation and imputing,
which is the lest of all things that are, and in deed nothing. But Osiander
puts for his ground the divine essence, God him self, which is all
things. See how iumpe these two ghospellers and Archeprotestants mete in the
very highest point of our religion. Upon this faint and frickle foundation of
two false and contrary opinions was that leage of Smalcaldium stricken: whereof
ensued that lamentable and cruel war, to the great waste and destruction of
Germany, with the murder of infinite thousands of men. Then experience it self
declared, how true that prophecye of Luther was, when in the year.1545. in a
certain little book written to two noble princes of the sight of a certain
coin brought out of base Germany, (whereof we shall speak more anon) he
warranted upon his oath and faith all the confederats, that by this his
doctrine of imputed righteousness, they might boldly and hardely assure them
selves of the victory at Brunswicke, Vide Micha elis Rotlingis ludimagistri
Nore^ bergensis li bellu^ co^tra Osiandru^.
and off everlasting salvation at the hand of God. But as touching Osiander,
and his doctrine, it may be seen in a little book printed in the ye are of our
lord.1550. with this title. De imagine dei. There be many other articles of
the Osiandrins: which to be short I omit. See the disputation of Osia^der
had at Regiemons.
Coiningsberg, in the year 1459. and his open confession set forth there
also, in the year 1550.

Stancarians, which against Osiander urge and affirm vehemently, that Christ
justifies us by his manhood only, not by his godhead at all. So Stancarus
both taught openly, and wrote against Andreas Musculus at Francford by Odera.

Antistancarians, which to refute the opinion of Sta^carus do so far affirm
that Christ justifies man and works our righteousness both by his manhood,
and by his godheade, that they doubt not to teach, the very godhead of Christ
to have suffered on the Cross with his manhood. that Musculus is of this
opinion, his extemporall treatise ((...)) off Luthers doctrine witnesses: and
the condemnation of the Swiceran ptotestants for this opinion: as it is notised
in the writing of Petrus Statorius the french man, printed this year 1560. at
Pinczouia in Pole.

Noui Pelagiani, New Pelagians, which say thereis no original sin in
children, but that it is only an infirmite not worthy of death. Suinglius is a
Pelagian.
So teaches Swinglius in his little book of baptim against Vrbanus Regius.
Again that Numa, Cato, Scipio, and such other notable men of the ethnikes,
although they lacked the true faith in Christ to come, yet that they are saved
by the virtue of the law of nature. It is the doctrine of Swinglius in the
book above alleged: and Luther entwiteth the Swinglians with it in his last
confession of the supper of our Lord.

Noui Manichei, Our new protestants are nevve Manichees.
New Manichees be and have been diverse protestants in our days. First Luther:
then Melanchthon, Calvin and many other, as Amsdorffius, Illyricus, Gallus,
Beza, VVestphalus. Luther and Melanchtho^ teach, that all things both good
and bad, come to pass by absolute necessite. that God is not only the cause of
sin by permission, but also by operation: as the worker of it. It is the
doctrine of Luther in his Assertions against pope Leo, and in his Resolutions:
of Mela^chthon in his annotations upon the epistle to the Romans. Again that.
The aduoutrie of David, the cruelty of Ma^lius, the betraieng of Judas, be as
well and as much the work and operation of god as the very Conversion of S.
Paul. Mela^chthon in his annotations upon the epistle to the Romans. But he
reca^ted this heresy afterward, as it may appear in his common places of
the last edition. Luther continued still obstinat in his error: whom also all the obstinat and zealous Lutherans follow yet as Illyricus, Amsdorfius, Gallus,
and other.

Manichaei and Marcionitae Caluiniani, which as scholars of Ihon Calvin do
profess, and spread abroad these detestable and blasphemous doctrines against
God and man, as follow. That god chefely created mankind for to be perpetually
damned, that god created Adam not only that he should die, Detestable
doctrines off Calvin
but also from the beginning predestined him to mischefe, and therefore he
could not choose but sin. That the sins committed by men are not only
done by gods permission, but by his will and compulsion. That all sins
committed of men are absolutely the works of god. That god works in men
theft, horedome, aduoutrie, and all such sin as man does. That the law of
god and the will off god be oftentimes contrary, one to an other. That the
devil by gods commandment and will lies in men's hearts. That not only God
is the cause of evil, but also does inspire in men's hearts evil thoughts to
work evil: so that men sin not, but God is the willer and efficient cause
of sin. This is the doctrine of Ihon Calvin in his book of predestination,
and of Theodore Beza ( the archeheretike of France) in his defense for Calvin.

This year 1561. one Lucas Sternberger in Omoluke a town of Morauia being
cast in to preson, preaching among the Sternbergers, and in diverse other
places, bearing him self for a Minister of the ghospel and scholar of Luther
and Melanchthon, preached and persuaded the people this doctrine that follows
for the true and express word of God.

First he openly taught and confessed, That al such as worship the name of the
Blessed Trinite do imagine falsely the Gods. That the name of the Trinite is
vain and superfluous, because that word is no where expressed in holy
scripture, being also but one God in heaven. Therefore he forbad that the same
song O veneranda Trinitas, O blessed Trinite should be song, and commanded
in his place to singe O blessed goodness of God. Horrible blasphemies of a
ghospelling Minister.
He wishes also that all the devils of hell would come and carry away this
Trinite: saying he can not tell whether it be a man or a woman: yet that he is
sure that the same Trinite was ones a woman, which had three husbands.

Secondarely he confessed and taught, that Christ was not true god but man
only like other me^, For if he had be^ god he should have descended out of he
auen in to earth and committed the gouuerneme^t of the world here to Angels.
That he was borne only of Mary and Joseph the carpenter and that he exercised
that craft with Joseph vntel the thirtyth year of his aage. Beside he
teaches, That Christ rose from death not by his own power but by the power of
god almighty: and that he worked no miracle, but by the power and operation of
almighty god, which had endued him with more excellent gifts and graces then
all the other prophets: adopting him for his son at the leghth for his virtuous
and honest life, when he was baptized of Ihon in the Iordayn, and the voice
from heaven came down saying This is my well-beloved son in whom I am delited,
so that Christ is not the son of god but touching his soul only, because in
the cross he commended and gave up but his soul to god.

Thirdly he mocketh at the holy ghost, saying, that it is nothing else but a
pigeon. affirming beside that nothing is written of his divinity in all
scripture nether of the old testament nether of the new and that it is not
known what is this holy ghost. Finally he had rather return to the cloister,
and be a papiste, then to believe in the holy ghost.

Fourthely. he will not the blessed virgin Mary mother of god to be a
perpetual virgin, but that she had before two or three sons, and that she
nothing differs from the rest of women: and therefore nether she nor any
other saints ought to be worshipped, or have their holy days kept. Again
that men ought to work the Sunday. and rest the Saturday, Note the ground of
nevve heresies novveadaies.
because in holy scripture the Saturday is commanded to be kept holy. But of
the So^day nothing is prescribed nor appointed. for (as Luther taught) nothing
ought to be admitted or observed, which god has not in expres words
commanded or forbid in holy scripture.

Fiftely he rejects holy baptim, calling it a devilish institution: affirming
also that it procures naught else, but hell and eternal damnation, for
circumcision was instituted of god, not baptim.

Sixtely as touching the blessed Sacrament of the altar he can never satisfy
himself with mocking, jesting, and scorning at it. for he says the Jews have
long ago eaten up the paschall lamb. and if any thing were left they burned
it. Finally he confesses he is of that opinion in this Sacrament, as
Melanchthon is. For at a certain time having some communicating with him, but
fewer then he thought, he invited all other by speaking to them in these
words. Come hither: for ^am not able to devour him up alone. as for other
sacraments he follows Luther in all points as his schole master, of whom he
received this doctrine.

Now that these heresies here reakoned up, be rife in Morauia, and that many a
soul is miserably in ueigled and seduced with them, the experience shows.
They also which are seen in the Alcoran of Mahomet, and in Luthers doctrine,
may well consider and perceive, The Issue of Luthers ^hospell.
that this fifte gospel of Luther prepares and fostifieth the way for
Mahomets Alcoran to come in to Germany.

And though the Lutherans to excuse them selves and their gospel will here
object, that Luther never invented, never thought, nor taught these detestable
heresies published by Lucas Sternberg, it may and ought well be awnswered unto
them, that though Luther never tought these matters expressly, (which yet is to
be doubted of) yet he gave abundant and sufficient occasion for these and all
other heresies and schisms, Luthers doctrine (to have naught but expres
scripture) cause off all heresies.
only in that he writes and bableth all ways, that nothing ought to be
received, approved or observed in the church, which was not manifest, evident
and express in holy scripture. And what other ground has this Lucas
Sternberg to abolish al truth of our Christen religion, and to plant his
deuelish doctrines, then this lesson of Luther? For ever he cries. Where is
it written, where is it in holy scripture that there be three persons? Where is
it read that Christ in the union of his godhead and manhood, should be the
Second person in Trinite? or that Christ is the true and natural son of God,
and not a creature according to his everlasting and divine generation? Where
is it expressed in scripture that the holy ghost it self is any other then
the everlasting father? Where is it noted in holy scripture that Mary the
mother of Christ was a Virgin before and after the birth, and that she
continued a Virgin allwaies? In what place of the Bible can we read that the
Sabbath day should be abrogated, and the Sunday instituted? And what heretic
I pray you may not say the like of all the articles of our catholic faith?
For what scripture has say the Anabaptists that infants should be baptized?
And the Swinglians. What Scripture, say they, affirms that the true body
and not the figure off Christ his body is in the Supper of the Lord? Again
the Lutherans. What place of scripture, say they, does testify that Christ
instituted the Mass in his Supper? Therefore if Luther had raised up no other
particular heresy, yet this was detestable and cursed inoughe, that he taught
nothing to be observed, or received in the church, but which god had expressly,
directly, and in plain words commanded or forbed in the Bible.

To this heresy of Lucas Sternberg an other sect directly repugnant and
contrary rose up very lately at Pinczouia in Pole. in the which place two new
ghospellers Petrus Statorius and Georgius Brandata teach that there is not one
God, but three gods, and they so diverse one from an other as three men. yet that
the son is somewhat less then the father and the holy ghost. Again that the
Creed which the church uses to singe, is not to be called the Creed of
Athanasius but of Sathanasius. as you would say of the devil. Certain noble
men of Pole demanding of Petrus Statorius and Georgius Brandata where they had
learned this doctrine being new and never heard off before in Pole, they
awnswered, It was the pure gospel and very word off god, and the very same
doctrine which they had learned of their masters, Calvin, Bullinger, Peter
Martyr, and VVolfgangus Musculus. But the cause why it was not before heard of
in Pole nor abroad in the world was that it pleased god to reuele to the
world this high mystery and great treasure now in these later days by his
faithefull Ministres. The Lord Stanislaus Baron, Mathias Stadnitzky, and
Franciscus Stancarus by their patent letters written to to the Swinglian
doctors above mentioned, in the year 1561. and sent by their own Messenger,
do testify and write these things of Petrus Statorius and Brandata.

IN WHAT ARTICLES THE CONFESSIONISTES, SVCCESSOVRS OF LVTHER, DO YET Agree and
accord.
Hitherto by the sundry and diverse factions of heretics of us rehearsed, it
may appear how and in what matters they swerve and disagree among them
selves. For who reads now all the articles of the Confession off Augspurg,
he shall see that swaruing and scattering in all the rest, they have remained
only in these few of one accord and agreement. And of those articles this is
the first.

First they agree all in this, that all sects will be called ghospellers, all
boaste them selves to follow the word of God, the gospel, the Creed of the
Apostles, and of Athanasius. they all say, that the word off God is clear
and open: and needs no interpretation, that women and men, lay and priests,
may al a like handle and treat off the word off God. And whatsoever sense of
holy scripture shall like any man, that he may follow and defend it for the
word of God it self.

The Second Article, wherein they do all agree is, that they do all with like
endeavor and malice, strive against the Catholic church. that none of them all
admits any Catholic or universally received exposition of holy scripture,
that they all account the bishop of Rome for Antichriste, all bishops,
Prelates, Priests, for the me^bres of the devil. that they do all abhor
constitutions and ceremonies of the Catholic church. That all hate and detest
a like the blessed sacrifice of the Mass. that all go about to take out of
the church all priesthood and clergy.

The third article, wherein all the protestants agree is, that for the most
part al leaders and Masters off sects forge some notable lies upon the
Catholic writers, and then persuade the people they are the doctrine of the
papists. As for example. They make the people wene that the papists taught
man to be able to merit the grace of God, and the benefit off justification
with his only good works. This and such other lies they have already so
persuaded the people, that although never Catholic man taught so, yet they put
this absurdite as the foundation and ground of papisticall doctrine.

The fourth article wherein all protestants agree, is that to confess and
reaken up our sins, to do any satisfaction whereby the temporal pain due
for sin may be released, to labor and endeavor to purchase everlasting life
by good works proceeding of the grace of God, and depending of the merits of
Christ, is naught else but a papisticall buchery, and torment of consciences.
that Co^firmatio^, Matrimony, and extreme unction be man's inventions, not
Sacraments of the church. They agree also al in this, that no man can live
chaste, Above in the leaf. 16.
no more then he can live without spetting, as Luther writes: and that to
fast certain appointed days, is the worshipping of devils. In these articles
off the Confession off Augspurg, in these articles of the fifte gospel, all
sects of our time agree wonderfully. But in all other points they braule and
snarle one at an other like cats and dogs.

A SHOW OF THE PROTESTANTS PETIGREVV as ye have it before at large deducted.
An ougly Monster brought forth of a cow, in the year 1523. in Waltersdorff
one mile from Friberg, in one Steckers farm, much resembling the cowle of a
Friar. Whereby Luthers Monstrous life and doctrine was boded.

Because no colors might express Luther the friars grace,
As also that such Champions might be known by their race,
Nature therefore in his chief time of wedding and of preaching
Did blase his arms in this Monster to give the a warning.
Such fair figures, such like truths, such foul roots, such offspring.
Such holy fathers, such good sons, such gospel, such blessing.
Yet thou which may read, upon this Monster do not mus^
But to have more deformites, his brood in this book peruse.
A. Martin Luther of an Austin Friar, an ambitious Apostata. A wicked deviser
of damnable doctrines. Father of all the sects of protestants: The
Archeheretike of our time.

Katerin Bore, a Nonne, by Luthers procurement, ran out of the Nonnery of
Nymick in Saxony, Easter eve at night, in the year of our Lord 1523. Came to
Wittenberg, lived two years a lewd life with the scholars there. Then coupled
her self in pretensed wedlock with Martin Luther, a Nonne with a Friar,
Apostatesse with Apostata. B.

C. Bernard Rotman an unlearned lay man: by reading of Luthers epistle ad
Waldenses. (...) Lutheran (...)meth (...). Of him spronge up the buddes off
this branche. Adamites Sabbataries Anabaptists Holders in common Howling
Anabaptists Mennonites Manywiuers Dauidgeorgians Byslepers Daemoniacalls Close
Anabaptists Steblers


D. Zwinglius, of a spiritual pastor a secular soldier. Reading the
Assertions, the Resolutions of Luther, and his book de formula Missa. Becomes
Father of the Sacramentaries, multiplieng in to the sects above named.
Signifiers Valuers Presentaries Iudaistes Imagebreakers Neutersacramentaries
Metamorphistes Pleadgers Figurers


E. Philip Melanchthon, first the slave of Luther: allwaies a variable and
inconstant fellow. Ever lerning, as S. Paul says, but never attaining to the
truth. Father and founder off the Co^fessionistes spredding them selves in to
three famous factions: each faction breding a plentiful issue. Zealous
Lutherans divided in to Lawles Lutherans Hellmasters Antidaemoniacalls
Antidiapherists Antisuenckfeldians Handlayers Priesters Inuisiblers
Twosacramenters Anticaluinistes Autofiandrins Ams^^rsians Helltormenters
Samosatenicalls
Disordrely and unruly Lutherans parted in to Suenckfeldians Stancarians
Newpelagians Manichees and Marcionite alumisles Newmanichees Antistanckarians
Osiandrins
Civil Lutherans scattered in to Scripturians Thresacramenters
Lutherancalicinistes Maiouristes Newpelagians Politic Lutherans Penitentiaries
Halfosiandrins Foursacramenters Adiaphoristes





THE PLACES AND COVNTRES WHEREIN THE FORESAID PROTESTANTS AND Heretics,
either dwell openly or be conuersaunt secretly.
THe Anabaptists dwell freely and openly in east and weste Friselande: and
especially about Geddan, Dantsch, Elbing and Coiningsberg, also in Morauia
abundantly, in Bohem not so com mon. Yet under pretext of Lutherans they live
here and there privily upon the Rhene: in Flandres and Henaut, in Holland, in
Westphalia, and now upon Danubius, and in Silesia they are common.

The Swinglians, rule almost every where, and above all other sects are most
dispersed. In Schueytzerlandt they have possessed five of the better Canto^s.
Basil, Zu rich, Berna, Schafusa, Clarona
And a good part of Sauoye, and the lake of Geneua. In England also and
Scotland they are thick. Yea and of late they have privily invaded the Count
Palatins Dominion of Rhene, and the dukedom of Wirtenberg. At Augspurg Luther
bears the name, but in deed Swinglius and Calvin bear the stroke. Yea Calvin
is of so great power, that he has his guard in France, It appeared well of
late in France.
and diverse places of Hungary. The Swinglians doctrine is not utterly banished
at Witten berg nor at Lipsia.

The Zealous Luthera^s and Confessionistes, have possessed the territory of
Vinarium, and the most part of Saxony, Magdeburg, Brunswicke, Luneburg,
Lubeck Hamburg, Breme, and all most all Denmark, and Holste, Holsatia,
Ratispona.
and the greatest part of the dukedom of Megaloburg, and in Byerlande the
cite of Regenspurg.

The Civil Lutherans, and Melanchthonistes bear all the rule in Misnia, in
the greater part of Franconia, and at Norimberg. In the upper and lower part
off the Palatins Dominion. and in some part of Swethelande. At V^mes, in the
dukedom of Wittenberge and the Marchie. But here they are somewhat diverse: for
some will be Flaccians, some Melanchthonistes and Adiaphoristes, Vratislauia
But in Silesia especially at Breslau, and Brige, the masters of Wittenberg
bear the greater stroke.

The Swenck feldians in Swethelande and at Augspurg, live privily, A^gusta
vindelicorum.
but yet are many and common. In Silesia among the Nobilite they florishe. at
Suidnicia also and at Glogouia they be not obscure.

The Osiandrins have showed them selves openly in that part of Prussia which
is under Albertus the Marquise: but at Norimberg they keep close.

Stancarians, in the lesser Pole and in Sibemburge^: Transsilua^ia.
for these disorderly Confessionistes are yet but grene, and dare not show
their heads, expecting a time, when the blaste of their heresy shall ones
infecte the people.

But how long o lord shall thou be angry? for ever? how long shall thy
zele and wrath be kindled like fire? Poor out thy wrath upon the nations
which have defiled thy holy temple. Nether remember, o lord, our old
iniquites, let thy mercies praeuente us. Make us all of one mind, of mutual
charity, of one faith, doing nothing contentiousely or for vain glory, but
in all humilite to acknowledge the one God and whom thon sendest, Christ Jesus.
AMEN.

This table of Heresies has already diverse times ben printed in the Latin
tongue, sold abroad, and read of many: and although all protestants have
maruailousely ben offended therewith, yet it has displeased none more then
Smidelin and his companyons the politic protestants. For these consider the
matter depelyer then the other common sects do: and perceive very well, that
this foul dissension of the Lutherans being known will bring at the length
their fifte gospel to naught. But howesouer Smidelin turn and wind him
self herein, will he nill he, he must of force confess, that the Lutheran
protestants, which call them selves ghospellers, be at heinous dissension one
with an other, and do bread and foster up, detestable and heretical schisms,
so diverse, so repugnant, so plain co^tradictory one to an other, that sooner
you shall make fire and water, hot and cold agree, then their doctrines, and
opinions. Where of undoubtedly it must ensue, that the evil thing consuming
allwaie it self, and nothing being worse then these cursed and dissensious
schisms, they will in time spend them selves, consume, and come to naught.

But how miserably comfort Smidelin him self with this slight and slender
argument when he cries out, Behold, the doctrine of the ghospel does not
only not decaie, nor go to wrack, as the papists hope, but increases daily
in many places, and is spread through out Christendom even in those places
where the gospel before was never heard of? First how true and worthy a
comfort this is, I report me to Smidelins own conscience. For, but if he be
a very block, or else beside him self and stark mad, he must needs confess,
that these new and fresh doctrines which daily arise and spring up to
destroy the old and awncient religion, can in no wise be called the pure and
express ghospel. Smidelin and his fellow Lutherans, which cleave yet only to
Luthers doctrine, are not so betle blind or ignorant, but that they know and
see very well, what eua^gelical doctrine has spro^ge up of late in France, in
England, in Scotland and in Pole. If they know it not, I will tell the^. The
doctrine preached in those countres is partly of the Suinglians, partly of
the Caluinistes, some Laskonicall and some Anabaptisticall, but all together
deuelish and heretical. In libello contra Staphylum.
And although the doctrine of Smidelin be not much better then these, yet in
his printed writings he openly confesses, that he accompteth none of the
foresaid doctrines for Christian or evangelical. And in deed if he be of the
opinion that the Brentians are (as he pretends) he must accurse and condemn
as Brentius does, the doctrine of the Swinglians, the Caluinistes, the
Anabaptists and of the Stancarians, not only for their doctrine of the
Sacraments, but for many other articles also, The ghospel of Luther decays
daily
especially the article of Justification and faith. Here let Smidelin behold
the judgment of his own conscience, lay his hand to his own breast, and ask
of him self, whether he think in deed that the gospel which Luther
planted, do increase and multiply, or rather be plucked, and rent daily in to
sundry parcels and pieces, clean hewed from the first shape, and so hared of
this sect and that sect, that of that poor ghospel now (as Luther left it)
nether head nor hear, nor tail nor foot does appear. Or if he can not
epsy this by examining and enquiring of him self, let him counsel his
brethern the divines and masters of Vinaria, which can well instruct him
hereof, and though it be to their great grefe, yet they will assuredly tell
him (for these are their words) that the gospel and doctrine off Luther
remains no where (alas) so pure and incorrupted as in the dominion of the
princes of Vinaria. And where is the^ the worthy and weighty comfort of
Smidelin, where is the triumph and joy he makes, that the gospel of Luther
(for that is the gospel he means) grows on daily more and more through
Christendom?

But now Smidelin finds an other sorry shifte to comfort his poor brethern
withal. This sorry shift our Apology of England alleges also in defense of
their dissensio^. Libro co^tra Catalogum
Because in deed he ca^ not deny the heretical schisms that are among the^,
he turns the blow upon the Catholics and charge the^ with the like
saying. that among the papists also are sects and schisms: for some monks
were black cooles, some gray some white, some eat flesh some fish, some will
take money, some take none. some use long portises. some shorter. Is not this
think you, a horrible and perilous disse^sion among the papists? If our
doctors and divines should use such arguments against them, how would they
scoff and scorn at it? But these ghospelling preachers using such, must not
only not be found fault withal, but must be highely praised and commended
therefore, as men of excellent virtue and knowleadge. Which allthough it be
very injurious, and may well be complained of, yet sense that it likes them so
to use us, we must take it in good part and bear it. But as touching the
matter, even as in our Christen religion we have learned of S. Paul to
acknowleadge and believe in one God, even so we must profess one faith, and one
baptim. Although therefore among religious men and women there be diverse
orders, and sundry rules, likewise between the clergy and the laite diverse
professions and vocatio^s, and that by the sure and certain providence of
almighty God, yet among these al, there is but one God, one faith, one Christ,
one church, one and the self same interpretation of holy scripture. We by the
true understanding of Gods word, have learned in the church the difference
between the Catholic faith of all men, Faith in one in all but trade of life
ciuers.
and the private hope of eueryman. First in the articles of our belefe, we
believe al one thing and al after one sort. But to every man privately it is
permitted, that upon right conscience, and due consideration, for the increase
and confirmation of his hope (which lacks not his sure reward) Heb. 2.
he may take and chose unto him some such honest trade of life and
conversation, as is agreeable to his nature, though he differ hereby from the
common life and vocation of other men. Therefore as concerning the agreement of
our faith, we read in the Apostle. Philip. 2.
If there be therefore any consolation in Christ if there be any comfort of
love, if there be any feloweship of the spirit, if there be any compassion and
mercy, fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having one love, being of
one accord, that no thing be done through strife or of vain glory. And
again. Nevertheless unto that which we have attained unto, Philip. 3.
let us proceed by one rule that we may be off one accord. Many such sentences
are in holy Scripture, whereby we are admonished, that the doctrine of our
faith and belefe ought not to be referred to any one state or person, but to
the whole communite off Christ his church. Wherefore S. James commands,
That we esteem not the faith of our Lord Jesus Christ in respect of
persons. Jacob, 12.
Whereof it appears evidently that the unite, consent, and agreement of our
faith is builded and grounded upon the communite off Christ's Catholic
church. Whereby all schisms and particular heresies are excluded. But that
the diversity of grace, of gifts, and vocation is to be referred to the
condition of every man. And what is the reason hereof? Because as we have many
members in one body, Romans 12.
but all members have not one office, so all Christen men are one body in
Christ: but every one has his singular and peculiar gifts, grace, and
vocation. And this blessed Apostle says also in an other place. Galat. 6. To.
2. and 14.
Let every man try his own doing, and so he shall have glory in him self
only, and not in an other. For we shall all stand before the judgment of
Christ, that every man may receive the works of his body according to that
he has done whether it be good or bad. 2. Cor. 5.
Seeing the^ these two points, the agreement of faith and diversity of
vocations, are in the Catholic church by due reason to be waighed and each in
his place to be osberued, I can not sufficiently maruaill at the sutle shifte
and wily deceit off these Lutherans, A vvily deceit of the Luthera^s.
forcing the Catholics to suffer among them heretics believing as they list,
and sowing schisms at their pleasure, bidding them withal dissemble and wink
at the matter, whereas yet them selves will not suffer the like liberty in
diversity of vocations among the Catholics, but will persuade Princes and
Magistrates to force their subjects, both temporal and Spiritual and
Religious of all sort, to forsake their godly vocation and perfect profession,
and to take such a frame of faith as it shall please the Prince or Magistrate to
prescribe them. The protestants co^founde vniformite and diversity.
What other thing is this, then to make that diverse, and different in the
Catholic faith, which should be one and uniform, and that one and uniform
in persons and vocations, which should be diverse and different? O horrible
confusion. If there were not beside this point, manifest and outrageous
impietes of the Lutherans, repugning both to right reason and to the word of
God, whereby we might judge how pestiferous, abominable, and wicked the
doctrines and doings of these Lutheran preachers and protestant Ministres are,
yet of this only matter it might appear evident, while they confunde
Vniformite and Diversity. Teaching that which ought to be in our belefe
consonant and agreeable, that it may vary and be diverse: and co^trairely those
things which in every man's peculiar vocation should be proper and distinct,
may in no wise vary or differ.

Whereof spronge the insurrection of the commo^s in Germany, the sedition of
the Anabaptists in West phalia, The fruits of this confusion. The late
rebellion also in France.
and the rebellion against their high rulers and magistrates? Surely of no
other root, then that Luther and all protestant preachers have taught, and do
yet teach, and write to, that seeing, There is no respect of persons before
God, Ephesians. 6.
therefore there ougth to be no difference of persons, no magistrate in the
church, but that all Christen men are fre, and therefore all other distinct
estats, dignites, and qualites as well great as small ought to be all one, and
all a like. And whereof arise these great and enormous dissensions in
religion, but only of this occasion, that the Luthera^s take away from the
Catholic faith all unite and agreement, and teach that every man may be
saved by his own private faith, which he forgeth him self, and that he may
for his own person freely believe what he lists? Thus they would force the
Catholics to a certain dissembling deceit, such as never was heard of. As that
they should suffer every man to believe as he list, and set up new factio^s and
schisms against the unite and agreement of our faith: But the difference of
vocations, qualites and degrees, as is between low and high, te^porall and
spiritual, private and public, they should no more suffer, but make all
estates common, all vocatio^s aequall, al trade of life one and uniform. If
this be not to confound heaven and earth, surely I know not what heaven and
earth means. Cold which proceeds of water, is of this nature that it
knitteth and fastneth together diverse things in to one mass and substance,
and co^serueth them also in the same, as gold, silver, bras, tin, lead,
claie also, durte and wodde. But heat contrairely resolves and seuereth all
these substaunces. So likewise the property of faith is to knitte join and
fasten together in one belefe, and in one uniform understanding of Gods word
all nations and all kind of me^, noble and base, princes and subjects, men and
women, rich and power, young and old. But the works of charity, the
perfitnes of living, the choice of our vocation is left fre to every man,
according to the qualite of his person, and condition of his power and abilite.
Wherein every man bestows his talent that God has lent him, and bears the
yoke laid on his shoulders gladly, going all ways forth, and pricking him
self forward with a sure and certain hope in God, 2. Cor. 6.
who shall reward every man according to his good deeds and measure of his
charity working severally with the common faith of Christ's church.

Now then if Smidelin be, I will not say learned, but at the lest of any
reason or judgment he may well think with him self, that there is great
and evident difference between the common nature (which is one in all men) and
every particular man, which has his proper and peculiar qualites and gifts
from God as it pleases his goodness, some of more price and value the^ other:
eue^ as we see in cou^tes and waightes. And therefore the old holy fathers
have so taught, that the grace of God is due neither to the nature, nor to the
person: and that, because god owes nothing to any creature. It is therefore a
very cursed doctrine of the Lutherans, and abominable before God to change
the faith of Christendom which ought to be common, Lutherans do change
faith in to hope and confidence.
one, and uniform in all, in to hope which every man has differently
according to his vocation. And contrary wise to make that every man's particular
hope, confidence, and trust is the common faith of the Catholic church.

Great is the misery and greater the shame off us Germans that have thus ben
deluded. We persuade our selves we are wiser, and see more. then all
Christendom beside, yea then all our sweet forefathers ever saw. But I
think, and not without reason, that it were great wisdom for us, if we
could but see and perceive how wise, grave, and circumspecte our forefathers
were.

As for doctor Smidelin, I would earnestly counsel him that giving up his
Lutheran doctourship in some Smithes shop, Smid. sounds in the germain tongue
Smith.
he begin again his divinity, and learn of some parishclarke, why when he
ringeth to sermon he ringeth but one bell and that the greatest: but when he
ringeth to even song or other service, he ringeth many belles at ones, A pretty
similitude.
both great and small. For here Master Smidelin may learn that the ringing
of one bell to sermon represents the unite of the Catholic faith taught at
sermons, which ought to be but one and vnifor-me in all men. But the iangling
of many diverse belles to common prayer signifies the diversity of me^, some
praieng fervently some coldely, some serving god one way, some an other* yet
so that every way comes to one end.

But now M. Smidelin practicing his smothered smithish divinity, runs in
rudely with his hammers, and tongues, and will needs persuade men, that the
variete of vocations must be reduced to the unite of faith, and contrary wise
that by their scattered and ragged faith (which they define to be every man's
trust and confidence in Christ) all men may freely believe as they list, and
frame them a faith after their fond fantasy. Such is forsothe the wisdom
and policy of our time passing our forefathers simplicite: and yet this
blindness they will have us to wink at, and run hedlong with the rest. Not
withstanding we, grounded upon the authorite off gods word comfort our selves
herein, that the unite and agreement of our Catholic faith is the ground of
all truth. But the variete among us off diverse vocations in the Catholic
church, serves as a guide and means to trade every man: that he so direct his
course in perfect hope and godly works off Christen charity, To. 13. 1. Cor. 15.
that at length for his deserts (auailable only through the merits of Christ
our Redemer) he may be counted for a star or part in heaven little or great.

To awnswer therefore directly to Smidelins accusation, charging us of schisms
and dissensions (by reason of diverse religions and vocations) we do plainly
confess, that in the doctrine of the Christen faith, according to S. Paul's
commandment, we be of one mind and of one accord. And again every man for
his qualite and vocation endeavors to bear his own yoke, and carry his own
burden, some more carefully and diligently then some: some this way, some that
way: according to the grace and gifts of god, and as each man uses the same.
And off this diversity of the gifts of god, Philip. 2. The cause of diverse
professio^s of religion in the catholic church.
and of man's infirmite or abilite it comes to pass, that among us some for
example of their conversation, and to set before them as though it were a
glass of perfection, do follow and embrace the rules and steps of old holy
fathers: some of S. Augustine, some of S. Bernard, other of S. Benedict, of S.
Dominicke, and of S. Frauncis, every man as his devotion serves.

But let us now see and consider the agreement and variete of the Lutheran
churches. In this point first they do all agree, that according to their
Christen liberte planted first of Luther, Luther reaches this in his book de
saeculari potestate in the 6. German tome fol. 602. and in many other places.
and now received off his scholars, there be no Emperor, no king, no
Magistrate, no prince. Again that where such are, yet they ought not be obeyed,
but al must be aequal. that the country man ought to be as high as the Noble
man: the Noble man as the Prince: the Prince as the Emperor: that the parish
clarke ought to be as good, as the vicar, and the bishop no better then the
vycar. And this wild and unruly doctrine of Luther has so far proceeded,
that not only many notable foundations, as Monasteries, bishoprics, and
other churches erected for gods service are wasted and destroyed, but also in
many places the commons against the Nobles, the Nobles against their princes,
yea and against the Emperor him self, have of late years diverse times
rebelled, laboring to suppress Nobilite, to overthrow all superiorite, and
to confound all princely souuerainte. Not consideringin the mean season, how
daily experience shows us, that heretics against Catholics or subjects
against their princes never prevails, Heretical rebellion never proves. In
the year 1325.
as Athanasius writes. For what success had the commo^s in Germany rising
against the Nobilite? more then a hunred thousand of them perished. What got
the people of Denmark, making insurrection against the Nobles? what auailed
the nobilite of Swethland and France rebelling against their Souueraines? We
have late examples of our own country.
they wrought all their own destruction. And if ye list to know, what
triumphs the heretics have had over Catholics in civil rebellion, The
triu^phes of late heretics over the Catholics.
see how the Swinglians sped in Switzerland, the Anabaptists in Mounster, and
among the Saxons, the Lutherans in Lifla^de, the Caluinistes in France. Every
one was rewarded according to his desert: missed of their purpose, and lost
their lives. And although the Moscouites in certain ceremonies vary from the
church of Rome, Vide prodr^ mu^ Staphyli.
yet their faith and belefe touching such articles, as the Lutherans have
swarued in from the Catholic church, is in most points agreeable to the
Catholic doctrine.

If therefore, o true and virtuous Germans, A good lesson for our country also.
we list to put out this great blotte of our good name, to avoid the utter
destruction and desolation of our dear country, and purchase the eternal
salvation of our souls, this is the only way for it, to seek after again
the steps and paths off our dear forefathers, to join our selves with the
whole corpse off Christendom, and to call back again and restore that
doctrine, that faith, that church, and that gospel, by the which we were
first made Christen men and have continewed so many a hundred year. For what
so ever the Lutherans babble of their new forged religion, how so ever the
protestants pratle in pulpits of the primitive church, yet they can not deny,
but that this their doctrine, their trade of ecclesiastical gouuernement, Even
so it is with us.
their manner of common prayer, and all other ordinances was never yet seen nor
heard of in Germany, sense it was first Christened, vntell Luther.

Charlemain the first Germain Emperor with his successors brought the Saxons
to Christen religion: Vide Carionem. So did S. Augustine the first Apostle of
English men Vide Beda^.
founded among them their chief bishoprics, churches and Colleges, planted
in Germany the very same doctrine, the very same religion, the very same
ceremonies, the self same Mass and service of god as it is at this day used
among all Catholics: and so left it to all Emperors after him. Likewise
those holy bishops and Martirs, the Apostles of higher Germany, which first
brought Christendom in to it, instructed it not with that doctrine or
ecclesiastical gouuernement as the Lutherans use, but with the very same
understanding of holy scripture, with the same religion and gouuernement of the
church, which the Catholics even to this day do practice.

S. Seuerin Archbishop of Rauenna converted Austriche to Christendom. The
first Apostles of the high Allemans.
S. Eleutherius and Quirinus the country about Anisus. S. Maximinus and
Rupertus the bishopric off Salispurg. S. Valentin and VVolfgang the cite off
Passau. Bedurum, Ratispona.
S. Paulinus and after him S. Emeranus Regenspurg. S. Corbinianus Frising. S.
Richard and Vilibaldus the cite of Eystat. S. Narcissus and Viricus Augspurg
and Algouia. S. Kiliaenus and Burchaerdus Virtzbourg. S. Columbinus and Gallus
Suethelande. Herbipolis.
S. Maternus and Valerius the inhabitants of Rhene. Constantia.
S. Paternus and Laudo Costnitz. S. Amandus and Argobastus Strasbourg. S.
Victor and Seruatius Worms. Argentina VVormatia Moguntia.
S. Crescens the disciple of. S. Paul and Maximus Ments. Which all beside
many other blessed Martirs and learned bishops, in other countres where they
planted Christ's religion, and instituted gods service, taught no other
doctrine, preached no other gospel, practiced no other religion, said no
other Mass, used no other clergy then such as from the Apostles time through
out all Christendom has been hitherto kept and used. In this religion we
germans were traded first to Christendom. With this religion our godly and
virtuous forefathers attained to everlasting life. By this religion the Romain
Empire has been translated to the Nobilite of Germany. Through this religion
the ancient germans have had great victories, have dilated their dominion,
has brought infidels to the Christen faith: as Hungary, Bohem, Pole, Vandale,
Slavony, Prussia, Lifla^de, Denmark, and Swetheland: which partly by force of
arms they have constrained, partly by instruction of holy bishops they have
persuaded to receive Christendom. All this may be seen in our Chronicles and
awncient foundations. But now we see to our great grefe and shame, that within
the space of forty years all these countres are all most come to
destruction. The heinous heresies, the sundry schisms, and the horrible
blasphemies every where practiced prove it to clearly. Farther the great decaie
of the German Empire, the contempt off our nation (being now in obloquy with
all the world, whom before all nations other loved or feared) testify this
abundantly.

Where is now become Thiethmarsh, which belonged before to the diosece of the
Archbishop of Breme? Countres lost in Germany by heresy.
The Danes have taken it. Where is Lifela^de the old soiourne and retire of
the Saxon Nobilite? The Moscouite by maine force has wronged it out of our
hands Prussia what is come of it, which was wont to be the receite and
soiourne of higher germany? The Polonians have challenged it and enjoy it. And
these two countres of Liflande and Prussia be no small territories, but two
rich and large Realms. especially Prussia which has in length above Above
three hundred of ours.
threscore miles, and in breadth Two hundred of our miles.
fourtye: and contains diverse cytes, ports, and villages great and small,
so rich and full of commodites as no place of Germany beside. And although
Lif^lande be not comparable to Prussia either in riches or in power, yet is it
a goodly, beawtifull, and large country, from whence not only the Nobles of
Saxony and towns of the seacoste, draw sundry commodites, but all the state
of the Empire also, and many foren countres. And these two countres, Prussia
and Liflande are as two sure feet of the Germain Empire: which now by our
dissension being both cut from the Empire, it is easy to conjecture, how
hansomly and surely it is like to stand. And how have we lost these noble
countres and provinces? Prussia lost by Luthers heresy.
by the force and power of our enemies? No truly. For the knights of the
Order in Alemaigne, forced the Prussians being yet heathen to receive the old
Christen religion which they had learned off their Apostles and forefathers,
and vntell our days have stoutely kept them in the same. And as long as that
worshipful Order continued in this godly purpose, H. Muti^s Cuspinianus in
vita Henri^i. V. and alij.
that country flourished and increased in all wealth. But as soon as that
Order received the new gospel of Luther abandoning the true gospel off
Christ, and forsook the spiritual Cross of that Order, following the fleshly
doctrine of Luthers cross, incontinently that whole country being got and
kept so many years under the old gospel, was suddenly lost through the new
gospel of Luther: the Nobilite of Germany thereof berefted, and yielded to the
prince of Pole. so that now they rule over the germans, which in times paste
paid tribut to the Emperors of germany.

The like happened of Liflande. for as long as the knights of the Order in
Lifelande kept and maintained the Catholic faith (whereby they first subdued
Liflande lost by Luthers heresy.
that country) ten thousand of them could in open filde put to flighte
fourscore thousand of the Moscouites: but sens that the same worshipful Order
put down the awncient religion, whereby they obtained such victories, planting
in the place of it heresy, all the victory has inclined to our adversaries,
and the Moscouites have obtained the country. For so it is. Gala. 5. Colloss.
3. The fruit of only faith. Lutherus in epist. ad Gallum Amsdorfium.
By agreement small things increase. by discord great things fall away. The
old Catholic faith works by charity, which is the bond of perfection and
all prosperity. The Lutheran faith abides not charity with it, but will
justify man alone. And therefore all charity, agreement, and unite is broken
among them. And no maruail. For God is the author off peace, 1. Cor. 4.
as the Apostle say the, and the devil of dissension.

The Turk has possessed Hungary, Hungary lost by Luthers heresy.
only by dissension of religion. For as soon as these Luthera^ preachers had
spread abroad their cursed heresies, and stirred up thereby among the estats of
the Empire, much variaunce, hatred, and malice, neighbors began so to
mistruste one an other, that all honesty fidelite and fre^dly feloweship
utterly decayed. Whereby every man sowghte after his own profit, nothing
regarding the common welthe and good estate of the Empire. In the mean season
they that bordered on the Turks were destituted of all comfort and succor of
us. Yea and the enemies of the Empire has diverse times had of the Empire it
self succor and aid. Beside that we have many ways hindered and kept back
our own countremen and Princes which both ought and desired gladly to
withstand the enemies of our country, getting and winning ground daily upon
us. And to make short herein, it is much to be feared that we Germans have
ministered sufficient occasion to the accomplishement of that old prophecy,
Lactan. lib. 7. cap. 16. Rupertus Taitien. super 20. cap Apocal.
which Lactantius mencioneth and diverse other writers. That the North shall
rule over the Southe, and the East over the Weste. And so Magog from the East
and Gog from the North shall come and destroy the Romain Empire: which yet
though weak and al most spent, ha^geth by a weak threde in the hand of us
Germa^s.

We have the examples of two great nations, which give us good occasion to
fear the fall of the Empire in Germany* The destruction of greece through
heresy.
to wit, of the Greeks, and off the Liflandmen. For what other thing did
Greece in times paste, then that we do presently in Germany? The Greeks resisted
the bishop of Rome: would not acknowledge the sea of S. Peter to be head of the
church. They made them selves at home bishops and prelates (against all canons
and rules of the church) whom they made al of equal and of like authorite. And
what I pray you followed of the gouuerneme^t of this headles church? First in
the clergy spronge up many heresies and schisms. Then the Emperor of
Constantinople and other princes of Greece fell at war together, and utter
deffiaunce one with an other. Thirdly every bishop and Minister being of like
authorite, having no head or chief bishop whom they might follow and obey, as
their spiritual Magistrate, every man expounded Scripture as it pleased him.
brief new sects and schisms were so plenty in all Greece, that by reason of
parts taking in religion, the Emperor rose against the other Princes, and
they against him: spoiling, wasting, ransacking one an other, country against
country, Prince against Prince, vntell all came to naught. For the Venetians in
this confusion and dissensio^ got from the Greeks Peloponnesus, Epirus,
Cor^yra, and other countres. The Hungariens won in to their hands Croatia,
Dalmatia, and other provinces: Vntell at the length the Turk entering in to
Greece under pretense of reconciling the Princes and the Emperor, Note and
bevvare in time.
slew, murdered, and extinguished miserably all the remnant of the greeks,
both Spiritual and temporal, the Emperor, and all other princes and Rulers:
ouerthrewe and took in to his own hands the whole Empire of greece, spoiled
also the Hungarians and the Venetians of that which they had got, and so at
the last utterly abolished and destroyed all the Sects and heresies: making
his slaves all the remnaunt of the catholic Christians. as they remain yet to
this day presently. Now the state of Germany to be as Greece was before the
cominge of the Turk, Our state in England touching religion is the same.
every man sees. And that we may fear the like end as the greeks had: the
like invasion of the Turk, or Moscouite, or some other tiran, I leave it to
every wise man to be waighed and considered.

An other example of the calamite hanging over our heads which now we see in
Liflande, makes me remember the miserable destruction of the cite of
Jerusalem, and the Jews. For what is more like then the overthrow of these
two people, The cyto of Jerusalem destroyed by schisms.
the Jews and the Liflandmen? There were among the Jews three sects repugnant
to the right doctrine of Moses and the Prophets. As the Pharisees, the Saduces,
and the Esseni. The ground of the Pharisees doctrine (as Josephus writes) was
this. That men did all things by forced necessite from God, not by liberte of
fre will. Lib. 2. cap, 7. de bello. Iudaico.
And this is the very ground of the zealous Lutherans doctrine, Matthew. 21. Luc.
20.
as Illyricus witnesses. The Sadduces affirmed (as the gospel witnesses)
that there should be no resurrection of the dead. And although the Suinglians
profess not openly this doctrine of the Sadduces, Read Vil legaignon against
Calvin and our discourse.
yet it follows necessarely of their doctrine, that our bodies shall not
arise, if (as they say) we receive not the true body of Christ really present
in the Blessed Sacrament. For this most holy Sacrament through the natural and
corporal conjunction of Christ his body with our bodies, 1. Cor. 15. In (...).
li. 4. ca. 14. et seque^^.
is a most assured warrant of our resurrection as Cyrillus and other doctors
of the church do teach. The third sect of the Jews, the Esseni, accord
maruailousely with our Anabaptists, as in the place of Josephus above noted it
may appear. These three factions and sects of the Jews, at what time
Vespasian beseaged Jerusalem, caused the horrible dissension and strife which
was then within the cite among the Jews them selves. Josephus de bello
Iudaico. li. 6. c. 1.
For notwithstanding the strait beseaging of the Romans, and the great
danger they stood in, yet dividing them selves in to three parts, some followed
Zelotas, some Simon Gerasenus, and some other Johannes Giscalenus, the Masters
and ringleaders of these sects. Yea they destroyed and mangled one an other in
the cite, no less then Vespasian did abroad. Now let us confer the state of
Liflande with this. The miserable estat of Lifland through heresy.
I doubt not, but we shall find them like in every point. The Moscouite has
three great armies and well appointed in Liflande: lays sore seage to the
Archbishop of Runebourg, and has all ready got his cheafest forts in to
his hand: Riga and Reualia. And what does the worshipful Order in this
perturbatio^ and tumulte? what helps the Priour and Master of the Order? What
sucker bring the foren protectours of the country? Let me now with good leave
speak that all the world sees and cries out at. It fares among them now,
even as it did in Jerusalem among the sects of Ze lotas, Simon and John. For
among them some are Lutherans, some Zwinglians and some Anabaptists* and
while every sect under pretense of his gospel hops to get some part of
the country from the Moscouite to him self, the Moscouite marches on, wins
ground daily as Vespasian did in Palestine, and the Turks in greece: and this
he does under a plausible pretense of reco^ciling the dissensions, and
extinguishing the sects in Liflande: and of restoring the country in to that
mighty princes hands. It is much to be feared, that all this is to us a
warning piece, and but a preamble of a terrible tragedy which we see already
played in Hungary these many years, and is now of late begone in Liflande:
the end whereof (as we may conjecture) is stayed only by two eyes: which
being putt out, the Jews and the greeks may read the story off their own
fall in our blood, and singe us that song that the Romans ones song unto them.
Josephus lib 6. ca. 7. de bello Iudaico.
DISSENSION HAS DESTROYED GERMANY. THE TVRKE AND THE MOSCOVITE HAS DESTROYED
DISSENSION. God grant that I deem herein amiss. For if that calamite should
happen (which our Lord of his tender mercy forbid) I, all mine, and al such
as I am, shall have our part therein: and perish with the rest. God is my
witness, I have brought in all this upon a good intent and purpose. And that I
have here touched the state of our present time, I did it not (God is my Judge)
to offend any man of whatsoever condition or qualite he be, but by this
charitable admonishement of my most dear country, to declare my good will, and
desire to serve, help, and succor her at all times. For undoubtedly the axe
is now put to the root of the tree: and if we bring forth no better fruit
then we have done, we shall surely all be hewed down. And as S. Austin says.
De fide and operibus and sermon. 181. de tempore.
It is an unfruitful repentance, which purposes not to amend. And certain
it is we have highely offended the wrath of God, as well by abominable
heresies and schisms yelding unto them, and suffering them among us, as by our
wicked and dissolut life.

As touching our living, it is not enough to hear sermons, have the gospel
allwaies in our mouth, and live not after the gospel. But we must follow the
lesson of the prophet saying. Ezech. 18.
Be converted and turn you clean from all your wickedness, and your iniquite
shall not destroy you. and an other lesson of the Apostle, He that stole let
him now no more stele. Ephesians. 4, Epist. 54.
And the saying of S. Augustine is worthy to be remembered: That the sin is not
forgeuen onles restitution be made. Which in all other sins is likewise to be
understood.

But as touching the horrible errors, Luther calls him self an evangelist
in the sixtetome of his works.
wherewith Luther the fifte Evangelist, and other new ghospellers in Germany
have plucked and removed from the Catholic church both them selves, and many
a thousand more, working this lamentable estate, variaunce, and dissension in
Christ his church, this surely is of all sins the greatest and most grievous
that may be. And hereof our Lord says, Luc. 17.
Woe unto that man by whom offense rises. And although this word Woe spoken of
Gods own mouth be a dreadful signification of his wrath and high displesure,
yet his mercy far passes, ready to receive us again in his favor, and
embrace his lost children, if utterly forsaking the straie paths of error
and heresy, we come again to the high way of Christ his church, and casting
away al wicked thought out of our hearts and fa^sie of gross heresies (as the
feding of the prodigal son upon bean coddes with the hogs) we return home
to our fathers house which is the church of God. Unto the which the prophet
exhorts us, saying. ^ere. 25.
Turn again every man from his evil way and from your wicked imaginations:
and so shall ye dwell for ever in the land that our Lord gave you and your
forefathers.

The only means therefore to avoid this great calamite hanging over us, is
utterly to forsake this new forged and dissensious gospel, and retire home
again to the Catholic church, embracing the right and ancient doctrine
thereof, wherein we were borne and brought up, and joining our selves to the
whole corpse of Christendom, letting go by, these scattering schisms and
seditious factions.

Which counsel of mine I trust is more sincere and godly, and will have better
succes, then the cruel and unmerciful advise of Martin Luther in a little book
which he made last of all, shortly before his soden death at Wittenberg in
the year. 1545. dedicating it unto two honorable Princes the Duke of Saxony,
and the Lantgraue of Hesse, that they should not dismiss their presonner the
Lord Harry of Brunswicke. The title of that little book is this. Ad Electorem
Saxoniae and Lantgrauium Hassiae D. Martinus Lutherus decaptiuo D.
Brunsuicensi. And to the intent that in these countres and every where the
world may know, how Martin Luther took upon him in his papacy, and how
proudely he behaved him self, I will out of his own book declare you word
for word the whole matter. These then are the words of Luther.

For my part I would not pass, An example of the pride and presumption of
Luther.
if that captive of Brunswicke were king of France and his son King of
England. For what could that hurt me? But to counsel you to let him go fre
and at liberty, that I can in no wise do. He has lost that hope and
confidence. For seeing God does punish him, who dare be so bold as to absolve
him from Gods punishment, onles he first do penance, and make due
satisfaction, so that we may boldly trust, that God is appeased and
reconciled? otherwise it should be no other thing but to tempt God: which in
no wise must be counseled.

Luther would forsothe that the Duke of Brunswicke were king of France. A
likely matter truly. But why suffered they him not to remain Duke still? who
gave Luther authorite to punish the Duke? Is not this against all laws Canon,
civil, and law of nature, that a man in his own cause may be a party and the
Judge? The civil law has hitherto so prescribed, that if any debate fall
out between man and man for injury taken or given, that the ordinary Judge and
lawful magistrate should determinat the matter: what? is the authorite of this
law wiped away also with the gospel? or was not the Emperor the high and
ordinary Judge of all Dukes and Princes here in Germany? what has Luther to do
herein? Is it against the doctrine of the gospel that the Apostle commands
us to obey the higher powers? There is no power Romans 13.
(says he) but from God. and he that resists the power, resists the
ordinance off god. which who do, purchase them selves damnation. But we must
not obey, say they, an evil magistrate. but what evil magistrate mean they?
forsothe the Emperor. And who says he is an evil ruler? Luther and his
fellows. But he should well and substantially have proved it, before he said
it. And would god we had mo such Emperors. The day will come that we would be
glad to scrape such Emperors out of their graves with our nails, if we might
so come by them. But grant they were tiraunts: which yet who affirms,
lowdely belieth them. Does not S. Peter say, 1. Pet. 3.
Be ye subject in all fear to your rulers not only good and gentle but also
such as are froward? It was not then Luthers part, but the Emperors bearing
the sword as an higher power and minister of god, to revenge and punish
malefactors. Nor Luther has no cause now so proudely to demand, Who dare
be so bold as to restore to liberty the presonner prince? Romans 13.
For he whose part it was to do it, was not only bold and able to do it, but
did it in deed princely: and scourged worthily those which had offended. But
now let us see what punishment and satisfaction this pope of Germany enioyneth
the Duke.

Whereas this captive, says he, is deprived of his estat and dominion, he
ought not to think that this is a worthy punishment for his deserts, but that,
being touched only gently, as with the flappe of a fox tail, he is but
provoked and invited to penance: Luthers penance.
and thus he must say. O most merciful god, whereas I have deserved a great
deal worse, and thou yet do but whip me with small rods, verily I will
gladly bear this punishment all days of my life: and I will utterly renounce
my dominion and estate: as of the which thou have most justly, na rather most
mercifully deprived me, and from the which I am rightly and worthily thrust
out. for I am not as I perceive now, fit to gouuerne the same. Thou art just
o lord, and thou have dealed justly with me, yet not according to my desert.
for as I said before, we must entreat with god from the bottom of our heart,
and obediently yield to his punishment if we do not so, he as the trier and
sercher of men's hearts, from whom nothing is preuy and whom no man can deceive,
will easily epsy it: and if any man go about to deceive or delude him, he
makes his cause be it never so god, stark naught: which all we Christen men
know well inoughe, or ought at least to know. Mark here now diligently good
Christen Reader. Now Luther will have this poor prince being prisonner not
to make his confession after the Lutheran order, that is, that he confess his
fautes only to god in his heart, but even after the papisticall manner (as
touching the confessing of his sins by mouth) Luther is become a papist for
a vauntage.
will that he keep nothing preuy from him or them that shall be his
confessors, nor be not so bold as to deny any thing. what then must this
penitent of Luther confess? Forsothe all those things, which his open and
notorious enemies do falsely accuse him of: to the intent that, if being forced
by cruel emprisonment he hap to yield up his own right, then all the world
might think that his voluntary confession was the cause of such satisfaction:
for they will have him confess, that he suffers such emprisonment worthily,
and that for his deserts he is thrust out of his estate and dominion: and that
he will never require it again, but will of his own accord yield up all his
right, and the right of his heirs for ever to his adversaries and mortal
enemies here in earth, abiding for and expecting an other estate in heaven. Is
not this think you a sweet and pleasant satisfaction, and merely invented of
Luther, and very gospel like? when the Lutherans offend against the
Catholics then in the whole penance there can be found no satisfaction.
contrition suffiseth. But now in this case, we must have all three degres of
penance, Contrition, confession, and satisfaction.

But now Luther to show that he is not only the holy Father, the high
bishop, and pope in Germany, but also that he is a prophet and the third Elias,
he comfort the princes underneath him, and does prophecy of things to come:
taking occasion of a certain coin brought unto him out of base germany, unto
Wittenberg in the year. 1545. whereof in this his little book thus he writes.
This year there goes a talk that certain strange coins are brought hither
out of base Germany: which both declare the great knowleadg off the Papists,
and threaten wonderful perils to the two princes the Electour Duke of Saxony
and the Lantgraue of Hesse. These coins of one side have two pillars Crowned:
the one with the Emperors, the other with a kings Crown. between the two
pillars are fetters and gives and two chains prepared for two men. O cleanly
spirit of Luther.
I think this shitten prophet, would bind the Prince Electour off Saxony and
the Lantgraue there with. for in the circle of the coin, thus it is graven. Ad
alligandos reges eorum in compedibus. that is, to bind their princes in
fetters. Psalm. 143.
The other side of the coin has a spread egle climping in his claws the two
swords which are painted in the Duke of Saxony his arms. Beside, the points
of these swords strike through a virgin lieng on her side underneath. and
fire droppeth on her like rain. the virgin is tituled, Psalm. 143.
Infidelite: the writing about is, Ad faciendam vindictam in nationibus. that
is, to work vengeance in nations. whereby they declare what they wrought
against us, and how they would have interpreted the leage of defense, if
those things that they said, had come to effect. At Smal^^ldium.
We need not here to ask whether of these two in this foresaid prophecye was
the true, or (that I may by your good leave use Luthers ciuilite) the shitten
prophet.

This day the Duke of Saxony was taken
The four and twentieth day off April in the year, 1547. in Locher filde:
and The ^a^t grave submitted him self.
the, xix. day off June off the same year at Halles in Saxony has manifestly
declared it. I can not without great grefe remember how our Noble country of
Germany has suffered a rennagat monk thus to blind them, and delude them to
our perpetual shame and ignominy in the face off all other countres, to the
utter destruction of thousands off souls, murder of our bodies, and spoiling
off our goods. Truly I fully persuade my self, that this foresaid coin was
sent unto us out of the low countres not without the instinct of the holy
ghost, either mercifully to admonish us to look better to our matters, or
that the vain prediction off this false prophet Luther might by so evident and
true a prophecy be convicted. For he that can not see may yet sensibly feel
that this whole matter had the very same event that the coin foreshowed,
clean contrary and repugnant to Luthers dream. Luther persuaded the simple
germans that this prophecy was fulfilled in Duke Harry then presonner: and that
thereby the popes dominion was utterly destroyed. and therefore pricked
forward the Duke and the Lantgraue to fight and rebel against their liege
Souuerain. For thus he adds yet farther in the same book.

But now for whom they have painted these gives and fetters we see, thanked be
god, which has judged according to the saying of the psalm. They have opened
the pit, and dug it up and have fallen in to it them selves. their sorrow
shall be turned upon their own heads, and their iniquites shall fall upon
their own crowns: therefore we thank the just and almighty god and praise
the name of the highest. Amen.

Se how this proud prophet boasts and triumphs as though all the element
ronge of trompetts and music, and as though this article, I believe the
Catholic Church vere scraped out of the Creed. Math. 16. Ephesians. 3.
or as though that were no more true, that Christ has said, that the Church
is builded upon a sure rock not able to be shaken. or as though it were false
that the Apostle writes, calling the Church the pillar and ground of truth.
Who the^ fell in to the ditche? was it not he that first threw his neighbor
in, and after The Duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue by Charles the Emperor
was constrained to pluck him out again, and fall in him self? all the world
knows and sees it. This then lo is the first prophecy of Martin Luther in
this foresaid book. Now let us here an other strait following hereupon.

To the intent, says he, that our conscience be not burdned with the sins
of an other, and we be counted before God as wicked Achab. For if he be
delivered out of preson, the papists without doubt will blaspheme Note the
Luthe rans God
our God, and will crake after this sort. Lo be not our prayers heard of God?
We have prayed for the Duke Harry of Brunsuicke, and God has tried our
patience, but he has heard us at the length. For although he suffered the Duke
Harry to fall in to the heretics hands for our temporal punishment, yet they
have not ben able to keep him still, but were compelled off God to dismiss him.
The prayers of the Carholikes.
Thanks be to our God, which has not forsaken the church and awncient
religion. And in deed true it is that this argument has most moved me. For we
know the pope and his parasites be incurable therefore they can do naught else,
but even in their most miseries, and wicked deeds comfort, color and trick
up them selves. His other prophecy whereby he would be counted a third Elias,
he confirms by this reason. That the same must needs be the right church off
Christ, which was able by their good prayers to restore their princes in to
liberte. Therefore if the Duke Harry through the earnest and continual prayers
of the papists were dismissed of his enemies, the^ every man will think
verily that the papists are the true and right church of Christ. And this is
true in deed. For this reason therefore Luther (as he writes) was most moved,
in no case to suffer the Duke to be set at liberty, lest perhaps the papists
should be taken for the true church of God, and he and his fellows for the
malign church. Here let every man that lacks not common judgment, consider
whether Luther be not such a prophet as Caiphas was: Joan. 11.
For he prophecieth now the truth, but as Caiphas did against him self and
for the contrary part. The Catholics in deed prayed continually and earnestly
for the emprisonned prince, that he might escape out of his enemies hands.
Luther wroughte by force and by craft all that he could to keep him
continually in preson, and in his enemies hands. Which part then did God
hear? undoubtedly the righter and more just. For God is no unjust judge, but
paieth every man according to his pains. Therefore he succored the presonner,
delivered him, and so dealed with him that he might say, Judge me o Lord
according to my righteousness. Psalm. 7.
God therefore gave the right and true sentence: and now which part and whose
prayers were heard, the event declared.

But how labors Luther to overthrow the reason of the papists (wherewith
he was so much moved) and by that overthrow to set up his proud and arrogant
prophecye? The first part of the reason he lets stand, and grants that
God hears the prayers of his church. But he lays at the other part, and
denies stoutely that the papists are able to obtain any thing of God. For
so he goes forth in his foresaid book.

Their prayer therefore is not to be feared, 3. Reg. 20. Fol. E. 4, and F. 1.
no more then Elias feared the prayers of the prophets of Baal. But as he
laughed to scorn their prayers and their God, so we may lawfully laughe to
scorn the papists and their God. For we know their prayers are execrable as
their doctrine and belefe is. According to that of the psalm, 199. Let their
prayer turn in to sin. And whomsoever they teach, he can not chose but be
condemned. Nether are their prayers other, then such as the devil ones mocked,
at what time a certain priest being well tipled saying his complet in his bead,
and spetting, as he prayed, O the ciuilite of Luthers sprit.
let also a great farte: well quod he, Devil* such prayer, such
frankensence. The like may be said of all their mumbling in churches and
monasterys. For they can not pray nor will not pray, nor know not what to
pray, nor how to pray. The heretical doctrine of Luther is so printed in
some men's hearts by the instinct of some evil sprit, that they pass upon no
prayer, believe no truth no miracle, not God him self: but one word of
Luthers mouth more persuadeth them, be it never so false, then God him self,
or his word, or the whole Catholic church. Therefore if any man at that time
had been so bold as to have said, that the Catholic church should through
her devout prayers obtain the victory against her enemies, and that this Duke
the^ prisonner should be delivered, and the other (the Duke of Saxony and the
Lantgraue) cast in preson, that man had been mocked and scoffed to death:
presuming so to contemn the authorite off the third Elias Luther. And I
doubt whether yet vntel this day some simple me^ are deceived by that his
prophecy: though the end of this tragedy being so open to all the world,
gives evident testimony that almighty God has heard the prayers of the
papists, and rejected those of the Lutherans: delivering the Duke Harry, and
bringing the other two Princes in to the Emperors hands as presonners.

Now Luther to absolve and consummat this his last work (for with this
holesom piece he ended his fifte gospel) he provoke me^ of arms and power
to fight courageously against their chief and Liege Souueraines. For thus he
writes. Only God must be honored, only god must be praised, to him only
thanks are due to the intent that he which makes all things, may give also
the victory. For god can abide none of these twain, either that man tempt him,
or that he trust to much to himself, We must walk the high way turning
neither on the right hand, nether on the left. Whosoever takes not weapon
when he may, he uses not the gifts of god: he turns on the left hand, and
seeing a blow coming lays out his head. He tempts god. wherefore it
happens well and worthily that such men's heads bear away the rappes. This
counsel of Luther is true and good touching Magistrates, Kings, Emperors,
Princes, and rulers. But not for them which are subjects and private men. For
Luther him self writes and teaches, that no Prince or Lord (which is under
a higher power and owes allegeaunce unto him) can rightely make war against
any other prince or Lord: Tom. 6. fo. 612. in lib. number milisint in stat^
salutis.
much less against his own Liege and Souuerain. Therefore it should at that
time diligently ben provided, that men followed not this seditious and false
high way of Luther, which no subject can tread without his princes leave.
Especially perceauing that this high way of Luther has ever an unhappy and
miserable end, repugning manifestly to the word of God, all written law, and
Luthers own doctrine.

Demosthenes the learned and eloquent orator says, Orat. 2. co^tra Philip.
wise men deliberat before the fact and fools after the fact. For as Liuy
writes, the event teaches fools. And we Germans use to say, the Italian
takes advise before he begin, the french man when he is a doing, and the
German when he has done. Which although it has hindered much our country in
diverse affairs, yet this is in us no voluntary negligence, but a natural
infirmite. For Hesiodus the poet notes three sorts of men to be on the earth.
saying.

Who knows all him self, is the best man alive.
He is the next that counsel can use.
But he is the worste, that woteth not to thrive,
And yet of an other does counsel refuse.
Seeing then we Germans are not so quick of judgment (which peradventure
proceeds of our cold country) as the Italian is, to foresee what is to be
done, yet we may now by this lamentable calamite that we see has befallen
us, A counsel good and necessary for us also
and the present great waste of our dear country learn and remember, how
within this forty years it flourished and prospered in all respects, before
this German prophet and fifte evangelist Luther ran out of his cloister. And
although our duty had been at that time to have remembered that saying of our
Lord, Beware of false prophets, Deute. 13. Matthae. 7. 1. Joan. 4.
and the words of S. Ihon. Try the spirits whether they be of God, and so to
deliberat before the fact: yet seeing we have forslowen that, let us at the least, after the smarte be wise, and have recourse now at last to that
commandment of almighty God, where he commands the simple people to ward
them selves from false prophets and teachers. For this question being in holy
writ propounded, Deuter. 18.
How shall I understand the word that our Lord has spoken? God
awnswereth and says. This token I will give the to understand it. That which
the prophet has foresaied in the name of the Lord, and comes not to pass,
that word the Lord spoke not, but the prophet of his own vain fantasy
forged it. If we draw the line of Luthers prophecye to this rule, we shall
evidently see that he is not only a false prophet, Joan. 8.
but also as his great grande father Satan is, a cruel murderer.

Is it not a great pride and rash arrogance of Luther to prophecye and write
that the god of the Catholics, who^ he calls papists, will not hear their
prayers for the deliurau^ce of the Duke? by what revelation had he this? Luther
is a false prophet.
Again that no man living shoud

Again that Luther has been a very murderer of men, Luther is a murderer and a
strong thief in the church.
and a strong thief in Gods church, it is evident hereby that his doctrine
and vain prophecyes (setting together the princes by the ears) has been the
only cause of all seditions, war and bloodshed that within this forty
years have happened in Germany. The first book that Luther made to spoil and
ransacke the church, was his book De Captiuitate Babylonica and Christiana
liberate. In the which book he so debaseth, reuileth, and brings in
contempt not only the awncient true and Catholic religion of Christ his
church, but also the laws both Canon and Civil, that it may seem he lacked
but a head and captain to make a perfect sedition. But whereas at that time
there was yet among men more fear of God and reverence to their magistrates,
the^ that they would be moved with Luthers light talk, few were found to
help blow the fire which he had kindled, vntell at the length Luther him
self moved peradventure more hotely with the sprit, ronge the alarm him self
in the year. 1523. setting forth a book entitled, De saeculari potestate.
in a part whereoff he writes these words.

These are our Christen princes which defend the faith and devour the Turk.
In tomo 6. germanico. Fol. 602.
In deed worthy men, and such as you may trust that by their great wisdom
they are likely to do some what, as to break their own necks first, Luther
proves contempt of princes by scripture.
and then lead whole countres and peoples to break neck after. These blind
princes I would well advise, to be ware only of one small sentence of the 166.
psalm, which is this. He pooreth out contempt upon Princes. I swear unto
you by God, that if through your negligence this poor sentence ones take hold
on you, you are undone, were you as mighty and of as great power as the Turk
himself. Nether will your storming any thing profit you. The matter is now
all ready well begone. For few princes are now that are not counted for
villains and fools: and that because they show themselves for such: and the
people begins now to wexe wise, and the plage of princes which god calls
contempt, increases daily in the peoples hearts: and I fear me it will not be
stayed, onles princes behave themselves, as it becomes them, and begin again
to rule more modestly. Luthers counsel to princes
For men ne will ne can longer abide your tyranny, O wellbeloued Princes and
Lords. Therefore provide for yourselues: God will not suffer this your tyranny
any more. the world is not no we as it was in times paste, Thanks to the
Luther.
when you were wont to hunte and chase men like bestes. away therefore with
your pride, power and haugtynes, and labor to do that is right and good:
suffer the word of God to have his course, which yet it must have and shall
have, and you shall not be able to let it. If we teach heresy, let it be
confuted by the word of God. If you will try the matter with the sword, take heed lest some man command you to put up your sword not in Gods name. But
you will say peradventure. If among the Christians there ought to be no
secular sword nor Civil gouuernement, how then shall men be kept in order,
how shall they be gouuerned? For among Christen me^ must be magistrates and
officers. Luther proves there must be no magistrates among Christen men, by
scripture.
I awnswer you. Among Christen men there can not be, nor ought not to be any
Magistrate. but every man is subject one to another all a like. as the Apostle
says. Philip. 2. Thinking every one superior one to another: and S. Peter.
1. Pet, 5. Every one show humilite one to another: unto the which Christ
also consents, saying. Luce. 14. when thou art called unto a marriage, go,
sit down in the lowest place. Among Christen men there is no superior, but
only Christ: and what superiorite or magigistrat ca^ there be where al be
equal, of one right, dignite, and vocation? and where none desires to rule
over the other, but every one is glad to be under? Where such men are, if any
would make a Magistrate, yet he can not make one that should be superior to the
other. for it is against nature to have superiors, where no man will be, nor
ca^ besuperiour* and where such men are not, there are not true Christians.
Again in the next leaf before he writes thus. They be princes of the world.
But the world is enemy to God. Therefore they must needs do those things that
are contrary to God, T^m. 6. Fol. ^^1.
and acceptable to the world, lest they lose their honor and be no more
worldy princes. Marvel not therefore if they storm and strive against the
ghospel and play like mad fools. For their doings must needs corresponde to
their name and title. Mark also that from the beginning of the world a wise
prince has been a seldom bird. but a good prince much more dainty. The
reverence off Luther tovvard Princes.
The most of them are other principal fools, or the most wicked knaves on
the earth. And therefore we can hope for little good of them, but fear
allwaies the worste. Especially in matters of God and pertaining to our soul
health. For they are as the hangmen and tormentours of god: etc. And anon it
follows. Therefore if perhaps there be any wise, good or Christian prince,
that is to be counted for a wonder and a singular token of gods great grace
and clemency toward that country.

I beseech you al good Christen readers, of whatsoever degree or qualite you
are, remember your vocation, and suffer not your selves to be abused of this
fond friar, or to be lead in to his seditious errors and contempt of
Magistrates, from the true belefe and awncient obedience of Christendom. For the
true gospel of Christ commands directly all subjects to obey their
Lieges, 1. Pet. 2.
Princes and Souueraines in all dread and obedience not only good, virtuous,
and merciful, but also froward, wicked and cruel.

But what effect had this fifte gospel of Luther and his prophecyeng of the
fall of Princes? forsothe in the year 1525. Sleidan in the 5. book.
(that is two years after the setting forth of that his seditious book) it
sturred up that notorious rebel Thomas Muntzer: whom yet Luther (as it may by
good evidence be proved) at the first excused and defended before the Duke of
Saxony: hoping that Muntzer should have sped of his purpose: But afterward
perceauing the princes to make great preparation, and to gather power against
the rebels, feling that his Christen liberte was like to fall in the donge,
strait he writes unto the Princes and Nobilite, to hew down the rusticall
rebels.

And to declare unto the whole world the great thought and grefe that father
Luther took of that his former pernicious and deadly counsel, The marriage of
Luther.
eue^ at the very same time, he took a Nu^ne out of her cloister, and for mere
pity of the poor commons so deluded, Vide Erafmum in epistol. ad Thoma^
Lupsetu^. an. 1525
celebrated the solemn sweet marriage of the fifte gospel. But to the intent
the Princes and Rulers might not epsy these his preuy fetches and deuelishe
inventions, the very same year. 1525, he set forth an other book quite
contrary to the former. Which he entitled. Whether souldiars be in state of
salvation. In that book he writes thus.

Here the law itself speaks, Tom. 6. germanico. fol. 612.
that no man ought to take weapon against his superior. For unto superiors
and magistrates honor, reverence, obedience, and dread is due. Romans 13. For he
that hacketh wodde over his head, the chippes will fall in his eyes: Ecclel.
27.
and as Solomon says, he that throws a stone upward it will fall down
upon his head. even such is the law made of god and received of men. For
these two can not agree, to obey and yet to rebel: to be a subject, and yet to
abide no ruler. Thus much Luther in that place. Here I beseech almighty God to
give the light of truth to all good and godly readers hereof: that laieng a
side al affection to the person or man, they will waighe and considre uprightly
the whole cause it self, as it stands.

Luthers books De Captinitate Babylonica, Contrari ete in the doctrine of
Luther
and of Secular Authorite, teach according to his gospel. that among
Christian me^ there can not be, nor ought no to be any higher power, or power at
al. And why wrote he so then? because that if the Emperor or other princes
would perhaps have persecuted the heresy of Luther, then the commons and
cytezens might lawfully have slaien the Catholic Prince, higher power and
magistrate. Now in his other book, Of the state of souldyars, the gospel of
Luther teaches plain contrary, that the higher power must be obeyed: not
only good, but also the badde: to punish the seditious and put to death
rebels. Again in his last little book written to the Duke of Saxony and the
Lantgraue, his gospel preaches after an other sort: as that subjects may
take weapon and stand in the field against their liege Souuerain. But so that
they walk the high way: that is, that spetting well in their hands and
falling to it lustely (as he was wont to say) they hew down their princes a
pase, and if it prove prosperousely, then give honor unto the Lord. Behold
the honor of God, that heretics seek. They teach the subject to murder the
Prince against the express commandment of God in holy write, teaching us to
honor God in the higher power.

Awake ye o Germa^s, A godly exhortation.
stir up your selves, see and acknowledge the merciful visitation of
allmighty God. Now god knocks at our hearts, and looks for repentance,
and that with this fatherly lesson of king David. Psalm. 94.
Todaie if ye have heard his voice, harden not your hearts. and the words of
the Apostle. Know thou not that the mercifulnes of god and long bearing
draws the unto repentance? Romans 2.
Let us therefore ask and cry unto god. O Lord convert us, and show thy
face, and we shall be saved. Psalm. 79.
Let us also hear the word of our Lord calling upon us by the prophet.
Anchar. 1.
Turn ye unto me (says the Lord of Hosts) and I will turn unto you. And
to the intent that all the honor be given to God, and yet that our good intent
and purpose lack not, if we will do true penance, we must from the bottom of
our heart lament with Jeremy the prophet, and cry with tears unto our lord,
Theren. 5.
O Lord turn us unto the, and we shall be turned. And what necessite drives
us to this cry and lamentation? surely even the very same which moved that
Prophet so to bewail and lament, when, he says. VVo be unto us, because we
have sinned. For truly I think we germans have sinned tentymes more greuousely
then those Jews. And what was the plage of their heinous offenses? the prophet
declares. The crown and garland of our head is fallen of. I fear me, we
germans shall heue the self same plage, onles we spedely do penance for our
wickedness. It follows in the lamentatio^. Therefore my heart is heavy and full
of grief. We, alas, are not yet come so far toward penance, that our heart
has been heavy for our sins. For we yet contynew in them. and why speed we
not to penance? Because our eyes are darkened. and wherefore? for the hille of
Sion, that is, the Catholic church. why? what is befallen it? because it is
destroyed. O Merciful god, this is to to true with us Germans. For among us,
one says Here is Christ: Matt. 24.
an other says, there is Christ. this man says, Among the Caluinistes is
the church, an other says, Among the Illyricans. the third, among the
Indifferents. the fourth among the Osiandrins, the fifte among the Swenck
feldians, and so with the rest. whereas yet it is impossible it should be
among them all. why so? because it is destroyed, it is scattered, it is
undone. And how comes it, o holy Ieremije, that the holy hill of Sion (the
Catholic church) is so wasted and destroyed? Foxes have walked in it. In deed
foxes, that is, as S. Ambrose and S. Augustine expound it, Ambros. in 9. cap.
Luc. Aug. in psa. 80.
subtle, crafty, deceitefull, stinking and lurking heretics. These foxes have
onerrunne, spoiled, and destroyed the holy hill of Sion, the Catholic church of
Christ. And as soon as the light that shines from this hill (the Catholic
church, Esa 42.
of whom it is said, I have set the up as a light to all nations) was ones in
Germany darkened and extinguished, men's eyes and hearts were so blinded, that
with open eyes they see nothing, and are so sick that they feel no pain at
all, nor perceive not how daily the Croune falls away from their heads.
Let him therefore pray that can pray. and who so ever fears the smarte of
gods rod, let him labor to escape it: and cry with the prophet. Thren. 5.
Turn us o lord unto the. and that he fail not also on his part, let him
say with mouth, and perform in deed, And we will be turned.

But because that (as S. Augustine teaches) repentance which proceeds not of
faith is unprofitable, August. de vera and falsa pae^it cap. 2.
there is no hope of true repentance among us, onles we embrace the true
doctrine of Christen faith. To the intent therefore that every common lay man
may be sure and perfect of the faith and religion which he follows, I will add
hereunto to knitte up this our simple treatise, a little piece out of a book
that Vince^tius lyrene^sis wrote above twelve hundred years past, under
Theodosius the Emperor, for the mayntenau^ce and setting forth of Catholic
religion.

A man peradventure may demand ( says he) seeing the Canon of holy scripture
is sufficient off it self for all points, what needs the interpretation off
the Church to be added thereunto? to the which question he answers. For
because forsothe holy scripture being deep and mystical, is not of all men
after the like sort expounded: but the sentences thereof some man expounds
one way, some an other: that allmoste as many men, so diverse expositions may
be drawn thereof. For the Nouatian expounds it one way. Sabellius an other
way. Donatus, Arrius, Eunomius, Macedonius, Photinus, Apollinaris,
Priscillianus, Iouinianus, Pelagius, Celestius, and Nestorius al founders of
sundry heresies, follow each of them their own proper and peculiar way of
interpreting holy scripture. Wherefore it behooves that in consideration of so
many crekes and by erroneous paths, the line of interpreting holy prophets and
Apostles be drawn and directed according to the rule of the Catholic and
ecclesiastical exposition. In the Catholic church it self we must
seriousely provide, that we follow only that which is received in every place,
at al times, of al me^. for this is Catholic in deed and properly (as the
word it self emporteth) comprehending all universally. This we may so do,
Vniuersalite Antiquite Consent.
if we follow vniuersalite, Antiquite, and Consent. Vniuersalite we shall
follow, if we acknowledge that faith and belefe which the whole church through
out the whole world acknowledges. Antiquite if we depart not from those
expositions which the holy awncient fathers have left unto us. Consent
likewise, if in the antiquite we cleave unto the determinations of all or
allmoste all priests, prelates, and teachers of the church. What then shall the
Catholic and Christian man do, if any part of the church cut it self of
from the communion and societe of the general belefe? What other then that he
must prefer the whole body before the deseased part? What if some new
infection plage not only some part but the whole church? Then must he
diligently cleave unto the Antiquite or awncient received faith which can be
seduced by no guile of nouelty. What if two or three men, or some one cite or
country swerve from the Antiquite, and received doctrine? Then against the
rash ignorance of a few he must set the awncient and universal decrees of
some general Council. What if such doubts arise that no such decree can be
found? Then let him labor to seek out and confer together the saiengs of the
fathers, such as though in diverse times and in diverse places, yet remaining in
the unite and belefe of the Catholic church, have be^ approved for teachers
and doctors of the same: and what soever he shall find that not one or two
only of them, but that al with one Consent have clearly taught, oftentimes
written, and continually held, this without all doubt and stagger he ought to
be leave. Thus far that holy father, Vincentius Lyren.

It were much to be wished that this good and profitable book were soundely
and truly translated in to the vulgar tongue, The book is in our english
tongue already translated, and is most necessary to be read in these^imes.
and so set in printe to be read of all men. For this holy father above twelve
hundred years since has so written of this matter, that he seems thereby to
call to the Catholic unite, and provoke to amendment off life, not only the
heretics of his time, but also even these of our time. To thentent that
shaking off all sin and heresy, we might live here in peace, unite, and
co^corde: and obtain hereafter the everlasting life, praising with all the
saints our Lord and God for ever: the which his dear son our Savior Jesus
Christ by his tender mercy and blessed merits grant us. AMEN.

FINIS.
A DISCOURSE UPON THE DOCTRINE OF THE PROTESTANTS TRIED BY THE THREE FIRST
FOVNDERS and fathers thereof, Martin Luther, Philip Melanchthon and especially
John Calvin: out of whose works are gathered sundry old heresies, absurdites
and contradictions by him avouched.
Our Savior in the gospel forwarning us off false teachers and prophets,
Matthe. 7.
which comi^g in shepes skins are inwardly ravening wolves, and checking the
proud Pharisees corrupting the word of god with their fond inventions,
making thereby a sect by them selves as Josephus records, Lib. 2. cap. 7. de
bello Iudaico. Matthew. 15.
pronounces of them in this wise. Coeci sunt and duces coecorum: Coecus autem
si coeco ducatum praestet, ambo in foueam cadunt. that is. They are blind and
the guides of blind men. and if the blind lead the blind, both fall in to
the ditche. Likewise the blessed Apostle S. Peter, according to the charge
given him off our Savior above the rest of the Apostles, Joan. 21.
even as above the rest he loved Christ, forwarneth also his flock of
heretics that should spring up among them, 2. Petr. 1.
as in the old law before some had spronge: and writes thus. Fuerunt and
pseudoprophetae in populo etc. There were false prophets also among the people,
even as there shall be lying masters among you, which shall bring in damnable
sects, even denying God that has bought them, and bring upon them selves
swift damnation: and many shall follow their damnable ways, by whom the way
off truth shall be blasphemed etc. In these sayengs both of our Savior, and
of S. Peter his vicar here on earth, we learn both that false heretics were
like to arise in Christ his church, and what a perilous thing it is to follow
the straypathes of such blind guides* which is, as our Savior says, to
fall in to the ditche with them. and as S. Peter tells us, to blaspheme the
way of truth, to wit, Christ him self who is the life, Joan. 14.
the way, and the truth. And truly if we endeavored our selves as S. Paul
bids us, Philip. 3.
to observe and follow those which walk after such sort, as we have him for
an ensample, Ephesians. 4.
if we were solliciti seruare vnitatem Spiritus in vinculo pacis, diligent to
keep unite of mind in the bond of peace, if we would, as he most charely
warns Timothe save that which is given us 1. Timo. 6.
to keep (the treasure of our faith) and avoid profane novelties of talk,
and oppositions of false named knowleadg, we would not so rashly have followed a
few false teachers against the common consent of Christendom, 2. Petr. 2.
we had not departed from our first faith, and after the knowleadg of truth
have turned away from the holy commandment, being so (as S. Peter says) in
worse case, then if we had never known the truth: brefely we had not fallen
in to so many and diverse pittes of heretical doctrine, 1. Timo. 3.
forsakinge the ground and pillar of al truth the Catholic church of Christ.
For verily who so earnestly and diligently would considre with him self,
whereby it has happened that in these late years so many have departed from
the catholic faith and yielded to new doctrines not heard of before, he shall
surely find the principal means thereof, to have been the only light
credence given to new preachers, and rash believing every new tale in matters
of conscience and salvation. The cause of this our rashness I will not search
out, though it be ready to find, our only sins and wicked life being the
very proper cause thereof, and nothing else. But the means as I said, has
principally ben light harkening to every such as listed to talk new doctrine:
the doctrine it self being plausible and gladly received of those, which
burdned with sin and wickedness, were gredy of the liberty, that in the
doctrine was preached. according as S. Paul prophesied saying, 2. Timo. 4.
The time shall be, when men will not abide holesom doctrine, but as such whose
ears does itch, they shall get them such teachers, as shall withdraw them
from the truth, and turn them to fables. For hereof it happened, that not
regarding what he was that taught, or upon what reasons he grounded his
doctrine, only the pleasauntnes of it, as a bayte, choked the hearers and
prisers thereof. For even as in the old law, the children of Israel when they
fell to iniquite, would not harken to the prophets, but badde them to speak
pleasant doctrine unto them, Esaiae. 30.
and seek them out errors, so many these late years pressed with sin,
harkned gredely to such doctrine as might deliver them from the discipline of
the church, from due repentance, confession, and satisfaction of their sins,
from obedience to pastors and curats, from fastings, from prayer, and all
necessite of good works, brefely from all clogge of conscience, In libro. de
capt. Bayloni^a.
from which Luther craked he had delivered the hearts off men.

Now as we are suffered to fall in to sin sometime, not only of infirmite,
or for trial of our strenghth, but also for the plage of other sins, as S.
Paul in the first to the Romans declares, so in punishment of this lewd
liberty so gredely embraced in smaller points of our faith, God has of his
secret and unknown justice suffered us to fall beside in to such enormous
heresies, though nothing pleasant otherwise, to such detestable doctrine, to
so diverse and contrary opinions, that considering now the trade of this
tragedy, and seeing to what issue it has proceeded, (though truly I fear it be
far yet from the issue and end) I have thought it a good and convenient
means both to stay somewhat this hedlong race, that men so blindely run
in, and to call back such as have passed all bonds of right belefe already,
by the very same means, by the which they first began to break the array of
Christ's church, and to run this mad and lamentable course. And because we
may work the matter even from the ground, I have thought good to consider the
very first sowers of the schismatic seed of our time: which I do find to
have been Luther, and his scholar Melanchthon, and John Calvin.

The first broker of this cursed bargain, whereby many have lost heaven and
purchased hell, was Martin Luther. The setter forth of the bargain and greatest
Merchant of these perilous wares, was Melanchthon: who seemed partly to perfect
that which Luther began, partly to amend with civil conformatio^, that which
the other furiously and beyond all reason blamed. Of these two heads are now
two monstrous sects swarming in all such places, as protestants and
ghospellers prevail. That is the zealous, roughe, and rigorous Lutherans
cleaving fast to every jot and parcel of Luthers doctrine, as being the very
evangelist of this fifte gospel: and the civil, soft and Philosophical
Lutherans, which after the trade off Melanchthon pluck up in Luther such
things as they mislike, and plant of their own such as they list. The third
chief Master of late heresies, and principal founder of wicked doctrine has been John Calvin: the head and Capitayn of the Sacramentary sect. For though
Zuinglius and Oecolampadius may seem his auncetours of a few years, yet he
bears now the name and the stroke of all that cursed sect, both because he
has written most thereof, and also has done most harm of any other.

Truly who so knew what manner of men these were, what abominable doctrine
they have taught, how variable and inconstant they have been in their own
sayings and doings, if he be a Christian man and fears God, he will never
forsake the whole corpse of Christendom, and the Catholic faith of so many
hundred years, to follow the private, new, and variable doctrine of their
brains. But it seems they are of a number unknown, and hereuppon rashely
believed. I will therefore add unto this work of Staphylus a short discourse,
touching the doctrine of these three Archeprotestants of our time. For even as
the intent and purpose of that virtuous and learned man Fridericus Staphylus in
this his Apology by us translated, was to reduce his dear countremen of
Germany, wandering like straie sheep, to the flock off Christ's church
again, partly by discovering the falshod of their guides craking of Gods word
without the right meaning thereof, and abusing the unlearned with false forged
translating off the same, which in the first and second part of his Apology he
has done, partly also by setting before men's eyes their great variaunces and
most clear dissensions in doctrine (an evident argument of heresy) even so our
intent and pupose is for the edifieng of such of my dear countreme^, as have
not of malice, but of ignorance cleaued unto the plausible and pernicious
doctrine of these three Archeheretikes Martin Luther, Phil. Melanchtho^, and
John Calvin, to make an especial discourse of their doctrine, because they are
in our country above all other sect masters most followed. For not only, the
common sort of deceived protestants but the learned and pretended prelates, and
ministres of our country, are partly Luthera^s, partly Sacram^taries. And of
the Luthera^s, some (though the fewer nu^bre) are zealous and rigorous
Luthera^s: that is, such as will in all points follow Luther, taking him for the
ver^ prophet of God, the fifte Evangelist, and the third Elias of our time.
Some are civil Lutherans, gentle and courtly protestants, which admit Luther
so far as the^ list, professing a kind of indifferency in many matters of
religion, as Melanchthon their first Master taught them. The third sort of
protestants, the most common and allowed sect in England, are the
Sacramentaries of Geneua. Who are so great in nu^bre and authorite, that the
other are almost of no account or reputation. To these me^ Luther is a papist,
and Calvin is the right and undoubted prophet.

To the intent therefore that beside the general discourse of Staphylus, the
particular humors of our country may somewhat be served, I have thought it
necessary to annexe here unto a particular discourse of these three sects, by
examining the three first founders and fathers thereof. But especially and most
largely we entend to treat of the Sacramentary sect, as being the greatest
sore of the corrupted body off our country: And although we say not herein all that may be said, (which would require a large volume, and perhap; more
tedious then profitable) yet these few that we shall bring, may be sufficient
arguments to discredit the authorite of any one of them: which in many men's
eyes seems so great, that at the warrant off their mouth, they stick not to
cast away all credit off all the learned men in Christ his church this
fiftene hundred years and upward.

For if I declare unto you most manifest and clear heresies, The argument off
this discourse.
such as have been condemned above a thousand years paste in that state and
time of Christ's church, as our protestants yet acknowleadg, or ^eme at the
lest to acknowledge for pure and uncorrupted, to be in the doctrine of Calvin:
If I show most manifest contradictions and brutish absurdites out off his
writings, in the waightiest articles of our belefe (as of the blessed
Sacrament, of Baptim, and of free will of man) if I declare unto you such
inconstancy of Melanchthon, as would scarce become a mean scholar in matters
of common lerning, if I discover a number of old heresies condemned also in
the primitive church, renewed by Luther (generally received of all protestants)
beside diverse other most certain tokens of heretical doctrine avouched by him,
all this I trust shall be a just and sufficient cause not only to suspect,
but utterly to mislike the residew off their doctrine and opinions, whereby
they have inueigled the hearts of men to the utter destruction off thousands of
souls. For truly if they be men sent especially from God, to restore unto us
the light of his holy word after the darcknes of so many hundred years (as
they pretend to be, and are taken for such) it can not possibly be, but that
their sayings and doings must savor of the Apostles, holy Martirs, and
awncient fathers of Christ's church, by whom the faith of Christ was first
planted here on earth, and spread through out the whole world. That is, they
must have Cor vnum and animam vnam. Actoru^. 2.
One heart and one mind as the Apostles had, they must Obedire excorde in eam
formam doctrinae in qua traditi sunt, Rom^. 6.
Obeyeuen from their heart to that m^ner of doctrine wherein they were brought
up, as the first Christians did, they must have the ensample of holesom words
and doctrine, 2. Timo. 1.
which they heard of their first fathers and teachers, as the church of Christ
has allwaies continued. But if their sayings and doings repugne directly
against the manner and usage of these holy men, if they be at variaunce among
them selves, and with them selves, (as especially you shall see in Calvin) if
they forsake the trade of old doctrine, and renew in their place old
condemned heresies: if they forsake the ensample of other, forging doctrine of
their own: no Christen man may doubt, but that they are not off that race nor
line, but rather of the issue of the old heretics, whose doctrine they renew,
and behavior they follow. For undoubtedly the saying of our Savior can not be
false: Matthew. 7.
By their fruits you shall know them. But now to the matter, and first of
Luther.

It is well known by all the histories of our time as of Fontanus, Reuerus,
Sleidan, and other that the first breach of the well ordered array of Christ's
church was by Luther attempted, not of revelation, conscience, or lerning, but
only for the grief of a repulse taken touching the publishing of that famous
pardon of the Cro^sad. For hereuppon began he first to open his lips against
the abuse of pardons, after against the pardons them selves, the^ against the
whole authorite of the church not only in that matter but almost in all other
necessary articles of belefe. And bi^ause we will not go by co^iectures but by
most^^ redemonstrations, I will bring you the words of Luth^^ him self.

In a disputation before the Duke George of Saxony held openly at Lipsia with
D. E^kius, he does plainly pronounce, That the quarrel of religion the^ by him
enter pr^s^d, was not begonn for the honor of God, nor should not end to his
honor. Fonta^us lib. 2.
Luther in all his doings declared well this his intent and purpose, but now
because Ex abund^ntia cordis os loquitur, as the heart thinks, the tongue
speaks, he utters it also in words, and be wraieth his deuelish intent.
rashely perhaps and vnprouidently on his own part, but not without the
merciful providence of allmighty god in our behalf. And in very deed according
to his talk the matter proved. For see how he made his entry to this ioly
enterprise. He knew right well, that the authorite of learned writers standing,
he could not plant his deuelish and wicked doctrine. Therefore at the first he
persuadeth the world that the gospel hitherto has been trod under foot, and
men's constitutions have prevailed. Wherefore nothing ought to be received, but
the only clear and express text of holy Scripture. L^^e Eras man in ^y (...).
For these be his words in his book De s^ruo arbitrio against Eraesmus. Lay
aside all the armor and defense, which the old Catholic writers, all schools
of divines, authorite of Counsels, and popes, the consent of all ages, and all
Christendom do minister unto you. We admit nothing but Scripture. Whatsoever
the old writers taught, the authorite of the church has delivered, Christen
people has embraced, Schools have defended, it is all the pestilent poison of
the devil. I will no judgment, but I require obedience. Nor let not any man
be any whit moved with the miracles or holiness of the Saints off the church.
They are all damned, if they thought as they wrote. Thus far Friar Luther.

Be these the words, think you, of a Christen man? If Porphirius, Lucian,
Julian the Apostata, or any Turk or Pagan should go about to withdraw
Christen men from the faith of Jesus Christ, and of his holy word, what surer
ground could he use of his persuasion, what suttler entry could he make, then
to persuade them that all Counsels, al doctors, al Popes have erred damnably
and taught Satanicall doctrine?

There arose in Holland about twenty years past one George David, first a
Lutheran protestant, and after a most detestable Apostata, affirming him self
to be the true Messiah and Christ. He lived afterward in Basil certain years
under pretense of a Lutheran protestant, and naming him self John of Bruncke,
he died at Basil: and but two years after his death was espied to be that
George David, whom so many Anabaptists followed and believed. At what time his
books and writings being serched, co^taining the reasons and persuasions of
his doctrine, among many other this was found, and is the viij. th in number.
If, Vide historian Daui^s Georgij. Antuer p^^ impressam. anno 1560.
says he, the doctrine of Christ and his Apostles had been the true and perfect
doctrine, truly the church which they planted and framed by their doctrine,
should necessarely have continued, and never perished. Because hell gates them
selves, as Jesus said, should not prevail against his church. but now it is
evident, that Antichrist has utterly overthrown the doctrine and building of
the Apostles. For this, says he, is manifest in the papacy. Whereof he will
have it necessarely ensue, that the doctrine of the Apostles be vnperfitt and
false: but the doctrine that he brings for the be the perfect and true. These
are the very words of the history of his life, set forth by the university
of Basil. Behold the reason of Luther to plant his new gospel, and the
reason of George David to overthrow the gospel is all one. Luther groundeth
upon the error of the church: George David groundeth upon the same. Luther
makes his entry by condemning the church: George David makes the same. Only
this is the difference. David goes plainly to work: and opens his devilish
intent at the first: and therefore he prospered not. Luther craftily pretends
the defense of Gods word (though he condemn the church) and therefore it
succeeded ioylely with him. For tenfolde worse is a preuy enemy then an open:
and sooner is the Turk avoided, The heretic more dangerous, the^ the Turk.
then the heretic: though they bring us both to one pit. the Turk walks
naked: he asks all at ones: his filthynes appears at the first sight, and
therefore the Christen man at the first blushe, abhors him. But the heretic
is cloked with the name of a Christian: asks but the denial of some part of
our says, pretends the word of God, and therefore is not off many espied.

Our Savior in that most tender and long prayers, that he made for mankind
after the mystical Supper, prays thus. Joan. 17.
O holy father keep them in thy name whom thou have given unto me, that they
may be one as we are. I ask not only for them, but for all such, as by their
word shall believe in me: that they all be one as thou father in me and I in
the, that they also be one in us, that the world may believe that thou have
sent me. Christ here prays for unite in his Church, and that to continue for
ever. For he said before, Joan. 14.
he would pray the Father, and he should give a comforter to tarry with us for
ever, the Spirit of truth. And why does our Savior pray for this unite and
truth to continue for ever in his Church? forsothe he protests it unto his
Father, and says, to the intent that the world may believe that thou have
sent me. Lo Christ would have the continuance of truth and unite in his
Church, to be a most evident argument to all the world that he was the true
Son of God, the only Savior and Redemer of the world. Now Luther and George
David deny this unite and truth to have continewed: and our protestants
appeal to the first six hundred years, condemning wickedly the whole corpse of
Christendom off these last ix. hundred years, of errors, superstition, and
idolatry. And what other co^seque^t look we hereof to follow, then that with
George David and his sect, they deny Christ him self? In the preface off
Staphylus to the bishop of Eistat you have seen, how the protestants of Bohem
are already come to this point, In the Ieafe 18.
where this heresy first began, and has most continued.

But here peradventure some civil Lutheran will be offended with us for urging
these words of Luther, and charging him so far therewith: and awnswer with
their common distinction, saying. The writings of Luther are of three manner of
sorts: to wit. some written before he thouroughly espied what popery was, some
again written in vehemence of contention, wherein sometime he showed him self
to much passioned. some again that he wrote in mekenes of spirit, and such to
be taken for the very pure kernel, and undoubted verite of his gospel. This
distinction and poor shift, Sleidanus lib. 3. histo.
though Luther used it before the Emperor at Worms, and be a common cloak of
the civil protestants, to cover the filthynes off their father, Luther: yet
both it stands little with the truth of an Evangelist, as he terms him
self, or of the third Elias, In epist. ad Argentoratenses. Melanchthon de vita
and morte Lutheri.
as his scholars call him, and will never be granted of the zealous Lutherans,
Illyricus, Gallus, Amssdorffius, and such other, which will not depart from
any one jot of Luthers doctrine. No nor Luther him self cannot abide it. For
thus he writes in his presumptuous book against our late Souuerain, Tomo 6.
fo. 436. editionis. an. 1553.
king Henry the eight. It repents me, says Luther, that I submitted my self
so much before the Emperor at Worms, that I would suffer any man to sit
Judge on my doctrine, or hear if any man could convince me of any error. For
I should not have declared so foolish an humilite, being sure and certain of my
doctrine. Beside that the same submission nothing auailed me before that tyran.
A man must be so sure and certain of his doings, that although all the world
be set against him, yet he depart no one jot from them. Thus far Luther.
Where you see, he confesses not that he speaks amiss sometime by infirmite,
sometime of a passion, but he makes him self to stand upon a most sure
ground, so that he can not say a miss. Tomo 2. fol. 35. sac. 2. contra
caelestes prophetas.
Likewise at what time Carolostadius suaruing from Luther, would so have
excused him self, that at the beginning he was but weak in the spirit, etc.
Luther awnswereth him, that the spirit of God uses no such excuse.

Well then: if the doctrine of Luther, be so sure and constant, that it may not
vary, will our protestants and new Masters at home stand stoutely to the same?
Will they condemn all Counsels, all holy Fathers, all authorite of the
Church, all that Christen people have hitherto believed? for these are the very
words of Luther, quoted you before out of his works. Truly this were a
compendious way, not only fot their purpose, but for the Turks to. Yea and
for Antichrist him self. For when he comes, can he devise any more politic
engine to vnderminde Christendom, can he wish for any better harbengers to
prepare men's hearts and good wills to lodge him in? weight the matter who
lists wisely and diligently: he shall find none like to this.

Yet Luther, they will say, leaves us holy Scripture, which Antichrist will
not do. Yea truly, but how leaves he it? I mean to be read of the unlearned
lay man. Forsothe he translateth it in to the mother tongue. And how?
sincerely and truly? I report me to the second part of this Apology, where
you have seen, how uprightly he has dealed herein. As for the common text
which our protestants after their Master, Luther, do use, and command to be
read in Churches, we have in our preface noted you in part the truth and
soundnes thereof. But to show to the world their fidelite and sincerite yet
farther, I will here specify some other places of holy Scripture altered and
corrupted by them. And this I will do but in part, and brefely: noting such as
it has been my chance here and there to epsy, not making any special
discourse upon the whole translation of the english Bible, which may with time
and more diligence hereafter be done.

Where as S. Paul has, Haereticum hominem deuita, Avoid the heretic man,
Tit. 3.
our new english tra^slatio^s read, Avoid a man that is an author of sects,
A number of places corrupted in the english Bible. printed in the years. 1549.
51. 52. and 62.
as though an heretic and an author of a sect were all one. By this false
forged text, the doctrine of our protestants being proved heretical, yet
Luther, Calvin, Su^n^k feldius, Osiander, and such other were only to be
avoided (as being the authors and first beginners off these present theresies)
but our protestants being no authors the^ selves of sects, but folowers of
other, may (notwithstanding S. Paul's wodes) be embraced and supported. But an
heretic (as S. Augustine defines) is he, In lib. de^tilitate credendi. ca. 1.
which, for tempor all commodite, honor or wealth, either forgeth him self new
doctrine, or follows. And all such S. Paul bids us avoid. But no maruail
if these men did so alter this text. It is good reason a man favor him self.
for else perhaps the people reading this text of S. Paul, would begin to
avoid our protestants, whom they see to be heretics. And therefore in an
other place, where S. Paul says. Oportet haereses esse. There must be
heresies, 1. Corin. 11.
they likewise turn it, There must be s^ctes, avoiding allwaies the name of
heresy, because it touched them to nigh. And verily it were not amiss for
them, if the name of heresy and heretics were quite forgotten: se^^g their
whole doctrine which they have learned of Luther and Calvin, is nothingels but
old condemned heresies patched together and newly scoured, as in this
discourse we shall evidently declare unto you.

For this purpose also, where S. Paul writes to Timothe, 1. Timo. 6.
P^ophanas vocum nouitates deuita, avoid strange novelties of words, whereby
he meant new ^ereticall doctrine, these men turn it, avoid vnghostely vanities
of voices, altering quite both the words and the sense of the Apostle. for it
stands upon these men to have novelties allowed.

With the like vain of evangelical sincerite, because they may not abide to
hear off altar, (having plucked them down against the express^ practice of
the primitive church and all ages) where S. Paul writes, 1 Cor. 10.
Are not they which eat of the sacrifice partak^^s of the altar? these men
turn for the (...). The latin has altar, and the graeke (...). In the same
place they make S. Paul talk of images (as though Christen men had then
worshipped images, which yet they say is but a late invention) where as he
talks only of idols and idolaters.

In like manner because traditions are a great eye sore to all new ghospellers,
they putt out of S. Paul the word Traditions, 2. Thessal. 2. and 3.
and put in his place sometime Ordinances sometime Institutions, as often as S.
Paul bids the^ to be kept. In other places, when the traditions of the
Jews are reprehended, 1. Pet. 1.
then they keep the word gladly.

All Sacramentaries that follow the banner of Calvin make light of the Sacrament
of baptim, teaching that the children of Christen parents may without danger
lack it, In institut. cap. 17. in fine.
if there be no contempt or negligence on our part. We shall have occasion in
examining of Caluins doctrine, to speak more of this cursed heresy. Now
because the saying of our Savior in S. John's ghospel, Joan. 3.
Unless a man be borne again of water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter
in to the kingdom of heaven, did utterly overthrow this wicked opinion, our
protestants in their translatio^s have found the means so to clippe the text,
that it might no longer directly fight against them: and therefore they leave
out the word ( again) in S. John, which of necessite imported a second
natiuite of baptim. But of this we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.
In the me ane ye see the upright dealing of our protestants. How are they to be
trusted in their sermons, in their homelies, and in a number of assertions and
articles which they teach without scripture, that corrupt the Scripture it
self?

They will say, A refuge for false translations of scripture confuted.
they alter sometimes the text, because of the greek, which varieth from the
latin. If they did so sincerely, and in all places, it were perhaps the less
fault, And yet not without great fault, the latin text being uniform,
universally received, and commanded by general Council, whereas the graeke
lacks such authorite, Vide Li^danum de optimo scripturas interpretandi genere
lib. 2.
and is beside variable and most uncertain, for the great variete and discord
of graeke copies. But now when the greek serves their purpose, and may any
thing further their heresies, then they grate gredely thereupon. But when it
makes against the^, they keep the latin, and let the greek pass. As for
example. Whereas in the Acts off the Apostles, the greek has (...), Cap. 13.
while they sacrifised, as Erasmus also has translated it, they follow the
latin, Ministra^tibus illis, turning it, as they ministered. Here they forsake
the greek, and Erasmus to because they will not hear that the Apostles
sacrifised, as the greek text co^uinceth, and Erasmus truly after the greek
translateth. But in an other place, where the greek may serve their turn, see
how they snatche after it, and yet were foully deceived.

In S. Paul, where the latin has, Iustificati ex fide pacem habeamus apud
Deum. that is, Being justified by faith let us have peace with God. Romans 5.
And the greek reads, (...), we have peace with God, they follow there the
greek, because they would set up a second justification by only faith, as if
S. Paul had said. Now being justified by faith in our first justification,
We have peace with God, we are safe and sure. But though the common greek text
read so in deed, yet the graeke fathers who has left us their learned
commentaries upon that place, did read as the common latin has, to wit
Chrisostom, Theodoret, Oecumenius and Theophilact.

In their translation also of the old Testament, their demeanor is not
unlike. For sometime, when the ambiguite of the hebrewe word or phrase may
importe any other sense, then the common translation has, in such places as
overthrow their heresies, they alter the text at their pleasure: sometime they
for sake both the hebrew and the greek according with the latin translation,
without any ambiguite at all. As in some few places for example of many, we
will now declare unto you.

In the psalm 118. the common translation reads Inclinaui cor meum ad
faceindas iustificationes tuas in aeternum propter retributionem, that is, I
have applied mine heart to fulfill thy statutes for ever, for the reward. Our
english tra^slations printed in the year. 1549. 1551. 1552. 1162. all with one
accord have altered the later part of the sentence: and instead of these
words, For ever for the reward, they turn it, allwaie, even unto the end.
This text of holy scripture they have corrupted for the maintenance of their
lewd liberty by only faith, and defacing of al reward for good works. And
upon what ground trow ye, have they uttered this false translation? forsothe
upon the ambiguite off the hebrewe text, which reads: (...). for here their
peufelowe Sebastian Munster has turned (...) in finem, Even unto the end. And
of him they have learned to correct the text of holy scripture. What then? was
the old translation allwaies before used, false and corrupted? Was it contrary
and repugnant to the hebrew original? No truly. But here it fares with our
protestants as our Savior noted of the blind Pharisees. Matthew. 15.
Caecus caecu^ ducit, and ambo in foueam cadunt. The blind leads the blind
and both fall in to the dike. They follow Munster, and their notes of Geneua
set forth by Robert Steven, both blinded with self will and malice against
the common translation of the church. For allthough the word, (...) do
signify sometime Calcaneus a hele, or hinder part off a thing (and the^
otherwise pointed then it is in this text of the psalm.) so that metaphorically
it may signify, the e^de, yet properly it signifies reward as Pagnin in his
dictionary notes, and as it is here pointed can signify no other thing. The
proper signification hereof in an other psalm most manifestly appears. Where
we read. (...), Psalm. 18.
In custodiendis illis retributio multa. In keeping of them (the laws and
statutes of God) is; great reward. And therefore the greek of the, 72. elders
have translated the place of the, 118. psalm (...) that is, for ever for
reward: and S. Hierom (then whom no writer in the latin Church has been more
skillful and perfect in the hebrew tongue) turns it proper eternam
retributionem for everlasting reward, keeping the propriety of the word (...)
truly expressed in the common latin translation. But our protestants have
either ignorantly or malitiousely forsaken the propriete of the hebrew word,
the greek interpretation of the, 72. elders, the learned translation of S.
Hierom, and the common latin text in all Christendom alwaie received, to follow
ignorant Munster, and the corrupted notes off Geneua. This is lo the word of
God which our protestants pretend only to embrace. This is the pure text which
they force the unlearned to read. But let us now consider some other places,
and see how ghospellike our ghospellers have behaved them selves.

In the, 9. chapter of the ecclesiastes, the common latin translation reads
thus. Sunt iusti atque sapientes: and opera eorum in manu dei. Et tamen non
scit homo vtrum amore an odio dignus sit. that is. there are just and wise
men: and their works are in the hand of god. But man knows not whether he
deserve to be loved or hated. The heretics of our times among other their
heresies teach an assured certainte of grace by only faith. This place because
(according to the saying of S. Paul, Philip. 2.
bidding us in metu and tremore operari salutem nostram, to work our salvation
in fear and tremble, and of S. Peter writing. satagite vt per bona opera
certam vestram vocationem faciatis, 2. Pet. 1.
that is, labor to make your vocation (in Christ) sure by good works) it
declares that all the doings of the just and upright man are in the hands of
god, and that no man knows whether he be in favor with God or no, teaching
us in all humilite and lowlines to repose our self upon God and his goodness,
not upon our own faith and confidence as the recheles protestants of our
unhappy time do, because I say this text overthrows this their heresy, they
have here, as in many other places, aduentered to alter the text of gods word
it self. And though in their alteration and departing from the received text,
these foxes tails be all tied and knitt together, yet in the new invention
and placing thereof they bear their heads far a sonder. For in the
translations printed in the years, 1549. and, 1551. thus they read. The
righteous, the wise, yea and their works also are in the hand of God. And
there is no man that knows either the love or the hate of the thing that he
has before him. In the translations of the year, 1552. and, 1562. thus they,
read. The righteous and the wise, yea and their servant also are in the
hands of god. there is no man that knows either love or hate, but all
things are before them.

As neither of these two translations agree with the hebrew, greek, and latin,
so do they both vary from the judgment of all the learned interpretours off
this place. first whereas the former translation reads. There is no man that
knows the love or the hate of the thing that he has before him: this lo
varieth from the hebrew, the graeke and the latin not only commonly used, but
that which we find in S. Hierom, in Symmachus and in Pagnin, yea and in
Munster him self. The hebrew reads. (...). the greek has. (...). S. Hierom
turns after the hebrew, word for word. Et quidem charitatem and quidem
odium non est cognoscens homo: omnia in facie eorum. that is. Both love and
hatred man knows not. all things are before him. The interpretation of
Symmachus alleged by S. Hierom follows the same sense and meaning. Pagnin
likewise and Munster, even as ye see the later english translations printed in
the year, 1552. and, 1562. does also follow. well then: the former translation
varieng from all these texts and authors alleged, is the later now perfect and
sound? In this part of the sentence it has well corrected the former, and
followed metely the hebrew etc. But in the other part where they read, Yea and
their servants also are in the hands of God: they walk wide of the truth.
and have forsaken therein all the learned hebricians both awncient and of these
days: to follow their dutche doctor Munster, who only has so translated it.
wherein they declare their great ignorance, (to charge them now no farther)
especially this translation being later, and as it should seem more corrected.
for the hebrew word (...) having the point camets under (...) can not signify
( servant) but opera, works, as Io^anes Mercerus the kings Reader in Paris,
a man excelling any other of this time (being no hebrew borne) in the knowleadg
of that tongue, in his public lessons noted. Whose authorite I have not
doubted to allege in this place, both because for his lerning I reverence him
having a long time ben his scholar: and for that, his conscience our men can
not mistrust, being one of their own cote touching religion. Beside Pagnin in
his dictionary has noted out of Rab. Abraham in his com. and out of R. david
in lib. rad. that the Radix (...) having (...) after him (as he has in this
place (...) in manu, in the hand of god) can never signify to serve, but to
work. The greek also has turned that word (...): S. Hierom, Symmachus, and
Pagnin, opera, works. Munster therefore and his ape our later english
tra^slations have declared here their ignorance, and given good warning to the
learned worthily to mistrust their judgment in other places.

But here perhaps you will demand, how the common latin agrees with the
hebrew and greek. We awnswer according to the judgment of the best learned and
most expert in the hebrewe tongue, that the latin translation has expressed
the right sense and meaning of the hebrew text, though it has not followed
precisely the very words. One S. Hierom instead of many shall counterpaise
the fond and perverted interpretation of Mu^ster, and our protestants his
scholars. His interpretation upon this place is this, Hic sensus est, Etiam in
hoc dedi cor meum, and scire volui quos Deus diligeret, quos Deus odisset, and
inueni iustorum quidem opera in manu Dei esse: et tamen vtrum amentur a Deo an
non, nunc eos scire non posse, etc. This is the meaning (says S. Hierom), this
also I labored to know whom God loved, and whom God hated: and I found that
the righteous were in the hand of God. But yet that now (in this life) they
could not know whether they were loved of God or no, etc. Thus far S.
Hierom. Whom for his lerning and knowleadge in the propriete off this tongue,
for his approved virtue, and great antiquite we may boldly prefer before
these vpstert smatterers of our days.

Neither is it any vnwonte thing in the common translation to follow the sense
of the hebrew, leaving the words: as in diverse places it is not unknown to
the learned. In the second psalm, where the hebrewe reads, Osculamini filium,
Kiss ye the Son, the common latin translation has turned it Apprehendite
disciplinam, Receive and embrace discipline, that is, refuse not the visitation
of the hand of God, etc: which to be the right and proper understanding of
that place, beside other authorites the judgment only off Ionathas Targu^ the
Chalday interpreter or paraphrastes writing before the coming of Christ, and
reuere^ced above all other interpretours of all the learned hebricians,
sufficiently co^uinceth. For that is his very interpretation upon this place.
whereby the ignorance and blindness of John Calvin railing upon this place
against the common translation, and charging it with ignorance of the hebrewe,
does evidently appear it self.

But to return to our english translations, as we have in these places
alleged, declared you their ignorance and itching folly, in following their
dutche doctor Munster (to speak nothing of their malice in departing from the
church, and presumptuousnes in altering at their pleasure the received text of
Gods word) so now we intend to show with what felicite they have followed
their blind presumptuous guide of Geneua John Calvin. For of these two
doctors and worthy fathers (after Luther) have our protestants learned to
corrupt the word of God by their false translations.

Calvin as he has of all other protestants uttered most detestable and
blasphemous doctrine, so far passing Luther and the protestants of
Wittenberg, that he accompteth the^ for papists, and calls them so in his
writings, so was he principally enemy to the blessed Sacrament of the altar,
the most precious jewel and dearest treasure that Christendom has on earth.
Such places therefore of holy Scripture as partly prophesied, partly expressed
the verite of this dread full Sacrifice, he has other perverted by heretical
and new inverted expositio^s, or corrupted by false and wro^ ge tra^slations.
In the 9. chapter of the proverbs of Salomo^ where it is said of Christ in
the person of Wisedo^ She has offered up her sacrifices, she has mingled her
wine, and prepared her table, is contained a clear prophecy of this blessed
Sacrament, by the judgment of the learned fathers, Ibidem.
S. Hiero^. Lib. 2. epist. 3.
S. Cypria^. Lib. 17. cap. 20 de cinit. Dei.
Augustine. and Homil. 5. in pasch^.
Eus^bius Emissemus: as also the words of the text do necessarely import. Now
Calvin in his french tra^slatio^ printed at Geneua and at Lyo^s by the heirs
of John Michel turns it thus. Ila tue ses victuailles, il a verse son vin:
that is She has killed her victuals, powered out her wine, and prepared her
table. And this is the very translation also of our english Bible printed in
the years. 1549. 1551. 1552. and 1562. But both the tra^slatio^s of our Bible
and of Calvin (herein their Master) are other them selves much deceived, or do
maliciously deceive other. For the latin, the greek, and the hebrew all with
one accord read after the first english translation aleaged by us. The hebrew
has (...): the greek reads thus: (...). The latin has, Prouer. 9.
Immolauit victimassuas, miscuit vinum suum, etc. Now I appeal to all the
learned in these tongues whether the words of these textes answer not word
for word to the first translation brought by us. True it is that in the greek
text the word (...) is ambiguous, and may signify to mingle or to fill out.
But the hebrewe text admitting no such ambiguite, from whence the greek was
derived, nor the latin which followed the greek, that word must needs be taken
in such sense as the greek received of the hebrew, and as the latins followed in
the greek. Therefore the french translation of Calvin, and our english following
the same, is not the word of God, nor the text of holy scripture, but the
word of Calvin and his text. What may not heretics do, if they may set us
forth their word, for the word off God, their imaginations for holy
scripture, their poisonned heresies for sound faith? You have seen what
conscience our protestants make of it: and how many places of holy scripture
they have altered, perverted and corrupted for the maintenau^ce of their
pretended ghospel. I will not in words exaggerat this wicked presumption of
our protestants. The matter it self does, I trust, sufficiently speak it.
And I do not utterly despeare their amendment, when they shall see, and feel
their falsehood discovered and brought to light: seeing that in the later
translations they betray sometime their former iuggling: as in certain places
here noted by Staphylus of Luther it is evident. For although (as we said in
our preface) of all the places corrupted by Luther, and noted here by
Staphylus, there is but one readen in the common translations off our country,
yet that is to be understood of the later only, See the places above in the
leaf 71. and. 68*
printed in the years, 1552. and 1562. For in the former translations printed
in the years 1549. and 1551. the place of S. Paul in the 1. to Timothe the 4.
chapter, and the first to the Corinthians the 9. chapter are corrupted, even as
Luther had first taught them. but in their later editions they have made the
holy ghost to talk in an other language. Well. I beseech God to give the^
grace farther to see and to amend their own fautes, and other men spedely to
beware of them.

And truly what one man, yea what one college or university of learned men, may
take upon it to set forth any translation, Fontanus lib. 1. histo. eccles.
Lindanus de opt. genere interpr. scrip. cap. 8*
other then which allwaies has been received? Erasmus Roterodam a learned man
undoubtedly, but in this point over rash, was the first of our time that with
his new translation in latin of the new Testament, comptrolled the old.
Whereof he is worthily reprehended of diverse. And what followed? Soon after
Sebastian Castalion set forth an other translation in latin also. Vide
Tiaphylum in absolu^ae apolog. fol. 62.
Likewise Luther in the vulgar tongue: which only was commanded among the
protestants to be read and used in a public decree made at Lipsia. But an on
after the Zwinglians of Zurich published yet an other translation of the Bible.
And in the preface of it, they write plainly, that the congregation ought to
be bound to no certain translation, but that every man may turn the text of
holy Scripture according to his judgment. Thus we see by this bare text of
scripture left of Luther (more then Antichrist will leave, as they say) in the
liberte of so many and diverse translations, to be a very bare and weak stay
of men's consciences, and little better, then if with Antichrist we had no
Scripture at all.

For when a doubt arises in holy Scripture (as thousands do) what help have
we? The expositions of holy fathers, Counsels, and so forth, by the vardit of
Luther avails not. Translations be false, diverse, and uncertain. What then?
Forsothe there is yet one shifte more. Smidelinus co^tra apologiam Staphyli. c.
4. fa. 1.
Places of scripture, they say, must be conferred and laid together: so one
place shall give light to the other. Is this allwaies true? May this be a
general rule? Let us take for example some parcel of holy scripture. Great
controversies and sundry sects are now a days upon these few words of
Christ, Take, eat, this is my body. Matthew. 36
Luther and Zuinglius, Brentius, and Carolostadius, were at defiaunce one with
an other upon the true meaning thereoff. Luther excommunicateth all that
confess not the natural body with the bread to be there. In parna Confess.
de Caeua Do.
Zuinglius and Carolostadius will have the bread to be but a sign or toke^ of
the body The latin text is plain and evident for the real presence. The greek
likewise. Will they counsel the hebrewe gospel of S. Matthewe? If any
hebrewe text served their turn, were it never so barbarous or Rabbinicall,
they would not spare to set it out to the uttermost. Let us then see what that
text has. I mean not the barbarous text of Munster, nor the learned exercise
of Quinquarboreus, but that text, which being found in Italy among the
Jews, was of late years printed and set forth in Paris without points by
the diligence of Ioannes Mercerus. That text reads thus. (...). That is. Take
and eat this which is my body. Here the hebrew text though it have some one
word more then the latin and greek translation, yet it furdereth the meaning
of the Catholics, and fights directly against the Sacramentaries.

But let these interpretations by help of tongues pass. Let us see how by
conference of other places, this sentence may be lightened. Luther compares
these words to the saying of S. John, Joan. 1.
Verbum caro factum est. The word is made flesh. Zuinglius compares them with
an other place. Joan. 6.
Caro non prodest quicquam. The flesh profits nothing. Calvin varying from
Zuinglius (though both Sacramentaries) in his commentaries upon S. Matthew,
says. In Matthe. 26.
Corporis appellatio pani tribuitur, ea ratione qua Spiritum Sanctum Ioannes
columbam vocat. that is. The bread is called the body of Christ, as John
calls the holy ghost a pigeon. An other sacramentary comes yet, 1. Cor. 10.
and says those words are like to the saying of S. Paul, The rock was
Christ. Lo these men have conferred these words of Christ, This is my body,
with other places of Scripture. But have they now found out the truth which
is but one? are they agreed? Truly as cattes and dogs. Luther never wrote so
bitterly against us Catholics, as he does against the poor Sacramentaries of
Zurich. You have the grievous complaint of the brotherhood of Zurich in the
third part of this book, against Luther. In the leaf. 85.
Read the later words of the place: and see how charitably he uses them.
Calvin likewise calls VVestphalus a papist, In vltima admonitione. In his
institutions the, 17. chapter. In libr. de vbiquitate.
and finds fault with Bullinger, for teaching that to eat Christ and to
believe in Christ is all one, And Brentius would prove against all the swarm
of Sacramentaries that Christ is every where really, not only in the Sacrament.

What then? is there no means left us sure and certain to know and
understand the right meaning of holy Scripture by? Sothely if you take the
shameless broad way that Luther prescribes you, none at all. But if ye
acknowleadg and reverence the authorite of holy fathers, of awncient Counsels,
off the Catholic and universal Church of Christ, during continually from the
time of the blessed Apostles hitherto, there is a right sure and infallible
way to obtain your desire. In the preface of Staphylus to the Bishop of
Eystat, and the first part of this his Apology you have a very evident and
sensible declaration thereof. As you tender your soul health, and the
inestimable treasure of life everlasting, which without right belefe is not to
be had, read and peruse diligently the Author. And you shall, I trust in God,
find your felfe satisfied to the uttermost. For how think you? May you not
worthily suspect that ma^s cause that disableth so many witnesses, so learned,
so holy, as Luther does, condemning all holy Fathers and Councels? Is it not a
pride comparable to the loftines of Lucifer him self, to say, I will no
judgment, but I require obedience? Is it not a most impudent arrogance and a
detestable blasphemy, to say that al holy men of the Church are damned, if
they thought as they taught? Never sense the world stood, was there heretic
that uttered such horrible blasphemies, as the cursed mouth and pen of
Luther has done.

But sithen that Luther condemns the old fathers of the Church, is he now
the first father thereof? has he no predecessors in his doctrine? In the
Apology of England every where.
Surely the Lutheran protestants of our country cry so much upon the fathers,
that seeing their Master denies all fathers, it may much be maruailed where the
scholars have found them. After long study I have at the length espied, who
are their fathers. And for the instruction of my dear deceived countremen, I
will not let to declare them.

S. Paul to the Corinthians says. Though ye have thousands of masters in
Christ, yet not many fathers: For in Christ Jesus by the gospel I have
begotten you. 1. Cor. 4.
Such the^ are to be accounted the fathers of Christ's Church or of heretics,
The fathers of the Protestants.
whose doctrine the church of Christ follows, or heretics. Let us see then
whose doctrine Luther and his scholars, the protestants, do follow. First not
the doctrine of the Fathers of Christ's Church. For they pardie by the vardit
of Luther, are all damned if they thought, as they taught. Off what fathers
then has he and his scholars learned their doctrine? We shall see by the
particulars.

Luther in his Assertions against Pope Leo teaches, Artic. 36.
that fre will after the fall of man is but a bare title: and that man while he
does as much as lies in him, sins deadly. yea and that the just man in his
good work sins also deadly. And Melanchthon his scholar in his Annotations
upon S. Super cap. 8. fol. 52.
Paul to the Romans says, that the aduoutry of David is as properly the
work of God as the calling of Paul, blaming the gloss of such, as say that
God permits evil, but does none, for fond and foolish. In lib. de predest.
co^tra Caluini sycopha^tas.
So teaches also John Calvin, and Beza his derling. This heresy they learned of
Simon Magus, of Marcion, of the Manichees, of Petrus Abailhardus, all condemned
heretics, as in haer. 46
S. Augustine ad Quoduultdeum, in haer. 42
Epiphanius, in In recognit.
S. Clement of Rome, and in In epist.
S. Bernard it is to be seen. The allegations of these places we note only at
this present, without recital at large, to avoid prolixite.

Upon this doctrine it followed, that good works by the denial of fre will
being wiped away, faith must do the deed. Luther therefore and all his fellow
heretics teach the sufficiency of only faith to salvation. Yea and our
protestants are not ashamed to putt it in to their Creed song in their
churches. Romans 3.
And for this purpose where S. Paul writes. We think man to be justified by
faith without the works of the law, Luther translateth it thus. Staphylus in
prodr^me.
We think man to be justified by only faith. This old damnable and most
enormous heresy they have learned of old heretics above a thousand years
ago. for ye may not think these me^ lack antiquite in their doctrine. Their
Fathers herein are Eunomius and Aetius, August. her. 54. e^ lib. de fide et
operibus Epiphan. her. 76.
who taught likewise only faith to suffice, condemned therefore for heretics
off the Church, as S. Augustine and Epiphanius records.

Luther and all his scholars can not abide worshipping of Saints, calling such
service idolatry. Their fathers touching this doctrine, Lib. 21. ca. 21. contra
Faustu^ and lib. 8. cap. vlt. de Cluitat. Dei.
are Faustus Manicheus the heretic, and Maximus Madaureusis the pagan, finding
fault with the Christians for such devotion, as S. Augustine mencioneth.

They condemn praieng for the dead, they abhor the blessed Sacrifice of the
Mass celebrated for the dead. they would make men believe it was never used
before S. Gregory's time. how say we then? if the contrary opinion denieng
prayer for the dead were condemned for an heresy long before S. Gregory's
time, was not troweye such prayer allowed and practiced? S. Ad quoduultdeunt.
haer. 53.
Augustine reakoning up the heresies before his time, writes of the Aerians
thus. Aeriani ab Aerio, qui cum esset praesbyter, dolens quod episcopus no^
potuit ordinari in Arrianoru^ haeresim lapsus, propria quoque dogmata addidit
nonuulla: dicens orare vel offerre pro mortuis oblationem non oportere. that
is. The Aerians so called off Aerius, who being priest, for grief that he could
not be made a bishop, fell in to the heresy of the Arrians, and added also
certain doctrines of his own, saying, that men ought not to pray nor to offer
oblation for the dead. The like writes of him before S. Haer. 75.
Augustine, Epiphanius in his book of heresies.

It was preached of late before diverse of the honorable Nobilite of the Realm
in the solemn funeral of the late most Catholic Emperor Ferdinandus, that
prayer for the dead was both superfluous and superstitious. It was said a
third place such as purgatory is, could not be justified by Scripture. and that
the ancient fathers before the time of S. Gregory acknowledged no such place,
nor prayer for the dead in such sense as the Catholics now take it and use it.
This sermon also has been thought worthy to be printed and set forth to the
vewe of the whole world, being preached of a pretended prelat of the Realm
before so honorable an audience, and at such a solemn memorial or Obsequy. I
must here crave pardon gentle Reader of the, if I divert a little from my
principal purpose to examine that part off the sermon, as defends this old
heresy of Aerius. Neither may you M. Grindall be offended herewith, when you
shall understand it, as I wish you may, if a young scholar and puine student
in divinity adue^ter to encounter with you. The cause of the Catholic church
whom wickedly with the old heretic Aerius you blame and reprove, the
honorable Nobilite of the realm, which in that place presumptuousely you
abused, the unlearned audience of our dear countremen, which shamefully you
deceived, makes me both to break the order of my discourse, and not to fear
your person, whom authorite has more auaunced, then lerning or true religion
commended. 2. Cor. 13.
Non enim possumus aliquid aduersus veritatem, sed pro veritate. for we can not
do any thing against the truth, but for the truth.

And what is it good Sir, that moves you to disprove prayer for the dead?
First of all (say you) in the Scriptures we find no commandment to pray
for the souls of the dead, unless they will cite the place of the book off
Machabees. And then S. Hierom shall make the^ awnswer, who permits in deed
these books of Machabees to be read: but because they be not of the Canon of
the Scriptures, they be not (says S. Hierom) sufficient of them selves to
establish any doctrines in the Church of God. This is your first reason Master
Grindall, why we ought not to pray for the dead: and it contains two parts.
First that we have no commandment in Scripture to pray for the souls of the
dead, but the place of the Machabees: and then that the same place is not in
the Canon off the Scriptures. Commandment in Scripture to pray for the de
ad, beside the books of the Machabees.


As touching the first part, I awnswer it, that we are commanded of S. Paul,
Tenere traditiones quas accepimus sieve per sermonem sieve per epistolam, To keep
such traditions as we have received either by word or by writing. And S.
Chrisostom tells us that it is a tradition of the Apostles to pray for the
dead. these are his words. 2 Thessalonians. 2. Homil. 69 ad populum Antioch.
Non temere ab Apostolis haec sancita fuerunt vt in tremendis mysterijs
defunctorum agatur commemoratio: sciunt enim illis inde multum contingere
lucrum, vtilitatem multam. Quum enim totus constiterit populus, extensis
manibus sacerdotalis plenitudo, and treme^du^ proponatur sacrificiu^, quo modo
Deu^ no^ exorabimus pro his deprecantes? that is, These things, says
Chrisostom, were not without cause decreed of the Apostles that in the dreadful
mysteries we should remember the dead. For they do know that it shall much
avail them. For when all the people stands with their hands stretched
forth, and the number of priests, when the dreadful sacrifice is proposed,
how may it be but that we shall obtain of God, praiyng for the^? Now Sir. S.
Chrisosto^ tells us it is a decree of the Apostles to pray for the dead,
which decree being not expressed in scripture is called a tradition. And S.
Paul bids us keep such traditions. ergo we have commandment in Scripture
to pray for the dead beside the place of the Machabees. Iac. 5.


Again are we not commanded in scripture to pray one for an other? How
far does this commandment extend? does it not reach to all those whose
sins are remissible, who are in the state to have their sins forgeuen? What
then if scripture tell us that after this life some sins are forgeuen? Ought
we not then pray for our brethern departed this life, and burdned yet with
such sins? Let us harken what our Savior says in the gospel. Matthew. 12.
Whosoever, says our Savior, shall speak against the holy Ghost, it shall
not be forgeuen him neither in this world neither in the world to come. Other
sins then of less offense and importance, though they be not here forgiven,
yet in the world to come they may be pardoned and released. Apocal. 21.
What place that is, let your wisdom instruct us, M. Grindall. In hell you
know, nulla est rede^ptio, there is no redemption: and in to heaven nihil
coinquinatum intrabit: no defiled or spotted thing shall enter. How say we
then? Scripture commanding us to pray one for an other, and that prayer
extending to all such as are in the state to have their sins forgiven, such
a state also being proved by scripture to be in the world to come, which ca^
not be but of such as have departed this world, have we not again found in
scripture a commandment to pray for the dead, and departed souls of this
world beside the place of the Machabees?

What will you reply M. Grindall, or what can you object against these
arguments? The principle of S. Paul, bidding us to keep unwritten traditions, if
you limit and restrain it never so much, yet must you needs suffer it to
extend to such traditions, as the Apostles them selves left unto us. You will
not, I dare say, prescribe against the Apostles. And that the Apostles decreed
prayer to be done at the Mass time, for the dead, you hear Chrisostom say
and affirm. Will you discredit S. Chrisostom? Will you as Brentius your mate
said of Epiphanius (affirming that the Apostles In prolegoments.
had delivered and taught that the vow of virginite could not be broken)
Iudico eum tam bonum tam pium virum vt hac asseueratione non voluerit Ecclesiam
Domini scienter fallere, sed cum non fuerit admodum vicinus temporibus
Apostolorum, cogito multa ad eum publica sed incerta fama, nomine Apostolorum
relata esse, quae fortassis alijde Apostolis vt plausibi^ior a essent
co^finxerunt, so say also of Chrisostom, that you judge Chrisostom, in deed so
good and ^^tuous a man, that he would not wittingly beguile the church of God
with so stout an asseueration, and yet because he was not very nigh the
Apostles, you imagine that he might have heard many things by report, as from
the Apostles, which other perhaps to make such matters more plausible, had
fained that they came eue^ from the Apostles. Will you thus, I say, as your
mate Brentius did, delude the authorite of Chrisostom? Truly other shift you
have none. And the^ we may ask you, whether you were nerer to the Apostles and
more assured what doctrine they left behind them, then Chrisostom was. There
is no less, you know, then twelve hundred years between you and Chrisostom.
And yet not only Brentius, but your self, and all such as with you have
departed from the Catholic doctrine of Christ's church, do stoutely affirm
that the Apostles never prayed for the dead, nor never decreed any such matter.
In his institutions the 18. chapter.
Now then let the Christen Reader judge who is herein more to be trusted,
Chrisostom or you. and if one Chrisostom fuffise not, let S. Augustine, a most
trusty witness (by the verdit of John Calvin, whose judgment you will not, I
suppose, discredit) of antiquite in the doctrine of the church, come and
affirm as much. Who writing to Paulinus of praieng for the dead. says. Lib.
de cu^a pro mor ^uisgerenda cap. 5.
Allbeit it were not read in the old scriptures, yet the authorite off the
universal church is not small, which in this custom is evident. Where in the
prayer of the priests which are offered to our Lord God at his altar, the
commendation of the dead has his place. Io here S. Augustine calls it a
custom of the vniuersail church to pray for the dead at the altar of God.
Lib. de vnita^e Eccles.
And vninersall is that, by the meaning of S. Augustine which every where, and
at all times is and has been: which in all places even from the Apostles them
selves has been observed. Epiphanius also coufuting Aerius affirms it to be a
tradition of the Apostles to pray for the dead. Her. 75.
Thus much then of the first part of your first reason M. Grindall that we
have no commandment in Scripture to pray for the dead, but the place of the
Machabees.

Now Sir as touching the second part, that you say the same place of the
Machabees is not in the Canon of the Scriptures, I maruail not much hereat,
considering of what race your doctrine proceeds. For as you have learned of
the old heretic Aerius condemned above twelve hundred years past, The
custom of heretics to deny parts of Scripture.
to disprove prayer for the dead, so have you learned off a number of old
heretics, to deny for scripture such places as overthrow your heresy. For
even so did the Marcionistes allow but 9. of S. Paul's epistles, Tertul. li. 4
contra Marcionem. Contra Fan^^um Manich. vbique and in haer 46. ad Quo auult
Haeres. 76. Cap. 17.
whereas the church allows. 14. So did the Manichees take away the first
chapter of S. Mathewes gospel, and rejected almost all the old Testament,
as S. Augustine witnesses. So the Arrians disallowed the epistle of S. Paul to
the hebrews, as Theodoret records in the prohem of his commentary upon that
epistle. So Aetius also denied much of the old Testament, as Epiphanius
mencioneth of him. Briefly it was the manner of all heretics so to do, as
Tertullian in his prescriptio^s notes. Therefore as I said, I maruail the
less at your demeanor herein, considering that it is no new thing for an
heretic to deny scripture it self, when al other shifts fail. What the^ M.
Grindal? Must we prove unto you that the books of the Maechabees are in the
cano^ of the Scriptures? O the blessed days of our time, wherein not only all the articles almost of our belefe, but the Scriptures the^ selves also are
called in co^trouersy, and that of such me^, as bear the persons of Prelates
and rulers in Christ's church. What authorites the^ may be sufficient to prove
that those books are of the Cano^? You bring against us S. Hiero^. you tell us
he says that these books of Machabees be not sufficient of them selves to
establish any doctrines in the church of God. You quote us his preface upon the
boo kes of Solomon. Sir if you read the place again, and mark it well. you
shall find that he says this of the Proverbs of Salomo^ and of the
Ecclesiastes, not of the Machabees. though in deed he say in that place, that
they are not of the Canon. And this saying of S. Hiero^ in that place, I may
well expound by his words in an other place. In his preface upon these books
of the Machabees he says expressly, that they are not in the Cano^ of the
Jews, but of the church of Christ they are received inter diuina volumina,
among Gods books. But what if S. Hiero^ do not acknowledge them for Canonical
scripture? What if in reakoning off the Canonical Scripture, Vide Me^chiorem
canumia locis theolog. lib. 2.
he follow the Hebrews and Josephus especially, as learned men have noted of
him? What if in his time they were not with full authorite received? The whole
corpse off scripture was not, you know, at one push approved. It was long
doubted of the epistle to the Hebrews, off the second epistle of S Peter, of
S. John's Revelation, and yet afterward without doubt and controversy they were
in all Christendom received and reverenced for holy Scripture Shall it now be
lawful for every heretic to condemn such parcells of holy Scripture, as have been so many hundred years of all Christendom uniformly received because they
were ones doubted of? It is not sitting for the wisdom of a Prelat, it
stands not with the Charity of a Christen man, to renew such doubts, and to
make a schism in the church of God upon private presumption and affection.

But to match the authorite of S. Hierom, The Machabees proved to be of the
Canon.
(whom only you allege) and to knitt up this matter shortly, you shall see
what we can say for the books of the Machabees. The, 85. canons of the
Apostles, allowed for such by the general Council held at Constantinople in
T^ullo, Ca^. vltima.
in reakoning up the books of Canonical scripture, recite the three books of
the Machabees among them. The third Council of Carthage held not long after
the time that S. Hierom lived, Can. 47.
reakoneth them up also for Canonical Scripture. Lib. 6. E^y molog. c. 1.
Isidorus declares also that in his time they were undoubtedly approved for
holy Scripture. S. Augustine is most clear in this point: for not only in his
books de doctrina Christiana, Lib. 2. c. 5,
where of set purpose he reakoneth the whole corpse of the old and new
Testament, Lib. 18. cap. 30.
he places these books of the Machabees among them: but also in his books
de ciuitate dei he does constantly affirm, that they are approved of the
Church for holy Scripture. And behold a most clear testimony of S. Augustins
judgment herein. A sort of Donatistes called Circuncelliones, murdered and
s^ewe them selves commonly being persecuted for their heresy of the Catholics.
they defended this their devilish fury and rage, with the example of Razias who
slew him self as in the Machabees it appears. They builded upon this fact of
Razias, as upon an example of holy Scripture. What answered them here S.
Augustine? It had been truly a ready answer for him to say, those books are not
of the Canon off holy Scripture, and therefore the example of him can nothing
help you, if he had so thought in deed off these books. But S. Augustine
denies them not to be of the Canon, as you do M. Grindall, for the
maintenance of your heresy, though it had been much then for his vauntage, and
might soon so have stopped the heretics mouth, if he had thought it the duty
of a Catholic bishop, to flit from scripture when vauntage served. His
obedience to the Church off God, his lerning and virtue taught him to cleave
unto the Church in determining holy Scripture, and to seek other means to
awnswer heretics. Therefore notwithstanding the fact of Razias, who seems in
that book to be commended for killing him self, he acknowledges the books
for Canonical Scriptures, and teaches us also how such examples in holy
Scripture are to be read. These are his words. Landatus est itaque iste Razias
amator ciuitatis, vt valde been audiens, etc? Contra 2. Gaud. epist cap. 23.
I stam vero eius mortem mirabiliorem qua^ qua^ prudentiorem narrauit
quemadmodum facta esset, 1. These. 5.
non tanquam facienda esset scriptura laudauit. Nostrum est autem sicut
Apostolus admonet, omnia probare, quod bonum est tenere. Et hanc quidem
scripturam que appellatur Machabaeorum non habent Iudaei sicut legem, and
Prophetas and psalmos: sed recepta est ab Ecclesia non inutiliter, si sobrie
legatur vel audiatur. that is. Razias therefore was praised as one that tendered
the cite, and a man of a very good name etc. But his death more strange and
wonderful then wise and discret is declared of the scripture how it was done,
not commended as if it ought so to be done. But it is our part as the Apostle
teaches us, to prove and try all things and to hold that good is. And this
Scripture which is called the Machabees, the Jews in deed receive not, as the
law, the prophets, and the psalms. But it is received of the church not
unprofitably, if it be read and heard with discretion. Thus far S. Augustine.
In whose Words you see M. Grindall that not only he acknowledges the books
off the Machabees for Scripture, and that received off the Church, but also he
tells us how Razias is commended in these books: not (as you object in your
Sermon) because he killed him self, but because he was amator ciuitatis etc.

How think you? Cap. 16. Cap. 19. Cap. 38.
shall we condemn the books of the Judges because we read there of Sampson,
that he killed him self? or the Genesis because we read there of Lot that he
lay with his daughters, and off Judas that he compained (as he thought) with a
hoore by the high way? shall we not rather reverence the holy Scripture, and
say with S. Augustine, that Scripture declares these things how they were
done, not commending them as if they ought to be done?

As for your other sorry shift, where you guess that the place of the Machabees
comme^ding prayer for the dead, has been put to the text by some addition of
late years, because you say certain of the oldest copies in greek have no
mention thereof, I answer, to charge the Church with any such addition, having
no proof thereof, August. co^tra Faust. Manic^.
as yet you bring none, is the manner of old heretics, the Manichees by name,
who said also the genealogy in S. Matthew was added to his gospel by some
they knew not who. And as for greek copies that lack that place of praieng for
the dead, if you have seen any such M. Grindall, you may rather think they are
corrupted of some old or new Aerians, heretics, as you have heard, in that
point, then to doubt of the common received text of holy Scripture. else what
heresy is there that may not escape by this shift, if it may be lawful upon
variete off copies (which may rise of sundry causes, as well the printed as the
written) to call in doubt the authorite of holy scripture, which ought without
all doubt being ones universally authorized, assuredly and constantly be
believed and followed? And thus much to the reasons and arguments brought against
the books of Machabees.

You go forth M. Grindall and you say. Prayer for the dead ought to be used,
though no Scripture commanded it.
Secondarely we have no example in the Canonical Scripture of any invocation
for the dead: What then M. Grindall, if that were true as we have proved it
already false? will you therefore condemn the practice of the universal
Church, which is clear and evident in this point? What example in Canonical
scripture have you off celebrating the Sunday holy day? Will you therefore
drive men to their crafts that day with the Sabbataries, a sect of the
Anabaptists of our time? See the Apology in the leaf. 113.
what example of Canonical scripture have you of invocation of the holy Ghost?
Will you therefore (as that protestant Minister of Morauia preached) rather be
a papist, then believe in the holy Ghost? What example have you in Canonical
Scripture of baptising infants before the years of discretion? Will you
therefore with the Anabaptists baptize no children hereafter in the Realm,
and call us all to the font again? And did not think you the Anabaptiste
laugh in his sleue, when he heard you make your reasons in pulpit, upon lack
of example of Canonical scripture? Especially when you concluded afterward so
stoutely and solemnly. For most certain it is, if prayer for the dead had been
so necessary, as many now adays would have it seem, it had not lacked all
authorite and example of the Canonical Scriptures as it does. Surely M.
Grindal you can never speak better word for heretics, then granting them
this your proposition, that without example and authorite of Canonical
scripture nothing is to be admitted. And yet this one sentence is the ground
and foundation of all your new doctrine? For why? May not the Anabaptiste say
unto you, if you had him in consistory before you? Most certain it is my L.
if baptising of infants and babes were so necessary, as you would have it seem,
it had not lacked all authorite and example of the Canonical Scriptures, as it
does? And could you then repel him for so saying, seeing you preach it in
pulpit, and make it your strongest argument to overthrow prayer for the dead?
Again might not Nestorius have told Cyrillus and all the fathers of the
Ephesin Council, We have no example in the Canonical scripture, that Our Lady
is called the Mother of God. And certain it is, if it were so necessary a
matter to have her so called, and believed for such, as you will have it seem,
pronouncing me an heretic for denying it, and assembling your selves so from
al parts of the world for approving and defending it, it had not lacked all
authorite and example of Canonical Scriptures, as it does, might he not, I
say, thus have told them, as you M. Grindall do tell us, if that argument had been thought worth the telling? Might not Arrius have quarelled in like manner
with the fathers of the Nicen Council for the words, Consubstantiall and
ingenitus, might not Heluidius have used the like against S. Hierom for the
perpetual virginite of our Lady, and Nouatus with S. Cyprian for reconciling
of such as had abiured Christ? For none of al these had any authorite or
example in the Canonical Scriptures. And yet M. Grin dall the Anabaptists, the
Nestorians, the Arrians, the Nouatians, the Heluidians, be all condemned
heretics, even by your own judgment, I doubt not, though the Catholic
doctrine in confuting of al those heresies, lack all authorite and example of
the Canonical Scriptures. Where is then now become your argument against us
for lack of Scripture, supposing it were true, we did so lack? Where is now
that stout and great assertion, Most certain it is, and cae. But to overthrow
with one word this forte and shooteancker of all your pretended religion, tell
us I pray you, if without authorite and example of Canonical scri pture you
admit nothing, where find you in all the corpse of the Canonical Scripture from
the beginning of the Genesis to the end of S. John's Revelation, this very rule
and saying of yours, that If it were a necessary matter to pray for the dead,
it had not lacked all authorite and example of the Canonical Scriptures? Where
find you in Scriptures, that without Scripture nothing is to be admitted? will
you drive us for lack of holy scripture to pray no more for the dead, and
bind us to your own rule having the same lack also? Will you make a rule of
your self without Scripture, and will not admit the rules and laws of the
church, except they bring you example and authorite out of scripture? I trust
your wisdom considers how unreasonable the request is. and I doubt not but
the Christian reader will by this consideration, beware off such deceitful
persuasions, whereby great part of our faith in Christ Jesus may by the guile
of heretics be deluded.

To pass therefore to your other reasons, let us consider the remnant of your
talk. Thirdly (say you) where in the old Testament be Sacrifices and
expiations appointed for many and sundry things, whereoff some seemed small
offenses, yet was there never any Sacrifices appointed for any purgation or
expiation of the dead. What if there were any such sacrifices for the dead in
the old law, would you the^ now practice the^ M. Grindal, in your common
prayer and service of the church? Leuit. 4. 6. and 7.
If you would, why use you no sacrifice for the sins and trespasses of the
quick, as you see in the old law practiced abundantly? Exodus 12. and 16.
Leui. 16.
Why reject you the blessed Sacrifice of the Mass clearly figured and
foreshowed in the ceremonies of the old law? Why leave you the Realm without
any sacrifice at all, as well after the order of Melchisedech which, you
know, was proper to Christ, Psalm. 109. Heb. 7.
and should endure for ever among Christians, as after the order of Aaron
which was proper to the old law and should end, when the light off the
gospel appeared? If you would not use any Sacrifice for the dead, though in
the old law you had found example thereof (as it is most evident you
would not, no more then you use the other) why then find you that lack, and
refuse to offer sacrifices for the dead, because you have no example in the
old law? Do not wise men see your collusion and false play herein? I will
not spend time and paper in amplifying your guile. I leave it to the prudent
Reader to be considered. I come to your other reasons that I may ones return
to my principal purpose again. You say.

Now if they shall allege, that the ancient doctors make for them, first it
is to be said that men's writings alone are not sufficient in matters of faith
and Religion. I answer we have not only men's writings, but holy scripture even
beside the Machabees, as we have sufficiently proved. Again, make you so light
of men's writings? what are Calvin, Beza, Bale, and such other, whose writings
you reverence and read? are they not men also? why command you the priests
of England to read the Institutions of Calvin? why in your notes upon the
Bible refer you us to baudy Bale for the right understanding of it? In the
16. chap. off the Apocal^ and other where.
last of all why make you so vaunting a challenge against all the Catholics
that live, and offer to yield, if they can bring but one poor sentence of any
one doctor or Council against you? As touching the writings of men, we know
that Animalis homo non percipit ea que dei sunt, The vvritings off me^ in the
church to befolovved. 1. Cor. 2. Deute. 32.
the fleshly man knows not those things that appertain to God. Yet we are
bid in holy Scripture Interrog are patres nostros etc, To ask our fathers
and they will declare us, to enquire of our elders and they shall tell us. And
S. Peter says, Spiritu sa^cto inspirato locuti sunt sancti Dei homines: The
holy men of God have spoken as inspired with the holy Ghost. 2. Pet. 1.
Neither can we forgett that beside the prophets, the Evangelists, and the
Apostles, of whom we have received the holy write of Gods word, Ephesi. 4.
Christ has left to his Church also, Pastores and doctores, Pastors and
doctors, as me^ by whom the Scripture ought to be expounded and the church
directed. And according to these lessons of holy Scripture, heretics have been
confuted by men's writings without holy Scripture, as in the conflictes of In
lib. de decretis Nic. Co^.
Athanasius with the Arrians, of In apolo gi^ post 8 ^^athem
Cirillus with the Nestorians, of In ^ulia^. libro 2.
S Augustine with the Pelagians, of In lib. co^tra valentin.
Tertu^lian, and lib. 4. ca. 43.
Irenee with the Valentinians, of ep. 60. et 69.
S. Basil with Eunomius you may read and see M. Grindall if you have not yet
seen. But let us pass on and see what you say farther.

It can not be denied but from Gregory's time and. But the eldest writers and
doctors of the Church speak not at all of praying for the dead. well then M.
Grindall at one push you condemn all the Christian people of England that ever
has been, of error and superstion. For sense the time of S. Gregory only, you
know, we englishmen have had the faith of Christ, and of that blessed Pope we
received it. But let that pass: your stomach is good that ca^ digest so many
hundred years without grudge of conscience. The eldest writers say you,
speak not at all of praying for dead. Not at all M. Grindall? will you abide
by it? Before so honorable an auditory, at such a solemn funeral, in so open
and public a place, blushe you not at so loud a lie? I am sorry you did so
far forget your self. You spoke then in pulpit, and now you speak in print.
These two conditions require deliberatio^, truth, and honesty. And how shall I
prove you the contrary? where shall I begin? I showed you before out of S.
Augustine and Epiphanius that Aerius was condemned for an heretic, even for
this cause that he disallowed prayer and oblation for the dead. Be not Augustine
and Epiphanius elder then S. Gregory? Your fre^des Cario^ and Pantaleon can
tell you they are his auncetours, the one above a hundred, the other almost
two hundred years. But these words may seem to have escaped you (though if
they had in pulpit escaped, yet in print they might have been corrected) for
even in your words following, you remember your self better, and then you
run to your distinctions, and you say. If the ancient fathers when they
pray for the dead, mean of the dead, which are already in heaven and not else
where, then must we needs by their prayer understand either thanks giving, or
else take such petitions for the dead for figures of eloquence and exornation
of their style and oration, rather then necessary grounds of reason of any
doctrine.

How can you suppose M. Grindall any such meaning in the old fathers, The
meaning of the fathers praiyng for the dead, imagined by M. Grindall: vain and
foolish.
as though they were either of so little wisdom, as to pray for those that
neded no prayer, or of so small faith as to doubt of their rest and perfect
bliss which are already in heaven? Let us consider your manner of reasoning. It
is manifest say you, that those holy fathers meant nothing less then by
praying for the dead to establish purgatory or third place. This you suppose
as manifest, without any proof at all, which you ought well and substa^tially
to have proved. For hereupon depend your distinctions that follow. But how
better and trulyer say we M. Grindall, it is manifest that those holy fathers,
seeing they prayed for the dead, that they meant undoubtedly there was a
purgatory or third place? You suppose they prayed only for such as were already
in heaven, and herupon you make your distinctions. But as your supposition is a
point of sophistry called petitio principij, and beside all reason and truth,
so are your imagined distinctio^s vain and foolish. Will you have clear and
evident proufes that the fathers praiyng for the dead meaned nothing so, and
that your suppositio^ is void of all truth? Or will you be contented
hereafter that prayer for the dead be solemnised in your churches, if we prove
unto you, the practice of the eldest fathers to have been such? S. Denis you
reject for an awncient writer, because of the judgment of Erasmus. Let us give
you leave to reject him, whom the sixtgenerall council and second of Nice
alleges for awncient, even for Denis the Areopagita S. Paul's scholar. Whom
the^ may we allege to testify against you, of such authorite, that you will
be contented to rest upon him? Your old fre^d and Master Ihon Calvin calls
oftentimes S. Augustine in dogmatibus ecclesiae fidelissimum vetustatis
interpretem, the faith fullest reporter of antiquite in doctrines of the
church. Let us the^ see what S Augustine reports of praying for the dead and
of the meaning of the church therein. De. 8. Dulcitij quaest. quest. 2.
Awnswering to the questions of Dulcitius demanding among other things how
the souls departed were relieved by the prayers of the church, after long
debating the matter, he concludes in these words. Cum ergo sacrificia sieve
altaris sieve quaru^cu^que eleemosynaru^ pro baptisatis defunctis omnibus
offeruntur, pro valde bonis gratiaru^ actiones sunt, pro non valde malis
propitiationes sunt, pro valde malis etiam si nulla sunt adiumenta mortuorum,
qualescunque viuorum consolationes sunt. that is, Therefore when the sacrifices
either of the altar, or of any aulmes geuinge are offered for all Christen
folcke departed this life, for the perfect and very good they are thanks
geuinges, for mean evil, though they are no relief to the dead, they are
propitiatory: for the wicked and very evil, though they. etc. as in the next.
yet they are certain comfortes for the friends that live. Thus far S.
Augustine. In these words M. Grindall we learn the meaning of the fathers
prayng and offering sacrifices for the dead, not to be allwaies thanks geuings
or figures of eloquence, as you would have them mean, but to be the^ only
thanckes geuinges, when they are offered for such as have departed this world
in a perfect estate, and vprightnes of life. For other departing as sinners but
not extreme heinous, and wicked, they are, he says, Propitiationes,
propitiatory sacrifices, that is, such as purchase favor and mercy at Gods
hand. The third sort of men though Christened, yet being Valde mali, that is,
so evil that they die without true repentance, they avail not at al. We
know well M. Grindall your doctrine being builded upon only faith,
admits not these distinctions of the estates of men. But the Catholic
church which condemned your heresy of only faith in Eunomius and Aerius above
twelve hundred years past, as you heard before, acknowledges them and
teaches them. By the which distinctions also we learn the meaning of the
church praying and offering sacrifices for the dead.

As for the figures of eloquence Master Grindall, which you imagine the fathers
used praying for the dead, is a figure of your own called (...). and in latin
is called Mendacium, we english men term it, a lie. But you say, you can
show by examples that the fathers so meaned. Let us hear and consider what
they are. You say.

But I will make this matter more plain by an example or twain, and caete.
And then you bring the words of S. Ambrose affirming first, Theodosium frui
luce perpetua, tranquillitate diuturna, and pro ijs quae in hoc gessit corpore
muner ationis diuinae fructibus gratulari: to enoiye perpetual light: and
continual quietness, and for those things that he did in this body to
rejoice in the fruition of Gods reward: and yet afterward praying for him in
these words. Domine da requiem perfecto seruo tuo Theodosio, requiem quam
parasti sanctis tuis. Lord give rest to thy perfect servant Theodosius, the
reast, I mean, which thou have prepared for thy Saints. In the first words,
say you, he pronounces plainly that Theodosius was undoubtedly saved, and in
the later he prays for him, using a figure of eloquence and vehemence of
affection. Here ones again M. Grindall you turn the cat in to the pan, and
reason tout au rebours as the french proverb goes, even as you did before:
for as then you would overthrow prayer for the dead, because you supposed
there was no third place, whereas the third place must needs therefore be,
because the church prays for the dead, so now the praying off S. Ambrose
for Theodosius, you call a figure off eloquence and vehemency of affection,
but his words commending Theodosius you call a certain persuasion, and plain
pronouncing of his undoubted salvation: whereas in deed the words of S.
Ambrose commending Theodosius proceed of a vehement affection, and love
toward that Emperor (for how could he be assured in deed of his blessed
state, seemed he never so perfitt in his life, without some special revelation
from allmighty God, which yet M. Grindall, I dare say, you will not say he
had) but his prayer for the Emperor was the usual practice of the church,
used at all funerals in all ages sense Christen religion began.

Again these words of S. Ambrose pronouncing Theodosius to enjoy the
perpetual light and continual quietness and cae. may well be a figure of
eloquence of Amplification and exclamation, but the praying for him, tell us I
pray you M. Grindall, in what figure of Rhetorike you will put it.

Farther if that saying of S. Ambrose. Domin^ da requiem perfecto seruo tuo
Theodosio, and cae. Lord give rest to thy perfect servant Theodosius, and
cae. be a figure of eloquence, used in that solemn funeral of that mighty,
and virtuous Emperor Theodosius, how well might it have becomed you also M.
Grindal, occupying the place of a Bishop, as that blessed Doctor S. Ambrose
then was, and preaching at the funeral solemnite of that most high, mighty
and virtuous Emperor Ferdinandus: as he did of Theodosius, to have said also
Da requiem Domine perfecto seruo tuo Ferdinando, Lord give rest to thy perfect
servant Ferdinandus? Feared you, that if you had so said, you should have been thought to have prayed for Ferdinandus, and when S. Ambrose says so, will
you not have us think that he prayed for Theodosius? Might not you have used
it for a figure of eloquence and so have followed the manner of the old fathers,
as you would seem to do in all your doings, if that manner of speaking were but
a figure of eloquence, as you say it was no more.

Again what difference is it M. Grindall to say. Lord give reast to thy
servant, and to say, Lord have mercy upon the soul of thy servant? For to
the departed out of this world no other rest can be given but to his soul:
if his be so, why are they called papists, which use so to speak, and yet S.
Ambrose so speaking is no papist?

But what stand we so long hereuppon? I will ask one question, and so pass
to your allegation off Chrisostom. Faustina a virtuous woman lamented much the
death of her Sister. S. Ambrose writes unto her, Epist. 8.
and says. Non tam deplorandam quam prosequendam orationibus reor: nec
moestificandam lachrymis tuis, sed magis oblationibus animam eius Deo
commendandam arbitror. That is. My advise is, that you lament not your sister,
but pray for her, and commend rather her soul, to God with oblations, then
moan and morn it with tears. I ask here. Did S. Ambrose will Faustina to
leave her lamenting, and fall to figures of eloquence, and so to utter her
vehement affection to her sister? does your wisdom judge so Master Grindall?
Or do not rather all wise men see, how far from all wit and wisdom this
shift of youres is?

Well; though perhaps ye spoke but merely here, yet you have a sad testimony
out of Chrisosto^. For he offreth the sacrifice of the mass even for the
Pariarches, prophets, Apostles, yea and the blessed virgin also* what if he do
so M. Grindall? Mary say you, shall we now gather hereof that these are in
purgatory? It is to great an absurdite. I grant it is so. What then will you
gather hereof M. Grindall? This oblation therefore, say you, is only a thanks
giving to God for the Saints of God departed. Will you gather so M. Grindall?
that is to great an absurdite. Have ye not heard S. Augustine say, that the
sacrifice of the altar is for some a thanks giving, for other a propitiatio^?
This your co^clusio^ of only thanks giving in the oblatio^ of the church is
much like to your concluding of only faith. The scripture says Iustus ex fide
viuit, Abacu^. 2.
the just man lives by his faith. LO say you, faith only justifies; and you
forget it is written again, Romans 1.
Factores legis iustificabu^tur, the perfourmers of the law shall beiustified,
whereby it is clearly proved that good works must co^curre with faith. Even so
now you forgett that although Chrisostom here offer up the oblation for the
Saints, as in thanks giving to God for the^, yet that in the same liturgy in
the next petition after he makes an other especial prayer for the dead,
saying. Sancti Iohannis Baptistae, prophetae and praecursoris, sanctoru^ and
nominatissimoru^ Apostoloru^ and sancti huius cuius memoria^ agimus, and omniu^
sanctoru^ supplicationibus, visita nos deus, and memor esto o^niu^ in domino
dormientiu^ in spe resurrectionis vitae aeternae, a^ requie^ presta eis, etc.
that is. By the supplicatio^s of S. John baptist, the prophet, and precursor of
the holy and most renouned Apostles, and of this Saint whose memory we keep
this day, visit us good Lord, and remember al those that sleep in our Lord
in the hope of resurrection to life everlasting and grant them rest and cae.
this lo M. Grindall you forget, and conclude very absurdely that the oblation
is only a thanks giving. But let us now again have a recours to S. Augustine,
the faith fullest reporter of antiquite in the doctrines of the Church, by the
verdit of Calvin him self, and let us learn of him how, and in what sense the
Church used the memory of saints in the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, and
whether that sacrifice be only a thanks giving, as you conclude M. Grindal.
These are the words of that learned and holy father.

Habet ecclesiastica disciplina, De verbis Apost. sermon 17.
quod fideles nouerunt, cum martyrs eo loco recitantur ad altar dei, vbi non
pro ipsis oretur, pro caeteris autem commemoratis defunctis oretur. Iniuria est
enim pro Martyr orare, cuius nos debemus orationibus commendari, that is. The
doctrine of the Church has, which the faithful do know, when the Martyrs are
in that place reakoned up at the altar of God, where they are not prayed for,
but the other souls departed there reakoned up are prayed for. For it is an
injury to pray for a Martyr by whose prayers we ought to be our selves
commended. In these words of S. Augustine we learn M. Grindall that the martyrs
are not prayed for, though they be named at the altar, as you heard in
Chrisostom the Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles named. We learn that other
souls departed, not Martyrs, are prayed for. Last of al we learn that the
martyrs pray for us, we pray not for them. Where is now your imagined
s^pposition M. Grindall, that the eldest fathers praiyng for the dead meaned
such dead as were already in heaven? S. Austen denies that the church prays
for the^, he says the doctrine of the church has otherwise taught, and that
the faithful know it. If you be of the church M. Grindall, if you be of such a
faith as was in S. Augustins time, you know that Martyrs were not prayed for:
you know that other souls departed were prayed for. Last of all you know that
the Martyrs prayed for us. But you deny al these matters, you mock and scoff
at it, and therefore you are not instructed in the doctrine of the church, you
are not of such faith as was in S. Augustins time. To conclude, you hold with
the heretic Aerius condemned for an heretic a hundred years before S.
Augustine flourished. And yet you were not afeared to abuse the honorable
Nobilite assisting at that Funeral sole^nite, nor ashamed to preach in pulpit
for the very pure word of God, an old cursed heresy. I beseech God to lighte^
the hearts of our most gracious Souuerain and Lady the Queen's Majesty, and of
the most honorable Nobilite of her realm, that they may see, avoid and
exterminat this ca^cred vermin of heresy, corrupting no less the temporal
wealth and prosperous estate of our dear country, then the spiritual hope of
our salvation, and al right faith in Christ Jesus. I have au^swered al such
reasons as you have brought in your sermon M. Grindal against prayer for the
dead. I have done in part my duty to the church of God, as my vocation
required. I have declared my good will to my dear country, as nature and just
indignation moved me^. I have done this but slightly and shortly, and yet I
trust sufficiently, having first e^tred the printing of this book, before I
understood of the sermon, and yet desirous to say somewhat, rather then to
suffer a preached and printed heresy vnco^ptrolled, or the truth untold. I
desire the catholic reader, to take this short digression in good part, and I
wish the protestant rather to mark the weight, then the copy of that I have
said. Let us then now return to the old condemned here sies, renewed by
Luther, and followed of al protestants of our unhappy time.

Luther with all his scholars contemn fasting days ordained by the church,
abusing Christen liberte for a cloak of their fleshly fantasy. They have
herein right ancient Fathers, the Manichees, as Epi. 93. cap. 4.
Leo witnesses. Aerius as Haer. 75.
Ephiphanius, and Lib. 30. cap. 3. co^tra Faustu^ Man.
S. Augustine write, and Eustathius, as the In praefat.
Council of Gangra above thirten hundred years past records.

They wedde freres and Nu^nes, Luther leading the dance of that wanton trace,
with Kater. Bore, Lib. 1. c. 7. de peccat. merit^s and remissione.
and break vows of chastity without scruple of conscience, following the
stepps of their father Iouinian, condemned therefore for an heretic as S.
Augustine records.

They throw down Martyrs towmes, scoff at the devout visiting of the^,
inueigh and rail against pilgrimage, holy relics, and places of devotion.
Nothing truly was in the primitive church more frequent then going on
pilgrimage: Homil. 5. in ^. Job. ^ome. 1.
in so much that Chrisostom cries out in one place. If I were of a strong
body and without ecclesiastical charge, I would not refuse so long a
pilgrimage, as to go see only the chains wherewith, and the prison wherein
Paull was bound. If I had lived then to have seen those holy hands bound
for our Lords sake, I would have put my very eyes on them, and continually
have kissed them. Thus speaks Chrisostom an ancient and learned father of the
Catholic church, and Bishopp of the great cite of Constantinople, and
thinks it no superstition to preach it to the people: for these words he
spoke in pulpit. But what fathers have the protestants in their contrary
opinion. Of whom learned they to mock, and scoff at such devotions? Of right
worthy masters, I warrant you. First (beside the Pagans of whom The odoret
makes mention) of Iulia^ the Apostata, as you may see in the works of
Cyrillus against him: Lib. 8. d^ curat. Grae car. affectionum. lib. 10. cap.
20* Lib. 3. de imag. Cu^^.
the^ of Eustathius as the Counsel of Gangra reports. After these of
Vigilantius, whom S. Hierom refuteth: and above seven hundred years paste off
one Claudius, against whom Jonas Bishop off Orleans in France wrote.

Luther, and all that follow his banner, be mortal enemies to the images of
Christ and off all Saints. Their holy fathers be old cursed heretics the
Marcionistes, the Manichees, Aerius, Felicianus, and all the wicked sect of
Iconomachi, as it is at large mentioned in the sixte general Council, and
second of Nicea. Nicephorus also records off one Xenaias, Lib. 6. ca. 27.
who held this heresy under Anastasius the Emperor about a thousand years
past.

Luther taught first in our time, In li. de cap tiuitate Babylonica.
that holy Orders is no Sacrament, that every Christen man, and woman is a
priest. And all the zealous Lutherans to this day believe and teach the same,
though Melanchthon and many of the Civil Lutherans be departed from that
fond and absurd opinion. It is also a current doctrine in the pulpits in
certain dyoceses of our country. De haeresibus hae. 27. Epiph. hae. 79. et 49.
The fathers of this heresy were Pepuziani, as S. Augustine makes mention, and
Collyridiani, as Epiphanius writes.

It is common to all Lutherans and protestants of our time to abhor the name
and profession of a Monk. This was the manner also of the Donatistes, and of
the Circumcelliones. What means said these heretics, this name of Monks?
In Psalm. 132.
Unto whom S. Augustine awnswereth, How much better may we say, what means
this name off Circumcelliones? Against such writes Chrisostom whole
treatises, entituling them, To^o. 5.
Against the dispraisers of monastical life.

The Lutherans and present protestants of our days protest that they have
departed from the sea of Rome, and other Catholic Bishops for the evil and
wicked life of the Popes and prelates in Christ's church. The Apology of
England pretends the same excuse. Co^tra Cres. lib. 3. ca. 6. Contra 2.
epist. Caud. li. 2. ca. 9. contra Donat. li. 6. c. 4. contra Parm. lib. 2. cap.
5.
But was this their own imagination, think you, and devise? No truly. It was
the very ground of that cursed sect of the Donatistes. And their fathers
herein are Cresconius, Gaudentius, Parmenianus, and other. As S. Augustine
writing against them eftsoons declares.

It is the doctrine of Luther in his book de Christiana liberate, and diverse
other places, that faith ought to be free, and no man constrained thereunto. In
our country also, when the sword was against them, Frithe and his fellows
cried for that liberty, though now they cease not continually to cry for the
contrary. It was the old accustomed manner of al heretics, Epi. 20 4. et
co^tra Petilianu^ saepe.
especially of the Donatistes as S. Augustine in sundry places witnesses.

Likewise before these heresies were favored off Princes and authorized of
higher powers, the riches and possessions of Bishops was a great eye sore to
all Lutherans and protestants. Now they can like well the pomp of Prelates,
being placed them selves in such preferment. But their former grief was an
heretical grudge of the old heretics Vadiani as S. Augustine writes, Aug.
haer. 50. Epiph haer. 70.
or Audiani as Epiphanius calls them.

What is now more common in the mouth of all protestants, then that nothing
ought to be added to the commaundeme^ts of God? For by this short blow they
wipe away all constitutions and ordinances of the Church. They learned this
argument off Julian the Apostata, who used it against the devotions off the
Christians, Lib. 9. co^tra Julian.
as in Cyrillus it appears.

Protestants will be counted martirs being cut of by the secular sword, that
their cancred doctrine infect not the sound sheep of Christ's flock. Great
crakes are made, and great works set forth of their stiff standing to the
stake and glorious embrasing of the fire. None do this more stoutely then the
Anabaptists, whom yet the greater part of protestants detest and abhor for
heinous heretics. But not only these new heretics, but much more the old as
the Marcionistes, and especially the Circumcelliones excelled in this pretended
patience, ^d Quodu^^^deum haer. 69.
and proud persuasion of Martyrdom. See S. Augustine, and the ecclesiastical
history of Nicephorus libro, 4. capite 23. S. Cipria^ also. lib de simplicitate
praelatorum.

Luther at the diet held at Augspurg in the year. 1521. being much entreated
of diverse (tendering) him for the authorite of Friderik duke of Saxony) to leave
all singularites and not to reject so rashely ancient Councels of Christ's
Church, Fon^^nus lib. 2.
he awnswered, he disproued none except the council of Constance, and thereto
he said he was moved with an invincible reason and most assured argument* that
was, because that council had condemned John Huss, affirming that the church
of Christ consisted only of such as were predestined and elected. And in this
opinion he would live and die. All the brood of that fond friar sing the same
song. Beza and his companions at the late Synod of Poissy in France, were
stiff in that opinion alo^g time, but at the length were driven from it.
whereupon they changed the tenor of their supplication, calling them selves
Les esleus de Dieu, the chosen of God. This wild persuasion is almost
received of all protestants. It is the very heresy of the Pelagians condemned
therefore in S. Augustins time, Here Is. ^^
as in his book De heresibus he recites at large.

What a great corrupter of holy Scripture Luther has been, in the second part
of this Apology it is at large declared by Fridericus Staphylus. How our
protestants also have followed his example therein, and how manifoldly they have
perverted the very text of holy Scripture, I have in part touched, to give good
warning in the rest. Who list to see how this has been the gui^e and manner of
old heretics, Let him read Tertullian in his praescriptions, Cap. 17. Capit.
vlti. Lib. 1. c. 1.
S. Ambrose upon the epistle of S. Paul to Titus, Iraeneus also, and S.
Augustine writing against Adimantus the manichee cap. 12. 14. and 16.

What should I proceed farther in declaring how Luther and his scholars follow
the race of old heretics, both in their doctrine and in the manner and
setting forth thereof? The very refusal of the ancient fathers in Christ's
church pronounced (as you have heard) so impudently of Luther, and followed with
no less impudence of his scholars, is no new point, but even the very shift of
their forefathers cursed heretics of old time. This appears well by the
disputations of Athanasius with Arrius, Coram Probo Indice. Socrates. li. 5.
cap. 10. Action 1. Epist. 28. lib. 1. co^tra Eu^^mitu^.
by the counsel of Sisinnius to the Emperor Theodosius: by the manner of
Eutyches in the Council of Chalcedon, by the writings of Cirillus touching
Nestorius, and of S. Basil concerning Eunonius. For all these learned fathers
could not draw those unruly heretics to the rule of the ancient and holy
writers in the Church of Christ. They appealed to only Scripture and would be
tried only by that, as Luther would, and the protestants of our time will,
though many heretics received not the whole corpse of Scripture, but such
parts only as liked them, rejecting all that made against them, even as now a
days also Luther and his scholars reject the books of Machabees, and the
epistle of S. James, the one because it prays for the dead, the other because
it writes directly against their only faith. Of what heretics they learned
this shift, we have already declared defending the Machabees against M.
Grindall.

Advise your selves now (good Christen readers) whether you think the surer
way to salvation, to for low the steps of these fathers of Luther and all
new ghospellers, all condemned heretics above a thousand years past, or
embrace the doctrine of the holy Fathers and learned approved writers in
Christ's church. May we not well judge and assuredly persuade our selves that
the very sprit of heresy spoke in Luther and speaks in all new ghospellers,
preaching and defending old condemned heresies? Why have protestants departed
from the old Catholic religion, and embraced the new doctrine of Luther? they
say forsothe because all things are reformed after the pattern and practice
of the primitive Church. What mean they trow ye herein? truly I do not
otherwise think, but that a great number, the unlearned and deceived sort,
take them to mean well, and that all is reduced to the doctrine and religion
approved and generally received in the primitive church for the espace of five
or six hundred years after Christ. But undoubtedly the learned and ringleaders
of this new fangled faith, if they mean truly, must needs mean the renewing
of such heresies, as were in that time condemned. For thus and no otherwise do
they follow doctrine practiced in that time: that is of heretics, as in a
number of particular assertions you have seen.

But to return to Luther, Luther ^ ued an he retike.
what point of a right heretic is there, that has not in him ben verified? He
condemns the Church and holy Fathers, appointed of the holy Ghost to
gouuerne and direct Anabaptists, the Sacrame^taries, the S we^ck feldia^s, and
diverse other, as it appears clearly by the Table of his Offspring in the third
part of this Apology. Finally because See the^efe. 29. and following
what the fruits of this ma^s doctrine have be^, it is in this Apology of
Staphylus in diverse places expressly set forth, Also the leaf. 127. b. etc.
as well for the great decay of devotion and spiritual vertus, as for the
temporal waste and misery, that of this heresy has ensued. Of his terrible
arrogance and pride (the most evident token of a wilful heretiken In the
leaf. 84. b. and 85.
as partly by their words in the third part of this book alleged it may
well appear. Never baude in bridwell, nor scolde in the stews so railed, as
this man does, being comptrolled of his doctrine. His awnswers against all
such as wrote against him, abundantly declare the same. For hereupon the
civil Lutherans do swerve in many points from such doctrine, as he was wont
to utter in the vehemence of sprit (as they call it) and in his cholere. He
wrote him self an Evangelist off Manicheus called him self an Apostle of
Christ: as S. Augustine witnesses. In epist. ad Argentoratenses. Contra epi.
fundame^ti. cap. 6.
And off his scholars he is called the third Helias, as in the story of his
death we read written by Melanchthon, Jonas and Pomeranus. Even as Manicheus
was of his scolers called the holy ghost, Ibidem.
and Montanus of his sect also. He writes, that he is sure and certain he
has his doctrine eue^ as Aetius said also of him self. Vide Rofensem contra
cap. Baby. Epiphanius in haer. 76.
I know God most clearly and even as perfitly as I know my self. The cause
and original of Luthers departure from the church was ambition, as all the
ecclesiastical histories Fo^tanus, Rouerus, and other do testify. to wit,
because he was not preferred to the publishing of the famous pardon of the
croisad. The same ambition made Aerius an heretic, because Eustathius was
preferred before him in a certain bishoprike as Epiphanius records. Haer. 75.
The like writes Tertullian of Vale^tinus, Lib. contra Vale^tinianos.
and Nicephorus reports of Montanus lib. 4, cap. 2. of Nouatus libro 6.
capite 3. of Florinus. libro 4. capite 20. Lib. 4. cap. 7.
and of Thebutes one of the first heretics in the Apostles time, the very
same cause of falling in to heresy. And truly even as the beginning and course
of Luthers doctrine has thouroughely resembled the manner of old heretics, so
his end was not much unlike, to wit, a soden and unprovided death. For being
merry and making great feste over night, he was found dead in the morning.
Sleidanns and Fontanus lib. 17.
especially of Arrius, though as by that the Arrians were nothing moved, so
the Lutherans of this make small account.

And this much of Luther the father protestant of our time, as touching the
points of his doctrine: where you see both what a godly ground he laid, and
how in the course and issue there of, he has showed him self to be but a
scholar of old heretics, as he has been the Master of many new. For this
man worse then any gutter or sink, which receaueth only the filthe that is
brought unto it, bredeth none, not only took old heresies of other, but added
also thereu^to some of his own: breding of his own filthy brain as foul
fond doctrine as any foolish heretic before him. And of these his proper
inuentio^s one of the maddest is, that he teaches the bread remaining bread,
to be the very natural body of Christ in the Sacrament. The pro^ heresy off
Luther touching the Sacrament has wrought his confusion.
Which has seemed such a fond doctrine eue^ to the ghospellers the^ selves
his scholars and brethern, that the far greater part off them has in
consideration of this point chefely, not doubted to condemn him for an
archeheretike* as you may see by the words of the brethern of Zurich in the
third part of this book. Fol. 68.
And by reason of this absurd doctrine not only at the first Zuinglius,
Oecolampadius and Calvin drew with them diverse countres from the unite of
Luthers gospel, but also the Lutherans them selves having many years served
the idol Luther, daily fail and shrink from him, cleaving to the cursed
Sacramentaries, proceeding allwaies in mischef, and increasing with time their
heresies and abominations.

About this time two year, Surius in epist. nuncupatoria praefixa Prodro^^c.
Brema a great cite of Saxony, and one of the first that had received the
light of Luthers ghospel, having continued in the foresaid doctrine of Luther
about forty years, as zealous and upright Lutherans, now after great strife
and contention among them selves, has openly condemned the same, and are
become Caluinistes. Likewise in Augspurg where the famous Confession of the
Lutherans was made, ^^fred to the Emperor, and confirmed by all the Nobilite
of the protestants, yet now there are mo Caluinistes then Lutherans, mo that
disprove that Confession and doctrine of Luther, the^ that approve it. How
other cou^tres also have flitted from Luther, having many years served hi^,
you have in the third part of this book declared. Pagi. 121.


Our country also being at the first change, all Lutheran, is now become for
the most part Caluiniste, and Lasconicall, as not only our doings at home
declare, but other countres abroad have noted of us. Peter Martyr at his first
coming to Oxforde was a right Luthera^ in the matter of the Sacrament, as he
declared him self not only in private communication, but also in his open
lessons, where inueighing at a time against the argument of the Sacrame^taries,
Christ is in heaven, ergo he is not here in the Sacrament, he cried out,
Profecto est nodus Diaboli, that is, Sothely this is a shifte of the devil him
self. He was wont also at his first coming to Oxford to complain, Anglos
nimiu^ vergere ad Zuinglianismum that we english men inclined to much to the
Zwinglians. Afterward as all the world knows, he condemned Luther, and became
him self, a Zuinglia^. For he had learned an other lesson in the Court.

Philip Melanchthon him self, the very darling of Luther and father of the
Confessionistes, in his later days became a very Sacramentary: as his familiar
letters to the Count Palatin of Rhene printed at Heidelberg in the year 1560.
has declared to all the world. Thus the proper heresy of Martin Luther, that
he him self by the spirit of the new ghospel had invented in the despite of
the Pope (for so he protests him self in a letter of his to the brethern of
Strasburg) was at the first much misliked, and is now almost euerywhere
utterly abhorred.

Ioachimus VVestphalus, the only stay and pillar of this Lutheran doctrine
co^plaineth him self hereof. For thus he writes. In lib. Rectafides de c^^a
^^i.
No false doctrine is so far spredde, none with so much labor and hypocrisy
defended, non has more beguiled the world, then this false doctrine of the
blessed Sacrament* meaning the heresy of the Sacramentaries. And Nicolaus
Amsdorfsius an other zealous Lutheran writes thus. The Anabaptists and the
Sacrame^taries do blind and deceive Germany with their pretended holiness even
as the monks before blinded the whole world.

And this verily has happened on Luther and his fellows not without the just
judgment of God. For whereas upon dispiteous malice he labored by his new
doctrines to overthrow the church of Rome, (where it has pleased our Savior
to place his vicar here on earth) as in diverse of his writings it appears,
he has wrought his oune destruction, and shame. for though in very deed
through the pernicious persuasions of that wedded friar, certain places and
corners of Christendom have swarned from the Catholic church, and authorite
of that Apostolic see in these north parts of the world, yet it has
thousands fold more ben enlarged in the west parts, and the new lands
found out by Spanyardes and Portugalles in these late years, as the letters
off the Jesuits directed from those countres in to these parts do evidently
and miraculousely declare. And truly eue^ so befell it, at what time Greece and
the east church departing from the head and unite, of Christ's church, gave
them selves to sundry schisms and heresies. Vide throuologiam Alexandri
Sculte^i.
For then sprange up the faith in Germany, Pole, Dennemarke, Swethen, Norwaie
and other north Countres. For thus from the east to the north, and from the
north to the west of the faith of Christ passes, donec, Luc, 21.
as Christ says, impleantur tempora gentium. Vntell the times of the gentiles
be acomplished. Our Lord grant that it pass not from us by heresy and
schism, as it passed from the greeks, and from Afrike the southe part of the
world. Greece and Afrike ^oste the fa^^ithe by he resy.
For both these people through schisms (especially of the Arrians and their
ofspringe) lost the faith of Christ, as the histories declare unto us. But to
return to our matter, the church of Rome, the sea Apostolic, that Luther
labored by heresy to overthrow, stands yet in his full force and interest,
notwithstanding the miserable loss of a number in our country and otherwhere.
Truly Luther him self comes very short of the count he made being rejected
now allmoste every where. The Catholic also may learn to avoid and shun
hereby all manner of protestants what so ever name or sect they be of,
proceeding all of this head, being all the corrupted issue of this unclean
spring, and the branches of this root.

Much more might be said of other proper heresies of this archeheretike Martin
Luther. But this one of his may serve for a taste to the zealous Lutherans of
our country, that they glory not so much of this their Elias, and fiffte
evangelist, as though all that ever he wrote or said were the gospel it
self. But now to the civil Lutherans.

The civil Lutherans are those, Of the civil Lutherans.
which not with such zele and rigor as the other, force men praecisely to
every doctrine and article of Luthers gospel, but are content ciuilly to
conform them selves to better judgment, and take so much of their Master,
Luther, as they shall think good and convenient. But these men by this their
ciuilite and philosophical moderation have conformed them selves to so many
frames and facions, as there be among them Superinte^dents and Ministres. As
for example in the administration of the Sacraments, through their ciuilite,
see in what maruailous unite their churches be directed. At Wittenberg where
the sea of these civil protestants is, four Sacraments are approved and
administered: to wit. baptim, the Supper of our Lord, Holy Orders, and
Penance or absolution. At Lipsia three only take place, holy orders being wiped
away. At Magdeburg but two are allowed: even as among the Caluinistes of our
country. And hereof jesting ones merely a learned man though with a heavy heart
being demanded why in the Luthera^s Churches were not 7. Staphylus in Def.
contra Mela^ch thon.
Sacraments, yes forso the quod he: there are 7. and two mo. For at Wittenberg
four, at Lipsia three, at Magdeburg are two: which in all make nine. And
these three cytes be little distant one from the other.

The father and head of these civil Lutherans is Philip Melanchthon: who so
long dalied in this kind of perilous ciuilite, that at the length, as you
have heard before, he fell to the pestilent heresy of the Sacramentaries. And
see I pray you how light, variable, and inconstant a person this man was.

In the year. 1540. Staphylus in prodromo.
he wrote bitterly against the Pope defending Luther miserably, as if he had been his slave or bondma^. In the year. 1548. Vide Lipse^ Interim and literas
ad Carolvvitzium. ite^que postremas a^ Com. Palatinum.
heenclined again to the Pope and embraced the Interim that was made in
Germany, that is, the delaie and deliberation vntel a general Council were
called. But of late even a little before his death in the year. 1559. writing
to the Count Palatin he condemned the proper doctrine of his M. Luther, and
joined him self to Calvin and the Sacramentaries.

This graund Captain was the inuentour or rather scribe and writer of that
famous Confession made at Augspurg in the year. 1530. But how he altered and
corrected the same, not only in his Apology in the next year after, but at
diverse other times, sometime for better, sometime for worse, I report me to
the diverse editions of that book. For who so conferreth the first edition and
certain next to the first, with the last, he shall clearly see what settled
judgment, and constant or grounded knowledge was in that man. But after the
death of Luther, how miserably it has been mangled, Nicolaus Gallus a zealous
and rigorous Luthera^ in open writing bitterly co^plaineth. For thus he
reports in general, after the reticall of certain particulars. Here then, In
libell^. Vox Vigilu^^ fol. d. 3.
says he, all Christen men may easily perceive, if they will yield to reason,
and consider and confer together their doctrines, how all those positions
which our adversaries in the foresaid articles after the death of Luther do
teach against us blasphemousely, do in deed in the very ground touch Luther
him self and his doctrine, though we bear the name thereof: yea and beside
the person of Luther, they belong properly to the true Confession of Augspurg,
which in the mean while is of them changed, perverted, and racked in to
express contrary meaning. And this false foisting and iuggling of the civil
Lutherans (though truly very uncivil in this point) is not only evident in the
confession of Augspurg the ground of all their new broched gospel, but also
in the works of their Master, Martin Luther, which they change and correct
daily at their pleasure. For Amsdorfius, Illyricus, and Georgius Rorarius, al
zealous Lutherans in open treatises and books entitled de deprauatoribus
librorum Lutheri, Vide epist. Hosis al Henri. duce^ Brun^uicen sem.
of the deprauers of Luthers books, charge the masters of Wittenberg but
Melanchtho^ especially, of certain hundreds of places changed, left out and
corrupted by the^, and that (as they say) against the ghospel, Luc. 6.
quia non est discipulus super magistrum the scholar is not above his master.

Again as touching the inconstancy of Melanchthon, those which have read and
seen his common places, can not be ignorant thereof: which as often as he set
forth, so often he altered and corrected. In the number of Sacraments what
diverse mind he has been of, and upon what occasion he so changed his mind,
See in the I^a. c. 45. and 72.
it is very well declared of Staphylus in the first and in the second parts
of this book. In one other pointeas touching justification, and the works of
man, I will show you how contrary he has been to him self, changing his
mind with every wether. At the first to gratify Luther his master, denieng
fre will in man, In his annotations upon S. Paul to the Romans thus he
writes. In cap. 8. fol. 53.
We say that God does not only suffer his creatures to do and work, but
him self does and works all things properly. as we confess the calling of
S. Paul was the proper work of God, so we confess all other are the proper
works off God, whether they be indifferent actions, as to eat, to drink and
such like, or evil works, as the aduoutry of David, the cruelty of Manlius
putting to death his own Son. And a little after. We need not therefore make
that gross gloss commonly used, to say that God suffers evil and does not
work evil and caetera. Thus far Melanchthon: where you see he agrees with
the bond fre will off Luther, and the wicked destyne off Calvin. And in this
mind he continewed long and many years. But at the length in a conference
held at Worms, Staphylus in absoluta apologia. fo. 126.
he was persuaded by doctor Eckius to reject this abominable doctrine. And at
the next edition off his common places he declared it to all the world. Cap.
de humanis viri bus and lib. arbitrio.
The zealous and rigorous Lutherans could not abide this his recantation,
especially Nicolaus Gallus and the Superintendents of higher Saxony. Gallus in
librosuo. Wechterhan. Theologi Saxonici in libellis supplicatorijs ad conuentu^
Nu^burgensem.
But accused him in open writings of apostasy. Farther when diverse universities,
especially those of Lipsia had subscribed to this later doctrine of Melanchthon
directly repugning to Luthers gospel, Nicolaus Gallus a rigorous Lutheran and
zealous ghospeller in his book entitled, An awnswer to the book of the
Professors of Wittenberg, examineth this their doctrine, and charge them
with Pelagians heresy taken out of Erasmus writings. Also in an other little
treatise of his entitled, Vox vigilum, by certain antitheses and conferences
off Luthers sayings, he sets forth to the world the incosta^t and
chaungeable mind of this Archeprotestant.

Who list to know more of this man, and how he with all his civil sect is
misliked of the zealous Lutherans, let him read the books of Heshusius and
Hieronimus Menczelius de pastoribus (not that I wish such books to be read,
but that who will needs read them, may note this in them) where they
greuousely complain of the licentious liberte of these civil and conformable
protestants Melanchthon, and his accomplices. He may read also the book of
Johannes Spangenbergius set forth in the year. 1561. which bears this
little: A true declaration of the benefits bestowed especially upon Germany
from God, by D. Martin Luther of holy memory, and of the great unkindness of
diverse toward so great benefits received. In the which book he inueigheth
not so much against us Catholics, which have allwaies worthily abhorred the
cursed heresies of that lewd friar, as against the civil Lutherans, and
disordrely extrauagants, which have swarued from the holy word of that fifte
euan geliste. Which they have done in such sort, that now none bears less
rule, then he that first sturred all this storm, and was the inuenter of this
terrible tragedy.

At what time the general council of Trent, by the consent of all the estates
of the Empire, Sleidam^s lib. 6. et 11. Histor.
and other Christen princes was gathered together, and be gonne, the
protestants of germany, especially the Lutherans, having their saufconduit, and
provision after the largest and surest manner granted, Melanchthon drew back,
and retracted the time by all means possible. Whereupon first he came to the
Emperor Ponta^us Rouerus li. 5. reru^ memora. page 410.
Charles soiourning at that time at Inspruch few days journey from Trent, and
made great suite both for him self, and his fellows, that they might not
present them selves at the council. For him self he alleged first his aage:
then that he was no divine, Non theol^ gum sed philotheol^ gum.
but a lover and favorer of divinity. And yet this is that Master of
Witte^berg, successor in the schismatic see of Luther, father of that
famous Confession of Augspurg, which not only the Lutherans, but the
Caluinistes them selves do reverence no less then the four ghospells. But
this awnswer no thing satisfing the Emperor, he pretended he would shortly
repair to the council, returned to Wittenberg, and from thence took his
journey thitherwarde. but at Norimberg he stayed, Erasmus Reinhold. i^ epist.
sua ad amicu^.
vntell his prince the duke Mauritius concluded the council with fire and
sword.

And this charitable devise of Melanchthon agrees well with other his doings:
as that he wrote, yea and put forth in prent a little book to the people of
Bohem wherein he sturreth them against their lawful Prince, and counsels
them to rebel against their Souuerain: In libel. ad Bohemoset Si^ sios.
whereupon ensued civil war and calamitous seditions in that country: as
also that he and other masters of Witte^berg in the year. 1548. at what time
the duke of Saxony and the Lantgraue off hesse rebelled, wrote openly against
the Emperor Charles and all his adherents. Illyricus in informati^ne sua de
quibusdam a^itulis.
Whereof Mathias Illyricus a zealous Lutheran charge them, and reprocheth it
unto them bitterly, in a certain little book which he made, called An
Information upon certain articles, etc.

This Philip Melanchthon father of these civil protestants, as in wavering and
often changing his doctrine, he was a right civil Lutheran, so corrupting the
general Confession of his brethern, and the works of his Master, he showed him
self very uncivil truly, but a right heretic I assure you. For this was the
practice of awncient heretics to fly and flitt from their saiengs, being
pressed with the learned Catholics. And truly of this famous Confession of
Augspurg and of Luthers works daily thus altered and corrected, The civil
Luthera^s resemble old heretics.
I would say corrupted, of these civil Lutherans, we may worthily pronounce
as Tertullian does of the Marcionistes, who had made also a gospel of their
own, whereof he says, Quotidie reformant illud, Lib. 4. aduersus Mar^ionem.
prout a nobis quotidie reuincuntur, aut erubescunt de magistro suo vbique
traducto. They frame it a new daily, as they are of us daily convinced, or be
ashamed of their master all where is reprouued. And see, I pray you, if these
civil reformers of Luthers ghospel represent not unto us the face and
behavior of old heretics, of whom Tertullia^ in an other place thus
speaks. In praescriptionibus.
Mentior si non etiam a regulis suis etc. Let me be accounted a liar, if they
vary not from their own rules, while every one tuneth at his pleasure the
song he learned, even as he that first taught it, did set it at his pleasure.
The Valentinians were as bold as Valentinus their Master, the Marcionistes
made at their pleasure a new faith, as their Master Marcion had done before
them. Brefely al heresies well considered shall be found to vary from their
first heads in diverse points. Thus far Tertullia^. which how true it is in
the scholars of Martin Luther the archeheretike of our time, these civil
Melanchthonistes declare unto us: and that to the great grief of the zealous
Lutherans, as the sundry writings of Gallus, Amsdorfius, Illyricus famous
Superintende^ts of that sect do evidently show.

This practice of Melanchthons inconstancy flitting from his own doctrine, the
ecclesiastical histories witness unto us to have been the manner of old
heretics. Off Thedotus, Asclepiodotus, Lib. 4. cap. 21.
Hermophilus and Apollonides thus writes Nicephorus. Quilibet etiam illoru^
castigatione^ proprioru^ scriptoru^ edid^^: idque varianantium and dissidentium
inter se exemplarium discordantia indicat, that is. Tho Synods of the Arria^s
resemble the confession of Augspurg and metinges of protestants. Nicephorus
lib. 9. c. 5.
Each one of them did set forth their own writings corrected and altered,
which the diversity of the sundry and contrary copies does declare.

The great variaunce and inconstancy of the Arrians no less then of the
Luthera^s, appears well by the ecclesiastical histories also. First in their
private Synod at Antioche, having concluded and agreed upon a certain confession
of their belefe, shortly after they put forth an other much different from the
first. Not long after three of these Arrian bishops being Li. 9. c. 7.
conue^ted before Consta^s in the west and being demanded a declaration of
their belefe, they uttered it in a far other sort, then they had decreed at
Antioche. Li. 9. c. 13.
In Nicephorus their diverse confessions are set out at large. F^we years
after the Arria^s meting together at Sirmium, Rouer. lib. 3. pa. 172.
published three sundry and diverse confessions of their belefe al contrary to
the former. Let us now see whether our Lutherans have not practiced in like
manner.

In the general meting of the protestants at Ausgpurg before the Emperor
Charles in the year 1530, First those of Strasbourg, Costniz and Memming
offered up a confession of their faith as far different from the Saxons as
they were from the Catholics.

Then in the Confession of the Saxons devised by Melanchtho^ in the description
of Christ's church, Staphylus in absolutae Apologia.
the word Catholic is clean left out. The next year after Melanchthon
writing his Apology put the word Catholic in: but with a strange and false
exposition added unto it, even such as the Donatistes made unto S. Augustine,
August. ep. 48. ad Vincentium.
when they said, that the word Catholic was not meant of the societe and
communion of the whole world, but in observing of al gods commandments, and
all his sacraments.

Thirdly the protestants of Lunneburg and of the Roue^s li. 5. page 439.
Lantgraues dominions were offended with the Saxons in the publishing of their
confession, because they yielded to much to the Catholics in the question of
ecclesiastical jurisdiction and authorite off bishops: whereupon Melanchthon
was expressly commanded to yield no farther.

Fourthly whereas in that confession presented to the Emperor in the year
1530. in the tenth article we read this, They teach that the true body and
blood of Christ is truly present in the Supper under the forms of bread and
wine, the next year after the same Confession being printed at Wittenberg,
they frame the same article after an other sort, and write. That the body and
blood of Christ are truly present and distribued to those which receive in the
supper: By the which addition they exclude all reservation of the blessed
Sacrament, for the sick, and tie Christ to the pleasure of the receivers. But
in the year 1540. wading further in the moire of heresy they make that same
article yet fouler. For this they say. That with the bread and the wine the
body and blood of Christ is truly exhibited to those which receive in the
Lords Supper. Thus lo at the length this monster of Luther was brought to
perfection, I mean his proper heresy about the Sacrament. But what? Does all
the brotherhood of that Confession stay here? Nay the zealous Lutherans deny
it and complain of it. Vide Roue ru^. lib. 5. page 439.
For from this their Confession Brentius and the Masters of Witte^berg in their
conference held at Worms in the year 1557. have departed openly, In publica
Confessione pure doctrine, etc.
yelding to the heresies of Zuinglius and Osiander, directly repugning to that
Confession, as Nicolaus Amsdorffius a zealous Lutheran charge them in open
writing. His words you may read in the beginning of the third part of this
book. Thus you may see how the sprit of Melanchthon and his fellows agree
with the doings and behavior of old heretics.

And although Philip Melanchthon, Fontanus li. 11. Melanchthon malicious and
cruel.
at the first visitation of the protestants in Germany was praised for his
modesty and meakenes, yet afterward as he grew in heresy, so did he in malice
and cruelty. The thrusting in of Osia^der in to Prussia procured by him
displacing Morlinus by force, his open writing against the visitatio^ of
Bauaria, his bitter and dispiteous inuectiues against the learned, virtuous,
and Noble man Fridericus Staphylus, has sufficiently declared to all the
world, that as good men eunt de virtute in virtutem, increase and go forward
in virtue, so he proceeded in mischefe and malice of heart, Vide Staphylum in
absoluta apologia. pagina 242.
as the property of heretics has allwaies ben. Illyri^us and other zealous
Lutherans ceased not daily while he lived to entwit this unto him. And I have
here recited only for the intent (God is my witness) that his credit hereafter
may be the less among such, as by his heretical ciuilite have been deceived
and trained into heresies from the unite of Christ's church, where only
salvation is to be hoped for. For that is the body off Christ as S. Paul
says and the pillar of truth. Coloss. 1.
and as S. Augustine writes. De vnita e^cclesiae cap. 4.
Whosoever believes that Christ Jesus is come in to flesh, and in the same
flesh has suffered for us, has risen again, and is ascended up, and that he
is the son of God, God with God, and one with the father, by whom al was made:
and yet do so dissent from his body, which is the church, that they do not
communicate with all the whole corpse of Christendom, certain it is that they
are not in the Catholic church. What Christen man therefore is there so
destitut of the grace of God, and all good reason, that will hazard his soul
to follow that guide, which woteth not him self which way to walcke, or to
learn a new belefe contrary to all Christendom beside that now is, and ever
has been, of such a Master as knows not him felfe, what he may say, and
was even to his death but a lerner and scholar? For then only began he to
profess him self a Caluiniste and a Sacramentary, having all his life time
before taught and deceived a number after the trade of Luther. And how can his
scholars be assured that the^ he found out the truth? We will therefore now
come to Calvin him self to whom Melanchthon has yielded, and see whether he
be a ghospeller worthy to be followed against the uniform consent of Christ's
church.

Perusing diligently the doctrine of John Calvin in his Institutions, Of Calvin
and his doctrine.
commentaries upon the holy Scripture, his resolutions upon the Sacraments,
and other his works, touching his doctrine of the bles^ed Sacrament of the
altar, which he allwaies terms the Supper off the Lord, and recording with
my self how the greatest swaye of the lost flock of our time, forsaking Christ
the heavenly shepearde and his vicar here on earth, have followed more that
wolf of Geneua John Calvin, then the foxes of Germany, Luther, Melanchthon,
Osiander, and other, truly I both lamented much the loss of so many Christian
souls straiyng after so perilous a guide, and maruailed yet more at the
blindness of our wicked time, that would be so soon lead out of the high way
of Christ's church (wherein only salvation is to be sought) and follow the
trade of such a doctor or Master, which like a mad will full man being out
off the way, runs up and down among the bushes and briers this way and
that way, seking of purpose any way, rather then he will take the common
high beaten way, that all Christen people have walked in. I say this good
Readers, not as enemy to the man (whom thanked be God I never saw nor heard)
but as finding him such in his writings as I have said, and intending by Gods
help to set him so before your eyes that you shall also say and judge no
less of him then I do. unless you are (which God forbid) of the number of
those obstinat Jews, who seying would not see, and hearing would not hear. I
trust rather in allmighty God, that no man has so pinned his soul to Caluins
doctrine, but that he will yield to the express word off holy Scripture, and
evident reason, when he shall see the same doctrine to fight directly against
them both.

And first we will consider how is doctrine fights against evident reason,
which by two manner of ways we will declare you. First by certain of his
propositions importing absurd consequences and impossibilites, next by clear
and most evident contradictions of his own saiengs: whereby not only the
faithful Catholic, but the deceived protestant may evidently judge and
pronounce, that this man's doctrine can not be of god, and his holy Spirit,
which is the Spirit of truth and unite, but is of the devil and his wicked
sprit, which is the sprit of falsehood and dissension. For truth is allwaies
uniform and agreeable with it self. And as the philosopher says of virtue, so
in truth there is but one way to hitt the mark: a man may shoot aside
diverse ways. Wherefote two contrary sayings may both be false and untrue:
but truth can never stand with a contrary. Who then teaches contradiction, as
he must needs teach some falsehood, so possibly he may teach al false, and
beside the mark: even as it happens with all heretics, that leave the
common high way of their forefathers, and seek out by paths of their own
inuentio^s, wherein the faster they run, the farther they straye, and the
harder they find the right way again.

Secondarely as touching the repugnaunce that is in Caluins doctrine against
the express word off God, I will also by two manner of ways declare. First by
a number of his propositions and assertions contrary to the express words of
Christ and his Apostles, next by the auouching of such doctrine as concurreth
with old heresies condemned above a thousand years past, in that state and
time off Christ his church, as Calvin him self does in sundry places
(especially upon the prophets, and in his epistle to Sadoletus) allow and
reverence. We recited you before diverse old carren heresies that Luther
stirred up, but Calvin beside all those has nouseled yet a little farther, and
dug deper then Luther did. A similitu de.
For even as a a bestly sow coming in to a fair garden set with diverse sweet
flowers and pleasant herbs, if in some corner thereof she epsy a donghell,
or heap of rotten wedes, or other filthe cast aside, will strait nousell
there and tomble her self in the filth and carren thereof, not meddling with
the sweet flowers or pleasant herbs: so truly these bestly heretics of our
time, especially Luther and Calvin living in the church of Christ compared in
scripture to the garden of the bridegrom, Cant. 5.
wherein are both sweet herbs of heavenly doctrine, and most delectable
flowers of virtuous living, lacking not yet her spots and wrincles of evil
life, which she allows never, but tolerateth of necessite and lamenteth,
having also not in her, but by her, and cast out of her, a number of old
condemned heresies, they like bestly swine nether embrace the virtuous living
that she uses, but raises at the infirmities which she is constrained to
suffer, nether follow the steps of her heavenly discipline and upright belefe,
but getting them to the donghell, nou^ell them selves in the old condemned
heresies, and ve^t them abroad to the world.

But now to come to the matter it self, let us considre first the absurd
doctrine, that he leaves us in his writings. I entend not to discourse upon
all the points of his heretical doctrine: but for a taste off the rest, I
will examine his assertions about the blessed Sacrament of the altar, because
this article does most nearest touch the glory and majesty off our Savior,
being the most precious jewel, that he left unto his church. After also we will
note diverse heresies, both old and new, in his doctrine upon the sacrament of
baptim. Last of all a few notable contradictions about his doctrine of the
fre will of man. But now to the first point.

Calvin in his Institutions in his treatise of the Lords Supper, Cap. 18. In
stitutionu^ impress. A^ gentorati. an. 1545.
teaching how by his imagination we receive Christ in the Sacrament, after
long dalying as though he would grant a real receiving off Christ his body,
at the length he concludes in these words. Corporis communionem Spiritus sui
virtute Christus in nos diffundit. that is. Christ pooreth down upon us the
communion of his body by the virtue of his Spirit. Which is as much to say:
Christ communicates unto us his body by the virtue of his Spirit. This is in
few words the communion of Calvin and all the Sacramentarie^^ denieng that we
eat in deed the body of Christ otherwise then by faith. Now let us see what
absurdites follow thereof.

First no scripture has this doctrine. That we receive not a communion of
Christ his body poored upon us in the Sacrament* Cap. 8. de fide.
And how absurd a thing it is to follow any doctrine without Scripture Calvin
him him self tells us. In his institutions thus he writes. I ought not to
seem to any man co^tentious, that I stay so earnestly upon this point that it
is not lawful for the Church to make any new doctrine, that is to teach or
deliver for truth any more then the Lord has reveled by his word. For wise
men do see how great a danger that is, if so much authorite were granted to
men. They see what a window is opened to the mockes and scoffs of wicked men,
if we sayie that to be taken for truth among Christians which men shall think
good. Let now then any scholar of Calvin show in all Scripture where it is
written, that Christ by the virtue of his spirit pooreth down upon us the
communion off his body. For Calvin as he writes in his Harmony upon the
ghospelles, thinks it an absurd thing to say that the flesh of Christ it
self should be derived unto us. But he says the communion of Christ his
flesh is derived unto us (which he interprets to be, a quikening virtue out of
Christ his flesh) correcting Christ promising us his very flesh. In comment.
in. 1. Cor. 11.
Now (as I said) of the deriuation of any such communion of Christ's flesh no
Scripture mencioneth. But it is a sophistical suttelty of Caluins imagination
not reveled in any place by Gods word. This is lo then one dangerous absurdite
by the confession off Calvin him self: onles perhaps he have some privilege
more then the whole Church has. For in the Church he allows nothing
beside the express word off God.

Again let us consider what is the communion of Christ his body poored down
upon us. It is says Calvin, vis quaedam viuifica ex Christi carne in nos
diffusa, that is, In comment. ut. 1. Cor. 11.
a certain quickening power poored down upon us out of the flesh of Christ.
Christ says in S. John, that his flesh is meat in deed, and bids us eat
his flesh and drink his blood, Joan. 6.
and in the other three Evangelists he says Eat: this is my body: Lut. 32.
but Calvin says, we eat the bread, Mar. 14.
and have a certain quickening power out of the flesh, Matthew. 26.
not (as in his Harmony he says) the flesh it self, and that we have a
communion of his body poored down upon us, which is not to eat the body, as
Christ badde us. This lo is not only beside scriture but expressly against holy
Scripture.

Thirdly where Christ bids us eat his flesh, saying, Joan. 6.
he that eats my flesh abides in me, he teaches an action on our part,
touching the receiving of Christ: But where Calvin tells us, that a communion
of Christ his body is derived unto us, he puts no action on our part,
touching the receiving off Christ, but only touching the eating off the bread.
For we eat not the body of Christ by Caluins doctrine: but a communion of the
same body is derived upon us, and poored down upon us, we suffering such
deriuation and infusion. Therefore between the saying of our Savior and the
doctrine of Calvin, there is as much difference as between doing and suffering,
action and passion.

Fourthly what meaned Calvin to imagine this communion of Christ his body to be
derived unto us, and not the body it self? He might have much peuish meaning
beside, which perhaps they only know, that are admitted to the secrets of his
mysteries, as the Electi of the Maniches were. But this one thing I am sure he
meaned, that because communion imports a number of communicants, and one
alone ca^ not communicate (which is the cause, why these sacramentaries require
allwaies a number at their table) therefore he would have no receiving of
Christ without a communion, nor any other receiving of Christ, then by having
a communion of him derived unto us. Let us suppose then (as it may easily
happen) that among the number of all that communicate, one only be a true and
upright beleuer, and all the rest evil and miscreants, as among so diverse
sects of protestants none other are to be found, but such as for fear or
otherwise sit down amongst them, being no protestants in deed, though in
this point no good catholics neither. But let us suppose that at the table of
the protestants, one only were faithful and duly prepared thereunto. The
communion of Calvin destro^eth the neces^ite of co^munica^^s.
It will follow that because according to the doctrine of Calvin the infidel and
wicked receives only the sign and bare bread, the faith full person remaining
alone through the infidelite of other, shall not receive Christ neither. For
being alone he can have no communion of Christ his flesh derived unto him,
every communion importing a number, as these men say. Now what an absurdite is
this, that the good man shall not receive Christ in the Sacrament, because
evil men receive with him, or because he can have no company of good men?

Fiftely if the communion of Christ his flesh be derived unto us by the Spirit
of Christ, then the Spirit of Christ serves the flesh as an instrument. Cap.
18.
Which Calvin in his institutions expressly says, calling the Spirit of
Christ, a cundyt pipe by the which the flesh of Christ is derived unto us. A
horrible blasphemy of Calvin.
Now beside that this is a horrible blasphemy, to make the Spirit of Christ
which is his godhead, inferior to the flesh of Christ as an instrument of the
same, it is also contrary to al reason and common course of nature. For the
flesh serves well in things created, as an instrument whereby the Spirit
shows forth his operations, as by our eyes we see, by out hands we feel
and so forth: but the Spirit never serves the flesh, nor never may be said
to be an instrument of the same.

Last of all if the due eating of Christ, is to have the communion of flesh
derived unto us by his Spirit, whereby we receive life, then the unworthy
eating of Christ is the communion of damnation. How shall that be derived unto
us? by the Spirit off Christ to? what ca^ be a more horrible blasphemy? by some
evil sprit? that were the doctrine of the Maniches. And yet if it be true that
the due receiving of Christ is no other thing, but to have a communion of him
derived unto us, the^ truly the unworthy receiving of Christ must needs be a
communion of damnation derived also unto us. Lo in what absurdites Calvin has
entangled him self by departing from the Catholic faith. For keeping the
Catholic doctrine, none off al these absurdites shall ensue. Wherefore it
seems I may well say now to Calvin, and all such as follow this his
doctrine, that which S. Augustine said to the Arrians. Tract. 20. in Joan.
Ego secundum fidem Catholicam Video quomodo exeam (de questione) sine
offensione sine scandalo, tu autem circumclusus quaeris qua exeas, that is. I
following the catholic faith* can easily find a way to rid my self out
this of question without offense or inconuenie^ce. But thou being al compassed
in, art to seek which way to get out. And even so fares it with Calvin.
For leaving the sure known doctrine of the catholic Church, teaching us
according to the tenor of Christ his own words, that we eat his flesh and
drink his blood in the blessed Sacrament, and imagining a communion of Christ
his flesh to be derived unto us by the Spirit of Christ, as by a coundit pipe,
you see what heinous blasphemies and brutish absurdites he is forced withal to
confess. And this point by us now examined, is the chefest Kaye of all the
Sacramentary doctrine, which being proved naught and full of absurdites,
declares that all the store within is of no better stuff. And that shall you
anon see, and sensibly feale, if private prejudice have not utterly bereued you
of common sense.

Calvin in his commentaries upon the first to the Corinthians, In 1. Cor. cap.
^1.
disputing how we receive Christ in the blessed Sacrament, concludes his
whole disputation in these words. I conclude says he, the body of Christ is
given us in the Supper really, as they commonly speak, that is truly, to the
intent it may be wholesome food for our souls. I speak after the common
fashion, but I mean that our souls are fed with the substance of Christ
his body, to the intent we may be made one with him, or, which is all one, that
a certain quickening virtue is poored upon us out of the flesh of Christ by
his Spirit, though it be far distant from us and be not mingled with us. In
these words Calvin utters two strange doctrines. First that our souls are
fed with the body of Christ, secondarely that we receive the body of Christ
really and truly, though he say after that body to be far distant from us,
meaning that it remains only in heaven: as in the very next words following
he declares.

As touching the first point, if our souls are fedd with the body of Christ
by eating the sacrament, we must learn whether he mean the soul only to be
fed and not the body or the body also to eat the flesh of Christ as well as
the soul. Calvin means the soul only to eat the body of Christ. For in
his commentaries upon the sixte of John, he pronou^ceth our eating of the
sacrament to be the work of our faith, and says farther in express words. I
confess we eat not Christ any other wise then by believing, which doctrine
how absurd it is, we shall anon speak off. Now let us see what absurdites
follow, granting the eating of Christ his body only to the soul. That the
soul only is not fed of Christ in the Sacrament.


First if the bread of life which Christ gives in the Sacrament, be eaten
only off the soul, then Manna the figure of this sacrament was more auailable
to the Jews, then this blessed food is to us Christians. Exodus 16.
For that the Jews did eat Manna bodily not only by faith, Joan. 6.
and that it was a corporal food unto them, the scripture does clearly
testify. Again that it was also a spiritual food, yea and the very same
which we receive in the Sacrament, the doctrine of Calvin defends though
blasphemously, as you shall see anon in the conferences of his doctrine with
holy scripture. Hereof will it follow by the absurd doctrine of Calvin, that
the figure shall excel the verite, Manna shall pass the body of our Lord,
the synagoge of Jews shall be off more perfection, then the Church off Christ
ransomned with his precious blood.

Again if the soul only be fed in this blessed Sacrament, the paschall
lamb shall also pass and excel it. Exodus 12.
The paschal lamb was eaten contra spiritum percussorem against the destroyer
spirit, for a sure preservation of the Jews both bodily and ghostely, even as
this heavenly passover wardeth us both body and soul from the assautes of
the devil. And our Savior beginning with his disciples this heavenly banquet,
calls it a passover, as Tertullian expounds it and Orige^, saying I have
inwardely desired to eat this passover with you before I suffer* Lib. 4.
aduersus Marcionem Luc. 22. Homil. 35. in Matthew.
if the Jews passover excelled this, as the sacrame^tary doctrine of Ihon
Calvin imports, why desired Christ so inwardly to eat this passover with
his disciples? does the lamb of God Christ him self, not so much profit the
due receauers thereof, as the paschall lamb of the Jews? Whereunto think you
tends this doctrine, but by little and little to train us even to infidelite?
who tendreth his soul health and life everlasting, let him spedely beware of
it.

Thirdly I might ask Calvin and all the rank of sacramentaries swarming now
so miserably in our dear country to the utter destruction off the same, where
they read in holy scripture, that the soul only fedeth on Christ, and
receaueth the body off Christ. The words of holy scripture declaring unto us
the promis of this heavenly food, be directed unto men consisting of body and
soul, not to the soul only. Beside that life and resurrection (the promis of
this blessed Sacrament) are no less requisite to the body* then to the soul,
as we shall hereafter more at large declare, when we come to the old heresies
depending of Caluins doctrine. Where you shall see, that this doctrine of the
Sacrrmentaries granting only to the soul the eating of Christ's his flesh,
denies the resurrection of the body.

As touching the second point, Real receiving can not stand without real
presence.
to wit, that we receive the body of Christ truly and really, and yet so that
the same body of Christ is as far distant from us, as heaven is from the
earth, I know not what can be more absurdely said. Calvin in deed will have
this to be a miraculous operation of the holy ghost: For, says he, the virtue
of the holy ghost is such, In Matthew. Cap. 26.
that it is able not only to gather together things by distaunce of place
separated one from the other, but also to unite them together and make them
one. Mark and ponder well the saing of Calvin: for this reason is the only
ancre off this point of his doctrine. He seems perhaps to some that lightly
ouerrunne his words, to speak reason. Let us the^ consider his words. It is
most true that the holy ghost being god him self, can do al things that can be
done, and therefore can (as Calvin says) knitte in one those things that are
far distant: as, God can by his omnipotency join heaven and earth together,
which we see are most distant. but then they being so joined shall no more be
distant. We grant that by the virtue off the holy ghost the body off Christ
which is in heaven, may be the food of our souls. But then it shall not
only be in heaven, but here also (or else our souls shall be there to, and
then seeing our bodies remain here, I see not but whosoever communicates
after Caluins doctrine, he must dye, the soul being separated from the body)
and we say not only he can do so, but the Catholic church teaches us, he
does so. Now Calvin because he will deny the real presence of Christ* in the
Sacrament, imagines that we eat the body of Christ really without the real
presence. But this imagination is a plain contradictition. And contradiction
is of those things that can not be done. A thing can not be present and
distant to. A thing can not be hot and cold to in one very place and moment
of time. And therefore all learned men have ever said, that God works no
contradiction. This then being a plain contradiction to have Christ present,
and not present, to have him in the Sacrament, and not in the Sacrament, we
say the holy ghost does not work it. Not because off any impossibilite off
God, but because the thing it self is impossible. And even as we may well say,
God can not sin, and yet derogat no whit from the omnipotency of God, so may
we say, God can not work a contradiction, God can not make a thing present
that is in deed absent and not present, and yet we diminishe not the
omnipotency of allmightye God. For that consists in such things as are
semely for his divine Majesty and are of them selves possible. Now
contradiction is of it self utterly impossible. Again the works of God are
permanent and uniform, the one of them destroieth not the other. But in
contradictions one part destroys the other, as a thing to be present,
takes away the absence thereoff. And likewise the absence destroieth the
presence. To say therefore, as all learned men say, that God can work no
contradiction, argues not an impopotency or lack of abylite in God: But
rather the doctrine of Calvin, making God the author of contradiction, argues
it.

Theodore Beza and his companions at the late Synod off Poissy in France,
praesenting up their confession touching this blessed Sacrament, though they
were all scholars of Calvin, yet they did not attribute this contradiction to
the operation off the holy ghost, but unto faith. The words of their
Confession presented the last day of September unto the council are these.
An. 1561
Because the word off God, upon the which our faith is stayed, warranteth us
the true and natural body by the virtue of the holy Ghost, In this respect we
acknowleadge that the body and blood of our Lord Jesus Christ is in the
Supper. By these words (Encestesgard In this respect) we mean that we
apprehe^d this great and excellent mystery by faith, which is of such virtue and
efficacy, that it makes things absent to be praesent. Hitherto the words of
their confession. Wherein they attribute that to faith, which Calvin their
Master attributes to the operation of the holy ghost. But be their faith
never so strong and vehement, yet shall they never obtain thereby that one
self thing shall be both present and not present. For this being a
contradiction, is a thing impossible, and such as God him self works not.
Faith, Heb. 11.
says S. Paul, est argumentum rerum non apparentium. Is a certainte off
things which are not seen. By faith we are assured of such things as seem
not to be, but are in deed. But a thing to be which is not, our faith can
not assure us. So by faith we believe the present being off Christ's body and
blood in the Sacrament, which appears not present unto us. Now then if
Calvin shoots much amiss to attribut his fond imagination to the miraculous
working off God, how much were his scholars beside the mark, that seeing Gods
power failed, would fly to their faith, and attribute such operation to it,
as God him self works not? And this doctrine being so absurd, Calvin has
invented because he would destroy Transubstantiation. That is to say. Rather
then with the Catholic church he will grant that Christ may be in many
places at ones, as in heaven, and in the blessed Sacrament to, which is no
contradiction but a work though above the common course of nature, yet well
agreeable to the omnipote^cy of almighty God, and uniformly of al holy fathers
acknowledged, he inuenteth an imagination of his own, making God the author
off contradiction, saying we eat Christ in the Sacrament, and yet being as
far distant from us, as heaven is from the earth, which both is a thing
that God never works, and such, as never man before the days of John Calvin,
taught in Christ his church. I have been good readers some what long in
debating this one point, because I wish every man to understand me. As for the
deceived scholars of Calvin in our dear country, if they will not believe the
Catholic church, touching the omnipotency of Christ to be in diverse places
at ones, they are confuted by the great work of Brentius a Lutheran de
vbiquitate set forth this very year for the proof of that only point.
though it be otherwise heretical.

Calvin in his commentaries upon S. John says in express words. In cap. 6.
I confess we eat Christ by no other means then by believing. And what
believing he means in his Catechism he does express. In believing that
Christ is dead for our redemption, Dominica. 51.
and has risen for our justification our soul eats the body of Christ
spiritually. Finally he means no other eating of Christ in the sacrament the^
by faith. For upon the sixth of Ihon he affirms eating to be the work of
faith, and in his Institutions he calls it the effect of faith. Cap. 18.
And this again is a great stay of all the Sacramentary doctrine to make men
wene, that we ought to look for no other eating of Christ his flesh, and
drinking his blood, in the blessed sacrament, then by faith. For this their
faith is so precious a thing in the eye of Calvin, that he is not ashamed to
write in his co^me^taries upon S. Matthew these words. In cap. 26.
If we could sufficiently be mindful of the passion of Christ, it were but
superfluous, to have the common use of Sacraments, for they are remedies of
our infirmity. This doctrine because it is a most perilous and most
blasphemous doctrine, and yet, as I understand to my great grief, much rooted
in the hearts of many of my dear deceived countremen, I will labor with such
reasons as I may, to remove it from their hearts. For truly this proud
confidence of faith planted by Luther, watered by Calvin, and increased by the
pricking forth of the devil in his Ministres, excludes all means to call
for grace, all due preparation to the holy Sacraments, all endeavor of virtuous
living.

First if by believing in Christ, That we eat not the Body of Christ only by
Faith
we eat Christ, and eat no otherwise then by faith, then is all
excommunication vain. Both the Catholic church has allwaies practiced, and
the protestants of our country for the maintenance of their wicked doctrine do
gredely practice, that for certain heinous crimes men are kept from the holy
table as they call it, or embarred the receiving of the blessed Sacrament, as
the Catholic church terms it. The doctrine off the Catholic church
teaching us, as the words of our Savior expressly importe, to eat not only
by faith, but in deed the flesh of our Savior in the blessed Sacrament,
worthily excludes from that most holy mystery open penitents (as the primitive
church speaks) that is, such as having committed notorious crimes, either
wickedly persevere in the same, or though repenting thereof, have not yet done
due satisfaction therefore. But the doctrine of Calvin and all the
Sacramentaries, excluding the real presence off our Savior, and grau^ting
this heavenly food to faith only, what avails it the^ to exco^municat or
remove from their table any notorious offender, keeping yet not withstanding his
faith, and believing allwaies in the passion of our Savior and resurrection
also? if by faith only he receive Christ, then may he eat as well at home in
his house, as if he were admitted in to the congregation. For though he be
excommunicat, he loses not yet his faith, unless perhaps, as they say
(according to the doctrine of their graundfather Luther) that who has faith,
has withal necessarely good works (whereupon they build their perilous
doctrine of only faith) so contrary wise they will say that a notorious
offender, a bearer of malice, a disobedient person, and so forth, leseth with all his faith, by the lack whereof he can not eat Christ unless he be
absolved: if they say this, first I ask what if the person repent before the
pretended bishop or Ordinary absolve him? In this case other he believes, and
so eats Christ though he stand yet excommunicat, as being not absolved, or
he believes not, and so his faith depends upon the external absolution, which
were to superstitious a doctrine for the new gospel. Again though we
granted them this subtle shift, and suffered them so to pluck their heads out
of the coler, that their excommunication were good, because their excommunicats
have lost their faith, and are become infidels (though truly their
exco^municatio^ be nothing else but the devils curse) Ciprian. in sermon. de lap
is, and lib. 1. Epis. 2. August. in euch^rid. c. 65.
yet by this their doctrine they condemn the primitive church, embarring
penitents such as lacked no faith pardy (onles a man may bewail his sins
and have no faith) some three, some seven, some ten years, some even to the
hour off their death from the receiving of the blessed Sacrament. Now if they
boldly condemn the primitive church, what may they not be bold to do? yet
they bear men in hand forsothe that they reduce all to the state off the
primitive church, and will be tried by the first six hundred years after
Christ. Iuell.
Well: this only practice in the primitive Church excluding penitents from the
blessed Sacrament directly destroieth our Sacramenaries doctrine teaching us
to eat Christ no other wise (as Calvin says) then by believing.

Again the practice of the primitive church was, Cirillus lib. 12. cap. 50. in
Ioa. Basilius and Chrisostomus in liturgijs.
that the Cathechumeni that is, such as were not yet baptized, and believed not
withstanding both in the passion and in the resurrection of Christ, should not
only not be admitted to receive the holy Sacrament, but were not suffered to
tarry in the church at the oblation and distributio^ thereof. For after the
ghospel they we re all by the deaco^s excluded. And to this day at Rome where
Turks sometime resort, and Jews always co^tinewe, some infidels and some
Catechumeni, at the solemn festes when most resort of people is, at the high
mass after the ghospel a stay is made and a search, whether any Catechumeni
other of the Jews or of the greeks be present. Notwithstanding these
Catechumeni believed in Christ, some off them no less then the Christians.
Nicephor. lib. 11. cap. 32.
S Ambrose was a Catechumin and a beleuer in Christ though not baptized, eue^
when he was elected bishop of Millain. S. Augustine being yet a Catechumin wrote
diverse little books, Vide Re^ract. lib. 1.
wherein he declared him self not only a true beleuer in Christ, but an
excellent divine, as it appears especially by his Soliloquia, which he made in
that time. Now if Calvin had lived in those days, and seen S. Ambrose and S.
Augustine not yet baptized, notwithstanding the faith and lerning they had, to
be thrust out of the churches after the ghospel, and not to have be^ suffered so
much as to be present at the sacring time, and the residew of the Mass, he
would of al likelihood, comforted the^ with the faith of his gospel, and
whistred them in the ear, that they received and did eat the flesh off
Christ no less the^ the other that received at the altar, seeing they believed
no less then the other. He might also have checked S. Ambrose for keeping the
Nicephor. lib. 12. cap. 41.
Emperor Theodosius so long out of the church for the great murdre he had
caused to be done at Thessaelonica. For the Emperor notwithstanding remained
in his faith, as it well appears by the great lamentations he made at home
in his house, when he sent Ruffinus one of his Nobles to S. Ambrose to be
admitted in to the church. And in very deed Calvin by this his doctrine not
only comptrolleth S. Ambrose and S. Augustine, but condemns all the primitive
church excluding the Catechumeni from receiving the blessed Sacrament, if, as
he say, faith only gives them this food. I beseech here all good Christen
men, and such as fear God and love their own souls, diligently to advise
with them selves, how they follow the Sacramentary doctrine of our preachers
of Geneua, lest that in following them they depart from the Catholic church,
both that now is, and ever has been, which in their Creed they profess to
believe.

Thirdly if when our Savior said to his disciples, Take, eat, this is my
body, by the word eating he badde us believe, what did he bid us in the word
taking? do we take by faith as we eat by faith? why then call they men so
earnestly to their table? may I not as well eat and take by faith at home, as
at their table? does not my faith serve me as well in the house, as in the
church? they are wont to say, we may as well pray at home, as in the
church, and why may we not also as well believe at home, as in the church? Then
if both taking and eating the body of Christ, be but a matter of faith, what
need they storm and trouble such as will not receive at Easter or other times?
may not good men tell them, that by their own doctrine they receive at home
believing in the passion and resurrection of Christ? Again when Christ bad the
Apostles take, and eat his body, did they look upon him believing him, and
received nothing outewardely? yes they will say they received the bread. what?
was the bread the body of Christ? the Lutherans indede would be glad to hear
that. For so should Calvin, be a Lutheran, and agree with Westphalus which
while he lived, he would not do for his life. What will here the Sacramentary
say? What shift has he yet? He will perhaps say, that Christ bad the^ take
bread, and eat his body. This were in deed to make Christ a very sophister: to
wit, that bidding the Apostles take and eat both together, saying withal it
was his body, he should mean they should take bread, and eat his body.
Brefely this I conclude. If Christ in these words, Take, eat, this is my body
meaned this, Take and eat this bread, which is my body, then Calvin agrees
with Westphalus, and is become a Lutheran, against his will. If he meaned this,
take bread, and eat my body, then was it a sophisticatio^. For it is a point
of sophistry to join two terms together, taking one properly and the other
improperly. As here by this last meaning, Christ bidding them take, meant
properly they should take in deed and bidding them eat, me^t improperly, that
is, they should not eat in deed, but believe. For as all the world knows,
believing is a very improper signification of eating: and such as never was
heard of before the days of John Calvin, being meant of sacramental eating.

But will you see, that by the doctrine of Calvin. By the doctrine of Calvin
the Apostles did not receive Christ in the last Supper.
the Apostles did not eat Christ at all in the last supper? I mean by faith.
For Calvin as you have heard by his words in his Catechism, means such
faith as believes that Christ died for our redemption, and has risen for our
justification. Now what faith the Apostles had when Christ made is maunde,
touching his death, I will not now dispute. Although it may seem they
doubted much thereof, Luc. 22
when they wo^dered so much at his words signifie^g his death, as that Judas
should betraie him: as also S. Peter after denieng him. But as touching the
resurrection, the scripture tells us plain, that diverse of the Apostles at
that time believed it not. For first S. Ihon in his gospel writes of him
self, Cap. 20.
that after he looked in to the grave and saw nothing but the winding shete
left, Vidit and credidit, he saw and he believed. And straight after he
writes of S. Peter and him self. Nondu^ enim sciebant scriptura^, etc. for
they knew not yet the scripture that he should rise from death. S. Thomas
also an other of the Apostles would not believe that Ghrist had risen, vntell
he put his finger in to his wounds. And therefore our Savior said after unto
him, Quia vidisti me Thoma, credidisti. Thomas thou haste believed because thou
haste seen me. Lo then S. Peter, S. Ihon, and S. Thomas believed not in the
resurrection of Christ when they received the blessed Sacrament in the last
Supper. therefore if Caluins doctrine be true, the Apostles did not eat Christ
at all in the last Supper. See what godly doctrine ensues of this ghospel of
Geneua.

But here perhaps some scoler of Calvin will object: what Sir? Will you then
conclude that because in the last Supper the Apostles without such especial
faith received the body of Christ, therefore now any man may receive it
without that faith? Truly such manner of reasoning of it self were naught. But
yet inioyning with Calvin it were not amiss. For he uses the like against the
doctrine of the Catholic church. In his Institutions, disputing against the
real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, Cap. 18.
and awnswering to those which for possibilite of being in diverse places at
ones, allege that the body of Christ is glorious and immortal and not subject
to place and measure, as our corruptible bodies are, he writes thus. Some
again, says he, seek a more subtle escape, to wit, that the body of Christ
given in the Sacrament is glorious and immortal, and therefore that it is not
absurd he be in diverse places, or in no certain place, or in any certain form
under the Sacrament. But I ask them. What body gave our Lord to his
disciples the day before he suffered? Do not the words sound that he gave his
mortal body and the same which should forthwith be delivered? Thus far
Calvin. If then this manner of reasoning be current and allowablein Calvin,
Christ before he suffered, gave his mortal body to be eaten, ergo he gives not
now any other in the Sacrament, why then may not we also reason against him,
The Apostles before Christ suffered, believed not in the resurrection, and yet
notwithstanding received the body of Christ in the Sacrament, ergo it is not
now requisite and necessary for the eating of Christ his body to believe in his
resurrection. If this manner of reasoning be naught and vicious, then you learn
that Calvin in reasoning against the church speaks not allwaies the
gospel, but utters sometimes his ignorance. And if this manner of reasoning
be good, then Calvin misseth much of the mark in his doctrine, where he
teaches that to eat Christ, is to believe in his passion and resurrection.
Again we do not reason in this sort. The Apostles at the Maunde believed not
in the resurrection, ergo such faith is not now necessary: as Calvin
reasons. The body of Christ was then mortal: ergo it is not to be considered
here as a glorious body or immortal. But this is our reason. The Apostles in
the last supper believed not in the resurrection: ergo Calvin defining the
eating of Christ in the Sacrament to be a believing in the death and
resurrection of Christ, excludes the Apostles from eating of Christ's body in
the last Supper. This is lo the effect of our reason. Now if we would infer
beside that because the Apostles did not then believe, such belefe now is not
necessary, I grant the argument were naught. and yet were it such as Calvin
uses against us, as you have heard. I have troubled you here somewhat long.
But this you have gained: that not only the present point of his doctrine,
whereof we now purposely do entreat, is proved to be absurd and detestable,
as the which excludes the Apostles from the true receiving of Christ in the
last Supper, but also we have farther declared you an other false point of his
manner of reasoning against the Catholic doctrine in this most blessed
Sacrament.

The fifte absurdite against this point of his doctrine may be this. If the
eating of Christ his body be (as Calvin says upon S. Ihon) the work of
faith, In Cap. 6.
or (as he writes in his Institutions) Cap. 18.
the effect of faith, that is, if by believing in Christ, we eat and receive
Crist in to us, 1. Cor. 14
then to what purpose did S. Paul bid men prove them selves first, and so to
eat Christ? For he that proves, tries, and examineth him self, first he
believes. Hebr. 11.
For without faith there is no trial of our hearts, and he that comes to god
(says the Apostle) must first believe. then if he believe before he prove him
self, he eats by Caluins saying, the body of Christ, before he be proved.
How stands this with S. Paul bidding us first to prove and so to eat? Surely
S. Paul me^t that the eating of Christ was not by faith only, which we must
needs have before we can prove and try our own worthiness or unworthiness, but
by receiving really after due probation and trial the very true and natural
body of our Savior Jesus Christ.

Last of all, if the eating of life which Christ promises in the Sacrament,
is the effect of faith, the eating of judgment and death is the effect of
infidelite. That is, if by faith we duly receive the blessed Sacrament,
through infidelite and lack of faith we receive our own damnation. By this
reason the Turk shall through his infidelite eat judgment and damnation,
though he never eat the Sacrament, nor the bread which S. Paul spoke of. This
doctrine therefore of Calvin may have good rhyme, but surely it has small
reason, it may sound well in the ears of ignorant persons, that we eat
Christ no otherwise then by believing in him: but it stands with no reason at
all, as you have I trust sufficiently heard: and yet when we come to the
contradictions of Calvin you shall here more, and see Calvin confute him self.
I will note only more most notable absurdite in this their doctrine, whereby
you shall perceive to what point they bring this holy Sacrament, and so come to
the contradictions of Calvin, as we promised.

Calvin teaches in his Catechism, that we receive the communion of Christ his
body as well in baptim, and by hearing the gospel, as at the Lords supper.
But that in Baptim and by the gospel we receive him but in part, in the
Supper we receive him wholly and fully. And in his resolution of the Sacraments
he teaches that we receive Christ in the Supper, even as we had him before
continually dwelling in us. Art. 19.
For, says he, Faith being required of us before we come to the Sacrament,
we have Christ also before: for our faith is not without Christ: And even as
the use of the Sacraments profits no more the unbelievers, then if they used
them not at all, so the beleuers communicate and have the verite figured by the
Sacraments (which is Christ) Art. 20.
even without the use of the Sacraments. Farther the profit which we receive at
the Sacraments, ought not to be restrained to the very time we receive the^, as
though the sign being given us, we received withal incontinently the grace of
God. It may well happen that the receipt of the Sacrament that in the act
profited nothing through our defaute or slacknes, may afterward bring forth
better fruit. Hitherto Calvin. In these words Calvin concludes his doctrine
touching this blessed Sacrament. Let us now examine it.

What means Calvin so to debace the excellent virtue of this blessed
Sacrament, as to compare it to baptim or hearing of the gospel? forsothe to
persuade men that it were naught else, but a morcell of bread, a mere figure,
badge or token. For see I pray you, what his opinion and doctrine is touchi^g
baptim.

Baptim, says he in his institutions, Cap. 17.
is a sign of the entering whereby we are received in to the fellowship of the
Church, that being grafte in Christ we may be accounted among the Children of
God. Here he means baptim not to make us enter in to Christ as a Sacrament
having efficacy thereunto, The opinion of Calvin touching baptim refuted
but to be a sign of that entering: to the intent that being first grafte in
Christ (or being borne of Christen parents by the virtue of Gods promise, or
being borne of infidels, by faith and repentance, as he teaches manifestly in
his institutions) being (as I say) thus grafte in Christ before, then by
baptim as by a sure token we may be accounted for Christians, not made such.
And this to be his very meaning I will by his own words declare you out of
his Institutions. In his chapter of baptim not far from the beginning, thus
he writes. Baptim promises us no other clea^sing then by the sprinckling of
the blood of Christ, which is figured by the water: who then will say that
we are cleansed with this water, which does assuredly testify that our true
and only cleansing is the blood of Christ? Lo here he teaches baptim to
figure our cleansing procured by the sheading of Christ his blood, which he
calls our true and only cleansing.

It is most true that by the precious death and passion of our Savior we are
purged from the sin of our father Adam, and all other actual sins. And yet
it has pleased God to use means for the applie^g of this souuerain benefit
unto us. Those are among other, his holy sacraments. And Calvin him self
writing upon S. Paul to the Corinthians, says plainly that by the blessed
Sacrament of the altar Sacrificij beneficium nobis applicatur, In. 1. Cor.
Cap. 11.
The benefit of the sacrifice is applied unto us. And writing upon the sixte
of Ihon, he blames them which teach the flesh of Christ to profit us only
as it was crucified, and says: Quin potius comedere eam necesse est vt
crucifixa profit. that is. Na rather we must of necessite eat it, to the
intent it may profit us, which was crucified. And again in in the same place
he says. Nihil nobis prodesset victima^ illam semel esse immolata^, nisi nu^c
sacro epulo vesceremur that is. It should nothing avail us to have that
sacrifice ones offered, onles we did now also eat of this holy ba^quet. Calvin
him self therefore acknowledges that not only the passion of Christ
suffiseth, but that also this Sacrament of Christ his body and blood must feed
us. Joan. 6.
The like truly we say of baptim. For as our Savior said. Onles you eat my
flesh and drink my blood, you shall have no life in you, Joan. 3.
so he said, Onles a man be borne again of water, and of the holy ghost, he
shall not enter in to the kingdom of heaven. And though Calvin call here the
blood of Christ our only clensing, yet S. Paul is not afeared to call
baptim also, Lauacrum regenerationis, the cleansing of our new birthe. saying
we were saved thereby. Tit. 3.
Again Calvin him self writing upon S. Paul to the Romans teaches no less.
In comment. in Cap. 6.
For there he says that by baptim we are graffed in to the body of Christ,
and live by the substance thereof, even as the graffe by the stock: saving
that the graffe keeps his natural taste and sape, but we keep nothing offour
own, but change utterly our nature in to the nature of Christ. A
contradiction of Calvin about baptim.
How then is baptim as he made it before, a figure of our clensing, and a
testimony only? You see he condemns him self. And this I have thought good
presently to declare (allbeit beside our principal purpose) lest that the
other doctrine of Calvin being apparently plausible, might corrupt the
unlearned, and well meaning Reader. But now to the matter again.

In the same chapter of baptim, Calvin mocketh at the whole Catholic church
(as Pelagius the heretic did a thousand years paste) teaching that original
sin is taken away by baptim. Cap. de Caena Domini.
Brefely in the next chapter following of his Institutions at the end thereof,
he makes so light of baptim in the children of Christen parents, that if
contempt and negligence be not on our parts, our children, says he, without
danger may lack baptim.

Thus lo you see how Calvin makes baptim but a figure, Calvin makes the
blessed Sacraments only bare signs, tokens, and badges.
and token or testimony of clensing: and even so much makes he the blessed
Sacrament off the altar, comparing it unto baptim, to wit, a figure, a sign,
a testimony which a man may as well lack as have, and without the which a man
may as well receive Christ as with it: imagining that these two most weighty
and holy Sacraments (for of all the rest he makes no account at all) are
naught else but as certain marks and tokens, whereby Christ may know his
flock lest perhaps in seking for them he should miss. See to what point our
Christen religion is brought by these new ghospellers of late years. Forsothe
to mere signs, tokens and figures.

As though we were yet under the shadows off Moses law, Arguments to the
contrary.
as though that which happened to the^ in figures were not brought now to a
sure verite, as though the coming of Christ procured not better, and more
present remedies for man's salvation, then such as were betokened in the
tabernacle, finally as though the church of Christ, redeemed with his most
precious blood were fed with figures, and traded* with signs and tokens, as
the synagoges of the Jews was. Would Christ think we; threaten us damnation
for lack of signs, as he does for want off baptim, Joan. 2
saying unto Nicodemus, Onles a man be borne again of water and the holy
ghost, he shall not enter in to the kingdom of heaven? Would he deny us the
life of resurrection for lack of tokens, Joan. 6.
as he does for not receiving his precious body and blood saying unto the
Jews, Onles you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall have no life in
you? Would S. Paul pronounce damnation upon us for the unworthy receiving of a
piece of bread, 1. Cor. 11.
as he does for the unworthy receiving of Christ his body? Was S. Peter
deceived, when he wrote that by baptim we were saved, as Noe was by water, 1.
Pet. 3.
or S. Paul writing that Christ clea^sed his church with the washing of water
in the word of life? or the whole church in S. Augustins time condemning
Pelagius for an heretic, August. ad Quoduultdeum haer. 88.
for that he denied (as Calvin does now) that by Baptim original sin was
taken away?

We recited you before, in this last conclusion of Caluins whole doctrine
touching this blessed Sacrament, out of his resolutions upon the sacraments,
that we receive Christ no less without the use off the Communion, the^ in
using it. You have heard there his reasons why. Truly he utters this doctrine
off his, not in one or two, but almost in all places of his works, where he
treats of this matter. In his commentaries upon the sixte of Ihon, where
Christ promises life and resurrection to those which eat his flesh and
drink his blood, Calvin says. No^ de Coena habetur co^cio sed de perpetua
communicatione quae extra Caenae vsum nobis constat. that is. Christ preaches
not of the Supper, but of that continual communion which we surely have
without the frequentation of the Supper. And this continual communion
without the frequentatio^, use, or access of the Supper, he means to be the
very same which we have in the Supper, as his words following declare, where he
says. Simul tame^ fateor nihil hic dici quod non in Coena figuretur ac vere
praestetur fidelibus. that is. Yet I confess withal that nothing is here
spoken which is not figured and truly exhibited to the beleuers in the Supper.
Then the doctrine of Calvin is clear and evident in this point, that we receive
Christ no less and have him no less dwelling in us continually, though we
come not to the communion or Sacrament, then if we come and resort thither.

What need I spe^de words, It booteth not to come to the communion by the
Doctrine of Calvin
time and paper in refelling this most absurd doctrine? if this be so, why
scorn they of Caluins sect against such as list not come to their table?
May not good men tell the^ that by the doctrine of Calvin they co^municat and
receive Christ allwaies by faith in their hearts, no less then at their table
or communion? and that they take nothing there, but such as they had before
they came thither? Calvin teaches this most directly as you have heard, and as
they may more see, which list to read his little treatise entitul^d. A
resolution upon the Sacraments in the fourtenth and ninteth articles.

I will here ask one question of the Caluinistes and scholars of Geneua in our
country. A question to the Geneuians of England
If, as Calvin says upon the sixte of Ihon, we have a perpetual communion of
Christ no less without celebrating the Supper of the Lord, then in
celebrating it, what need Christen me^ celebrat that Supper? They will perhaps
awnswer, that in the Supper we receive Christ Sacrame^tally not only
Spiritually as without the Supper we do. If this be the only difference
touching our part, and the fruit that we receive thereat, the^ the difference
only is this: that at the communion we receive a piece of bread, more then
they which stand by and look on. Spiritually, says Calvin, al true
beleuers receive Christ and eat his body before they come to the Sacraments,
In resolut. art. 20.
for else says he, we should tie Christ to his sacraments. Sacramentally we
receive Christ by Caluins doctrine, what the communion of England is.
when we receive the signs, to wit bread and wine. Lo what the communion of
our country is* a piece of bread and naught else.

They will perhaps say, we celebrat in the Supper the remembrance of Christ
his passion. I awnswer. So do they which stand by no less then those which
receive. Again is eating your bread and drinking your wine, a remembrance of
Christ his death and passion? A likely matter truly. You are wont to cry on
scripture, and allow no doctrine without it. Tell us then from the beginning
off the Genesins, vto the end of S. Ihons Revelation, where the remembrance
of Christ his passion is taught to be celebrated by eating a piece of bread at
a table in the church, and drinking a drawthe off wine at the hand of a
Minister, upon whom no hands have been laid by the order of priesthood as by
S. Paul we learn to be necessary. 1. Timo. 4.
Show this and them your communion shall be somewhat more then a piece of
bread, and a cup of wine. Now is it nothing else. And this verily is the
cause of so many dry communions in our country: this is the reason why in
Germany as Friderikus Staphylus records, Above i^ the leaf. 105.
some of the Sacramentaries come not ones in ten years to the communion, some
never at all.

As touching the hearing of the gospel, if, as Calvin in his words above
recited, and in his resolutions teaches, Vide art. 5. and, 6.
we receive Christ and are made partakners of all his benefits no less then by
the communion, then is it enough to hear the sermon, and no need at all to
tarry out the communion: then was the primitive church mu^he deceived suffering
the Catechumins and open penitents to hear sermons, excluding them afterward
from the communion. De incomprehensibisi dei natura contra Anomaeos homil. 3.
S. Chrisostom in his homelies complains that in the pulpit he had as great
audience, as was possible: but at the altar he was left alone. Truly by
Caluins doctrine he was a fool so to complain: for the people had received
Christ all ready at the sermon. What neded they then to tarry out the
communion? Again what scripture have these men that at Sermon we receive
Christ no less then at the communion? truly if men see not these absurdites,
they will see nothing. By the sermon we are instructed, not cleansed as by
baptim, we learn Christ, we do not communicate Christ's body, as in the blessed
Sacrament. But these men, as long as they may say and teach what they list
vncomptrolled, what may we think they will at length do? truly they will have
nor communion nor baptim, nor church nor minister, but a fair pulpit in the
field, where every man as the Spirit moves him, may teach what he list,
and the other believe as they list. It is all ready in some countres brought to
this point. And there is no cause but we may fear the like: unless spedy
policy refrain their unruly liberty.

You have good Readers the effect of Caluins doctrine touching the blessed
Sacrament, with certain of the absurdites depending thereof. We come now to
his co^tradictions about the same matter, which when you shall see to be in
him diverse and most manifest, record with your selves, that as in common plea
where the witnesses are taken in contrary tales, the evidence must needs be
naught, so in the controversy of this most high mystery, Calvin being the
enditer against the old possession of our belefe herein, and chief pleader,
if you may take him in contrary tales, you may not doubt, but the evidence
of his doctrine must needs be stark staring naught. Beside, his co^tradictio^
shall serve us, as a most strong weapon to overthrow his doctrine laid in
against us: for thus he him self shall cut is own throat, condemn and confute
his own sayengs. I will first draw you out the effect off his doctrine
against the real presence off Christ in the Sacrament, and show you how he
acco^breth him self, how he turns and windeth seking by some probabilite to
co^founde the doctrine of the catholic church, and yet after many words
confounds him self, by his own contradiction. Mark therefore his words we
bring you now, and how the other that we shall bring you after do agree.

In his institutions treating of this Sacrament, Cap. 1^.
see how he does contrary him self. First he says: We ca^ not be me^bres of
Christ his body, bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, which all S.
Paul affirms we are, unless whole Christ both in Spirit and in body cleave
unto us. Ephesians. 1. and 4. 1. Cor. 6.
and our Lord, says Calvin, does testify, offer and give in the holy supper
to all that receive that spiritual banquet such a communion of his body and
of his blood. And after he concludes thus. I say therefore that in the
mystery of the Supper, by the signs of bread and wine Christ is given unto us
truly, yea his body and blood, to the intent that first we may be made one
body with him, then being made partakeners of his substance, we may also
receive the virtue thereof, Coalescamus in vnum corpus.
for the enioieng of all his benefits. All this he says against the^, which
acknowledging a certain communion with Christ in this Sacrament, make us only
partakners of the Spirit of Christ, as in his words somewhat before he
expresses. Would a man desire any more Catholic doctrine then this is? truly
it seems no. But you shall see within few lines he marreth all that he made
before. For when he comes to declare after what manner we receive the body and
blood of Christ (for by evidence of scripture he was forced to confess that we
receive it) the^ lo he stretches him self, and calls his wits about him,
how he may defeat the real presence of Christ's body and blood. In 1. Cor. 11.
He grants we do truly, and (as he writes upon S. Paul) really receive the
body and blood of Christ. But he will not have it as the church teaches,
really present. How then shall we really receive Christ? We need not says
Calvin, imagine any presence of place to receive Christ by. How then? This
benefit (says he) Christ gives us by his Spirit. By* the Spirit of Christ we
are coupled and joined to Christ. and the Spirit of Christ is as a certain
cundite pipe, by the which whatsoever Christ is, and has, is derived unto
us. for if we see the Son shining on the earth with his beams, for the
engendring and quickening of things, give as though it were, his substance
unto the earth, why should the Spirit of Christ be inferior or of less force
then the shining down the son for conuaying unto us the communion of Christ
his flesh and blood? Wherefore scripture speaking of our partaking with
Christ refers the whole power thereof unto the spirit. One place shall
suffice for all. For S. Paul writing to the Romans in the eight chapter
teaches that Christ dwells no otherwise in us then by his Spirit. Whereby
yet he takes not a way the communion of flesh and blood that we now speak
of, but teaches us that by the only spirit we possess whole Christ and have
him dwelling in us. According to the latin edition printed, in the ieare. 1545
These lo hitherto are the words of Calvin, even as they lie in his
Institutio^s, the 18. chapper. The effect of his whole tale is this. That by
the Spirit of Christ only we receive the body and blood of Christ. The first
contradiction.
And is not this clean repugnant to that he said before blaming them which
taught that in this Sacrament we were partakners of Christ in Spirit only? For
how receive we the body and blood of Christ by the Spirit of Christ only,
but spiritually only? The flesh and blood of Christ are no spiritual things:
Valentinus and Marcion were condemned for such doctrine. How then receive we
things of a corporal substance, not mere spiritual, only by the Spirit?
This is a mere imagination of Calvin, as we have before declared you. No
scripture terms the Spirit of Christ a cundite pipe. No scripture tells us,
that the Spirit of Christ co^uaieth us his flesh and blood. It is beside
scripture and against all reason: and therefore not to be admitted by the only
warrant of Caluins mouth. We must not leave the doctrine of the church
(though it had no reason to defend it) for the bare assertion of Calvin, being
against all reason. For this is against all reason that we should really eat
the body, and drink the blood of Christ, being not really present, though
Calvin to set a gaie color on the matter, attributes this strange means
and order to the operation of the Spirit of Christ God him self. For (as we
have before proved) god him self works no contradiction: as it is to receive
that which is not present to be received. Therefore notwithstanding all the
shifts that Calvin makes, it is no real communion of Christ his body and
blood that he teaches, as he would it should seem to be, but a mere
spiritual, which before he blamed.

As touching the Son, if Calvin speak like a philosopher it is no body mixte,
and made of the elements, as the natural flesh and blood of Christ is, but a
pure simple and celestial body: and so we grant the substance thereof is
derived to the earth by the shining thereof. For that substance is a lightsom
and shining substance, and differs no whit from the light and clerenes
thereof. Now Christ took very flesh in all conditions like to our flesh,
except the corruption that sin brings. This flesh of Christ is so endued
with divinity, that it loses not his natural substance. Therefore the
substance of the So^ and the substance of Christ his body, are things far
different. Again if the substance of the son quickens the earth, that
substance is really present with the earth. By this reason therefore Christ
also should be really present with us feding us with his substance. Which we
do confess, but Calvin denies. How the^ does that similitude make for him?
Truly nothing.

Farther* The Son by the means of his shining, says Calvin, gives his
substance to the earth, and so Christ by the means of his Spirit gives us
the communion of his flesh and blood. Mark that Calvin says the communion of
the flesh, not the flesh it self to be derived unto us. For by the communion
of the flesh of Christ, he means (as upon S. Paul h^ writes) Vim ex
Christi carne viuifica^, In 1. Cor. Cap. 11.
a certain quickening power out of Christ his flesh. Now this quickening
power of Christ his flesh, is not the flesh of Christ it self, Which (by
Caluins doctrine in his institutions) of it felfe is not quickening or giving
life. Cap. 18.
But it is the Spirit only of Christ which gives life and quickens, The
second contradiction
says he. Lo then again you see notwithstanding all his fair words before,
his doctrine is now, that we have but a spiritual food only in this
sacrament conuayed unto us by the Spirit, as the son by his shininge conuaieth
his substance unto the earth. Is not this ones again a plain contradiction
to that which he wrote before, blaming those that make us partakners of Christ
in Spirit only? is not his doctrine the very same? is not the communion that
he imagines to be conuaied unto us a spiritual thing? does he not call it a
certain quickening virtue out off Christ his flesh? this quickening virtue, is
it not by the doctrine of Calvin a mere spiritual thing, seeing that he
teaches blasphemousely with the old heretic Nestorius that the flesh of
Christ (notwithstanding it is Propria Verbi, one person with the Son of God) is
not of it self quickening. I trust you see now evidently, that though Calvin
write we receive truly and really the flesh and blood off Christ, yet he
means nothing so.

But why did he thus dally, and delude the world, The canse of contradictions
in Calvin.
a man may demand. Forsothe as I suppose even for this cause. Calvin being
learned, and knowing the truth well, if he had listed to utter it, perceived
right well by the express words of scripture in sundry places that Christ of
his passing mercy and goodness would be joined to man not only Spiritually,
and by grace, but eue^ really and truly by the participation of his body and
blood. Calvin knew all this, and acknowledged it: (as you have heard in his
words before) for express scripture moved him thereunto. Notwithstanding
being undoubtedly malicious, and self willed, and in deed a very heretic,
desirous to pla^te a new doctrine, to bring the church in co^te^pt pricked
with malice against the clergy, which in his works he utters many times)
though he granted that man received whole Christ both in body and Spirit, as
he writes in the 18. chapter of his Institutions, yet he would not grant the
real presence off Christ his body, which the church teaches and all holy
fathers have acknowledged, as a most necessary consequent to the real
receiving: but as you see imagines a communion of Christ his flesh to be
derived unto us by the Spirit off Christ as by a pipe. Because therefore truth
and falsehood can not possibly agree, he falls often in to open
contradictions: saying one thing as truth and conscience taught him, and then
saying an other thing, as pride, malice* and envy moved him, the walking mates
of heresy. Hereof rise the sundry and manifold contradictions in his writings,
not only about this most holy mystery, but in the doctrine off baptim, and of
fre will especially, as we shall in part note hereafter unto you. 2, Reg. 15.
And truly it has so pleased God to confound the counsel of these
Achitophels rebelling against their Liege Souerain the church of God, that
not only one against the other teaches most contrary, but also each one with
him self disagreeth. And this merciful providence of God has been always a
souerain means for the utter co^fusio^ of heretics.

Let us return to the words of Calvin above alleged and see why Calvin
granting first a real and true receiving of Christ his body and blood,
afterward denies the real presence thereof, which is to deny that he said
before. He says, that Scripture speaking of our partaking with Christ,
refers the whole power thereof unto the Spirit. for S. Paul (says he)
writing to the Romans in the eight chapter teaches that Christ dwells in us
no otherwise then by his Spirit. Calvin belieth holy Scripture.
Mark here well good Readers, and see the truth off Calvin. S. Paul says
in that eight chapter, that the Spirit of god dwells in us, and again that
the Spirit of him that raised up Jesus from death dwells in us, and that he
which raised up Christ from death shall quicken our mortal bodies because
of his Spirit that dwells in us. In all these words S. Paul teaches the
Spirit off god, god him self to dwell in us, to quicken our mortal bodies,
that they die no more in sin, but live to god. Other the^ this S. Paul in
all that chapter speaks not, touching the dwelling of the Spirit of god in
us. Read the chapter and see. Now is this to say, that Christ dwells in us
no otherwise then by his Spirit? Mark the saying of S. Paul, and the
consequence of Calvin. S. Paul says, the Spirit off god dwells in us. and
Calvin says Christ dwells in us no otherwise then by his Spirit. is this a
good consequence? The spirit of god dwells in us. Ergo he dwells in us no
otherwise then by his Spirit? Eue^ as good, as this. We are justified by
faith, ergo by only faith. These words ( no otherwise then) are the words of
Calvin fathered upon. S. Paul, not the words of S. Paul, they are the
limitation of a proud heretic set upon holy scripture, not the words off
holy scripture. He followed herein his father Luther, who translating the words
of S. Paul per legem cognitio peccati, Romans 3.
By the law comes the knowledge of sin, turns it thus, By the law comes
naught else but knowledge of sin. In the lea^e. 67. b
which text to what purpose he so perverted, you have seen in the second
part of this Apologye.

But what, will some scholar of Calvin say? though S. Paul say not expressly
so, yet perhaps he mean so, seeing that no scripture beside expresses any
other dwelling of Christ in us the^ by his Spirit, I awnswer. All were it true
that scripture expressed no other dwelling of Christ in us, then by his Spirit,
yet were it not true that S. Paul said so in that chapter, as Calvin says
he does. But the Scripture says plain that we are joined to Christ, not
only in Spirit, but also in body: heard you not before that S. Paul said,
Ephesians. 14. 1. Cor. 6.
that we are members of Christ his body, bones of his bones, and flesh of his
flesh? And does not Calvin say, The third contradiction.
that this can not be performed onles whole Christ both in Spirit and in body
cleave unto us? they are his words before alleged out of his Institutions in
the. 18 chapter. And does not Calvin here ones again write a plain
contradiction? he told us even now that Christ dwells in us no otherwise
then by his Spirit, and that S. Paul taught so. Now he tells us that whole
Christ must cleave unto us both in Spirit and body, and that because S. Paul
teaches so: saying that we are members of Christ his body, bones of his bones,
and flesh of his flesh. Lo you see him in contrary tales, now trust his
evidence who list. Thanked be god, Calvin has turned the weapon upon him
self, minding to strike the church of Christ.

Again Calvin disputing against the Catholics, The four the co^tradiction.
that the evil men receive not Christ in the Sacrament, makes his argument of
the body of Christ, which if evil men received, seeing they receive no life
but damnation, they should says Calvin, receive a dead body, and the body of
Christ without the Spirit of Christ. If this reason of Calvin be good, the^
the good and worthy receauer must needs receive the body of Christ, not only
the Spirit of Christ: he must needs have Christ dwelling in him bodily, not
only Spiritually as he said before. His words are these in his commentaries
upon S. Paul to the Corinthians. In 1. Cor. 11.
Ego hoc axioma teneo neque mihi vnquam excuti patiar, Christum non posse a
Spiritu suo diuelli: vnde constituo non recipi mortuum eius corpus, neque etiam
eum otiosum, aut disiunctum a Spiritus sui gratia and virtute. that is. I hold
this principle, and will never be brought from it, that Christ can not be
divided from his Spirit. wherefore I determine that his dead body can not be
received, nor he also unfruitful, severed from the grace or virtue off his
Spirit. Here Calvin laboring to confute the Catholic doctrine confounds him
self. For this is his reason. The evil man receaueth not the Spirit of
Christ: therefore he receaueth not the body of Christ, which can not be without
it. A man might here say to Calvin: why Sir, no more does the good man
nether. for you said even now that the Spirit of Christ only dwells in us:
which if it be so, the body and flesh off Christ dwells not in us: the^ if
we that receive Christ as much, and in as ample sort, as he may be received,
receive only the spirit of Christ, what need you fear in the evil man's
receiving dividing of Christ from his spirit, or his dead body to be received?
it were enough to say, the evil man receaueth not the Spirit of Christ in the
sacrament, and therefore he receaueth not Christ. But now you reason as though
the evil man, if he received Christ should receive his body without the
Spirit: and as though he good man received both body and Spirit. Which were
contrary to that you said before: That not the flesh of Christ, but a
communion of his flesh (which is, as you teach a mere spiritual thing, to
wit, In commentar. in 2. Cor.
a quickening virtue out of Christ his flesh) is derived unto us by his Spirit.
What could Calvin awnswer here, being pressed of one that would not forsake his
advantage? Well: He is gone and paste all awnswering. But he has scholars good
store on live: Let them awnswer and defend these contradictions, if they can.
Or if they ne can ne list to defend them, let them put him out of credit, and
believe such a false fellow no more. I beseech our Lord they may so do.

Calvin in his institutions, as you heard before, The fifte contradiction.
says. The Spirit of Christ is as a certain cundyt pipe by the which
whatsoever Christ is, and has, is derived unto us. And this spiritual pipe he
imagines to be a means to receive the communion of Christ his flesh by. Now
in other places he makes the flesh of Christ, to be as a pipe for conuaiaunce
of life unto us. In his commentaries upon the sixte of Ihon thus he writes.
Sicut aeternus Dei sermo fons vitae est, ita caro eius veluti canalis, vitam
quae intrinsecus in diuinitate residet, ad nos diffundit, that is, As the
aeternall word off God, Christ, is the fountain of life, so his flesh like
as a pipe deriueth unto us life abiding, within the deite. Before he said. The
Spirit of Christ derived unto us all that Christ is, or has and so
consequently life. Now he says, The flesh of Christ conuaieth life unto us.
Before he made the Spirit off Christ a pipe for conuaiaunce of life. Now he
makes the ^leshe of Christ to be that pipe. Does not this doctrine confound
it self? unless to establish his doctrine, he will confound the two natures
of Christ, God and man, flesh and Spirit, making each one instrument to the
other, and appointing to them both like actions and functions. Which were the
heresy of the Monothelita.

Calvin in his commentaries upon the sixth of Ihon and upon S. The sixte
contradiction. In cap. 11.
Paul's first epistle to the Corinthians, disputes earnestly that evil men
receive not Christ in the Sacrament. His reasons therefore in the fourth
contradiction we touched. Would it not now seem a strange matter, to hear
Calvin say the contrary, and confess that all which come to the communion
receive the body and blood of Christ, but the good and worthy receive only to
salvation even as the Catholic doctrine teaches? were it not a wondrous
matter to see Calvin agree herein with us, and disagree with him self? Lo then
his words. In his institutions the 18. chapter, Cap. de C^ena Dom.
proving out of S. Paul that because we must be members of Christ his body,
bones of his bones, and flesh of his flesh, we must cleave unto him both in
spirit and in body, he infers thus. Talem corporis and sanguinis sui
communionem and caete. Such a communion of his body and blood Christ in the
holy Supper, does testify, offer, and deliver to all that sit down at that
spiritual banquet: although (cum fructu) profitably he be received of the
faithful only. Lo you hear Calvin say, that all which sit down at the
spiritual banquet of the Supper, receive the body and blood of Christ, offered
and delivered unto them. And because you might not doubt, but that the evil
receive also, he puts a distinction between them and the good, saying that
the faithefull only receive (cum fructu) profitably: giving us to understand,
that the other receive, but unprofitably. else had it ben in vain to say, the
good or faithefull only received profitably. it had been enough to say, the
good only received. But it is a common saying oportet mendacem esse memorem. a
liar had need have a good memory. Calvin here remembered not, that he had in
other places defended the contrary: but laboring here, to set forth to the
uttermost his doctrine of the Supper, and to make men wene that he taught
according to scripture, the real receiving of whole Christ in the Sacrament, In
comment. in Cap. 6. 1. Cor. 11.
pronounces stoutely, that Christ in the Supper not only offreth, but
delivers him self, and that re ipsa in very deed (as in an other place he
writes) to all that sit down at that Spiritual banquet. Truly I may say
here and in all these other contrarietes of Calvin, as often as the one part is
true (for many times both parts are stark false) that which S. Augustine
wrote of the Donatistes: who being in a solemn conference at Carthage,
sometimes uttered the truth against the^ selves unawares, as Calvin does now:
that is. O Violentia veritatis. Contra Donat. post collationem cap. 3.
Quod semper illa tenuit, inimicoru^ confessio confirmauit. O the force of
truth. That which truth always held, the confession of her enemies has
confirmed. Which yet in his other contradictions more clearly shall appear.

Calvin in his institutio^s writes this. Omnino isthaec pijs tenenda regula
est etc. Cap. 18. The seventh co^tradiction.
This is a sure rule to be kept of all good me^, that as ought as they see the
signs appointed of God ( bread and wine in the supper) they think assuredly
and persuade them selves, Rei signatae veritatem ^erto adesse cogite^t.
that the verite of the thing betokened is also present. For to what purpose
should Christ give in to thy hand the sign of his body, but to make the right
sure of partaking thereof? For if it be true that the visible sign is given us
for confirmation of the unvisible thing to be given, the sign of the body
being taken, let us not doubt but the body also is given unto us. Art. 20.
Now in his resolutions upon the sacraments thus he writes. Oultre plus,
L'vtilite que nous recepuons aux sacramens, ne sedoibt restraindre au temps de
la reception d'iceux, comme si le sign visible si tossed qu'l nous est propose,
nous apportoit auec soy en vng mesme instant la grace de Dieu. that is. Beside,
the profit which we receive at the Sacraments, ought not to be restrained to
the time we receive the^, as if the visible sign as soon as it is presented
us brought with it forthwith the grace of God. Be not these two tales contrary?
In the fourth contradictio^.
First he bids us not doubt but with the sign we receive the body, which (
as you heard before of Calvin) can not be void of grace. Now he says that the
visible sign brings not forthwith the grace of god. First he makes it a
rule that seeing the signs, the verite also ( Christ him self) be present. Now
he says the profit of the Sacraments ought not to be restrained to the time we
receive the^. Peradventure he means, we should receive the signs and not
see the^. else how these two saiengs may be reconciled, I see not, and I think
no man else does see. But it is not ones nor twice, that he thus contradicts
him self, but many times and often: and that in small space, as out of his
resolutions upon the Sacrae^nts I will note now unto you.

In the third article of his resolutions he writes, Christ estant fills
eternell de Dieu, d'vne mesme essence etc. that is, Christ being the eternal
Son of God of one very substance and glory with the father, has taken upon
him our flesh, to the end that he should communicate us that which he had
properly by nature. The 8. co^tradictio^.
In these words are two doctrines contrary to his former saiengs. First if
Christ be (as he is in deed) of the very same substance and glory with the
father, then he is not a following cause of life, as he teaches writing upon
the sixte of Ihon. We will allege you his words herafter when we shall
detecte you his heresies. The 9. co^tradictio^.
Again here he confesses Christ to communicate unto us, that which he had
properly by nature, to wit his flesh, In commentar in 1. Cor. 11.
before he grants not us his flesh, but a spiritual communion thereof, to
wit a quickening power out of that flesh.

In the. 9. article thus he writes. Albeit we put a difference between the
sign and the things figured thereby, yet we separat not the verite from the
figures. The 10. contrad.
The figure or sign which Calvin means, is bread it self, the thing
figured is Christ. Now if he sever not Christ from the bread, then is he there
present really (as the bread is) with the bread. Which Calvin writing against
Westphalus and other Lutherans does allwaies declaime and inueigh against.

In the next article following, thus he writes, But we must not have a
regard to the bare sign but to the promis which is thereto annexed. Behold I
beseech you what fond contradictio^ this is. The 1^. contrad.
For what is the promis of the blessed sacrament? Christ says. Who eats my
flesh has life, Joan. 6.
and I will raise him again at the later day. Lo life and resurrection is the
promis. If this, as Calvin teaches, be annexed to the sign, how calls he it
a bare sign? But Christ teaches us, as you see, that this promis is not
annexed to the bread, which is impossible, but to his very flesh: and that full
of all divinity: which is no bread pardy. It follows in the article. Therefore
the simple matter of water, of bread and wine does not present us, nor give us
Christ. Lo here again he calls the sign a simple matter of bread and wine.
How then I pray you is that weighty promis of life and resurrection annexed
unto it? The 21. contrad.
Beside, he says the sign does not present us Christ. Yet before in the
seventh article he wrote that the principal office off the sacraments was,
that god by them does testify unto us his grace, represents it and seals
it unto us. And in the.8. article he calls them true witnesses and seals.
and every where he calls the bread the figure of Christ his body. If all this
be true, how says he now true, saying that the sign does not present us
Christ? how calls he it a simple matter of bread and wine? Lo how many
contradictions are couched in one of his articles. But let us considre the
rest.

In the twelueth article thus he writes. Farther, as for that which is given
unto us by the Sacraments, that is not by their own proper virtue, although
that the promis is comprised in them, whereby they are endued with the qualite
thereof. Here he confesses again, in the sacraments is comprised or contained
the promis of the gospel: and that this promis remains in the sacraments,
as the qualite does in a substance. First if bare bread be (as he said
defore) the sacrament (calling it a sign, such as with Calvin all sacraments
are) In art. 10.
how can it have any such promis or any such qualite in it? The 13. contrad.
Cap. 16. de Sacramen.
who ever heard that life, and our resurrection were promised to a piece of
bread? Then if the sacraments (as in his Institutions he defines them) be not
only bare signs, but sure witnesses of gods grace toward us, their virtue
being the work of God, why denies he by their virtue any thing to be given?
He would deface the sacraments, but he co^tradicteth him self.

But will you see a clean repugnant and direct contrary doctrine to all that
hitherto has been said? For hitherto you hear Calvin say art. 9.
that he seuereth not the verite from the figure, art. 10,
that the promis is annexed to the sign, and again art. 12.
that the promis is comprised in the Sacrament. Now at the very end of all
his resolutions, see I pray you how he resolves him self. In the last
article thus he concludes. Art. 26. The 14. contrad*
Although says he, the bread be given unto us as a mark or pleadge of the
communion, yet because it is a sign, not the thing it self, nor has not the
thing included in it, they which stay their mind thereupo^ worshipping
therein Christ, they make an idol of it. Lo now Calvin has plucked of his
visard, and plaieth his part kindly, now he says the thing of the
sacrament, to wit Christ, is not included, contained, or comprised in the
sacrament, that it is but a sign or a pleadge. In deed we agree with Calvin
that Christ is not in the bread and much less is the bread a pleadge or mark
of our communion or participation of Christ. 2. Cor. 1.
S. Paul says the holy ghost is given unto us, as a pleadge, no scripture
says so of bread. Again we confess that the true flesh of our Savior is
given us in this most blessed sacrament, in form and shape of bread not
remaining, In sermon. de coena Dn^^.
but by the omnipotency of the word, as S. Ciprian speaks, made flesh.

But why does Calvin make the Sacrament now but a bare sign? Why C^luin
makes the Sacrament but a bare sign.
Why denies he now the thing or verite of the Sacrament to be therein
included, having granted it before? Forsothe the devil him self moved Calvin
to say so, enuieng at the glory of god, and desiring as little honor to be
done to Christ, as might be. For after that Calvin as the proctour of the
devil, had for the blessed flesh and precious blood of our Savior
(pronounced to be in this most dreadful mystery by the mouth off Christ him
self) substituted material bread and wine, and yet to make a color of
holiness, as the wo^te of the devil is, had told us, that he separated not the
verite from the figure, Christ from the bread, fearing lest perhaps by this
tale some scrupulous sacramentary would have worshipped the verite, not
separated from the figure, to wit Christ joined with the bread, he turns
his tale, and tells them at the end of his talk, which he thought should
best stick by the readers, that the sacrament is but a sign, and has not
the thing or verite of the sign included in it. Nether does he co^ceale his
wicked purpose, but boldly utters it, even straight, saying, they that
worship in the Sacrament Christ, make an idol of it. I have lo discovered unto
you good readers the wicked devise of this proctour of the devil Ihon Calvin.
stop your ears at the wi^ked enchantme^ts of this flattering Circe, and
harken rather to the doctrine of that holy, and learned Father of the Church S.
Augustine. In comme^t. in psalm. 98
who speaking of the worshipping off Christ in this blessed Sacrament, says
Non solum non peccatur adorando, sed peccatur non adorando, that is, We do not
only not sin or offend in adoring it, but we do sin if we do not adore it.
Lo this learned Father fears no idolatry in adoration of the Sacrament, but
pronou^ceth it a sin, not to adore it. wherein he declares the doctrine and
belefe of Christ his church at that time. and he spoke these words in pulpit,
preaching to his people, and expounding them the word of God. Now this cursed
caitif Calvin bereueth our blessed Savior of his due honor, and tells us
we make him an idol. well. the devil yet has got small worship at his
proctours hand here, making him to speak such contradictions, as shall work
at the length, I trust in god, his utter confusion, and all enemies of gods
honor. And therefore we will yet discover you more of his contradictions, and
sorry lessons learned of his master the devil the spirit of dissension and
contrariete.

In the thirtenth article of his resolutions he says: The.15. Conared.
the sacrament is an instrument by the which god works. If the sacrament be
an instrument whereby Christ works, how is it a figure of Christ, as these
Sacramentaries will have it only to be? who ever heard that the figure of the
workman as a figure were his Instrument, or the instrument his figure? Is not
this doctrine a mere confusion and contradiction? The truth is: that bread is
nether the figure of Christ nor the instrument whereby he works. No scripture
says so: The church never taught so. No reason persuadeth so. It is but a
dream off Calvin.

In the fiftenth article he says the Sacrament does warrant us Christ. The
16. Contrad.
In the tenth he said it was but a bare sign and that we should not regard
it. Believe now whether part ye list. Truly both can not be true.

In the sixtenth article he says, The 17. Contrad.
the sacrament warra^teth Christ only in the elected and predestiant. In
the.18. article he says, that in the sacrament Christ is offered aequally unto
all. and that the promis of god is not weakened by the incredulite of men. If
the sacrament warranteth and confirms Christ only in the elected, is not the
promis or verite of god promised in the sacrament, weakened by the incredulite
of men? for they by their incredulite, says Calvin, can not receive Christ
which is the substance of the sacrament, and that which Crist promises. You
see his constancy and agreement. Is not this a worthy guide for a man to build
his faith upon, and forsake his former belefe?

In the twentieth article he says, it may happen that the use of the Supper
which profited us nothing in the act or doing of it, because of our
negligence or slacknes, may afterward bring forth better fruit. This point
lo is contrary to all his doctrine in his institutions and commentaries upon
holy scripture, The 18. Con.
where he teaches the effect of the Sacrament In institut. cap. 18.
that god fedeth us not with bare signs, In resolut.
that he gives life withal, In comment. in 1. Cor. 11.
thath our souls are fed with Christ truly and really. For now a man may
receive the Sacrament and lack all this. He may I say receive it well and
worthily, and have none of all these. For if the unworthy receauer receaueth
forthewith his damnation (as S. Paul says) Calvin can not mean this of the
unworthy receauer: especially saying withal, that it may afterward bring
forth better fruit, which to the unworthy receauer it can not do.

In the six and twentieth article he says: The.19. contrad.
we must not tie Christ to the bread and to the wine. and yet in the ninthe
article he him self tieth Christ thereto. For he says. Nous ne separons pas
la verite d'auec les figures. we separat not the verite from the figures. If
Calvin do not separat Christ, which is the verite from the figures of bread
and wine, does he not couple and tie Christ thereunto? Truly the
Sacramentaries and Lutherans both do it, making the bread and the wine to
remain. The Catholic church does not, believing that the consecrated and
blessed bread, is no more bread, but as Christ says, His body. and the the
wine his blood.

Lo you have good readers a number of contradictions gathered out of this
small treatise of Calvin: wherein yet according to the title thereof, he minded
to give the world a full and perfect resolution of the Sacraments. But whiles
he labors to utter his heresy under color of some Christianite, and to
persuade his falsehood under the cloak of some truth, he is miserably driven, to
tell contrary tales, to say one thing and think an other, brefely to
confound him self with his own words. For what better reason may possibly
be found to discover false forged doctrine of an heretic, then to trippe him
in his talk, and take him in contradiction? Nothing can more discredit the
Author of a sect or declare more his wicked pretense, then to epsy diversity
of doctrine and variaunce of opinions in him. nor never, I think, appeared it
better in any heretic (except allwaies that fond friar Martin Luther) them in
Ihon Calvin. And yet this is he, upon whose only warrant and word diverse
deceived persons, have hazarded their souls and lost their life. I beseech
god give the remnant grace to see, know, and deteste from henceforthe, such a
teacher as you see now Calvin is.

Diverse other contradictions might be gathered out of this man's doctrine
touching this blessed Sacrament, if we listed to scanne each of his
propositions and saiengs. But because I have been over long already, and yet
in so good a purpose me thinks I can never be long enough, I will now pass
to the repugnaunce in his doctrine against holy scripture.

Our Savior says in the gospel off S. Ihon. Cap. 18.
Who eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life everlasting. Joan. 6.
Calvin in his institutions and in his commentaries upon that place teaches
thus. Who eats the bread at the communion he receaueth a cundyte pipe by the
which life is derived unto him. Repugnances in Calvin to holy scripture
Mark I beseech you Christen readers, how he has altered the words of our
Savior. Where Christ says, Who eats my flesh, Calvin says who eats the
bread at the communion. and where Christ says he has life ever lasting,
Calvin says he has a cundyte pipe by the which life is derived, calling
the blessed flesh of our Savior, one person with the godhead, a coundyt pype
or instrument, by the which life is derived from god the Father. For that is
his meaning, (as you shall see more plainly hereafter, when I come to his
heresies) attributing life not to the flesh of Christ, as Christ him self
does, but to the Father in whom he teaches life to remain principally, as
you shall anon see. But now to an other proposition.

Christ says, Joan. 11.
I am the resurrection and the life. Calvin says in his commentaries upon the
sixte off Ihon, The Son is as a river by the which the life abiding in the
father is derived unto us. Here again Christ speaking as god and man, says him
self to be the life. For as the general council of Ephesus charely warns
us, Cirilus in apologetico in defensione anathematismi 4.
the words of the gospel are all ways to be attributed to Christ as to one
person, though consisting of two natures* Calvin says the life to remain in
the father. Where blasphemousely he excludes Christ, making him as a river or
means, by the which life is derived unto us. But of this we shall have more
occasion to speak hereafter.

Our Savior after he had said in the sixte off Ihon, my flesh is meat in
deed, and my blood is drink in deed, expounding those his words unto the
carnal Jews, thinking he had meaned his flesh and blood, Cirillus lib. 11
Cap. 22. in Joan. Cap. 81.
after the bare nature of man, says thus. The words which I spoke unto you
are Spirit and life, giving us to understand (as the learned Father Cirillus
notes) that he spoke of his flesh, and blood, inseparably annexed to the
godhead, and one person with the same. Now Calvin in his institutions
affirms that by the Spirit of Christ, his flesh is derived unto us and made
our food. In the which doctrine he separateth the Spirit of Christ from his
blessed flesh, giving us the one without the other: whereas Christ him self
above affirmed that he meaned his flesh coupled and united to the Spirit,
saying, the words which I spoke unto you (to wit, of my flesh and blood) are
Spirit and life, that is, not bare flesh but endued with my Spirit, the godhead
it self: nor to be derived unto us by the Spirit, as separated from the
flesh, or as a cundit pype to conducte the flesh unto us (which Calvin in
his institutions says, as you have heard before) but to be given unto us with
the Spirit, and deite of our Savior jointly and inseparably, as they are in
him one person, and one Christ. Thus you see how he corrects and alters
the words off our Savior at his pleasure.

Again whereas Christ says in S. Ihon, I^an. 6.
He that eats my flesh and drinks my blood, has life everlasting,
promising us by eating to have life, Calvin correcting the saying of our
Savior, in his commentaries upon S. Ihon, In cap. 6.
where Christ promises life and resurrection by the eating of his flesh and
drinking of his blood, he says, Christ speaks not here of the Supper, but
of the perpetual communion of him, which we have beside the use of the Supper.
And yet that ye may not think he means of any other communion (naming the
perpetual communion) then the very same which we have in the celebration of
our lords Supper, in few words after he adds thus much. And yet I
confess, that nothing is here spoken, which is not also figured and truly
exhibited unto us in the Supper. Thus he makes him self as sure off Christ,
without the receiving of this blessed Sacrament, as when he receaueth it.
which by the conference of an other place of holy Scripture you shall see yet
ones again.

S. Paul says The bread which we break is the participation of the body of
our Lord: whereby we learn in this blessed Sacrament to receive the body of
Christ. Calvin teaches us without the blessed sacrament to receive it. For in
his resolutio^s upon the sacraments he has these words. Art. 19.
Right as the infidel by the use of the Sacraments receaueth no more profit
thereby the^ if he used the^ not, eue^ so the verite figured in the sacraments
is communicated to the faitheful and beleuers, though not receiving the signs
or sacraments. By this rule we receive Christ in the supper, which before has
b^n given unto us and dwells in us perpetually. And in the.9. article of the
same work he says. that such as have before received Christ, receiving the
Sacrament do renew and continue that which they had before received. By this
his doctrine you see, he corrects the words of Christ teaching us to
receive him by eating his flesh and drinking his blood. And the words of S.
Paul, saying the bread to be the participation of our Lords body: by which
word he means the blessed Sacrament: naming it so of that which it was
before: Exodus 7.
as the serpent was called Moses rodd, Joan. 2.
and the wine water in Cana Galilea.

S. Paul says. Who so ever eats the bread and drinks the cup of the Lord
unworthily, he eats and drinks his own damnation: 1. Cor. 11.
giving us to understand that at the receiving of the blessed sacrament, we
receive other life by the worthy receiving other damnation by the unworthy. Now
the doctrine of Calvin directly repugneth. For thus he writes in his
resolutio^s upon the sacraments. Farther says he, Art. 20.
the profit which we receive at the sacraments, ought not to be restrained to
the time we receive the^, as if that the visible sign as soon as it is given
us, should bring us forthewith the grace of god. It may happen that the
receite of the sacrament which in the act profited nothing, through our
defaulte or slacknes, may afterward bring forth better fruict. Thus far
Calvin. Consider now, if this doctrine be not clean contrary to the meaning
of S. Paul. For if, as S. Paul says, receiving the sacrament unworthily we
receive our own damnation, why also in receiving it worthily receive we not
withal incontinently the grace, and virtue thereof? Again if by our defaulte it
works us damnation, as the Apostle says, how ca^ it afterward avail us,
as Calvin teaches? Thirdly if at the receite of the sacrament, we receive
nothing, what shall the bread (that Calvin imagines alone) signify? shall it
signify that by eating it, we receive no profit thereby? In good sothe it will
signify unto us, that Calvin mocketh with God, and the world, and that in
eating the bread, we eat nothing else* And truly if you remember his doctrine
before, you see he means naught else.

S. Paul speaking of our Lords body and blood given us in the blessed
sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
says thus. He that eats and drinks unworthily, eats and drinks his
own damnation, not discerning the body of our Lord. Calvin in his
commentaries upon this place says, That the wicked person therefore eats
unworthily because he refuses the body of our Lord offered unto him, eating
thereby the only sign. to wit bare bared. Mark the difference of S. Paul's
doctrine, and Caluins imagination. For how does the wicked eat the body and
therewith his damnation, which S. Paul teaches, if he eat but bread and
refuse the body, which Calvin imagines? I will grant who refuses Christ,
refuses life, and thereby works his own damnation. But this is not to eat
his damnation, in such sort as S. Paul speaks there.

Our Savior in the sixte of Ihon says, Your fathers did eat Manna in the
desert, and are dead. This is that bread which comes down from heaven, that
a man may eat thereof and not die. Calvin in his commentaries upon the first
to the Corinthia^s, the tenth chapter teaches, that the Jews eating Ma^na,
did eat the very body of Christ spiritually as we do, and received the same
effect by eating the Manna, as we do by the communion. He labors much in
that place to prove this fond doctrine, and forgeth a sorry shifte to avoid
these words of our Savior in S. Ihon. Christ, says he, having to do with
the Jews preferring Moses before him, in his answer to them, expounded not
what Manna signified, but letting all other things pass, framed them an
answer mete for their capacite, speaking not according to the nature of the
thing, but according to the meaning and s^ns of the hearers. Thus much
Calvin. But behold, I beseech you, the sophistry of this wily heretic. He
would make us believe, that Christ in S. Iho^ played the Rhetoricia^s part, and
withal is not afeared to make our Savior (O blasphemous Sacramentary) a liar.
For Christ says plainly, That the Jews eating Manna died (for not by
eating Manna, but by believing in the Messiah to come, they were fed of
Christ) But the bread which he would give should be life everlasting to those
which eat off it. If now as Calvin says, the eating of Manna served their
turn, no less then the bread of life Christ him self served ours, to wit,
that they received also the bread of life spiritually in eating Manna, as we do
in eating the blessed Sacrament, then were not that sayieng off Christ true,
nor his comparison good, preferring the bread of life which he would give us
before the Manna of the Jews. For their Manna as Calvin says, was bread of
life to them: then was it not inferior to that which Christ would give, but
all one and the same. But now to an other.

Our Savior in S. Ihon has these words. Joan. 6.
Who eats my flesh and drinks my blood, dwells in me and I in him.
Institut. Cap. 18.
Calvin corrects these words in his doctrine of the Supper, and makes this
proposition. Who believes in the death and resurrection of Christ, the
communion of his flesh is derived unto him, by the virtue of his holy Spirit.
First in this doctrine where Christ bids us eat his flesh, and so promises
him self to dwell with us, and in us, Calvin bids us believe in Christ his
death, saying thereby we eat his flesh: and the^ instead of Christ God and
man abiding in us which our Savior in this most holy Sacrament promises, and
(no doubt) perfourmeth unto us, Calvin warra^teth us of a certain communion of
the flesh remaining only in heaven, which shall be derived, he says, by the
Spirit off Christ unto us. This is lo not to have God and man Christ him self
abiding in us (which because Christ promises us, we must undoubtedly believe
so) but to have him only spiritually abiding in us: to wit, coming to us
only by spirit and abiding only in heaven by flesh. How false and how far
disagreble with the words of our Savior this doctrine of Calvin is, we have
in his absurdites and contradictions declared. Presently it suffiseth to know,
that he does both in terms and in sense comptroll and alter the words and
meaning of our Savior.

S. Paul writing to the Corinthians, of the due access and reverence of this
blessed Sacrament, 1. Cor. 11.
says. Let every man try him self and so eat of this bread. Calvin in his
Institutions and upon the sixte of Ihon teaches, that by believing we eat
Christ. Cap. 18.
Now seeing that no man tries him self, but first he believes, and in
believing we eat Christ, then before we try our selves, we do eat: contrary
to the express words off the Apostle, bidding us first to try our selves,
and so to eat of this bread of life. And truly according to the doctrine of
Calvin (as you have seen before) believing in Christ's death and resurrection
we eat and receive the body and blood off Christ allwaies, no less then in
the use of the Supper or communion. Which excludes all trial of our selves
required by S. Paul.

For the maintenance of this wicked Sacramentary doctrine, Calvin abuses and
turns from their right understanding, not only such places of holy
scripture as directly make against him, as you have hitherto partly seen, but
also such as by any consequence of reason, might seem to hinder the course of
his wicked doctrine. For example I will pnt you in mind of one or two. Cap. 20.
Whereas it is written in S. Ihon that Christ entered, where his disciples were,
the doors being shutt, because this miracle might importe to the body of our
Savior a possibilite of being in sundry places at ones, and so destroy the
false ground of these sacramentaries, tying Christ to the right hand of his
Father, Cap. 18
Calvin in his institutions says, that Christ entered not the doors being
shutt, but that the doors opened of them selves. Otherwhere he writes, that an
erthequake was made, and so the doors opened. Brefely he inuenteth what shifte
he may, rather them he will yield to the truth of the church.

With like confidence this presumptuous Sacrame^tary Ihon Calvin peruerteth by
false tra^slatio^ the Sea the lease 158.
words of holy scripture in the proverbs of Salomo^ co^taining a clear
prophecy of this blessed sacrament. We alleged you the place before, and after
what sort it was by him corrupted. If we would in other points and articles of
the Catholic faith by him denied and impugned use the like diligence, we could
be as long in the retical and setting forth of the^, as he is in the whole
corpse of his works, where such doctrine is taught. But now I will proceed to
the other parts of our promis, touching this one article, and after say
somewhat of some other point of his doctrine.

Our Lord in holy scripture, by the mouth off his prophet Jeremy, speaking
against the perilous presumption of those, which forsake him and his holy
word, Ierem. 2.
pronounces the plage that falls on the^ in these words. They have forsake
me the fountain of life, and have dug the^ selves pittes and pudles al to
broken, and such as can hold no water, giving us to understand, that who so
forsakes the right way prescribed unto us by allmighty god in his holy word,
and refuses the most holesom drink of the fountain, god him self, is
forced forthewith, being as a man berefted of his right understanding and
sense, to lap in such pudle, as the fond imagination of his own brain
instructed and supported with the devil, ready to thruste forward, when god
forsakes, can inue^t. Of such it is said in holy scripture. Who loves the
peril, shall perish in it, and again. Who touches the pitche shall be filed
therewith. You have seen how Calvin has forsaken the express words of god
in his gospel, to further thereby the plausible doctrine, and pleasant poison
of his own imaginations. You shall now see what pittes and pudles he is feign
to lap in, forsaking the doctrine of Christ in the gospel. Truly they are
such and so filthy, that I fear the recital thereof may be to good
Christian hearts more noysom then profitable. Notwithstanding because this man
is of such credit among the deceived sort of our country, that his
Institutions, the very fardle of all his beggarly doctrine, and box of his
venomous heresies, is commanded to be read of such, as have charge of souls
(a sufficient means truly to draw all the unlearned of England, but if god
stay them, to eternal damnation) I will by the grace of God give you for a
taste, such instructions touching the most blessed sacrament of the altar,
and the sacrament of Baptim, which only for sacraments he allows, that you
may hereafter little lust after the perilous persuasions of his doctrine, in
other inferior points of our Christen faith, the dearest and most precious
jewel that we have on earth.

The pittes and pudles that Calvin has dug him self, are old heresies
condemned above a thousand years, and now renewed by him partly in express
words, partly by most assured and necessary consequence of his writings.

Calvin in his commentaries upon S. Ihon has these words. In Cap. 6. Joan.
Old condemned heresies renewed by Calvin in the doctrine of the blessed
Sacrament.
It is to be noted there are three degres of life. The living Father has the
first place, as the fountain off life, but yet far distant and hid. The
Son follows him, whom we have set before us as a river by the which the life
abiding in the father is derived unto us. the third life is that which we
draw of him. Thus far Calvin: This doctrine, beside that it is a mere
imagination of Calvin, and a broken pudle of his brickle brain, it contains
in it sundry heresies. First if the Son of god Christ him self, be a following,
that is, a second cause of life, as Calvin says, then is it not equal with
the first, and so is it a creature, not god the Creator, which is first and
chefest, and second to none. The^ he co^pareth Christ to a river and god the
father to a fountain. Now the fountain is before the river, and is cause of
the river: the^ by the doctrine of Calvin, god the father is before the Son and
cause of the life in the Son. For all this he means of god the Son, not of the
flesh off Christ which he denies to give life or to be quickening of it self.
This lo is the cursed and detestable heresy of Arrius condemned in the first
general council of Nice above twelve hundred years paste. If S^ruetus whom
Calvin burned at Geneua for an Arrian, were now alive again, and Calvin to, he
might challenge M. Calvin for the like, and call him worthily to the stake.

Again this doctrine of Calvin resembles much in words (but in effect
passes far) August. l^b. 20. cap. 2. contra Faustu^ manich.
the doctrine of Faustus Manicheus, who said that god the father occupied the
chefest and principal light: but the Son consisted in a second light. Which
fond opinion of him Saint Augustine confuteth as a detestable heresy. Much
more may we so do in this distinction of degres of life, that Calvin imagines
to be in the blessed Trinite.

Thirdly he affirms the life which we receive of Christ, the Son, to abide
in the Father: as though Christ of him self gave not us life by the
participation of his divine flesh. Which to say is the heresy of Valentinus
whom S. Irene confuteth.

Calvin in his commentary upon the resolution of the Sacraments, says that,
Unto the substance of bread remaining bread, the body of our lord which is
the verite figured by the bread is so coupled and united, as the godhead was to
the flesh of Christ, it remaining true and natural flesh. And this his
doctrine he goes about to prove by the words of Gelasius in his epistle to
king Frauncis prefixed before his Institutions. It is also the doctrine of
Calvin that Christ is in the Sacrament only by faith not corporally* For so
(says he) he is only in heaven. Then will it follow by the reason of Calvin,
that the godhead was joined and united to the flesh of Christ only by faith,
and that the flesh was not deified and one person with god. This was the
heresy of Paulus Samosatenus condemned all most thirten hundred years paste.

The doctrine of Calvin in his Institutions is, as you partly heard before,
that in the blessed Sacrament the manner of receiving Christ, is by the
operation of his Spirit, In institut. Cap. 18 and in. 1. Cor. 11.
which (says he) is as a certain ^undyt pipe, whereby what soever Christ is,
or has, is derived unto us. and by the Spirit of Christ, he says, we
receive in to our souls his body and blood, which yet departs not from the
right hand of the father. This doctrine separateth Christ, making his holy
Spirit to serve as a cundyt pipe for the conuaiaunce of his flesh in to our
souls. Beside the absurdite of the doctrine, which we before declared you, it
sauoureth of the heresy of Nestorius. For as he denied the flesh off Christ to
be inseparably united to the godhead, and therefore taught that we received not
whole Christ, but his flesh only and not his godhead (for these were his
words (as Cirillus records) In oppositione ad anathematis. 11.
Qui manducat carnem meam, non dixit qui manducat diuinitatem. that is, Christ
said, he that eats my flesh, he said not he that eats my divinity etc.)
so Calvin denies we receive whole Christ, granting us a spiritual food
only. In. 1. Cor. 11.
For so (in his commentaries upon S. Paul) he concludes, saying that a
certain quickening virtue is derived unto us out of the flesh of Christ by his
Spirit, though the flesh be far distant from us and not joined with us.

The doctrine of Calvin as it contains variable and contrary assertions, so
it bredeth diverse and sundry heresies. You heard even now that by making the
Spirit of Christ a pipe for the conuaiaunce off Christ his flesh in to our
souls (which he teaches both in his Institutions and in his commentaries
upon S: Paul) he fell in to the heresy of the Maniches no less wicked and
ancient heretics then Nestorius. Now you shall see that making the flesh off
Christ a pipe for the conuaiaunce of Christ his divinity unto us, he falls in
to the heresy of Nestorius. In his commentaries upon the sixte of S. Ihons
gospel thus he writes. As the everlasting word off God is the fountain of
life, so his flesh conuaieth unto us like a certain pipe that life abiding in
the godhead. And in this sense the flesh of Christ is said to give life,
because it communicates unto us the life which it boroweth other where. These
are the very words of Calvin. Now let us considre the doctrine of S. Paul
saying. 2. Cor. 15.
As in Adam all do die, so in Christ all shall be quickened or endued with
life. Upon the ground of this doctrine which can not be denied, thus I
reason. If the flesh of Christ does not of it self give life, as Calvin
says, but serves us as a pipe of the life abiding in god, then the
sinnerfull flesh of Adam was not of it self damnable and the cause of our
damnation ( We all sinning and dieng in Adam as S. Paul says) but a pipe or
instrument of death and damnation abiding in some evil God, from whence the
flesh of Adam took death and damnation, as the flesh of Christ (acording to
Calvin) boroweth life of God. For otherwise the saying of S. Paul shall not be
true, attributing as properly and as truly life unto our Savior, as death
unto Adam. Now to imagine a higher cause of death in Adam, then Adam him
self, and an evil God in whom that death before remained, Tom. 6. passim and
in lib. de haer.
to be from thence derived to sinners, is the very doctrine of the cursed
Maniches, making two Gods or beginnings of all things one of the good, and an
other of the badde: as in S. Augustine it is easy to find.

But here perhaps some scholar of Caluins schole, Why Calvin may vvorthely be
charged with such heresies.
and zealous professor of the gospel of Geneua will step in and say, that
Master Calvin never taught, never allowed, nor so much as dreamed off the
approving of such heinous heresies as these are. And therefore we deal not
charitably herein, but rather utter our malice and stomache to no purpose. To
such because I think it were hard for me to frame an awnswer of my own, that
might please them, I will awnswer with the words of M. Calvin him self, which
I hope shall not mislike them. Master Calvin in his Institutions having for his
pleasure long iested at the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, and with a few
sorry reasons labored to prove that such as said Mass, crucified Christ
again, at the length moves the like objection as this is, against him self,
and awnswereth unto it in these words. I know well, says he, they have a
ready answer, whereby they will charge us as slaunderers. For they will say we
lay that unto their charge which they never thought, and which they were
sure they could never do. But we know well inoughe, it is not in their hands
to make Christ live or die. Nether care we if they never thought to kill him.
Only this I would show what absurdite does follow by their wicked and heinous
doctrine. Thus awnswered Calvin, thinking it a sufficient excuse to escape the
note of a slau^derer and false accuser, having well deserved it. We awnswer the
same being no false accusers of Calvin, but true reporters of that we find in
his writings, and say, that we pass not whether Calvin ever thought as
Arrius, Faustus Manicheus, Valentinus, Samosatenus, Nestorius, and the whole
sect of the Maniches taught. Only we entend to show that by his heinous and
wicked doctrine, such heresies do consequently follow. Which the unlearned take
so much the sooner, for that they come under the visard of a favorer of the
gospel. Whereas being now brought to light, and their visard plucked of,
they shall appear in their liknes, to wit, old cursed and condemned
heresies. This I trust shall make men take better aduisement which way they
walk in matters of belefe, nor lightely to trust every new Master bringing
new lerning, and not heard of before. Lest as Calvin has done, by listening
after new doctrine, they fall in to old heresies. But now to the residew of
them.

That the paschal lamb offered and eaten by Moses in the old law, was a
clear figure of Christ the true lamb of god to be eaten and offered in the new
law, for the redemption of mankind, it is a verite of all Christen men
confessed and undoubtedly received. The words of our Savior saying that it
behooved him to fulfill all which was written of him in the law, Luc. 24.
the psalms and the prophets give us no less to understand. S. Paul also
teaches us that al things happe^ed to the Jews in figure, to wit, 1. Cor.
10.
of such things as under Christ should be accomplished. Brefely Calvin him
self in his commentaries upon S. Paul to the Hebrews, confesses that all
the sacrifices of the old law do lead us to the sacrifice of Christ: In
cap. 9.
which doctrine he learned of the holy fathers, especially S, Augustine, De
ciuit. dei lib. 17. Cap. 20. and in psalm. 39.
who repeteth it in sundry places of his works. Calvin therefore in his
Institutions treating of our Lords supper, accords this figure of the
paschall lamb with the supper off our Lord in this sort. The paschall lamb
says he, being bodily eaten did figure the spiritual eating of our paschall
lamb which is Christ. Upon this his doctrine it follows, that Christ was but
spiritually, not corporally offered up for us. For the paschal lamb of Moses
figured Christ not only as it was eaten, but also as it was offered. If then
the figure of the lamb eaten be accomplished by spiritual eating of Christ,
the figure of the lamb offered shall be also accomplished by the spiritual
oblation of Christ. For both actions were true figures of Christ, and both
were to be accomplished by Christ, no less the one then the other. Now to
make the sacrifice of Christ, but a spiritual sacrifice, lib. 4. aduersu^
Marcionem
is the heresy of Marcion whom Tertullian confuteth. The truth is that as
Christ was a true sacrifice figured by the paschall lamb to die for us, so was
he a true sacrifice figured by the same to be eaten by us.

Because the heresy of Valentinus renewed by the heretical doctrine of Calvin,
well espied and tried out makes much for the verite of the real presence in
this blessed Sacrament, we will yet farther see how the doctrine of Calvin
destroying the real presence, vpholdeth and renews the heresy of Valentinus.
The opinion of Valentinus was that the body of Christ was a celestial body,
descending from heaven through the womb of the blessed Virgin, taking no
fleshely substance thereof. Calvin calls rem signatam the thing figured in
the Sacrament a spiritual and celestial thing. In iustitut. Cap. 18.
In the same place not many lines after thus he concludes his doctrine of the
B. Sacrament. I say therefore, the holy mystery of the Supper consists of
two things to wit the earthly signs setting before our eyes according to
our caepacite the invisible things, and the Spiritual verite figured and
exhibited by the signs. The matter also of this spiritual verite he
expounds him self to be Christ with his death and resurrection. And in an
other place of his works, writing against the council of Trent thus he
speaks. In antidoto.
The bread remains bread terrestrial and corruptible: but the celestial
body of Christ is joined thereunto: and hereof, says he by the authorite of
Ireneus, this mystery consists of two things, the one terrestrial and of
earth, the other celestial and of heaven, to wit the celestial body off
Christ, and the material bread of earth. Hitherto you see Calvin in the
blessed Sacrament to acknowledge no other body of Christ, then Spiritual and
celestial: even as the heretic Valentinus did: and to color his doctrine
also by the authorite off Ireneus. Now you shall understand that Ireneus
writing against the foresaid heresy of Valentinus, for the confutation thereof
among other arguments, uses the common belefe of the Catholic church,
touching this blessed Sacrament. Li. 4. Cap. 34.
Our doctrine says he, is conformable to the Eucharistie (terming so this
blessed Sacrament) and the Eucharistie confirms our doctrine: for we offer
unto god that which are his own, declaring accordingly the unite and
conjunction of the flesh and of the Spirit: For as the material bread
receiving the invocation of god, is no more common bread, but the Eucharistie
consisting of two things the one of earth the other of heaven, so our bodies
receiving the Eucharistie: are no more corruptible, but have certain h^pe of
resurrection. Thus far Ireneus. In the which words against Valentinus he
affirms, that the Sacrament contains Christ him self which consists of
two things or natures, being one person, to wit of earthely flesh taken of
the virgin, and of the celestial godhead descending from heaven. Now Calvin
because he will deny the real presence of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament,
imagines the celestial body of Christ without flesh to be joined with the
material bread, as Valentinus the heretic did, abusing also to that purpose
this very place of Ireneus wherein he shows him self other very ignorant of
Ireneus meaning and disputation in that place, or very malicious in deprauing
it after his own brainesicke fantasy. For S. Irene directly reproves the
opinion of Valentinus denieng the incarnation of Christ, and his true flesh,
because in the Sacrament we receive his true and natural flesh. and therefore
a few lines before he says. Quomodo constabit eis etcae.? How will they be
assured that the same consecrated bread is the body of their lord and the
cup of his blood, if they deny it to be the Son of god maker of the world?
Does not here that holy Martyr, and learned Father prove the very flesh and
natural body of Christ, against that heretic, upon the ground of our
belefe touching the real presence of Christ him self in the Sacrament? Does
not Calvin taking away this ground of our belefe, and denieng the real
presence of Christ's flesh in the Sacrament, leaving us only a spiritual
verite, consequently allow the heresy of Valentinus?

Again Valentinus denied the resurrection of our bodies. Ireneus proves it
unto him, by the doctrine of the Sacrament, saying in the same place above
alleged. How dare they say that our flesh shall come to corruption and not
receive life which is fedd with the body and blood of our lord? Now Calvin
in his Catechism, in his Institutions, and every where teaches that our
soul, not the body eats the body of Christ, really and truly, but not
corporally: and is nourished there with in hope of life everlasting. Does not
this his doctrine granting that celestial food, and only warrant of our
resurrection to the soul, destroy the resurrection of the body, as Valentinus
the heretic did? Is he not ones again most manifestly fallen into broken
pudles of old condemned heresies?

Our Savior says, Onles you eat my flesh and drink my blood, you shall have
no life in you, he that eats my flesh and drinks my blood has life, and I
will raise him up again in the later day. Joan. 6.
Now if the soul only eats this heavenly food, The doctrine of the
Sacrame^taries destroieth the resurrection of our bodies.
as Calvin teaches, the soul only shall have life, and be raised up at the
later day. For the only warrant of resurrection is the participation of the
flesh and blood of Christ. For though the bodies of infidels, of heretics,
and of evil Christians, shall arise again, yet they shall not arise to life,
nor in such manner of resurrection, as our Savior means, Philip. 3. ^. Cor.
15.
which is (as his blessed Apostle S. Paul teaches us) to put on immortalite,
to be made incorruptible. and to be glorified. For so shall only the true
beleuers in Jesus Christ, and partakners of this holy sacrament arise. As for
infa^ts baptized, though they receive not sacrame^tally the flesh and blood of
Christ, yet even as by the faith of holy church they believe and are accounted
to have faith, so by the communion of Saints and societe of the Catholic
church they are incorporated to our Savior and assured of their resurrection.

It will peradventure seem impossible to the favorers of Caluins doctrine, and
prisers of his gospel, that he should ever mean any such heinous doctrine,
as this is. Verily what he thought in conscience, we will not judge: but what
his writings declare^ him to be, you see, I think, evidently. In his
Cathechisme laboring to wipe away this suspicio^ from him he says, he has
a witness and a warrant of the resurrection of his body, and of the salvation
thereof, in that he eats the sign of life. But I pray you, could he more
manifestly deny the salvation of the body, then to attribut it to that thing
which can not give it? For what avails it for the assurance of life, to eat
(as he says) the sign of life, which is naught else, but a morcell of bread?
Where finds he such assurance of life in holy scripture? What scripture
tells him, that by eating the sign of life his body shall rise to
incoruption? Christ promises us life and resurrection by eating his flesh and
drinking his blood. Is the flesh and blood of Christ a sign of life? Is he
not the true bread of life? Is not his holy flesh, united to the godhead, and
made one person with god, true quickening flesh and giving life? Surely this
doctrine off Calvin utterly overthrows the resurrection of our bodies.

Peter Richier a french ghospeller, Villogaio no^ contra Caluinu Cap. 20.
Caluins scholar, denies this fond doctrine of his Master, to wit, that by
eating the sign of life the body should be assured of resurrection, and
imagines an other shifte, that the soul being raised spiritually by eating
the body of Christ, shall give life to the body and raise it also. What wicked
dreams and inventions are these off proud and presumptuous heretics? The
promis of life and resurrection is made to the flesh of Christ, not to the
bread, nor to the soul. Thus lo it fares with them, which content not them
selves with the sure known doctrine of the Catholic church, but by drifte of
reason, or prick off pride, and malice search out new inue^tions of their own.

It is the doctrine of Calvin and all the sacramentaries, that in the
celebration of our Lords supper be no consecration of the mysteries. For
that, they say, the bread there is no other wise blessed the^ other creatures
of god are by the virtue of their creation. Calvin in his Institutio^s says,
that Christ in the benedictio^ which he used, directed not his words to the
bread, and that to bless the bread is which craft and charming. The like he
writes in his commentaries upon S. Paul to the Corinthia^s. This doctrine lo
is the very heresy of Faustus Manicheus. we (says that Maniche) In 1. Cor. 10.
use the same religion in all creatures of god, as you use in the bread and the
chalice. Lo this heretic acknowledges noother kind of religion, in the holy
mysteries, then in other creatures of god. That is, that the one is as much
blessed as the other. But what answers here S. Augustine? Tom. 6.
For he reports these words of the heretic in his books against him. Does
he acknowledge no other benediction in the Sacrament then in other creatures of
god? Is he ashamed of the benediction used in the church of Christ? Does he
call it witchecrafte or charming? Lib. 20. cap. 13. Contra Faustu^. Fit
misticus non nas^^tur.
See therefore what he awnswereth. Our bread and chalice (says S. Augustine)
is not common: but by certain consecration is made mystical is not borne so.
And therefore that which is not so made (to wit by certain consecration)
though it be bread and cup, it is food for refection, not the sacrament of
our religion, though allwaies we bless and give thanks to god in all his
gifts as well corporal as spiritual. Thus far S. Augustine, declaring that
in the mysteries we use a certain and propre consecration, whereby the
mysteries are made other then they were by nature. For he says of the bread it
is made mystical, non nascitur. it is not so by nature. giving us understand
that by virtue of consecration the bread is made that, The communion o^ the
protestants is but foo^e for refection.
wiche by nature it was not: to wit, the body of our Savior. Again S.
Augustine says, that which lacks consecration is food for refection, not
the sacrament of our religion. So the Caluinistes in their communion by the
judgment of S. Augustine have food for refection, not the sacrament of our
religion. Finally S. Augustine confuting the old heresy of the Maniches, does
also confute the new heresy of Calvin, yea and the order of our communion,
where no consecration, nor benediction is used.

Thus we see, Christian readers, what broken pittes and pudles Calvin has
dug him self, and all sacramentaries are forced to lap in, forsaking the
fountain of life Christ him self in this blessed sacrament of the altar. We
see, who list to be a scholar of Calvin, a ghospeller of Geneua or a
Sacramentary protestant, he must also be an Arrian, a Nestorian, a
Sam^satenical, a Marcioniste, a Donatiste, a M^ni^he, and a Valentinian diverse
ways. These heretics with all their doctrine were condemned above a thousand
years, in that state of the church, which only our adversaries approve for
pure and virtuous. If that state had the right doctrine, those heretics were
by them worthily condemned. If they were worthily condemned, these
sacramentaries can off no good Christian men be allowed, followed or supported.

As in our discourse upon Luther, beside a number of old cursed heresies by him
renewed and common to al protestants, we declared you one proper heresy of his
own, for examples sake, even so after the rank of these old condemned
heresies, which Calvin has incurred only in mistaking, or rather wilfully
departing from the Catholic faith off the most blessed Sacrament of the
altar, I will recite you one most horrible and blasphemous heresy of his own
imagination, for examples sake of many more which might be brought, if we
listed in this short discourse, to say all that might be said. In his
institutions upon the article of our Creed Descendit ad inferos, He descended
in to hell he teaches, Cap. 7.
that Christ there suffered the pains of hell: and mocketh at the belefe of the
Catholic Church teaching us that then our Savior delivered the souls of the
fathers off the old law, according as the scripture witnesses, speaking by
the prophet most evidently of our Savior, Tu quoque in sanguine Testamenti tui
emis^sti vinctos tuos de lacu in quo non est aqua. Zachar. 9.
that is, Thou also through the blood of thy testament have let thy pr^sonners
out of the pit, wherein is no water. Hieronymus in Zachariam. 9.
which ^aying of the prophet the learned fathers have allwaies expounded of the
descending of Christ in to hell, and delivering there the souls of the fathers
of the old law. But as touching the heresy of Calvin, which in place of this
received doctrine this presumptuous heretic avouches, you shall hear his
own blasphemous words, and learn of what a master our ghospellers of Geneua
have learned their false faith. These be his words first in latin. Nihil actum
erat si corporea tantum morte defunctus fuisset Christus: sed opera simul
praecium erat vt diuinae vltionis seueritatem sentiret, quo and irae ipsius
intercederet, and satisfaceret iusto iudicio, vt cum inferorum copijs
aeternaeq^e mortis horrore quasi consertis manibus luctaretur: Correctionem
pacis nostrae illi impositam fuisse propheta docet, fuisse propter scelera
nostra a patre percussum, attritu^ propter nostras infirmitates. Quibus
significat in locum peccatorum sponsorem, vadem, adeoque instar rei submissum
ad dependendas persoluendasque omnes quae ab illis expetendae erant poenas, vno
hoc duntaxat ^x^ pto quod doloribus mortis non poterat detineri. Ergo si ad
inf^res descendisse dicitur, nihil mirum est, cum eam mortem pertulerit, quae
sceleratis ab irato deo infligitur. Hitherto are his words as they lie in his
institutions in latin. Now let us see the english. Nothing had been done, says
Calvin, if Christ had dyed only by bodily death. O heinous blasphemy of these
cursed heretics. What could be said more blasphemously? Has not now the
death of Christ satisfised for our sins? Be these the ghospellers that set
forth and commend so much the passion of Christ? Is the bodily death of Christ
nothing? Must his soul suffer also in hell? You shall hear forth the words
of Calvin. But it was also requisite, says he, that Christ should feel the
rigor of gods vengeance, whereby he might appease his wrath and satisfy his
just judgment, that he should fight and combat with the Hosts of hell and
horror off eternal death. Lo he says Christ ought beside his bodily death,
which was on the Chrosse, feel also the rigor of gods vengeance, satisfise
also his most just judgment, and abide the horror of eternal death. O
horrible blasphemy, mete for a sacramentary ghospeller. For how then said
Christ in his Cross, after all the bitter torments suffered for mankind and
accomplished, Matthew. 26.
Consummatum est, It is finished? Was he yet to suffer more in hell? And how
cried he in his last most blessed words, Father in to thy hands I commend my
Spirit? Was that to be tormented after of the devils in hell? Did his Father
keep it no better, but let it be tormented yet again? Finally how was that only
sacrifice on the Cross (as S. Hebr, 10.
Paul says) a perfect co^summatio^ and sanctification for ever? Must he yet
besides suffer torments in hell? So says Calvin, Master to all the Geneuian
protestants of England, expressly against scripture, blasphemously against God,
and heretically against the Catholic doctrine. And where writes he this? In
his Institutions: a book so precious in the eyes off some pretended bishops,
that it is by them commanded to be read of such, as have charge of souls. May
not we worthily cry with that holy father Policarpus, O Deus in quae nos
tempora reseruasti? Eusebius. lib. 2. histor.
O God to what times have thou reserved us? Do we yet look whether these
protestants tend, that so blasphemously write of the blessed passion of
Christ, and command such writings to be read of the unlearned priests, which
shall teach it again to the simple and unlearned people? And yet Calvin will
prove his blasphemies by scripture: truly even as he proves the rest of his
doctrine. For lo these are his words following. The prophet teaches that the
chastisement of our peace was laid on him, he was smitten of the father for
our offenses, and bruised for our wickedness: by the which words he signifies
that he was sent in to the place of sinners as a surety, a pleadg, yea and as a
gilty person to pay and abide all such pains, as were to be required of them:
only this excepted that he could not be continually stayed with the sorrows of
death. Therefore no maruail if he be said to have descended in to ^ell seeing
he suffered such death as God in his wrath punishes the wicked withal. Thus
far you have the words of Calvin, and his heinous heresy therein contained.
As for the saying off the prophet, which (as he and his fellows do in infinite
other texts of holy scripture) he wresteth from the true meaning, the Catholic
church has allwaies taken it to have been fulfilled on the Cross, in the
bodily death of Christ. For there he was smitten off the Father for our
offenses, and bruised for our wickedness, there the chastisement of our peace and
atonement was laid upon him. But Calvin, as if he were a man priuileged from
God to say and teach as he lists, will have it so meant, that Christ beside
his bodily death on the Cross, be sent in to the place of sinners, which is
hell (for of Christ's descending in to hell he now disputes, unless (as some
protestants do) he make no hell at all, and say that Christ descended no
otherwise in to hell, but that he was tormented on the Cross) Read the
preface of Staphilus page 18. and the leaf. 106.
there to pay and abide all the torments of sinners, saving that he suffers
it not eternally. This is lo the reward off heresy, and of such as forsake
their faith: to fall in to most horrible blasphemies, such as a Turk would
abhor: and yet to see them not, but persuade them selves they have the light
of the gospel, and be only true Christians, and all the world beside blind,
superstitious and idolaters, not only that now is, but that has been this
thousand years. I will no more exaggerat the matter. I wish them amendment and
knowledge of the truth: and desire all other to beware in time, of such
perilous heresies, as these vnghostly ghospellers of Geneua bring to our
deceived country. We will now pass to the doctrine of Calvin, touching the
sacrament of baptim and consider how pure and evangelical his doctrine thereof
is.

In the sacrament of baptim, Heresies of Calvin about the Sacrament of Baptim*
though the doctrine of Calvin be almost of all protestants of our country,
not only the sacramentaries, received and embraced, yet it contains many
strange and horrible heresies. Which so in that man happened, because he
serched all subtle shifts, and pried out all the preuy fetches he could
devise, whereby he might defeat the doctrine of the Catholic church. For
hereupon he vvttereth in his doctrine diverse heinous heresies other ignorantly
or maliciously. First therefore we will discover unto you, such of his heresies
as are taken off the old condemned heretics in the primitive Church: Then
such as he forged him self expressly against holy scripture, and yet defends
them no less foolishely then wickedly, as allwaies the proper of heretics is
to do.

It was the heresy of Pelagius, as S* Augustine records, that children were
not borne in original sin. His words of the^ are these. Ad quoduultdemn.
Her. 88.
Paruulos etiam negant secundum Adam carnaliter natos contagium mortis antiquoe
prima natiuitate contrahere, sic enim eos sine vllo peccati originalis vinculo
asserunt nasci, vt prorsus non sit quod eis oporteat secunda natiuitate
dimitti, that is. The pelagians deny that children borne by flesh after Ada^
be guilty of death by their first natiuite. For they make them to be borne so
without bond of original sin, that they need no remission in their second
natiuite or regeneration. Here the Pelagians make children to be borne in state
off grace and not guilty of original sin. This these heretics taught
generally of all children. Calvin teaches the same in children borne off
Christen parents. 2. Cor. 15.
Hear his words, out off the 17. chapter off his Institutions toward the
end. Infantes nostros antequam nasca^tur se adoptare in suos pronunciat Deus,
cum se nobis in deum fore promittit seminique no^tro post nos. Hoc verbo
continetur eorum salus, that is. God promising that he will be our God, and
our childrens after us, pronounces that he adopteth and admits our
children for his own, before they are borne. In this word their salvation is
contained. And in an other place thus he writes. In appendice contra Interin.
Sancta videlicet and c^te. The issue of Christen parents is borne holy because
of the promis of God: and their children even yet in the womb before they come
to open life, are admitted in to the leage of life everlasting. Calvin here
and the Pelagians agree in this, that children are borne without original
sin and in state of grace. The difference may seem to be, that Calvin
speaks this of Christen children only whereas the Pelagians speak generally
of all children. But you shall see that by the proof which Calvin brings
for this abominable doctrine, it shall stretche to all children. For what is
the proof he brings? Forsothe the promis of God. What promis is that? that
which he made to Abrahan, saying he would be his god and his sede after him.
In this word says Calvin, their salvation is contained. Let us the^ suppose
that by the warrant of Caluins mouth all the realm of England being now
Christian, should leave their children unbaptized, because they are already
admitted in to the leage of life everlasting. Those children coming to the age
of me^, and having other children, must they baptize their children, or must
they not? If they must baptize their children, then the promis of God reaches
not unto them. For if it reached to them, it should ereache also to their
children: In which case they need not be baptized, but may live by the baptim
of their grandfathers. If they may not baptize their children, but let them
live without baptim, the^ see what detestable enormites and heinous
blasphemies will ensue thereupon.

First by this rule all the christening of children in England sens the faith
first planted there, and the realm thouroughely baptized, wiche pricketh now
well upon a thousand years, has been in vain and to no purpose, for that
they came of the issue and blood of Christen parents.

Secondarely all baptim now may cease in the realm, all fontes may be shutt
up, and of two sacraments which only remain, they may take away one, to
wit baptim, and then talk no more of the Sacraments in Christ his church,
but of a sacrament: which also in what point Calvin has left us, we have I
trust sufficiently before declared.

Thirdly Christendom shall be no more a spiritual matter, given by the
administration of Sacraments, but a temporal benefit, entailed to the blood of
the parents. And then great questions might arise of bastards, being not the
^ede of Christen marriage, but the fruit of filthy fornication or sinful
aduoutry.

Fourthely we must put out of the scripture the words of our Savior, I^an.
3.
Nisi quis renatus fuerit ex aqua and spiritu sancto, non intrabit in regnum
caelorum, that is, an. 1549* 1551. 1552. 15^2.
Onles a man be borne again of water and the holy ghost he shall not enter
into the kingdom of heaven. And truly they draw well toward to do so. For
look in the English bibles who will, printed of late years, and he shall
find the word ( again) to be left out. And even as now they have left
out that one word (by the which our regeneration by baptim is most
necessarely imported) ^o may they within few years leave out the whole
sentence, and the^ make a scripture of their own. For what other can we look
for of these impudent presumptuous heretics, if they may be suffered to run
their race at will? Our lord stay it, if it be his pleasure.

Last of all if Christendom so depends of our parents, why have all
Christen men ever so charely baptized their children, as all stories do
testify? Was it as Calvin writes, because they should not depart without
the sign or badge of a Christian man? Truly he writes so: and in so writing
he holds the heresy of the Maniches, as in the other he does of the
Pelagians. as ye shall anon see. But now harken what les^on S. Augustine gives
us touching the baptim of children. These are his words. Quisquis dixreit quod
in Christo viuificantur paruuli qui sine Sacrame^ti eius participatione de vita
exeu^t, Epist. ^ 28.
hic profecto and contra Apostolicam praedicationem venit, and tota^ condemnat
Ecclesiam: vbi propterea cum baptisandis paruulis festinatur and curritur, quia
sine dubio creditur aliter eos in Christo viuificari omnino non posse. that is.
Whosoever shall say that infants shall have life in Christ which depart out
of this life without receiving baptim, truly that man both proceeds against
the doctrine of the Apostles, and also condemns the whole Church: where men
make haste and run to baptize their infants for that cause surely, because
undoubtedly they believe that other wise they can have no life in Christ. Lo the
testimony of S. Augustine a most assured witness of antiquite, In institut. Cap.
18.
and best to be trusted in report of awncient belefe, by the verdit of Calvin
him self. Let us a little considre the place. Calvin as you heard before,
says that children of Christian parents are borne holy, and are admitted in to
the leage of life everlasting being yet in the mother womb. and that by the
promis of god they are all ready saved. S. Austen says with out baptim they
have no life in Christ: and that who so says contrary (as Calvin does
teaching them to be saved before baptim) he proceeds against the doctrine of
the Apostles, VVath the doctrine of Calvin is
and condemns the whole Church. Lo now you see expressly, what the doctrine
of Calvin is. It fights directly against the doctrine of the Apostles. It
condemns the whole church. It is the heresy of the Pelagians. But some
scholar of Calvin will say that S. Agustin here speaks of the children of
hethe^ parents. No truly. For mark his words. He says. me^ make haste and
run to baptize infants. What men trow ye were they? hethen? Would the hethen
run to baptize their children, being them selves vnchristned, and detesting
all Christendom? Or would Christen men run with the children of hethen
parents? No that was against the law of the primitive church. For the child
could not be baptized or Christened, Thom. 22. q. 10. ar. 12
against the fathers will, vntel he came to full age and discretion. And
therefore at this hour the practice is in Italy, where Jews are common, that
the father remaining a Jew, the child under age can not be forced to baptim
against the fathers will. Else by this time all Jews, had been christened in
Italy, and other where. By this testimony therefore of S. Augustine it is clear
that Calvin by this detestable doctrine defends the cursed heresy of
Pelagius. Now ye shall see he teaches also as the Maniches did.

S. Augustine reakoning up the sundry and heinous he resies of the Maniches,
among the rest reakoneth also their heresy against baptim, Ad Quoduultdemn
Haeres. 64*
writing of them in these words. Hij baptismum in aqua nihil cuiquam perhibent
salutis afferre: nec quenquam eorum quos decipiunt baptisandum putant: that is.
These men affirm that baptime done in water brings no salvation to any. And
thereupon such as they deceive, they think they need not be baptized. Let us
now hear whether Calvin say not eue^ the same of baptim. Cap. 17.
In his institutions in the treatise of baptim, defining it to be but a sign
and token, or badge of a Christen man, he concludes with these words. Quis
ergo aqua ista mundari nos dicat, quae certo testatur Christi sanguinem veru^
esse atque vnicum nostrum lauacrum? That is. Who then will say that we are
cleansed with this water, which does assuredly testify, that the blood of
Christ is our true and only cleansing? In the leaf. 202.
Of these words we have above disputed, and declared you the falshod and
untruth of them. Now only mark that he agrees with the Maniches. For as
they say, that baptim done in water brings no salvation, so Calvin says
that by the water of baptim we are not cleansed. With the other part of the
Maniches saying he agrees as just as may be, in the end of the. 18. chapter
of his Institutious, where he writes thus. Non ideo baptisantur infantes
^idelium, vt filij dei tunc fiant primum etc. that is. The infants of Christen
men are not therefore baptized, that they may become the children of god, as
though they were before out of the church, but rather they are with a solemn
token received into the church, because they appertained before to the body of
Christ, by the benefit of the promis. Therefore if we let pass this token
without contempt or negligence, we are safe from all danger. This he writes
blaming the Catholic church for suffering the midwiues and lay people in time
of necessite, to baptize children: saying, they need not so to do: but that
without baptim the child may be saved: even as the Maniches thought: and
therefore esteemed it nedeles, as Calvin does, to baptize those of their sect.

An other old heresy Calvin by his doctrine off baptim consequently defends,
when he writes that after baptim, we need no other penance, all our life
time, but when we fall, have a recourse to our baptim. His words in his
Institutions the. 17. chapter are these: Sic cogitandum est quocunque
baptisemur tempore, nos semel in omnem vitam ablui and purgari. Itaque quoties
lapsi fuerimus, repetenda erit memoria baptismi, and hac armandus animus, vt de
peccatorum remissione semper certus securusque sit. that is. So we ought to
think whenever we are baptized, that we are cleansed and purged for all our
life time. therefore as often as we fall we must remember our baptim, and arm
our mind therewith being sure of forgeuenes of sins and careless. By this
doctrine Calvin wipeth away the sacrament of penance: and therefore in the
words following, he teaches that the absolution given by the church is
referred to baptim. Now to take away penance after baptim and to deny the
second table of repentance, after the shipwreck of our former renewing in
baptim by deadly sin (which in the 19. chapter of his institutions he calls
a wicked doctrine) is an ancient heresy of the Nouatians, as in S. Ciprian
every where it appears, and in S. Ambrose, who wrote a learned work against
them. Lo the laudable and sound doctrine of Ihon Calvin, a man called of the
devil to raise up old carren heresies, and to infect therewith the well
disposed hearts of good Christians.

Truly if Hercules was a man much renouned and of great fame and reputation,
for that he drew out of hell (as poets do feign) the great helhownde
Cerberus with is three ougle heads, of what fame and reputation trow we, ought
Calvin to be, who has plucked out the devil him self out of hell with
three times three heinous and horrible heresies (which above these thousand
years have been tied to the deape dongell of hell) and has let him lose
again, to walk at his will, and preach at his pleasure about the world? In
the doctrine of the blessed sacrament of the altar he raised up, as you have
heard, the heresies of Arrius, of Samosatenus, of Nestorius, of Faustus
Manicheus, of Valentinus, and of Marcion. In this sacrament of baptim, he
teaches as the Pelagians, the Maniches, and the Nouatians, all famous and
notorious heretics taught above a thousand years paste.

It shall not need to discuss or examine any farther his doctrine defending
these heresies. It suffiseth for any Christen man to know that they are old
condemned heresies, and accounted for such of the church of Christ. And with
this reason concluded S. Augustine his little treatise of heresies, having
reakoned up all such as had been from Christ's time to his. I will give you here
his conclusion and doctrine, for a good holesom triacle, against the poisons
off Calvin above recited. His words are these. Quid contra ista sentiat
catholica Ecclesia superfluo quaeritur: cum propter hoc scire sufficiat eam
contra ista sentire, nec aliquid horum in fidem quenquam debere recipere. Sed
multum adiuuat cor fidele nosse quid credendum non sit, etiam si disputandi
facultate id refutare non possit. Omnis itaque Christianus catholicus ista non
debet credere. that is. It is but in vain to require what the Catholic church
teaches against these heresies: it is inoughe to know that she does teach
against them, and that no man ought to believe any of all these. But it avails
much to the faithful and true believing heart to know, what ought not be
believed, though by drifte of reason it be not able to refute it. Therefore
every Christian Catholic man ought in no wise believe these things. Lo we have
a good holesom lesson of this most reverent and learned Father. I beseech god
give us all grace to follow it, and to detest al such doctrine and doctors,
as forces us to embrace such old cursed heresies by their new devised
fantasies, and to forsake the Catholic church of more then fiften hundred
years, to follow the trace of new and old heresies patched together, and
blasted abroad scant yet half one hundred years.

His heresies forged of him self about baptim are these. In institut. Cap.
17. In comme^tar. in. 1. Cor. Cap. 10.
First he teaches that the baptim of S. Ihon and the baptim of Christ was all
one. Then that the Jews were no less baptized under Moses in the cloud and
in the read sea, then Christen men are now in the font. And that equal grace
was given in both. These are two heresies expressly against holy scripture.

As touching the first S. Ihon in the gospel puts a most manifest
distinction between his baptim and the baptim of Christ, Mat. 3.
saying thus of him self. I baptize you in water to repentance, but he that
shall come after me is of more power, then I am, he shall baptize you in the
holy ghost and in fire. In these words S. Ihon declares that he baptized in
water only to repentance, preparing the hearts off men and disposing them to
receive the Messiah Christ him self, who should baptize them, not in water
only as Ihon did for repentance, but in the holy ghost also and fire, that
is, giving to those which by Christ were baptized the holy, ghost, as a full
pleadge and assurance of remission of our sins, and the fire of burning and
fervent charity, whereby al vanites and pleasures of the world should be
quenched and consumed.

Again if the baptim of S. Ihon were all one with the baptim of Christ, the^
we must correct holy scripture saying of S. Ihon, praeibis ante faciem domini
parare rias eius, thou shall go before the face of our Lord to praepare his
ways, and say with Calvin that he Christened me^ as well as Christ did, and
was the Lord him self, that should weane us in to the faith by his baptim.

Thirdly the baptim of S. Ihon is called in holy scripture no other, but
baptismus penitentiae the baptim of repentance. For repentance was the way
that S. Ihon made to bring men to Christ. Now the baptim of Christ is called
lauacrum regenerationis and renouationis spiritus sancti, Tit. 3.
the fountain of regeneration and renewing of the holy ghost. Be these all
one? Is there not a far passing difference between them?

Last of all we read in the acts of the Apostles evidently, that such as
were baptized before of Ihon, were after baptized again by S. Paul. Acto. 19.
The words of the scripture are these. Paul coming to Ephesus found there
certain disciples (that is such as bore them selves for Christians) and he
said unto them, have ye received the holy ghost and do ye believe? but they
said unto him. We have not so much as heard if there be any holy Ghost. Then
he said. Wherein then are ye baptized? which awnswered unto him, In the baptim
of Ihon. Then Paul said Ihon baptized the people with the baptim of penance,
telling the^ they should believe in him that should come after him, that is, in
Jesus. This being heard, they were baptized in the name of our Lord Jesus.
Hitherto the words of holy scripture. Now if the baptim of Iho^ and Christ
were al one, as Calvin says, why did S. Paul baptize them again as the
scripture here declares? Does Calvin allow rebaptisation? Is he an
Anabaptist? Or were they baptized again because they were not instructed
before in the holy ghost? This were in deed a good reason for the furious
Anabaptists to make us all come to the font again, because when we were
babes, we understood nothing of the holy ghost. What shift then has Calvin
here to defeat this most express text of holy scripture? Truly he labors
impudently to defeat in it his institutions: but with no less folly then
impudency. For whereas it is written they were baptized in the name of Jesus,
Calvin denies scripture. Institu. C^p, 17.
that is says Calvin, they received visible and sensible graces of the holy
ghost they were not baptized again. Lo the scripture says, they were baptized
in the name of Jesus. Calvin says they received visible graces of the holy
ghost. May not a man by this means come and deny baptim utterly and say
that after the ascension of Christ none were baptized? For in all the new
testament after the ascension of Christ we read of no other baptim, but that
men were baptized in the name of Jesus. So we read in the first sermon of S.
Peter made after the coming down of the holy ghost. Baptizetur vnusquisque
vestrum in nomine Jesus Christi. Acto. 2.
Let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ. And of the
Centurion and all his house it is written, Acto. 10.
they were baptized in the name of our lord Jesus Christ. Now all this by
Caluins doctrine was no baptim, but only a receiving of visible graces from
the holy ghost. For why may it not as well mean so in other places as here?
shall scripture mean sometime one thing, sometimes an other as it pleases
Calvin?

Again many were baptized, that received not those visible graces. Or else
Calvin must say there is no baptim now in the world nor has no ben these
many hundred years. Cornelius also and his family received those visible
graces before they were baptized. Acto. 10.
Whereby we learn it is not al one to receive those visible graces, and to be
baptized.

But what need we farther refute this impudent heretical shifte of Calvin? It
follows immediately in the text above recited. Et quum imposuisset manus eis
Paulus, venit Spiritus Sanctus super eos and loquebantur lin guis and
prophetabant. that is. And when Paul had laid hands over them the holy
ghost came down upon them and they spoke with tongues and prophesied. Lo these
visible gifts were given them after they were baptized by laieng on of hands.
For the scripture tells us, that first S. Paul baptized them, and after
laid hands on them, which being done the visible graces were given them.

What think ye now? did Calvin trow ye read so far? In institut. Cap. 17.
yes sothely. And yet goes he forth to defend impudently that which he had
ones wickedly affirmed. For he says, all this was but one action though it be
diversely told, for two several actions. and he says so only. But by what
authorite, by what reason says he so? He tells us, it is the manner of the
hebrew phrase to speak first the matter shortly, and after to set it forth
mere at large. What if it be the manner of the hebrew phrase? Is it so allwaies,
or sometimes only? If it be so all ways, then should he at least have
brought here one example. Now he brings none at al. Beside that he shoots
very wide of the mark. Quinquarboreus in Operegra^.
No tongue auoideth more idle repetitions of one thing, no tongue affects
more breuite and speaks more in fewer words, then the hebrew does: and
therefore it is called of al other most chaste, frugall, and less ryotous in
language. I report me herein to the skilful thereof. If he mean it is the
hebrewe phrase sometimes to speak so, what of that? so is it the greek phrase,
the latin phrase, and the phrase of all tongues sometimes to do. What then?
Because it does so sometime, ergo does it so in this place?

But where trow ye was Caluins wit and remembrance when he wrote this? An
impudent folly of Calvin.
What meaned he to bleare our eyes with the authorite of an hebrew phrase in
this place, which another was written in the hebrew tongue nor of any hebrician?
For whose words are those we alleged you before? Be they not written in the
Acts of the Apostles the.19. chapter? Was the Acts of the Apostles ever
written in the hebrewe tongue? we never heard yet, that any part of the new
testament was written in the hebrewe tongue, except S. Matthewes gospel only
and the epistle unto the hebrews. Again who wrote the Acts of the Apostles?
Was it not S. Luke the Evangelist a greek borne, to wit at Antiochia? To what
a miserable shift trow ye was this wilful proud heretic driven, when to
uphold his heresy against the express words of scripture, after all other
shifts, he was glad at the length to fly to the succor of an hebrewe phrase,
in such a text as neither was written in the hebrewe tongue, neither of any
hebrewe borne? But what will not an heretic do, rather then he will
acknowleadg the truth? We read that only Christ was able to put the Pharisees
to silence, and stop the mouths of the Sadduces: two heretical sects of
the Jews as the Lutherans and the Caluinistes are now of the Christians. We
have peradventure ben over long in this one point. But it was necessary that
the subtle shifts of that wily heretic, should be discovered. This perilous
book of his Institutions, is (as I understand) in our english tongue, and
commanded to be read of the simple and unlearned priests. Let these few
points, that by occasion in this our discourse we have discovered, be a lesson
and charitable aduertisme^t unto them, what to judge of the rest. Truly it were
better for them, being unlearned, to nourishe a serpent at their table, then to
read this perilous poisonned book: whereby the old serpent is ever at hand
to seduce them, in to most heinous: heresies, and most horible blasphemies, as
we have before in part touched.

The second heresy that Calvin utters and forgeth himself about this
doctrine of baptim is, that the Jews were baptized in the cloud and in the
read sea, as we are in the font. He teaches this doctrine in his commentaries
upon the first to the Corinthia^s the tenth chapter, and concludes that and in
spirituali substantia and in figura visibili both in the spiritual substance
and in the visible figure, their baptim in the cloud and in the read sea,
agrees with our baptim in the font. And therefore he teaches the Jews to
have had the sacrament of baptim no less then we. And this he does, because
he would bring our Christen faith to mere figures, signs, and shadows, in
the which the Jews in the old law were traded to a better perfection under
Christ, as S. Paul teaches. But let us see how heretical and false this
doctrine is.

First it repugneth manifestly against holy scripture. For S. Paul after he
had said, the Jews were baptized in the cloud and in the read sea, he says
even immediately after Hec in figura facta sunt nostri, these things were done
in the figure of us. and again after a few lines, Haec autem omnia in figura
contingebant illis. all these things happened to them in figure. And thus do
all holy fathers expou^de this place. Homil. 23. in 1. r. 10. tract. 11. and
45. in Joan.
Chrisostom says. Veritatis nominibus vsus est in figura. the Apostle used
the names off the verite in the figure. S. Augustine says: their passing
through the read sea, whereby the escaped the Egyptians, In com. in 1 Cor. 10.
figured the deliuraunce of us from the devil through baptim. Theodoret
writes, that the cloud over shadowing them from burning heates figured the
grace of the holy ghost ouershadowing us from flame of concupiscence and
sin. Ibidem.
S. Hierom likewise writes that these things happened unto them in vmbra and
typo, non in veritate, in shadow and figure, not in verite. Only Calvin
against express scripture, and so many learned fathers, impudently, as his
manner is, defends that the cloud and the read sea was as true a baptim to
the Jews as the holy font is to us. But let us see what absurd
inconveniences depend of this doctrine, though nor scripture, nor authorite of
holy fathers made against it.

If the children of Israel were baptized both in the read sea and in the
cloud, with the like perfection as we in the font, then they were twice
baptized: and our baptim may be double not withstanding the perfection of it.
Which being so, we must change the scripture in S. Paul, saying there is vna
fides, vnum baptisma but one faith and but one baptim. Ephesians. 4.
Calvin here awnswereth that these are two different signs, making but one
baptim, awnswering to our baptim. But see I pray you what a sorry shifte this
is. For first by the doctrine of Calvin, Iustitut. Cap. 17.
(as you have heard before) baptim is naught else but a sign of the remission
of sins, by the which we are admitted in to the fellowship and societe of
Christen men. Now if the Jews had two such different signs, had they not
two baptims? or else if those two signs made but one baptim, then in the cloud
they were not baptized, vntell they had passed the read sea, which was
afterward. Now S. Paul says, they were baptized in the cloud, and in the
sea. If the word Baptized, as Calvin will have it, be meant of true baptim,
such as ours is, then were they truly baptized both in the cloud and in the
sea: which were two diverse actions, and at two sundry times.

Again if the children of Israel were baptized in the cloud and in the sea,
with the like perfection as we are in the font, how will Calvin avoid the
suspicion of an Anabaptiste, seeing they were baptized before in their
circumcision by the doctrine of Calvin? For Calvin in his Institutions, in his
chapter of baptim teaches that circuncision was to the Jews as baptim was to
us: the only difference being in the outward sign. to wit, that by
circuncision they had remission off sins, life everlasting, and were admitted
in to the leage of god. And our baptim (as you have heard) Calvin defines to
be naught else, but a sure token or warrant that we be admitted in to the
societe and number of Christen men joined in leage to god. Now if the Jews by
Circumcision had their perfect baptim, and yet in the cloud and in the sea were
baptized again as perfitly, does not this doctor of Geneua teach us
diversity of baptims? Calvin furdereth the cause of the Anabaptists.
Does he not much further the cause of the Anabaptists? Seeing it is but a
matter of signs by Caluins doctrine, have not they great occasion to cry
upon rebaptisation? It is not much to be maruailed, if so many Sacramentaries
be also Anabaptists, as experience does show in all those countres, where
Sacramentaries do swarm. The doctrine of Calvin does minister right good
occasion thereunto, as you shall see yet by one consequence more, deducted of
this his heresy.

If the Jews were baptized in their circuncision, in the cloud, in the sea,
and received the same baptim as Christen men do in the font, how say we to
the baptim of S. Ihon? Why did S. Ihon baptize the Jews being baptized before
with the very same baptim? For if (as Calvin here says) the Jews were
baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, no less then we are in the baptim of
Christ, and again the baptim of S. Ihon be, (as you heard him say before)
the very same baptim, that Christ his baptim is, why, I say, did S. Ihon
baptize them again? Does he not here teach plain rebaptisation? Let us yet
go one step farther.

The Jews, says Calvin, were baptized in the cloud, and in the sea, in
their circuncision, in the baptim of S. Ihon, even as we are in the water of
our baptim. Why then did S. Peter at his first sermon made to the Jews
exhort them to baptim again? And those of the Jews which believed in
Christ, why were they baptized, as the text says they were? For it is
written. Acto. 2.
Qui receperunt sermonem eius baptisati sunt, they that received the word of
Peter, were baptized. And why did Ananias baptize S. Paul? If the Jews were
as verily and as truly baptized in the cloud, under Moses, Acto. 9.
(which Calvin most impudently affirms) as we are in the font under Christ,
and his minister, why were they baptized again of S. Ihon, or of the Apostles,
when they came to the faith of Christ? What a number of baptims does Calvin
teach us, beside the one only baptim of Christ, which the Catholic church
has learned in holy scripture? Circuncision, the cloud, the sea, the baptim
of S. Ihon, and al these the very same and of the self same effect, and force,
as the baptim of Christ. Is not Calvin trow ye a ioyly Anabaptiste? Nay does
he not far pass the Anabaptists? They go about to repete one twice. Calvin
makes us five for one: off the which every Christened Jew by his doctrine,
has four. and every unchristened Jew has three.

I would now pass from his heresies to his contradictions. But I must needs
put you in mind off one ioyly trick of Calvin which he practiced in the
planting of this heresy. In his commentaries upon S Paul where he teaches
this doctrine, after long labor and strife, seeing he could bring forth no
true child, but that it proved to a mo^ster, and ougle unnatural thing, and
perceauing one foul fault in it which he thought most of all those of his
generation would abhor, he goes about to cloak it and color it, as well as
he may. The great fault that he espied him self in this doctrine, is, that
it had no express scripture for it. You shall hear him find the fault and
see how he will remedy it. These be his words. Sed rursum obijcitur: Calvin
avouches doctrine of his own without scripture.
nullum de his verbum extare. I d ego fateor: sed neque dubium hoc est quin
Deus spiritu suo defectum externae praedicationis suppleuerit. that is, But
they will obiecte again. That there is no word extant hereof. That do I
confess, but it is not to be doubted but that God by his Spirit has supplied
the lack of external preaching. Lo Calvin now is glad to run to the refuge
of the holy ghost for his doctrine when scripture fails him. But when the
Catholic church, Caluinvvil not allow the doctrine of the church without
scripture
directed allwaies and assisted by the holy ghost, teaches us any thing,
that is not expressed in holy scripture, Calvin can not abide it. Hereupon in
his Institutio^s he raileth at the adoration of Christ in the blessed
sacrament, because in holy scripture, says he, Nulla eius mentio ostendi
potest, quae tamen non fuisset pretermissa si deo accepta foret, that is. No
mention there of ca^ be showed, which notwithstanding had not be^ omitted, if
it had liked god. And in the matter of reseruatio^, though he grant that the
primitive church used it, yet because it is not expressed in scripture, he will
none of it. Thus when it pleases Calvin, scripture is requisite, and when it
pleases him not, scripture may be lacked and the spirit of god may supply
it. In like manner though he cry upon scripture always, and (as we noted you
before out of his Institutitio^s) will not allow the church no farther, Cap. 8.
de side.
the^ she brings express scripture for her, yet not only in this place he
teaches beside scripture, and confesses it to, but also in many other places.

In the matter of the blessed sacrament of the altar, you have seen in how
many and sundry points, his doctrine repugneth to holy scripture, while he
labors to persuade men, that to be but bread and wine, which our Savior
pronounced to be his body and blood. It comes now to my mind, how impudenly
he shifteth away the authorite of express scripture, where with he saw him
self pressed. You shall hear his words. In his Institutions the 18. chapter
thus he writes. Vtcunque verboru^ Christi tangi se religione quiritentur,
Calvin requires to be heard, thou ghe scripture be plain against him.
quo minus figurate intelligere ausint, que sunt tam aperte dicta, non est
tamen hic satis iustus praetextus, cur omnes quae contra obijciuntnr rations
ita respua^t. that is. Howesoeuer they cry and complain that for the
reverence of Christ his words they dare not take it for a figure which was so
plainly spoken, yet this is no sufficient pretense why they should refuse al
such reasons, as we bring against the^. This he writes against the Luthera^s,
which will not go from the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament. And see we
not here the incredible arrogance of this proud heretic? Does he not show
him felfe to be a very Antichriste? Calvin is an Antichrist.
For what can Antichriste require more off men, then to have the express
words of Christ yield to such reasons, as he will object against? And does
not Calvin require the very same? Does he not bidd the Lutherans believe his
reasons, against the express words of Christ? And where as the Lutheran
alleges that because the words of Christ are plain saying. This is my body,
he can not be brought to make it a figure, as Calvin does, what other shifte
has Calvin, then to say that this is no sufficient pretense, why they
should refuse his reasons for the contrary? Which is as much to say. Though
Christ speak plainly, yet you must harken also what we can say against it:
and ye must give ear to such reasons, as we can lay against him: and then
follow my reason, what soever Christ or the ghospel tells you. Now what ca^
Antichriste require more? Verily as S. John said of the heretics of his time,
1. Joan. 2.
Antichristi multi sunt, there are many Antichrists, so may we most truly say
of our time. there are many Antichrists: but none a more righter Antichrist,
the^ this heretic Calui.

You have seen good readers, what heresies and how diverse Calvin has partly
renewed, partly forged of his own, in his doctrine about these two
Sacraments, which only he acknowleadgeth, and takes for Sacraments. If we
would use the like diligence in other points of his doctrine, we could be
long, and should be, I fear, tedious. And truly it were to be wished, that
neither the heresies of this man, neither any heresy at all were known to the
common and unlearned people. But because this subtle heretic has so wined him
self in to men's hearts, that he has trained them not only from the
Catholic church of Christ, but also from the Luthera^s, and Melanchthonistes,
which before bore all the swaie of this new gospel, I thought good to discover
his heresies, and other abominable doctrine about these two Sacraments, as two
of the waightiest articles now in controversy, and most of all other touching
our salvation: to the intent that not only the Catholics, and such as god
of his goodness has hitherto stayed in the faith of the church, may (as they
do) utterly abhor his doctrine, neither yield by the wickedness of the time,
to any one point thereof, but also our dear deceived countremen, that so
gladly read his works, and so gredely devour his diue lish doctrine, may
learn of these few, what to judge of the rest, and by the sour taste of these
mislike the remnant of his unpleasant and most poisonned doctrine. For if in
these two blessed Sacraments, the one being the gate and entry of salvation,
the other being a most heavenly food to preserve us therein, he sticks not
to utter so harnous heresies, and sets him self so wickedly against the
church of god, what conscience trow ye is he like to take in other points of
our Christen religion, less necessary, and of less importance? well: Though
he were in all the rest sound and without blot, yet these his heresies of us
recited, of him uttered and taught, may be sufficient to discredit him in the
conscience of any Christien heart. For I think, and trust verily, there is no
Christen man in all the realm of England, be he never so far waded in
heresy, but that he does reverence the primitive church of Christ, of the
first five or six hundred years, and will be ready to condemn all such
heresies, as were in that time and age condemned. Now the Maniches, the
Aria^s, the Vale^tinians, the Marcionistes, the Nestorians, the Nouatians, the
Pelagians, the Samosatencall, and other, whose heresies Calvin has renewed
were in the compass of those five hundred years condemned. If we would come
down lower, we could recite a number more of heretics, condemned also in
Christ his church, with whose heresies the doctrine of Calvin does agree. But
in consideration of the impudent bragges made now in every pulpit, that all is
reduced to the state of the primitive church, I have chosen out such
heresies in Caluins doctrine, as were in that time condemned: giving you to
understand that all is not the gospel which is there spoken: unless perhaps
by reducing all to the state of the primitive church, they mean renewing of
old heresies condemned in the primitive church. And truly so must they mean
if they say truly. But let us return to Calvin.

In the doctrine of free will, Contradictions of Calvin about the doctrine of
free vv. l.
I will make no especial recital of his heresies: But note you his
contradictions, of the which ever one part is an heresy. In his Institutions
the.14. chapter, he writes, that God did not only foresee the fall of the
first man Adam, and in it the fall of all his posterite, but also it was his
will, it should be so. Page 57. page 132 and 136.
Again in his book of predestination against Pighius he has the same
doctrine, saying that God would not have suffered Adam to fall, but that he
would have it so to be. Also that God so determined it and ordained it. Now in
his book of free will against Pighius also, he says in two places these
words. I confess with Origin that those which take away free will from Ada^
before he sinned, be heretics. Page 67. 68.
How agree these sayings of him? If it were not only the will of God that Adam
should fall, but also that he determined and ordained it so to be, then he fell
of necessite. For the determined will of God can not be frustrated. Ada^
therefore could not, if he had would continewed in his innocence. And yet had
he free will? If hot and cold be all one, then is this doctrine uniform.

Again in his book of predestination he says. All wsuchickednes as man
commits by malice of his own, page 243.
procedethae so of God, and that not without good reason, although we know it
not. And to make his opinion herein most clear, in the same book he says. It
is a fond solution of S. Paul's saying, Esadu odio habui, I hated Esau, to
say that the reprobats do work their own destruction by their own malice.
And yet see what he says in his institutions the.2. chapter. Man, says he,
can not impute the hardness of his heart to any other cause, then to him self.
This lo is most true. But why then said he before, the wickedness of man
proceeds of God? Why reprouueth he that solution, which he now makes him
self?

Farther Calvin in his book of predestination, going about to mitigat his
former doctrine, where he taught that the reprobats could not chose, but do
evil, Page 156.
says afterward, he means not of every particular work. for a little
before he confesses Saul had done certain things well. But directly contrary
to this shift is an other express doctrine of his in the very same book, Page
154.
where he says. Men can not possibly have any affection to do well, unless
they be of the chosen and elected. such as reprobats never be. For of Judas a
sure reprobat Calvin him self pronou^ceth: Certum est Iudam nunquam fuisse
membrum Christi: In eom. in 6. Cap. I^^n.
Certain it is that Judas was never any membre of Christ.

Calvin yet for the better auauncement of his wicked doctrine against free
will, pretends to follow S. Augustine in all points. And therefore in his
book of predestination, he says, he varieth not from S. Augustine so much as
one syllable in this question of predestination. Page 18.
Notwithstanding in his Institutions he says, Cap. 2.
that S. Augustine was sometime scrupulous, and would not tell the truth of
predestination roundely. as when in his book De praedestinatione and gratia he
says, that the induration and blinding of the reprobats is not to be referred
to the work and operation of God, Cap. 6.
but only to his foreknowleadg. Here in this most gracious doctrine of that
good Father, Calvin charge him with scrupulosite. And yet he will bear us in
hand forsothe, that he agrees even in every syllable with S. Augustine. Where
in the one he declares him self a praesumptuous heretic: in the other a
false contradictour of his own sayings.

Finally Calvin as in words and doctrine, so in doings and behavior
contrarieth his own self. Cap. 8.
In his Institutions he wrireth: It was never permitted to preachers of Gods
word to add any one syllable to holy scriptare, or diminish from thence, but
to preach the only bare word, as it lies. Now as in all his doctrine he
talks more then half beside holy scripture, so in this matter of
predestination he is not afeard to add to the very text of S. Paul, words of
his own, for the maintenance of his wicked doctrine. For in his Institutions
laboring to refer the induration of the reprobats to the proper and eternal
will of God, as a superior cause, then their own deserts and malice, thus he
talks. Cap. de predestinat.
Restat nunc vt videamus curid Dominus faciat, quod eum facere palam est. Si
respondeatur sic fieri, quia sic impietate, nequitia, ingratitudine sua meriti
sunt homines, been id quidem and vere dicetur. Sed quia nondum patet istius
varietatis ratio, cur alijs in obedientiam flexis isti obdurati persistant, in
ea excutienda necessario ad illud, quod ex Moyse adnotauit Paulus, transeundum
erit. Ne^pe quod ab initio eos excitarit Dominus, vt ostenderet nomen suum in
vniuersa terra. Romans 9.
That is. It remains now to see why God does that, which it is now clear he
does. If ye answer that so it is done, because men by their own wickedness,
malice, and ungratefulness have so deserved (to be forsaken of God) that shall
be well and truly answered. But because yet we see not the reason of this
variete, why some being brought to obedience, other continewe indurated, in the
discussion of this doubt, we must needs have recourse to that which S. Paul
noted out of Moses, to wit that from the beginning the Lord had stirred
them up to show his name through out all the world. Calvin adds to the text
of holy Scripture.
Now these words, from the beginning, are not in S. Paul, nor Moses in any
text, latin, greek, or hebrewe, but are the words of John Calvin added to the
text of Gods word for a vauntage, to wit, to make us believe, that from the
beginning even before the fall of Adam, God was the cause off induration and
hard heart of reprobats. For he is not you see, co^te^ted to attribut it only
to their own deserts and malice, but seeks a superior cause in God, and that
by the words of S. Paul from the beginning, which he nor none of all his
scholars are ever able to show us in any text of S. Paul, that is. This is lo
the plain dealing of these ghospellers and refourmers of Christ's Church:
These be the chalengers of Gods word. This is the pure text they vaunte and
boaste of. They pretend to covet after the pure text and bare letter. But as
the poet said, ex vno disce omnes. By Calvin learn what the rest are. And Time
Danaos and dona ferentes. trust not an heretic though he bring you scripture
it self.

What false trick is there, The demeanor of Calvin, touvard holy scripture.
that Calvin has not played? He has corrupted the text with false
translation, as we showed you in the 9. chapter, of Salomons proverbs. He
belieth holy Scripture, as you heard in the S. chapter of S. Paull to the
Romans. He denies express scripture, as we declared you in the 19. chapter of
the Acts of the Apostles. He requires to be heard against express scripture,
as we recited you out of his Institutions. And now you see he adds to holy
Scripture. If this archeprotestant and great ghospelling doctor, behaueth him
self so in his printed works, which remain to be vewed of all learned men,
what will the nouices of his religion, and young prinking preachers stick to
do in pulpits, where they know their audience to be not allwaies learned: and
of the learned, some of a presumed prejudice to take all for good, other to
wink at all and vti foro?

Albeit the doctrine of Calvin (as you have partly seen) be stuffed with
abominable heresies and most absurd contradictions, yet in all his doctrine
he talks peremptorely. He matcheth him self with the Apostles. He condemns
and reprouueth at his pleasure all holy fathers. Whereby his pride and
presumptuousnes sure mates of heresy utters it self. I will for example note
you a few of his sayings, where you shall see how proudely he demeaneth him
self and how courteousely he orders the holy, ancient, and learned fathers.

First as touching his contradictions about free will, witting and feeling him
self very well, that he might wottly be charged therewith, in one place of his
book of predestination he vtereth his fear, and with a word of his mouth
thinks to make all the matter smothe. page 61.
These are his words. I say again I am not ignorant what apparent absurdite
and contradiction this doctrine has with profane men, and dispisors of God.
But whatsoever they babble or bark, our conscience ought to serve us for a
thousand witnesses. A solution of Calvin to defend his coutradictions.
Is not this a gaie solution trow ye? has he not given us a substa^tiall
warrant of the vniformite of his doctrine? For what says he? Forsothe
whatsoever contradictions we see and behold with our eyes, yet we must trust
Caluins conscience, that he is so honest a man, that he would never say or
utter any such thing. Now read again those few of his contradictions that we
have recited, who list, and let him judge in his own conscience, what the
conscience of Calvin is, and how far it is to be trusted.

Again as touching the singularite off his doctrine, which he knows and
confesses to be contrary to the old fathers, what reason, think ye, brings
he for the defense off it? In his treatise of baptim, the 17. chapter of his
Institutions, he expounds the words of Christ to Nicodemus, Unless a man be
borne again by water and the holy Ghost, he shall not enter in to the knigdo^
of heaven, Joan. 2.
to be but an allegorical speech against the whole practice off Christ's
church, and consent of all holy fathers, and learned writers expounding the
words off Christ literally as the text has, for necessite of baptim. This
Calvin knew and confessed. But how then think you does he excuse the matter?
what cl^ke has he for his singularite? Ye shall hear. After long talk thus
he concludes. Scio alios aliter interpretari, sed hunc esse germanum sensum
non dubito. that is. I know that other men have otherwise expounded this, but
I doubt not but this is the right sense. Lo Calvin doubts not, and therefore
we must believe him more the^ all the church beside. What is arrogance, if this
be not?

Likewise in his doctrine and book of predestination, Page 164. and 165.
such as find fault with his doctrine, he says they blaspheme God: and
cries unto them, as S. Paul did to such as Calvin is. Romans 9.
What art thou man which disputest with God? Now what the doctrine off Calvin
is, you have seen partly by this our simple discourse, and more especially it
appears in the third part of this Apology. Yet he matcheth him self with
God, In the leaf 112.
and vaunteth the co^ptrollers of his heretical doctrine with the check of S.
Paul, as curious serchers of Gods deep secrets. And therefore no maruail if he
set light by the holy Fathers off Christ's church and reverence them no deal
at all.

In his treatise of baptim, Institut. Cap. 27
laboring to promote his heresy, touching the baptim off S. Ihon, that it
should be equal with the baptim of Christ, remembering that the Fathers of the
church lay in his way and withstode him, Calvin disprouueth the learned
fathers.
to make the restafeared, he gives the venture upon S. Augustine, and says.
Nec recipienda est illa Augustini argutia in spe dimissa fuisse peccata Ioannis
baptismo, Christi baptismo reipsa dimitti, that is. Neither is that sutteltly
off Augustine to be admitted, that by the baptim of Ihon sins were forgeuen
but in hope, by the baptim off Christ they are forgeuen in deed. In other
places he calls S. Augustine, Cap. 18. de cena domini.
in dogmatibus ecclesiae fidelissimu^ vetustatis interprete^ a most trusty
reporter of antiquite in doctrines of the church. But when it pleases M.
Calvin, S. Augustins doctrine is but a suttelty. Likewise reprouuing the
doctrine of penance, where it is compared to the board after a shipwreck,
which is a usual similitude off all learned writers, Cap. 19. de peniten.
he writes thus. They say it is the similitude of Hierom, whose so ever it
be, no doubt but it is a wicked similitude. Again in his treatise of
predestination, where as S. Gregory (as all other Catholic writers) teaches
that no man can be assured off his election, Cap. 14. de predest. and
prouidentia.
he vaunteth proudly that learned Father with these words. Pessime and
perniciose Gregorius etc. that is? worst of al and wickedly taught Gregory etc.
In his commentaries upon the sixth of John disprouing the interpretation of
Chrisostom, whom Theophilact, Euthymius and diverse have coueted always to
follow, Fallitur says he, meo iudicio Chrisostomus, Chrisostom in my
judgment is deceived. What think you would Calvin fear to utter, that
sets so light by these learned fathers, whom the church so many hundred
years has reverenced and followed? May not we say to Calvin and al such
presumptuous preachers of new doctrine, we know S. Augustine, we reverence S.
Hierom, we credit Gregory and Chrisostom: but you M. Calvin what are you, as it
was said to the unbelieving Jews attempting to work miracles under the name
of Jesus and Paul, Acto. 19.
Iesum noui, Paulu^ scio, vos aute^ qui estis? that is, Jesus I know and Paul
also, but who are you?

Calvin yet staieth not here, he is not contented to reject certai^ of the
Fathers the most learned and most approved, in certain points. He goes farther.
He co^de^neth the whole primitive church in the whole manner of the worshipping
of God. For disputing against the blessed sacrifice of the Mass, he charge
it with Iuish superstition: and thus he pronounces off the whole order of the
special and most principal service of the primitive church. Cap. 18. de cena
domini.
They followed rather the Iuish manner of sacrificing, then as Christ had
ordained, or the order of the ghospel required. Thus says Calvin, not
speaking of these late years, but even of the primitive church, Calvin
condemns the primitive church,
of the first six hundred years, unto the which time our Caluinistes at home
dissenting in this point from their Master (at lest as they pretend) do referr
all their doings and make the people believe that the primitive Church used that
order of Communion as they do now, telling them withal that the blessed
sacrifice of the Mass and the manner thereof has been used only sense these
later hundred years. Notwithstanding Calvin their master acknowledges that
manner off sacrifising in the primitive Church, long before that time, which
because off the ceremonies thereof he calls Iuish.

I wot not herein what more to maruail at and lament, other the intolerable
pride of this presumptuous heretic condemning the very primitive church and
therefore leaving us no church sense the departure hence of our Savior, or the
wicked guile of our new preachers, which doing no less then Calvin does, set
yet a better color thereon, to entrappe thereby the readier the unlearned and
well meaning people in to their schismatical communion. For they condemn not
openly the primitive church of Iuish sacrifising, as Calvin does, but deny
stoutely that any such sacrifice or ceremonies was then used, Iuell.
and offer to yield if we can prove it. Let them now learn off their Masters
own confession, that such there was, and let them learn off their Creed, where
they say they believe the Catholic church, not to condemn the primitive
church therein, which if they deny to be the Catholic and true church of
Christ, they may as well deny Christ him self head thereof, and frustrat the
whole, mystery of his blessed Incarnation, as you heard before David George
did, and many Luthera^s and Caluinistes do now in diverse parts of Germany to
the great grief of al good Christian hearts

But to return to Calvin, what may not he or any other heretic do, condemning
and setting light by the fathers of the primitive Church? For by them we have
not only the true and right interpretation of holy scripture, but the
scripture also it self: which without their testimouy we could not be assured
of. Wherefore S. Augustine after he had left the Manichees, and cleaued to the
Catholic church of Christ, writing against the^, and commending unto them the
authorite thereof, he says. Euangelio non crederem nisi me Ecclesiae
commoueret authoritas. I would not believe the gospel, unless the authorite
of the church moved me thereto. Now Calvin is nothing moved therewith, but
leans more to his own judgment then to all the learned writers, and holy
Fathers of Christ's church beside. Whereof he was worthily ones checked of
Bucer, telling him quod iudicaret prout amaret, amaret autem prout libet. that
he judged as he loved, and loved what him pleased. In Epist. a familiari.
And truly the only cause whereby Calvin in his Institutio^s, in his
comme^taries upon holy scripture, and in other his works abuses the reader
and deceives the unlearned is, that he fears not expounding scriptures
boldly to prefer his own judgment eloquently set forth before the
judgment of S. Augustine, Hierom, Chrisostom, Ciprian, Gregory, Bernard and all
the other holy learned men that ever wrote. Now what arrogance is this? If every
learned man may set forth his judgment to the world as the true meaning of
Gods word, and condemn the allowed doctors of so great antiquite, lerning,
and virtue, as the holy Fathers are, who sees not that every country in
Christendom, every university of the country, yea and every learned man of each
college in the university may plant from time to time new doctrine, make new
expositions off holy scripture contrary to all other, and teach daily a new
faith? especially in this our time, when learned me^ such as Calvin was, lack
not in all cou^tres. How bitterly wrote Luther against Zwinglius, Melanchtho^
against Illyricus, VVestphalus against Calvin, Brentius against Peeter Martyr,
and all the other against these? Each of them by lerning labors to draw the
world to their own judgment, while they all condemn all other men's
judgments. You will say. We must cleave to scripture, and leave al parts
aside. Truly al do so. And that is not the controversy between these men, nor
between the^ and the Catholics, which of them cleave to scripture (For all do
so as fast as is possible) but whether of them all do rightly expound, and
truly understand holy scripture. For the Caluinistes do otherwise understand
holy scripture, then the Melanchthonistes: The Melanchthonistes otherwise then
the Saxon Lutherans: The Saxons otherwise the^ the Osiandrins: The Osiandrins
otherwise then the Suenckfeldia^s and they otherwise then all these. Those
which have read their writings, can not be ignorant thereof. I will make you
here a brief note of the special matters now in controversy between them,
Caluinus in postrema admo nit. ad Ioach west. phalum. Melanchtion in literis
ad Electorem Rheni.
and so make an end with Calvin.

The Zuinglians and Caluinistes agree with the Civil Lutherans, the
Melancthonistes, in the article of good works, that they are necessary to
salvation: and in the Supper of the Lord, that the figure only, not the true
body of Christ is there given. Again these two sects in diverse other articles
vary out off measure: As in original sin, in free will, in baptim, and in
Penance. For Calvin denies all these as the Church teaches: whereas the
Melanchthonistes acknowleadg them. Nicol. Gallus in these. and hypothes.
Illyricus in informat. De quibusda^ articulis.


The Lutherans of Saxony, to wit, the zealous Lutheraus agree with the
Caluinistes denying free will: and braule with the Melanchthonistes for
allowing free will against the doctrine of their Father Luther. Yet again
these zealous Lutherans in the article of original sin, agree with the Civil
Lutherans, and defy the Caluinistes. Callus contra acta Adiaphoristarum.
But in the articles of Justification, of good works, of the Supper of our
Lord, and how the law and the ghospel ought to be distinguished, in these the
zealous Lutherans dissent both from the Civil Lutherans and from the
Caluinistes. For they teach good works to be pernicious to salvation, they
acknowleadg the real presence, which both the other sects deny.

The Osiandrins agree with the zealous Lutherans of Saxony in the article of the
Supper of our Lord, with the Civil Lutherans in the article of free will,
Vide Osiandri confessionem fidei suc and libellum de imagine Dei.
with the Caluinistes in the article of good works. But these again dissent
from all those three sects in the article of Justification, and diverse other
special points of doctrine.

The Suenckfeldians agree with the Osiandrins in the article of Justification,
Swenckfel dius in lib. de vsu eua^gelij: and in excusatione sua contra
Wittenberg. ma^datum.
with the Melanchthonistes in the article of free will, with the Caluinistes,
that evil men receive not Christ in the Sacrament. But with all other sects
they disagree in the doctrine of baptim, and of all the Sacraments, of preaching
the word, of faith, of the church, of the humanite of Christ, and of diverse
other.

Thus you see brefely set before you the unite, consent, and agreement of this
late ghospel. You see what man Luther was, what Melanchthon, what Calvin, the
three cursed springs of three most wicked sects swarming now in Christendom,
where this new ghospel has spread his branches: to wit, of the zealous and
upright Lutherans, of the Civil and conformable Lutherans, and of the
Caluinistes or Sacramentaries. You may judge by the heads, what the offspring
is: by their fruits, what their sprits be: by these particulars of their
doctrine (which for a taste only we have discoursed upon) what their whole
gospel is.

These are the blind guides, and lying Masters, whom in place of all approved
writers in Christ's church, a number of deceived persons have followed. Instead
of holy Hierom, lewd Luther, of learned Augustine, inconstant Melanchthon, of
blessed Ambrose, proud Calvin. In place of sound religion, old condemned
heresies: of constant faith, contrary opinions: of universal belefe, private
imaginations: of Gods holy word, men's devises. A great shame to forsake
ancient belefe. A heinous offense to make parts in Christ's church. A wicked
impiete to depart from Christ and his dear spouse, Ephesians. 4.
the ground and pillar of all truth. But a far greater shame to embrace the
lewd liberte of Luther, to follow the variable brain of Melanchthon, to cleave
to the cursed heresies, fond absurdites, and clear contradictio^s of Calvin.
The heresies of Marcion, Valentinus, Arrius Nestorius, and other had color of
lerning. The Montanistes, the Tatiani, the Manichees, the Nouatians had
pretense of holiness and virtue. These two conditions were vehement persuasions
to draw the world unto them. But the heresies of our time be gross,
blasphemous, and dissolut. The denial of the blessed Sacraments and right use
thereof proceed of ignorance in true divinity: The denial off free will, and
wicked assertion of fatal destine under the name of Gods forekuowleadge is a
horrible blasphemy. The breach of ecclesiastical authorite, doctrine of only
faith, contempt of all good order, and constitutions, is a mere licentious
liberte and wanto^ dissolutnesse. How then happenteh it that men are so abused?
that the learned are drawn, the unlearned deceived? Will you have the truth
told? Peccata nostra diuiserunt inter nos and Deum. Our sins have divided
between God and us. The gate of his grace is shutt from us. And why? We love
the world, we let slip our faith: we be nailed to our temporal trash: we
make it our God. We will rather become hethen then suffer for our conscience.
Otherwise if we feared God, we would mistrust this dissolut religion: if we
were not blinded with selfewill and hardness of heart (the plage of former
sins) we should epsy the absurdite and fondness off this vpstert gospel.

How were it to be wished that at the entry of these new preachers and
planters of strange doctrines, we had had a Pacuuius among us? I will recite
you the story of him. It is written first of Liuy, Lib. 1. cap. 47.
and repeted of Macchiauell in his discourses. After the great bartaill lost
by the Romans at Can, al Italy almost forsaking their allegeau^ce to the
cite of Rome, and tre^bling at the power of Hanniball, the cite of Capua
misliking the gouuernement of their Senators and Counselors (as it fares in
time of calamite and distress, that the fault is laid to the Rulers)
conceived a great hatred against them, and deliberated to murher them every
one, and to place other in their rowmes, which they thought should better
direct their common welthe, and more to their co^tentation. This Pacuuius being
then the chefest Ruler of the cite, perceauing well the peoples furious
intention, and the danger the whole Senate stood in, devised with him self a
witty policy, both to appease the people, and to save the Senate. He calls
the Senate together: Declares them the intent of the people: opens them his
meaning, and says. My advise is you suffer your self to be shut up in the
palace, in my custody. I will assemble the people, and show them what case you
stand in. For the rest if you dare trust me, I will take such order that no
harm shall befall you. They trusted him. He calls the people, and says
unto them. People: the time is now come that you may order the Senators, as
you desire without any farther tumult. But yet because I know well, you will not
leave the cite withoult a Senate, and counsel, you must needs, if you will
destroy the old, make a new. And therefore lo here the names of all the
Senators. As I name you one to deliver up in to your hands, so you must name
me an other to succeed him. This being said, he opened the scrolle, and named
an ancient and grave Senator. The people hearing his name cried straight, he
was a proud and cruel man, and not worthy to bear rule. Well then, quod
Pacuuius, Who shall succeed him? Here the people was at a stay: and looking
one upon an other knew not a long time whom to name. At the length one being
named, some began to smile, some to laugh, other to disdain. All perceived
well (as Macchiauell wittely notes) that the fault appearing in the Senate
universally, when it came to particular examination, was no fault in deed, but
a misseconstruing and wrong judgment of the people. By this means the people
knew the^ selves: the Senators remained in authorite. Particular fautes were
redressed, the whole order and estat remained. Sucha Pacuuius I say, was at the
entry of these heresies to be wished: and presently may also be heard. For
although that which is past, ca^ not be revoked, yet it may be amended. Let us
then with Pacuuius demand of such, as loathe their ancient and received
belefe, what new faith will they embrace? For without some faith, I think
none yet that bear the name of Christians, will line. Will they be right and
zealous Lutherans, taking Luther for the very man of God, and undoubted prophet
to reuele his holy word in these our later days? Will they reject all
Fathers, all Counsels, all that Christendom has hitherto believed, as you have
heard before Luther does? Then beside all that we have said of his doctrine
and behavior, sufficient I trust to prove him a right heretic, if an heretic
may be known by his fruits, let them satisfy the civil and disordrely or
repining Lutherans: let them accrode with the Sacramentaries, the Anabaptists,
the Osiandrins, the Swenkcfeldians and all the remnant of Luthers branches: as
you may see and view in the petigrew of his offspring drawn out by Staphylus. If
they set light by that fond friar, as the more part of protestants do, to the
great grief and bitter complaining of all zealous Lutherans, what sect will they
be of? Will they ciuilly believe at pleasure, as Mela^chthon did, and be
euerlerning (as S. Paul of heretics pronounces) but never attaining to the
truth? Who laugheth not at so fond a change, if in so weighty a cause any
Christen heart can laugh, and not rather lament such wilful blindness or
blind willfulness, as in these civil Lutherans appears? Will they forsake
Luther utterly, and become Sacramentaries? Yet then we may demand of what
sect of Sacramentaries they will be: For Calvin and Bullinger, Geneua and
Zurich agree not. But if they will be Caluinistes as most part of
Sacramentaries are, who yet will not disdain there at, knowing the pride of
Calvin setting light by the holy Fathers, his corrupting of holy Scripture,
wicked renewing of old condemned heresies, fond auouching off most clear
contradictions, rash teaching of most absurd doctrine in that article where
he we was thought most to have excelled? All which (and much more) we have in
this simple discourse discovered unto you, gentle Readers, to the intent that
you may see what an evil change you make, to leave the ancient fathers, the
Catholic and universal belefe, the faith you were baptized in, and in the
which all our forefathers these thousand five hundred years and upward have
served allmighty God, and lived as Christen men, and true members of Christ's
church, to leave, I say all this, and to become protestants or new
ghospellers, that is, men of a new faith and religion, which you must learn of
some one of these three, Luther, Melanchthon or Calvin, or of such as have
learned it of them. By this consideration I trust, you shall pereiue that though
the universal name of reformed ghospellers and chalengers off gods word have
pleased you, though the general name of papistry have displeased and misliked
you, yet the particular being now discovered, as well off the persons, as of
the doctrine, you will either incontinently return from whence you departed,
or at lest deliberat thereof, and of these few learn to mistrust the rest.

Fridericus Staphylus, whose Apology we have here translated you, being a
Lutheran many years, and so far in credit, with the protestants, that he
might have been a doctor of divinity among them, also a Superintendent at
Augspurg, at Brunsuick, Lubeck and Hamburg, by this very consideration became a
Catholic. For having many years ben a Lutheran and a familiar friend of
Melanchthon, Vide Joan nem Lyre sium Cleuensem in vita Staphili.
advised with him self to write also in defense of the Lutheran doctrine. He
had not yet at that time read the ancient fathers: but had heard them much
alleged of Luther and Melanchthon, and trusting to their allegations, thought
undoubtedly that the doctrine of Luther was agreeable with the learned fathers
and the primitive church. Hereupon he divised, after the imitation of the
Master of the sentence and other schole men, to set forth in one volume the
whole effect and sum of Luthers doctrine. This book he entitled. Corpus
doctrinae Lutheranae: the body or sum of Luthers doctrine. For this purpose
he began to ^eke the doctors, and search the original of Luthers and
Mela^chthons allegatio^s. But here lo in this particular search and
examinatio^he found the doctors and ancient writers to condemn directly the
doctrine of Luther. At this he was maruailousely astonned, brake of his
enterprise, began with private study to peruse him self the ancient and
approved writers in Christ's church, as well the greeks as the latins, and to
confer with them these new writers of our time. See in the leaf 56. In the
leaf, 28.
About this study he bestowed (as he writes in this very Apology) two and
twenty years, not meddling with any other civil or worldly matters in all that
time. By this means though slowly and slackely (as in the preface of this
Apology he complains him self) he shifted at length him self out of the
captious controversies of this time, and became not only a right good
Catholic, privately and in conscience, but openly also to all the world he
declared it, and discovered more the^ any of our time has done, both the
false ground of all their pretended doctrine ( that is, the bare title of gods
word without the right understanding of the same) and also their variaunces,
sects and dissensions among them selves. Whereby in diverse parts of Germany
especially in the territory of Bauaria, many have returned from the dissolut
heresy of Luther, to the holesom discipline of the Catholic church. This he
did to his dear country of Germany in this Apology, written of him in his
mother tongue. This I have made now common to my dear country also, having no
less need thereof, then that miserable country of Germany has. I trust herein
I shall offend none, but such perhaps as first must be offended, before
they can be amended. Heresy is compared to a ca^cre. 2. Tim. 2.
Unless it be launced, it festereth, and grows to the corruption not only of
it self, but of other. To make an end, I desire the protestant to make the
example of this learned and virtuous man Fridericus Staphylus, to read this his
labor, to consider the ground of false doctrine taught by Luther and his
successors, to vewe the diversity and contrariete of his scholars, the number
of sects, the blasphemies of each one, to weigh the issue off this doctrine,
the dissolut life and contempt of order, the countres of Hungary, Lifland and
Prussia lost by Luthers heresy, finally to behold the old heresies renewed by
Luther, and other his behavior resembling heretics, the inco^stancy, variete,
and wilfulness of Melanchthon, the fond absurdites, clear contradictitions,
and most heinous heresies of Ihon Calvin. I beseech the Catholic that needs
not this eure, and instructions, to thank allmighty God therefore, to pray
for the protestant, and all deceived persons in matters of conscience and soul
health. 1. Cor. ^.
Vt idipsum dicamus omnes, and no^ sint in nobis schismata, simus autem
perfecti in eodem sensu and in eadem scientia, that is, that we may say all one
thing, and that there be no schisms among us, but that we be perfect in one
self understanding and in one self knowleadg. Such perfectnes of unite and
agreement, with amendment of life and true repentance, our Lord for his tender
mercy grant our country and all Christe^dom, through the merits of his dear
So^, our Savior and Redemer Christ Jesus. To whom with the Father and the holy
Ghost, be all honor and glory now and ever. AMEN.

FINIS.
Quoniam viri doctissimi (Angli) and sacraru^ literaru^ peritissimi, apud me
fide dignissimi, Apologia^ hanc Friderici Staphylia Thoma Stapletono fideliter
traductam attestati sunt, itemque disceptationem ab ipso scriptam, aduersus
doctrinam Lutheri, Melanchthonis and Caluini, vtilem and per omnia Catholicam
iudicarunt, merito vtramque typis excudendam iudico.

Ita attestor, Cunnerus Petri, pastor S. Petri Louanij, sacrae Theologiae
professor
.16. Nouembris. an. 1564.
A TABLE OF THE SPECIAL MATTERS CONTAINED IN THE APOLOGY OF STAPHYLVS: IN THE
DIScourse of the Translatour, and in the prefaces off both. Gathered by the
order off the A B C. The figure fignifieth the leaf: B the second side.
A short description of the Author of the Apology. fol. 9. b. and seq.
Abominable heresics of the Lutherans touching Christ. fol: 17 Heresies of
Calvin about the Sacrament of baptim. fol. 231. and in the leaves following. The
opinion of Calvin touching baptim refuted. fol. 202. A contradiction of Calvin
about baptim. fol. 203. Certain protestants call baptim a bathe for swine. fol.
109. Certain false translations of the english Bible. fol. 5. b. Item fol. 152.
and seq. The duty of a converted Catholic. fol. 56. b. What is Catholic. 49.
b. The church ought to be obeyed. 62. b and. 63. Why Calvin may worthily be
charged with the heresies off the Arrians, the Maniches, and other. fol. 224.
Detestable doctrines off Calvin. fol. 112. Absurdites in the doctrine off
Calvin. fol. 190. and seq. The confession off Ausgpurg resemble the Synods off
the Arrians. fol. 186. The civil Lutherans resemble old beretikes. fol. 185.
b. Vniuersalite, Antiquite and Consent sure notes off the Catholic doctrine.
fol. 144 Conferring off Scribture is no certain rule to interpret scripture.
fol. 159. b. 160. What the communion off England is. fol. 205. That we receive
not a communion of Christ's body poored down upon us in the sacrament. fol.
190. The communion off Calvin destroieth the necessite off communicants. fol.
191. b. People need not resort to the communion by the doctrine off Calvin.
fol. 198. b. 204. b. Caluins doctrine about the blessed Sacrament condemns
the practice of, the primitive church. fol. 198. excludes the Apostles from
receiving Christ in the last Supper. fol. 199. excludes the trial that S.
Paul requires. fol. 201. Calvin denies scripture. fol. 237. An impudent folly
off him. fol. 238. he furdereth the cause off the Anabaptists. fol. 240 he
avouches doctrine off his own without scripture, and will not allow the
doctrine off the church without the same. fol. 241. he requires to be heard
against express scripture. ibidem. b. The principles off the Catholic
religion. fol. 15 The difference of the present communion from the first. fol.
8. Old condemned heresies renewed by Calvin in the doctrine off the blessed
Sacrament. fol. 222. Contradictions in the doctrine off Calvin. fol. 206. and
in the leaves following, Calvin belieth holy Scripture. fol. 209. The cause off
contradictions in calvin. fol. 208. b. The Lutherans have corrupted the Creed.
fol. 97. b. They deny an article off the Creed. fol. 106. The communion off
the protestants is but food for refection. fol. 228. b. What the judge off
praesent controversies ought to be. fol. 20. b. A clear example off debating a
controversy. fol. 21. What is all the controversy between the Catholics and
the protestants. fol. 35. Calvin teaches Christ to have suffered in hell. fol.
229. What his doctrine is. fol. 233. b. Off the Civil Lutherans. fol. 182. b.
The difference between Catholics and heretics. fol. 24. The Catholics have
the word off God no less then the protestants. fol. 33. The late death off
many great princes in a short time. fol. 26. b. Such death a token off Gods
wrath. fol. 27. Difference between life and doctrine. fol. 35. b. Doctrine how
it is to be tried by the fruits. fol. 38. b. How to discern true doctrine from
false. fol. 41. A brief recapitulation off the schisms and dissensions among
the protestants. fol. 93. Item fol. 249. Testimonies off Lutheran
Superintendents and Ministres witnessing the disagreement in doctrine among
them selves. fol. 78. and in many leaves following. Dissension destroieth
heresies. fol. 98. b. It is a sure token off heresy. fol. 99. Prayer for the
dead defended again M. Grindall. fol. 163. and in the leaves following.
commandment in Scripture to pray for the dead beside the place off the
Machabees. fol. 163. The meaning off the Fathers praying for the dead. fol.
171. English corrupted translations learned of Luther. fol. 68. 71. b. 72. b.
off Munster. fol. 155. b. 156. off Calvin. fol. 158. Excommunication off the
protestants embarreth not from the communion by the doctrine off Calvin. fol.
196. b. A good lesson for England. fol. 126. 138. b. A corrupted text off
Luthers in the english transl. fol. 68. 71. b. and.72. b. Brauling among the
Archeprotestants for ecclesiastical gouuernement fol. 45. and 46. Holy Fathers
despised by old hertikes, as by our protestants now. fol. 32. b. and. 178. A
very good faith off a coolyar. fol. 53. Faith is one in all: but trade off life
diverse. fol. 122. Lutherans do thaunge hope in to faith and cosidence. fol.
124. The fruit off only faith. fol. 128. That we eat not the body off Christ
only by faith. fol. 196. b. A question to the Geneuians off England. fol. 204.
b. A strange order off serving the church in Germany. fol. 43. b. A notable
example off the sundry sects in Germany. fol. 56. b. and 57. The gospel off
Luther decaieth daily. fol. 121. The first Apostles off the Germans. fol. 126.
b. The ghospellers doubt and vary what the gospel preaches. fol. 91. The
marriages off new ghospellers. fol. 96. b. The miracles off the new gospel.
fol. 35. The marks off the heretics off the primitive church. 24. The same
mark in our heretics. fol. 25. A ready way to try out an heretic. fol.
53. An answer to stop the mouth off an heretic: fol. 54. A lesson off S.
Antony to avoid ^eretikes. fol. 62. The manner off heretics. fol. 67.
Heretics off great virtue in appearance. fol. 38. Off the Canonical hours off
prayer. fol. 69. Heresies suffered in the church for our trial. fol. 2. and.3.
The duty off a Christen man in time off heresy. fol. 3. b. Hungary lost by
Luthers heresy. fol. 128. b. The destruction off Greece through heresy. fol.
129. Jerusalem destroyed by schisms. fol. 129. b. The miserable estat off
Lislande through heresy. fol. 130. Countres lost in Germany by heresy. fol.
127. b: The means whereby many have fallen in to heresy. fol. 146. The
heretic more dangerous then the Turk. fol. 150. b. Greece and Afrike lost the
faith by heresy. fol. 182. The end of present heresies fol. 19. Good counsel
of Sisinnius to defeat heretics fol. 21. b. It behooves not to dispute with
heretics fol. 22. b. Inconstancy of Lutherans fol. 97. b. Inconstancy of
Lutherans. fol. 44. b. A loud lie of the Lutherans against the Catholic
church. 33. b A pretty story of wrong interpretation fo. 51. The liberty of
Luthers gospel. fo. 75. What parts of scripture may be read of the laite.
fol. 78. b Liflande lost by Luthers heresy f. 128, The pride and presumption
of Luther f. 132. Luthers penance fol. 133. He becomes a papist for a
vauntage fol. 134. b. He is a false prophet. fo. 139. A murderer and strong
thief in the church. ibi. The Lutherans vary at their metings and conferences
like the Arrians. fo. 186. b. The labells of the Lutherans principles fol. 18.
b Sacramentary sects among the Lutherans fol. 87. b The outward behavior off
Lutherans in Germany fol. 59. Why protestants bark at the evil life of the
clergy. fo. 61. b. The church ought not to be forsaken for the evil life off
men in the church fo. 62. Lay men are not commanded to read scripture f. 64.
The hebrew text could not be read off the lay Jews. folio 64. b. The dangers
proceeding off the laites reading scripture fo. 65. Luther will prove by
Scripture, there ought to be no Magistrates among Christen men f. 140. b. The
marriage off Luther fol. 141. b. Contrariete in his doctrine fol. 142. The
cause of Luthers breach from the church, and the manner of the first entry
thereof fo. 149. a. and b. Luther proved an heretic fo. 179. His proper heresy
touching the Sacrament has wrought his own confusion fo. 181. b. Lutherans in
Bohem teach the soul to die with the body fol. 17. b. Luther at the first
planting of his heresy writes against obedience to princes. fol. 16. He makes
chastity a thing impossible ibid. Luther clippeth the coin of Gods word. fol.
66. He adds to the text fol. ^8. Enemy to virginite and wedlock both.
Ibidem. b. He teaches pluralite of wives. fol. 69. renews the heresy of the
Pelagians, and off the Manichees. fol. 68. Item of Vigilantius. fol 69.
Changes opinion in doctrine fol. 72. and 74. con demneth good lerning. fol.
73. writes against obedience to Magistrates fol. 75. A notable testimony of the
Caluinistes against Luther fol. 25. All new sects have begone of Luther
ibidem. b. The fruit off liberty preached by Luther fo. 44. The pride of Luther
fol. 36. A notable testimony of Luther of the life of his scholars. lbi. b. The
fruits of the Lutherans doctrine fol. 39. The evil life of the Catholics and
of the Lutherans proceed of diverse causes fo. 40. b. and 41. Mela^chthon
teaches pluralite of wives. fol. 69. changes opinion in doctrine. fo. 72.
becomes a Suinglian. fo. 88. is a dissembling ghospeller fol. 90. he becomes
a baker. fo. 107. b. Horrible blasphemies of a ghospelling Minister f. 112. b
Wicked doctrine of Luther touching Matrimony fol. 96. Melanchthon inconstant
in doctrine. fol. 183. A corrupter off Luthers books ibidem. b. A breder of
sedition and rebellion. f. 185. a. and b malicious and cruel fo. 187. b. The
Mach^bees proved to be of the Canon, fol. 166. The writings of men in the
church to be followed. fol. 168. The fathers off the protestants fo. 161. 162.
Item fol. 165. b. and in the leaves following. The doctrine of our protestants
consists of old heresies, folio 161. 162. Item fol. 175. and in the leaves
following. The principle off the only written text how it is meant of
protestants. fol. 7. Protestants refusing the Council show them selves to
lack Charity fol. 20. Luther proves co^tempte of Princes by scripture. fol.
139. b. his counsel to ^rinces fol. 140. Protestants are proved to be
heretics fol. 98. The protestants are Manich^es fol. 111. b. Protestants
confound vniformite and diversity fol. 122. b. The fruits of protestants
confusion in do^^rine fol. 123. Prussia lost by Luthers heresy fol. 127. b A
necessary lesson for deceived protestants fol. 58. A vain crake of protestants
fol. 59. No certainte of Faith in protestants fol. 18. Disagreement in doctrine
among our protestants fol. 7. Outward pretense off agreement in the same
ibidem. b. Special articles off contradictions among the protestants. fol.
80. b. Thirten heresies among the protestants touching the blessed sacrament
fol. 90. b. Five among the Lutherans fol. 90. and eight among the Zwinglians.
86. b. The ground off all protestants doctrine false and deceitful fol. 42.
An other decitfull ground off protestants fol. 43. A persit rule to discern
false preachers. fol. 37. A charitable shift of the protestants. fol. 29. b.
Real receiving can not stand without real presence. fol. 194. The cause of
diverse professions of religion in the Catholic church. fol. 125. Heretical
rebellion never proves. fol. 125. b. Scripture needs exposition. 47. Why the
protestants cry upon only Scripture. fol. 48. What the unlearned shall do in
variete off interpretations off scripture. fol. 48. b. A token to know false
interpretation off scripture from true. fol. 49. b. Every heretic alleges
scripture. fol. 59. b. How interpretation off Scripture is tried true. fol. 60.
The body of Christ under one kind of the Sacrament perfect and whole. 60. A
similitude. fol. 3. b. fol. 65. b. fol. 124. b. and.189. b. Scripture corrupted
by Luther fol. 66. and many leaves following. The doctrine of Sacramentaries
destroieth the resurrection of our bodies. fol. 227. Calvin makes the blessed
Sacraments bare signs tokens and badges. fol. 203. Of the Sacrament of the
altar, see in the word, Calvin. That the soul only is not fedd of Christ in
the Sacrament. f. 193 Chalenging of only Scripture cause of heresies. fol. 114.
The ground of the Leage at Smalcaldium, brickle and variable. fol. 110. The
Sacramentaries desire to be under the winge of the Lutherans. fol. 81. b. they
condemn Luther. fol. 84. b. Luther condemns them. fol. 84. and fol. 86. b.
Four Sacraments acknowledged of Melanchthon. fol. 45. Scripture alone
suffiseth not. fol. 41. b. 42. Great confusion in the church by small
alteration of the Scripture. fol. 70. b. Scripture hard to be understood.
fol. 4. The custom of heretics to deny parts of scripture. fol. 165.
doctrine defended without express commandment in scripture. fol. 169.
Staphylus refuses to be doctor of divinity, because of the oath of
wittenberg. fol. 10. b. Why he forsook the Lutherans. fol 11. 56. and.252.
Why Calvin makes the Sacrament of the altar but a bare sign. fol. 214. b.
The Sacramentaries tie Christ to the bread. fol. 216. Repugnances in Calvin to
holy Scripture. fol. 217. The law of the Turks compiled by heretics. fol.
19. A refuge for false translations of Scripture confuted. fol. 154. Detestable
heresies concerning the Blessed Trinite. fol. 17. To cleave to the written text
only is an old heresy. fol. 47. In the word of God two things are to be
considered. fol. 34. A wicked persuasion of worldly careless men. fol. 51. b.
A buckler for the vulerned against new preachers. fol. 52. b. Zuinglius is a
pelagian. fol. 111.
Faults escaped in Printing.
^l. Page Lin. 3. 1. 2. Read for good, goods. 99. 2. 27. for wrath in, wrath,
as i^ 157. 1. 28. for the righteous, the works of the righteous.

FINIS.

