SATIRICAL ESSAYS CHARACTERS AND OTHERS. OR Accurate and quick Descriptions,
fitted to the life of their Subjects.

(...)

THEOPHRAS. Aspice and he^^s^ sort aliquid decoctius audis. Mile vapora^^
ector mihi serueat aure: luuen. Plagosas minime Plagtarius.

JOHN STEPHENS. LONDON, Printed by Nicholas Oaks, and are to be sold by Roger
Barnes, at his Shop in Saint Dunstanes Churchyard. 1615.

TO THE WORTHY AND Worshipful, my honored Friend, Mr. THOMAS TVRNER Esquire,
etc.
SIR,
YOUR approbation of some parcels, has entitled you to all: and your alone
worthiness has deserved all. If I entreat your Kindest judgment, that is
your Impartial, to survey this; I shall but rather furnish out a brief
Epistle, then instruct your knowledge: which is already (I dare say) resolved,
that the impartial censure is the best, if soundest: of which you are provided
well to censure this. And if I tell you that instructions likewise may be here
admitted; though such as may confirm and not provoke your detestation of
baseness; imagine that I mean no otherwise: Nay, if I tell you further, that
some things here included may modestly endure the name of knowledge; you shall
but take the promise of my own judgment to encourage yours in the perusal,
by way of hazarding my whole credit: and so absolve me from the thought of
Arrogance. I wrong your patience and worth, by preparation of your way to read
and judge. You are sufficient for me: and able to conceive, that all becomes
your own, as I would be, being your

Truly Affectionate I.S.

To the People.
MY Epistles have no fortune to purify men's apprehension, much less to new
create, or to increase their judgments: Be therefore suddenly persuaded to
reclaim thy censure having viewed this, or be perpetually haunted with thy
double mischief, Impudence and dullness. Take this along, and I have done
speedily. Things be here censured so tractable, as if they and thou disclaim
acquaintance, thou must immediately be taken for one affected to tyrannical or
clownish ignorance: Be then thy own Reader; thou needst not my comment: nor do
I request thy favorable constraction. Yet, if thou can believe that perfect
sense and meanings be not only tied to public favorites, thou needst not be
ashamed to justify both me and mine: If (otherwise) thou can not relish;
blame thy self only, at thy own peril.

The Contents.
THree Essays of Cowardlinesse.
Essay 4. Of High-birth. Essay 5. Of Disinheritance. Essay 6. Of Poetry. Essay
7. Of Discontents.
Two Books of Characters.
THE FIRST BOOK.
Charact. 1. An impudent Censurer. Charact. 2. A complete Man. Charact. 3. A
good Husband, Charact. 4. A contented Man. Charact. 5. A good Emperor.
Charact. 6. A worthy Poet. Charact. 7. An honest Lawyer. Charact. 8. A
Detractor. Charact. 9. An Humorist. Charact. 10. A Coxcombe. Charact. 11. A
Rank Obseruer. Charact. 12. A Parish-Polititian. Charact. 13. A Spend-thrift.
Charact. 14. A Vbiquitarie. Charact. 15. A Gamester. Charact. 16. A Novice.
Charact. 17. An Epicure. Charact. 18. A Churl. Charact. 19. An Athiest.
Charact. 20. A Liar. Charact. 21. A Drunkard. Charact. 22. A Begging Scholar.
THE SECOND BOOK.
Charact. 1. A Iaylor. Charact. 2. An informer. Charact. 3. A base Mercenary
Poet. Charact. 4. A common Player. Charact. 5. A Warrener. Charact. 6. A
Huntsman. Charact. 7. A Fawlconer. Charact. 8. A Farmer. Charact. 9. An
Hostess. Charact. 10. A Tapster. Charact. 11. A Lawyers Clarke. Charact. 12. A
mere Attorney. Charact. 13. A crafty Scriuener. Charact. 14. A welsh Client.
Charact. 15. A Country Bridegroom. Charact. 16. A Country Bride. Charact.
17. My Mistress. Charact. 18. A Gossip. Charact. 19. An old woman. Charact.
20. A Witch. Charact. 21. A Pandar.

A Caution.
BE once advisd, and thou shall never take
A Mercenarie, though a famous man,
To prove the labors, which thy Muses make;
Each line although he does directly scan.
Directly? no; he cannot so survay,
Except with resolution to persist:
But, if a while you do forbear to pay,
His resolutions he does all untwist:
And (like a crafty Lawyer) though he frame
A formal judgment to recover cost,
Yet brings a writ of error in the same:
So (by himself) his judgments worth is lost.
Does he not then his credit much deface?
No: that you would believe, he does beseech
(If so his judgment takes no common place)
His meaning held no concord with his speech.
Does he recover credit then, or save
Opinion kept perhaps above desert?
Impossible: for like a cheating Knave,
Protested faith to shame he does convert.
Friends often be sparing: Poets of the Town,
Value their judgment, high above the rate:
Both may devise to bring the censure down,
Yet both can never change a volumes fate.
Then rather let this work commended be
By those (unknown) who know capacity:
So shall each sentence that they do rehearse,
Prefixe a just and laudatory verse.
A Friends Inuitation: no Flatterers Encomion.
WHen many are invited to a Feast,
Though the inuiter does not know his guest
And therefore cannot well provide in have,
One dish so curious, as may please each taste:
Yet if this Host has such a careful mind,
As that he will, for each man's stomach, find
A seu^rall meat; and so provide with care,
Good hous-roome, hearty welcome, and good fare:
Shall we condemn his liberal act and love,
If thanklesse invitants the same disprove?
Some (peradventure) does one dish there see,
Which with his nature does not well agree:
Some other may perchance dislike the feast,
Because it is not all what he likes best.
And so with diverse censures they do take
Due praise from him who did the ba^quet make:
Which may discourage him that does intend
Such careful cost another time to spend.
Yet (worthy Author) let not this dismay
Thee, to go forward in that virtuous way
Thou have propounded; nor let that be lost
Which is so rare. Thou art a noble Host,
And 'cause thou know not the minds of those
That shall receive thy feast, thou do dispose
Of things so fitly, that all here may find
Diverse provisions for each readers mind.
What if perchance some surfeit at thy feast,
Because they cannot easily digest
Some vicious quality, which reigns so rife
In vicious minds (made known by their lewd
So rife; as you the danger have expressed, (life)
That knowing it, they might the vice detest?
Pity their weakness then, seeing thou do tell
Nothing to poison humor, but expel.
What if some others will thy feast abuse,
Because it is of seu'rall kinds? refuse
The founders dignity, because ti^ known
Men's tastes and palates only be their own?
Thou made it not for only one man's sake,
But all the worlds, if all of it partake.
Take resolution therefore to thy mind;
Add wings unto thy fainting courage; bind
All thy due strength together; to provide
So rare a Banquet; which may long abide
To all men's profit, and the founders praise.
He therefore does invite the guests that says
This is a Noble Feast; and wishes this,
That he, which of this feast does judge amiss
May (if he wants what is in this combined)
Seek to atchieue the same, but never find,
ANTHO. CROFTES.

SATYRICALL ESSAYS, CHARACTERS AND OTHERS.
Three Satyricall Essays of Cowardlinesse.
ESSAY. I.
Fear to resist good virtues common foe,
And sear to loose some lucre, which does grow
By a continued practice; makes our fate
Banish (with single combats) all the hate,
Which broad abuses challenge of our spleen.
For who in Virtues troop was ever seen,
That did courageously with mischiefs fight
Without the public name of hipocrite?
Vainglorious, Malapert, Precise, Devout,
Be terms which threaten those that go about
To stand in opposition of our times
With true defiance, or Satyrickeri^es.
Cowards they be, branded among the worst,
Who (through contempt of Atheism) never durst
Crowd near a great-Mans elbow, to suggest
Smooth tales with gloss, or Envy well addressed.
These be the noted cowards of our age;
Who be not able to instruct the Stage
With matter of new shameless impudence:
Who cannot almost laugh at innocence;
And purchase high preferment by the ways,
Which had been horrible in Nero's days.
They are the shameful cowards, who contemn
Vices of State, or cannot ^l^tter them;
Who can refuse advantage; or deny
Villainous courses, if they can esp^e
Some little purchase to enrich their ch^st,
Though they become uncomfortably blessed.
We still account those Cowards, who forbear
(Being possessed with a Religious fear)
To slip occasion, when they might erect
Horns on a Trades-mans noddle, or neglect
The violation of a Virgins bed
With promise to require her Maidenhead.
Basely low-minded we esteem that man,
Who cannot swagger well, or (if he can)
Who does not with implacable desire,
Follow revenge with a consuming fire.
Extortious Rascals, when they are alone,
Bethink how closely they have picked each bone;
Nay with a frolic humor they will brag,
How blancke they left their empty Clients bag.
Which dealings if they did not give delight;
Or not refresh their meetings; in despite
They would accounted be both weak, unwise,
And like a timorous coward too precise.
Your handsome-bodied youth (whose comely face
May challenge all the store of Natures grace)
If, when a lustful Lady does inuit,
By some lascivious tricke^ his dear delight,
If then he does abhor such wanton joy;
Whose is not almost ready to destroy,
Ciuility with curses, when he hears
The tale recited? blaming much his years,
Or modest weakness, and with cheeks ful-blown
Each man will wish the case had been his own.
Grave holy men, whose habit will imply
Nothing but honest zeal, or sanctity,
Nay so vprighteous will their actions seem,
As you their thoughts Religion will esteem.
Yet these all-sacred men, who daily give
Such vows, would think themselves unfit to live,
If they were Artlesse in the flattering vice,
Even as it were a daily sacrifice:
Children deceive their parents with expense:
Charity lays aside her conscience,
And looks upon the frail commodity
Of monstrous bargains with a covetous eye:
And now the name of Generosity,
Of noble carriage, or brave dignity;
Keep such a common ^kirmish in our blood;
As we direct the measure of Things good,
By that, which reputation of Estate,
Glory of rumor, or the present rate
Of Saving Policy does best admit.
We do employ materials of wit,
Knowledge, occasion, labor, dignity,
Among our spirits of Audacity,
Nor in our gainefull proiects do we care
For what is pious, but for what we dare:
Good humble men, who have sincerely laid
Salvation for their hope, we call Afraid.
But if you will vouchsafe a patient ear,
You shall perceive, men impious have most fear.
ESSAY. II.
MAny aspiring fellows you may see,
Who, after they and fortune do agree,
Come (by brief windings) to be men elect;
Through private means, heaven knows how indirect.
To flourish quickly and advance their head,
As if they took possessions from the dead:
When all the Heralds never could devise,
From whence the fathers kindred might arise.
Though many call them Nephew, Brothers son
(Because a thriftie garment they have spun)
Who (else) with public shame had bin disgraced,
And all the titles of their love defaced:
But now they flourish, and with Worship swell,
Whose poor beginnings every Groom can tell.
As if a newfound Whittingtons rare Cat
Came to extol their birthrights above that
Which nature once intended: These be men
Who think not of a Hundred yielding Ten:
They turn base copper into perfect gold:
Counterfeit couzning wa^es bewis^ly sold.
Men be persuaded well of prosperous fate,
Giving much credit to a crasty pa^e,
But if these cowards durst discover all,
Both how they did their high estates install,
How they began to make a league with hell,
Or how they did in damned plots excel,
Their very lives alone, if they were dead,
Would make an other work for Hollingshead.
Alas they dare not; these be cowards right,
For whose abortiue d^eas the blackest night
Is never black enough, nor can conceal
Their shame, which lewd posterities reveal.
Fine hansome outsides who so highly stand
On the reputed courage of their hand:
Who keep their pages with such spacious guard
(Scorning to play without a coated-card)
Who keep a large Retinue, or erect
Buildings; in which they never can expect
To dwell, with credit of their famished slocke;
Or to maintain the use of one good lock.
These notwithstanding to augment their gloss,
And turn some brave expenses into dross,
Will be the servile debtors to a slave,
(Who has no remedy, but to deprave
Their fortunes with inuectiue impudence,
Or make petitions to defray expense)
And yet these mighty Vpstarts cannot dare,
To pay a single cross: Except they spare
Their pomp; which gives a luster in the Court,
And in the City makes abundant sport.
Spend-thrifts, and Gallants likewise (who have lands
Which bear all Saffron for their yellow bands)
Those which have only complement, and whoope
In Tauernes; may attend the former troop.
Those that dare challenge any man of arms,
And seem to bear^ about them valtant charms;
Belching uncivil Envy, in the face
Of him that meekely contradicts their grace;
As if they carried vengeance in their jaws,
Or executions of the Statute-law^s.
Those men if stricktly challenged, quake with fear,
Contriuing basely how they may forbear:
And (leaving then a while their pompous pride)
They best bethink, how they may closely hide
Their contumacious heads with privilege:
For when the flat-cap tradesman does all age
Forfeit of payments (and because at length
His wife, and so the world, does know his strength)
When he procures a Champion to demand
The noble answer of his debtors hand:
And dares my valiant Swaggerer to meet,
His lawful challenge in the open street;
He, rather then he will provoke the strife,
Sues by petition to my plaintifes wise:
Who, if she does not very much forget,
Takes down the quarrel, and so pa^es the debt.
Another sort of Cowards you may see,
(Transcending these in a more base degree)
Who to preserve advancement, or uphold
Their Families, (without expense of gold)
Will, in promiscuous manner, congregate
Amongst good men, who blockish Papisme hate;
Nay, they will be attentive in the Church,
(All to avoid the law, and penal lurch)
They will con-niue at holy arguments,
And often bear a sway in Parliaments:
They will agree to constituted laws,
Which almost ruin to their kingdom draws,
(All notwithstanding) they directly dare
Hope to be saved, as other Papists are;
Expecting on some opportunity,
When they may make a traitrous unity:
For all the truth which can excuse their fate,
Is, that they finely can equivocate:
A Cowards doctrine, full of shameless fear,
Infuses joy to their misguided ear,
And yet no equal justice them controules,
Because they have a Curtain to their souls;
Corrupted Officers, the common curse
Of public Law, who stuff their gaping purse
With wrongful fees, and grow extremely fat
By their delitious tricks, or lying squat
Up to the cares in pleasant Alchymie,
If these men durst bewray their infamy,
And bring their holiest actions into light,
The day would run to a prodigious night.
N^w fees created are, and then the match
M^st something take to frame a brief dispatch:
I^formers be prevented by a feate,
Which q^alifies indeed their boisterous heat,
Although unjustly: Clearkes and other knaves
(Who w th their generous ruffs the court outbraues)
Will take a pention, or a quarter fee,
To make their friend from information free;
And (to prevent the mischief) will declare
How other bills already do not spare
To certify the Court a day before
Of that, for which the plaintiff does implore:
So false and fained reuolutions crack
The crafty meanings that pre-caution lack:
Yet still they gape, and say they cannot save
The many pounds which they so freely gave
To purchase ten times more for they intend
Only on private meanings to depend.
Before I speak, let no good Law^e^ bl^me
My love to him, though I bad vices name.
Another sort of Law-professors come
Within this Catalogue to crave a room:
They who depend upon a Judges look
More then the points of Littleton, or Brook,
They who procure a great man's happy smile,
By Coaches, Colts, and other courses vile:
Who keep one special Court, and blind-sold wise
Tread (Mill-horse like) the circuit of Assise:
They who be fitter to maintain the sport,
Of Christmasse revels at an Inn of Court:
Fitter to feed delitious Ladies ears,
Or flattringly remove their patrons fears:
Fitter to follow the forgotten trades,
Or make a reading of the knave of Spades:
To make a libell, or neat ruffes allow;
And sometimes very fit to drive the Plow.
Fitter then to exceed the true degrees
Of merits, and convert mere voice to fees.
These men (it makes me laugh) they still contend
To choose a long-liu'd patron for their friend;
But if his destined length becomes too short
To make the time of long vacations sport,
Then all my favorites be vanished far,
And almost tremble to approach the bar.
Then they perceive, Life (upon which they gnaw)
Is more uncertain then their common law:
They travail home again by weeping cross,
And bring the law much credit with their loss.
But if they dare, untouched, remain still free,
Another Patron dares corrupted be:
Else like egregious Cowards, they withdraw,
Hiding themselves, and the abuse of Law.
I see a Lawyer, who has spent his time
At Innes of Court in some excessive crime;
But being once advanced to view the bar,
He brings all bird-lime, and polluting tar,
With which he so defiles the Laws pure Sense,
That each man will account it impudence.
If a good simple Client entertaines
This Mercenary Varlet, and explaines,
How he has purchased a convenient field,
Lordship, or Manor, which may easly yield
A large revenue, that affoords full cost,
Whereby he saues himself, and nothing's lost:
The greedy Lawyer does begin to pray
He will repriue his answer till a day;
Intending he perceiues points difficult,
Through which the crafty seller may insult.
Meanetime he visites some old broking knave,
And (with a sight of Angels) ties the slave,
Through nice propounded Articles to swim,
And get his Clients bargain even for him.
Then will he basely flatter, and pretend
The seller was my worshipful dear friend,
Who recollecting how commodious
The bargain was for me (so covetous)
Did kindly offer me the peny-worth
In which (before) I wanted putting forth.
Ungracious were it to impute disease
To any men of knowledge, or to these,
With a pernicious meaning to contemn
The most respectfull honest Law, or them:
When therefore I the name of Lawyer use,
Or (any way) the title do accuse,
Imagine, I, as do the vulgar clownes,
Call those men Lawyers, who have Lawyers gowns:
Reserving to my self a purer sense,
Which says a Lawyer is all innocence;
A Lawyer truly taken; which implies
One who does Art and Reason exercise,
Both which, and Equity do him sustain;
Who truly does the name of Lawyer gain.
That waking sighted Runaway, the Hare,
(Which is pres^ru'd by a continual fear)
Cannot (by this) protect her innocence,
So much as Officers their lewd pretense:
The Fox an ancient Hierogliphicke was,
In Fri^rs robes to show the common pass
Of smooth hypocrisy, and Church-mens craft;
But now a formal gown may serve to waft
This badge among our prowling Officers,
Which Name and Habit rightuously inferres
As much compacted villainy, as meets
Among the Stewards of rich Country Leetes:
Both Cousen with as great conformity,
As if they held some new fraternity:
Both be so practiced in good Virtues scorn,
As if Atturnies had directly sworn
To match the Officer, and powle the flecee,
As if they both consisted of one piece.
They both insinuate their sweating pains,
Their common payment: each (alike) constraines
The hunger-bitten Client to disburse,
Till they have left his hopes even with his purse.
Yet will you dare to say those men exact?
No; that were brainlesse: they so well compact
Their polliticke inventions, that the fault
Of asking more then due, creepes to the vault
Of Clerks dull ignorance to purchase leave,
When their discovered proiect^ d^ deceive
A Substitute in Courts may rather take
All wrested fees, that gloss may thereby make
The Steward seem less culpable in vice,
When Substitutes are taught by his advice:
And if some one their cousenage does betray,
The Substitute can easily slinke away.
My baudy Proctor likewise, who presumes
To purge men's purses* for vene^eall Rhumes;
Who th^^atens penance in agh^stly sh^ete,
If Clie^ts (though they s^rip from head to feet)
Be sla^k^ in payment of extortious coin:
This man who studies first how to purloine,
Before he looks upon the civil Law;
This man, who has a prompt and ready paw,
Who loves no Innes of Court, shutting his crackes
And all his rage, under a nose of wax;
Who, when a fornicato^ looks awry,
That he the least advantage may espy,
He will ^ff^^iously attend the Court,
Because he ^^^els out the ensuing sport,
And when a grievous fi^e afflicts the purse
Of ^^^shly sinners, to esc^pe the curse,
He and the thriftie Judge can closely share
The foul^ taxation, which with pious c^re
Is well intended to correct the sin,
Establish bridges which decay within,
Reli^ue sick persons, or amend highways,
Or some religious Chapel, which decays.
But they have other uses to respect,
To buy their ciu^ll garments, or affect
The wanton lust of some egregious whore,
To win new credit, to deceive the poor;
And so deceive the vnsuspectfull time,
For (else) he durst not so insatiate clime
Into the fiery region; neither dares
His habit seem acquainted with these cares.
Now must I summon Parish-hypocrites,
Who seem attentive to celestial rites,
Who think the Art of him that well does live,
Is all performed, if he example give,
Which may become the parish: if he pray
Aloud in Chambers, or devoutly pay
The tribute of true dealing unto all
Who (can to their ass^stance) Justice call.
If in Assemblies he can show good works,
And call offenders, Infidels or Turks:
He thinks he has discharged the final part
Of a religious or honest heart:
Though he does closely keep a virtuous punke,
Or though (on cautious t^arms) he^ can be drunk:
Though in another County, and the name
Of other Agents he can schedules fram^;
And thinks himself to be a man well blessed,
Though he receives the Sinful Interest:
For this eye-seruing-age is quickly gone
To all deceit if we lack lookers on.
These be most valiant Cowards, men that dare
Be boldly impious, and yet basely fear,
Least common rumor should observe or think
They be not still awake, though still they wink.
Some false Physicians lie within the reach
Of these, who true sincerity impeach,
Their glasses, glisters, oils, ingredients
(Which hope of lucre oftentimes inuents)
Do carry all (as if a cowards soul
Kept in their bosoms) to the dead man's roll;
Hiding their fearful practice in the graves:
Lean death, their operation still out-braues.
Sometimes their crabbed Envy does invent,
Sometimes they kill with new experiment:
For still they er^e by custom, or by chance,
Either by malice, or by ignorance:
And (having spent prescriptions to each dram)
He thinks alas sure I protected am,
If now I see our physic does no good,
Or seeing I have sucked his purse and blood,
If I can tell his friends there is no hope,
Or that he must expect deaths fatal scope:
Then shall I be discharged with credits fee,
And to condemn more lives, remain still free.
They shift their compass to avoid our scorn,
Hiding their actions from the faire-fac'd morn.
Now my censorious Critics who disgrace
Each work they know not, with a scuruy face,
Who banish Authors to Barbarian lands,
And sling true solid matter from their hands,
With a disdainful Motto of Nonsense:
Although themselves (excepting impudence)
Have nothing to excuse their vanity:
Latinle^se Lawless Rogues, they often be,
Who having past their verdict, will recant:
For their maintaining faculty is scant.
Or if these Apish Cowards dare defend,
The vice of Judgment, brings them to their end.
And yet some Writers do deserve the name
Of Cowards likewise: they be grown so tame
With being often handled, often praisd,
As they forget their motion, being raisd
Above the highest spheres: they think it much,
More then indeed enough, to have been such
As they were once accounted: though they sleep,
Follow their ease, and sluggish silence keep:
Nay though they wake, and (which does po^son the^)
F^llow the errors which they did condemn.
Some worthless Poets also, have the vice
To write their labors as they cast at di^e:
If (by adventure) some strange happy chance,
Smiles on their borrowed works of ignorance,
They can bewray their the^uish names, and give
Notice to all, how they eterni^'d live.
But if (presuming on their sickly strength)
They write, and do betray their selves at length:
Then, oh they came into the public press
Against their wills; they dare not then con^esse
Who wrongs the world with such base Poetry:
Nay, their own eldest sons they will deny.
All hide their vices. Printers also hide
Errors escaped, which makes wise men deride
Excellent wits, deserving worthy praise,
When (through distinctions lest) the truth decaies:
But among all base writers of the time,
I cannot reckon up more desperate rhyme,
(Which travails with a fear so damnable)
As Libell-lashing measures: they excel
Only in this; that these be counted best,
Which the soole-Author dares acknowledge least.
These are contemptible enough, and yet
Their lines mask under a fictitious wit,
When wit (as hitherto) was never seen
Truly engendered by a tr^uiall spleen.
Nor can they thus reform what is impure,
Seeing men so touched, conceive themselves past cure.
Well do these cowards thrive, when having blown
Shame to the peoples Ears, they loose their own.
Briefly, it were a thing preposterous,
If rich men, who are nicely co^etous,
Should not be trembling cowards; when they think
Upon the joyful pains of death, they stink.
Nothing prouokes me sooner to confess
That Atheism is their chiefest happiness,
Then to consider how the very best
Struggle with death, declining to their rest:
One pluckes away the hairs which should reveal
His righteous thoughts: another does conceal
The furrowed wrinkles of his tawny skin:
Another scoures his stumpes, or does begin
To break the glass with foolish ecstasy,
At the reflexe of Chap-f^lne gravity.
Can these, with safety of a quiet mind
Puff up themselves with an ambitious wind
Of Riches, Rumor, Lucre, and Expense,
Whiles Kings and good men have no difference?
They have Abundance, I have some alone,
They feed a hundred bellies, I feed one.
Both vanish to Obliuions cave, unless
Our very thoughts a living soul express:
Which being once admitted, no souls can
Keep their worst secrets from the face of Man.
ESSAY. III.
NO more: no more: now says my honest friend,
Be politic; or study to commend
The time, and timelings, least you do bestow
More copious terms then license dare allow.
Content thy self (Cordatus) I will blame
No reverend Churchman, neither will I name
One lewd professor, who pollutes the grace
Of such a formal and respected place:
I will not name their livings, nor their lives,
Much ^esse their bondage to their hansom wives:
As if they durst not show the times disease,
Because indeed they dare not them displease.
I will not wrong their holiness: and why?
In holiness true zeal you may descry.
Nor will I tax Church-vices, least I wrong
The labor which to writing does belong.
For when I have again repeated all
Their vices public, and sins personal:
I shall but reckon the antiquities,
Of Gloss, of Ignorance, and Simonies:
And so repeat things mentioned long before,
Nay things prefixed upon each Playhouse door.
Let them (alas) continue, or increase,
O let them long enjoy a qui^t peace;
For they already know the mischiefs well,
They almost scorn such inwards to expel.
And why? they fear taxation: o strange fate!
They who contemn reproves, are desperate.
We cannot hope such persons will amend,
Who may (without control) their vice extend.
Enough, enough, I have bethought so much
Concerning cowards, that my self am such:
I dare not speak my meaning under pain
Of being crossed, of being curbed again.
Why crossed? why curbed? go ask authority
Why it protects peculiar vanity?
And it perhaps will answer in de^ence;
C^owes to themselves beperfect Innocence.
Or (which is more familiar) Envy loves
That humor best, which bitterly reproues
All states, all faculties besides her own:
She favors that, and fears it should be known,
Though it be noted; or with public shame,
Has purchasd ((...) you write) an odious name.
Men think their fashions and their faces best
If (in a flattred humor) they be blessed,
To hear men discommend both such and such,
Not naming theirs; although they be so much
Apparent filthy, as no vulgar eye
Would make a question of deformity:
And so superior vices do propound
A freedom to their scope, as being sound
In selfe-conceite, if they can save their skin
From being Printed with a public s^nne;
Though (setting books aside) they do ^rofesse,
Enough to poison all their names no l^sse.
See how I breath into the spacious Air,
A Theme as spacious: Can my V^rse repair
The fruitless errors of men obstinate;
Who cannot freely their own vices hate?
Who rather gainefull vices do cond^mne,
Because they cannot purchase gains by them?
For in their own offenses they reserve
Such cautions as may closely them preserve.
Well, sir, admit men labor to be wise,
And for themselves do secrets exercise,
Who shall dare contradict such worthy pains
Which fosters credit, and ill terms restraines?
Avaunt base Hipocrite, go henceforth set
Upon thy pillow, thy close cabinet,
And sleep with all the papers in thy hand,
Which thy most secret counsels may command;
Or I with Spaniards better shall agree;
Or I shall trust a Lapwing more then thee.
Good men dare iustifye, even touching all
The essence of their thoughts original:
Touching themselves, their meanings they may save,
Least they their good success of means deprave.
But well, suppose men so directly halt
As they do fear to patronize the fault,
Shall they not seek vnpunish'd to remain,
If actions passed cannot be called again?
We daily do transgress; and some perhaps
Deserve the plagues of lashing after-claps:
But then, alas! what satisfaction can,
Written reproves be for a vicious man?
You make professions undergo contempt,
And make the least offense so far exempt
From civil virtue, and some new conceits,
That you enforce good fellowship to straights.
So: Have you done (dear Motley?) yes almost;
But stay a little, and behold vncrost,
The reason, why we do so closely deal,
And why we cover vice: I can r^ueale,
To frustrate your inventions which produce
Nothing halfe-worthy of a well-borne Muse,
But triuiall vanities, and deep expense,
To tell man's weakness by experience:
You might with more applause bestow more pains
To grace the Mayors Triumphs, and the chains
Which do attend his Lordship to the Hall:
You might expound things termed mystical:
Or might in better phrase compose a song,
To show his Highness staid at Cambridge long;
And not in terms, as hasty as the truth,
Discover haire-braine fallacies of youth:
You might, you might, Seuerus, and detest
To scourge close dealers who be safely blessed:
For I can well resolve you are the cause,
Why men reserve (in acts) a private clause:
You, and your nice observance do restrain
Men, and their actions both, from being plain:
And yet you call those Cowards, who beware
As if they were possessed with childish fear.
Suruay thy self, quicke-sighted formalist,
And then discover that abusiue mist,
With which men shelter any private sin:
Charity always does at home begin.
Now have you ended? then, I answer all
By scorning to excuse or hide my fall
As thou do urge: if I transgress my square,
I of Relapse, not of Reproof beware:
And I believe thou likewise wilt amend,
If so thou do not labor to offend:
For that ind^ed betrays men's dealing naught,
When they do study rather to be taught,
In subtle mischief of a newer mint,
Then to abjure deceits of ancient print:
For they hate couznage, once entitled Old,
Because the Title shows it often told,
And so affoords no lucre; not because
It favors Atheism and corruption draws.
Why do I tax, why do I trouble men,
Or why with noted crimes defile my pen?
The most notorious cowards will betray
Themselves, and follies, though I turn away.
Yes (which is worth my laughter) they accuse
Their closest fears, even while they do refuse
To let you understand their subtle drifts,
They do discover such avoiding shifts,
That you may thence collect some fearful trick,
They study to appear so pollitick.
As, Fellons brought before a Justice, each
Hopes to be saved, if others he impeach:
And as some Indians dealt, being al-amaz'd
To hear the Spanish guns and forces blazed;
They bought their safety through a fine deceit:
For knowing gold to be the Spanish bait,
They would protest, that fifty leagues beyond
Was common plenty of that yellow sand;
Meaning to turn the fools another way.
And so deal vicious persons: they betray
Another folly, to preserve their own:
Observe, and you shall gather things well known.
Go tell a Church man he has lost his voice,
Or ask him why he does in strife rejoice:
And he will answer; Lawyers do not speak
So much to purpose, as the Pulpits creake,
Although they do receive fees doubled twice;
Which far exceed my single Benefice.
Go tell a Lawyer he relyes on chance,
Because he does affect dull ignorance:
And he the worst objection soon auerts
By telling how The times neglect deserts.
Go tell a Magistrate of morning bribes,
And he, to shallow means, the same ascribes:
But then demand of Honor why she fails,
In giving that which every way auailes
To nourish her beloved sons? And she
Will answer, They profuse, insatiate be.
Ask shifting Russians why they do forget,
To hasten payment and discharge their debt,
Or why they do sufficient men dislike?
And they will answer, Great-ones do the like.
Go tell a Gamester he has cheated long,
Or unto many offered shameful wrong,
And he will answer, that himself before
Was often cheated twenty times and more.
Go ask a Drunkard why he follows wine,
Abuses God, or gives a Heathen sign;
And he will quickly answer thy demand,
The Parson was so drunk he could not stand.
Go tell a Hot-spurre he has killed a man,
Go ask him how he does the terror scan:
And he will answer; a Physitian's free
To murder twenty millions; why not he?
Go tell a fawning wretch he does rely
Upon the slavish vice of flattery:
And he will answer, That the best are glad
To follow such endeavors, or as bad.
Go tell a whore she does her sex pollute,
By being such a common prostitute:
And she will answer in defense of fame,
Citizens wives, and Ladies do the same.
Go tell a tradesman he deceiues the day,
Refusing light, deluding every way:
And he will answer to avoid thy curse,
Go further on, you will be cheated worse.
Thus cowards all (not daring to defend
The diverse follies which they dare intend)
Confess themselves, and others do elect
Vices, which none but Devils dare protect.
When I pronounce a Coward, it implies,
Malice and spite be Cowards qualities:
They are inseparate, and why? because
A vicious Coward so exactly knows
Himself unable, that he does decree
To have consorts as impotent as h^e;
Because he may avoid the mighty shocke
Of men's contempt, ranked with a greater flock;
Whereas perhaps if he were lest alone,
His baseness only would be looked upon.
But hark you sir (says one) you have forgot
To brand our female; with a cowards lot.
They be a proper subject: do not spare
Them and their covert dealing to declare:
They be attired with inuentiue doubts,
And have as many fears as they have thoughts:
They labor daily, yet they do suspect,
They cannot half a hansome face erect:
They paint, they pow^er, they with toies exced,
Alas! they dare not show themselves indeed.
Night they do honor: then they do obtain
That which perhaps the day calls back again:
They do entice their Husbands to believe
Any thing (then) and any thing to give:
They do entreat, when Husbands scarce replye
But with a purpose nothing to deny:
They not without adu^n^age do contend;
Nor any cowards odds do discommend.
Well, (...): admit they do abound with fear,
Females for nothing else created were.
They need not of t^eir weakness be ashamed;
But Men should blush to hear the folly namd.
You do discover men's impediments,
And tell us what the crasty age inuents.
As if authority forgot his whip:
You may be silent, and surcease to nip.
Let sage Authority proceed by course
Of Law, to punish these without remorse.
Then you must bid Authority respect
Things not accounted evil; or neglect
To punish friend-lesse fee-lesse infamies,
And tax brave mischief with seuerer eyes.
Nay that will never be; for tell the base,
And poor offender (who feels no disgrace)
He has offended; and he dares reply,
He took his pattern from Authority.
So shifting be the simple Idiots,
So shifting base be higher Patriots:
And must be ever till they do reveal
Fear to commit, not study to conceal.
Of High Birth. ESSAY. IIII.
THINGS curiously made, differ as much from things begotten, as earth from
living men, and artificial bodies from man's issue. Children therefore may
challenge from their parents more prerogative, then workmanship or man's
Invention; for it participates with us in being only, but they in being ours:
for things begotten be originally our own, but things created be ours at the
second hand continually: else man were two ways excellent, and able to create,
as well as to beget, without pattern or example, whereas truly in matters of
Science and manual labor, man, without the help of man, does nothing. So
ignorant he is, and chiefly bound unto imitation, as he never did, nor will,
produce that, which depends not on some president: only our Issue is our own
absolute; for man, secluded from the company of men, is by the help of Nature
fit (of himself) for infinite generation, though nothing else: Which argues
the full necessity of being sociable, and mightily condemns those currish
people, who think it all-sufficient, if they can once assume the pride, to
say, they are not any way indebted; or that they be their own Supporters: And
think it the safest friendship to forget Humanity, neglect Acquaintance, make
love an outward Ceremony, nay scarce so much: and never be offended with a
curse so much, as when they must have man's assistance to restore them.

These are unmindful why man does multiply, Why lawful Marriage was
invented: Or why GOD, thinking it not enough to work a Union with HVMANITY by
the bond of NATVRE, did also extend affinity to those of an other stock; that
INCEST might be vnacted; and by the consequent, that MAN should not engrosse
only the love of his own FAMILY. Man therefore thus enabled to produce; it
follows by implication that amongst posterity some one must have precedence;
in which, sons (by consent) have that Immunity of Eldest: And He, according
to usual speech, is called the Heir Apparent: which is a name so largely
taken, as (with it) we imply any one able to inherit, though not the eldest.
But properly it extends to the First Begotten, who (in being first) supplies
the office of a Substitute to discharge that which incumbers the parent; the
office of a valiant warrior likewise, who couets by being first, to take the
first charge, give the first assault, and (above all) to be according to his
name, truly forward in the high Atchieuements of honor: so forward, as for
any of his Rank to be before, should be thought a miserable baseness. It is
an observed point of Nature (among the Ancients) that Elephants, Pliny.
A^l^anus. Philo^tr^.
when they travail by Troops, knowing by a peculiar instinct that their
adversaries (for the most part) encounter them in the Rereward, they marshall
themselves that the eldest may be first ready to sustain the violence; which
gives a memorable precept to man's issue, that he (if eldest) ought rather to
protect, then cavil with his inferior relatiues; that they (because youngest)
ought rather to submit, where his good counsel may assist, then be malignant
or maintain Faction.

This Theater of man's life, admits degrees of height, in which the eldest is
above the others; and therefore as the Centinell, or Scout (in Armies) is
vigilant to foresee advantage, and so preserve by diligence when courage of the
rest is little worth: So should superiors in birth be as much provident for
the safety of those, in respect of whom they be superior, as to esteem their
birthright a blessing.

It is therefore no safe conclusion, to say he is the eldest, and so most
excellent; but he is the eldest, and therefore should be most excellent: For
in production of the soul it fares otherwise with a man, then with
unreasonable creatures; among which there needs no better warrant to signify
courage, then the first breed, which signifies the strength of Nature in the
Parents or Breeders. But with Man, (who communicates with Beasts only in
form) it is only sufficient for him to challenge in his Issue what himself
bestows: As for the Divine Materials of Reason, if sometimes they do
hereditarily succeed to the son of a prudent father, we may from hence
conclude, that GOD more often dispenses with it, to make man see the true
ORIGINAL, rather then Flesh should challenge any part; or Fathers think they
be the sole efficients. For it is now made a common argument of the SONS
folly, if the FATHER be more then commonly wise. And I am very much persuaded,
that this (if nothing else) may assure the Politician of some supreme
disposer, who gives warning to his presumptuous folly through the plague of a
foolish heir; Nihil dat quod non babet, ergo non babet: nam Si babuisset daret.

His policies are not his own: for he would then impart them haereditarily to
his Issue.


that he may ouer-value himself at his own peril: seeing he has often his
own workmanship before his eyes, to argue against him, and his arrogant
conceit. Be it sufficient therefore that cunning Nature, which principally and
commonly works out each natural man's existence by causes well known, Matter,
Form, and Privation, is not able in things essential, to distribute any
particle without Divine providence: so the eldest naturally inherites nothing
as by peculiar claim, but senseless lineaments of body. Howsoever, most
convenient it is, that every one by birth ennobled, either by single prioritie,
or prioritie united to noble parentage, should seek to accomplish the part of
nature undone in more then complement, civil silence, or common passages; and
make the birth absolute. For Man, a sluggish Creature, (prompt enough to
decline after satietie) seems naturally to be unfurnished, that he might not
be unoccupied. So Nature has left much imperfect, to intimate by the vacant
absence of some things needful, that man's labor should make things useful.
Nature affoords timber, but workmanship the structure: the earth produces Ore,
but Art the Silver: Nature gives plants, Knowledge the use: Among all which
she does require a more ample and less supplement, according to the value,
raritie or estimation of the thing. For Chymicks know, the more precious
metals ask more pains in extraction of the true quintessence, then baser
Minerals: Gold is the seventh time purified, and then becomes beautiful:
besides the quality of things more precious, ought still to be equivalent
with their precious subject. Courageous horses be managed with curiosity:
delicate voices be selected to learn harmonies, whilst harsh and strong
voyc'd cryers be ridiculous. Diamonds, not glass, become pure metal, and
rich garments have much costly appearance. High bloods likewise be the fittest
receptacles for high actions; but if a sackecloth be embroydred, the adiunct
may deserve honor, though the groundwork be Plebeian: and men of vp-start
Parentage may, in respect of brain, take place before Nobility, though their
persons be odious. Our selves and parents, or instructors, be the secondary
causes which protract or abbreuiate, enrich or impouerish, our own destinies.
For either we are driven with fatal obstinacy, to ouer-take fortune; else,
by the negligence of education, or being not seasoned in minority, our stupid
dullness gives Fortune leave to ouer-take us. High birth is so far from
privilege to exempt any from these, as it approches near to misery, when
shame is vnpreuented; and makes destiny notorious.

I know no difference therefore betwixt the degrees of Fortune, if Birth alone
makes the comparison. For which is more predominant, if one of obscure fortune
becomes public by merits, remaining still the same if he transgress; or if
one descended nobly, does but deserve himself, and family, through great
engagements, being ready to descend below himself if he miscarry, and be as
public in disgrace, as vpstarts in applause? For this Age of Innovation is
fitter to behold one swimming to a remote shore, then to reuolue how happily
the inhabitants be there delighted: fitter to see new actions, and active
spirits proceeding, then the maintenance of honor proceeded: and fitter to
behold one falling from a rock, then from a stumbling molehill. So that if
Noblemen advanced, continue so; and ambitious Gentry, nay or baseness, do
aspire and thrive, I see no difference: if ruin threatens both, the last
transcends in outward happiness. The best similitude which makes diversity,
reaches but thus far: I see an embroydred empty purse, and stoop to view it
narrowly, because the outside glisters: I spurn a powch before me, and hear
the sound of silver; I take both, keep both, and will esteem the coin above
the empty purse, and yet prefer the outsides alone not both alike; because
the one is capable and beauteous already, the other does contain already, but
can never be beauteous: no more then vpstarts, though renowned in merits, can
ever take Nobility of Birth; because it will demand succession to confirm
antiquity. So that ennobled fortunes (being an outward beauty) shall but make
me more willing (as an embroidred purse) to see their in-sides, not enlarge
their value: when as perhaps one basely obscure, shall more purchase my
reverence, though less attract my labor to discover him. As for the chief
ornaments which qualify great parentage, they should be such as make most in
the advancement of a Commonwealth. For when Laws receive their body from the
concordance of Nobility; it must (by good conjecture) follow, that the life or
motion of them (which is an equal prosecution of Justice) would, through the
countenance of Nobility, receive more credit and reverence. For the visible
dignity of persons, does atract sluggish or obstinate beholders, with
unanimity or terror.

Thus ignorant men (unacquainted with our state of question) will often wish
within themselves, That a Dunce or Coward may prevail before the Combat,
because they incline more to the estimation of his carriage, fame, or feature,
then to the others: which love does (notwithstanding) sometimes vanish into
fear, adoration, or a reverend conceit. The very name of Crumwell was able to
disseuer insurrections; (...)
so much was he credited with an opinion of sincere gravity. To be a man
likewise generally famous, does oftentimes dispense with comeliness of
personage, and purchases full applauded success in every dispatch under the
pattent of having been generally commended, But if popular fame be not
gracious, the ornaments of body, comeliness, and behavior, must be assistant
to High birth, in public atchieuements of honor, to make a prosperous
beginning. For single birth, without additions, is no general to command an
Army, or to prevail with multitudes: which (by the order of reason) should
be a Noble and generous intention, because birth is sooner capable of respect
only then base agents.

By this caution therefore did the Noblest Romans apply themselves to take the
patronage of Plebeians; (...)
accounting it the most honorable entrance, to exercise their efficacy of
birth, by the protection of poor Clients, or otherwise illiterate Citizens:
The frequencie of which custom made Nobility famous. It is the excellent
sign of man's participation with Divinity, to discern and judge of nature.

This therefore should be the singular part of instruction among Noble pupils,
and all that would become proficients, to certify, allay, and augment nature:
which cannot be by a restraint, but by giving free liberty to enjoy all, that
so the worst may be removed; else by a This poli^y ^n^rap^^ (...) it show
(...) and so in (...) easily prevented.
colorable restraint of that which formerly was permitted. For when we say,
Natura recurrit, we must conceive, Nature has tasted: for Ignoti nulla
cupido. And by the consequent, whilst we dote upon things absent, our
inclination is discovered.

From hence therefore did Phrina know Praxitelus loved the Image of his Satyr,
because when he heard his house was burnt, he asked only if the Satyr were
safe: So when we have once enjoyed, and now lack our custom, desire will be
manifest.

It is not therefore wisdom to correct the natures of children, by keeping them
in covert from the worlds eye, unless they be appointed for a Monastery. For
that which we cannot do, because we know not, we dare do freely when we
are acquainted. But Nature being discovered, by having once enjoyed, years
will then easily admit a contrariety. And as Wormwood, rubbed upon the nipple
of a Nurses Teate, weanes the child; so thy detestation, or continual
inuectiue against that vice which thou would abolish in the Childs nature,
remooues it sooner then stripe, or furious choler toward the Child
himself. For these be able to make him, not abandon the vice, because he
abhorres thee; and in despite will keep it, notwithstanding eye-seruice:
whereas folly being hated for its own sake, (because it is deformed) the
expounder of this deformity may be still beloved.

Vicious men may, without question, be entertained by Princes, and give much
morality: provided always, that apprehensiue natures be near hand, to make
applications. For then as the Apes heart (it self being a most timorous
Creature) being well applied, begetts courage in the patient: So Cowards,
Epicures, and blasphemous persons, may (by good compositions) produce
Valiancie, Abstinence, and Humility in Princes: but poisons be a dangerous
physic, without skillful professors.

The study to discern Nature in Noble persons, should be equivalent to their
own disquisition of nature in others; for seeing they ought by superintendence
to ouer-looke man, they should be perfect in the Character of Man, bearing
their best Library about them.

They should represent the Lion, who is noted (above all) to carry a most
valiant head, and a Maiesticke countenance; intimating the apparent and
invisible potencie of high spirits.

Besides (that I may continue this Mythologie) the neck of a Lion has no
joints; whereby he cannot look backwards, unless he turns his body;
neither can Princes, without scandal to their courage, and bounty, turn
their head only upon the foe that makes pursuit, with a meaning to run away
faster, and not regaine their Title, or recall gifts with an intention to
upbraid, except they turn themselves to encounter, or their just rage to
inflict a deserved ruin. The back of Lions carries a magnanimous breadth: And
all the noble deeds of Ancestors, historical examples of Monarchs, with
infinite renowned precepts of former ages, make but one broad back president,
to strengthen the wisdom of Princes. The bones of a Lion have less marrow
then others; for lascivious suell diminishes valor. The want of pith
therefore makes Oak more durable then Elda; and a contempt of wantonness
prouokes Princes to an immovable subsistence. Lions have an exquisite
property to smell out their own advantage: For it is reported, the male
knows when the Lioness has been adulterous with the Panther, by a peculiar
sense of smelling: And the wisest part of men worthily descended, is to betray
their own abuses; for men of this rank are incident to strong delusions. A
Lion sleeps and yet his eyes are open: so provident high Statesmen, that
possess much, cannot have eyes too many, or too watchful: Neither may
absolute man incur security. When Lions devour, famine does enforce them;
And when Kings take the sword, a zealous appetite, to satisfy forgotten
virtue, should provoke them. Neither may generous Natures be nobly offended,
except, as by an impulsive, or sufficient cause, they overcome. So by a
Heroyicke scorn to malice, they can both swallow and digest the cause with the
conquest.

Howsoever it may be fictitiously reported, that Lions have (by a miraculous
motion) been defensive to condemned Martyrs; yet may the observation afford
thus much morality: That, as a true noble man may by no means receive a more
excellent moderation of spirit, and spur, to greatly-good actions, then by a
religious Fear; so cannot this be any way expressed better (himself being so
eminent) then in perfection of Divine Justice, and good men's causes. It is
admirable (if true) to see how generously Lions have scorned to be base
debtors: Insomuch that it is memorably reported, Androcles a vagabond captive,
cured a Lions paw; In gratification whereof, Gellius.
the Lion afterward (when Androcles was among the Roman spectacles to be
devoured) spares, and protects him against a rampant Pardall: Which carries a
double precept for generous natures': First, a preservative against
ingratitude, where followers have been serviceable; then a contempt to be a
slavish debtor (if means can avoid it) especially to base-minded Tradesmen;
who upon single debts enforce a double engagement: Both of credit and
restitution: for if you remain in their books for a commodity, you must
remain likewise in their favor to avoid scandal, reiterations, and
commemorations among all societies.

Such is the common treacherous baseness of their conditions, though they
protest otherwise; which may exhort any Noble mind to believe this Maxim
True; He has discharged half his reputation among men, that scorns the
credit of a Citizen, or ind^ed any man. An other singular note is fixed upon
this magnanimous beast above written; his wrath extends no further then the
provocation. And therefore when the Arabian soldier, Gesar.
charging a Lion with his Spear, was disappointed of the object, and
ouer-threw himself with violence; the Lion returned, and only nipping his
head a little (for his presumption) departed quietly. This being confirmed with
many famous examples, I may infer thus much. If it may seem convenient or
honorable for Nobility offended, to punish, not respecting penitent submission
(which may without high offenses seem tyrannical) yet if the punishment
exceed the crime, we may confidently account it bestial, and worse. Again it
is notably remembered, that Lions never run away, except they can privately
withdraw, (being overcome with multitude) into a secure Mountain, or
wilderness. And I observe that it ill becomes a brave resolution, to enter
himself among proiects, from which he must necessarily recoile, except he
carries a cautelous eye, and true circumspection. Lastly, I may conclude this
moralized comparison, with Aesops controversy betwixt a Lioness and the Fox:
the Fox commends her own fruitful generation, seeming to disgrace the Lions
single birth, to which this answer does reioyne: I bring forth one, and yet
that one is a Lion: which good allusio^ may remove the curse which some would
cast upon Nobility, because often their children in number be inferior to
common prostitutes: But I am peremptorily resolved, that the multiplicity of
children reares up an obscure family, and brings an ancient stock to ruin:
For among many base childrens blessings, birth may make variety of fortunes:
But among much Noble posterity, Fortune does challenge a more vaste partition;
and makes a discontented heir fit for all innouating enterprises; so that one
Noble remainder of much antiquity, or one true Lion of a family (if Art and
Nature can be made operative) will be a more safe prop to succession, then the
doubtful variety of children. I observe it as an infa^lible rule, that there
have been as many base originals, as their have been honorable descents in
Nobility. For, as questionless the largest Rivers be derived from lowly
Springs; So birth and succession have been so basely intermingled, so casually
interrupted, so frequently impaired, and very often attainted (though with
absolution) that I may well justify the first principle, and add further,
That generally, to maintain the noble estate of dead Ancestors, requires as
much true policy, as to erect a new Family: And to exceed the pattern of
heroicke ancestry, deserves perpetual commendations. Which purpose cannot
prosper well, except we prevent or avoid oppositions, rather then purchase new
addition. For men may clime better by troublesome, rough, and dangerous
passages, then stand tottering upon the eminent spire: and therefore has
contentious dealing been the ouer-throw of kingdoms, and flourishing
Captains; because prosperity is waspish, and brooks no competition, nor
almost assistance. The Historian therefore says well: None more deaf to
counsel then natures vnthwarted; Plutarch.
none more obtemperate to be counseled, then men destitute. As for the
ambitious ecstasy of noble spirits, which makes them indirectly consult upon
new addition; the Fable does condemn them perspicuously: for like Aesops
Dog, they snatch at shadows, and loose the certainty, who dote upon such
covetous desires. Presumption also, and Popularitie, be two treacherous
confederates: the first was never good when a Kings favor is the object; so
long as Mines and Countermines have been the Court-deuises. The last will
never be good; so long as people do but conduct their favorites to the
Scaffold, and cry Alas, it is pity; but who can help it? The first cannot
thrive, because offenses with Kings outweigh merits: as also the jealous coceit
of safety, is a multitude of fears, and they threaten the most highly
favored: The last is mortal, because he surfets of one dish; nothing but
fame: served in (like Turkish Rice) by infinite waiters. And shall we wonder
if it choakes him, when he deuoures all? The best love therefore that can be
bestowed upon the people, or the best friendship that you can receive from
them, is to suffer them in things indifferent, or not to show a currish
severity: for (like the Hungarian Heyduckes) their wrath is prone to mischief,
and their amity is worth nothing: so that indeed to flatter with them, and not
regard them, is a sound proposition: For if Coriolanus contemnes their
authority, they can abhor his name, and banish his person: or at least banish
him from prevailing in public assistance. The safest course (that I can be
acquainted with) to confirm and perfectly retain noble dignities with good
approuall; is to be immutable honest, and no reported Politician: for the very
name contains (among general opinions) much powder treason, Atheism, curses
of inferiors, and condemnations of all, except their close minions.

An other thing that does briefly replenish a noble Spirit, must be more
example, dispatch, or quick perfect motion, then precepts or doctrines: These
being the dull laborious object, of melancholy Artists; the other being a
Rhetorical inducement to establish the delight of action: In which nothing
draws greater efficacy, then speediness and fortunate event; though both
these rely much upon a contriuing faculty, which is begotten by a frequent
practice. And therefore it betokens a sluggish fear, and private weakness,
when we loath to enterprise: For courageous minds acquire hability (through
custom) equal to desire: but when the appetite fails I perceive no stomach
of Nobility. It may seem somewhat controuersiall, whether State-knowledge, or
Militant resolutions be more graceful to generosity: And, questionless, I
conceive few Roman Senators, or not any (except Cicero) was insufficient to
lead an Army, as well as to deliver his opinion in the Councell-chamber: both
be so unseparably annexed, as we may hardly think he aduises the
Commonwealth lovingly, who is afraid to justify the Commonwealths quarrel;
when himself adiudges it lawful. As for the outward pomp or magnific^nce of
mighty persons, it may become a festival day better then common policy: for
this age does not so soon adiudge the royal mind, as the fantastic humor,
by expense of needless bravery; accompting that rather magnificence, when we
expend our own about the Kingdoms glory: which by reflexe produces an apparent
love, and fear toward such active spirits. For all men reverence him truly,
who is impartial, and industrious to advance equity, or to confirm goodness
with goodness among a l. And howsoever the full stomachs of men will hardly
suffer them to commend such worthy ones alive; yet have their deaths been
always deplorable. Whereas polliticke brains with false bottomes, have found
a public curse, which was before restrained with Authority.

I dare not become an Instructor, it appertains to deep Professors: Neither
can I reprove, it may incur the name of Malapert: I labor only, to prove by
demonstratiue reasons, which is bare Counsel. As for Nobility, if it bear the
name of Legitimate, it will bear a contempt also (with Agesilaus) to be
reproved, when pains may happily discharge their function. Neither at any time
shall high births aspire to hazardous downefals, if they esteem honor as the
reward of virtue, Theophrastus.
no virtue in it self.

Of Disinheritance. ESSAY. V.
IT is more impossible for an unnatural father to be a true friend, then for
an abused son, to be an obedient son: because I think it is an
irrepugnable precept. That he who from a devilish disposition finds a
soone-moued contrariety betwixt himself and his undoubted children, must (of
necessity) be a man who refuses all men, except advantage pleades for them;
seeing he neglects those, for whom nature pleades, if advantage be absent. The
same may be inferred concerning all degenerate Kinsfolk, though in a less
degree. But for the first I have observed it generally; that he who was apt for
disinheritance, has been a man always of as many affections, as there be
faces: And as prompt to refuse any, as to receive any, if he might save by the
bargain. Howsoever subjects be now grown so tyrannical, that where pretenses
may accomplish their malice, they cannot think there is a God, or, at least,
they think God favors their proceedings. For calumnious pretenses, and
aggrauated trisles have been the common gloss of parents cruelty in this kind:
Their president is vulgar, for tyrants never slew without state-Alchimy, or
multiplication of pretended treasons; neither may Alexander lack occasion, so
long as he had a meaning to kill Antisten^s. The hungry woolfe may call the
lamb his debtor, but a good stomach is the day of payment and the proverb is
well verified: If thou would beat a dog here is a staff. So that although
churlish parents pretend just causes of disinheritance, yet these are quickly
found, soon allowed, and as soon amplyfied. From whence you may gather, that
no spark of natural affection, but only a compulsiue maintenance, keeps the
reference betwixt such parents, and such children. For loving nature and
affection be flexible, of long forbearance, much pity, manifest care; and
keep an established form of affability, with which friends or kinsfolk be
unacquainted: this prouokes an eminent reflexe of love; whereas rough carriage
begets love in Curres, but a conte^ptible scorn in Noble Spirits.

It is therefore more commendable to follow the extreme of virtue abounding,
then defective: The first partakes with mediocritie in the nature; but the last
is altogether opposite. We may more safely therefore allow indulgence, then
austerity; because it approaches nearer to true love. For though indulgence
has made children lofty in behavior toward others, yet (I observe) it
breeds a true and vndiuorced affection toward the original cause. It is
therefore an excellent rule, for children, to receive instruction of strangers;
and by the consequent, to be any way restrained without the parents knowledge,
or at least their taking notice: whereby Nature cannot grudge against Nature,
nor yet want reprehension.

For howsoever Marcus Cato said well, That he had rather unrewarded for doing
well, then unpunished for offenses: yet we have naturally a secret spleen
against the Judge, though we account him righteous and impartial. It must be
expected then, that children do know a difference betwixt Fathers and
Masters; which makes them the more implacable, when they see Nature
impartial. From hence Sertorius, a politic Captain, would not himself
repress the impudence of his Soldiers; least, howsoever they deserved ill,
yet his correction might take away their loving duty: which respect made him
suffer the enemies incursions, rather to scourge their insolence, whilst they,
out of a hare-brained lunasie desired battle. And thus the sacred decree of
Correction may be kept vnviolate, and the love of Children unblemished. For I
am unanswerably persuaded, that parents wrath diminishes the Childs love,
making him servile, or else refractorie to the doctrine of themselves and
others; because they cannot undertake with delight, so long as frowns and
fear be crept into their fancy. But affable parents beget truly
affectionate children, who may endure another man's reproof to mitigate the
name of Cosset, and yet lovingly adore the father because he was always
loving. So then the Fathers diligent love, and a Tutors modest instruction, may
make a seldome-seene heir affect his Fathers life without hypocrisy, and
prove a venerable wise man. Without which love apparent, or oftentimes
indulgence, I see an eldest son, instead of the Fathers blessing, render
back sweating curses. I see another inclining only to the mother; and a
third, slip into his disinherited Fortune.

The Comaedian therefore says ingenuously touching a fathers duty: I
ouer-passe expenses, I call not every thing to a strict account; and that which
other sons labor to keep secret, I do not bitterly condemn in mine, lest
many things should be concealed; for he that (through a rugged usage)
depriues his father (by false excuses) of youthful accidents, will soon
deceive others. It is more availeable then, to govern by liberality, not base
compulsion: for he that thus becomes obedient, expects only till he may want
the witness of his actions.

Now for the dangerous effect of parents changeable love (it having been
propounded, that want of love breeds disinheritance) I will demonstrate, how
horrible, unlawful, and impossible disinheritance maybe iudiciously accounted.
The divorce of marriage is a weighty case, much forbidden, much controverted;
because marriage it self is made a strict union, so far as Husbands seem
incorporate with their Wives, being both to be taken as one flesh. But this
union admits many exceptions; neither may any think their being made one,
extends further, then the rhetorical aggravation of unity, to insinuate how
difficult a thing Divorce will be betwixt two, so narrowly united: but children
have a more exquisite property of indiuorceable, because they really partake
with parents by existence; deriving a particular and true strength of body from
the parents ability. And therefore it seems the matter of disinheritance is a
thing so odious, as (being held improbable to be acted among the Jews, or any
Nation) no Law of Scripture contradicts it. Indeed rebellious sons are by the
verdict of Divine iniunction, to suffer death, if they shall strike the
parents, or rise up against them: But for the matter of Disinheritance (which
far transcends the punishment of death, as shall appear) I have read no
syllable which may give the toleration of Divinity. Death indeed,
comparatively respected, may be thought the best wages of a rebellious son:
for the act includes his full sentence; because to smite his parent, is to
seek the destruction of his efficient cause: which act keeps within it so
much ingratitude, as heavenly Justice can do no less then remove him, who
durst remove his begetter; it being an inseparable part of holiness, to pay
offenders with their own coin. But disinheritance so much exceeds death, as
it approches to a continued torment. Death is so fa^re from misery, wh^re men
expiate offenses, as it rather affoords felicity, because it gives a present
satisfaction, and a present hope to enjoy a good portion; if penitence, and a
satisfactory mind be companions. But disinheriritance, or abdication, does not
only enforce death, but makes the circumstance tyrannical. A violent death is
but an abridgement of nature; but disinheritance does often bring a violent
death, and enlarge the wickedness of nature. I see no difference betwixt them
in the conclusion: for death is an effect commonly of disinheritance; but no
death more excludes all humanity. The case is palpable. I give directions to a
traveller: he arrogantly contemnes my counsel; which does so much provoke
me, as (to amend the matter) I draw him by compulsion to an apparent ambush:
in which, after many sustained abuses, horrible vexations, and desperate
incounters, he concludes his life with infamy; or perhaps blasphemy. So,
currish and cruel parents, by disinheritance deals every way answerable to
this similitude. The hor^or of which barbarism is the more amplified, by so
much as natural affinity claims a more humane president then strangers.
Banishment or abiuration is tolerable: for it takes original by public
decree, superior counsel, and authority of those, from whom I can challenge
nothing but justice; whereas disinheritance, a National banishment (transcending
foreign exile in the Cause and Manner) proceeds from private occurrences,
which cannot reach so high an affliction; because the nature of it is equal
to, nay above public justice.

Now it may well be esteemed humane, when parents punish with rigor, where the
Law condemns not; because in every offense highly punishable, the Law is open:
if that condemns, the Parents love may a little be excused, though he does
not excuse his sons accusation; but where himself exceedes the Laws rigor,
when the Law is silent, and becomes Accuser, Judge, and Executioner, we may
discover a damnable flintie heart; apt enough for massacre; seeing he first
plays the tyrant with his own Image.

Parents therefore cannot argue and say (except Disinheritance) they have no
remedy for disobedience; seeing there is no crime which may deserve so great
satisfaction, but the Law is all-sufficient to render Justice, and save them
vnpreiudiced in the aspersion of Unnatural: which the Title Disinheritance
draws with it inseparate. For if we take a view of those impulsive causes
which breed occasion, we shall perceive how accessory Parents be to all
their Childrens vices; and by the consequent, how culpable they are to punish
that so strictly, of which themselves be Authors.

Setting aside the position which makes the Children participate with Parents
in vices liable to constitution, we may (without these) demonstrate, how
guilty they are of each notorious crime in Children, through a deficiencie of
rectified education. For as, in natural productions, nothing is so absurd,
from which Art cannot extract a dear quintessence; so among natural men, and
the conditions of humanity, nothing is so irregular, from which industrious
and true instructiue method cannot produce a Divine excellence. Indeed the
disquisition of natures is difficult, and much judicious labor belongs to the
true sifting of a perverse disposition. But questionless, the worst natured
among all badde men, are, by a true seasoning of minority, a wise progress,
or institution of ripe years, and an ingenious confirmation of practices well
deserved; they are capable of goodness, subdued in mischief, and apprehensiue
in a sufficient measure. So that we must not ignorantly impute the curse of
Children to a wrong cause, seeing it is either the curse of the Parents; First,
not to instruct children at all. Secondly, not to instruct them sufficiently.
Thirdly, not in the true manner. Examples are infinite: Alcibiades may include
all. He, a voluptuous and sensual Swaggerer, could never be reclaimed by
many strong experiments; till coming by chance to the Philosophical Lecture
of Socrates, he was suddenly converted: such a sympathy there was betwixt
this Philosophers doctrine, and the Disciples attention; whereas twenty others
might perhaps have been frustrate in the same conversion, though their
Precepts had been equal; because there is an invisible concordance to make
them aequiualent.

Which manner of instruction, respecting the quality and person, of method and
Tutors, be matters only appertaining to the Parents charge. Now (if a curse
imposed upon them, be a hinderance to the perfection of both, whereby they
neither can be provided of true Instructors or instructions) Shall we accuse
the child as an efficient of the Fathers curse, or the fathers curse now
existent, as an original of the child's future inconveniences?

This being necessarily concluded, we may well infer, concerning
disinheritance, That parents curses being the only causes which may provoke
this irreligious act (seeing they might sometimes, but do not, and do not
sometimes because they cannot, though it be possible, ingraft goodness) by
their own ignorance; we may infer, (and that most justly) that they
resemble Heliogabalus, who being the cause of his friends drunkenness, would
cast the miserable wretches amongst tame Bears and Lions, to terrify them
when they awaked. But herein they differ: he was the voluntary cause of his
Friends; Parents, the unadvised cause of their Childrens error: in stead of
which he threw his friends among tame Bears and Lions; Parents, by
disinheritance, throw their issue amongst rampant Wolves.

For besides the perplexed imfamie, and sorrowful perturbations of such
excluded Castawayes; what shall we conjecture touching their desperate
resolution? Or how shall we condemn, if they be mercilessely overthrown by
the impulsive necessity of destruction? Seeing their destitute fortune inuites
them to embrace each glistering temptation, and to shake hands with calamity.

I cannot (for mine own part) comprehend all this without remembrance and
pity of such parents ruins; seeing they cannot discharge all, before children
have incurred destruction without them.

Nothing is written which does not amplify our instruction (says Divinity)
and Nothing amongst all is more effectual then true OBSERVATIONS, except
DIVINITY. Most ingenious therefore and full of persuasion, may that Morality
be, soon collected from insensible creatures, they have an excellent and
singular love (each creature in his kind) to nourish up their weak little
ones. The hunted Lioness drives her whelps before. The pregnant Bear
forsakes not her den until she be delivered; neither do the whelps come forrh
until they can escape danger. The Snake swallows her young, if any
disadvantage happens. And above all, most admirable is natures ingenuity,
touching that foreign creature, called by the name of Su; which (being
persecuted) shuts up her Cubbes in a depending scrip, and so protects them from
the Huntsman. The multitude of examples would be tedious. Briefly therefore, it
is a general note among them; they never forsake their infantry till it be
able every way (like themselves) to prevent mischief.

This may rebuke all cruellminded parents, who (notwithstanding the discursiue
light of reason) can cast off mere Humanity, and go beneath a brutish
goodness of nature, not only to forsake, but to abhor their issue; and
leave them destitute, before they be any way enabled to sustain nature. For
children be indeed thus rejected ever, because they be unable. Omitting these
indifferent allegations, which some may account sophistry, rather then sound
doctrine; because they believe nothing but what Scripture makes apparent; nor
that can be accepted among them, unless no Christian contradicts it; neither
can that which all acknowledge, win oftentimes any more then outward belief.
It shall be therefore sufficient to confute this error in question, by the
soundest proof; and then the unbelief of Hypocrites will serve to multiply
their condemnations.

We cannot (where things be left untouched in Scripture) assume a safer
pattern then the Omnipotent properties of our Creator. First then, that
Metaphorical affinity, of father and son, which Himself has pleased to
entertain betwixt Himself and the Elected, may serve to instruct parents
(without controversy) in all degrees of duty, and inseparate relation.

Now all agree upon this Principle, that whomsoever God has once loved, him
he has loved everlastingly. It is impossible therefore, if at any time there
has been Amity betwixt father and son, that (this being observed) it should
fall away to disinheritance. For if Gods Majesty descend so low, as to
continue his love always where He has begun to Love: shall not imitation
hereof be requisite in fathers, who be commanded to love their children, and in
whom nature exacts more proportionate equality, then in the least degree can be
imagined betwixt holiness and frailty? each circumstance appears so manifest,
as I know not how Sophisters can colourably distinguish. A second instance may
confirm this president. God never has forsaken the most wicked Reprobates,
till they have voluntarily forsaken him first: The prodigal demanded his
portion, left his father, and yet the father willingly accepts him being
converted. This becomes far opposite to the practice of our age: so
peremptory is the humor of disinheriting-parents, as they forget common
charity, and refuse love with an implacable contempt of reconcilement. As for
the pretended causes which commonly provoke parents, I cannot any way
conjecture, that they be either half so infinite, or in the least degree so
terrible, as those with which all parents provoke Omnipotence: and therefore I
cannot well see how such fathers can claim the petition of forgiveness, when
they cannot forgive their own issue. The heir of a Kingdom entitles himself
not more justly to his Crown, then eldest sons do to their homely
inheritance. Now I observe, that wheresoever has been a successory regiment,
there, weake-braind, ryotous, tyrannical, and lewd princes, have been admitted
to their dignities without contradiction. And does not the blood of common
heirs answer to a Kings privilege, in the Title of Legitimate? Why then
shall we protect such unjust partiality? If children should receive no more
the^ they deserve: or if they should claim interest of love, no longer then
merits make a full proportion; how should the liberality of parents, and the
prerogative of children, appear? or what thanks and filial love may Fathers
expect from such Children, more then from good Apprentices? Cimon could intombe
his Mares, when they purchased credit in the swift races of Olimpiades.
Xanthippus could bewail his dogs death which had followed his Master from
Calamina. Alexander could erect a City in the honor of Bucephalus, when he
had long been defended by him in the dangerous attempts of many fortunate
battles. The Ass may well (among the Heathen) be adorned with Lillies,
Violets, and Garlands; when their Goddess, Vesta, by an Asses voice, avoided
the rape of Priapus. If merits therefore should only challenge the love of
parents, nothing might make a difference betwixt sons and bond-slaues: Seeing
bare Humanity, and the Law of Nations has accounted the honors of One worthy
to be honored, nothing but equal and necessary thanks. Nay, in all ages, so
bountiful and respective has authority been to true merits, as even the
desertlesse children have met with dignity to remunerate the fathers
worthiness: Thus did the Athenians bestow great wages upon Lysimachus, to
gratify the service of Aristides: And thus the Romans preferred the cause of
Marcus Brutus, because his Ancestors had took the Countries quarrel against
tyrants. Shall fathers then esteem it such irregular custom to dignifie their
own begotten issue, though desertlesse; seeing strangers have done this to
congratulate good fathers?

Two examples there be ancient and modern (worth our memory) that show the
practice of our Theme in question; and affoords singular observation. The
first is evident, in the reign of Agis a Lacedemonian King: In whose
principal City of Sparta, the custom had prohibited alienations that
prejudice the heir: The custom grew to be a confirmed Law: After
continuance, there fell a difference betwixt one of the highest Magistrates and
his eldest son: The father was so actually provoked, that he exhibites a
Decree to license Disinheritance; the Decree was established: And afterward
(says Plutarch) covetousness became public. From hence my observation is
double. First, the original cause of disinheritance was fury: Secondly, the
commodity was rank covetousness.

Lastly, it is apparent by the Tower-rowles, that (during the reign of Edward
the fourth) one Thomas Burdet an Englishman, being somewhat innocently
condemned to death (about captions terms ignorantly uttered) in his way to
death espied his eldest son, whom (before) he disinherited: him therefore
he penitently received; and having now confessed seriously, that he felt Gods
wrath upon him only to punish that unnatural sin: He humbly begged
forgiveness of God, and of his son: The application of such a paenitent
remorse is easy.

Having now marshald up this troop of Arguments, which (I think) are
approueable; some (questionless) will account them white-liuerd soldiers,
dressed up only with a Rhetorical habit: But censure is no less infinite,
then oftentimes odious: Trial therefore shall discharge the integrity of
these; whilst I proceed briefly to muster one troop more; whose courage is
enough animated by their adversaries weakness; if not impossibility of
appearance. For if the birthright (which intitles an heir) be inseparate, then
the prerogative is also inseparate; for inheritance depends upon priority;
which being unremovable; the adiunct essential cannot perish without the
subject. Relations therefore be so congruous, that we may sooner affirm the
Son and Father not to be, then heirs and inheritance not to be
correlatiues: and by the consequent as lawfully may we deprive both of Being;
as we may permit the one without the other. (:*:.:*:.:*:) (* * *)

ESSAY. VI. Of Poetry.
POETRY is called the work of nature: I rather think it a Divine alacrity,
entertained by the fitness of nature: for if (in general) a cheerful spirit
partakes of a Divine influence; then this (being spiritually maintained, with a
desire to communicate, and express such quickening inventions) can be no
other, being the soul of alacrity, then an invisible Divine work; which does
transport nature; whilst nature meruailes at the cause. Aristotle.
Philosophy has divided our souls faculty; and makes the Intelligent part
our principal essence; that cannot perish: Poetry depends on that, and a
sublime fancy; they being the helps of our dispofall: or (to speak truly) a
Poet uses every function of the soul: Depending upon which, he must reject
Nature: for Nature perishes; the Soul cannot. Nature is then the Hand-maide;
but an Infusiue worthiness, the soul of Poetry.

Conceive but this, and Nature will disclaim: Nature imparts her Faculties by
Generation; excluding study and custom: A Poet never is engendered so, further
then a natural Logician, therefore he exceeds Nature.

We may observe a sweet concordance in this mighty Fabric: All things are
coupled with an allusiue union: Life, is a flash of immortality; Sleep, of
death: middle age of Summer: Arts also, and ages past, have a similitude with
things inferior, and signify things future.

Language is likened to a Casket, Logic to an Artificers Instrument;
Rhetoric to a precious Color; And Poetry likewise has a fit resemblance
with Prophecy: both be an unutterable rapture; both be a boundless large
capacity: both be a universal tractate: both be confined within a small
number: both be discredited with false pretenders: both be dispersed among
men (originally) obscure: both be alike neglected: both (generally) contemned
alike.

Poetry is made the conveyance of amorous delights: and certainly it does
bestow much sweetness in apparrelling loueaccents. This only might discover
it for a supreme donatiue; seeing the music in heaven is an agreement of
souls. Jerome Savanarola, the Monkish Philosopher, makes Poetry a part of
reasonable Philosophy; maintaining this, against natural pretenders of Poetry:
I will not meddle with his arguments, they are elaborate and learned: the truth
is evident without serious proof.

Verse and Rhyme be things natural: for they be only color and appearance:
but if you value the Phrase and the Materials after the same proportion; as
thinking your conceit able to furnish a poem; you shall indeed perceive it
likewise natural; that is, naked, unpolished, nay the scorn of Poetry. A
quick contriving head may utter laudably; but never was a brain so sudden, as
to compose well without the president of others in the like kind: nay, take
the most illiterate Writers, (who propound experience and familiar allusions)
they have a time to Meditate, to compare, to dispose.

This Art of Poetry cannot prove eminent, unless the writer has a rejoicing
heart, an apprehensiue head, and a disclouded memory. It is impossible
therefore for one dejected by calamity, or one perplexed with questions of
another Science, to get perfection in this free knowledge: I say, perplexed
with questions of another Science; because a Poet should rather copiously
discourse of all, by application to a witty purpose, rather then be exquisite
in a particular Art, respecting depth of rule, or quidditie. Notions,
conjectures, and some of the best passages, be more sufficient for him, then a
praecise certainty of rules.

He therefore who propounds excellence, must refuse the multitude of questions,
and the vexation of miseries: both be as clogges and fetters to that aspiring
faculty. From hence I may conclude the perfection of this Science does match
the strains of right Alch^mie: it being (in both) alike impossible to find
that man who shall directly promise to attain perfection; because impediments
exceed the means. The nourishment of Poetry is good applause: for Poems being
made to allure and bewitch the reader in a lesson of moral precept, must
prosper in their meaning, or be discountenanced: As all professions be, which
make men's good opinions the reward of knowledge: and therefore has England
affoorded few men accurate in Poetry, because opinion has vouchsafed to rank
her among trivial labors, and recreatiue vanities: whereas the Italians have
proved singular proficients; because (says Rosinus) authority has graced
their elegance. The reason (I think) which has wrought in England such a
degenerate value of Poems, proceeded (first) from the the professors ignorance
and general baseness: but secondly from the stubborn gravity of the best
readers; who scorn to account the best Poems profitable works, because all
have hitherto bin accounted slight composures, or at best unprofitable. And we
imagine it a weakness to recant an error. Some have certainly contemned the
worthiest labors even through malicious despair of attempting the like
worthily. Howsoever, the base opinion which Poetry incurs among us, has bin
repaid with justice: that is, the discredit of our Nation: for our
vnder-valuing opinion has deprived the public of more judicious works then
be already extant: And so the glory of our Nations eminent wit, has been
eclipsed with forraigners.

As for the private and sensible benefit (which any shall conceive in publishing
his labors) I see none virtuous but this: he may excuse (by them) his silent
nature; and be accounted better, as a Melancholy Poet, then a speechless
fool. Fame and Eminence savor of a fruitless ambition; that will now
purchase nothing for Poetry by preferment, but an opinion that Poetry is his
knowledge, and (it being so) that he is fit for nothing else: or some perhaps;
nay, the wisest, will bestow compassion, and say, It is pity such a pregnant
wit should e^d^uour so idly. These be the comforts of being famous: let
Doetrs be ambitious of it. The deepest Poets have neglected verse, I mean the
polished form of verse: but I would sooner love such works in prose; and
heartily entreat such writers, even for their own dispatch-sake, and the
readers also, to abandon Poetry, except they can avoid that crabbed style and
form, which weakens any readers appetite and apprehension.

The relish of Poetry is a candied bark: an elegance so sweetened with apt
phrase and illustration, as it excludes rough harshnesse, and all mystery:
controversies and Phylosophicall questions be therefore improper arguments for
a Poetical tractate: they cannot be expressed with an enticing liberty.
Similitudes be the fit interpreters of Poets: when I affirm this, I do not
approve all similitudes, but such as do interpret: which they cannot do,
except they be more familiar then the thing interpreted. This condemns any,
who from a depth in learning, shall produce the Mathematickes, to illustrate
Grammar: or shall compare things known by repetition to an example in
Astronomy.

Poor and Prodigal have been a Poets Titles: these have been fixed with a
contemptiue meaning: but I imagine they advance his quality: for therefore he
neglects wealth, because he feels in himself a Jewel which can redeem his
bondage in adversity. Freedom of Brain and Body is a Poets music: Peace
and Health preserve, and do reviue his fancy. When therefore a Reward is
motive, it makes the labor like it self, servile. Poetry should therefore
(being an impartial free science) be undertaken by the free Professor; a man
sufficient in estate: such a one as need not use flattery to win reward; nor so
indite, that things may be dispatched quickly, and his wants quickly furnished;
nor so dispatch, that he may rather make things saleable, through obscoenitie
or scandals, then approved labor. These mischiefs follow a mercenarie hope:
and therefore be mercenarie Poets odious: such (I mean) as are provoked by
poverty, and will exact their wages.

ESSAY VII. Of Discontents.
PLeasure and Sorrow be the objects of virtue: but discontents may be thought
rather the objects of pleasure. Virtue moderates the folly of pleasure and
sorrow: but pleasure so moderated, remoues discontents. I reckon disconte^ts
among my private Sorrow may be ^dmitted in behalf of p^blic* calamitie^ which
can not be s^ well termed Discontents.
sorrows; which amplify my own misfortune; which feel the same (perhaps) a
greater torment for my friends misery, then my own: yes, I am better assured
of my own fortitude to contemn sorrows, then of my friends aptness, to
relish my counsels; or of his own freedom to advise himself: and therefore
his vexation (he being my self) afflicts me more injuriously: because I can
overcome my own, better then His. I call those properly D^sconte^ted, who are
busiethoughted: who, like brainelesse patients, are almost desperate if another
gives them poison; and yet (being recovered) they will adventure to poison
themselves: for many of this rank you shall perceive, who having passed the
discontents which come by others malice, will (of their own accord) frame new
perplexities: They will conceive things otherwise then they be, and so nourish
a conceit till they believe it real.

Opinion is indeed the mediate cause of discontents; but then a rectified or
false capacity (being an immediate cause of rectified or false opinions)
begets a true or idle discontent. I call that idle, which is begotten by an
idle fancy: such idle discontents are soon expelled; they are a causeless
Melancholy, begot by alteration, dispersed by alteration: But Melancholy,
meeting with a real cause, becomes a settled mischief. Howsoever, nothing
(though most worth our discontent) can be said His or My discontent, unless
we so conceive it. For certainly, a careless resolution may be freed from
conscience and discontent together: whereas perhaps a nice examining head may so
ensnare it self with multitude of thoughts, that the confusion may provoke
both: but then a careless resolution serves worthily to abate such idle, and
such real discontents. For as in natural bodies fasting and food destroy and
nourish; so in our daily proiects, co^sideratiue thoughts and careless
negligence fasten and remove. The best Plato. Gilen. Cicero. D. Thom.
Philosophers have left a doubtful number of men's perturbations; some assign
six, some five, some four, some eleven. They might (in my conceit) be all
reduced unto a triple number: including likewise the very causes of all
discontent. Imagine therefore they proceed first from iealousies of what kind
soever; either in being contemned, neglected, or ambiguous of good success:
then from doubts not to be resolved, either through weakness of our
understanding, or intricacie of the question, then from an extreme desire,
either of things difficult or impossible. To iealousies, and such desires, all
are incident; to doubts and questions, Scholars, or Scholler-like heads only:
these comprehend the sum of all our crosses: of all our sorrows both in
soul and body: Nay, all more narrowly may be reduced to a desire: for when we
briefly say, He has his desire, we must withal intend, that he is neither
troubled with pleasure, grief, fear, audacity, hope or anger: the six
turbulent passions reckoned by Plato.

Certainly (amongst all) perplexed questions be to a laboring head, most
troublesome: and less blameable was that found Aristotle.
Philosopher, who made the Ocean capable of him, because he was not capable of
reason for the Ebb and Flow; rather then such as be ashamed to live, when
either needinesse, fear, ignominy, grief, or disappoyntments contradict them.
It is mere bestiall to dye upon such weak incounters; which might be all
confuted with a Heathens knowledge: but then to dye for ignorance may seem
excuseable: for such a live is bestiall, where we are ignorant of reason; and
better is it to be ignorant of reason how to prevent death, then to preserve
life in ignorance. The truth is, our discontents of any kind do mis-informe
our judgment; no otherwise then a busy knave, who (seeing the bad luck of
lawful means) does bribe the Magistrate and never was a Magistrate more
easily bribed, then is a judgment (so oppressed) corrupted. We have no
liberty to know, much less to judge; no reason to discourse, much less to put
a difference, no freedom to conceive, much less to understand, when
Discontents do trouble us. They interpose our brightest eminence of wisdom;
no otherwise then clouds darken the Suns glory: They keep a strong
possession against our virtue and all good society. The most significant title
they can deserve is Treacherous: for they breed sensibly an innovation;
begetting in us a preposterous change; and that commonly proceeds from worse to
worse: For being more incorporate with them and their mutatio^s, we challenge
less freedom in our selves, to help our selves. Discontents, like an extreme
disease, be of a shifting nature: they delight continually in motion; as men
vehemently sick do change their beds and chambers.

A Discontented man does and undoes, that he may do again: thinking to loose
his humor in variety; or by adventure (if by nothing else) among many changes
to make one good one. But this desire of change corrupts our honesty. We shall
perceive a threefold mischief which goes inseparate with discontents: for
they be ready to seduce our thoughts, our words, our actions: We mis- esteem,
mis- condemn, mis- attempt, through discontented passions. The reason is
manifest: for Discontent being the companion of our thoughts, makes them, our
words and actions ruled by that; and so become unpleasing, like it self:
Therefore do male contents undervalue merit in their own opinion; Therefore
(being waspish) they detract from worthiness; therefore they dislike or do
condemn bitterly; and therefore, likewise, do men thus affected, undertake
more venturously then wisely. So that Salust has observed well touching the
Character of Catilines adhaerents; that they were Homines quos flagitium,
egestas, aut conscius animus exagitabat.

And, questionless, such men so inwardly bitten with their own afflictions,
can find no leisure in themselves to keep affinity with others: Good
Sovereigns therefore, loving Parents, honest Friends, loyal Subjects, wise
Masters, have been no malcontents: for (being so) it is impossible that such
a troubled Fountain should send forth any thing but offensive tumults. There
is nothing more does make our enemies rejoice, then a dejected spirit; and
nothing more afflicts our soul then to be sensible of their reioycings;
therefore does that experienced Prophet David so often wish for a deliverance
from their triumph; so often does he lament their insultations.

Infinite are those advantages, which may be had against men discontented: and
therefore has a melancholy spirit some prerogative in this respect; because
his time of discontent is scarce distinguished from his daily carriage; for
night is sooner visible in an open Palace, then a smoky Cottage. I may
propound of these, what Celsus does of Cole-worts: being half sodden, they are
laxatiue; but twice sodden, they are binding: So discontents being but
slightly apprehended and entertained, may be a means sitting to prepare the
way for honest applications, and to purge security: But being suffered long to
boil within us, they do confirm their own; and also stop the passage of
other worse corruptions.

Of Moral and awakening discontents, the wise Solomon speaks; when he
resolves positiuely; Anger is better then laughter, for by a sad look the
heart is made better: Melior est ira risu: quia per tristitiam vultus,
corrigitur animus delinquentis: Some Favorites there be, so much beholding to
Fortune, that in a whole AGE they have scarce learnt the definition of sorrow.

In these men the Proverb is verified; Fools are Fortunate; and yet agreeable
with an honest meaning: For those (I think) are chiefly bound to Fortune, or
Providence rather, who cannot through a good simplicity affect dishonest
practices, and close dealings: It being consonant with reason, that men
ill-befriended with a subtle Brain, should be assisted with some higher
POLICY.

All that we suffer, is by our OWN or FORTVNES work: We cannot be too
patient with Fortunes, too much provoked with our own works of sorrow: when
fortune punishes, we have no remedy; when our own indiscretion punishes, we
may afflict our selves the longer with a wise fury, that we may learn to
recollect and to awaken our judgment.

Some have a resolute contempt for all adversities; but such a valorous scorn
may be engendered by a sottish ignorance, or an incapable dullness; no otherwise
then both may be a Drunkards motives in extreme hazard.

As for my self; I never felt a sorrow, which I esteemed a discontent, unless
it gave no profitable use; either by making me more circumspect and provident;
or acquainting me beforehand with my destiny. The most honorable dealing with
our worst afflictions, is to confute them by a discourse of brain, and so
exercise our knowledge, for our own advantage, against the foes of knowledge.

But none among the worst crosses shall indeed predominate, if sometimes in a
lawful humor we do cross our selves.

Two Books of Characters. The first Book.
CHARACTER. I. An Impudent Censurer
IS the torture-monger of wit, ready for execution before Judgment. Nature
has dealt wisely with him in his outside; for it is a privilege against
confutation, and will beget modesty in you to see him outface: He is so
fronted with striving to discountenance knowledge, by the contempt of it, as
you would think him borne to insolence, though indeed it be habitual and
comes by negligence of his company, which rather seek to laugh and continue,
then to reform his vanity. A Chimney-sweeper may converse with him very
safely, without the hazard of blushing; and so may any that will contemn his
ignorance: buffets will convince him better then language or reason: That
proves him ranke-bestiall, descended from the walking Ape; which on the
Mountains seem careful Inhabitants, but at your approach, the formality of
man only. The Land-theefe, and Sea-captaine, be never less out of their way;
but wiser commonly about their object: They spare to wound poor travelers,
but he incounters any thing not worth eyesight. A wise man's mind gouernes his
body, his mind is only restrained by a bodily fear: And if you hope to be
released of what he dares, you must enforce him to what he dares not; and then
you shall perceive him to be the comicall braggard, or the gingling spur. Lay
aside this medicine and he is incurable; for he is so ravished with his own
folly, as he often commends what he misinterprets, and still dispraises (if he
scorn the Author) because he cannot perceive. To commend therefore and
discommend what he conceiues not, is alike tolerable and equal. The wild
Arabian comprehends him fully; for as the one, so the other, takes tribute and
exaction of all passengers, except acquaintance and familiars: if any thing
makes him praiseworthy, this must, or nothing; because he seems (by this
means) moral in friendship; and so in some kind virtuous: But his applause and
detraction, are both odious, because abounding through his mere pleasure. When
all Trades perish, he may turn Shop keeper, and deal with balance; For in
weights and measures none is more deceitful. He ponders pithy volumes by the
dram or scruple, but small errors by the pound. If he takes courage in his
humor, he haunts the Authors company, recites the work, intends it to some
third person, and after he has damnd the thing in question, he refers
himself to the right owner; who, if he be there manifest, must conjure this
devil quickly, or he will seem honest, and crave satisfaction: but call his
life in question, and he betraies his guiltiness, which then accuses him of
false dealing howsoever; yes, though he has commented rightly; for he commends
ignorantly, and discommends scandalously. For delighting in his humor, he
makes his Freehold an Inheritance: put it to the hazard, and he will compound
for the title.

CHARACT: II. A Complete Man
IS an impregnable Tower: and the more batteries he has undergone, the better
able he is to continue immovable. The time and he are always friends: for he
is troubled with no more then he can well employ; neither is that less, then
will every way discharge his Office; So he neither surfets with Idleness, nor
action. calamities, and Court-preferme^ts do alike move him, but cannot remove
him: Both challenge from him a convenient use, no vilde endeavor, either to
swell or despair. His religion, learning, and behavior, hold a particular
correspondence: He commands the latter, whilst himself and both be commanded
by the first. He holds it presumption to know, what should be looked, or
thought upon with wonder; and therefore rather then he will exceed, he can be
less then himself: accounting it more noble to imitate the fruitful bough
which stoopes under a precious burden; then applaud the tall eminence of a
fruitless Birchtree: knowing Humility is a fitter step to knowledge, then
Presumption. He smiles upon Vice and Temptation first, seeming to allure it,
till, without suspicion, he may soon disrobe and disarme it: For having
labored to know the strength of folly, he knows it to be his Captive. From
hence proceeds his victory, in that he can prevent mischief, and scorn the
advantage of baseness. His worthiness to be rewarded he may conceal: but
his desire to do nobly, in a better kind, his actions will not suffer to be
unknown; by which the world can judge he deserves, and save him from the
scandal of a Cunning Hypocrite. If merits direct him in the way to honor,
they do not leave him in the way to honor; but are his best attendants to
accompany his whole preferment: For to deserve what he obtaines, and to
deserve no more, is sluggish; to deserve after a thing bestowed, is duly
thankful; But a continued merit stops accusation. Whatsoever he borrowes of
the world, is by himself paid back with double interest: For what he
observes, passes through the forge of his wisdom, which refines it; and the
file of his practice, which confirms it as a good pattern: So the interest
exceeds the principal, and (which exceeds all) praises the usurer. The name
of guilt (with him) is vanished under the charm of a good conscience: which
with his eyesight save his taste a labor: for he knows what experience can
teach, but is not taught by experience. He is faithfully his own friend: and
accepts the friendship of others for his own sake; but imparts his own for
others. When he loves, he loves first: from hence he chalenges a double
honor: for Love and Prioritie is a twofold merit. He lackes nothing to
engender happiness; for he can spare nothing that he enioyes; he enioyes it so
honestly: And that he has already, serves to purchase new contentment. For as
he lives, his capacity is enlarged, though before it were sufficient for his
other faculties: they be most numerous when himself is nothing: for being
dead, he is thought worthier then alive: then he departs to his advancement.

CHARACTER. III. A good Husband
IS the second part of a good man: he chalenges no more nor less from Art or
Nature, then does become his faculty, and give comfort to his wife; so he does
not (by striving to please) seem low minded; nor by ouer-valuing his
properties, prove a tyrant. His behavior and discourse promise no more then he
means, and may very well justify. He is not altogether to be chosen by the
common weight, or standard; for his best parts be invisible. A good wife shall
know him quickly to be worth her taking: for h^e enquires out her worthiness
first. He is not therefore put to much trouble of being denied twice: for if
he thinks he can prevail amiss, prevail too soon, or not prevail,
because he is too good; he has the modesty to refuse first: but otherwise,
if opinion dares susspect, and so refuse him first, he may account it
happiness, because he was refused so soon: having (by that means) escaped
one who could not discern him. The honor of a good wife makes him no more
unpracticed in the patience of a bad, then if he conversed with her: so his
virtues be habitual, not enforced. The misery of a bad wife likewise has no
more ^nraged him to discredit all, then the worthiness of a good one has
moved him to be an Idolater: So his blessing is, not to augment his curse, or
curse his blessing. The highest end of his marriage premeditated, is to resolve
how he may desire it without end. He feels not the absence of youth by a
decay in lust; but measures the approach of a crooked body by his entire
affection. He neither deceiues himself with a foolish confidence, nor draws
a disadvantage to himself, by being distrustful: for he may be acquainted
with those, to whom he cannot safely commit his wealth, much less his wives
honesty; but he never suspects, before he be past suspicion, and every thing
be apparent. He has (notwithstanding) no friend whom he dares make his
deputy. He seeks rather to be well known, then commonly noted: for being
known, he cannot be mistaken; but otherwise it is very doubtful. He hates
not her, but hers; and that with a hope to make her detest herself, not be
divorced from him: for he couets rather to be daily amending her, then make a
new hazard, or want resolution. He may dislike therefore his wives humor, and
love her in the same quantity. He cannot be chosen, because a better is
absent: for he is himself, the president and the pattern. He cannot therefore
be refused, if he be well known: For being good, he proves the best, and
being so, the best Husband.

CHARACTER. IIII. A Contented Man
IS a fair building in the bottom of a Valley: you can discern nothing about
him, unless you approach near, and nothing in him worth himself, unless you
do proceed. There is no land like unto his own conscience: that makes him sow
and reap together: for actions be (with him) no sooner thoughts, then they
prove comforts, they be so full of Innocence. His life therefore is a
continual harvest: his countenance and conversation promise hope; they both
smile upon their object: neither does the end fail his purpose: for his
expectation was indifferent and equal, according to the means. Events
therefore cannot oppress him; for he propounded all, before he undertook
some; and saw the extremest point of danger, before he did imbarke. He medles
no further with uncertainties, then loss and lucre be alike in accident: for
doubtful things of moment, make men stagger; whilst hope and fear distracts
them. If probable and lawful means deceive him, they cannot trouble him: for
he ascribes nothing to himself, that is above him. When Gods determinations
do therefore disappoynt; he neither maruailes, nor mis-interprets. Neglected
fortunes, and things past, he leaves behind; they cannot keep pace with him.
The necessity of things absent, he measures by his means: but as for things
impossible, he could never begin to affect them. And in the quest of future
proiects, he never does transgress the pesent comfort. He can with as much
selfe-credit be a Captive, as a promoted Courtier. Dignities may do him
honor, not entice him: poverty may threaten, and be peremptory, but cannot
overcome. Riches may make his honesty more eminent, not more exquisite. He is
so far from adding malice to any, that he can praise the merits of an enemy.
Anger and Revenge be two turbulent passions: in him (therefore) the first
shows only that he can apprehend: the last, that he can justly prevent
further mischief. So he neither does insult through anger; nor satisfy his
bitterness by revenge. Repentance, which with some proves melancholy, with
him proves a delightful assurance: for seldom does he lament things merely
vicious, so much as virtues imperfectly attempted. He undertakes every thing
with more advantage, then any (but himself) can imitate: for being void of
troublesome vexation, his willing mind makes the way less difficult. His
policy and close dealing do not disturb his time of pleasure, or his quiet
dreams: For he can awake with as much delight in day, and sleep with as much
solace in the dark, as either his intimate purpose can awake to every man's
applause; or be concealed to his own safety, and no man's detriment. He does
not readily incur another rage; nor does he rail against himself; for he
cannot be before hand with quarrelsome engagements; nor rashly run into a
manifest error. He does not therefore (when all approve him) miscall himself,
closely, damned Hypocrite, or lewd villain. He feels more felicity in this,
that he can forbear to enjoy any thing, rather then let any thing enjoy him;
or rather then he will enjoy any thing indirectly. He is not so
selfe-subsisting that he scorns to borrow; so shameless, that he borrowes
all: nor so alone contented, that others do not partake in his freedom: or so
absolute in freedom, that he becomes not more absolute by the use of others.
He makes more ill mea^ings good, by good constru^tion, more hapless events
honest by a lawful confidence, and more dangerous undertakings easy, by a
calm proceeding, then the contrary. For (whilst he knows Jealousy as a
fearful, eating, and distasteful vice) he cannot suspect without the
cautions of why, whom, how, where and when. Briefly, being contented, he is
content to be happy: and being so, he thriues best when he thinks best: he
does more then he undoes. He wins more often then he saues: and, like the
Caspian Sea, remains the same unchangeable.

CHARACT. V. A good Emperor
IS the second Savior to Christianity, and a direct center of his peoples
love: his greatness extends rather to posterity, then is confident of
pedigree. He may be counseled or confirmed, but his election remains
peculiar. His object therefore (to discern) may be infinite, or extravagant;
but paterns (to imitate) must be supernal; for he acknowledges but one
supremacy, and in that remembers a succession: which makes him leave man's
precepts unto frailty, view honor as a thing mediate, himself immediately next
to his Creator, and does only know his high commission a determinable power,
not know and murmr. He lackes nothing of divinity, but time in his
prerogative, the want of which takes away eternity: so all the honor which
relates to him for Gods sake, conueighes it self to God for his own. His
fear does vanish into love or anger; for he may embrace or conquer, but cannot
submit. His royal bounty is as well prompt to take with honor, as to give
with liberty. And as he can deserve nothing because on him depe^ds every
thing: so is he not by any man to be deserved, because unto him every man owes
his whole Inheritance. If therefore he does give where subjects doco^demne; or
choose when multitudes abandon; he does but manifest his free desires, and show
affinity betwixt himself and holiness: which raises from the dunghill to the
scepter; and from the most obscure disdain of vulgar thoughts unto the state of
happiness. Nay oftentimes this secret in public office, proves true; That
men without the aid of birth, and glory of famous merit, lack only so good an
entrance, but have commonly a better ending: or at least, strive more to
attain what others presume upon. The event therefore makes his large
prerogative true wisdom, which may be mis-interpreted weakness. The Lion, a
King of beasts, is recovered in sickness, by eating an Ape; and a good King by
devouring flatterers.

CHARAC. VI. A worthy Poet
IS the purest essence of a worthy Man: He is confident of nature in nothing
but the form, and an ingenious fitness to conceive the matter. So he approues
nature as the motive, not the foundation or structure of his worthiness. His
works do every way pronounce both nourishment, delight, and admiration to the
readers soul: which makes him neither rough, effeminate, nor windy: for by a
sweet contemperament of Tune and Ditty, he entices others to goodness; and
shows himself perfect in the lesson. He never writes upon a full stomach,
and an empty head; or a full head, and an empty stomach. For he cannot make
so Divine a receptacle stoop to the sordid folly of gall or envy, without
strength: or strength of brain stoop, and debase it self with hunting out
the bodies succor. He is not so impartial as to condemn every new fashion,
or tax idle circumstance; nor so easy as to allow vices, and account them
generous humors. So he neither seeks to enlarge his credit of bitterness,
by a snarling severitie; nor to augment his substance by insinuating
courtshippe. He has more debttors in knowledge among the present Writers,
then Creditors among the ancient Poets. He is possessed with an innocent
liberty, which excludes him from the slavish labor and means of setting a
gloss upon frail commodities. Whatsoever therefore proceeds from him,
proceeds without a meaning to supply the worth, when the work is ended; by
the addition of preparatiue verses at the beginning; or the dispersed hire of
acquaintance to extol things indifferent. He does not therefore passionatly
affect high patronage, or any further then he may give freely; and so receive
back honest thanks. The dangerous name and the contempt of Poets, sprung from
their multitude of corruptions, proves no disadvantage or terror to him: for
such be his antidotes that he can walk untouched, even through the worst
infection. He is no miserable selfe-louer, nor no unbounded prodigal: for he
can communicate himself wisely to avoid dull reservedness, but not make
every thought common, to maintain his market. It must be imputed to his
perfect eyesight, that he can see error, and avoid it without the hazard of a
new one: As in Poems, so in proiects, by an easy conjecture. He cannot
flatter, nor be flattered: If he gives Desert, he gives no more; and leaves
Hyperbole in such a matter of importance: As for himself, he is so well known
unto himself, that neither public fame, nor yet his own conceit, can make
him ouervalued in himself. He is an enemy to Atheists; for he is no Fatist
nor Naturalist: he therefore excludes Luck and Rhyme, from the acceptance of
his Poems; scorning to acknowledge the one as an efficient, the other as an
essence, of his Muses favor. He paies back all his imitation with interest;
whilst his Authors (if revived) would confess their chief credit was to be
such a pattern: otherwise (for the most part) he proves himself the pattern,
and the project in hand: Silver only and sound metal comprehends his nature:
rubbing, motion, and customary usage, makes the brightness of both more
eminent. No marvel though he be Immortal, seeing he conuerts poison into
nourishment; even the worst objects and societies to a worthy use. When he is
lastly silent (for he cannot die) he finds a Monument prepared at others cost
and remembrance, whilst his former actions be a living Epitaph.

CHARACT. VII. An honest Lawyer
IS a precious Diamond set in pure gold, or one truly honest, and a complete
Lawyer: The one gives glory to the other; and being divided, they be less
valuable. Divinity, and a corrected nature, make him habitual in the first;
but studious labor, and a discursiue brain make him equal, if not absolute, in
the last: he knows Law to be the Mris of man, and yet he makes Honesty the
Mris of Law. The first therefore may exceed the last; but the last never has
predomina^ce in him, without the other. He is too divine to be tempted with
fear, favor, Minerals, or Possessions; and too divine not to be tempted with
perfect knowledge, and a pitiful complaint: he has as much leisure to
confer with conscience, in the most busy Term, as in the deadest Vacation:
And he is always more diligent to maintain wronged poverty, then attentive to
allow injurious Greatness: he can as freely refuse a prodigal, or enforced
bounty, as he can accept or demand due recompense: He resorts to London with a
more full brain, then empty bags, and (at his return) he purses up more full
comfort, then yellow coin. He cannot be so confident as to persist in error;
nor so ignorant as to err by weakness: When therefore (through an abundance)
some knowledge is confounded; his error only proves a doubtful question; and
serves to reduce scattered remnants into method. The multitude of contentions
make not him rejoice in the number, but in the difficulty; that truth may
appear manifest to our progeny. He railes not against the vices of his
profession, but makes his profession commendable by his own practice of
virtue: his Clients disease of being suspe^ded touches him like his own
sickness; he dares not give a dangerous purgation to dispatch him, nor by
negligence and delay, let the evil grow inward and incorporate; to strengthen
it self, or consume the patient. He is therefore exquisit in preservatives
against the consumption; though perhaps he may fail in restoratiues to support
weakness. He may well be a president to the best Physicians; for he
undertakes no cure when he perceiues it inclining to be desperate: So he
makes the cause, and not his Client, the object of his labor. If he has
favor enough to make truth be current, he looks no further: which he needs
not to patch business; nor would he willingly pursue it; if truth were not
often discountenanced. He does therefore at a Judges death lament the death of
his learning, not his own private lucre: He can ride the circuit, and scorn
to be circular. He has no leisure to protract time or save his Clients opinion
with jests premeditated, or windy inferences: His modesty was never below his
courage in a good cause; nor his courage inclining to impudence, though he
were still honored with a prosperous event. He owes so much worship to desert
and innocence, that he can as faithfully applaud sufficient worth, as not
insult over, or exclaim against dull ignorance. He is miraculously preserved
against incantations: the strongest spell cannot charm him silent, nor the
most tempting spirit provoke him to a vain pleading. He dares know, and
profess in spite of potency; he dares be rich and honest in despite of
custom: And if he does not grow from a good man, to a reverend Title, he
scorns to be a Traitor and blame tyranny; but he descends below his own
unworthiness. Briefly, he is a precious vessel, he indures the rest, and the
defiance of time: he is a sound commodity which never fails the Customer: and
does heartily confess that whosoever swarues from this pattern, swarues from
honesty, though he be deeply learned: Howsoever, he thinks a Lawyer deeply
learned cannot choose but be honest; except multitude of Clients oppress him.

CHARACT. VIII. A Detractor
IS his own private foe, and the worlds professed enemy: He is indeed an
obstinate heretic, and if you will convert him, you must anew create him
likewise: he is of the Mahumeta^ sect which has despised all religious Arts,
and Sciences, except the confusion of all; so he approues continually the worst
things among many good, and condemns that which is iudiciously commended: to
read therefore and refuse, makes up the best part of his judgment. His five
senses have a mortal combat with all objects, that afford sense, or any thing
upon which they fasten: his eye could never yet behold a woman fair enough, or
honest enough, on whom he might bestow the sincere part of his affection: but
he marries one to beget an equal society of froward children: his ear was
never well contented with a delicious tune, for the left is only open, and
that only apt to conceive discords through a customary habit; which has
rejected all, and therefore will: For that he once has, and is again minded
to oppose worthiness, gives him both reason and encouragement to continue
spightfull: but (to our comfort be it spoken) his envy ends commonly with
himself, or at most, endeavors no otherwise then a nasty passenger, to rub
against, and defile fair outsides, because himself is loathsome: he stops
his nose if a perfume approach, but can well endure a stinking draft, or
kennell, and embrace the savor: His palate has no relish except he may
discommend his diet, and yet he consumes all to the very fragments: he
touches or takes up nothing which is not blasted by him with a natural
defiance; or at least he will utter the manifest form of discontent. His
tongue, the Herald of his imagination, is a busy officer, and will (without
question) challenge the same reward of him, that it does of women; for it
dispatcheth the same service, and deserves therefore (proportionably alike) to
be called the maine property of each: he is not inferior also to a woman in
malice; for she is that way limited, though vndeterminable: but he
transcends; accounting it his pomp to be infinitely licentious toward all.
He railes against the Sat, and speaks treasons confidently to himself
alone, expecting an event of his desires: Nay, sometimes he is taken (through
the license of his tongue, and a little sufferance of the company) in peremptory
speeches that bring him to his answer: Neither will he hearken to reformation,
till he lackes his cares: He is not (if a Churchman) ashamed to quarrel,
first with his Patron, and openly disclaim against the poor value of his
Benefice: If, a common humorist, he will diminish the worth likewise of a
gift, before the giuers face; and looks to the disconueniences, not the
commodity, he receives by possession. A slight Arithmetician may cast up the
total sum of his Character: and by substraction (being the body of his soul)
may find him under the value of an honest man, above half in half: for he
lacks Charity, and so comes short six degrees of a good Christian: and therefore
is an egregious coward because he scorns to justify, except he railes
against the dead; thither he hastens being unworthy to live longer.

CHARACT. IX. An Humorist
IS the shadow of Understanding, the traitor to Reason, or the vanity of a
better man: Bloodletting, a good whip, honest company, or reasonable
instructions might (at the first) recover him. But if he continues among
laughing spirits one quarter, the disease will grow inward, and then the cure
grows desperate. If his humor be hereditary, he is more familiar with it,
and makes it the principal virtue of his family: If imitation breeds a
habit, he makes it the pledge of sworn brotherhood, or at least the favor
of new acquaintance: he never is infected single, or with one only; for either
he is now admitted to the several orders; or he is prompt enough to subscribe
generally when occasion peeps. You must not dare to discommend, or call in
question, his behavior seriously with his companions; for though you cannot call
the humor lawful, it is sufficient if you can call it his humor. You may justly
forbear to restrain him; for if he be truly adopted, he thinks it an
especial part to be respectlesse. Tobacco is a good whetstone for his
property; he does seldom therefore forget to provoke his constitution this
way: and (by being insatiate) he knows well his humor may escape the search of
reason, by virtue of the mist. He has from his cradle bin swadled up, with
much obstinate and peremptory affectation: It being indeed commonly the
character of his ripest age, to support that freely in his manhood, which was
forbidden in the spark of his minority: he never slips opportunity with
deliberation; he is therefore prompt enough to begin; and the reason of his
act is enough, though only that he has begun, because humor is the motive.
There is nothing within the compass of thought so triuiall, so absurd, and
monstrous, which his vanity will not auerre to be ponderous, decent, and
natural. Neither will he abhor to justify them by his own practice, against
all opposers. He travails up and down like Tom of Bedlem, under the title of
mad Rascal, Witty Rogue, or Notable mad sla^e, and these attributes be a more
effectual oratory to applaud his humor, then a direct commendation. He will
not sometimes (upon small discontinuance) vouchsafe to acknowledge, or (at
least) know, his familiar friends, without much impertinence and
Interrogatories of their name, or habitation; whilst another time, he dares
adventure his knowledge, and salutations upon mere aliens. He is very much
distracted, and yet I wonder how the frenzy should be dangerous; for he never
breaks his brain about the study of reason or invention: seeing his humor is
the privilege of both: It is therefore sufficient for him to be extreme
mela^choly, and be most ignorant of the cause or object; and suddenly to be
vnmeasurably frolic without provocation: whilst he is only beholding to a
brainlesse temperature in discharge of his credit. He will converse freely with
Serving-men and Soldiers within 12. hours; and presently when the ague has
once seized him, he proves tyrannical and insolent toward the silly vermin.
He never brake a vow in his whole life, or brake vows continually: for either
they have not suited with his variety, to be intended, or he has intended to
observe them no longer then might agree with his body, which ebbes and flows.
When he grows old, and past voice, he learns foreign languages: as if, when
he had dined, he should devour the sauce. In a word, he is a chief commander
of actions, but no command^r of himself; being in his best bravery but a
Turkish Slave, ever subject to desire and appetite: according to their pattern,
he is himself to himself praiseworthy, or elegant; but to worthiness it
self, odious.

CHARAC. X. A. Coxcombe
IS a needless Ornament: He takes the upper hand of a fool, and of a wise
man also; and in opinion is as good as a Courtier. His education has been
(from a child) tenderly fearful; and the mother remains still afraid of his
fortunes, least his politic wisdom should hazard them too far: whilst his
fortunes hazard his wisdom. He has been always a young Master, and yoked
his ears first to insinuation, under some oylie-tong'd servant, or flattering
Tutor. To know he has rich kindred, and to derive a pedigree; satisfy his
valor, learning, proficience in estate or credit with mere contemplation. So
much indeed does he hang upon the pillars of his gentry. As it shall therefore
be the first preparatiue of his acquaintance to salute, and ask What
countryman your Father is, of what house: or he will enquire his demesnes
only (of some neighbor:) and if your body be hansome, your clothes
proportionable, your parents wealthy; he has purchased an everlasting friend.
A round oath is valor enough, a foolish Dittie Art enough, and good fellowship
honesty enough. The truth is, he scorns to be a searcher, and thinks it
enough for his Tailor to meddle with linings. But in the circumstance of making
your clothes, the price of your Beaver and silk stockins, your purpose to
travail, or of your long absence; The Spanish Inquisition cannot be so
unmerciful. He is contented richly, nay absolutely, to be taken only for a
harmless man. The generositie and noble carriage of his discourse, is to run
desperately into the name of some courageous gallant Knight, or some Baron in
favor: if their alliance to his family can be detected, he gives way with an
apparent relish. He is very well fitted for all societies, if his outside be
suitable; further then which he never conversed with himself effectually. Nor
can I wonder, though he pays dearly, and preserues clothes delitiously;
seeing those alone are the maintenance of his whole worth; and therefore you
shall perceive him more furiously engaged about the rending of his doublet, or
a little lace, then a magnanimous box, or a bastinado. He is ambitiously given
to be promoted, either by some embassage to divulge his pedigree, and learn
fashions, or by entertainment of some chief Noble men to discover his bounty;
and (withal) his stipendious affection. He shifts his familiars by the survey
of prospect, and the externals; but his directions proceed from the proverb of
like to like, rather then Physiognomy. He is credulous and confident: the
less certainty he has of a report, the more public he is, and peremptory.
He commits the best part of his understanding to a talkatiue Barber: with whom
he is the more frequent; because he thinks, to have a curle pate, is to have a
visible wit. He would be Physical, and justly; for not to preserve his folly
in health, were to deceive the world of his pattern: but being merry for
disgestion, his laughter is exorbitant, causeless, endless, and like
himself. His safest course will be to marry: nothing makes him so sensible as
a wise, good or badde; till then, the further he flies from his Character, he
becomes it the more naturally. * * *

CHARAC. XI. A Rank obseruer
IS his own Comoedy, and his own Audience: for whatsoever he frames by
experience, he applauds by custom: but being out of his element, he is an
Eele in a sand-bagge; for he, wanting the humor of his wrested observance,
falls away into ignorant silence. He is arrogant in his knowledge so far, as
he (thinks) to study men, will excuse him from the labor of reading, and yet
furnish him with absolute rarities, fit for all fashions, all discourses. He is
a very promiscuous fellow; and from thence proceeds the vice which makes him
without difference, comprehend ponderous and trivial passages under the same
degree of value or estimation. For whatsoever becomes his politic vent,
becomes his understanding. When he does therefore fill up the vessel of his
conceits, he has regard to such things as may be uttered with most advantage,
either of money among the plaiers, or reputation among the general gallants of
our City. He takes account of all humors, and through the practice of a
contempt to all, he partakes in all: for he uses what he derides, under the
privilege of scorn, and so makes it familiar. So the largest benefit which
others reap by contemning the vice in himself, arises beyond his purpose or
intention: for he extends to others no further then agrees with his own greedy
constitution, meaning to credit, or enrich himself; not amend others: by which
means all his goodness is accidental. He does (notwithstanding) in some
points resemble virtue; but in the worst manner. For being impartial, he
plays the tyrant; and sels the vices of his dearest friends to discovery, by
plays or pamphlets, but is content that they should still reserve them to their
future infamy: So he becomes sooner excluded oftentimes from society, then
his flattring shifts can readily repair. Flattery and insinuation be indeed
the number of his thriving moral virtues, through which (under a pretense of
fair meaning) he takes occasion to betray the marrow of man's variety: and
this affoords fuel for his bitter derision. His Tablebookes be a chief
adiunct, and the most significant Emblem of his own quality, that man may
bear about him: for the wiping out of old notes give way to new: and he
likewise, to try a new disposition, will finally forsake an ancient friends
love; because he consists of new enterprises. His capacity is apprehensiue in a
strange measure: if he were less capable, he might be more commended. For he
incroaches often upon admittance (where things be well delivered) to multiply
his observation: and yet he will verify the thing, as if it were now
committed. If he converts to a deserving quality, he will propound the
credit of a good meaning no stipend for his vain discoueries. Till then, he
must entreat to be suspected, or odious, whilst he whispers closely among free
companions: Neither must he hope to amend the Age, or himself; because he
never intended the first; and the last he forgets (though he intended it)
through vain glory; as being transported with his pride only, that he has
observed, and can observe again. Briefly, he resembles a foolish patient, who
takes a costiue pill to loosen his body: for whilst he means to purge
himself by observing other humors, he practices them by a shadow of mockage,
and so becomes a more fast corruption: if he does not therefore feel the
disease, he dies hide-bound. (* * *)

CHARACT: XII. A Parish Politician
IS Machiavels Mungrell Puppy; taken from school before he has learned true
Latin; and therefore in trivial things only, he partakes with the Sire;
because he lackes true breeding, and true bringing up. He labors commonly for
opinion where he is so well known, that opinion would persecute him, without
labor: he thinks religion deceiues most unsuspected; and therefore he seems
to be a zealous Christian. The Church is a principal part of his devotion; and
to be a frequent Auditor, or outwardly attentive, is a sure defense (he
thinks) against capital error. He is openly kinde-hearted; cries God
forbid, Amen, Christ be his comfort. But rather then he will seem a Puritan,
with indifferent companions, he can break an obscoene Jest, be wanton,
sociable, or any thing, till he converse with a Precisian by whom he hopes to
save: then the eyes roll upward, the hands be elevated, commiserating terms
be multiplied, with sighs innumerable: then he railes against the wicked,
whom a little before he heartily saluted. And after some paraphrase upon the
verse of such an Evangelist, Apostle, or Prophet, he dismisses the Puritan,
that himself may laugh in a corner. His mind and memory put on the same
vizard of greatness, which makes him so much incline to the posture of weighty
labors, that he gives no attention to things openly recited, though they
actually possess him. To be imploid therefore for a Noble man, is (to him) an
infinite trouble, and begets employment with all acquaintance to discover it:
so the bare means to make men think he is much entertained, costs a time
equal to his occurrents. Being to be visited (though by sure Clients) he has
the room of attendance, the Art of delay, and a visage that seems pitifully
interrupted. If he rides to dispatch, the horses be early sadled, and brought
to the door, that neighbors may observe; when, after five or six hours
expectation, he comes like one that was detained by urgent importunacies. His
best materials to work upon, be Time, and Place; which, if they afford
circumstance to let you understand his new purchase, his new buildings, the
great marriage of his children, or entertainment of high personages, or
bounty toward the Hospital, it comes freely and fitly, if openly. When
occasions trouble him a little, he loves to trouble himself extremely; and
thinks it a point of ^eaching policy, to reprove or amend that formally,
which has been allowed by singular good iugdements. If he dares (with
privilege of the hearers ignorance) disparage worth in any, he takes leave of
the occasion, and his own policy. This he takes in honor of his courtship to
show he can be ambitious, and build on others ruins: But this proclaims him
a starved Cannibal; who, through the famine of desert, feeds his worthiness
with his own excrement of detraction. His desire and audacitie be at open
strife. When he would, but dares not commend himself, by correcting another
faculty: then with a straind laughter, and a willing palsy in his head, he
seems to discover somewhat is unsettled; or he makes his elbow signify, that
something wants his finger. His complements be at liberty, his friendship lies
locked up in prison; the key whereof he has lost willingly. For if you call
him friend before he has wrested the advantage of an enemy, he leaves you
destitute, but more happy then you believe. If he can seem to forget your
countenance, he intends that you must think him devoted to things above you,
or that his brain labors: and upon this ground he walks when he neglects
your salutations, or takes no notice of your person. Briefly, he is a man of
this days profit; he expects nothing without double interest, and that by
compulsion. He is a weak foe, a weaker friend, or the general shadow of a
wiser man.

CHARAC. XIII. A Spend-thrift
IS a man ever needy, never satisfied, but ready to borrow more then he may be
trust-a with: The question of him will be, whether his learning does
out-ballance his brain, and so becomes a burden; or whether both be crept
into his outward senses: Certainly his Intellectuals of wit, and wisdom, be
manifest, but are (like the seven Stars) seldom seen together; they
mutually succeed, as having vowed to govern by course: whilst wit reigns,
excess, and royot have the upper hand: But when he recollects himself, he is
wholly metamorphosed; wit gives place, and his extreme of wisdom, disclaimes
the smile of a merry countenance. His only joy is to domineere, be often
saluted, and have many Creditors: his Lordships lie among the Drawers,
Tobacco-men, Brokers, and Panders: But adversity makes him leave company, and
fall to housekeeping, and then his servants be vanished into Sergeants. His
only flatterers be Conceit and Fancy, which charge Memory his Steward, to
bring in no Accounts till they be casheerd; which cannot be whilst Imitation
is his Captain, or Credit his Corporal. He dreams of being Lord chief
Justice, or at least being eminent, though he lives dissolutely; and has no
Saint but Fortune. He is, and ever will be a quarter behind with frugality; in
which volume he cannot be perfect, because the book is imperfect: for he still
rendes out the beginning of his lesson. His Heaven upon Farth, is a fair
Mistress; and though his means be l^rge, yet his principal sorrow is the
lack of maintenance. The misery of his sense is an old man, and his fathers
life troubles him not a little: Almanackes therefore which foretell the death
of age, be very acceptable. The hurly burly of his brain is infinite, and he
scarcely knows what he may freely make an election of. His worst bawd is too
good a nature, which makes him incident to false applauses, and carue his soul
out among his famil^ars: he has multitudes of dear acquaintance, but his
dearest friends are ready to stabbe him. For either those whom he accounts so,
be men of fashion; or those who be indeed so, desire his death, because they
see no amendment. He scorns to acknowledge his debts, but as things of duty,
with which mechanics are (as he thinks) bound to uphold high birth and
Gentry: but the end proves otherwise. His downfall therefore is not admired,
because he was ever falling; and his bare excuse, makes experience the shadow.
Briefly, he may seem a treacherous friend; for he deals dishonestly with all
that challenge interest in him; they be his Creditors: And yet he deals more
lovingly with them, then with himself; for when he paies them, he punishes
himself: If he cannot pay, he is punished more then they; and punished
enough, because he cannot pay: for then he consumes.

CHARACT. XIIII. A Vbiquitarie
IS a Iourney-man of all Trades, but no sauer because no s^tter up: He would be
an Epitome of Arts, and all things, but is indeed nothing less then himself:
If an itchy Tailor gave him not his making, he had (I think) perpetually been
unmade: For if he scratch his head, the body calls him; if the body, then the
elbow; if his elbow, then again the body; if the body, then the head itches:
so never quiet, never constant, still doing, still about to do the same,
remains my doer doing nothing. The worst of dog-daies was his birthday when
fleas abounded, which (from his cradle) have so bitten him, as till his death
he must be tickled. The worm of giddiness has crept into his private
purposes: every hour, almost, gives him a new Being, or, at least, the purpose
to be an other thing then he is. If a country l^fe inuites him he yields: the
Court request him, he yields likewise: but then disgrace auerts him to his
study; a Library is gotten: by this time love has struck him, and he adores
the Saint: But then some play declaimes against this love; he quickly is
persuaded, and follows Poetry. Thus my vagabond of vanity is from post to
pillar transport^, because he travels without a perfect license. You shall
soon discern him by his arguments and reasons; They (for the principals) flow
from one fountain of ignorance: for all his proof depends upon I think so;
Every man says so: All dislike it: His very conversation is infectious, but
never frustrate: for either you must follow him, and that way you must look to
be a looser: or he will follow you, and then resolve that your inte^tio^
thriues but badly. No object, no society, season, thought, or language, comes
amiss, or unexpected, his policy therefore seeks to be rather frequent then
effectual; to run about the world daily, then travel seriously; to see a
multitude, before society; and guess at much, rather then know a little. In his
discourse he daunces All Trades; and flies from field to thicket, as being
hunted by an Ignis fatuus. Talk of Academies, and he tells you Courtnewes;
canuase the state of your question, and he tells you what new book is extant.
If you discourse, he still desires the conclusion; and is attentive rather to
the sequel, then careful to understand the premises. In his behavior he
would seem French, Italian, Spanish, or any thing, so he may seem vnvulgar;
accounting it barbarous not to contemn his own Nation, or the common good;
because he loves to be more valued by seeming singularly precious: His habit
only discouers him to be true English: and to be weary of the place, colors
his emploiment: To liiie (with him) is all vanity, and that life alone his
dearest happiness: his death therefore may be somewhat doubtful, because
with it he has no Being.

CHARAC. XV. A Gamester
IS Fortunes Vassaile, temptations Anuile, or an outlandish text which may
soon be translated into cheaters English: He affects gaming from a
schoole-boy; and superstitiously fore-thinkes how his mind gives him. The
elements of fire, earth, and air, be with him alike predominant; he i^
in^^^med with rage, melancholy with thoughts, iouiall with fortune; but he
never we^^^^ in sorrow or repentance: When he looses little, you must ^now he
looses much, for he loves tha^ any man should conjecture he is able: And
though his luck be infinite to win abundance, yet could he never have the
luck to purchase. If he quarrel^ you may protest he looses, and he must
scr^mble or be bea^e^ ^re he can be quiet: if he make peace you must meet
him ^n the winning way, and then you might more safely swagger with him: he
loves his own advantage well enough to be a Lawyer, but would make a most
preposterous Judge: The seven deadly sins sleep in his pocket, and he never
draws money but the noise awakes them. Pride, Lechery, Drunkenness, and
Gluttony, be his Sabbath sins, which (out of gettings) he employes on
Festiuals, and Sundaies. Blasphemy and murder play the Drawers with him, and
bring the fearful reckoning of his losses; and instead of Usury, Theft plays
the Scriuener to furnish him with money: He can both fast, and watch, and yet
is far enough from being a true penitent; for curses following, do discover
why the rest was intended. Fortune makes him her most silly Statesman: she
holds him by the chinne a while, but ere he can recover what he only wishes,
he sinkes incontinent, and worthily; for loss and gain alike encourage him,
but never satisfy. If he plays upon Ticket, he knows you are but a simple
fellow not able to exact, though he resolves to pay nothing; so he did never
purchase, if not this way, except he borrowes; and that extends far enough to
make him the debtor at his own pleasure. If he be perished, his restoration
is to famine, though not degenerate; for seeing he was ruind under the Goddess
Fortune, he may well claim the portion of a rich widow. If neither she, nor
any shee-creature else be gracious; let him vnpittied prove a Cheater, for he
thrust himself to exile, and went to willing bondage.

CHARACT. XVI. A Nouice
IS one still ready to ask the way, yet far from finding it, though you do
direct him: He is indeed a simple thing of one and twenty, that dares safely be
a pupil to any Tutor. Or take him naturally for a familiar kind of Spaniell,
that may be readily taken up, and stolen away from himself, or his best
resolutions. He is ever haunted with a blushing weakness, and is as willing
to embrace any, as not to be distasteful unto any: He trusts any man's opinion
before his own, and will commit his life to him that can insinuate; you get
acquaintance with him by a bare salutation; drink to him with a new
complement, and you have purchased his entire love, till he be cheated. The
name of Countryman, or civil carriage, vnlockes his Cabinet of intentions,
till you extract the very quintessence. He cannot choose but be exceeding
credulous, for he confutes nothing further then his eyesight, or common sense
extends. Draw him to the paradise of taking all in good part; or teach him to
apprehend the worst things well, by screwing in a mere conceit of your
generosity, and he wilthrust the ward-ship of his credit, Lands, or Body, to
your patronage: So you may take relief, and tender Marriage, though his father
held not in Knights service. If you misdoubt he should perceive you, or if you
think it difficult to deceive him; compare his Title with his Index, o^ both
together with his stuff contained, and you may soon discern him: For either
unexpectedly he does betray himself; or false fire does discharge him. Being a
little boulstred up with sweet heresies of subtle language, and Musical
Tauernes, he suddenly begins (except some charitable hand reclaimes him) to
mistake Tobacco for a precious herb; and oftentimes I think it cures his raw
humor, by operation of the price, without the Physic. You may easily also
drive him to mistake brown paper for Littletons Tenures; Canuas, and Red
Herrings, for his fathers hoppe-bagges and Lent provision. I need not say he
will be valorous; for Parasites and Cony-catchers know, he oftentimes can see
he has been cheated, and yet his modesty will not suffer him to enforce
satisfaction. He will much wonder at a triuiall event, and thinks it
Witchcraft to foresee disadvantage. As for the world, Religion, or natural
causes, he can enquire of them, but difficultly believe reason: In the shutting
up therefore of his folly he does confess the character, and leaves it to
succession.

CHARAC. XVII. An Epicure
IS the picture of Somebody, or a man of two senses: the Eye and the Palate:
for his smelling property is stuffed with the vapors of a full stomach; his
hands the instruments of his mouth, no senses; and the belly has no cares, but
a trusse to support it: He is his own Tailor, and thinks directly that more
expenses belong to the linings, then to the outside. He cannot stir in
business without a Coach, or a Litter; and then he is suddenly interrupted, if
the clock strikes Eleven. He is (whatsoever some think) a good Physician for
his own body; for he still rises from the Table with an appetite, and is
soon re^dy for another meal of dainties. If he be a Lawyer, the b^^t meats
will soonest corrupt his carcass, and his conscience: for he feeds
immode^^tely, and will do much for ^ brace of Pheasants. If he be a Divine,
he preaches all charity, and discommends Gentlemen extremely, because they
leave Housekeeping. He thinks his bed the best study, and therefore speaks
well in the praise of stretching meditations. He accounts Cookery a delicate
science, and preferres the knowledge of confectionary receipts; to which
purpose nothing passes through the throat, till he takes particular notice of
the ingredients. He is troubled much to think, how he may most readily shorten
his life, and not perceive the reason: Therefore he revolues continually, what
may be most convenient for the taste, and hurtful for the stomach. He invites
himself to much provender by accident of visitation; though he comes with a
resolved policy: and he provokes many solemn meetings, under the title of
Hospitality, when he makes himself (by these means) fitter for an
Hospital. He is contented to bestow broken meat among poor folks, but no
money: for he loves not to depart with that, in which himself has been no
taster. He is the noted foe of famine, and yet he is daily employed about the
procreation of a dearth: for the value of nothing is beyond his ability, if he
has present money, though no more then enough to discharge the present
commodity; or credit to make men trust upon executors. He has heightened the
price of out-landish-fruits, and has purchased the general name to our
Country of Sweetmouth'd Englishmen. Marrowpies, Potato-rootes, Eringoes, and
a cup of Sack be his chiefest Restoratiues, and comfortable Physic: He makes
no dinner without a second course. He is overruled more by his teeth, then his
appetite: for when they grow weary, he leaves feeding, and falls to drinking:
which argues (unless I mistake) a larger capacity of Stomach then
Understanding. He keeps a principal point of stateliness in carriage; for he
delights rather in a subtle flatterer, or secretary, that gives good el-bow
attendance, then to hear himself discourse, or any who neglects to feed his
humor; either with commendations, or voiling reverence to his high fortunes, or
with licentious fables, and derisions of his opposites. If dinner be ended,
and you desire to converse with him, you must tarry till he be awake: for his
vast chair, a downy couch, and chiefly a fine capable seat in the Church, that
may confront the Preacher, or be situate behind some pillar, are three easy
and common receptacles for his full stomach. None resembles death so fitly, yet
none makes less moral: His sleep therefore which proves him rotten and
stinking alive, proves rather death it self, then a remembrance. Briefly,
being true English, he will abhor thirst, and hunger, because he scorns a
Spaniard and his properties.

CHARACT. XVIII. A Churl
IS the sup^rfluity of solemn behavior: And was intended for an allay to
fif^y light louiall constitutions; but na^^r ^^ntendit op^^mum.
Nature being then otherwise employed, he was (against her will) made a
monstrous lump of Humanity; through the negligence of her handmaids, or the
malice of her enemies bad education and nutriment. He is the unsociable son
of Saturn, that looks strangely at the face of man, as if he were another
thing then himself. He thinks, to be familiar is to betray himself; and that
the world might plentifully be inhabited, by him only, and a couple of
drudges. If you be civil, he says you are fantastic; and friendly language
he terms flattery. No estate, no advancement, can remove his humor: for he
does not live (whilst he lives not discontented) but sleeps, or counterfeits.
He thinks salutations were ordained to beguile, or betray; he loves not
therefore to salute, or be saluted. He will refuse gifts, that come from
reconciled foes, and thinks an injury can never be forgotten. On equal terms
likewise, he is heartily unwilling to receive, except (in glory) he can
ouer-value his deserts, by thinking he has deserved ten times more. A
selfe-respect, and a disdain of others, be his nourishing vices: So he chooses
rather to loose a bargain, then to become a debtor; for he holds it more
honor and policy to steal, then to be beholding. If you enquire his health,
or the times news, he dares protest you are an impertinent, or a shallow
companion. Other men's triumph is his sorrow, other men's sorrow his triumph: for
in his conscience he has rejoiced never, if not in misfortunes of some, or
all. His own adversity quickens him to rejoice at others misery. He cannot
therefore be saved, seeing he admits company as a delight, in nothing but
desolation: and then, not their company, but their passion. His entertainments
be, a fierce dog to bid you welcome, a currish voice to confirm it, and the
way is open for a farewell. The two first be apparent, the latter he intends:
So does he embrace acquaintance or neighbors; but impotent people he threatens
in another kind with Whippe, stocks, and Beadle, they only be his familiars
and defenders. His Dog, and he, are the only good fellows; and his dog
proves the better man, by being more tractable. He will prevent you in a
commodity, and give more; as also, he dares discredit any thing, or any, not
with a meaning to commend his own, but to endammage others. He will be shaven
all ways to the best help of a deformity: and though his actions will soon
verify the Character, yet he will more mis-shape nature by ill-favored
Linen, a greasy felt, and Garments made for the purpose; as if he meant to
discover himself by the forehead, least he should not be known quickly. He
is satisfied upon the smallest wrong, and will rather take the laws
assignment, though a trifle, then be content with large composition: yet none
does more grumble against the Law-professors. He listens to the death of great
personages, as a Butchers dog to the Oxes slaughter; rejoicing to be glutted
with his entrails, or vices, seeing he is not bettred by his body of worth,
the best food. It fattens him to hear a prodigalls consumption, though he
partakes nothing in the ^ootie. If you fasten a gift upon him, his thanks be
liberal, though he does not requite: if he does not brand you with an
insinuating Title; yet in extremity of his passion he is so far (as he
thinks) from being uncharitable, as he makes the charity of Counsel, Purse,
or Assistance, things that would give little thank for his labor: and so he
practices them under the rank of such things as do not concern him: He says
therefore, Meddle with me, when I meddle with you. So that if shame provokes
his wealth to invite strangers, he has no bountiful meaning, but a resolution
to live by broken meat long after, which does not savor well, except it be
moldy: that, and himself therefore, should be spent sooner; otherwise they
grow visibly odious, but himself more odious then that.

CHARAC. XIX. An Atheist
IS no reasonable Man: for he will sooner embrace a superficial color in
things of moment, then search into direct causes: as for obvious and common
accidents, he never looks upon them so much with reason, as upon matters of
course. In subtilties he is bestiall; for he admits no more then event; and he
is therefore no reasonable man, because no religious man. For Heathens and
Barbarians have from the beginning been worshippers of somewhat. If thou can
seem to be familiar with him, and enter into the extremities of ill fortune,
or begin to speak of great men's funerals, or honest men's persecutions, he
will instantly discover what he believes, being bold enough to speak plainly
(if thou can apprehend) that virtue, innocence, and crafty dealing be alike
rewarded: that wicked and religious men have no difference but the Name: that
wrongs may lawfully (if without danger apparent) be repelled with worse
wrongs: and that therefore it argues baseness of spirit, to contemn any
opportunity of advantage: that expectation of other, where joy is already
present, were dotage, or madness; and that honesty, which exceeds common
form, is singularity. From which Arguments you may draw the conclusion. If he
reserues these precepts among strangers, his practice will verify the pattern.
Take this for a foundation, Every Atheist is an Epicure, though the one is not
controvettible. If he inclines more to Epicurisme then policy; this watchword
will be frequent in his cups, hoc est vivere, hoc est vivere. But you may still
observe, that he co^tends to wash away all care with company, discourse and
laughter, as if he knew his usurious creditor (a guilty conscience) waited to
expostulate with him at an advantage. One therefore of this proportion, is more
liable to the Law, but less dangerous to the commonwealth. He brings most
villainy that feels the disease inward; and confutes his own obiectio^s with
falacious doctrines. He lives much about the fountain of Iniquity, and
therefore he must propound that those streams of custom be tolerable, or leave
his profession. He has a natural flourish for super-naturall accidents. He
turns Divinity into colorable inventions of Philosophy. He knows every thing
under the name of a natural body: he believes Nature to be an invisible
power, which intended generation for corruption, and corruption for generation.
He distinguishes bodies into simple and compound, and makes creation a vulgar
project obedient to the harmony of elements. Then, if he knows the meaning of
Homogenea, and Hetrogenea, of corpus imperfcte mixtu^, and perfect mixtu^, he
remains largely satisfied. As for the causes of terrible events, he apprehends
the power of Exhalations, Meteors, Comets, and the Antiperistasis: which very
names are able to forbid all further inquisition. He goes not therefore beyond
himself for his authority: and he esteems it more convenient to think there
is a reason in nature, then to trouble his brain with miracles, when they
exceed his positions. He never was taken for a friend in society, neither can
he bestow love, because cause he cannot adventure his person. If at any time
he intended love, he intended likewise a Physician; and him, no further then
agreed with his own humidum radicale: which must also be understood, if
himself were no Physician. He is always consident beyond reformation. He
dies with hope between his jaws, and therefore one may think him no
desperate slave; but such hope deceiues him, because he hopes to live longer.

CHARACT. XX. A Liar
IS a tame Fox; hunted up and down, often for pleasure, often against his
will. Arithmetic is in him a natural vice, or at least the principal parts of
the Science: for he can both substract and multiply with more ease then speak
true English: He may as well be a Tradesman of any sort by his profession, ^s
a Knight of the post, or a man-pleaser. He should (by his qualities) be a good
Gamester; for the one is just in league with a voluntary ignorance, or any
enforced knowledge, as much as the other: He never offends this way, but he
offends double; for he cannot with credit, or knowledge of the Art Military,
think it sufficient to defend with bare affirmance, and the walls of
circu^uention, except his canno^othes be ready planted and discharged. He is
not guilty of his own vice alone; for seldom does he avouch it, which his
confederate will not justify: and therefore he prouides adherents for security:
his common misery is well known, it persecuts him with divine justice for all
his truth'is extraordinary, win no belief; because no false-hoods are so
frequent. Any advantage accruing to himself prouokes his faculty; though
sometimes a friends love intices him to strange adventures. If neither the
first nor second be opportune, he so labors only to beget wonderful
narrations. He is ready enough to ouervalue himself, his friends, and his
commodity: accounting it a pollitick strain to set an excellent fair gloss
on all; that he may purchase the reputation of a large estate: Which seems to
argue an innocent upright course, not fearing tyranny: But indeed he does (from
hence) deceive the world and die a beggar, through the foregoing estimation.
He tells no wonder, without some preparatiue: as namely, he admits before hand
what may be: or he begins thus: You may think it is a lie: or, it will seem
strange, but I protest before God, it is very true: or the like: But if he be
one that maintains Ordinaries and public meetings; he speaks altogether upon
credible report; and you shall be the third man partakes of the nouelty: for
he has always talked with one, that was an eyewitness: if he were not
himself the agent or beholder. He may at his electition be admitted into the
College of Jesuits, but he loves not to forsake his Country, though he
boasts of travails; and yet he is a mere fugitive. He was originally intended
for a Rhetorician; and lackes only a little instruction: For he is more
conversant with Tropes then Figures; and yet the figure of repetition, is his
own natural. Attention makes thee very much culpable in his reports: belief
makes thee apt to err in the same kind. He is more confident (if he could be
uncased) in the rare exploits of Rosaclere, and Delphoebo, Amadis de Gaul, or
Parismus, then the most holy Text of Scripture. If he should strive for
Antiquity, no English Generation can compare with him: And yet he needs no
Herald, for he deriues his Pedigree immediately from the devil.

CHARACT: XXI. A Drunkard
IS in Opinion a good fellow, in practice a living conduit. He is at all
points armed for a Knight errant, and called upon for adventures, every way as
full of hazard. This makes him enter boldly into the Lions, or the Green
Dragons Cave; into the White Bears jaws, the Mermaids closets, the Suns
Palace; nay, more into the devils chamber of presence. And for his Travails
let the Globe witness; through every corner of which, he has or can walk at
his pleasure. Freedom he challenges, and therefore scorns to be a tedious
customer, till by enforcement, he drinks upon record: otherwise he shifts his
watring place; either to avoid his lowse, the Baylife; or to renew his
fountain: the last only pleades for his commendation, because he proceeds
still from worse to better: which discommends him most, because it nourishes
his faculty. The torment of his eyesight is a frothy Tapster, or a sluggish
Drawer with a deceitful po^. The plagues of his palate be good wines, where he
cannot purchase, nor be trusted: or a Tavern well furnished, that ioynes to
the prison door: they vex him, as a feast vexes the famished, in a strong
Castle: or a Lamb the starued Fox, when Mas^ifes be awake. He never
disallowes religion for putting Lent in the Almanac: for Tobacco, a Rasher,
and red Herrings, his instruments of relish, be at all times perhibited. He
has a cheap course of breake-fasts, to avoid dinners; which at his pleasure
he can spare, through morning Antidotes: the inquisition of these he studies,
and looses by the knowledge. He indifferently concludes, and begins
quarrels: that quality neither much blames nor praises him. Opportunity he
embraces, but in a bad sense: for he is rather studious to follow any man's
calling then his own. His nose the most innocent, bears the corruption of his
other senses folly; From it may be gathered the emblem of one falsely
scandald: for it not offending, is ^olourably punished. It serves therefore for
nothing but such an Emblem, except to prove the owners great innocence, by how
much it is the greater: His eminent seeming virtues be his peculiar vices: For
his casting up expenses, and his wisdom over the pot, be his unthriftiness,
and folly: He were utterly base, if unable to defend his habit: you shall
therefore know him by his arguments. If he inclines to Scholler-ship, they be
these: First, to abandon melancholy; For care, he faith, kills a Cat: then to
avoid mischievous thoughts; for he that drinks well, sleeps well, and he
that sleeps well thinks no harm: The weakness of which may be soon confuted,
because he staggers in the argument. His teeth be strongest, because least
employed. Hence you ^ay take the emblem of one truly miserable; who abounds
in profits, which he does not use. A beggar, and he are both of one stock, but
the beggar claims antiquity: the beggar did drink that he might beg, and has
his meaning: the other drinks that he may beg, and shall have the true mening
shortly. In the degree of beggars it is thought he will turn Dummerer; he
practices already, and is for that purpose many times taken speechless. If he
goes out in the morning a libertine or freeman, he returns at night a
prisoner, if he does return: for he cannot return safely without his keeper:
otherwise, he converts suddenly from flesh to fish, and dives into the mud, or
swims in his own water. These together prove fastingnights to be his natural
season. Whilst he is waking, he purges all secrets; least I therefore by
keeping him awake longer, should err in the same kind, I have now cast him
into a dead sleep.

CHARAC. XXII. A Begging Scholar
IS an Artificial vagabond: He took his first degree (as we may imagine) in
the University: But he never thinks himself a full Graduate; till by
Cosmographicall science, he survey the degrees of Longitude, and Latitude,
belonging to most of our famous Cities in England: So he becomes practitioner
in the Mathematickes, though he pretends Divinity by order of Commencement,
which might be a safe license among diverse; if the Statute vouchsafed not to
take notice of his roguery. He has from the first hour of his Matriculation
inherited the name of Sharke, by way of a general dependence in the College:
But being perhaps expulsed, or departing in a hungry humor, he travels with a
prompt memory, instead of other knowledge; and above all things he is wise
enough for himself, to remember his wants. He never looked into Divinity
beyond the meaning of two Sermons; and upon those he has insisted so often,
that he feels no need of another Library: He still pretends (like some single
Physician) the cure of one disease, that is, the cold of charity, and therefore
(his charitable advise being ended) a bill of receipt follows for the
ingredients: But the disease may be thought to grow more desperate through the
mistaken cure; because the medicine is applied unfitly. His help extends far
and near to fugitive Raga-muffians, under the sign of impotent soldiers, or
wandering Abrahammen; but his help proves the maintenance of their function,
because it proves his own, by occasion: For being received as a Secretary to
the counsel of vagrants, he conceals much idle property, in advantage of
himself and Countrymen, not of the commonwealth. If you would privately know
him; you must know likewise, the journey to his friends has been tediously
undertaken; and whilst he brings his money in question, you must know he begges
for an answer, and so betrays the doubt of sufficiency: howsoever (in
public) he insinuates a deprivation; by being too sufficient. Being admitted
(for Hospitality sake) to receive lodging; he has a slight of hand, or
cleanely conueiance, which threaten silver spoones; and leaves a desperate
sorrow among all the household servants, because he departed so soon. In the
space of a natural day he seldom travails further then to the next
Alehouse; that so by degrees he may approach to a great Market upon the
Sabbath. He paies for what he takes continually, one way or other: for being no
customer, he cannot be trusted, except in case of necessity; and then he paies
them experience to beware of such as he another time. He has learning to
propound the Apostles president for travails, but conscience little enough to
look any further. If his family be not portable, it comes in the rereward, and
awaites his return to the Rendevouze: if otherwise he be atte^ded with neither
wife, nor maideseruant; he makes use of both, as he finds himself able: He
is sometime inducted by a simple Patron, to some more simple Vicarage; But his
Tithes and Credit concluding in Harvest, he takes his slight with the Swallow:
He cannot therefore thrive among the promoted begging Scholars, because he
has no continuance. (* * *) ()

The second Book of Characters.
CHARACT. I. A Iaylor
IS the beggars bodylowse, which lives upon the blood and carcass of the^ which
can worst spare any: He proceeds commonly from such a one, as could not govern
himself, to govern others imperiously: He cannot think of a place, more
suitable with the safe practice of his villainy: No, not among the roarers, or
the company of quack-saluers: a thief, and a Murderer, be the names which
make him iron mad, whiles himself proves the more exquisite offender: and if
formerly he has bin infamous among al, it proves felicity with him now to
insult over some, and grows the more implacable. At his first inductio^, he
begins (like al new Officers) to reform methodically: Neither does he spare to
diuulge (with oftentation) the marrow of his dearest policies: He may very well
seem a bountiful Host, for he detaines his customers whether they will or no:
but his bounty retireth, when he loses advantage. He is a true Alchymist, no
dreamer in that science: nor the best proficient has thriu'd better in his
proiections: He does indeed familiarly (by virtue of his stone-wals, without
the Philosphers stone) convert rusty Iron into perfect silver: He makes men
believe, that the poor captives shall work in daily labor to get a living:
whiles his conjecture is verified in their nightly labor, Living lice.
by working through the enclosure; or being idle they get livings too many: If
he perceiues an open object of increase, he will himself work the means of
disorder by ple^tiful liquor, that so a large fine may redeem the quarrel: To
which purpose he does sophisticate his fuming Beer, to breed a skirmish the
sooner: and then the dungeon is a dreadful word, until a co^petent bribe
pacify his humor. Nothing makes him so merry as a harsh mittimus, and a pote^t
captive: they come like an inscriptio^ with a fat goose against
new-yeares-tide: but bail sounds a sorrowful retrait: as if the inferior
Thief should loose a booty by composition: and yet he will take his wives
suretiship for the more extent of liberty, because he knows her perfect in
the instructions of that Alchymie. He is a circumspect companion, and still
dreams of an escape: and of a breaking forth he may well dream, having so
many putrified sores in one body; but seldom do any escape in his debt, though
at their breaking out, they be a week behind: for above one week he never
trusts; and not so long, unless the former advantage will recompense a
fortnights arrerages. Briefly, he is in a manner the Devils huntsman, who
keeps those Beagles either for castigation, because they were not cunning
enough, else for amendment of the Chase. For if he sends them forth, they prove
Graduates, when they escape the Gallows. As for himself, you may either meet
him in the midst of Carrowses among his Customers, or riding post in
melancholy, to re-imparke his wild runnagates.

CHARAC. II. An Informer
IS a protected Cheater, or a Knave in authority, licenced by authority: he
sprang from the corruption of other men's dishonesty; and meets none so
intricately vicious, but he can match the pattern: which makes him free of all
Trades by the statute: for this gives him a freedom to survey all besides
himself. He is a fellow as much beholding to his five senses, as to his
intellectuals: he can diversely employ all his senses about diverse objects; but
commonly they are all occupied about one or two chiefly: the winding up of a
jack is better then music to his cares in Lent: the steame of a roasted joint
attracts his nostrils unsatiably: the sight of a shoulder of Mutton then feeds
his stomach; but the taste and feeling of it, provokes him to a dreadful
insultation. He is worse then an Otter-hound for a diue-dopping
Ale-house-keeper: and hunts him out unreasonably from his Element of Liquor;
and yet he may seem reasonable honest, for he hearkens readily to a
composition. But whilst he consents to save men harmless (upon terms
indifferent) he makes open way for another of his coat to incroach upon the
like premises. Victuallers therefore find no relaxation by his oath or
assistance; though they should meet with more trouble, if he did not assist
them. Arbitreme^ts be besides his calling: but if he be held sit to be an
arbibitrator, he will have a sure hand in the business. For if he be trusted
to keep the pledge of their reconcilement, the pledge must be his, whilst they
are reconciled at their own peril. He comes always with a serious countenance
to dejected Ale-men, and promises restoration with an Exchequer license to
vex the Justices: whilst he takes forty shillings, three pound, or upward for
a single sub-poena, to defend the Liquor-man; who incurres new charges by
trusting in the apparent cousenage. He takes away the relation betwixt a Lawyer
and his Client; and makes it generally extend to the Clearkes in Offices; under
whose safeguard he has his License sealed to travail: a foot-post and he
differ in the discharge of their packet, and the payment: for the Informer is
content to tarry the next Term (perhaps) till a Judgment. His profession
affoords practisers both great and small; both bucke-hounds and harriers: the
essence of both is inquisitio^. But the first is a more thriving and ancient
stock of hatred: for he is a kind of Antiquarie: the last is seldom meddling
with men much above him: howsoever, sometimes he is casually the scourge of an
ignorant Justice.

CHARAC. III. Abase Mercenary Poet
IS the most faithful obsequious servant of him that gives most: he subscribes
his definition to all Dedicatory Epistles. If mother-wit raisd him to be a
writer, he shows himself a dutiful Child, and begges Poems in defense of
Nature: neither can he choose but betray himself to be a cosset, by his odd
frisking matter, and his Apish Titles: which may persuade any reasonable man,
that he studies more to make faces, then a decent carriage. If he have learnt
Lillies Grammar, and a piece of Ouids Metamorphosis, he thinks it time to ask
his patrons blessing with some work that savours very much of the authors
meaning, and two or three Latin sentences. If he has seen the University,
and forsaken it again, because he felt no deserts which might challenge a
benefactor: then he calls every man (besides his patron) a despiser of
learning, and he is wonderful angry with the world; but a brace of angels will
pacify his humor. If he be an expulsed Graduate, he has been conversant
so long with rules of Art, that he can express nothing without the Art of
begging, or public sale: but commonly he is some swimming-headed Clarke, who
after he has spent much time in idle Sonners, is driven to seek the tune of
Silver, to make up his consort. Necessity and covetous hire, bribe his
invention, but cannot corrupt his conscience: for though he undertakes more
then he is able, yet he concludes within expectation of others that know him,
and so he deceiues himself only. He will never forfeite his day to
necessity, if he writes by obligation; but he never pays back the
principal to his Author: which happens diverse times when he is the Scriuener
and the Debtor: for the tide of one Pamphlet being vented at his elbowes, with
leaning upon Taverne-tables; he ties himself to certain limits; within
which precinctes he borrowes much, translates much, coins much, converting
all to his project: and if matter fails, he flies upon the Lawyer, or
flatters his object: but he never becomes so excellent, that the Creditor of
his invention, may think it a dignity to have had such a Debtor: and
therefore he pays back nothing. His Apologies discover his shifting
cousenage: For he attributes the vices of his quill to the Ages infirmity;
which endures nothing but amorous delights, close bawdry, or mirthfull studied
Jests: As if the ignorance of any Age could hinder a wise man's propositions.
He is a Traded fellow, though he seems a Scholar: but is never free of the
Company, or accepted, till he has drunk out his Apprentise-hood among the
grand Masters, and then with an vnivocall consent, he may commend his Wares,
turn them into the fashion, and dress over his old Pamphlets, to incroach
upon the buyer. He presumes much upon absolute good meanings, though the Text
be palpable: and yet where he commends himself best, he is not refractorie:
for he still promises amendment, or some more voluminous work, to gratify
his Benefactors; but he could never live long enough to finish his miracles.
But he is much indebted to the favor of Ladies, or at least seems to have
been graciously rewarded: if he affects this humor, he extolls their singular
judgment before he meddles with his matter in question: and so selles himself
fictitiously to the worlds opinion. If his hands be no more active then his
head, he is guilty of many a good Scribes idleness, by making that legible,
which (before Trans-scription) might have been tolerable folly. If you be
therefore an honest, or generous Patron, suffer him not to be printed.

CHARAC. IIII. A common Player
IS a slow Payer, seldom a Purchaser, never a Puritan. The Statute has done
wisely to acknowledge him a Rogue: for his chief Essence is, A daily
Counterfeite: He has been familiar so long with outsides, that he professes
himself, (being unknown) to be an apparent Gentleman. But his thin Felt,
and his Silk Stockings, or his foul Linen, and fair Doublet, do (in him)
bodily reveal the Broaker: So being not suitable, he proves a Motley: his
mind observing the same fashion of his body: both consist of parcells and
remnants: but his mind has commonly the newer fashion, and the newer stuff:
he would not else hearken so passionatly after new Tunes, new Tricks, new
Devises: These together apparel his brain and understanding, whilst he
takes the materials upon trust, and is himself the Tailor to take measure of
his souls liking. If he cannot believe, he does conjecture strongly; but
dares not resolve upon particulars, till he has either spoken, or heard the
Epilogue; unless he be prevented: neither dares he entitle good things Good,
unless he be heartned on by the Multitude: till then, he says faintly what
he thinks, with a willing purpose to recant or persist: So howsoever he
pretends to have a royal Master, or Mistress, his wages and dependence prove
him to be the servant of the people. The cautions of his judging humor (if
he dares undertake it) be a certain number of lying jests against the common
Lawyer; hansome conceits against the fine Courtiers; delicate quirkes against
the rich Cuckold a Citizen; shadowed glaunces for good innocent Ladies and
Gentlewomen; with a nipping scoff for some honest Justice, who has once
imprisoned him: or some thriftie Tradesman, who has allowed him no credit:
always remembered, his object is, A new Play, or A Play newly revived. Other
Poems he admits, as good fellows take Tobacco, or ignorant Burgesses give a
voice, for company sake; as things that neither maintain, nor be against him.
He can seem no less then one in honor, or at least one mounted: for unto
miseries which persecute such, he is most incident. Hence it proceeds, that
in the prosperous fortune of a Play frequented, he proves immoderate, and
falls into a Drunkards paradise, till it be last no longer. Otherwise when
adversities come, they come together: For Lent and Shrouetuesday be not far
asunder: then he is dejected daily and weekly: his blessings be neither lame
nor monstrous; they go upon four legs; but move slowly; and make as great a
distance between their steps, as between the four Terms. If he marries,
he mistakes the Woman for the Boy in Woman's attire, by not respecting a
difference in the mischief. But so long as he lives unmarried, he mistakes
the Boy, or a Whore for the Woman; by courting the first on the stage, or
visiting the second at her devotions. Take him at the best, he is but a
shifting companion; for he lives effectually by putting on, and putting off. If
his profession were single, he would think himself a simple fellow, as he
does all professions besides his own: His own therefore is compounded of all
Natures, all Humors, all professions. He is politic enough to perceive the
Commonwealths doubts of his license, and therefore in spite of Parliaments or
Statutes he incorporates himself by the title of a Brotherhood. I need not
multiply his character; for boys and every one, will no sooner see men of this
Faculty walk along, but they will (unasked) inform you what he is by the
vulgar denomination.

CHARAC. V. A Warrener
IS an earthly minded man: He plucks his living from the earths bowels: and
therefore is his mind most conversant about that element: He lives in a little
Arcenall or Watchtower, being well provided with Engines and Artilery: with
which (like another tyrant) he does encounter the enemies of his Inhabitants;
that he may engrosse them all the more entirely: And yet in some respects he is
a good Governor, for he delights more in the death of an enemy, then six
subjects: The reason is apparent, for one foe is able to destroy twenty of his
Vassailes; and so his gains be prevented: Therefore a Pole-cat and he be at
continual variance: yet he is charitable and merciful, for if the Pole-cat
turn Ferret and obey him, none agree better: He does Waive much spoil by his
midnight watches, and yet he owes no Lord-ship: The truth is, tumblers, nets,
and other traffic do escheate to him, although the owner be living. He
verifies the proverb of plenty, as the more he has, the more he does desire:
for though his own ground be full of breeders, yet he cannot forbear to have
his hand in private Warrens. He is much, and most perplexed, because pales and
hedges will not keep his Cattle in compass: if he cannot therefore compound
with the neighbors adjacent, he has a trick to affright those that
transgress their limits, by scattering murtherd captives (as Pole-cats, and
Weasels) in their places of refuge: And this is a deep quillet in the
profession: Besides this, he has little knowledge of moment, except the
science of making Trappes: or circumuention of innocent dogs to feed vermin:
The chief petition of his prayer, is for black frosts, Sunshine weather,
and calm mid-nights: under the protection of the last, he walks fearelesse,
with a pike-staffe, to exercise the liberty of that season among other men's
backesides: Where he has many night-spels, to the hazard of much Pullen, and
indeed all things thieue-able; if he does not play the valiant Footman, and
take tribute of passengers: Neither is he worthy to be such a dealer with nets
and Conycatchings, if he could not entrap the Kings subjects. I make no
question therefore that he is worthy of his profession: Howsoever sometimes he
is caught in a pitfal of liquor by his companions: whilst they perhaps being
Poulterers, prove tyrannical substitutes, and rob his possessions: but in
revenge, he does often encroach upon the Poulterers likewise with a drunken
bargain.

CHARAC. VI. A Huntsman
IS the leiutenant of dogs, and foe to Harvest: He is frolic in a fair
morning fit for his pleasure; and alike rejoices with the Virginians, to see
the rising Sun: He does worship it as they; but worships his Game more then
they: And is in some things almost as barbarous. A sluggard he contemnes, and
thinks the resting time might be shortened; which makes him rise with day,
observe the same pace, and prove full as happy; if the day be happy. The names
of Fox, Hare, and Bucke, be all attracting sillables; sufficient to furnish
fifteen meals with long discourse in the adventures of each. Fox, draws in
his exploits done against Cubbes, Bitch-foxes, Otters, and Badgers: Hare,
brings out his encounters, plat-formes, engines, fortifications, and nightworke
done against Leueret, Cony, Wilde-cat, Rabbet, Weasell, and Pole-cat: Then
Bucke, the Captain of all, prouokes him (not without strong Passion) to
remember Heart, Hind, Stagge, Do, Pricket, Fawn, and Fallow Dear. He uses a
dogged form of government, which might be (without shame) kept in Humanity;
and yet he is unwilling to be governed with the same reason: either by being
satisfied with pleasure, or content with ill fortune. He has the discipline
to marshall dogs, and sutably; when a wise Herald would rather marvel, how he
should distinguish their coats, birth, and gentry. He carries about him in
his mouth the very soul of Ouids bodies, metamorphosed into Trees, Rocks, and
Waters: For when he pleases, they shall echo and distinctly answer; and when
he pleases, be extremely silent. There is little danger in him toward the
Common wealth: for his worst intelligence comes from Shepherds or Woodmen; and
that only threatens the destruction of Hares; a well-knowne dry meat. The
Spring and he are still at variance; in mockage therefore, and revenge together
of that season, he wears her livery in Winter. Little consultations please him
best; but the best directions he does love and follow, they are his dogs: If
he cannot prevail therefore, his luck must be blamed; for he takes a speedy
course. He cannot be less then a conqueror from the beginning, though he
wants the booty; for he pursues the flight. His Manhood is a crooked sword
with a saw back; but the badge of his generous valor is a horn to give
notice. Battery and blowing up, he loves not: to undermine is his Stratageme.
His Physic teaches him not to drink sweating; in amends whereof, he liquors
himself to a heat, upon cool blood; If he delights (at least) to emulate
his dog in a hot nose. If a kennell of hounds passant take away his attention
and company from Church; do not blame his devotion; for in them consists the
nature of it, and his knowledge. His frailties are, that he is apt to mistake
any dog worth the stealing, and never take notice of the Collar. He dreams of
a Hare sitting, a Fox earthed, or the Bucke couchant: And if his fancy would
be moderate, his actions might be full of pleasure.

CHARACT. VII. A Falkoner
IS the egg of a tame Pullet, hatched up among the Hawks and Spaniels. He
has in his minority conuersed with Kestrils, and young Hobbies; but growing up
he begins to handle the sure, and look a Fawlco^ in the face. All his learning
makes him but a new Linguist; for to have studied and practiced the terms of
Hawks Dictionary, is enough to excuse his wit, manners, and humanity. He has
too many Trades to thrive; and yet if he had fewer, he would thrive less:
He need not be envied therefore, for a Monopoly, though he be Barber-surgeon,
Physician, and Apothecary, before he commences Hawk-leech: for though he
exercise all these, and the Art of Bow-strings together, his patients be
compelled to pay him no further, then they be able. Hawks be his object, that
is, his knowledge, admiration, labor, and all: they be indeed his idol, or
mistress, be they Male or Female: to them he consecrates his amorous Ditties,
which be no sooner framed then hallowed: Nor should he doubt to overcome the
fairest, seeing he reclaimes such Haggards; and courts every one with a
peculiar Dialect. That he is truly affected to his Sweetheart in her
fether-bed, appears by the sequel; himself being sensible of the same
misery: for they be both mewed up together: But he still chooses the worst
penance; by choosing rather an Alehouse, or a Cellar, for his moulting place,
then the Hawks mew. He cannot be thought less then a spy, and that a
dangerous one: For his espials are, that he may see the fall of what he
persecutes: and so the Wood-cocks perish: If they do not, his Art is suspended.
He is a right busy-body, who intermeddles so much with others affairs, that he
forgets his own. He would not else correct his Hawks wildness; and be so
ready to trample down the standing corn; or make way through enclosures: That
argues him to be Rebellious, and Vulgar; one apt to strive for liberty. His
Manhood I dare not signify, it remains doubtful upon equal terms,
because, seldom tried with any thing but wild-fowle: and then he performs
water-seruice; perhaps sea-seruice; but both in some foul manner: By Land he
serves, on horse or foot; on both, to destroy Partrige, or Pheasant. There is
no hope of his rising, though he does excel; for he rather seeks to make
others ambitious of rising, then himself: and therefore though he frames wings
with Daedalus, he thereby makes his Hawke only ambitious: Yet if any shall (by
conjecture) take a flight from Paul's Steeple; he will (I suppose) as soon as
any. I had rather (in the mean time) take his word then his oath; for when he
speaks without an oath, he is not troubled with the passion of his Curres, or
Haggards; and therefore cannot so well excuse it, if he breaks his promise. As
for Religion, she is a bird of too high a wing; his Hawks cannot reach it, and
therefore not He: And if he flies to heaven, it is a better flight, then any
he has commemended: There, I meddle not with him; thither he must carry
himself: for I can neither condemn, nor save him.

CHARACT. VIII. A Farmer
IS a concealed commodity: his worth or value is not fully known till he be
half rotten, and then he is worth nothing: he has Religion enough to say, God
bless his Majesty; God send peace, and fair weather; So that one may pick
Harvest out of him to be his time of happiness: but the Tith-sheafe goes against
his conscience; for he had rather spend the value upon his Reapers and
Plough-men, then bestow any thing to the maintenance of a Parson. He is
sufficiently booke-read, nay a profound Doctor, if he can search into the
diseases of Cattle: and to foretell rain by tokens, makes him a miraculous
Astronomer. To speak good English is more then he much regards; and for him
not to contemn all Arts and Languages, were to condemn his own education.
The pride of his housekeeping is a mess of Cream, a Pig, or a green Goose,
and if his servants can vncontrowled find the highway to the Cup board, it
winnes the name of a bountiful Yeoman. To purchase Arms (if he aemulates
Gentry) sets upon him like an Ague: it breaks his sleep, takes away his
stomach, and he can never be quiet till the Herald has given him the
Harrowes, the Cuckoo, or some ridiculous Emblem for his Armory. The bringing
up, and Marriage of his eldest son, is an ambition which afflicts him so soon
as the boy is borne, and the hope to see his son superior, or placed above
him, drives him to dote upon the boy in his Cradle: To peruse the Statutes and
prefer them before the Bible, makes him purchase the credit of a shrewd
fellow, and then he brings all adversaries to composition; and if at length he
can discover himself in large Legacies beyond expectation, he has his desire.
Mean time, he makes the prevention of a dearth his title, to be thought a good
Commonwealths man: And therefore he preserues a a Chandelors treasure of
Bacon, Linkes and Puddings in the Chimney corner. He is quickly and
contentedly put into the fashion, if his clothes be made against Whitsontide
or Christmas day: and then outwardly he contemnes appearance: he cannot
therefore choose but hate a Spaniard likewise; and (he thinks) that hatred
only, makes him a loyal subject: for benevolence and subsidies be more
unseasonable to him, then his quarters rent. Briefly, being a good
housekeeper, he is an honest man; and so, he thinks of no rising higher,
but rising early in the morning; and being up, he has no end of motion, but
wanders in his woods and pastures so effectually, that when he sleeps, or
sits, he wanders likewise. After this, he turns into his eleme^t, by being too
ventrous hot, and cold: then he is fit for nothing but a checkered grave:
howsoever some may think him convenient to make an everlasting lasting bridge;
because his best foundation has been (perhaps) upon wool-packes.

CHARAC. IX. An Hostess
IS (if beautiful) the abatement of reckonings, or the second course: if a
widow, she is the iourneyes end of a wether-beabeaten Traveller: if ordinary,
she is the servant and the mistress; but in general, she is a receiver to all
professions, and acquainted by experience with cookery, or sluttery. Being
invited to her own provisions, she prepares the way to mitigate her prises,
either by exclaiming upon the hard times, or insinuating the sublime price of
Mutton. She must be pardoned, though she depart before supper is ended, or
approach when supper is ended; for she is modestly ashamed to hear her sinful
reckonings. She professes the kitchen, but takes place in the chamber: and
having interrupted the Guest with a cup of Heartily welcome, she signifies his
sorrow, though it be manifest silence; she excuses the attendance by variety
of guests; and blaming the Maidservants, she commends herself for the sole
agent: and you must conceive amiss of the shambles, or butter-market upon her
honesty. Her chiefest knowledge is to distinguish upon the trades of our belly;
and though she condemns a Tailor for strengthening his bill with bumbast,
stiffening, silk and buttons; yet she furnishes her own in the same kind,
with wine, bread, sallets, and cheese; and though she seldom abate the price
of reckonings, yet she can give a morsel of her own into the bargain; if
that may satisfy. She may abhor drunkenness; but in her own house
conceales it, and receives the advantage: neither dares she reprove her
husbands thirsty humor, least she should loose her liberty; when he resignes
his power to laziness, by which he was engendered. Her husbands sloth make her
employed proudly; being heartily ambitious of labor, if she can boast well,
that her pains alone keep her husband and his family: If her self be sponge
and cork, she has a daughter, or a Chambermaid of Ivy. These and she
together make the best of a bad bargain; and therefore she affoords no
peny-worth which is not the best that can suddenly be bought for money. She
seldom invites cost-free: for she determines to be paid commonly. If therefore
she does invite, she is a rare woman; neither has she any thing else to plead
raritie. Briefly, she is a thing of clean linen, that is the warrant of her
cleanliness: She makes the welcome of a new, the farewell of an old Traveller.
She hearkens joyfully to the numerous footing of horses; and having, with a
quick accent twice called the Chamberlain, she is now busy about dressing
supper.

CHARACT. X. A Tapster.
IS an Infernal: the Beelzebub of a Sellar, and the very motion of a double
Judge. He was engendered by a Drunkards appetite and urine: for nothing but his
desire to fill and empty, has bred a Tapster. He strives to be familiar at
first sight; but instead of friendship he retains the names of Customers:
only betwixt Brewers men and him, there passes hungry and thirsty love;
consisting of Hollandcheese and rowles in recompense of Bottle-ale, and strong
Beer. Drawers and he live at variance; for he thinks the grape a
disparragement to malt; and therefore he incounters Wine even with the
smallest Beer he has, to affright the fortitude of Sack and Claret with
extremity: But (which betrays his stratagems) he gladly makes the Vintners
vessel his vassaile and Renegado. His riches are single, they consist of
single money; his profession double, it consists of double Beer: but then his
faculties are again so single, that if he leaves the cellar, he must beg or
steal: for ignorance and laziness have been his education. Mean time he is
kept from robbery by exchange of single pieces: and yet he disables himself
in exchange, unless he expects nothing by delay. He feels the same sorrow to
hear you discommend his liquor, that he does to see you depart. That which
aagrees with a covetous man's gain, agrees with his conscience; therefore what
goes against his profit, goes against his conscience
It goes against his conscience to see the cup stand quietly; and against his
stomach to see you prefer Mutton before powdered beef. He has an ambitious
memory, which cannot deceive him, because he has taught it to deceive others:
for his abundance of memory, and his meaning to get a stock, labor to beget
a superfluous twopence in the reckoning. His brain swarms with a tempest of
bottle-reckonings; which makes him careless of hats, least he should breed an
impostume, by enclosing their multitude, else he is afraid least the hot and
moist reckonings he carries in his head, should dissolve his felt; and therefore
che goes uncovered: else to show he reverences the Cellar and weekedayes, more
then the Church or Sabbath; for then only he plays the Turk, and puts on
else (which is indeed the reason) he knows all comers claim his duty, and
therefore he walks bare-headed to save a labor. He attributes the scant
measure of his Judge to the Cellars darkness, and his saving nature; but
rather then he will justify both, he has a certain slight of hand to fill
the first glass, and so avoyds inquisition. All his conscience is, that he
dares not cast away Gods good creatures; and therefore he preserues the
droppings to make a compound. Of his prayers and religion, I neither find any
thing, nor will I leave any thing written. But I believe strongly, that in
stead of Praying, he wishes to hear men desirous of Collops and Eggs, or red
Herrings. And therefore I think he should thrive best in a sea voyage; because
he commends the relish of meats seasoned exceedingly. He has nothing to
commend his literature, but Brachigraphy, or the science of short writing,
which he practices upon the barrels head, or behind the door: the meaning
whereof he propounds, but does not discover the rules. If he dares defend his
function in Winter, he must provide an Orator: for he speaks coldly for
himself, as being troubled with a common hoarsenesse, to betray his vigilance.
Briefly, you must imagine him a light fellow, and like the c^rke, which swimmes
with moisture, is supported with liquor, and tied about the bottle or iugges
neck: there, or near about that, you may find him personally.

CHARAC. XI. A Lawyers Clarke
IS his Masters right hand, except he writes with his left: or the second
dresser of Sheep-skinnes: one that can extract more from the parchment, then
the Husbandman from the Fleece. He is a weak Grammarian; for he begins to
pierce, before he can construc well: witness the Chambermaid. Neither can you
discommend him: for his best education has been at a dull Writing-schoole.
He does gladly imitate Gentlemen in their garments; they allure the Wenches,
and may (perhaps) provoke his Mistress: but then he must be a Customer to
Cooks shoppes, and low Ordinaries, or visit the Broaker, to be-speake Silk
stockings; without which he thinks Gentry does much degenerate* presuming on
which, and his plausible discourse, he dares attempt a mistress: but if he
chooses worthily, he feels himself worthily contemned, because he woes with
bawdery in text; and with Jests, or speeches stolen from Plays, or from the
common-helping Arcadia. He may be reasonably commanded by his master in
attendance: but if he rides with a Cloake-bagge, he thinks himself disgraced
behind his back. Howsoever, he is otherwise a peaceable companion: for as
he continually makes agreement, so himself sits quietly, by his own Emblem
of meekness, the sheeps-skinne; except the itch troubles him. You can make no
question that he is not ignorant to dispatch readily; for he has his business
at his fingers end. He may pretend Schollership, but all that is nothing to a
Iugglers, who exceedes in the slight of hand; which is the Art of both. He
trembles therefore alike with all Handicrafts, (though he be most valorous) to
think he should dare strike in the court: for upon his Palms and Fingers
depend his In-comes. He is no vain Disputant; his knowledge is positive
engrossed, and so upon record. Self-conceit in labors, he refuses: for he
labors about nothing which is not justifiable by Presidents; either of West,
his master, or a teacher. His Poetry is mere natural, if he has any; that
costs him no labor: in carriage, and the rest, he barely imitates; that
labor is worth nothing. He is not ashamed of what he does: for he regards
not to have a finger, but a whole hand in the business. To which purpose you
may see his name subscribed in Court, after sealed and delivered. He does
rely upon his masters practice, large indentures, and a deske to write upon.
Westminster likewise does not altogether not concern him: he has a motion
thither, and a motion there: thither he moves by way of iniunction from his
Master: there he moves in the common place of breake-fasts, for relief of his
stomach; and if he can match his break fast and dinner without grudging of
his stomach, he has his desire. He is a follower: for he wears a livery;
but no servant, for he pays his own wages. Serving himself, he serves God
by occasion: for whilst he loves his gain, and serves his desire of getting,
he hates idleness. If his master thriues, he cannot do amiss; for he
leads the way, and still rides before; but if he incline to the consumption
of state, he needs a master that can thrive in that practice also, to recover
him. He is the Sophister, or Solliciter to an Attorney; and from himself he
proceeds to an Attorney: that is his commencement. (* * *)

CHARACT. XII. A mere Attorney
IS a fellow at your command for ten groates, and has no inheritance, but a
knavish form of understanding. He is extremely graced if he talk with two
velvet-cloak'd Clients in five Terms; and desires to salute great Lawyers in
view to purchase reputation. He is indeed the vpshot of a Lawyers Clarke, and
retailes his Learning from Poenall Statutes, or an English Littleton. He is a
better commodity to himself then Stockefish (being well beaten) His chief
inventio^ is how he may take bribes from both parties, and please both
fashionably: how he may cosen his friends to all advantage, and give the
gloss of good dealing: if his wickedness thriues well, he proves a terrible
Ass in a Lions skin: But whilst he out-dares the Eagle, and forgets himself
to be a Kastrell, his confidence deceiues him: His Pen and Inke-horne is a
special property; he wears it pendant, to express his dependence:
Sub-paenaes, Executions, and all Writs of quarrel be his bond slaves. He does
naturally exclaim upon Poets and Players; they are too inquisitiue about his
cousonage. He commends Divinity; but makes the professors simple men when they
submit to his mercy: He still preferres the authority of a Statute where it
makes for his purpose (though mistaken) before God and a good conscience. His
Religion is the Kings continually: And he would willingly come to Church on
Sundaies if he had ended his Declarations: His chief pride is to behave
himself better then he is able, and chiefly in delivering of his charge at
Court-leetes, where he assumes much peremptory state, and knows the audience
cannot distinguish where he stole his lesson: and then though his mind be not
in the Dishes, it is in the K^tchin. His highest ambition is an Innes of Court,
an old rich Widow, and the Steward-ship of Leetes, and still he hopes to be
first of his name: He loves little manners but where he hopes to save, and
there he plays the Sycophant. He had rather eat still then wipe his mouth:
his Alms be old S^ooes for Broomes, one for another; for without receiving he
never gives. His discourse is commonly attended with a Scire facias, and he is
ashamed in his heatt when he hears of a cunninger knave then himself.
Briefly, indeed he is a mere Attorney, fit for all turns that any way enrich
his Cofer: for he has knavery enough to cosen the people, but wit enough to
deceive the gallows. Howsoever being too busy about his common bait of lucre
(thinking to snappe at the devils glow worm) he is catched in his common
noose, the Pillorie; from whence he is delivered: but the Hunts-man marks him
for for an old breeder.

CHARAC. XIII. A crafty Scriuener
IS the curse of man's crafty dealing, a curious workman, and may be free of
the Locke-smithes, for full of Instruments he is, and Engines: and makes
Manacles for any man's wearing above Twenty One. His first ambition commonly is
to join forces, and make up his defects of policy, and custom by partaking in
another proiects: then does he readily aspire to frequented places, a
convenient shop, the notice of his neighbors, and to engrosse credit, or some
text Widow, by the nouerint of his Grogren Gown: A common strumpet never
fawned so much on young heir, as he with flattery observes the Usurer, and
with nice dutiful care to preserve him, makes his rotten hide, the chief
Indentures that contain his Title. Obligations be his best prayers; for he
cannot tie God to perform conditions, or put in fuertyship: his friendship
has a Counter mand of being too honest; which he will obey, rather then not
save by the bargain. He is the safest man from danger in the pedigree of
rapines; for first, the gallant lives by sale and Country Tenants; the Citizen
by the Gallant; the Scriuener and the devil upon both, or all: So neither
lives by loss with the Gallant, nor upon trust, with the Citizen: his
condemnation is a knot of Seals and their Impression: the first discover to
him a conformed unity; yet none has more hand in the procuring of variance.
The last discouers a tractable nature, which gives and takes impression. Of the
first (that is to give) he knows no meaning but when he gives the print of his
fist, that it may stick by elder brothers a whole age: Of the last (that is to
take impression) he knows none but a wrong meaning: for the best seal that
imprints love in him, is only the Kings picture; and that love continues no
longer then he beholds it. His quils and instruments betoken peace: you cannot
therefore expect more valor in him, then to win ground by the advantage of
weak Prodigals, and such as run away from thriftinesse: they be most
importunate with him: with them he preuailes most: to them he sels his
extortious nature at the highest value, because they be most willing to make it
their peny-worth. His memory is his own; another cannot safely trust it in
reckoning the day of payment: for he reckons what he can save, by renewing the
hazard of a second forfeit, not your loss by the first: and so he ouer-reaches
you, by ouer-reaching the time, when you trust his memory: which (like an old
ridden Jade) looks not to the Iourneies end but to the baiting place, though
he goes further then the iournies end: If you trust him therefore you may feel
the forfeite, and pay largely for an acquittance. His learning iumps just with,
or falls sometimes short of an Atturnies; being only able to repeat the
aforesaid form to thousand purposes: So all his mystery is indeed nothing to
increase his Art, but his Policy, or plain knavery: And that, being served in,
to the worlds banquet, represents a large foxes head, and a little
Sheepe-skinne in diverse dishes. It is the total of his Creed, that nothing
should be justified, or called lawful, which has not hand and Seal: that
makes him exercise Hand and Seal, as the warrant for devises of his head and
Soul. He never rayses the spirit of a Prodigal by charms, but he together
rayses the spirit of mammon a Citizen, and then this potent coniurer binds them
both fast in a Quadrangle. He will seem to know the Statute and common Law;
but the construction fails commonly (for he looks to his own advantage)
except the Law has practiced upon his hearing, to teach the comment when he
mistakes the Law. Having at length been a long Auditor to the sweet lecture
of Usury, he loves the matter so well, that he becomes proficient, graduate,
and professor in the Science: but after general profession he approaches
quickly to his center (from whence he sprung) Nothing.

CHARAC. XIIII. A Welsh Client
IS a good Iourney-man, if not a good Footman: He is the only friend of
Lawyers (if they be Welsh begotten) and still sollicites them for a judgment.
His valor is, that he can by no means carry coals; and is therefore ever
fittest for an action of the case. When he expresses (as he thinks) his
bounty to out brave his adversary before his Counsel, then does he rather and
indeed express a waspish nature: The which together with variety of purses, be
the best maintenance, if not commencement, of his action. His pride lies wrapped
up in a clout between his legs, or in a pocket in the Armehole: from thence
he draws his Angels to feed his Lawyer, though himself sleep supper-lesse.
(Howsoever) he is content to be his own Cook; and though his diet be
slender, yet his money and victuals lie within a clowtes thickenesse, to prove
him able: This might excuse him from a beggarly want of food, but rather
detects him of a beggarly thrift. He makes the Term his time of pilgrimage,
and Offices at Law, the Shrine where he offers up his devotion: Which (after
he has ended his voyage) amounts to voluntary penance; for he travails
bare foot. Though he be long in travail and tarries late, yet nothing can
be recovered by default of appearance: for inundations be his perpetual
affidavit; and they alone are able to wash away all costs. The profit which he
gives to English Lawyers, he gives generally to the Laws profession: that
proceeds from his language, which to the credit of Innes of Court, and
Law-French, he vtters harshly, to the great amazement of beholders. A piece of
Parchment and a Seal thoroughly paid for, satisfies him presently in steed of
judgment; but otherwise he spends his faith upon the hope of costs: And if he
dies before execution, he scarce hopes to be saved.

CHARACT. XV. A Country Bridegroom
IS the finest fellow in the Parish; and he that misinterprets my definition,
deserves no Rosemary nor Rose Water: He never was master of a feast before,
that makes him hazard much new complement: But if his own Master be absent,
the Feast is full of displeasure; except in his latter days he grew
rebellious; and then he must remove away to his wives Country; except his
fortunes be peremptory. Although he points out his bravery with ribbands, yet
he has no vainglory; for he contemnes fine clothes with dropping pottage in
his bosom. The inuitation of guests, provision of meat, getting of children,
and his nuptial garments, have kept his brain long in travail; if they were
not arguments of his wooing Oratory. His inuitations are single, his provisions
double, his expected children seldom more then treble; but his garments at
least quadruple. He inuites by rule within in distance, where he hopes to
prevail; not without some paraphrase upon his meaning. But (howsoever) he
seems generous: for nothing troubles him, or takes away his stomach more,
then default of company: yet in his provision he had rather take away your
stomach then fill your belly. As for his children if he begets above three,
he may beget for Gods sake to store the Parish. And yet his raiment (for the
time) must show much variety. The Tailor likewise must be a vexation to him,
or his clothes would never sit hansomely: But (above all) a bridle in his
mouth would serve better then a Pickadell; for if you restrain him from his
objects, and the engine of his neck, you put him into the Pillory. He must
savor of gallantry a little; though he perfume the Table with Rose-cake; or
appropriate Bone-lace, and Couentryblew. He has Heraldry enough to place
every man by his Arms: But his quality smells rank with running up and down
to give a heartily welcome: Blame him not though he prove preposterous: for
his inclination was perhaps always good, but his behavior now begins: which
is notwithstanding (he thinks) well discharged if when he dances, the heels
of his shoes play the Galliard. (* * *) ()

CHARACT. XVI. A Country Bride.
IS the beginning of the world: or an old book with a new Title:

A quarters wages before hand, and the Title of a Country Dame be the two
Adaments of her affection. She rises with a resolution to be extremely sober:
this begets silence, which gives her a repletion of air without ventage: and
that takes away her appetite. She seems therefore commendably sober unto all:
but she drives the Parson out of patience with her modesty, unless he have
interest or be invited: She inclines to statelines, though ignorant of the
meaning: Her interpretor, taster, caruer, and Sewer, be theresore accidental;
and yet without these, she were an Image to the assembly. Rosemary and Ribbands
be her best magnificence. She will therefore bestow a Livery, though she
receives back wages: behavior sticks to her like a disease; necessity brings
it; neither can she take pleasure in the custom: and therefore importunacie
with repetition, enforce her to dumb signs: otherwise you must not look for
an answer. She is a courteous creature: nothing proceeds from her without a
courtesy: She has no ornament worth observance, if her gloves be not
miraculous and singular. Those be the Trophy of some forlorn suitor, who
contents himself with a large offering, or this glorious sentence, that she
should have been his bedfellow. Her best commendation is to be kissed often:
this only proceeds from her without interruption. She may to some, seem very
raw in carriage, but this becomes noted through the fear of discovering it. No
question is to be made of her maidenhead: yet if she weeps, a question may
arise; as whether she does still desire to keep it? but the answer take: away
the doubt of loosing it: for neither can she repent her match before trial, nor
the loss of chastity, seeing she matched for that purpose: but these are
nothing to preserve her honesty: for she cannot also cunningly proceed; but
like a quiet creature, wishes to loose her Garters quickly, that she may loose
her maidenhead likewise. And now she is laid.

CHARAC. XVII. My Mistress
IS my perspectiue glass, through which I view the worlds vanity: she has
five servants beside my self: and me (that I may still continue dutiful) she
suffers to be before hand with my wages: But I that know her coin is
counterfeit, suspect she is a witch, and charms the taker, or it would not
else be so current: The truth is, I first began to look upon her, because she
said she loved a Poet well, and was in part a Poetresse: for which good
quality I might have loved her likewise; but she was only good at long
Hexameters, or a long and a short, even for variety sake; which came so full
upon Ouids amorous vein, that I despised her meaning. She had her education
under a great Countess; and if she could leave the courtship she learnt when
she was a waiter, she might quickly prove a reasonable good woman. Her body is
(I presume) of Gods making; and yet I cannot tell, for many parts thereof she
made herself.

Her head is in effect her whole body and attire: for from thence, and the
devises there engendered, proceeds her blushing modesty, her innocent white
teeth, her gaudy gowns, her powdered hair, her yellow bands, her farthingals,
and false Diamonds.

All these together, and a quick fancy commend her function: for Fiddlers and
Painters be full of Crotchets. I have heard her also wish for new hands: but
those she has, will serve conveniently among them that know her properties:
you need not make the question whether she can sing; for visitation will teach
you, that she can scarce leave singing. And as for dancing, she will ask the
question of you. She has the trick of courtship, not to be spoken with; to
take Physic, and to let her mountebancke be the best ingredient. Her wit is
Dainty, because seldom: and whatsoever is wanting in the present delicacie of
conceit, she makes good by rehearsal of stolen witty answers, even to the
seventh addition. She purposes to travel shortly, when as her voyage will
only return with some French commodity; and she will rather fetch it,
though she may be furnished at home, because she loves the cheapest ware, and
the outlandish fashion. Her generositie extends thus far; to bestow love, and
look for neither thanks nor requital; because a Marmoset and little Dog be
ignorant of both. These excepted, she never loved truly. Her moral virtues be
a subtle thrift, and a thriving simplicity. But whilst she makes the best
construction of a matter, she would make likewise a thousand pound Ioyncture of
her behavior only, and Courtcarriage. This bargain is open for any man, who
thinks not the peny-worth doubtful. Her best Religion is to teach a Parret the
Lords prayer; but the ten Commandments be a new matter: so that Petitions be
more plausible with her, then Injunctions: at her own request therefore I give
this to her looking-glass.

CHARAC. XVIII. A Gossip
IS a windy Instrument; a pair of hellowes, or indeed two: For without her
fellow, she is nothing. These labor jointly as at an Alchymists furnace, only
to beget vapors: she receives and sends back breath with advantage; that is
her function. Her end is to kindle; that is, to warm, or burn: she can do
both. And being quiet, or not in contention, she is without her calling; that
is, her company. Her knowledge is her speech; the motive, her tongue; and the
reason her tongue also: but the subject of her eloquence is the neighbors
wife, and her husband; or the neighbors wife and husband both. She is the
mirth of marriages, and public meetings: but her natural season comes in
with a minced pie, at Christmas; when all may attend with leisure. She carries
her bladder in her brain, that is full; her brain in her tongues end, that
she empties. It was washed down thither with pints of Muscadine; and being
there, she looses it like urine, (but in public) to ease her kidneyes: which
would otherwise melt with anger, because she cannot be heard; or consume with
malice, because she was prevented. Being once a servant, she then learnt to
run, or go apace; that she might tarry and take, or give intelligence by the
way. She aemulates a Lawyer in riding the circuit, and therefore she keeps a
circuit in, or out of her own liberties: striving to be both one of the Judges,
Jury and false witnesses: that is her freedom only, to censure. She
contemplates within, that she may practice abroad; that makes her reveal
secrets. Her meaning is color, that she dawbes on every Fable; but in her
self abhorres it. Her truth is, to make truths and tales convertibles: tales
be her substance, her conceit, her vengeance, reconcilements, and discourse. To
talk of Cookerie, or cleanliness, and to tax others, is her best and only
commendation. To talk of what she is ignorant, yields her credit and
presumption; to tax, gives a tribute to her own praise by implication; and
begets her Empire. Her lungs be everlasting: she cannot be short winded: if
those would perish, she might be recovered. She is alike dangerous with the
Pox, to the town where she inhabites: and being pledged, or admitted among the
fem^les, she infects more easily. If she railes against whoredom, it favors
not of devotion; for she is only married, to escape the like scandal; from
the door outward. The burial of a second husband gives her the title of
experience; but when she has outlived three, she takes authority and
experience both (as a Soldier that has passed the pikes of three set
battles) for granted. Her commendable antiquity reaches not above fifty;
for growing old, she grows odious to her self first: And to prevent the loss
of company; (having lived vainly) she commences hostess: that alone preserues
her humor. A mungrill print would best express her Character: for she is
indeed a mungrell woman, or the worst part of both sexes, bound up in one
volume: seeing she corrupts the best by the use of them.

CHARAC. XIX. An old Woman
IS one that has seen the day: and is commonly ten years younger, or ten
years elder by her own confession, then the people know she is: if she desires
to be youthful accounted, you may call her Mistres, Widow, or the like; but
otherwise old Mother, grandame, and such names that do seal antiquity: the
first she takes well, if childlesse: the last never well, but when she can
speak wonders to grandchildren of the third generation. If they please her,
she has old Harry sovereigns, that saw no sun in fifty years, to give away
on her deathbed. She loves the upper end of the table, and professes much
skill in Cookery: she thinks it also some felicity to give attendance about
sick persons: but is the common foe to all Physicians. In agues, aches,
coughes and tissickes, she confidently will undertake to cure by prescription:
if her self be untainted. As for diseases which she knows not, she dares
proceed to Dragonwater, Holy Thistles, Worme-wood-drinkes, and Clister s,
without the help of Galen, or Hippocrates: if she blushes at the Suns
rising, her color changes not till bedtime: and sometimes though she drinks
down her breakfast, by dinner time her teeth be grown, and she will seem to
chew the cud. She may as safely walk amongst contagious Lepers, as into the
kitchen, and smells infection, or perfume with the same nostrill. She has
perpetually the pride of being too cleanly, or the adherent vice of being too
sluttish. She affects behavior in the brood of youth, and will divulge her
secrets of superstition to any that will be attentive. Envy is to her a just
parable twinne, and though it be offensive commonly to few, yet does it
oftentimes consume her self, and starve away her memory.

CHARAC. XX. A Witch
IS the Devils Hostess: he takes house-roome and diet of her; and yet she
paies the reckoning: guilty thoughts, and a particular malice of some one
person, makes her conceive detestation of all: her policy of sequestration, to
avoid jealousy of neighbors, detects her envious spirit: for the melancholy
darkness of her low cottage is a maine conjecture of infernals: her name alone
(being once mounted) makes discourse enough for the whole parish: if not for
all hamlets within six miles of the market. She receives wages in her own
coin: for she becomes as well the object of every man's malice, as the
fountain of malice toward every man. The torments therefore of hot Iron, and
merciless scratching nails, be long thought upon, and much threatened (by the
females) before attempted. Mean time she tolerates defiance through the
wrathful spittle of matrons, in stead of fuel, or maintenance to her damnable
intentions: she is therefore the ignorant cause of many Witches besides her
self: for ceremonious avoida^ce brings the true title to many, although they
heartily scorn the name of Witches. Her actions may well seem to betray her
high birth and pedigree: for she does quickly apprehend a wrong before it be
mentioned: and (like a great family) takes no satisfaction which does not
infinitely countervaile the abuse: children therefore cannot smile upon her
without the hazard of a perpetual wry-mouth: a very Noble-mans request may be
denied more safely then her petitions for small Beer: and a great Ladies, or
Queens name may be less doubtfully derided. Her prayers and Amen, be a charm
and a curse: her contemplations and soules-delight be other men's mischief: her
portion and suitors be her soul, and a succubus: her highest adorations be
Yew-trees, dampish Churchyards, and a fair Moonelight: her best preservatiues
be odd numbers, and mighty Tetragrammaton: these provocatiues to her lust
with Devils, breeds her contempt of Man; whilst she (like one sprung from the
Antipodes) enioyes her best noone about midnight: and (to make the comparison
hold) is trodden under foot by a public and general hatred: she is nothing, if
not a Pythagorean; for she maintains the transmigration of spirits: these do
uphold the market of bargain and sale among them; which affoords all sorts of
cattle at a cheaper rate then Banks his horse, and better instructed: but
(like a prodigal) she is out-reached, by thinking earnest is a payment;
because the day is protracted. Her affections be besotted in affectation of her
science; She would not else delight in Toades, Mice, or spinning Cats without
diversity: It is probable she was begotten by some Mounte-bank, or Wording
Poet, for she consists of as many fearful sounds without s^ience, and vtters
them to as many delusiue purposes: She is a cunning Statuary: and frames many
idols: these she does worship no otherwise then with greedy scorn: and yet she
is a deep Idolater: implication is enough with her, to bespeake any man's
picture, without his entreaty: for if it appears that he can provoke her, it
implies likewise that he desires to be remembered by her; and images be a
certain memorial. She seldom lives long enough to attain the Mystery of
Ointments, herbs, charms, or Incantations perfectly: for age is most incident
to this corruption, and destiny preuents her. But howsoever she be past
childbearing, yet she gives suck till the latest minute of fiue-score and
upwards. If she out-liues hemp, a wooden halter is strong enough: unless she
saues a labor.

CHARACT. XXI. A Pandar
IS the scab of a Commonwealth: surfets raise him to a blister; necessity, and
want of good Surgeons, make him a mattery sore; whilst Time and Tobacco brings
him to a dry scale. He is commonly the vpshot of a younger brother, who lackes
Honesty and Inheritance; or the remainder of a prodigal, who has lost them
and himself. His Etymology is Pawne-dare: which intimates; he dares pawn
his soul to damnation, or his stolen parcels to the Brokers. Bawdy songs and
he came both in together; for he is no generous companion except he can sing,
and also compose stinking Ditties. He has been a great hunter up and down in
his days, and therefore (it is no wonder) if toward a decay he become
Warrener. He is the devils Countryman or indeed acquaintance: therefore in the
devils absence he proves his Deputy; and welcomes customers with fireworkes: a
pipe of Tobacco, and a hot Queen. His Vsher-like attendance on Public whores
has made Coaches frequent; to distinguish them and Private Ones. His valor is
expressed in black patches (much about Roaring Boys humor) but playsters,
which express him more ventrous, he conceales. He wishes to be the first
teacher of a Nouice: and (being so admitted his Tutor) he first teaches him to
beware of adultery and theft, by making him guilty before he has offended:
with which two vices he does first accuse him, because himself is best
acquainted with those two. If he be married, he has divorced himself,
because his wife was honest, and so means to continue: or (being dishonest)
because she was odiously deformed, not worthy to entice others. His Creed is a
matter of three Articles, and them he believes actually: First, that there is
no God: secondly, that all women, and more especially that all Citizens wives,
be, or would be, common, or peculiar whores: and lastly, that all things are
lawful, which can escape the Laws danger: good examples therefore prevail
with him, as showers among the stones: they make him more studious to deceive
passengers: not to produce imitation in him, nor to beget fertility in them.
His Fellowships be retired, and within doors: for being abroad, he is a sober
lump of villainy; delighting vnsociably (like a Cutpurse, and for the same
reason) rather in multitudes then civil numbers. The Bawd and He, are chief
confederates: with whom (together, as occasion happens) the Constable has
standing wages to be an assistant; every way as He being ready to disturb or
not disturb their customers, as they shall instruct him.
dangerous as the other two. Bowling-allies, Dicinghouses, and Tobacco shopes,
be the Temples, which He, and his Fraternity of Rorers, have erected to
Mercury and Fortune: In the two first he does acknowledge their Deity; in the
last he offers smoking incense to them both; in recompense of booty gotten by
Chance and cheating. If the Gallows be disappointed of his destiny, they can
blame nothing but his tender bones, which could not brook so long a journey;
or a whores quarrel, whilst Wine was his Leader.

FINIS.

