The godly end, and woeful lamentation of one John Stevens, a youth, that was
hanged, drawn, and quartered for High Treason, at Salisbury in Wiltshire, upon
Thursday being the seventh day of March last 1632. with the setting up of his
quarters on the City gates.
To the tune of Fortune my foe, etc.
depiction of city gates of Salisbury

NOw like the Swan before my death I sing,
And like the Raven heany news I bring,
Oh dismal rate, and cruel destiny,
Which brought me here in this same sort to die.
Did ever any hear of oue so young,
That was so bad and had so vile a tongue:
Which was the cause that brought me to that fail,
For which to God I now for mercy call.
In famous Wiltshire was I borne and bred,
And by my careful Parents nourished,
Ah woe is me, John Steuens is my name,
That to my friend and kindred am a shame.
Oh let me be example unto all,
That they may never in such mischief fall,
Children and Prentices, eld and young
Serve God in heart, and govern well your tongue.
It was the D^uill that wrought my overthrow,
It was the Devil that brought me to this woe,
And (...)e I di^ not ^e^es my God aright,
Satan with shame does thus my deeds requite.
In femous Salisbury, that City fair,
My Parents bound me Prenti^^ with great care,
But careless I, my life did lew(...) spend,
Which brings me to a shamesull (...)eles end.
To God above I do for mercy cry,
It Is for High Treason, that I here must die,
Drawn, hanged. and quarterd this is now my doom
My body must have neither grave nor tomb.
And for my fact that was so visd and base,
I apprehended was in that same place,
And strait to London then I up was brought
Is be examined, where I soon was caught.
To the King-bench then was I strait way led,
Where I a year almost continned,
And then from thence I was again sent down,
To be art aign'd next Sises at cur Town.
There by just Justice I my Trial had,
Which soon condemned me for my fact so had;
My Judgment was I should from thence besent
To Prison back, a while for to repeut.
The second part,
To the same tune.


ANd then I should be on a Hurdle laid
And to my Execution place conuaid,
Where in a Rope I there should strangled be,
In shameful manner for each one to see.
My Members, and my Bowels forth be cut,
And in a flaming fire they should be put,
There to consume and unto ashes turn,
As wicked members there they then must burn.
My Body must in quarters eke be cut,
And on the City gates they should be put,
To be a sight for others to take heed,
Where ravenous Fowls upon my flesh will feed.
And now I do beseech you Parents all,
That here are come to see my timeles fall,
In virtues paths do you your children train,
That they may heaven and heavenly thoughts retain,
Oh do not suffer them to curse and sweat,
But train them up the God of heaven to feate,
Teach them obedience to their Sovereign King,
And their Superiors, whence does virtue spring.
And Children all do you example take,
Oh let me be a warning for your sake,
Spend not your lives so vaineas I have done,
Whose glass is broke before my sand is run.
Unto your Parents reverent honor give,
The Lord commands it, then you long shall line,
Your days he says shall be long in the land,
This is your duty, as he does command.
Honor the King, for so the Lord does say,
And see the Magistrate you do obey,
Unto your Equals loving be and king,
To your inferiors bear an humble mind.
But now, O Lord, for mercy I entreat,
Thou can forgive although my sins are great,
Lord make me clean, and make me clear as glass,
And then the Snow I shall in whitenes pass.
Great God upon me power the Spirit of grace,
And then in Heaven I hope I shall find place,
Christ my Redeemer, he has ^^^e for me,
My soul I hope with him in heaven shall be.
Lord bless the King, and send him long to reign,
Preserve the Queen, their Issue, and their Train.
And God forgive me, and my Prince I pray,
Whose Laws and Statutes I did disobey.
Lord let thy Gospel flourish in this Land,
Grant that the truth may flourish still and stand,
Preserve the Clergy, Nobles, and the State,
And keep the Commons from all strise and hate.
Uaine world fatewell, I am prepared to die,
My Soul I hope, shall straight ascend sheskie*
I come, Lord Jesus, now I come to thee,
To thee one God, yet holy Trinity.
FINIS.
Printed at London for H. Gosson.


