A discourse wherein is debated whether it be expedient that the scripture
should be in English for all men to read that will.

First read this book with an indifferent eye, and then approve or condemn,
as God shall move your heart.

Non quis dicat, sed quid dicat animaduertas velim.

EXCVSVM LONDINI IN aedibus Roberti Caly, Typographi: Mense Decembris Anno.
1554. Cum priuilegio.

A question to be moved to the high court of Parliament.
WHether it be necessary that the scripture should be in the vulgar tongue for all men to read at their pleasure without restraynt? Yea, or whether it may
well be permitted so to be? Considering on the one part, the manifold
inconveniences which have sprung thereby these years paste, as obstinacy,
disobedience, fleshely liberty, loss of devotion, swarms of errors, and
heresies, with damnation of thousand souls: and on the other part weyenge
discretlye not only the great difficulty that is in scripture with the
causes thereof, but also diverse and sundry most manifest probations, which
fully persuade that the scripture by no means ought to be suffered to be in
every man's hand in the vulgar tongue for all men to descant up on and to
wraste after their fleshlye appetites: which all appear euidentlye to be most
true, by that which is here set forth in this process. That is to say: in
these six chapters following. The first. The scripture is very hard to be
understand. The second. God would the scripture to be obscure and hard, and
the mysteries not to be plain to al men. The third. Sundry causes whereof the
hardness in scripture does come. The fourth. How many ways the letter does
kill. The fifth. The best means to understand scripture by. The sixte. Fifty
probations that scripture ought not to be in english.


Nevertheless to the intent none should have occasion to misconstrue the true
meaning hereof, it is to be thought that if all men were good and catholic,
then were it lawful, yea and very profitable also, that the scripture should
be in English, so that the translation were true and faithful: But neither
all the people be good and catholic, nor the translations true and faithful.
As for the common translations, which have been used in most men's hands,
are so full of faults, that to correct and amend them were even as a man
would go about to sow up every hole in a net to make it a whole clothe.
Yea and yet beside this, if your enemy should give you bread, which ye knew
well he had poisoned before, would ye not be afraid (though it be after
scraped never so clean) to eat of it? At al times heretics have labored to
corrupt the scriptures, that they might serve for their noughtye purposes to
confirm their errors therewith, as Dionyse bishop of Corinth testifies: but
specially now in our time, O good Lord, how have the translatours of the
Bible into English purposelye corrupted the textes, often maliciously puttinge
in such words as might in the readers ears serve to the proof of such
heresies as they went about to sow? Which be not only set forth in the
translations, but also in certain Prologues and gloses added thereunto. And
these things they have so handled (as in deed it is no great maistrie to do)
with probable reasons very apparent to the simple and unlearned, that an
infinite number of innocents they have spirituallye poisoned and corrupted
within this realm, and caused them to perish obstinatlye.

Now for the other part, all the people, namelye the fervent readers of
scripture in English, be not only not good, but the most part of them be
stark naught, so froward, so perverse, so leude, and so wicked, that they be
ever ready to pervert that which is good, and to take a self wyllye opinion,
contrary to the true sense of scripture and meaning of tholye ghost, as God
knows experience has showed ever since the Bibles were set up in churches,
common for all men that would to read.

But if all men (I say) were good and catholic, and the translations true
and faithful, ye Bible in English (though it be now much hurtful) then
might be much profitable.

And that is the cause that the Clergy did agree (as it is in a co^stitution
prouincial) that the Bibles which were translated into English before
Wycliffes days might be suffered: so that only such had them in handling as
were allowed by the ordinary and approved mete readers thereof, and that their
reading should be only to the settinge furthe of Gods glory. For though
scripture to good people be a norisher of virtue, and to them that be naught
the mean of amendment, and for him that is whole, lively food, and for him
that is sick, even as a medicine: yet often times we see that one stomach
takes harm of that meat whereof another takes profit, and that which helps
one sick man hurts another. Some men might be admitted to the reading of
S. Mathewes gospel, which yet be not hable well to wey the gospel of S.
John. Many hable to peruse the acts of the Apostles, which be far unmeet
to meddle with Thapocalyps. Many might be allowed to handle the Epistle to the
Colossians, which be to weak for the Epistle to the Romans. The father often
permits to one of his children a knife to cut his meat withal, whereas he
takes from another of his children (foreseyng his wantonness) the knife for
fear of cutting his fingers. Many in these our miserable days now past have
so miserably abused the scriptures against the meaning of tholye ghost, that
under the color of great zeal and good affection they have perverted and
wrasted all amiss. Yea and scantly two of them have in all points well agreed
together: nevertheless in this one point they all ever agreed. That is to say,
to destroy utterly all unity and comely order, all holy sacraments, all
holy prayers and fastinges, with all godly devotion.

And yet beside this, nothing should sooner cause us to judge that scripture
ought not to be in English for every one to read and descant upon that will,
then to see that the busy readers be ever for the most part of the wicked
sort: such be ever busy bodies to dispute and reason (but al without reason)
of things far passing their capacities: where as S. Gregory Nazianzen
rebukes all those, saying, that only Moses ascended up into the hill and
spoke with God, Exodus
but the people tarried beneth and received the laws and precepts that they
should keep, and the points that they should believe at him, saying unto him (as
would god our leude gospellers would now say to the true preachers) hear you
God, and let us hear you. Saint Hierome also in his time greatly complayneth
that the comen ignorant people did presume to meddle with the mysteries of
scripture* seeing that saint Paul shows that tholy ghost so ordained his
church that he would have some reders and some hearers, some techers and some
learners. But these quite turn up side down the right order of Christ's
church, the one part meddling with the others office: and the more blind the
more bold, the more ignoraunte the more busy, the less wit the more
inquisitiue, the more leude the more babbling of great doubts and high
questions of Christ's Sacraments, and of his priuye and unsearchable
mysteries, and that often most presumptuously with out al reverence or godly
fear, both at drinkinge and eating, as though it were but a Canterburye tale,
and that when the ale is in the wit is out. Then flow furthe many errors
and heresies. Then are the simple catched in the snare of the Devil without
hope of recovery. And all this (alas and woe is me) have we full experince of
in these years paste. But now, thanks be to Jesus Christ, that by his
only might and power, when it was paste all man's help, has delivered us
from the Devil and the bondage of Pharao, and brought us furthe of darkness of
scismes and heresies into the clear light of the truth again by sendynge us
our blessed queen Mary (even another Helena to bring again the holy
cross) which even from her infancy has sticked fast and cleued surely
unto the sound pillar of truth (the catholyke church) which will never
fail: she has ever defended it to the uttermost of her power. Lord grant
her long life to continue the same, and grant her joyful deliverance of
her most comfortable burden.

When God of his great mercy sent her to be our liege lady, our queen and
gouernesse, then we received of him as great a benefit, as ever did the
Israelites of Hester or Judith. O lord, before her coming, the church was
trodden down and pitifully (spitfully I might say) spoiled, by might, by
tyranny and heresy: the great Devil was let lose, al was quite plucked up by
the rotes, under the color and false name of vice superstition and ydolatrie,
they utterly destroyed all devotion, all virtue, and godly religion. The
fearful Serpent Python, that grievous dragon with many heads mentioned of in
the Apocalips, did still persecute the woman in the sun: That is to say, our
mother the church, devouring her children here in this realm incessauntly,
till Gods merciful pity, gods pitiful mercy did elect and send this blessed
woman Mary our Queen instead of Michael tharcha^gel to overthrow him, and to
restore his temple and furnishe again his house, which now of late within
these.xxii. years was here in England worse spoiled and defaced then ever was
his temple at Jerusalem, either by the Chaldies, or by Antiochus. Marye
therefore our noble queen, God him self did appointe even as he did Iosue,
Esdras, or Judas Machabeus to bring us into the right way again toward the
land of promise (for we were far strayed amiss through sin, avarice* and
lecherye) and to reedifie his temple through her wisdom, she being the
perfect mirror and pearl of all christian queens and princes. Yea, and if the
old proverb be true (as it is most true in deed) which says, every prince
is to his realm and subjects, either a very precious Iuell, or else a deadlye
poison, because such as the prince is, such will the people labor to be,
whether it be in virtue or vice. What a precious Jewel then have we received
of God, in receyuynge her noble estate to be our lady and queen, an example
of all virtue, devotion and prayer, a spectacle to al realms? And suerly the
common voice is that her grace is not only most noble, most virtuous, most
witty, and most studious, but also most excellent in learning, far
passinge either the noble Romans, Cornelia and Hortensia, or the godly
learned women of whom S. Hierome writes Eustochium Paula and Blesilla.
Therefore if queen Saba iustlye said it was a sign that God loved his
people, ^. Barall. 9.
for sendynge them Solomon to raygne over the^, may not we as justly now say
the same to England? And if the wisdom, piety, and virtue, of Onias was
said to be the cause of the prosperous estate of their city, 2. Match. 2.
shall not we likewise say to this our realm? Besides this, Roma. 12.
if governors be highlye praised in scripture, which rule with great
solicitude and carfulness, what shall we then say to her, which for all our
wealths both bodilye and ghostly is still most vigilant and careful? And
finallye now to conclude, if among the heathen, the noble Princes have ever
highlye been extolled for sundry virtues, how highly is she worthy the^ to
be extolled for so plentiful and so manifold kinds of virtue?

Which does not only excel in godliness, in devotion, in prayer, in
fasting, in abstinence, in humility, in charity, in mercy, pity, and
compassion, in discretion, in knowledge, in wisdom, in excellency of wit,
being of no small study in godly literature, but being of exquisite
learning, of profounde knowledge, and of exact judgment, beside notable
diligence and great painfulnesse even from her childhode (as for her policy
and affairs of the realm, in settinge furthe the wealth and commodity
thereof, and in defendinge us from outward and inward enemies I speak not
of) but also which does far pass all other (as it is evidently seen) in
her most godly innated zeal, that she bears still most earnest toward the
unity and faith of Christ's true religion, and toward the chief head thereof
under Christ which by the space of these xx. years, even till she came, was
banished this realm, through scisme and heresy, through covetousness and
letcherye, Lord be merciful unto us.

Wherefore if in the Gospel of. S Luke many holy women for godliness, devotion
and zeal toward Christ's church be highly praised by name, and likewise in
thactes of the Apostles, and in the last Chapter to the Romans: yea and if. S.
Hierom wrote a whole book of such holy and virtuous women, what less praise
is her highness worthy now to have, being inferior to none of the all? being
euin now among al princeli women in the world a very Phoenix. But I will let
this pass: I will say no more but only this, yt the daughter may welbe known
by the Mother, and that as we fell from all goodness at the most unjust fall of
her Mother that most noble Lady Queen Catheryn: So do we now rise again at
the most just risinge again of her noble estate to the Crown of England:
So that in her most godly person is shut up all our worldly joy, comfort,
and hope, whom with her most noble and virtuous husband, Philip our Lord and
King (not much inferior to her highness in grace, virtue, and godlynes, as
credible men report) Jesus long prosper in honor, grace, and virtue daily
increasinge. But now to the process intendid,

The first Chaptre. Scripture is very hard to be understand.
IF nothing else should move the Scripture to be taken furthe of the irreuerente
and lewd handling of the multitude, this one thing were sufficient, to
consider the great difficulty, the great obscurity and hardness, that all the
aunciente writers with one consent affirm to be in Scripture: yea Scripture
it self grants the same. Scrutamini Scripturas, search the scriptures
(says Christ) but if they have need of a scruteney, Joan. viii.
the^ they be not easy: christ would not so have bid if they had been light. Nor
Peter would have said many things be hard to be understand in Paul's
epistles, which then the people did peruerte (says he) as they did other
Scriptures to their condemnacion. And what did Paul mean of the mysteries of
Scripture when he cried O Altitudo diuitiarum. etc. O the depnes, Romans xi.
O the height of the secrets of God.

Harken now the testimonies of of ancient writers concerning this matter.
GReg. Nazian. says: Non cuiusuis christiani est de dei mysterijs disserere,
Greg. Naz. li. primo theol. suae.
non adeo res hec est vilis, etc. It is not for erye Christian to dispute of
the mysteries of god, the matter is not so vile. etc. Again he says: Greg.
Naz. in appollogia et Hier. in proaemio in Ezech.
Non oim librorum sacrae scripturae tractatio omnibus aetatibus permittitur
apud hebraeos, the Jews did not admit all men to the readinge of Scripture
co^sideringe the great difficultye and high mysteryes therein.

The testimony of S. Ambrose.
Scriptura diuina magnum mare est habens in se abissu^ sensuu^ profundorum.
etc, Ambr. lib. vii Epist. xliiii.
The holy Scripture (says he) is a great Sea having depnes without botom of
many profound senses.

Two testimonies of Chrisost.

Nihil est in scriptura quod non multas sensuu^ habet diuitias: Chrisost. hom
xxi. in Genesis
neque enim vel syllaba vel apiculus est in sacris litteris in cuius profu^do
non sit nobis quispiam magnus thesaurus. There is nothing in Scripture (says
he) but it co^teyneth great spiritual tresure through the manifold senses:
there is neither syllable nor letter wherein some great riches is not hid. O
what difficulty is then in it? Can it then be turmoyled of al, as it must
needs be, being still in thenglishe translation?

More over he says. In Sacris literis nihil est quod non ingente^ thesaurum
contineat modo scrutatorem habeat. Hom xxi. et xxiiii. in Genesis
At no^ cuiuis contingit adire Corynthum. There is nothing in scripture, but
it co^teineth great treasure, so that there be a dilligent searcher. Howbeit,
it is not for every one to search furthe the secrets or difficulties.

Diverse testimonies of S. Hiero.
Scriptura ta^tis obscuritatibus et futuroru^ typis obuolutae^, Hier. ad Algas.
tom. iii.
vt ols interpretatione egeat. Est porta orie^talis de qua verum lume^
exoritur, quae clausa est communi populo et soli illi patet, qui habet clauem
David. et ce. Scripture is wrapped (says he) in so great darkness, and figures
of things to come, that it has all need of interpretation. It is the east
gate (that Ezechiell speaks of) whereout the true light does spring, which
is ever shut to the comen people, and is only open to him that has the keye
of David. etc.

An other testimony of S. Hiero.
Hie. de canonicis epistolis.
Iacobus, Ioannes, Petrus, and Judas. vii. Epistolas scripserunt succinctas and
breues in uerbis, sed longas in se^tentijs, ut rarus sit qui in earum lectione
non caecutiat, Apoca. Ioannis tot habet sacramenta quot uerba* James, Johan,
Peter, and Jude (says he) wrote.vii. Epistels, quick and breffe in words,
but long in sense, that few there be which do not err in readinge of them
Thapocalyps of saint John, is as full of mysteries as of words.

An other testimony of S. Hiero.
Fateor me nunque in diuinis uoluminibus proprijs uiribus credidisse et ce.
Hie. in prologo in Parali.
I confess (says he) that I durst never credit mine own wit, in triyng
the sense of scripture, but ever searched of other etc. But what place of
scripture durst not our men in these days take in hand? And all through
thenglishe translations, away with the^ therefore.

Yet an other testimony of S. Hierom.
Totum quod legimus in scriptura ^^et quidem and fulget in corrice, sed dulcius
in medulla est: Hier. ad paulinum.
qui edere vu^t nucleum frangat nuce^. Reuela (inquit David) oculos meos, et
considerabo mirabilia de lege tua. All that we read in scripture (says he)
does flourish and shine in the letter: but it is much sweter in the spiritual
sense. He the^ that will eat the curnel let him break the shelle. And David
said. Open thou mine eyes (O lord) give thou me knowledge and I shall
understand the wonderful mysteries of thy law. Mark then hereby the hardness
of it.

The testimony of Cyrill.
Cyrill lib. v. in leuit.
Ex hostiis quae offeruntur et conceduntur sacerdotibus, pars igni traditur et
sic deo offertur, vt sciamus quod nobis aliqua ex scriptura apprehendere et
cognoscere conceditur: aliqua tame^ su^t quae deo reseruantur. and ce. Of the
sacrifices of tholde law (says he) part was given to the priests, but part
was committed to the fire and so reserved to God. Whereby we may understand,
that part of scripture is given to us to apprehende and understand, and part
is reserved only to the knowledge of God, as appears more plainly in the
last sentence, but one, of this chapter.

The testimony of Damascene.
Quaedam in sacris literis quae de deo traduntur sunt effabilia, Damas. lib. i.
Capi. ii.
quaedam ineffabilia: quaedam cognoscibilia et quaedam incognoscibilia. Some
things in scripture (says he) concerning God may be spoken as that God did
create the world: some may not be spoken, as thunitie of substance with
trinity of persons, and the eternal generation of the son, which none can
express says Esaias: some may be known as that God is eternal, God is
incorporeal, but some can not be known, as of the judgments of God. O what
great depenesse without botome?

The testimony of Erasmus.
Eras. in ecclesiast. lib. iii.
Sunt qui fortiter negant in canonicis libris vllam inesse obscuritate^, modo
assit peritia sermonis, et sanu^ iudiciu^. Quoru^ opinioni hactenus certe
fauco, vt optarim esse verissimam: sed vna voce reclamant omnes ecclesiae
doctores: et in his ij quoque qui nec linguarum peritia, nec sano iudicio
carueru^t. There be which deny any hardness to be in scripture, so that
right judgment and learning in the tongues be not lackinge. And surely
hitherto I have so ever favored this opinion, that I have wished it to be
most true, but all the doctors of the church cry against it with one voice:
yea even they which neither lacked good judgment, nor conning in the tongues.

Finally all thauncient holy writers affirm that nothing is now commanded
in the new testament, but the same was commanded in tholde. Nec quicquam esse
gestum quod non sit vel a Prophetis praedictum, vel typis adumbratum. And that
there is nothing done now in the new, but the same was either spoken before by
the prophets, or else darkelye shadowed in figures. Oh is there not then great
hardenesse in scripture? More over, the ancient writers do affirm that never
man was able to discuss fullye all the mysteries of scripture, and that tholy
ghost would them not fully to be perceived, as the times, the consu^mation of
the world etc. And the midst of the second chapter of the.ij. Epistle of
Paul to the Thessalonia^s. ( Tantu^ quitenet teneat etc. donec de medio fiat.
Which place S. Augustine plainly confesses that he does not understand).
The beginning of S. John's Gospel, Thappocalyps, the beginning of Ezechiell
about the wheles, and from the xl. chapter the discriptions and dimensions of
the temple. etc. Yea and beside this how many places be in scripture not
easy to be perceived of ye unlearned? As that of Paul: Phillip. i.
I do fulfill that which lacked in Christ's passion. etc. Work your salvation
etc. Phillip. ii.
Do not these to the simple seem very blasphemy? With many hundred textes as
hard as these.

All this now well considered (concerning the contents of this first
chapter) and with indifferent ears heard, and every thing that is here spoken
weyed to the bottom, having a godly zeal to Christ's flock, do you think it
expedient, yea or tolerable for all leude and wicked without restraynte to be
judges and arbitrers upon scripture, as they will needs be if it be in the
vulgar tongue?

The second Chapter God would the Scripture to be obscure, and the mysteries
not to be plain to al men.
CHrist often so mingled his communication (says Erasmus in the preface of
Matthew) that I think his will and pleasure was to be hard, and not to be
understand. Yea, there be certain places (says he) almost not possible to
be expounded: and yet God would his secrets to be so hid from the wicked
and ignoraunte by tropes, figures, and other obscurities (lest like swyne they
should tread down pearls) that yet sufficient light might be opened and
showed to the studious, learned, and godly. Again God would for our exercise,
for our labor, for our study, and diligence, August. lib. de doctrina christ.
cap.
the mysteries to be sought forth not without great difficulty, that they
might appear moore precious being dear bought.

Moreover God ordained such obscurity and hardenesse to be hid in tropes
and allegories, that the high mysteries might more clearly shine forth of
clouds and darkness.

Beside this, as the son beam gives more heat against glass or plate, so
do often the mysteries of scripture moore delight, and give more spiritual
heat being searched and tried forth of darcke clouds and thycke shadows.

Finallye God this ordained for that he would not man to be to busy in triyng
above his capacity, as the two penye doctors have ever been. Beatus homo qui
semper est pauidus.

Blessed is he that ever keeps a godly fear. Nolite altu^ sapere nec sapere
plusquam oportet. Be not to wise in your own eyes. The wise man said not
without cause: alti^ra te ne quaesieris. Seek not above thy reach. For think
surely that they which go about to apprehende the high mysteries, do follow
as it were to overtake their own shadows: the faster they follow, the faster it
slippeth away.

Mark also that it was not without high mystery, that God reproved Esdras
for searchinge to high in his secrets: iiii. Esd. iiii. iiii. Esd. xii.
and in another place, bad him open his mysteries only to the wise. And again
it was not without high mysterye that God would not suffer the people to
ascend into the mount, Exodus
nor the wicked to build up the tower of Babylon so high as they would.
Genes.
Think that herby the ignorant multitude are taught not to climb to high
into Gods secrets and privy mysteries. Remember (I beseech you) how
Thisraelites could not behold Moses face for brightness. ii. Cor. iii.
And consider likewise how Dionyse saint Paul's disciple, says, if thou
can not well look up to the shinyng of the sun with open eyes, but they
will dasell, and thou must hold up thine hand between thine eye and the son:
how many hands then had thou need to hold up, if thou should behold
the unsearchable mysteries of the sun of righteousness God him self? The
shinyng beams of ye heavenly influence thou can not behold, but as it were
under a cloud.

Luke. viii. Math. xi. and xiii. John. xv. Romans xi. and xvi. Ephesians. i. and.vi.
Col. i. and.ii. Phil. iiii.
Mark well, it was not without great cause, that both Christ and Paul often do
speak of mysteries. As in Luke, Mathewe, and John: And in the Epistles to the
Romans, to the Ephesians, to the Colossians, and Philippians.

Consider also with how great fear and reverence the mysteries ought to be
touched, Phil. iiii.
yea and that only of the learned men. And ponder earnestlye with your self
how Christ would his mysteries to be opened but to few (mystesterium est
archanum vel secretum dei consilium paucis cognitum, seu occultum dei iudicium
atque sacrame^tum) neither to the wicked, nor yet to the infirm that be not
able to weye them. Yea and that many mysteries be received in the church of
Christ, which never were written, as S. Basil witnesses.

Beside this S. Dionyse says: Dion. in cael. hier. cap. iii.
Decentissimum est mysticis scripturarum eloquijs sacram et obstrusam
caelestiu^ spirituum veritat^m archanis velamentis et sacratissimis signis
occultare. It is most decent to hide the holy and unsearchable verity of ye
heavenly sprites in the mystical speakinges of scripture with secret coueringes
and most holy signs.

And S. Augustine affirms, that sacrae scripturae obscuritas cu^ diuersas
pariat sententias vtilis est, the darkness of holy scripture when it brings
forth diverse senses then is it profitable.

This gere our new fangled readers do smally pass upon. Therefore it can not
be chosen, but the English translations which have been the occasion of most
mischief must needs be taken away.

The third Chapter. Sundry causes whereof oftymes difficulty and great
hardness in scripture does arise.
THe causes whereof oftymes the great difficulty in scripture does arise, j.
are very many: one is, for that there be so many tropes, figures, and dark
sayings in scripture.

Another is, ij.
hardness in scripture often does arise of the propriety of the tongue, that
every tongue has his own proper phrase not perfitlye to be known being
translated into another tongue.

A third cause is, iii.
lack of knowledge of the antiquity: which often causes great hardness, seeing
it is not for every man to know the antiquity: but only for them which be of
great study, wisdom, and learning in sundry authors.

iiii.
A fourth cause, that often one name is common to diverse: yea, and often one has
diverse names.

A fifth cause, that one word often does signify diverse things: v.
or that one word is often diuersllye taken: as this word lex, the law, is
taken in one place for the figures and ceremonies: Math. xi.
in another for the threateninge of the law: in another for the wholle Bible:
Romans iiii. Hec Orig. lib iii. in To. iii. in medio et in eccl. Eras. lib. iiii.
in another for thold testament: in another for the law of nature before the
fall, and in another after the fall: in another for the law written: and in
another for the law of the ghospel.

A sixth cause, that repugnance often apperith in scripture: vj.
as I and my father be one, my father is gretter then I: John.x. and.xiiii.
Romans iii. James.ii. Ephesians. iiii. Psalm. iiii. Math. v.
we judge man to be justified by faith with out the works of the law, man is
justified by the works of the law, and not by faith only: be angry and offend
not, every one that is angry is worthy Judgment: be angry and offend not, let
all indignation and anger be taken from you: John.xiiii. matthew.x. mat. xxviii.
I leave my peace with you, I came not to bring peace but the sword: go not
to the heathen, go in to all places of the world: with such like many
hundredth places.

A seventh cause, vij.
that one thing in scripture is often diversely told, as Stephans rehearsal, Acts
the vii. is not recited straight as it is in the Genesis. And saint Luke Acts
the ix. speaking of Paul's conversion tells it not as Paul does him self,
Acts the xxii. and xxvi.

viij.
The eight cause, that textes in the new testament are recited forth of the
old, and not word by word: Math. ii
as that of Matthew quoniam Nazereus vocabitur, He shall be called a Nazarite.
Yea and somtymes fourth of the new and yet not so to be found: as that of the
Acts: Christ said beatius est dare quam accipere. Acts. xx.
It is more blessed to give than to receive.

ix.
The.ix. cause, that often appears variaunce in the years and times, yea and
that the diuersytie of the times often to them that be well learned causes great
confusion.

The.x. cause, that textes many times which ought spiritually to be understand,
x.
they take carnally, and like wise take the contrary.

The.xj. xj.
cause, that somtymes it appears to the sensual man not to be possible: as
Oportet vos nasci denuo, John.iii.
Ye must be borne again: Nisi efficiamini sicut paruuli, etc. mat. xxviii*
Except ye be made like chylderne. etc.

The.xij. cause, that often it seems blind and no profyt in it: as that of the
Judges: xij.
the trees went fourth to anoint them a king: yea and that of Deuteronomy. (If. S.
Paul had not expounded it) thou shalt not mussell the Ox that treadyh fourth
the corn.

xiij.
The.xiij. cause, that oftetimes the person that speaks is not ever well
marked. As Paul. loquu tus est in persona imperfecti hoi^s:
non quod volo bonum hoc ago. etc, The good that I would, do I not: but the
evil which I would not, that do I. Christus Ioquitur in Matheo sub persona
vulgaris Iudaei.
Non est bonum, sumere panem filiorum et mittere canibus. It is not mete to
take the chylderns bread and to cast it to dogs. Et in psa. loquitur sub
persona corporis sui mystici Roma. vii. Math. xv. Psalm. xx. Psalm lxviii
Long a salute mea verba delictorum meoru^, The words of mine offenses are
far from mine health. Delicta mea a te non sunt abscondita: Mine offenses
are not hyd from the. etc. Yea and beside this often in the Psalms, in the
Prophets, in the gospels, and other places moo also very hard (to the
knowledge whereof the unlearned by them selfs can never attain) the words be
sometime spoken as in person of the Prophet him self, sometime in person of God,
sometime of the angel, sometime of the Devil, sometime of man, sometime of
Christ as God, sometime of Christ as man, sometime as head of the church
militant, sometime as head of the church triumphant, sometime as in the person of
his sensual parties of his own body, and sometime in the person of some
particular part of his body mystical. etc.

The.xiiii. cause, that scripture often uses this term all, where as some or
part be but meant. Cum exaltatus fuero a terra omnia traham. etc. John. xii*
When I am lift up from the earth, I will draw all men unto me. Omnes (...)
love. etc. beside that which lies hid within?

xix.
The.xix. cause, that they mark not (and in deed it is not for every man to
mark) what things were given but for a time to continue, and what for ever:
As the workynge of miracles was given but for a time, mar. xvi.
as S. Augu. in his days did witness saying: he that then would, look for a
miracle was a miracle to the world him self. And that of the acts, Acts. xv.
to absteyne from that was offered to Idols, to absteyn from blood, and from
straungled.

xx.
The.xx. cause, that scripture is full of diverse and soundry senses. It is the
book written (as it is in the Apocalypse) both within and without, in the spirit
and in the lettre: within by the spiritual meaning, without by the sense of the
letter: within, because it promises invisible things, without, for that it
disposes the visible things: within, because it moves to desire heavenly
things, without, for that it teaches worldly things to be contemned.

The.iiii, Chapter, The letter does kill and that sundry ways.
Seeing the letter does kyl (as. S. Paul says) and that diverse ways, the
ignorant people ought to be sore aferde to covet after that which causes
present death. How be it ma^s nature is such ever to desire that which is
forbid. Nitimur in vetitu^ se^per, cupimusque ^egata.
Nevertheless for as much as the letter does kill, and that so^dry ways, and
that the rude simple and unlearned (yea oftymes the proud, arrogant, and
captious) be ever ready to take rather that which shall hurt then that which
shall help, shall the scripture then be so left, that the leuyng of it may be
occasion of spiritual death to the multitude?? God forbyde: It ought in no
wise to be suffered.

j.
The letter ever does kylle when a mystery is to be understand (and yet not of
the rude to be piked fourth, and therefore not to be had in English) where the
reders will stick still to the bare words, as the Jews did being prohibited
to plow with ox and ass together (which was meant, that Iudaisme and
Christianisme could not be joined in one, nor that a christian could serve both
God and the world) And as some have done in the gospel (says. S. Augu.) with
these textes: Luc. xxii.
Selle your coote and bye a sword. etc. I neither received nor learned the
gospel of man ( Galath. i.
denyeng thereby Christ to be man) And as the Anabaptists play with that of
Matthew: matthew. v.
thou shall not swear at all, with many textes in like manner wrasted.

The letter does kylle in all places, ij.
where as the holy ghost did mean a mystery after any facion, and yet the
reader will not take it. (Yea often he can not take it, and therefore not mete to
be Judge in the matter having it in englysh) after the example of the Jews,
which still seek at the letter in these textes: the Adder and Dragon thou shall
tread under thy feet. Psalm. c.
etc. The wolf and the lamb shall feed together. Esaias. xi.
etc. Eleuabitur mons domus domini super omnes colles. Esaye. ii. Esaias. ix.
Psalm. xx.
etc, and sedebit super solium David. etc. Et ponet super caput eius corona^ de
lapide precioso, etc, The hylle where the house of God shall be builded shall be
exalted above all hills. etc. He shall sit upon the seat of David. etc He
shall set a crown of gold and precious stones upon his head. etc. where as
these textes and many moo were only to be understand of Christ and of his
coming, though they did not so appear then, nor yet do to the carnal.

The letter does kill, iiij.
as often as the scripture means any other thing then the words do sound
as Comediie amici mei and inebriamini, etc. Cant. v. Hierm. xxv
inebriamini and vomit, etc. Eat my friends and be dronkene. etc. Drink and
be dronken, spewe and fall. etc. And that of the gospel, when thou have a
blow on the one cheke, turn the other: Math. v.
which neither Christ nor Paul did fulfill, John. xvii. Acts. xxiv.
as appears in the gospel and in thaucters. Therefore it is Hyperbole
dissuading from reuengement.

The letter does kyl if time be not observed as appears in the sacrifices,
figures, iiij.
and prophecies. etc.

v.
The letter does kylle the Jew, which yet does affirm the observation of the
law.

The letter does kill the Jew which does stick only to the letter of the
law, vi.
and will not know that all was written for us, ^om. xv. ^ Cor. x.
and that all chanced to them in figure, but will stycke still to their
sacrifice, circumcision, choice of meats, clean and unclean. etc, And will
not find fourth Christ there.

vii.
The letter often does kylle where men take examples to follow, that be not to be
followed, but rather to be merueld at: as Phinces a private person praised in
scripture for manslaughter: Number. xxv.
Dan. xiii.
Daniel a private person reprehended the Judges: And Samuel did kyl Agag: i.
Reg. xv. Iud. xvi.
Moreover the example of holy Sampson (nu^bred in Cathalogo sanctorum) for
killing himself: and so likewise of them which would go kill theymselfes
willingly, because Christ said: he that loses his life shall save it.

Be all our Englysh readers so discrete that none of them play as mad parts
as these, taking occasion at their english bible? Have not we as evil now
(though not wholly in the same heresies) as ever were from the beginning:
either Simon magus, Martion, Valentinus, Cherinthus, Cherdo^, Hermogenes,
Montanus, Tatianus, Porphyrius, Nouatus, Arrius, Aetius, Eunomius, Photinus,
Donatus. Manicheus, Pelagius, Wyclyffe, Husse, Swynglius, Oecolampadius, or
Luther? Yes truly. But eue^ as at all times God has sent catholyke Fathers to
overthrow them, so does he now in our days. Praised therefore and glorified
be his name for ever and ever, which after he had grievously scourged us with
errors and heresies a long season and many years, first sent Marye our
blessed Queen ioynyng with her our most godly King Philyp (whose reigns
together, in joy, virtue, and honor Jesus long preserve and prosper) and
sense then by their means being inspired by the holy ghost, has sent our
high Prelate of noble blood my lord Cardinals grace, Legate from the Popes
holiness (as for my Lord Chaunceler, my lord of London, with many other
inferiors, which still watch and travel I speak not of) to reduce us in to
the unity, and to bring us again in to Noes ship, which have lain a great
time in the maine sea like to be drowned and almost in despair of recovery
into the ship again.

The letter does kylle all them that flee from the letter to imaginacion of
their own where the letter must needs be taken as it lies. viii.
And thus the testimony of the true meaning of the letter does kill all our
sacramentaries, which deny Christ's natural and real body in the sacrament
of the alter, he saying it is the same body that honge upon the Cross, but
they will set Christ to schole, and say he would have said, it had been but a
figure. etc. Has not the english Bible brought many to this heresy? both
many that have been burnt, and many mo yet alive in their bodies but dead in
their souls? Was not Ione of Kent thus killed with the letter, phantastically
fleyng from it, and not taking Verbum caro factum est: arygbt? But denyeng
thereby Christ's true humanity? Also did not the letter thus kyl the late
Arrian (co^uinced by a learned young man named master Proctour) which fondly
fled from the true letter: Ego and Pater vnum sumus, I and my father are both
one? So that between him and Ione of Kent Christ should be nothing, neither
very God, nor very man,

The letter does kylle the fleshly libertines, ix.
which gather that the Gospel is so free, that they may do what they will:
Where as in deed now in the new law less liberty is given to sin: and the
more perfyte the gospel is, the more hard it is: and it is not light to the
carnal man, but to him which through charytie and a lively faith, wyllyngly
does all that the law commanded, ascribing all goodness ever to God.

The letter does kill all such as only do stycke to the grammatical sense (
x.
which Paul calls the letter) where they ought to seek a mystery.

And thus the letter does kill a sect of heretics ^alled Anthropomorphitae,
which readinge in the Genesis, that God said, Give. i.
let us make man to our own image: and readyng also in sundry places bodily
members attribute to God, do boldelye say that the Godhead is corporal:
Reading also that he said. Gene. v.
Paenitet me fecisse hominem. It repents me that I made man, ascribed to him
man's affections: and readyng that he said. Descendam et videbo. Gene. viii.
etc. I will go down and see, etc. Did impute ignorance unto him. Likewise it
kylleth the sect of Euchitas, which continuallye use to pray with mouth, i.
They. v. Luke. xiiii.
because Christ and Paul bad pray still. And it kills thus another sort,
that cut and mangle them selves, readinge in the gospel, Mat. xviii. Coll.
iii. Math. xix.
pluck out thine eye, cut of thine hand, mortify your members upon the earth.
etc. Blessed is he that geldeth him self. etc. Luc. xiiii. Romans xii. Math. iii.
And another sort the letter here does kyl, he that hates not father and
mother. etc. Cast hot coals on your enemies head. etc. He shall baptize you
with the holy ghost and fire. Yea and thus it kylleth the Pharisees which
supersticiously do write the commandments in the he^mes of their garments,
Deuteronomy. vi.
in scrolles on posts. etc. because God bad keep them in their hearts, and
talk of them evening and morning. etc, they did not mark that God meant
nothing else by that phrase of speaking, but only a vehement study and desire
to observe the law. Have not our English men (namely in the city of London)
had now of late like Jewish affection in setting up wrytynges on the Church
walls and pyllers, ever falsely wrasting the^ awrie and applyeng them to an
evil purpose? And thus they painted up the textes of the new testament upon
their walls: which only do serve against the Iewyshe fastes to blind and
deceive the simple sort therewith, as though they had been spoken against our
holy Vigils and fastinges. These textes I mean and such like: Mat. xv.
That which enters in to the mouth does not defile etc Bie all that comes
i. Corin. x.
into the sha^bles. etc. Tit. i.
All things be clean unto them that be clean, etc. Ye that do not eat
misiudge not them which eat: Romans xiiii.
with many more. And likewise they set up their textes wickedlie applied both
against the blessed Sacrament of the Altar and other holy sacraments, and
also against our holy father the Pope. Of such damnable applications of
scriptures many churches were full. But I would have wished that instead of
these they would have set up that of, s. Peter: my derely beloved brother Paul,
ii. Pet. iii.
wrote many things heard which. etc.

The letter does kill being red and not trewly understand, xj.
or trewelye understand and not observed.

The letter is counted to kyl for that it forbyddeth sin, xij.
and by occasion thereof augmenteth the desire, or else for that it is a witness
against us.

The letter does kylle, xiii.
for that it discloseth our sin: Concupiscentiam nescirem esse peccatum etc,
Romans vii.
I had not known that concupiscence or lust had been sin, if the law had not
said, thou shall not covet or lust, etc.

xiiii.
The letter does kill as often as ye take or apply any text contrary to the
true meaning of the holy ghost.

xv.
Finally the letter does kill all them that search above their reach in Gods
mysteries (as I fear many have done in these years past) Luc. ix.
one desired to follow Christ, and was not permitted: Math. viii
Another commanded to follow and yet not desyryng: Acts. ix.
Yea and Paul greatly resisting was drawn in manner by compulsion. Consilia
dei occulta: gods counsels are unsearchable. But in these miserable years now
past what mystery is so hard that the ignoraunte with the Bible in englysh
durst not set upon, yea and say they understood it, all was but light? They
desired no declaration, but their own even in the, highest mysteries: where as
the prophet teaches that the declaryng or expoundynge of Gods word does give
light and understanding to the yonglynges and ignorant: Declaratio sermonu^
tuorum illuminat et intellectu^ dat paruulis.
And God thretneth that (P^ou. xxv) Scrutator maiesta it is opprimetur a gloria:
these archer to high in his mysteries shall be thrust from his glory: which
thing causes the Prophet to say: Psalm. cxxx.
Neque ambulaui in magnis, neque in mirabilibus super me: I have not walked to
high in great mysteries nor wonders above my reach. But alas experience does
show that our men through having the Bible in englisshe have walked far
above their reach, being sundry ways kyld and utterly poisoned with the
letter of thenglysh Bible. Therefore for Jesus sake away with it, let it kill no
moo,

The. v* Chaptre, The best means to understand the Scriptures by.
Because there is such great difficulty and hardness in Scripture, and because
ye letter does kill many ways, I think nothing can be told more needful
then to show plainly how we may best come to the true knowledge of the
Scripture. And therefore here note well that sundry and diverse things be
required to obtain the true understanding and meaning of Scripture by.

One is, by discrete and godly conferring place to place, j.
and Scripture to Scripture. And this affirms S. Aug. saying, Aug. lib. iii.
de doct. cap. xxvi.
the best interpretation is to expound one place of Scripture by an other
more manifest.

An other is, by consideringe the time, the men, ij.
with other circumstances, as how, where, and when they were written.

An other is, by searchinge diligently the process both before and after. iij.


iiij.
An other is, by daily exercise searching, and askinge the counsel and
judgment of other learned men.

v.
An other is, by fervent prayour and pure devotion with an humble heart and
simple spirit knowinge that GOD withsta^deth the proud, John. iiii.
and also that conninge makethe to swell in arrogance, i. Cor. viii.
if grace be wanting. Wherefore Origin says that both great study and
feruente Praiour be required to obtain the true intellection of Scripture by.
Homil. xii. in xxxiiii. Exodus
Qu. lxxxxv. ^oui et Vet. ^esta.
And S. Aug. witnesses that the holy spyrite opens the meaning of Scripture
only to the studious, diligent, and devout, prius amemus sacras literas
qua^discamus, Iaque certo per su^sum habeamus in illis nil esse neque falsum
n^que leave. aut humana mente scriptum: sed omnia plena caelestis Philosophiae
dignaque sancto spirituquacu^que specie sese offerant, si vt oportet
tutelligantur. haec Aug. de vtili. cred. capi. vi,
and devout, and to such as have a firm belefe in the articles of the
Catholic faith received. vj.

And an other is, by ouerseing the old and aunciente writers Judgments upon
Scripture, and by conferring their expositions together.

Hereby plainly appears that with the English Bible alone (though it were
trewly translated) man could not be brought fully into the true meaning of
Gods word. But we se and well perceive, that thousands have been brought from
the true meaning of gods word through the English Bible: therefore away
with it. It has kilde to many souls already, GOD best knows: whom I beseech
send a spedy redress.

The.vi. Chapitre. Scripture ought not to be in the vulgar tongue, that al men
without restraynt may read it.
Fyfty probations of this assertion, The first Probation.
I Never heard nor red that GOD would his people to have the book among
themselves to towse or type at their pleasure. God gave the book to Hieremye
and bad him read to the people that which he had written. Hier. xxxvi.
Esaias. viii.
GOD bad Esai take the Book to him for the same purpose: Yea and it was not
without great mystery that God bad Ezechiell first eat the Book, Ezech. iii.
and then read it in thaudience of all the people. Dan. xiii.
Again Moses gave the book to the Levites to keep and read to the people:
iiii. Re. xvii
and in king Iosaphattes time the Priests and Levites did read the book and
teache the people: like as did also afterward Elchias the Priest and Sapha the
Scribe Esdras did sundry times take the book and read it to the people, iiii.
Re. xxii. ii. pa. xxxliii. ii. Esd. viii. and.xiii. iii. Esd. ix. Bar. i. Hier.
xxxvi.
they diligently hearing him. And Baruch the Prophet read the book to the
king and to the people, they giving ear unto him: Luc. iiii.
Yea and Christ our master took the book of the Prophet for this cause, and
red and expounded to the people: his doing herein was for our example. Whereby
we may easily learn that all people should not have the Scryptures in their
own handlinges at their pleasure, as they have had these dosen years past to
their utter spiritual destruction.

The second Probation.
God sent Jonas to preach to Niniue: Ion. i. and iii.
he sent not a book written to every one of the Ninevites to read them
selves. God said by Hieremy (speaking of the time of the Gospel) that the
time should come he would write his law in thartes of his people: Hier. xxxi.
So that the writtinge of tholde law in tables of stone (signifieng the stony
hearts of the Jews) is not to be reioysed at, but rather to be lamented and to
be ashamed of, knowinge that Scripture was only written for sin, else never
had been written, but only in the heart of man. It was three thousand years
after the creation of the world before the old law was written: and yet then
only written for wickedness and sin. It was also a long space after the
ascension before the new Testament was written, some part at one time and some
at an other, and yet every part only written for sin and scisme: so that the
simple ignorant people, this well considered, ought not to be so desirous of
the scripture written, as they ought to be desirous to hear the true meaning
of scripture: for that only is the scripture and the gospel of Christ. For
says. S. Hierom. Euangelium non est in scriptura, sed in sensu: non in
superficie, sed in medulla: non in sermonum folijs, sed in radice rationis. The
gospel is not in the writing, but in the sense: it is not in the outward
apperaunce, but in the inward meaning: it is not in the leaves of the books,
but in the ghostly understanding. Christ never bad go write his gospel or
holy word, but badde preach it. Then if thou have an humble heart, and can
but read the englysh Bible, think thou must have it taught thee, and not to
take it thy self.

Say as the Eunuche did to Philip: Acts. viii.
how can I understand it except I be taught? Christ did preach often to the
people, Math. iiii.v
but he wrote not to them at all: and he sent his disciples and bad them
preach to the people his ghospel, Mark.i. Luc. viii. Math. x. and.xxviii. Mar.
vi.iii.xvi. Luc. ix.xxiiii Luc. xii.
and then they went and preached, but he bad them not write at all. That which
ye have heard (says he) in secret places shall be preached on the tops of
the houses: he said not it shall be written in your churches (as it has been
Iewishly used on late here in England) nor written in Bybles to be read of
every one in his mother tongue, and set up for that purpose in every church,
Peter says the holy fathers did speak Gods word by the holy ghost: ii.
Pet. i.
he tells nothing of writing it. Math. xxvi
Christ where he spoke of the memorial of Mary Magdalene, said: whersoeuer
this gospel shall be preached. etc. He said not whersoeuer this Gospel
shall be written. Mark.i. Luc. iii.
John Baptist preached much, but where did he either write or command to be
written? Mat. xxiiii.
Christ often promised that his Gospel should be preached in all the
world: Mar. vi. Luc. x.


And therefore sent fourth both the apostles, and the lxxij. disciples, and all
godly preachers ever since (so that none can preach except he be sent. Romans
x.
) But in no place we read that he bad go write his ghospel. I can not then but
meruayl that men to their own confusion are so desierous to have the scripture
in their mother tongue. O how often speaks Paul, and S. Peter also of
preachinge the gospel? Romans x.xv.
In the Epistle to the Romans, in either Epistle to the Corinthians, i. cor.
ix.xv: ii. Cor. i.xi. Gal. i.iiii.v. Ephesians. ii. Phillip. i. Col. i. i. These.
ii. i. Tim. ii.iii. ii. Tim. iiii. Act. ix.xv.xx i. Pet. iii, iiii Act. vix.xv.
Luc. x. Math. vii. Luc. xi. Acts. x. Acts. xix.
to the Galathians, to the Ephesians, to the Philippians, to the Colossia^s, to
the Thessalonians, to Tymothe, and in Thartes. And S. Peter also both in his
first Epistle and also thrice in thactes Besides this, Martha is praised in the
Gospel for hearing Christ's word taught: and Christ in his sermon in the
mount says, he that hears my word and does it (not he that reads it or
writes it) shall be like ned to the wise man buildynge upon the rock. etc. And
again blessed be they that hear gods word and keep it: and as it is in the
Acts when Peter preached, the holy ghost fell upon all that heard him: yea and
they of Asia were praised for hearing Gods word. But where (I pray you) have
you of writynge it for all men to read? How be it the only drifte (as I
think) of all such as obstinatly stick to have the scripture in writing in
the vulgar tongue, is thereby to be Judges of the sense of scripture them
selves, contrary to the universal church of Christ. But therefore it may not
be suffered.

The third probation.
THrough the damnable liberty of having it in the vulgar tongue have not all
holy mysteries been despised? Have they not thereby utterly condemned all that
has not been expressed in the letter of their English Bible? Have they not
made us worse hereby then the Jews? To take all mysteries from us except they
be expressed in their English* The Jews durst not express the high name of
God Iehoua, But what mystery durst not our men meddle withal? Yea reason,
turn and toss at their pleasure? The Jews had Cabala their tradition left
among them by Moses without writynge, received as it were by hand from
generation to generation, concerning the mystical sense included in the
words of scripture: But through this damnable heresye our men have whollye
condemned all that is not expressed in the letter of their English. And yet S.
John said, I had many things to write unto you, nevertheless, I would not
write with paper and ynke, but I trust to come and speak with you mouth to
mouth: Aug. ad Ianu.
yea and S. Augustine says: quae non sunt scripta sed tradita custodimus,
quae toto terrarum orb obseruantur: we keep and observe not only such things
as be written, but also traditions not written, which be observed in all
places of christendom. Again, if ye will nothing to be Gods word but that
which is expressed in the letter written, what say ye then to Moses? Were not
the words of God spoken to him gods word till they were written? Were not the
words of God spoken to the Apostles gods word till they were written? Christ in
saying to Peter blessed art thou etc, Mat. xvi.
declares that that high mystery came into S. Peter's heart) as to the prince
of Chap postles) only by secret inspiration, and not by the word written.
And so does likewise this, that neither Evangelist nor Apostle did ever by
writing send the faith to any nation, but where they were first informed by
preaching. For faith comes by hearing (says Paul) and not by writynge.
Romans x.
Furthermore, Paul bad the Thessalonians (as I said) keep the traditions
which he had given them by mouth: ii. These. ii.
because the words that he spoke to the people by mouth, our lord and used
about the sacrament of the Altar, or about the sacrament of baptism, who can
show the reason fully of all ye words, gestures, orders, questions, and
aunsweres there used? And yet all these we have received of Christ and his
Apostles. Thus much says Origene.

And here mark I beseech you of Origenes words (which was liui^g wtin
lxxxx. years after saint John the Evangelist) that many such traditions were
left by Christ and his Apostles, which be not in the Bible expressed, and yet
to be observed of all faithful Catholic people.

Beside this what they will say to many things more not expressed in Scripture
and yet under the pain of damnation to be believed I cannot tell: as to the
Baptim of infantes: the.iii. persons in Trinity to be of equal power and of
one essence, that God the Father is ingenitus not begot, the procedinge of the
holy ghost from the father and the Son: the deity and equalitye of the Holy
Ghost with the father and the Son: the observing of the Sunday: the order of
our Creed: the continuance of the virginite of our Lady: that she is Theorocos
matter dei, the mother of God: the receyuinge the Sacrament of thalter fasting:
the mixtinge water with wine in the Chalice: the Son to be consubstantial
with the father: that Christ's soul descended in to hell: the making of the
sign of the Cross: the number of the Sacraments: that there be.ii. natures
in Christ knit together in vnitate divine supposite: and that Souls
departinge hens straight ways have the fruitio^ of the deitye: And that men
and women have power to ministre the Sacrament of Baptym, It is not expressed
in scripture, neither by commandment, counsel, license, or example.

what they will say to this gere, I wot not: but this one thing I am well
assured of, that having the Scripture in English has brought tholy mysteries
of God into contempt and hatred.

Where as the wisdom of God (as S. Basil. despiritu s^^cto. cap. xxvij.
Basil testifies) never would all the mysteries of our faith to be put in
writing thereby to be a laughinge stock both to the Jews and Gentiles. For if
Christ himself were counted a sclaunder to the Jews, and folishnes to the
Heathens, how much rather shall the high mysteries of our faith so be counted
being most hard to be perceived? Mysterium no^ est quod ad populares aures
effertur. patr^s ergo in occu^to ac silentio misterijs suam seruauere
dignitate^. Basi. xxvii de spu^ sancto.
Again it is not a mystery (says he) that is open to every man, or that is
blown in to every man's ear. Tholy Fathers ever kept tholy misteryes in most
secrecy reuerencyng the dignity thereof. S. Dionise, Dioni. cap. i. in celes.
hierarch. Iren. lib. 3. ca 4 Epiphan. co^tra Aeriu^. Tertul de cor. mili. Orig.
homil. v, in number. Cypri. de Lot, pedu^. Hila in psalm, ij.
Ireneus, Epiphanius, Tertulia^, Origin, Ciprian, and Hylari with one consent
do firmelye establisshe this against the approuers of thenglisshe
translacions: Yea and S. Basil does affirm that there be so many mysteries
without Scripture which must be credited, that he can in no small time recite
them al: Deficier me dies (inquit) si ecclesiae mystria citra scriptu^ tradita
pergam recensere. How can it then be that the Englisshe Bible can continue,
many such me^ taking occasion thereby to condemn al holy mysteries received by
the Catholyke Church even from the beginning, S. John testienge that so many
more things were done, that the whole world were not hable to conteme all if
they were written? And s. Paul bidding the Thessalonians (as ye have heard)
observe all his tradicions, received by mouth, and not by writing (says
Theophilact) and yet as well to be believed as the other? Yea and in the time of s.
Peter, Linus, Cletus, Anacletus, Clement and Euaristus. etc. S. John's Gospel
was not written: but these men will nothing to be believed but only that which
is in their English Bible: so that all that time the Christians by this their
judgment should not have been bound to believe that which is now in S. John's
Gospel, because then it was not written. How be it al faithful people believe
that the Church of Christ taught above.lx. years after Christ's ascension all
that is now in S. John's Gospel, being yet not then written. In the time our
mother the Church was a virgin. I mean not corrupt nor adulterate with sundry
heresies there were almost no scriptures of the new Testament in Paper and Ink.

All the monitions, words, and works of Christ were then written in the
hertes of the faithful: but sone after when through sin it began to wax
cold, then was writing for the simples sake to preserve their faith: and yet
that not withstanding the authorite of the church (the fundacion of all treuth)
of as great strenght as it was before the new testament was all written. For
were there not heretics (I pray you) which denied diverse books of scripture,
as Martion and other? wherewith were they subdued? even with verities not
written, Mark well that Moses (says Origene) greatly passed not for the
letter written when he did break the tables: nor Christ when he said to the
Jews, the scripture shall be taken from you, spoke of the letter (which they
keep still) but of the sense. Wherefore away with the english damnable
translation and let them learn the mysteries of god reverently by heart: and
learn to give as much credit to that which is not expressed, as to that which
is expressed in scripture: Knowing that in.iij. points thautoritie of the
church is above the authority of scripture. One is in fortifieng verities
not written to be necessary to salvation (as plainly appears by many verities
in this probation) another is for that the church received the gospels of Luke
and Mark (which Mark never saw Christ) and did reiecte the Gospels made by
his high Apostels, Thomas and Bartilmew: as for the gospel of Nicodeme (which
yet was familiar with Christ) I speak not of. The third is, because the
church in all doubtful causes and matters of controversy must ever be judge
of the true sense of scripture. For she alone has ever ye true sense of
scripture. So yt by her authority only Ireneus did convince Vale^tin:
Tertulian, Mertion: Origin, Celsum: Ciprian, Nouatum: Nicen council, the
Arians: Hierom, Iouinian: and Augustine, ye Donatistes: with many other. And no
meruell, for so much Christ him self made his Church the Judge over
scripture, when he sent the Apostels and disciples to preach saying: He that
hears you, hears me. And also when he said: Who so would not hear the
Church, should be reputed and taken as an Ethnycke, or Publican. Seeing then
that God thus appointed, who will refuse to seek the true understanding of
scripture at that judge, whom Christ appointed himself? Surely none but self
willie heretykes.

And here now to speak a word or two of the Saboth, and of mixtinge water
with wine in the chalice (whereof I should have spoken before, when I recited
many verities not written) and first concerning the Saboth. Albeit the
matter of the precept be moral and the day legal, so that it might be
changed: yet the church would never have done that, without special
ordinance of God being made judge in the cause.

And likewise it is to be said of mixtinge water with wine in the chalice. The
Ghospel speaks of wine only turned into Christ's precious blood, who
durst then mixte water therewith? But the church is so assured of Gods
pleasure therein without any scripture, that they dare not only put in water,
but also dare not leave it out. And whereby knew the church these things, but
by Christ and his holy Apostles which taught in their time? And so in these
things and many other more went it forth from age to age continuinge in the
church till this day, begone by Christ in the beginning without mention
made in scripture written.

The.iiij. probation.
Some desire to have it in the english tongue only for knowledge, and this is
but curiosity: some only for vain praise, and this is but vain glory to be
seen learned: Some only to taunt poor priests and other therewith, and this
is but deuelishnes: so that for none of these it ought to be in english. Now
where some would desire it in english only to be edified thereby (for this
desire only is to be embrased) treuth is they may be sufficiently edified by
sermons and holsom doctrine of the scriptures expounded unto them by such as
have the key of knoweledge, as often as they shall well require: and herewith a
godly mind will be content, knowing that the contrary is against the catholyke
church. So that euin the good and catholyke people which would do good and no
hurt with the Bible in english, yet may not be permitted to keep it in the
english tongue: partly lest the infirm and weak thereby should be offended,
either in misiudging, or in taking example (if occasion serve) to get the same
liberty to their destruction, and partly that no occasion be given thereby to
obstinate heretics to murmur that they have it not in english them selves as
well as the other. And this answer I give unto them which seem of a godly zeal
to say, scripture ought to be in english for the use and commodity of such
people as with an earnest zeal and devout study do hunger and thirst the
simple and plain knowledge of Gods word, not for contentious bablyng, but for
innocent living, not to be curious searchers of the high mysteries, but to be
faithful doers of Gods byddyngs: not to be troublous talkers of the Bible, but
sincere folowers of Gods precepts therein contained: not to be vnreuerent
reasoners in holy scripture for vain setti^g out of their painted sheathe, but
to be humble and louly workers of Gods glory: not to be curious disputers in
the Gospel for the mayntenau^ce of their inordinate lusts and carnal
liberty, but to be vpryghte walkers in holy conversation of life in the rule
of the gospel prescribed.

The fyfte probation.
Having the scripture in englysh they presume to know all the scriptures
perfitly (and that to their condemnation) contrary to.s. Hieroms rule which is
this, Si non succedat idoneus interpres, potius nescire oportet quam cum
periculo discere. etc. If there be not one present that is mete to expound the
scriptures, it is better not to know the mysteries, then with ieoperdie and
peril to search them. etc.

The syxte probacion.
The most part of the people be evil: but Christ would none such should have
the handlyng of his secrettes: as appears by that he wills precious stones
not to be cast amongst swine, nor holy bread to dogs. Therefore scripture
ought not so to be left, that all without any discretion or difference may
handle it at their pleasures: which must needs be, if it be set at liberty
in the vulgar tongue in every church.

The seventh probation.
The most part of the people be ignorant and not hable to discern between
the letter and the mystery: but none such be mete judges in such high matters
(and yet none wylbe more bold then blind bayarde) therefore the scripture
must be kept forth of the handling of all such: which cannot be, if it
continue in English as it does, for all men to dispute of it that will.

The eight probation.
Is not the scripture full of figures and tropes? Shall it then be so left, that
every one shall be judge thereof?

The ninth probation.
The universal church of Chrst did never allow nor approve Scripture to be in
the vulgar tongue, weying the manifold inconveniences, that have issued
thereof: but ever from time to time among other errors did tread that down
and suppress it. If we therefore, according to the article of our Creed,
believe the universal Church, we must not admit the scripture to be in our
English tongue, knowing that as S. Ciprian says, that which has been done
and ordained by the church (the holy ghost being the guide) is of as great
weight, as that which was done by Christ him self.

The tenth probation.
Scripture is counted to be sometimes meat, sometimes drink: Greg. lib. i.
moral.
drink in light places, meat in obscure places, which in expou^dinge is as it
were eaten being broken. It was not therefore without great mystery that
Christ caused the Apostles to break the bread to the multitude of the people,
whom he fed with v. loaves, signifiynge the spiritual breaking of the bread
of the soul among the people ever to be done by the ministers diligently:
and that it should not be complained upon by the Prophet, Hierem. Thren. iiii.
saying: my children have desired bread, and there was none to break it to
them: and likewise by Amos: there is a great hunger (says he) not of lack of
bodily food, but of hearing the word of God. And also by Esaias, the nobles
did perish for lack of mete and the multitude for lack of drink. Esaias. v.
By these it may well appear that the common people should not presume to
expound ye scriptures the^ selves, nor to be judges thereof: which yet they
will do (as experience shows) if they have it in the vulgar tongue. Therefore
away with it.

The eleventh probation.
There be diverse and sundry senses in the scripture (as both Origin and
Augustine do declare) which be not for every simple brain to find out.
Orig. homil. 2. ^ 11. in Ge. Aug. de vtilitate cre. ad honor. cap. 3.
The mystery often is hid, the well of scripture is deep, puteus altus est:
every ones strength is not hable to draw up the water of life forth of the
botome of it. Therefore the well must be covered, lest the yonglinges fall
into it, and so be drowned.

The xii. probation.
Paul thought not the Corinthians hable to have the mysteries opened unto
them, i. Cor. iii.
saying: I feed you with milk, and yet our most ignorant people will murmur,
if they may not feed the^ selves with the highest mysteries of all, even in
their own native language. Paul s^^th he fed the Corinthians as young
children, which if they feed the^ selves will defile and slober their clothes.
And do not these now in our days defile their weddinge garmente with
presuming to feed them selves with spiritual fode of the soul? And mark here
I prai you that it was not without cause that Paul used here this similitude,
saying children not suffered to feed them selves often strike the meat
(through frowardnes) forth of the nources hand, often forsake it, and turn
away: even as do still the wicked which would feed them selves spirituallye
with the english translation of scripture to their utter poisoning after the
manner of children, which being permitted to feed them selves, may gather up
poison or ven^m, and feed thereon: not that I mean that in scripture should
be any poison: but that a medicine ministered by the Physician often heals,
which taken by your self not knowinge how, where nor when to take it,
poysoneth and kylleth. The Be and the Spider gather on one flower, the one
honye, the other poison: the flower ministering no occasion thereunto, but only
their own natures. Where upon S. Augustine says: Aug. in psalm. xlviij.
omnia diuina eloquia salubria su^t been intelligentibus: periculosa ijs qui
eam volu^t ad sui cordis peruersitatem detorquere: all holy scriptures be
wholesome and most profitable to them that understand them aright: but they be
perilous to al such which will wrast them after the frowardness of their
own hearts. O lord how many have wrasted the scripture amiss through the
wicked liberty of having it in English these many years?

The xiii. probation.
Christ said to ye Saduces, ye do err not understanding the scriptures: Math.
xxii. Joseph. lib. 2. de bell. Iud. et. li. 18. de antiquit.
and the cause was, that they received no interpreters upon scripture, not
much unlike unto our men, which only with the English translation (though it
be never so false, so corrupt, and dampnable) would take upon them the full
understanding of scriptures.

The.xiiii. probation,
Saint Peter testified (as it is in my first chapter) that many things in.
S. ii. Pet. iii.
Paul's epistles were hard to be understand, which the unlearned did then
pervert to their destruction, as they did other places of scriptures. And yet
for all this dare our unlearned men be still desirous to have the same
scriptures in their own speech to peruerte to their own condemnation?

The,xv, probation
Did Christ often testify that it was not for every one too know the high
mysteries, and yet dare the blind so presume still only with their English
translation? It was not without great cause that Christ would not his mysteries
to be published to al people. For the comen sort never used them well. And
therefore many high mysteries there be (says. S. Basyl) which never were
wrtten, but in the heart of the elect. And. S. Hierom upon, Labia sacerdotis
custodiunt scientiam: Malach. ii.
says that the ministers of Christ's Church whose duty is to teach the
scripture, must not still utter, but keep, Tertull. in lib. de praescript.
haeret. in medio libri tribuit omnibus apostolis arcana cognoscere, quae
ignobili vulgo no^ licuit*
that in time and place it may be published: Their office is this to do, and
not for every man to search the secrets. Christ would, not every one to be a
medler, when he said to his disciples: it shall be your office to know the
mysteries: and to Nicodeme: Art thou a Master in Israel, and know not this
gere? as who should say, it belongs to teachers to be ripe in scriptures,
and for other to be hearers. iiii. Esd. xii.
God said to Esdras speaking and declaring high mysteries: put these secrets
surely up, and teach them to the wise me^ that be hable to understand them:
iiii. Esd. iiii.
as for the lewd he rebukes them as unmeet to know such high secrets and
mysteries. Every Idiote can bear stones to the building of a house, and lay a
hepe together, but none can couche them as they ought to be in their places,
but the mason: every fool can read and babble of the scripture, but only the
godly learned teachers can play the spiritual masons part in couchyng the
lively stones in the spiritual buylding of Christ's house.

The.xvi. probation.
God says by Malache the prophet (I recited the text euin now) that the people
must require the law and the meaning thereof at the mouth of the prist: Mala. ii.
but then is it not for every one to take it himself, to controlle and
descaunt at his own pleasure.

The.xvii, probation.
Can the unlearned only with the english bible and with reading only the
english translation discern or know how Christ's words be true that he came
to fulfylle the law, Math. v.
and not to break it, and how many manner of ways that is true, and yet how
he is the end of the law? Again can he perceive thereby how the old testament
and the new are both one in substance, Vetus lex occultatio nouae, nona
reuelatio veteris, Aug.
and yet diverse in perfection and in imperfection, and what needs the old
still to remain, yea or what neded the new to be given, seeing Christ
answered to the lawyer askinge how to come to heaven: Luc. ^.
In the law what read thou? Love thy lord God. etc. Moreover can he see in
his english book how the gospel is easy and light? (for so Christ calls it)
and that thold was over hard and importable as it is in thactes the.xv. seeing
that in thold only manslaughter was forbid, here to be angry is is condemned:
there love thy friend, here love thine enemy: there, eye for eye, here, if thou
have a boffet on the one side, turn the other: there, commytte no adultery, here,
yt thou beholdest a woman unchastly thou art an adulterer: there, thou shall
not be forsworn, here thou shalt not swear at al: there, for stealyng other
men's goods you must restore fourefold, here, for not geuyng thine own thou
may be dampened? Can ye with thenglish bible tell these and many moo as hard
things as these be? I am sure ye can not. And therefore if ye might be suffered
(which God forbyde) still to wade in thenglish translation, ye must needs
still walk from blindness to blindness.

The.xviii. probation.
In the Law and the Prophets o how many hard things be contained? yea what
part of scripture is so light that a godly learned man dare take in hand fully
to discuss, expound, and declare by his own wit, if he do not see nor
never have seen any doctor or expositoure thereon? And yet shall scripture be
suffered to continue in thenglish tongue for all men to expound at their
pleasure.?

The.xix. probation.
What things have we gotten by the scriptures being in englysh these years
past? servants stubbourne, froward and disobedient to their masters and
mastres, fleshly liberty, contempt of all godly order, loss of devotion and
godlynes, prayer and fasting set at naught, and unbridled boldness to all
mischefe. See then whether it be high time to take it away again. Suffer the
sword of the spirit to continue no longer in the mad man's hand. Hebre. iiii.


The.xx. probation.
Who is hable to tell at the first sight how many hundredth fautes be even in
their best transiation (if there were any good) and yet shall they be suffered
still to continewe? shall they still poison moo? like as do a thousand
damnable englysh books set forth within these.xxij. years. Lord deliver us
from them al, and that with all speed. I take God to record (if I may speak
only of one fault in the translation and touch no moo) my heart did ever
abhor to here this word dominus, (which most commonly does include noster) to
be translated the Lord, where as it ought to be translated our Lord, the very
latin phrase so declaryng: as appears sufficiently by that one example of the
comike where one says to Pamphilus Pater est, what man that has a judgment
in the latin tongue can deny this word Pater here in this place to include
tuus, and so to be translated in to English thy father? is not the same
judgment to be given of. S. Iohans saying to Peter, Johan the.xxj. Dominus
est: It is our Lord our Master: where as they have falsely translated it, as
in many other places, calling him the Lord? And likewise in the salutatio^ of
our Lady, Hail Mary full of grace dominus tecum: does not here this word
dominus include noster? would thou make tharchaungell like a devil to call
him the lord? he is the lord to the devil, but to us he is our most merciful
Lord, and so to be called. Our father which art in heaven hallowed be thy name.
etc. And S. Thomas cried, my Lord and my God. Again, seeing God is Lord of
Abraham, Lord of Isaac, and Lord of Jacob, would then Abraham, Isaac, or
Jacob call him the Lord? no truly: but my Lord, or our Lord. This I speak
not now so much for the translation, seeing it swarmeth as full of faults as
leaves (I will not say lines) as I do for that I would wish that the comen
speech among people (spro^g of custom through the fond translation) I thank
the Lord, the Lord be praised, the Lord knows, with all such phrases might
be left, and that ye people might be taught to call him our Lord, I thank our
Lord, our Lord be praised, our Lord knows. etc.

The xxi. probation.
The holy martyr and chief bishop, S. Clement writynge to S. James Thapostle
wylleth the word of God not to be read after every man's toye in his brain,
saying many places of scripture (says he) without the leadinge of the holy
ghost, may be wrasted and taken after every man's leude mind and fond
judgment (which thing has been put in practice of late) and not as the
spirit of God did mean. Oportet ab eo intellige^tia^ discere scripturaru^,
qui ea^ a maioribus secu^du^ veritatem sibi tradita^ seruat. Haec diuus Clemens
lib. x. recog. Idem quoque doce^t Iren. Tertull. Athan. et Epiphan.
But (says he) we must ever learn the true meaning of scripture of him
which does observe it, as he has according to truth received it of the
elders. Hereby we may perceive that we must ever take the meaning of
scripture at his hand that went before in the truth of Christ's universal
church. But how can it then be in the Englysh tongue, for all me^ to read and
take as they have done at their pleasure? they have made scripture no
scripture, by false recitynge, by false wrastyng and tournyng. For as Martiall^
says: Quem recitas meus est o Philentine libellus, At male cum recitas
incipit esse tuus. O my friend the book that thou recitest is mine, but when
thou make false recital, then thou make it thine own book and none of
mine. O lord in how many places may scriptuce by the wicked be turned into
sundry facions (as God knows it has been) even after the oracle of Apollo.
Aio te aeacida Romanos vincere posse? Is it the^ to be continued in thenglish
tongue?

The xxij. probation.
If scripture in the vulgar tongue had been needful, God would have sent it
to the Eunuche, to Saul, and to Cornelius in the viij.ix. and x. of thactes:
but there ye read that god sent them teachers, Philip, Anany, and Peter: and
not the scripture: which had been but in vain as appears by the Eunuchs
saying: how shall I understand scripture by reading except I be taught?
Whereupon S. Hierom says. Ego (vt de me loquar) nec sa^ctior su^ hoc eunucho,
nec studiosior, qu^cu^ librum teneret etc. ignorabat tamen eum que^ in libro
nesciens venerabatur. O how many this day, much more ignorant then
Theunuche, will take in hand only with their English book to open mysteries
both to their own destruction and others.

The xxiij. probation.
Our men will nothing but their english book, but the holy man Ireneus which
did see. S Iohans disciple (or as some affirm, which was scholar to S. Iohans
disciple named Policarpus) does testify that we must follow the order of the
traditions which the forefathers did leave unto them, unto who^ they committed
the cure of Christ's people: unto which ordinances the very heathens (says
he) coming to Christ's stock did obey, having their belefe written by the
sprit of God in their hearts, and not written with ynke in velom or perchement.
What shall we say then to them which yet bewail their Jewish scriptures
plucked beside ye posts and walls, and only desire their scripture with ink
and paper in the book? As for salvation only written in the heart by the holy
spirit, it should seem, they pass not of.

The.xxiiij. probation.
The heathen Philosopher would not youth to be the medlers with moral
philosophy, because they were unapt thereunto, either to be Judges thereof, or
to take any profyt thereby: and he meant not only youth in years, but also in
manners: a child (says Esaie) of an hund^eth years old shall dye. Esaias. lxv.
What then shall we say shall we admit unto the ha^dling of our heavenly
philosophy whom the heathen thought unmeet, and unworthy to handle their
lerning which was but profane? would not the Jews permit all ages to the
reading of all the books in the old testament, and shall we christen men do
it? will we be worse then the Jews? Yea worse the^ the profane ethnickes and
more out of order? O Lord be merciful unto us.

The.xxv. probation,
It was never admitted (though somtymes permitted) in any place of
christenedome scripture to continue in the vulgar tongue, but only in time of
scisme or heresy, shall it now then be suffered to continue any longer in this
realm, so many mischefes yssewyng therout as have done daily increasing these
many years, and would do still more and more?

The.xxvi. probation.
When it is in the vulgar tongue, the comen sort play with Gods word, as the
devil did disputing with Christ, brought Gods word, but to a wrong purpose.
Christ said man lives not only by bread, but by every word that proceeds
fourth of Gods mouth. The devil spoke Gods word, but it was not fourth of
Gods mouth: so did the old Prophet of Bethell speak Gods word, iii. Reg.
xiii.
but not out of Gods mouth. Likewise did the.CCCC. iii. Re. xxii.
Prophets which deceived Achab. All sorcerers, witches, and co^iurers use
gods word, but not out of Gods mouth: so have all heretics in times past,
and do at this day. But when is it Gods word furthe of Gods mouth?

How shall we know or prove that? Ever when it is spoken according to the
consent and faith of the catholic church.

For very scripture does show that the true understanding of Gods word,
and that is forth of gods mouth spoken, is ever to be sought in the catholic
church, for the catholic church alone has ever the true sense of scripture,
which is for that cause called of S. Paul the pyller and foundation of all
truth: i. Timo. iii.
wherein also for this cause God ordained some apostles, some Evangelists,
Ephesians. iiii.
some Prophets and teachers, still to continue, lest we should be overthrown
with blastes of error. And therefore Ireneus wttnesseth, Iren. li. 3. cap. 3.
and long after him S. Augustine that the true meaning of scripture is to be
had by the trial of the succession of the holy bishops and fathers since
Peter's time in the sea of Rome, which thing caused S. Augustine to say, I
would not believe the gospel if thautoritie of the church caused me not so to
do. Aug. in epist. fund.
So that we must believe that has been received of all men, at all times, and
in all places of christendom, and we must lean to thantiquitie, to the
generality, and consent of the fathers: and the true sense and meaning of
scripture must ever be proved and tried out herby. How be it to none of this
our new men will agree, because it whollye makes against the^: but they ever do
study to bring al into question and to deny al general councels, all
ordinances, decrees, canons, and expositours upon scripture. And much of this
disorder thenglish Bible does cause: wherefore me think it may not well be
permitted to continue.

The xxvij. probation.
Can it be chosen, but so long as all people have the Bible in English at their
pleasure, there shall ever be some among them ready ministers of the devil to
dispute, reason, and teach the residue, to the utter destruction of all
devotion and good order? And yet among them selves they shall say, the cause
is they can not be taught truly of the preachers abroad. And hereby heresye
shall be sowed plentifullye, and Gods word pitifullye abused under a colorable
defense thereof. They shall say: o the Gospel ought not to be kept from
christen men: and that is very truth: it ought to be taught them and
preached unto them, but not to teach them selves for wrastynge it amiss.

The xxviij. probation.
It is the occasion of many heresies to have the scripture in the vulgar
tongue. How be it heresy did never spring forth of scripture, but only of the
perverse understanding of scripture (says Hilarious). Hilar. lib. ij. de
triuitate.
And yet then seeing the rude ignorant sort be ever prone peruersly to wrast the
scriptures, we must think that to have scripture in english, is to minister
occasion to ye common sort to fall into errours^ and that it so shall do
appears by that they be not hable to weye nor bear the mysteries, nor to
understand the tropes and allegories which the great learned men often are
scant hable well to digeste, how much less the cobbler, carter, or coryer?

The,xxix, probation,
Hilarious upon In cord meo abscondi eloquia tua Shows that the high
mysteries ought not to be publyshed abroad among all people. It is good
(says he) to hyde the kings priuetie and secret. And s. Paul (says he) was
aferd to feed the people with any other but with milk. Math. xiii.
Christ in the gospel tells of inestimable treasur found and hid in the
fylde that was bought: Math. vii.
and of the precious stones not to be cast before swyne, nor the holy unto
dogs. etc. What does all this but plainelye forbydeth thee Bible in English
or the mysteries thereof to be set abroad?

The,xxx, probation,
Like as GOD appointed tholde law to be written in stone, tables, or book, so
did he appoint (as Hieremie witnesses) the new to be written only in the heart
of man. Hier. xxxi.
Why should the writing in books then be so highlye regardyd? But this
carnal, this fleshly regardyng by no means can be so well extenuate or rather
quyte taken away, as by taking the scripture fourth of the vulgar tongue and
fourth of thandling of the lewd ignorant.

The,xxxi, probation,
God appointed the Gospel only to be written in the heart of man. And therefore
the Apostels did fulfill their office concerning this matter, in that they only
wrote their epistles to the people being absent, but ever taught by mouth
them that were present, as appears to the Corinthians, where Paul says:
othere things, i. Cor. xi.
when I come and am present, I will order: And.S. John. said, Epistle.ii.
I had mani thiges to write, which I will not write, but tell you and teach you
mouth to mouth.

The same teachinges then and many other have been received in the Church euin
as it were by hand, and so continued still and shall do, tholye ghost
teaching from time to time, as Christ promised, if the Bible were ones taken
forth of the ignorauntes judgments.

The,xxxij, probation.
i. Timoth. i.
Paul writes to Timothe rebukynge many which then would presume to be
doctors and teachers not mete for that office: but how many thousa^des be in
England English teachers now, yea rather seducers and only sowers of heresies
through the englysh translacion much worse and more ignorant then they of
who^ Paul then spoke?

The,xxxiij, probacion.
If it be laufull for all to have the handeling of scripture, then made not
tholy ghost a just division of gifts appointing but some doctors and teachers
and the other to be taught: Yea and Christ called in vain the Apostles and their
successors the salt of thearth, and the light of ye world, if every one that
will shall have that office, as no doubt they have had this long time, and
will have still, if it should continue in English, which GOD forbyde-

The.xxxiiij, probacion.
Gregorius Nazianzen says, Oportet paulatim infirmis fidelibus ea que
perfectiora sunt aperire, etc. Greg. Nazian. concione de spiritu sancto.
We must by little and little open the secrets of scripture to the infirm
christians. How can it be suffered then to be in englysh for every one too
open it to him self?

The,xxxv, probation.
Paul would all to be taught the scripture: and therefore he wrote his epistles
to al: but not all to descant upon them. For then he would not have said, i.
cor. xiiii.
if any be thought to be a prophet let him know what I write unto you etc.

The.xxxvii. probacion.
Moises did commit the book only to the pristes and not to the people. Deuteronomy.
xxxi.
And the priest was ever made judge in hard causes of the scripture. Deuteronomy. xvii.
But our men will be judges them selves: and where learned they that? even of the
devil the autour of arrogance. God said in Deuteronomy. he that will not obey in this
to the preiste, Deuteronomy. xvii.
shall suffer death. But what obedyence would the english readers give to the
priest? yea to the highest Priest of all in earth under Christ?

The xxxvij. probation.
S. Basil bids be circumspect that ye blabbe not out the holy mysteries, nor
suffer them to be defiled with profane eyes, but ye shall rather be afraid
to handle them: yea, ye shall reverence the hid mysteries of God with
spiritual and not corporal beholdynges, and keep them not touched nor to be
handled of the rude, ignorant, and common people. What can be more plain then
this against the Bible in the vulgar tongue?

The xxxviij. probation
O how many scrupules and doubts have spronge in many men's heads (which
neither they nor their fathers ever imagined before) through the scripture in
English? How many alterations, scismes, and deuisions among the simple have
risen, yea between man and wife, master and servant? How many women heretics
have taken upon them thoffice of teachinge hereby in these years paste, Women
heretics.
and all contrary to Paul's doctrine?

The xxxix. probation:
Among other, one of the greatest inconveniences that has these wretched
years spro^g by having the Bible in english, is this, that many, yea very
many, God best knows, have presumptuouslye taken upon them being yet most
unmeet thereunto, thoffice of doctors and teachers in corners and conuenticles,
being not sent, but arrogantly and presumptuouslye, saying, God did send them,
and they would seek for none other sending, how be it they did not mark the
plague of Osias king of Judah for usurping thoffice of the priest, whereunto he
was not called. They did not mark how Christ being very man did chose the
xij. Math. x Luc. x.
Apostles and lxxij. disciples, and sent the^ forth, where ye see both the
outward choosing and outward sendyng. Acts. i.
Mathias was outwardlye by men chosen to succeed Judas: and so were the seven
deacons outwardlye called: Acts. vi.
and thactes the xv. it has pleased tholye ghost and us etc. Behold here
both the inward and outward sending. And the holy ghost said, Acts. xiii.
separate me Paul and Barnabas, and they put their hands on them and sent
them furthe. Here ye see outward sendynge. Yea, and Paul says: Rom x.
how shall they preach except they be sent?

Now if we should take only inward sendinge without the outward, then the
Church could never be certain who were sent and who were not.

Again Christ appointed certain Apostles, doctors, and teachers etc. Which
order, says Paul, Ephesians. iiii.
shall continue in the church for ever. But the^ it must needs be that ye
church shall still appoint them as they did then etc. Moreover he that shall be
called to the office of a priest or bishop must have a good report of them
which are without. i. Timo. iii.
Mark here the outward sending. And S. Augustine says* if because
Thappostles were taught of god, Aug. in prolo. li. de doct. Chri.
none own ought to be outwardelye called or taught, then (says he) let
none read the gospel, nor none hear sermons. Paul had tholye ghost and yet
he went not to preach till Ananias had laid his hands upon him. Acts. ix*
He was sent (says he) to man to receive the sacraments and to be joined to
the church. Nevertheless all might be done and wrought only inwardlye by
thangell or spirit of God: but then should never be any certayntie. Therefore
God has ordained that like as in temporal governance none is made ruler but
being outwardly sent and appointed by men, even so in the spiritual
functiones. Wherefore now to conclude, seeing the only remedy to redress this
damnable error of them which teach secretly and do^ much hurt in corners
through the english translation is to take it away (for by other means it will
not be stopped) it can not be permitted that the Bible should continue in
english. Here in this I might have had just occasion to speak against
preachers which had authority (wickedly given) to preach, and did comenly
preach understanding not the latin tongue (as it was said) but were called
some from one occupation, and some from another, and some from plaieng the
vices part in enterludes: but I will not meddle with this matter

The,xl, probation.
Hierom. in Ezech. 44.
S. Hierom says, Alta, and profunda dei mysteria non sunt monstranda vulgo, nec
proferenda ad populum, ne si maiora se audierint, maiestatem scientiae far
non possint, and quasisolido suffocentur cibo, qui adhuc lacte infantiae
nutriendisunt. The deep and profounde mysteries of God are not to be showed to
the common people, nor to be vttred to the^: lest they hearing greater things
then they can bear, be not hable to atteyne to the knowledge thereof: and be as
it were choked with hard meat, which yet ought to have been fed but with
milk of infancy.

The.xli, probation.
It helps well and is a good probation against the english Bibles that
Christ ever used paraboles to the rude unlearned sort: yea and that the
words of the gospel do testify that often when he spoke they understood him
not: Nihil (inquit) horum intellexerunt: but yet he said to his disciples and
their successors: Vobis datum est nosse mysteria: It belongs to you to know
the mysteries: Yea and when he would teach them high secrets, he ascended
into the mount from the comen people, whereof Esai had spoken. Esaias. vi.
Ye shall hear with your ears and not understand. etc. In expounding which
place. S. Hierom does utterly drive away the comen people from meddling or
handlyng the mysteries of scripture. Again does not Christ show in the
Gospel, Luc. xii.
that he is a good steward, which gives in measure to the servants their
meat in dew season? what a wicked steward were he then, which without all
measure or discretion, observing no order, regarding no man's person or blood,
would set on the table before all men indifferently, were he Lord or lorell,
master or servant, all kinds of disshes at ones both gross and fine?

The.xlij, probation.
Chrisosostom upon, Chrisost. lib. iiij de sacerdotio.
Intend lectioni. i. Ti. iiij, shows thoffice of Bisshops to be to study
the scripture, and thoffice of the laity to know the scripture by their
teaching and preaching sufficient for their salvation.

The.xliij, probation,
S. Augustine shows certain places of scripture to be for pregnaunt August.
epis^. Volusiam.
wits, and certain for the rude and dolardes: But how then can the scripture
be in thenglish tongue for all indifferentlye to read?

The,xliiij. probation.
O how many English readers do take hurt of the Prophets and canticles not
knowwing the mysteries, nor when it is a trope? not knowing when it is to be
taken to the lettere, and when the letter does kylle?

The.xlv. probation.
Gregorius Nazianzen says I is conuenit de rebus diuinis disserere, lib. i.
suae theol*
qui contemplandi acumine coeteris antecellunt. etc. It is mete for them too
intrete of Gods mysteries, which do excede and pass other in excellency of
gift, etc, But then it shall not be lawful for every one to have it in the
vulgar tongue.

The,xlvi. probation.
S. Hierom says that the Jews did not permit any to read the beginning
of Genesis, In proaemi^ E^echielis.
nor the canticles, neither the beginning nor the end of Ezechiell before.xxx.
years. And the Romans suffered none to read the books of Sibylla but only
the ten commissioners named decemviri, Fenestella. lib i. capi. xiii.
and before them the.ij. commissioners named duumviri, So much reverence they
gave to their book, And shall we christians suffer the high mysteries to be
miserably tormoyled of all hands? But ye will say: S. Hierom and Chrisostom
also in certain places seem to allow the laity unto reading of scriptures:
And. S. Hierom did translate scripture unto the Dalmatians. Truth is, many
things for a time have been permitted of devotion, but after seeing the success
naught, they have been taken away. After the beginning, maids, wives, boys,
and men kept vigils together about martyrs tumbes: and Vigilantius for
reproving it was sharply taunted of S. Hierom: yet afterward for inconuenie^ces
it was taken away. Eusebius. lib vi. cap. xxxiij.
And at the beginning the body of Christ was given to the laytie in their
hands to carye home. etc. But thorough witchecraftes and other abuses
committed, that custom was taken away. Likewise the laytie received once
under both kinds, which custom through offenses and perils that chanced,
and that might chance still, is justly prohibited and taken away utterly.
And likewise answer is to be given to all them that make these forsayde
obiectio^s to have the scriptures in english.

The.xlvii. probation.
If that which Eusebius does testify in his time to be true, had been now
verified in these our days, we neded not then to be so ferd of having
scripture in every man's hand. Libro eccl. cap. xvi.
His words be these. Imperiti obseruant ne disputare audeant de ijs quae
ignorant, et de illis testimoniu^ perhibere quae nesciunt. The unlearned ever
observe this, that they dare not once dispute or reason of those things that
they be ignorant of, nor bear testimony of those things which they know
not. But alas now the more ignorant, the more obstinate in mad boldness,
so that by no means thenglish translation may be suffered.

The.xlviij. probation*
Scripturarum intelligentiam non ex propria praesumptione, sed ex maioru^
scriptis and autoritate sequeba^tur quos et ipsos ex apostolica successio^e
intelligendi regula^ suscepisse constabat, Haec Eusebi. lib. xi. Eccl. cap. ix.
The example of Grego. Nazian. and Basil be to faithful christians a sufficient
rule to follow, which if we do, we will say away with thenglishe Bibles, away,
they can not be abiden.

For the readers thereof pass of no expositions of the fathers, but only
stycke to their own bare taking of scripture as they phancye it, and as they
please: where as these.ii. holy doctors studied scripture together, not
presumptuously following their own imagination, but following the doctrine and
authority of the elders, whom they knew to have received the understanding of
scripture even by succession from the Apostels.

The xlix. probation.
If Spiridion iustlye reprehended Triphillius but only for chaunginge of one
word in scripture ( cubile for lectu^) what reprofe are our men worthy, Lib.
i. Tripere. capit. x.
which change many hundred words, yea sentences and all? If holy Basilius
would not suffer one syllable of scripture to be corrupted or altered, lib. vii.
tripert. cap. xxxvi.
but rather would have suffered many deaths, what shall we then say to the
great and damnable corruption and alteration that has been among our men? If
holy Basilius bad the Emperors coke meddle with his cokerye and let scripture
alone, tuu^ est (inquit) de pulme^tarijs cogitare, no^ dog mata diuina de
coquere lib. vij ^rip. ca. xxxvi.
what would he have said to our men these years past?

The.l. probation.
Having the scripture in English causes many braynles bodies to dispute and
reason they know not whereupon, and ever to lay scripture for the wickedlye, as
al heretics ever did, where as in deed in reasoninge with such, scripture
will not serve. Tertull. de praescrip. haerettcoru^ et lib. iiij. co^tra
M^rtionem.
For as Tertullian says, in disputing with an heretic we must not flee to
scriptures, nor pitche our battle there: for there either never or else very
hardly the victory shall be gotten. Heretics wylbe overcome (says Sisinius
unto Nectarius in ye story of Socrates li. 9. trip. ca. 19) neither with
scriptures nor with disputations Approbata ab ^cclesia no^ oportet rursus
rationibus fulcire etc. Nam que^admodu^ par est spiritui fa^cto et Cbristo
diuinitas, ita in suis institutis est aequa authoritas and potestas: Nec minus
ratu^ est quod eeclesia dicta^te spiritu sancto tradidit qua^ quod ipse
tradidit. Haec Cypri. de Lot. ped.
but only by the authority of the church, and by the traditions of the
fathers and elders. So that beside the scripture written we must receive many
traditions not written: many general councels in who^ the holy ghost did
speak: and sundry interpretations upon scriptures made by the holy fathers
being replenished with Gods spirit.

The conclusion of this simple discourse.
Seeing now these probations which be evident against the scripture in English:
seeing also the great hardness that is in scripture with ye causes thereof, and
how many ways the letter does kyl: And seeing again that the universal
church of Christ has utterly forbid the scripture to be in the vulgar
tongue, considering the manyfolde inconveniences that rise thereof, as great
numbres of heresies, disobedience, and contempt of powers, with fleshely
liberty etc. And finally, seeing that by no means so soon as by the scripture
in english, heresies do both spryng daily, and be also maintained, wherein
should good men be more diligent than in thexter patio^ hereof? wherefore it
shall be every faithful christians duty, being in authority, to lay to his
healping hand to the taking away quite (and that with all speed) the English
translations with all heretical English books, which no doubt have been the
greatest occasion of all the mischeifes we have had in this realm of late
days. Through these, our new found religion has ever strongly been
maintained and vpholden. Our new found religion (I say) which ye must needs
confess to have been stark naught and damnable, because the beginning was
aduoutry, the continuance extortion, and the end plain treason. Yea, and
even from the beginning their procedinges (for so they termed them, being
rather worthy the name of retrocedinges) were still from sin to sin: First,
Peccatu^ quod per paenite^tia^ no^ deletur suo pondere ad aliud peccatu^
grauius trabit: Et hoc suppliciu^ domini long omniu^ est grauissimu^, qua^d^
vnu^ peccatu^ per aliud p^nitur, quod peccatur quum in profundu ^enerit,
conte^nit.
forsaking the head of the church, falling from the unity thereof: then
despising all general counselles, all ordinances from the beginning kept
through out christendom: After this spoiling, pollyng, pylling, robbing and
stealing all lands, ornaments and goods of the church (being more fearse
then ever was Julian thappostata) without mercy or pity: And finally
spytefully contemninge all the holy sacraments, with all censures and
judgments of the church and fathers upon scripture, only sticking to their
own, what pleased them to fancy. O lord, was not this a time most miserable?
Jesus be merciful unto us, and grant us never to fall again into the like
palpable darkness.

Of Mass and all other divine service in the church to be in Latin and not
in the vulgar tongue.
ANd here note further (I beseech you) that like as it is now spoken of
scripture not to be in English, even so is it meant that as unlawful it is (yea
and more too, if more may be) that the high mysteries in the sacrifice of Mass
or other divine service should be in English: where as the priest is a common
person and offers up for all the people being the mean between God and them,
so that his communication, is to God, and not to the people. What cause is
there then why divine service should be in English, except ye think that God
understands no Latin? Neither the Italians nor Grecia^s have divine service
in their vulgar tongue. Moreover, at that time of divine service all the comen
people then present, should only put their whole affiau^ce in fide ma^ris
ecclesiae in the faith of our mother the catholyke church: like as our belief
is in the baptism of infantes. Yea, and note further, that it was not without
great mystery the writing of Christ's title at his passion in Hebrewe, Greek,
and Latin. Also it was not without great mysterye that many words were never
translated, as Alleluya, Osanna, Amen, Sabbath, Kirieleison etc. And that
Christ prayed in secret and silence alone, the head for the whole body, to
signify unto us thereby, that the priests office is likewise to do the same,
the common minister for all the people, being mean between God and them. As for
that of Paul to the Corinthians, i. Cor. xiiii.
which might appear to the simple to make for their purpose to have all in the
vulgar tongue, if ye mark it well, it is only spoken for them which do
preach, expound, or interpret scriptures in ye church: that is to say, that
their sermons, their expou^dinges, or interpretatio^s of scriptures (they
being authorized thereunto) must ever be made in that tongue which the hearers
do understand and perceive.

And this (ye know well) both is and ever has been used. And therefore here now
further, A man might demand a question wherefore ye com to the Church I
suppose ye will say (as ye must no doubt, if ye tell the treuthe) that the
chief intent of your coming is or ought to be, to pray (though sermons and
divine service, and the ministration of the holy sacraments be causes also)
seeing that Christ called the Church the house of prayer, Luc. xix.
bringyng for him the testimony of Esaie: and seeing also we have in scripture
so many notable examples concerning the same purpose. Luc. ii.
Anna the prophetisse continued day and night in the temple in fasting and
prayer: Luc. xxiiii.
the Apostles after Christ's ascension remained still in the temple in laudyng
and blessyng God: Peter and John went up in to the temple at the ninth hour of
prayer: Acts. iii.
Solomon besought GOD to grant the petition of all that prayed in the temple:
iii. Re. viii.
and Daniel being a prisoner in Babylon, Dan. vi.
ever looked toward the temple, when he prayed, upon his knees thryse in the
day. This suerly does prove that the chief intent of coming to the church
ought to be to pray. But all this time which now (thanks be to God) is past,
having the divine service in English was an extreme enemy to all godly
prayer and devotion. For then men phansied so to hear what was read (striving
often thervppon in simple judgment) that feruente prayer which ought to be,
was smally regarded. And here now for this time I make an end besechig al
godly people (as for Momus his judgment I pass not of) well to accept this
my labor: seeing that herein is nothing spoken but that which has been
taught for treuthe and believed of al men, in all places, and at al times since
ye primative church: seeing also that herein we lean only to the generalytie
of all christendom to the antiquity of the elders which have received it as
it were by hand even till this day, and to the consent and agreement of all the
holy fathers: Whose wits were as much as our new men's, their diligence as
great, their lerning greater, their study more fervent, their devotion
hotter, their nombre more, their continuance longer, they always taken for
catholics (but the other ever for heretics) always laboring and studiyng that
might be whollye to the profyt of the church of Jesus Christ: To whom, with
the father, and the holy ghost, be all honor and glory, for ever and ever.

AMEN. Memor^^e nouissima: Eccl. vii.
and in aeternum non peccabis. I. S.

A PRAYER.
IESV God and man we beseech thy Majesty,
Of mesureles mercy tender our misery,
Have to help, that help have in thy hand,
Ne cesse with thy (...) repair this Island,
Suffer not Satan and his cursed progeny
To bewitche thy people with scisme and heresy
And strengthen us O God of power and puisaunce,
Never to quail through thy gracious governance
Deed and word in us so proportion
Infinitely yt we acknowledge thy heavenly wisdom
Snared we were and nigh snatched to confusion
Scisme and heresy prevailing in this region.
Have thanks and praise for our restitution.
As we may and can we must and will willingly
Waking and sleping exalte thy Majesty.
Thy mercy for our selves as we ask and have,
Have like mercy we humbly cry and crave
On Philip and Mary, grant the^ of thy mercy
Reign, peace, and power in long life and felicity.
Autoris nomen libri no^ scribitur huius,
Vt placido vultu quisque probaret opus.
Plus circa nome^ quam veru^ plebs stomochatur,
I is adhibens solum, qui placuere, fidem.
Fautes escaped the printer in many of the books.
Leaf. Side. Line. A.v. ij..iiii. read, often hurts. C.viii. i. in the
marge^t, math.ix D.v. i. xvii. read, Acts E.iii. i. xv. put out.,. E.iiii.
ii. in the marge^t, Iac. iiii. H.vii i. in the margent writ, Iren. lib.
tertio. capit. iiii. I.i. i. i. read, and it is. I.i. ii. v. read, that which
has I.ii. ii. xviii. read, do, apereth I.vi. i. xx. read, Altercations, I.vi
ii. xxii. read, sending, How I.vii. ii. xxii. read, none now.


