

(...) Partly of such, as he has Slanderously (...) Harding withal: Partly of
such other, as (...) committed about the trial thereof, in the Text of the
four first Articles of his Reply. With a Reioyndre upon the Principal
Matters of the Reply, treated in the Third and Fourth Articles.

By Thomas Stapleton student in Divinity.

Magna est Veritas, and praeualet.
Great is the Truth, and it preuayleth.
(...) SPES ALIT AGRICOLAS



Printed in Antwerpe, by John Latius, At the sign of the Sower. 1566. With
Special Grace and Privilege.

(...) Maiestatis Gratia Speciali (...) est Thomae Stapletono (...) inscriptum,
A Return of Untruths upon M. Ievvelles Reply etc. per aliquem Typographorum
admissorum tuto and libere imprimendum curare, and public distrahere, nullo
prohibente. Datum Bruxellis.26. Aprilis. Anno.1566.

Subsign. Pratz.

A TABLE OF THE PRINCIPAL MATTERS, BY THE ORDER OF THE ALphabet, Wherein,
Art. signifies the Article. Fol. the leaf.a. and.b. the first and second side.
A.
Asia the less (in great part) understood not the Greek tongue. Proved out of
Strabo against M. Jewel. Art. 3. fol. 64. b. 65. a. and b. Aultars in the
Apostles time. Art. 3. fol. 118. b. S. Augustine our Apostle defended from the
Reproaches, Lies, and Slanders of M. Jewel. Art. 3. fol. 129. b. 130.131. and
133. a. and b S. Augustine our Apostle commended by Venerable Bede. Art. 3. fol.
129. a. and b. by S. Gregory fol. 132. a. and b Athanasius facingly belyed of
M^ Jewel. Art. 4. fol. 27. b Athanasius ad Marcum Papam defended. Art. 4.
fol. 26. b. 27.39.41. b. and 42. a Athanasius thrice banished, and thrice
restored. Art. 4. fol. 159. b. and 160. a Of the Africanes dealing tovvarde
Pope Zosimus, and of their Copie^ of the Nicene Council. Art. 4. fol. 47. b.
and 48. a. and b Appeals to Rome decreed in the Nicene Coun^^ll. Art. ^. fol*
(...) 73. Also in the Council of Sardica. fol. 74. Appeals to the Pope: of
Chrysostom to (...). Art. 4. fol. 82. and in many following. Of (...) Iul^us.
fol. 89.90. and 91. Of Flauianu^ to Leo fol. 92. a. Of The (...) to Leo also
fol. 102. b. Of John Talaida patriarch of Alexandria, to (...). fol. 109. a
(...) prove a Superiorite in him, to whom the Appeal is made. Art. 4. fol.
(...) 104. The Appeal of Donatus to Constantin the Emperor mislyked and
reproved by S. Augustine, by Optatus, and by Constantin him self. Art^ 4. fol.
104. b. 105.106. a No Appeals made of Ecclesiastical matters to any Prince
lavvfully. Art. 4. fol. 104. b. and seq. 107^ and 108. Appeals made to the
Pope, when the Emperor took the contrary part. Art. 4. fol. 108. b. and 199.
a No Appeal removed from the Pope to any other Judge lavvefully. Art. 4. fol.
110. a. and b.
B.
S. Basils place touching the number of Communicants expounded. fol. 7. a
Brittanny received their first, open, and settled Christendom from Rome. Art.
1. fol. 19. b. Art. 3. fol. 124. and 128. Broth^r^ be not always names of
equalite. Art. 4. fol. 119^ Confirmation of Bishops by and from the Pope^ Art.
4. f. 126. b. 127. b. 128. b. 129. Bishops restored by the Pope. Art. 4. f.
158. b. and seq. Reconciled to the Pope. fol. 165. b. and s^q.
C.
The Communion of England differs from the Order of the Mass^ Recorded in S.
Dy^nis^. Art. 1. fol. 3. a. And in S. Basil and Chrysostom. Ibidem. b.
Like^ise in Cyrillus bishop of Jerusalem. Ibidem. fol. 4. a. ^Vh^re Sacrifice
the Communion book lacks. Art. 1. fol. 5. b. and 6. a. In the Comm^nion of
England there is no Consecration: Ibidem. The Number of Communicants at a
Mass or Communion is no part of Christ's Institution. Art. 1. fol. 7. a.
and.b. Item fol. 8. a Communion between those that never savve, one the other.
Art. 1. fol. 10. a. Item between those which were absent one from the other.
Ibidem fol. 14. b. and 15. a. Such Communion in distinction of places proved.
Art. 1. fol. 15. b. The vanity of M. Ievvelles Challenge. Art. 4. fol. 186. a
The Intent of M. Ievvelles Challenge. Art. 1. fo. 34. a. Art. 4. fo. 181. b.
Communion under One kind proved out of holy Scripture. Art. 2. fo. 49. b. and
seq. The words of Christ, Drink ye all of this, do not force the lay
people to R^ceiue the Communion under both kinds. Art. 2. fol. 44. a. and b.
and seq. M. Ievvelles Challenge is ansvvered, but he alters the Question,
three sundry vvayes. Art. 2. fol. 55. a Calfhill and M. Jewel in contrary
opinions. Art. 3. fo. 103. b. and 126. a. and b Constantinople subject to Rome
in spiritual Jurisdiction. Art. 4. fol. 19.20. and 21. Chrysostomes Appeal to
Innocentius the Pope. Art. 4. fol. 84. b. 85.86.87. and seq. Item. 94.95.9^.
Four Conditions ^^quired to a compromisse. Art. 4. fol. 101. b Dedication of
Churc^es in the yer^ of our Lord. 346. Art. 4. fol. 134. b Councelles
Confirmed by the Pope. Art. 4. fol. 134. b. to the leaf 157. The Chalcedon
Council allowed and defended Art. 4. fo. 174. and seq. How Constantinople
obtained the second place after the Bishop of Rome. Art. 4. fol. 155. b. 1^6.
a. and.b.
E.
What were the Syrian psalms of Ephr^m. Art. 3. fol. 93. a England received
their first Faith and Christendom from Rome, not from greeks or hebrews.
Art. 3. fol. 127. and in many leaves following, all M. Ievvelles Arguments to
the Contrary dissolved. The Communion of England, See C. The Service of Engl^nd
in many points contrary to the Catholic Faith. Art. ^. fol. 133. b. 134. a
Emperors never judged over bishops in matters of the Faith Art. 4. fol. 92. b
Bishops often the East subject to the Sea of Rome. Art. 4. fol. 14. b. to the
leaf. 20. (...) fol. 117. to the leaf. 126.
F.
Why the Sacrifice is not Celebrated upon good Frydaye. Art. 2. fol. 54. a The
first preachers of the faith in France. Art. 3. fol. 67. The latin Service in
France, not understood within the first 600. years Art. 3. fol. 100.
G.
How S. Gregory abhorred the name of Universal Bishop* and yet practiced him
self an universal Supremacy over the Church Art. 4. fol. 7.8.9. and in many
leaves following. S. Gregory our Apostle. Art. 4. fol. 24. a
H.
H^vvseling of persons practi^ed in the primitive Church. Art. 1. fol. 11. a.
and.b. the Pope called Head of the Chalc^don Council by the letters of the
Council (...)
TO M. JOHN IEVVEL THOMAS STAPLETON vvissheth the love of Truth.
IF you are, M. Jewel, the Man that you pretend to be, desirous of Gods
honor, a Zelatour in the House of God, and a Boulter out off that Truth,
which you have vaunted, and many do think, can not be found: it shall not
seem strange unto you, much less it shall offend you, if I among the rest,
though a Man to you unknown, yet a Christen Man and your Countreman, do put
my helping hand to this your Zealous enterprise, and as if it were shevve you
some part of the way that may lead you thereunto. For as between the Flynt
and Iron, being stricken together, fire does Fly out, so Judgments and
VVittes contending, the Light off right knovvleadge must needs appear. Such
Light ones appearing, the Truth is soon had. You M. Ievvel, to have this
Truth tried, have proposed your Questions, and have Challenged all that will,
to join issue with you in a number of Articles. To that your Challenge it
has been Ansvvered Copiously and Lernedly. And the Truth has been proved,
not only in the Terms of your Challenge which is less material, but much
more in the Matter, comprised in those Terms. To that Answer you have Replied
largely also and painefully.

In this your Reply as you have spared no Rhetorike, multiplied Allegatyons,
hunted after Common places, entered in to Digressyons, al to make a Shevve of
lerning, and a Countenance of a Just and Full Reply to the Matter it self:
so have you for the Disgracing of your Adversary, and for Discredityng the
Author him self, used much Art and taken great Pains. Now with Scoffs
and Tauntes, Now dissembling a great while his Meaning, and reasoning sadly
against that no man said, coming in after with your, But M. Harding will
say, Then altering quite his text in your Reply, and so confuting at pleasure
your own Inuentyon. At other times not Replying to him at all, but Opposing
off your own store. But one Cast you have invented, which I remember not
that any other writer ever Used before. A Cast I say sufficient alone, if it
were clenly conuayed, and vprightlye practiced, not only to discredit the
Author and to Co^founde the Adversary, but also to overthrow his Doctrine,
and to satisfy the Matter. What is that trovve we? Forsothe you have scored
all alonge the Answer of D. Harding, even from the beginning to the ending,
Untruths, as you call them, Slanders, in deed they be.

In these Untruths, you note to the Reader, not only the presumed faults,
errors or escapes of the Author, in penning and treating his Matter, but much
more you note every Principal point of Doctrine, every Proved Proposition,
and Matter treated, that seemed to you and your humor, Untrue. In this
Inuentyon you take great pleasure. Of it you make great Vau^tes. By it you
think to win the Credit and Persuasion of al men. For, this point you note
to your Reader oftentimes not only in the text of your Reply, but in your
Preface, in your Conclusyon, and in the Table of your book. In your Text,
tovvard the end of your first Article, having the^ charged D. Harding
with.44. Untruths, you Cry out, and say. O M. Harding, Jewel. page 91.
is it not possible your doctrine may stand without lies? So many Untruths,
in so little room, without the shame of the world, without fear of God? In an
other place you put the Reader in mind again of this matter, and you say of
D. Harding. This man could never utter so many Untruths together without some
special privilege. Page 195.
In your Preface you require these Untruths, first and especially to be
discharged, or amended, for thus you say. Before he address him self to his
Second Book, I would counsel him to consider better the ouersightes and
scapes of his former Book. And a little after. But before all things let him
write no more Untruths. For thereof he has sent us enough already. Let him no
more wreast and rack the Scriptures: let him no more neither misalleage, nor
mysconstrue, nor corrupt, nor alter the holy Fathers. Thus many ways you
presume D. Harding to have dealed Untruly. And this you vvil not have your
Reader to forgette. In your Conclusion you put again the Reader in mind of
them, as a Matter above all other to be boren away. For among other things
thus there you speak to D. Harding. Your Untruths be so notorious, and so
many, that it pi^^^th me in your behalf to remember them. But the places be
evident, and Cry Corruption, and may by no shifte be denied. The like you do
in your Table, upon the Name of M. Harding noting very sadly and solemnly the
total sum off Untruths, which by your good Audit arises in the whole
Answer of D. Harding, to the number of 255. adding, that they are with better
advise to be redressed.

Now verily M. Ievvel, were your Audit herein good, and your Notes true,
that so many Untruths in that answer were in deed committed, partly by the
Autho^s fault and oversight (to speak the least) partly (...) and Untrue
Doctrine therein con^^yned* (...) the book worthy to be reproved, (...)
greatly to be blamed. Yea I vvi^^ (...) you M. Jewel, then were his doctrine
(...) tolerated, and his Person never to be cr^^^^ed. Then was it both
vvisely done of you to discover it, and charitably done to express it, to note
it, and to open it unto all the world. For more Charity it is, that one false
Teacher abide the Shame, Blame, and Reproach, then that a Thousand ignorant and
innocent souls be induced to Error, False doctrine, and Heresy.

But if on the Contrary part, these are no Untruths, which for such you have
Noted, M. Jewel, if neither the Doctrine neither the Dealing of D. Harding is
found Untrue, if all these Untruths, (as far as I have yet entered withdraw
you, which is to the one half thereof) be Returned every one upon you (One
Only excepted, which yet is no Untruth in doctrine, but a missetaking of the
Author) if they be proved to be your own Untruths and that Slanderous:
what can remain but that both the Answer of D. Harding, is so far, good
and perfect, and void of Untruth, and you for your part are found to be a
great Slaunderer of your Adversary, and an Open enemy to the Truth, which
you vvil seem to defend?

I will say farther M. Jewel. What if you, not through your whole Reply,
nor yet through out the former Half thereof, which at this time I have only
taken in hand, but through those places only of this Half, in which you
labor in the text to Justify the Untruth noted in the Margin, what I say
if in these small Parcelles of half your Reply, (though in deed the Principal
and most Important Parcelles thereof) you have beside of your own part,
what with false Doctrine, what with extreme Lewd Dealing, committed
certain Hundreds of Untruths your self: then what shall we say unto you, or
of what Credit ought you hereafter to be, with all men, that love the Truth,
and are not Fastened to Factions.

May we not then say to you with the prophet. Esa. 5.
Veh qui dicitis malum bonum, bonum malum? Accursed be you that call evil,
good, and good, evil? which call Truth, Untruth, and persuade Untruths for
Truth? May we not truly take you for one of them, which the Apostle says,
shall come in the later days, In hypocrisi loquentiu^ mendaciu^, Uttering lies
in Hypocrysy? 1. Tim. 4.
For what greater Hypocrysy is there, then to Charge Untruths, (...) Untruly,
and to impugn the Truth with the color of Truth? May you not vvorthely
be thought to be one of them, whom the Prophet describes saying, Esa. 28.
Posuimus mendacium spem nostram, and m^ndacio pr^tecti sumus. We have put our
Confidence in Lying, and Lies have been our Sauegarde* Are you not truly like
to those false prophets of the Jews, who (as the prophet says) Docue^^^^
ling^am suam loqui mendacium, Ierem. 9.
vt inique agerint laborau^^ a^t. Framed their tounges to Utter Lies and took
great pains to Deal Falsely: For so Manifold and so Thick are your
Untruths that it may seem, you have Labored your self to Utter them. Yea
may we not then think, that S. Peter, as it were pointed to you M. Ievvel,
when he said, As there were false prophets among the people (of Israel) so
there shall be lying Masters among you, 2. Pet. 2.
which shall bring in wicked and damnable sects? Verily M. Jewel we may
say all this and much more most truly of you, and that therefore (your
excessive lying and Untrue dealing being so evident) neither your doctrine is
to be tolerated, neither your Person ever more to be credited.

For what kind is there of Authors, that you have not Corrupted, Misalleaged,
False Translated, and by one means or other Abused? What Fault in vvriting
is there that you have not in this your Reply committed? I speak not off your
Whole Reply, but of that Part only which I at this present have taken in
hand to examine, that is, the Effect and Principal Points of your four
first Articles.

A brief Summary of M. Ievvelles Allegatyons.
As touching your Authors and Allegatyons, which you have so Ambitiously
Multiplied through out your book, and whereby the simple are much abused,
beholding therein a Countenance of Lerning, but not able to descrie the
Covered Falsehood, you have Falsified and Misalleaged the Doctors and holy
Fathers of Christ's Church, the Decrees of Councelles, the laws of Emperors,
the Ecclesiastical Histories, the Schoolmen, and other good VVriters a
number. You have falsified and mangled the very Text of holy Scripture, namely
of S. Paul *in one Chapter ix. times as the Reader may see in the third
Article fol. 107. and in certain leaves following. The Text of D. Hard.
falsified.
You have Altered the Text of D. Harding, not when you allege his whole text
alonge in the divisions, as you call them (for that you savve well, were to
much open a legerdemaine) but in the Text of your Own Reply, when you
Repete his words pecemele, to confute them. For there lo, sometime you add a
word, and then dispute against your own Addition (as Art. 3. fol. 62. b.
63. a) at other times you quite Alter his words and meaning, and so you
Reply against that which he never said. This levvdenesse you have committed
in many and sundry places of this part of your Reply, especially in the.3.
Article. Namely fol. 117. five times in one place. In the Letter I.
Other particularites of this your dealing are noted to the Reader in the Table
of this book. But brefely to give you a view thereof, behold M. Jewel
what Authors and of how diverse sorts you have in so thick Allegatyons
Missealleaged, and Abused. I note you vvithall the leaf and page of this
Book, where you shall find them each one so declared and proved to the eye.

The holy Fathers by you thus used or rather misuded are. Doctors Stories, and
other good Authors missealleaged by M. Jewel.


S. Ciprian. Articulo. 3. fo. 70. b. Art. 4. fo. 76. a. 127. a. and. b S.
Basil. Art. 4. fol. 122. b S. Ambrose. Art. 3. fol. 95. a S. Hierom. Art. 3.
fol. 84. S. Chrysostom. Art. 1. fol. 39. Art. 3. fol. 90. Art. 4. fo. 83. a S.
Augustine. Art. 3. fol. 70. a. Art. 4. fol. 57. a. Athanasius. Art. 4. fol. 27.
Leo. Art. 4. fol. 152. b. 163. b. 176. a. S. Gregory. Art. 4. fol. 3. a. fol.
141. a. S. Bernarde. Art. 4. fol. 80. b.
The Historiographers, with whom also you have so dealed, ^ are

Ruffinus. Art. 4. fol. 121. a Socrates. Art. 4. fol. 28. a Sozomenus. Art. 4.
fol. 131. a. 153. b Theodoretus. Art. 3. fol. 124. b. Art. 4. fol. 139. a. 160.
b Cassiodorus. Art. 4. fol. 159. a Beda. Art. 3. fol. 133. a Galfridus
Monemuth. Art. 3. fol. 130. b
Other good Authors both old and new, whom you have in like manner and with
the like Sincerite alleged, are.

Clemens Alexandrinus Art. 3. fol. 90. a Liberatus. Art. 4. fol. 142. a. 155.
a. Sulpitius Art. 3. fol. 100. a Gelasius Art. 4. fol. 175. a Gennadius. Art.
4. fol. 120. b Innocentius. 3. Art. 3. fol. 97. and 98. a Eckius. Art. 3. fol.
87. a
What Counsels you have in like manner falsified and Misalleaged, it may be
seen, Art. 1. fol. 28. b. 37. a. Art. 4. fol. 37. a. 40. b. 71. b. 74. b. In
alleging your Civil Laws and decrees of the Canon law how you have
partly to a wrong understanding drawn them, Councels and Laws
missealleaged.
either of your own ignorance, or of lawyers miss information, partly quite
mangled them and falsified them, you may behold M. Jewel, touching the
first, our Answer to your Reply concerning Justinians Constitution Art. 3.
fol^ 77. and seq. and touching Appeals Art. 4. fol. 103. and 104. concerning
the later point, the laws of Iustinia^ Art. 4. fo. 51. a. 52. b. 53. b. of
Honorious fo. 79. a. and b. and the decrees Artic. 4. fol. 115. and. 176. b.

The Schoolmen likewise, Durandus, Schoolmen Abused The Cause of M.
Ievvelles so many and thick Quotatyon^.
Art. 3. fo. 87. b. Thomas Aquinas. fol. 88. b. and Lyra. fo. 103. b. you have
Alleged for your purpose, but falsely and Corruptely. By such falsehood and
Sleighte, you have Multiplied your Allegatio^s, and furnished your book with
Quotations, not caring how or what you brought, so that the Margyn were
stuffed. These Quotatyons you used as a Call for birds. With them you Tolled
and Bayted your Reader. Who takes in gladly the Bayte of Authorite, but sees
not the Hook of Falsehood and Untruth vvherevvith you Choke him. For this
purpose you have a knacke to macke sundry Allegations which are but one. As in
the fourth Article. fol. 6. a. you do most Ambitiously. Also Artic. 1. fol.
27. and Art. 3. fol. 105. b. By such shevve of lerning you thought to win
credit. And under the Visarde of the Fathers and Councils, of Histories and
Laws, of Authors both old and nevve, you thought to play the part of a
Learned Writer and of a true Teacher. But the visarde being now plucked of,
your Untrue Alleagatyons discovered, your Bonovved Feathers pilled away, you
vvil remain not only for opinion of good lerning as pilde as AEsops davve, but
also for farther Credit off your Word, you will stand (I fear) for
yanckeroute. Verily if Truth may prevail, as she ever has and will
prevail, you for your Untruths (except you redress them) are no more to be
acompted for a Teacher of Truth, but to be taken for (as S. Peter terms
such) a Lying Master.

Of your other yehauyour and Dealing M. Ievvel, if I should put you
particularly in mind, what fault is there of an honest, discrete, and
upright writer to be avoided, that you have not incurred, and either
Ignorantly or vvilfully committed? Your Ouersightes touching the Story, Time,
and Practice of the Church are Great and Many. The great Ouerfightes of M.
Ievvel.
I report you and the Reader to these places for example thereof Art. 3. fol.
82.83. b. Art. 4. fol. 39. b. 42. a. 44. b. 94. a. 140. b. 160. b. 162. b. 164.
b. 174. b. Howbeit this may proceed of Ignorance, and is Excusable.

He claims by heretics.
But that you should Claim by Open Condemned Heretics, and Build your Proufes
upon their sayings and doings, what Ignorance can you here pretend, or
what Color off Excuse can you devise? If you remember you have done no such
thing, Consider I beseech you how Often and how Boldly you allege the
Arrians, their sayings and doings, in the fourth Article against the
lavvfull and dew Obedience, (practiced by the Carholike bishops whom those
Arrians persecuted) to Christ's Vicaire here in earth, the bishop of Rome. For
the readyer view hereof, and how also you Claim by the late Greeks, by
Eutychia^s and by Donatistes, these places noted may point unto you. Art. 1.
fol. 13. a. Art. 4. fol. 75. b. 97. b. 109.110.119. b. 120. a. and b. 126. a.
130. b. 162. b. 163. a. 169. a. If such Plea may commend your Action, then
must you seek for an other Benche, and an other Court. The Catholic Church
admits no such vvitnesses to speak or to give evidence. We have not so
Learned Christ, M. Jewel. This point verily of all levvdenesse, is the
levvdest.

An other slight or Craft you have to destroy a Truth by telling a Truth.
Example whereof you may behold. Art. 4. fo. 160. a. and 161. a. By that
means you make many long Processes, to very short Purposes.

Your manner of vvriting is beside so Dissolut Loose and Negligent, His loose
Manner of vvriting.
or else your self so Impotent, in contradiction, that many times you are
found times by the force of your own reasoning to be Cast in your own
Turn. For a vievve of particular examples in each one of these faults, I
remitt you to these places. For the first, Art. 1. fo. 11, b. 31. b. Art. 2.
fo. 50. b. Art. 4. fo. 62. a. 158. a. For the second, Art. 1. fol. 19. a. 25.
a. 32. a. Art. 4. fol. 149. b. 150. a. For the third and last. Art. 2. fo.
45. a. Art. 3. fol. 85. b. 111. b.

His vvro^ge and lewd manner of Reasoning.
Your manner of Reasoning, is so beside al Reason, and so Squarre from the
Purpose, that thereof arise a huge and main Number of lewd and Fond
Arguments, which by the Force of your talk must needs be Concluded. Verily
no less fond and foolish, then those which you made and framed your self
also in your Reply under the name of D. Hard^nges Arguments. Only this is the
difference. Those in your Reply were fathered of you upon D. Harding untruly
(as it has been othervvhere declared unto you) and were your own, By M.
Rastel.li. 2. cap. 4.
but made in sport, or else to make sport: These which are to be found in
this Book, are rightly youres, and of your self made in good earnest. I have
only brought them in to their Form, and exemplifyed them by the like. Wherein
how uprightly I have dealed, I make every Indifferent Reader, yea your self
M. Jewel, if any Indifferency be in you, the Judge. Where and in what
places these your lewd and fond Arguments may be found, because the
number is not convenient to be noted in this place, I remitt you to the Table
of this Book, and to the first letter of your own Name therein. Other
general examples of your lewd Dealing, or rather VVra^gling, you may
consider M. Jewel (not to trouble you with long search thereof) Art. 1. fo.
4. b. 17. b. Art. 2. fol. 46. b. Art. 3. fol. 62. b. 121. b. Art. 4. fol. 3. a.
30. a. 56. b. 133. b. 185. a. 186. b. His lewd dealing and wrangling.
Many particular faults might yet more be noted. But for a short vievve
thereof, I remitt you M. Jewel, or any other the Reader hereof to the Table
of this book, and the place, of it above said. All which laid together,
every Indifferent Reader and your self also shall see, except in such things
you can see and not see, that both for your Untrue Allegatyons of the Fathers,
the Councelles, the very text of holy Scripture, the Ecclesiastical histories,
the Laws and Decrees, and of other good Authors both Old and Nevve, as also
for your dishonest and lewd dealing through your whole manner of vvriting,
neither your Person is to be Credited, and much less your doctrine to be
tolerated.

By this also it may appear, that I have rightfully Returned Untruths upon
you, The Title of this book.
and have therefore not without good Cause Entitled this my small labor. A
Return of Untruths upon M. Jewel etc. which yet I have so Entitled not only
for this Cause, but also and that Principally because the Untruths which in
these Four Articles, to the Number of a Hundred twenty and fyve, you have
charged and turned upon D. Harding I have discharged him thereof, and Recharged
or Returned them upon you again. The other newly Charged upon you to the
number of certain hundreds, are such as you have committed in your Reply, in
such places as you labor to Justify and to prove, that thing, which in the
Margin of D. Hardinges text you noted for Untruth. Which pains you take not
always, and therefore always I enter not to your Reply, but shortly do
Justify the untruth, and so Return it upon you for a Slander. Only you take
that pains, when the Untruth requires such a proof or declaration: As
when it contains a Matter of Doctrine. And at such times I enter your
Reply, and what I find touching that untruth, I go thourough with it,
especially in the third and fourth Articles. In the other two why I do not
so, the reason shall be given in my Preface to the Reader.

But touching these Untruths, Upon what grounds, M. Jewel has Noted D.
Harding with Untruths.
which it has liked you M. Jewel in these four first Articles to charge D.
Harding vvithall, if we should Consider a little your manner of Dealing
therein, and somevvhat specify the same, vvoulde it, trovve you, thereby
appear, that you did it, either for the Love and Zele of Truth it self, or
else upon good and substantial grounds moved thereunto? No truly. But directly
the Contrary. For (as touching the first) what Love or Zele of Truth can be
presumed to have been herein (I appeal but to all indifferent Readers) when
you note that for Untruth, which you could not be ignorant, was not the
saying of D. Harding him self, but of his Author alleged then presently?
Examples of this your Dealing the Diligent Reader may epsy. Art. 1. fo.
10.26. and 29. Also Art. 3. fol. 120. b. Art. 4. fo. 48. b. For in these
places, you note for untruths those words which are the very words of S.
Hierom, of S. Augustine. Of Leontius, of Origin, The Doctors own sayings are
made D. Hardinges Untruths.
and of the Nicene Council out of Franciscus Turrianus. All which Authors
being by D. Harding in those places alleged, are noted by M. Jewel to speak
untruly. If you vvoulde needs note the matter for untrue, you should have
noted the untruth M. Ievvel upon such and such Authors, not upon D. Harding.
Now what shall I call that in you, gross ignorance or vvillfull
dissimulation, when you note those sayings of D. Harding for Untrue, which
are the very sayings of other good Authors though not alleged then presently?
So you Note that for Untruth, yea and for a foul deprauation or holy
scripture, which is the very saying and doctrine of S. Hilary. Art. 2. fol.
48. b. The like you do Art. 4. folio. 170. a. by a saying of Innocentius the
first, defended also by S. Augustine. In these points M. Jewel either you
loved not the Truth, or else you must confess, you missed of the ground
thereof.

Untruths noted upon a wrong dissembled meaning of the Author.
Again when you dissemble the Course of D. Hardinges treatise, and upon that
Dissimulation do score up Untruths, because that is not Concluded, which in
deed was not of him in that place Intended, can this your dissimulation
proceed of the zele and love of Truth? In the first Article, when D. Hardinge
alleged Clement, S. Dyonise, Justinius Martyr and Ireneus, S. Basil and
Chrysostom and last of all Cyrillus for proof of the Sacrifice of the mass,
you note upon al these Allegatyons a number off untruths, because (you say
there) those Doctors do speak of a Communion and not of Private Mass,
whereas yet (as I said) they were expressly brought to prove the Sacrifice
of the Mass not to prove private Mass. Of this your leude dealing you may
read more particularly in this Return Art. 1. fol. 4. b. But this your open
and manifest dissimulation, can it (I appeal to your own Conscience) proceed
of any Zele or love of the Truth? Did the Truth, I say, move you to note
those Untruths? The like dissimulatyon you use in a number of other Untruths,
which you have scored upon D. Harding, as the diligent Reader may consider
Art. 1. fol. 5. and 6. a. folio. 9. b. 10. b. 17. b. Art. 2. fo. 53. a. Art. 3.
folio. 117. b. 119. a. 121. a. 123. a. Artic. 4. fol. 185. a. 186. b. but
especially in the same Article. fol. 2 b. and.3. a. where you charge D.
Harding though not with Untruth in the Margin, yet with a great Untruth in
your text, as if he had nipped a saying of S. Gregory quite in the midst,
scoffing also there at him, as if he had (you say) the Choynecyngh etc. and
all that because (you say in that place) D. Harding alleged those words of
S. Gregory to prove that the B. of Rome was called the Universal bishop.
which thing in that place was not of him at all Intended, but an other Matter
expressly taken in hand, as in that place (Art. 4. fol 2. b. and.3. a.) you
may behold and see to the eye M. Jewel. Now this so open and great
dissimulation of youres, in scoring and charging of Untruths upon D. Harding,
has it I say on your part any Color or Appearance, of any love or zele of the
Truth? All the world sees you did it to Deface, to Shame, and to discredit
your Adversary, whom otherwise you could not with any force of good Reason,
any lerning, truth, probabilite or Authorite overthrow.

Other your Untruths scored upon D. Harding are such sayings and Assertions,
as not only D. Harding but all the Catholic Church affirms and holds for
assured verites of the Catholic Faith. Common Verites of the Catholic
Church, noted for special Untruths of D. Harding.
You could not then justly note them as special Untruths of D. Harding, as
if they had been of his own Inuentyon, but if you vvoulde needs score them up
for untruths, you should have scored them upon the whole Church of Christ,
or (as you esteem that Church,) upon all Papists in general. For now as
you have ordered the Matter, your brethern do vaunte (as I have heard some of
them my self) that D. Harding has committed this great number of untruths,
him self by his own negligence or vvilfulnesse. Such your untruths so noted
may shortly be seen. Art. 1. fol. 1. b. touching the name of Mass. fol. 6. b.
7. b. 8. a. 11. b. 20. a. and. b. 32. a. Art. 2. fol. 41. a. 43. a. 44. a. 54.
b. 57. a. Art. 4. fol. 1. a. 58. b. 71. a. 111. a. 116.126. b. 134. a. 165. a.
170. a. etc. By this way you might note M. Ievvel a number of Untruths not
only upon all Catholic vvriters of these days, but also in the Old Fathers
and Doctors of Christ's Church, who say herein no less then we say, as
upon these your Untruths it has been here declared. Again these matters
being between you and us in question and controversy, you to proclaim them
for untruths, it is to blow the Triumph before the Victory.

But that in this your Singular Devise of Scoring up Untruths, you rather
sought means to fill up the Score, then to boulte out the Truth, Untruths
repeted to make up the Score.
it may well appear by the repeting of one self Untruth, so often times.
For some you repete four times in one Article, as Art. 1. fol. 32. a. some
other three times, as in the same Article fol. 40. b. and Art. 4. fol. 172. but
many there are which you repete twice, only to make up the Number. As Art.
1. fol. 8. a. Art. 2. fol. 53. b. 54. b. Art. 3. fol. 123. b. Art. 4. fol. 19.
By which your dealing it may easily appear to any Indifferent Reader that in
the great Number of these Untruths, you sought more the Number then the Truth.

To you therefore M. Jewel that thus untruly have dealed, that so many ways
have betrayed your corrupted Affectyon, and Blotted your self so much,
intending to Blemish your Adversary, I may well answer with the wise and
discrete saying of that Noble Philosopher Plato, vvherevvith he touched that
Rude Reprocher Diogenes. Calcasti fastum Platonis, sed maiore fastu. Or rather
I may tell you, as in the Grand Senate off Rome it was told ones to a
dissolut and ryotous young Man declayming sadly off Virtue, Quis te ferat
cenantem vt Crassus, Plutarchus in Catone Vticensi.
aedificantem vt Lucullus, loquentem vt Cato? Who can abide thee, to lavish in
sumptuous building as Lucullus, to riot in ba^ketyng as Crassus, and yet to
talk sadly as an other Cato? Which Reproach as he had right vvorthely before
that Honorable Senate, for his extreme dissimulation and vvretched Hypocryse:
so deserve you M. Jewel in the estimation of all men to be taken, for a
dissembler and Hypocrite, you (I say) that with such and so manifold
Untruths do charge other of untruth, and dealing your self most untruly
pretend to be a Singular proctour of Truth. For who may abide you M.
Jewel, to Corrupt the Fathers as have done old heretics, to scoff like an
other Lucyan, to lie as fast as an other Sinon, and yet to talk like a
Teacher of Truth, to preach like an other Paul, and to be a Comptroller of
other men's Untruths? Blamers should allvvaie be Blameless, and Fault finders
ought of all right to be Faultelesse. Remember the holy Scripture Master
Jewel, that speaks thus unto you. Hypocrita, eijce primum trabem do oculo
tuo, Matthew. 7.
and tunc videbis eijcere festucam de oculo fratris. Thou Hypocrite, cast out
first the beam out of thy own eye, and then thou shall see to pike out the
mote of thy brothers eye. You M. Jewel that note your brother of untruth,
deal first your self Truly. Then shall you see better, what is Untruth, and
then may you more boldly tell the other his fault. Remove away first the
mighty beam of your so many, so Notorious, and so Open Untruths. Then may you
with a better face, pike away the motes, the small errors and escapes,
which your brothers eye seems to have.

For like as the Son or Moon at their arising or going down, A Similitude.
when either the Misty Morning vapors, or the evening falling dew dimmeth
our sight between, do seem to our eyes much greater, then tovvarde none time
or midnight when mounting on high they have passed all such lettes: or like
as the shining son beams yield not their light so clear, where a spotted
glass vvindovve stands between, as in the open field: so verily M. Jewel
your Judgment being partly dimmed with a wrong persuasyon of many
Untruths, partly blinded with a corrupted Affection of Singularite, desire of
Contradiction, or some other worse passion, can not so clearly Pearce to the
true trial of the Truth, and to descrie Untruth in others, as if your
Judgment were Upright, and your Affection Clear. For now the Case in you
standing, as we see it does, every light escape in D. Harding seems a
wilful and Manifest Falsifying of the Author, every true and Catholic
proposition, contrary to the humor of your Affection seems a Notorious and
wilful Untruth. Yea and of this it falls out, that many times either you
miss the true meaning of your Adversary for want of Judgment, or else
dissemble it utterly for no want of evil Affection, so to take Occasion and
Matter of Untruth. Of this also it arises, that the Fathers own sayings,
are D. Hardinges Untruths. And to make matter of Reply, D. Harding is made to
say, that which he never said.

Correct therefore your self M. Jewel, and Amend that is amiss: Your
great Faults I mean, which in this preface you see Opened unto you. Which
for your own sake I have so Opened, that beholding them at the first so
Particularly laid for the, you might think either that you are in deed
(which I promised at the first) brought somevvhat in the way, to find out
the Truth, which so earnestly you pretend to seek after: or else that you are
shortly admonisshed to Clear your self, and to teach us the Truth, if we
have missed thereof. God send you M. Jewel, I heartily vvishe, a hearty and
earnest love of the Truth, at perfect knowledge thereof, and Grace from
Almighty God to teach other the same. Far you well in Christ Jesus.

Thomas Stapleton.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
ALbeit in the Epistle prefixed to M. Jewel, I have (Christen Reader) said so
much, as may in great part suffice to instruct and prepare thy Attention to
the reading and understanding of this Return of Untruths etc: yet, to
thentent that before thou enter to perusing thereof, thou may all things
thouroughly be instructed, I have thought good shortly to lay before thee, the
Cause of this our Enterprise: the Order and manner of our present writing: the
Matter principally contained therein: and the profit that hereof may be looked
for.

Touching the first it is not unknown to all those that any thing have
trauayled in perusing such books, as of late have come forth touching matters
in religion controuersious, neither what Challenge was published at Paul's
Cross of late years, neither what Answer has been made thereunto, nor last of
all what Reply has come forth against that Answer. The Reply is known to
be great, esteemed to be learned, and thought to be such a piece, as the party
impugned shall never be able to answer. What answer the party can make, it
shall in the Reioynder appear. But for one man to answer the whole, and that
stitche by stitche (as the Replier requires) both the time would be so
long, that many a soul in the mean might perish, abused by that lewd piece
of work, and also the book would be so great that few would bye it, fewer
peruse it, and ^ot one among a hundred read it over. It has been thought
good therefore of those that in Truths cause love to take pain, that for
better expedition, many set upon it, though each one did but a little. The
Answerer has not been idle, as by his Reioynder it will well appear. Yet other
men's pens he could not stay, every one to follow, as Zele pricked forward,
D. Sanders in the 7. book.
One has confuted an Article of the Reply: an Article among the rest most
importa^t. An other has taught us to Bevvare of M. Ievvel. M. Rastel.
I have thought good to Justify the Untruths, which it has liked the Replyer
to charge upon his Adversary all alonge his Reply. To this I was moved by
diverse reasons. The Cause of the setting forth of this Return etc.
I ever thought (as in the process afterward I saw it fell out) that the
weakest parts through out the Reply, should be those, where such Untruths
were noted. For I thought not, nor any man else I trow will think, either that
the Replyer has so little wit as not to epsy, which parts were most lykely
to be Untrue, and there to score up his Untruth (the proper Badge in deed of
this Replyers Cognysance) either that he owed any such good will to his
adversary (who^ by that Invention he minded for ever to deface and discredit)
as that he would dissemble and wink at great faults, and note only certain
small escapes. These weaker parts therefore being proved strong and good, I
thought the residewe of the whole Answer should need at al no defense: but
might stand for true, as being passed over by the Replyer without any note of
Untruth. For as in a broken net, the holes being sowed up, the whole net is
good and will serve well again: so it seemed me, these presumed Untruths being
redressed or discharged, the whole Answer might go for good, godly, and true.
By this means therefore going through the Reply, a compendyous way was
found, shortly and yet sufficiently both to defend the former Answer, and to
satisfy this Reply. And this lo was one and the first Cause that moved me to
(devise this Return. An other Cause (which perusing a long the Untruths as
they stood in the Margin of the Divisions I espied) was this. The Replyer in
all these four Articles, the former half of his Reply, has noted for
Untruths, both the principal Matters treated and proved in the Articles, and
also the Conclusions thereof, as not yet proved. I saw therefore that in
Justifying these Untruths it was necessary to enter the Reply: to labor the
principal Matters: and to prove, that all things were well proved. This is in
effect to answer the whole. For, other small matters neither so weighty, as the
Replyer would cauille at them, neither so weak as he could find any Color
of Untruth to set upon them, might well for breuities sake, in a full and
perfect Reioyndre be omitted. This therefore I have done, and by this the
Replyer may think him self sufficiently answered, in this former half of
his Reply.

How, in what Order and manner, and how far I have this done, it shall now
appear. I do first lay forth the words of D. Harding printed in a several
letter, The Order and manner of setting forth the same.
upon and about the which, the Replier has noted the Untruth. Then follows
i^mediatly the Untruth and the number thereof noted by the Replyer, word for
word, as it stands in the Margin of his Reply upon the text of D.H. After
in an other distinct letter, follows the Justifying and discharging of the
Untruth, whereby the Replyer is Recharged, the Untruth upon him Returned, and
he proved a Slaunderer. When occasion serves, as when some principal Matter
containing doctrine and concerning the state of the Question occurreth, whereby
the Reader may be edifyed, the whole text of the Reply concerning that matter
is inserted, and to every parcel thereof Answer is made. In the first Article I
have done this only in two places, co^tayning the very substance of the
Article, as I shall anon declare. All the other Untruths I Justify shortly
without entering to the text of the Replyer. Thus I have there done because D.H.
has him self made a full and perfect Reioyndre to this first Article. In the
Second Article, as the Untruths there noted, require very seldom such labor,
but may shortly be Justified, so have I not often entered the text of the
Reply, but only about the Principal matters of the Article, whereof I shall
speak anon. In the third and Fourth Articles, especially in the Fourth, I
have not left any whit of M. Iewelles Reply, were it never so long and
tedyous, unanswered, in such places as Untruths were noted. What principal
Matters I have after this sort in these four Articles treated, and discussed,
it remains now to declare.

The Principal Matters treated and contained therein^ Fol. 21. and seq.
In the first Article, the Untruth noted against the daily external Sacrifice
of Christ's Church, I have persecuted at large and touched M. Iewelles Reply
therein. This I have done at large and abundatly, because the ground of this
Article, which is of private Mass stands hereupon. For a daily external
Sacrifice on the priests part being necessary, and yet the people not bound
by any law or precept daily to communicate, it remains most necessary, that
in Case none will Receive, the priest may and ought to Receive alone, seeing
without Receiving the Sacrifice may not be celebrated. And thus private Mass,
which is the sole Receiving of the priest, is found not only lawful, but
necessary. In the last Untruth in like manner touching the place of Chrysostom,
M. Iewelles whole Reply is answered, private Mass is expressly proved out of
Crysostom, and the Replyer forced by all reason to Subscribe.

In the second Article, concerning the very questyon of the Challenge, Fol.
43. b 44. a.
the Replyer alters it and enlarges it, and enters a new Action,
confessing secretly that in the former he is Guilty. The grounds of the
Question, as that Christ is wholly received under each kind. and that the
Commandment of Christ. Drink ye all of this, partayneth not to the lay
people, but to pristes only (for these being granted, there is neither
Inconvenience, neither the breach of any Commandment committed in receiving
under Fol. 41. a. fol. 44. a. and seq.
One kind) are both treated and proved in two several Untruths of that
Article, and the Replyers text in the later point answered.

In the third Article it is proved against Untruths noted to the contrary,
both that we at the first Receiving of the Faith in our Nation, Fol. 56. b.
57. b. and seq.
and that the East and West Church within the first 600. years had their
Church Service in the Greek and Latin tounges, which the Common people
understood not. Whereby at the beginning the Replyer is forced by all reason
to Subscribe. What other special Matters in this Article are treated, and
how far I have entered the Replyers text, Art. 3. fol 134. a.
because at the end of the same Article I have already particularly declared,
I think it not needful here to repete.

In the Fourth Article these principal matters are more especially treated
and discussed by occasion of the Untruths noted. Art. 4. fo. 7. and. seq. 9.
and. seq.
First how John of Constantinople usurped the Title of universal Bishop, in
what sense he usurped it, and how the holy Pope Gregory abhorred it. Next that
the same Learned Father S. Gregory not withstanding he so abhorred the Name,
Practiced yet him self a Supremacy universal over all parts of the Church,
Fol. 29. and seq.
both of the East and of the West. The great Co^trouersy touching a (anon of
the Nicene Counsel for the Popes primacy forged (as the Replyer says) by
Pope Zosinius is again a fresh debated, and the long lying text of the
Replyer in that behalf thouroughly answered, Fol. 50. e^ seq.
Zosimus clered and the Popes primacy confirmed. Justinians Co^stitutions and
decrees confessing the Popes primacy are defended from the lewd and fond
expositions of the Replyer, and his whole text thereupon perfectly examined.
Fol. 59. and seq.
By occasion of the 104. Untruth noted by the Replyer, it is proved by holy
Scripture, and confirmed by the Fathers, that Peter was left by Christ as the
Foundation of his whole Church and therefore as the principal Gouuerner, Fol.
62.63. et seq.
and Universal Vicair the^eof. The next Untruth forced me to discover a great
number of textes of holy Scripture racked, wrested, and corrupted, partly in
general by all protestants, partly by the Replyer him self in this Fourth
Article. Wherein many other points touching the Popes primacy (the matter of
this Article) by the way are opened. The.106. and 107. Untruths occasioned me
to enter to the Replyers text touching Appeals to Rome. Fol. 71. and seq. to
the leaf. 111.
There it is proved against all the Arguments and Obiectio^s of the Replyer,
that Appeals to Rome were decreed by the holy Councels, practiced by the holy
and learned Fathers, namely of Athanasius and S. Chrysostom two of the greatest
patriarchs after the B. of Rome, and two of the most learned Fathers of the
greek Church. Last of all that such Appeals do necessarely importe a
Sovereign Authorite of the Pope over the whole Church. Item that no Appeals
can be removed from the Pope or made to the Emperor in causes ecclesiastical,
as the Replyer labors in vain to prove. It is proved also at large in this
Article, by occasion of Untruths noted to the Contrary, that the Pope erreth
not in faith: that he has allwaies been over the bishops of the East, that
the Pope Confirms bishops, Fol. 111 117.127.135.158.167.107.
that he Confirms and Approves al General Councelles and without him none
can be confirmed: that he Restores bishops and Patriarchs unjustly deprived,
to their Churches again: that he Reco^cileth them upon penance after
Excommunication: last of all that all doubts and questions of greater
Importance have been Removed to him. All this by the Practice of the first.600.
years. And in each of all these Matters the whole text of the Replyer is
answered line by line and stiche by stiche. In fine it is proved against the
Replyers Untruths, Fol. 175. e^ seq.
and against his whole text thereupo^, both that the Bishop of Rome was
Called, Saluted and Entitled Universal bishop in the Chalcedo^ Counsel: yea and
that of the Bishops and Council it self: and also that many ways and often
he has been called Head of all Churches, Fol. 193.194.
and bishop of the Universal Church. By the means whereof the Replyer is
forced by good and express evidence, either to revoke his ouerbolde Challenge,
or else to come to the Book and Subscribe. And thus much of the principal
matters especially treated and debated in the process of these four Articles.

What profit of all these Matters thus debated, may of thee be looked for
(gentle Reader) thou may soon concieue considering only this one Case. D.
Harding in his Answer, treating first most of these Matters, both has uttered
such good lerning as he found in other Catholic writers, treating before of
the same in latin: and also by his learned and private study beside has added
much thereunto, M. Jewel has in his Reply partly uttered such escapes to
avoid the Authorites alleged, as commonly of the Latin writers of his sect
are used, partly and that most commonly has aleaged beside against the Truth
all tha^ he could find in other, or has read him self. He has, I say,
said for him self, as much and more then could honestly be said. He has
opposed, Argument^, Allegations, reasons and Authorytes for the Contrary part:
As if he did not Reply against an other, but treat him self freely and
freshly of the matter. By this means in these two books (the Answer of D.
Harding, and the Reply of M. Jewel) both parts have said their mind, the
one for the Catholic faith: the other not only against the Catholic faith,
but also for his own sect and opinion. I have been therefore driven in
persecuting the text of the Replies, not only to defend the Catholic, but
also to answer the heretic: not only to uphold our own grou^des and to
repair them with new defenses, against the Replyers new assaults, but much
more to overthrow the Adversaries grounds and foundations which he opposes
and sets up afresh against the Truth. I have done therefore herein a third
and new labor in most points not before done of any. By perusing whereeof,
thou shall (gentle Reader) be instructed, not only how to maintain the
Catholic doctrine, but also how to overthrow the heresy: not only to see the
grounds of the Catholic faith established, fortified and confirmed, but also
to behold the fickle foundations of the Lutheran and Caluinian Religion
(touching the points here treated) battered, shaken, and overthrown. Brefely
thou shall see in the person of M. Jewel and of his manner of reasoning, that
the foundation of his and his fellows Religion, especially against their dew
Obedience to the Sea Apostolic, stands upon Ignorance of the stories,
falsifying of the doctors, of councelles, of the laws, His Untruths in this
Return Arise to.562.
and of other good Authors both old and new. For hereof lo, Arise the
hundreds of Untruths committed by this Replyer in the treating only of these
principal matters above specified and in fighting only against the weakest and
vntruest parts of his adversaries Answer. If our purpose had been, to have
gone alonge his whole Reply and to have persecuted his text upon other parts
of the Answer, not so noted with Untruths, and therefore of all lykelyhood the
more True parts, the Stronger, and the less able truly to be reproved, this
Replyer then should tell by the Thousands, and might go for a Pinner for his
Numbers of Untruths. But of his Dealing in the Epistle prefixed to him, it
has been said sufficiently. To return to our matter I say.

If the Argument of these other three first Articles do less delight, as being
in deed of less importance, yet Consider I beseech thee (gentle Reader, if
thou shortly desire to be informed which way to take) and diligently peruse
the Fourth Article of this book. Namely in such places where M. Iewelles
Reply against Appeals made to the Pope, against the Confirmation of General
Councelles, and of Bishops that were doubtefully Ordered, against the Restoring
of bishops deprived, the Reconciliation of bishops excommunicated, and against
the Authorite of the Pope over the East Church is examined, answered, and
confuted. For in those places it shall appear, both with what shifts,
absurdities, Inconveniences, and open Untruths the allegatyo^s of D. Harding
are impugned, and much more with what extreme lying, lewd and Untrue dealing,
the contrary part is by M. Jewel vpholded and defended. Being in this Article
persuaded, every wise and discrete Reader, shall incontinently in all other
matters now denied by heretics, retire to the unite and belefe of the
Catholic Church. For the bishop of that Apostolic See being by such Clear
and so manifold Practice, by so many Grave and Irrefragable Authorities
beside, both of holy Scripture and of the learned Fathers, Confessed and proved
to be the Head, Chief Ouerseer, and Guide of Gods house (the universal
Church) being also evident that his Faith (as it is also in this Article
proved) in any matter to be decreed and delivered to the Church, Fol. 111. and
seq.
neither has at any time nor can possibly err: what doubt remains, but in
all points we must believe as that holy See believes, and behave our selves in
the house of God, in all things touching the Service of God, after no other
way or facyon, then the order taken by that Souerain See has of long
appointed, used and accustomed, This Article therefore, as I have especially
labored therein, and spent more then half this book thereupon: so every
Reader that seeks by this my small labor to be aedified or instructed, I
desire most earnestly, diligently to peruse.

If any one of my dear Countremen may hereby, or by any part of this rude
labor (rudely in deed, and hastily compyled) be instructed, or any way
edified to a better consideration of his duty to God (as that many may I most
heartily wish, and verily hope) him or them for all reward I beseech to help
me and them selves with their good prayers: to help I say the Catholic
Church (whereof both we and they are children and members) to call earnestly
and often upon the Mercy of God, that he stay this raging storm off schism
and heresy, neither suffer it to ouergrowe this part of the world (as the
Arrian heresy ouergrewe the East Church) and to crepe on like a Cancre, as we
see it daily does (only for the multitude of our iniquities provoking allwaie
his just indignation) but that he look mercifully upon his spouse, and
confound al her enemies, Psalm. 128.
vt co^fundantur and auertantur retrorsum omnes qui oderunt Syon. that they be
confounded and recoyled back all that hate Sion, the holy Catholic Church.
Farewell.

In Antvverpe the 24. of July. 1566. Thomas Stapleton.

FAVLTES ESCAPED IN printing of this book.
Leaf. Side. Line. Fault. Correction. In The Epistle. 10. a. 20. Choynecyngh
Choyneco^gh In The.3. Article. 113. b. 3. fore fere 114. a. 10. fiet fit 116.
a. 20. as is 121. In the margin Saint Paul to the Corin. etc. put it out. 122.
123. 125. b. 15. put in the margyn Pantaleon in Chronographia 129. a 12. nation
Incarnation. 134. b. 21. ten nine In The.4. Article. 104 b. 15. three but three
assaults made, but 107 b. 11. extrema externa 27 comentum conuentum 115. b. 1.
decree draw 13. 3000 300 133. a. ^. pointed painted 13^. b. 6. (...) (...)
146. a. 16. were summoned were not summoned 147. b. 33. Constantius
Constantinus 165 a. 5. of often

A RETVRNE OF VNTRVTHES UPON M. IEVVEL. etc.
The first Article.
THE communion likewise of the Sacrament, Diuis. 1.
is a public feast by Christ through the ministry of the priest in the same:
prepared for every faitheful person.

Page 1.
The first Slanderous Untruth of M. Jewel, for charging D. Harding with
Untruth, where none is. Harding.
For there is no such preparation.



And so being common by order of the first institution, and by will of the
ministres, it ought to be reputed for common not private.



The second Untruth of M. Jewel, and that a Slanderous.
which will deem the worste of the Priest, yet to all well meaning folcke, such
will does appear, who know the duty of the priest to be, to distribute unto
all which duly prepared come to receive. The priests will is not to be judged
of any external usage or practice, such as you gather, but of this only, if
any coming to the communion, duly and semely prepared be repelled of the
priest. Which thing because in no priest appears, or if ever it appeared, by
the Church it was never allowed, therefore it is true, that by the will of the
minister admitting gladly al faithful folcke prepared thereunto, the feast is
common for all, not private for the priest alone. These two Untruths are
gathered only of the external behavior of the priest: whereas the truth
thereof depends of the preparation and devotion of the people jointly
concurring with the ministry of the priest, by the means whereof the feast
is common. It appears also by Reservation, that the Catholic Church
prepares more for the people, then the protestants which abhor from all
Reservation.

Diuis. 2.
Therefore in this respect, we do not acknowleadg any private Mass, but leave
that term to Luthers school, where it was first divised.

Page 2.
The third Slanderous Untruth.
The 3. Untruth.



Diuis. 5.
The vnblouddy and daily sacrifice of the church, commonly called the Mass.

Page 4.
The 4. Untruth. The old Fathers never commonly called it so.

The 4. slanderous Untruth, ^oyned with an other Capitain Untruth touching
the old Fathers, which makes the fifte. Ambros. 33. epist. Leo ep. 81. Greg.
li. 4. epist. 32.
otherwise called the Mass. Howbeit all were it true, that the old Fathers
never commonly called it so, yet were it no Untruth, to say it is commonly
called so: For if these ix. C. years only the daily sacrifice had been
commonly called the Mass, were it an Untruth, trow ye, to write, commonly
called the mass? The i will of Brytanny is now commonly called England and, and
Scotland. Yet the old writers above little more then a thousand years, never
called it so. Shall it be now an Untruth if a writer say, The i will of Britanny
commonly called England and Scotland? But the old fathers even within the
compass of six hundred years, did commonly call it so. S. Ambrose, Leo the
first, and S. Gregory. The old fathers in the counsels off Can. 12.
Milleuet, of whom S. Augustine was one, and in the Can. 3.
second at Carthage in Afrike, Can. 2.
the old fathers of the counsels of Arelat, off Can. 22.
Orleans, and Can. 21. and 47.
Agatha in France, the old Fathers of the councels of Can. 4.
Ilerd and Ca^. 3.
Gerund in Spain, all within the compass of 500. years speaking of that
daily sacrifice do call it by the name of Mass. Judge now gentle reader,
whether it be an Untruth, to say, Commonly called the Mass.

We Have for proof of the sacrifice beside other places etc, the Institutyon
of Christ in the new Testament.

The 6. Slanderous Untruth.


of all, the sacrifice of Christ on the cross is not of any Evangelist named,
and yet off the Evangelists we learn, that Christ was sacrificed on the Cross.

That S. Andrew the apostle, touching the substance of the mass, worshipped
God every day with the same service as priests now do in celebrating the
external sacrifice of the Church.

Page 5.


The 7. untruth Slanderous, and the 8. touching. S. Andrew.
Therefore you do but fondly to make as though it were a Contradiction bewene
the Communion and the Mass. Again S. Andrew offered unto God the sacrifice of
his dear Son, the body and blood of our Savior. This is the substance of the
Mass of which only D. Harding here speaks. This was no such Communion as ye
do practice, where no external sacrifice of Christ his body is. This was mass
where such external sacrifice is made.

Abdias who saw Christ our Savior in the flesh.



The 9. Slanderous Untruth.
But how proves M. Jewel the history of Abdias to report Untruly? Marry
says he of it. It is a very legende of lies. This is sone said, but nothing
proved. As for that which in the text M. Jewel brings for proof hereof, it
is of M. D. Harding thouroughly confuted.

They shall find in Clement the whole order and form of the Mass, set forth
by the Apostles them selves.



The 10. Slanderous Untruth.
Sole Receiving of the priest in the Mass. Therefore it is true that in
Clement touching the Substance of the Mass, which is the daily Sacrifice of
the Church, the whole order and form of the Mass is to be found, though
there be in him no token or show of Private Mass.

They shall find the same most plainly treated of, and a form of the Mass
much agreeable to that is used in these days, set forth by S. Dionyse.



The 11. Untruth Slaund. Eccles. Hier. ca. 3.
al which things M. Iewelles Communion lacks and the Mass has. And to
prove the Mass it was brought, not to prove Private Mass.

I do farther refer thee to Justinius the martyr, and philoso^her, To Irenaeus
the martyr and bishop of Lions etc. To the old Bishop and Martyr Hippolytus.



Justinius martyr, The 12. Untruth Slaund.
Ireneus lib. 4. cap. 32. and Hippolitus, as it is in M. D. Harding alleged.
Justinius says Panis, vinum, and aqua offeruntur. The bread, wine and water
are offered. Ireneus says of Christ in his last Supper, Noui testamenti nouam
docuit Oblationem, quam ecclesia ab Apostolis accipiens in vniuerso mundo
offert deo. He taught a new sacrifice of the new Testament, which the Church
receiving of the Apostles does offer unto God through out all the world.
Hippolytus says Pontifices immolare preciosum Corpus and Sanguinem Christi
quotidie. That bishops do offer the precious Body and Blood of Christ daily.
These considered, I trust the burden will sone be dis^urdened

Finally I refer them instead of many to the two worthy fathers, Basil and
Chrysostom, whose Masses be left to the posterite at this time extant.

The 13. Untruth Slaund. and the 14. belying S. Bas^l and Chrysostom.
The 11. Untruth. They contain the very order of the Communion.

Tua ex tuis tibi offerimus per omnia and in omnibus. We offer unto thee thy
own of thy own thourough all things and in all things. The very same words
are in the Mass off Chrysostom. 1. Ob^ation of the my^^eries.
After which (as well in the Mass off S, Basyll, as of Chrisostom) a
commemoration of the blessed Saints in heaven, namely of our Lady, of Saint
John Baptist, and of the Saint of the day, 2. Memory of Saints.
is made, and prayer for the dead in the faith of Christ, is had. Is this the
very order of the Communion M. Jewel? Do you offer the mysteries in your
communion? Make you any Co^memoration of the Saints? 3. Prayer for the dead.
Pray you for the dead? Is it now an Untruth that S. Basil and Chrysostom in
their Masses, do witness the daily sacrifice of the Church? Or is it true that
the Masses of S. Basil and Chrysostom do contain the very order of the
Communion? For though a number of communicants be mentioned in both those
masses, yet does all the rest contain the very order of the Communion, as you
now use it M. Jewel? In sua Translat.
Again your friend Erasmus M. Jewel, calls the lyturgie of S. Chrysostom,
Mass. I trust it shall be no Untruth with you M. Jewel to call things as
Erasmus calls them.

Amongst all Cyrillus Hierosoly mitanus is not to be passed over lightly, who
at large expounds the whole Mass used in Jerusalem in his time, the same
which now we find in Clement.



The 15. Untruth Slanderous and the 16. in belying S. Cyrillus. In catechesi
Mystagogica. 5
but to prove a Sacrifice the substance of the Mass, and the order of the
whole Mass in his time concurring with the Mass that now is. This his own
words shall try which are these. Cum hoc sacrificium offerimus, postea
facimus mentione^ etiam eorum qui ante nos obdormieru^t. Primum patriarcharum,
Prophetarum, Apostolorum, Martyrum, vt deus orationibus illorum and
deprecationibus suscipiat preces nostras. Deinde pro defunctis sanctis patribus
and episcopis, d^nique pro omnibus oramus, qui inter nos vita functi sunt
maximum esse credentes animarum iuuamen pro quibus offertur obsecratio sancti
illius and tremendi quod in altari positum est, sacrificij. When we offer this
Sacrifice, afterward we make mention of them which have dep^rted this life
before us. First of the patriarchs, of the Prophets, of the Apostles, of the
Martyrs, that God by their prayers and intercessions may receive our petitions.
Then for the holy fathers and bishops departed, last of all, for all men we
pray, which among us have deceased, believing it to be a great relief of
souls, for who^ the intercession of that holy and dreadful sacrifice, which is
laid upon the altar, is offered. Thus far Cyrillus. Untruly brought in for
the Mass and Sacrifice thereof? These V. last Untruths were gathered to make a
number, The lewd dealing of M. Jewel.
upon this false ground, as though they were all brought to prove Private
Mass. Now M. Jewel knew well enough that from the first part of this 5.
Division, hitherto, profes are brought only for the Sacrifice and substance
of the Mass. And again he knew that in the very next Diuis^on only he
begins to speak of Private Mass, where the words of M. D. Harding are
these. Now this presupposed, D. Hard. in the 6. division page 13.
that the Mass stands upon good and sufficient grounds, for the stay of all
true Christen men's b^lefe, let us come to our special purpose, and say somewhat
of Private Mass. These words of M. D. Harding, do immediately follow the former
allegatyons of Dyonise, Basil, Chrisostom, Clement, and Cyrillus. Now what
Untrue dealing is this, to heap so many Untruths, upon one false ground to
evidently appearing? God amend you M. Jewel, and send you some shame or
honesty, that you dissemble no more so impudently.

The feast is common. All be invited.



The 17. Untruth Slanderous. For by order of the church all be invited.
Though the priest expressly inuiteth no man by word or by gesture, yet the
order of the Church, the sermons of the Priest, the counsel in Confessions do
inuit al men to frequent the holy Sacrament. In this sense it is true that all
be invited. In this sense wrote D. Harding. Of any words off the Priest or
gesture of the Deacon in the service of the Mass he meant not, nor spoke not.
Now M. Jewel, because he will imagine no other inuiting but this, he calls
it a manifest Untruth, that all be invited. But to prove an Untruth in the
Author, you must take the meaning of the Author, and not appoint him what
meaning you list. So every fool may comptroll the wise.

They having quite abrogated the other two (Consecration and Oblation) and not
so much as once naming them in their books of service.



The 18. Untruth Slanderous.
as in the last Supper our Savior first offered it, the Oblatio^ of the holy
Mysteries, in the Communion book, is neither named, nor practiced. The
sacrifice of Christ on the cross is mentioned. The sacrifice of praise and
thanks giving on Our part, the offering up of our selves, our souls and
bodies to be a reasonable, holy, and lively sacrifice to God, is in the
Communion book well mentioned, if the Daily Sacrifice of the Church, the
precious body and blood of Christ, under the form of bread and wine, were
offered there also. By the which we offer in deed a Sacrifice of praise and
thanks giving unto God, by the which we offer unto God a reasonable holy and
lively Sacrifice, not our selves only, but much more the most precious Body
and Blood of our Savior, and by that and with that our selves also. Without
this Sacrifice to say in your Communion book, that ye offer a Sacrifice of
thanks giving, to say that ye offer your selves a lively Sacrifice unto God,
it is but mockery with God and the Church: you do damnably abuse your selves
and the people. For M. Jewel, you omit the Institution of Christ, and make
one of your own. Harken to the holy Fathers, to whom you offer to yield, and
learn that you do so. Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
S. Ciprian says. If Jesus Christ our Lord and God he himself be the high
priest of God the Father, and he him self first offered a Sacrifice to God the
Father and Commanded the same to be done in the remembrance of him, surely
that Priest does truly perform the office of Christ who follows that, that
Christ did, and the^ does offer a full Sacrifice in the Church to God the
Father, if he so begin to offer according as he sees Christ to have offered.
What Sacrifice is that M. Jewel which Christ offered to God the Father and
commanded the same to be done in the remembrance of him? Was it the Sacrifice
upon the Cross? Did Christ command the Church to Sacrifice him on the Cross
in the remembrance of him again? Was it not in his last Supper, that he
commanded us to do in his remembrance? Does not S. Ciprian dispute there
expressly Co^tra Aquarios against such as would Co^secrat the Sacrament with
only Water, proving unto them that they must use both Wine and Water, where
you use Wine only and no Water in your detestable Communion? Does he not
expressly speak of the Sacrifice in the last Supper? Can you deny all this M.
Jewel? Or will you yield to this one Clear Sentence of so Ancient a Father so
long above the compass of your 600. years?

Again S. Ciprian says, That Priest does truly perform the office of
Christ, Lib. 2. Epist. 3.
who follows that that Christ did, and then does offer a full Sacrifice in the
Church to God the Father, if he so begin to offer, according as he sees
Christ to have offered. But what did Christ offer in the last supper? Let S.
Cyprian instruct us. In the same place and epistle he says. Quis magis
sacerdos dei summi quam dominus noster Jesus Christus qui sacrificium deo patri
obtulit? and obtulit hoc idem quod Melchisedech ob^ulerat, id est, panem and
vinum, suam scilicet corpus and sanguinem. Who is more the priest of God most
high, then our Lord Jesus Christ, which offered a sacrifice to God the Father?
And offered the same which Melchisedech offered that is, bread and wine, that is
to say his body and blood. What Sacrifice the Communion Book lacks.
This is the Sacrifice which Christ offered in the last Supper. This Sacrifice
the true Priests of Christ do offer in the church, and so as Christ himself
offered. This sacrifice the Communion book has not, names not, uses not.
This sacrifice, this Oblation of the holy mysteries, of Christ's body and blood
S. Ciprian speaks of. This Sacrifice M.D. Harding most truly said that you
have abrogated. This Sacrifice most truly he said that not ones you have named
it in your books of service. Go now M. Jewel, and if ye will note an Untruth
in M.D. Har. note not, as here you note, The Sacrifice is expressly named in
the Communion book. but note, This sacrifice is expressly named in the
Communion book. And so shall you in deed make a great manifest Lie on your
own part, and find no Untruth at al in M.D. Harding. For alas it is to true,
that you have not the Sacrifice of the church in your Communion book. Alas it
is to true that damnably you have omitted Christ's Institution. Cursedly you
deceive the people, and most miserably ^yow condemn your own selves. Other
Fathers that do witness an external Sacrifice which in the Communion book
is utterly left out and omitted, when I come to the 34. Untruth, I shall have
more occasion to recite. As touching Consecration, S. Augustine says, speaking
of the blessed Sacrament, Certa Consecratione fit nobis Mysticus panis. Contra
Faustum Manichae. Lib. 20. cap. 13.
The Mystical Bread is made unto us by a certain and known Consecration.
Such Consecration the Communion books have not. And though in the Mass book
no mention thereof be made, yet the order thereof being so many hundred years
before taken, such special mention is not now needful or required. But the
Communion books containing a new order of the Ministration, In the communion
of England there is no consecration of the Mysteries.
if therein they had used any Consecration at al, that being one principal part
of Christ's Institution, they ought to have expressed the same. Howbeit
certain it is not only by that they make no mention thereof, but also by that
they give the remnant of their bread to the dogs, that they use no
Consecration at all, but account it as very common bread. Likewise the wine
that is left, either the Minister drinks it with his common meat, or if very
little remains, it is cast in the flower, as Poynet a late pretended bishop of
Winchester did in an open Communion ministered in the Cathedral Church of
Winchester. By these their doings, say and pretend what they lift in words,
all the world sees and knows, they use no Consecration at al. For good and
evident proof thereof I ^eferre the studious Reader to the treatise of our
lords Supper lately set forth by D. Sanders: In the second book the
xiiij. Chapter it is proved that the figurative doctrine of M. Jewel and his
fellows, can not stand with a Sacrament, which has Consecration.

The number of communicants together in one place is no part of Christ's
institution.

Exercitationis ad p^etatem Sermon 4.

The 19. Untruth Slanderous. and the 20. For S. Basil by the place alleged,
is not proved to think any such matter.
so you would stand to his only judgment, or to the judgment of the learned
Fathers in other matters. But S. Basil says no such thing. This he says
in the place by you alleged. Spiritualis lex non pauciores quam duodecim esse
vult, mysticum pastha comedentes. The spiritual law admits no less then
twelve to eat the mystical passover. Now M. Jewel is this the Institution
of Christ, or is it not? If it be, why then do you in your Communion books
take an express order that three may make a sufficient Communion? Why break
you the Institution of Christ, in the very spring of your ghospel? If it be
not the Institution of Christ, nor S. Basil meant no such thing, why speak
you so Untruly, why say you S. Basil thinks the number is part of Christ's
Institution? For other words tending to any such purpose, in all that Sermon he
has none. But S. Basil his meaning is this. The true meaning of. S. Pasils
place alleged by M. Jewel.
He wills that such as take upon them the contemplative life, should live in
some number together and not under ten or twelve in a company, that their life
and behavior might be void of all sinister suspicion. For that purpose he
brings the example of the twelve at Christ's maunde where that most holy
mysteries were wrought. But as touching the matter it self, whether a number
of communicants be part of Christ's Institution, Brefely thus I say. Christ
gave it to a number, Christ gave it after meat, Christ gave it at night time.
That the number of Communica^ts is no part of christ^s Institution.

August. ad Ianuarium.

Epist. 118.


You with us do confess the two later points to be no Parts of Christ's
Institution. You give it neither after meat, neither at night time, but in the
fore noone, and before all other meats. Why so? Forsothe because both you and
we believe as S. Augustine did, quod si hoc monuisset Christus, eum morem nemo
variasset: that if Christ had commanded that, no man would have changed that
manner. Wherein S. Augustine and we both have left the fact of Christ, and
followed the tradition of the Church believing upon the custom of the Church,
that the same fact of Christ was no Co^mau^dment. Right so M. Jewel because the
Church of Christ so many hundred years has celebrated this holy Sacrament
without a number of communica^ts, we believe verily that Christ never commanded
a number in this celebration, and we believe that if he had so commanded, eum
morem nemo variasset, no man would have changed that manner or order. This is
our belefe M. Jewel grounded upon the Doctrine of the Church: which we are
assured by holy Scriptures (as I have otherwheres at large proved) can not err
in the faith, In the Fortress par. 1.

Cap. 3.4. and seq.


but must for ever (not only v. or vj. C. years as it shall please you to
appoint) continue in sound and upright doctrine. Your opinion to the contrary
proceeds by schismatic departing from the Church.

Diuis. 8.
The manner, number, and other rites of receiving, is not fixed nor determined
by the Institution of Christ, but ordered by the Churches disposition.

Page 18.


The 21. Untruth Slaund. and the 22. For the number is no part of Christ's
Institution, as it shall yet farther appear.
If it be truly said, Christ appointed no certain fixed number, why note you it
for an Untruth, The number is not fixed by the Institution of Christ? What
difference is there in those two sayings? Or is the one true because M. Jewel
says it, and the other Untrue because D. Harding says it?

But how prove you M. Jewel that Christ appointed a number, and yet no certain
number, Because Christ said Take ye, eat ye, drink ye all, divide ye among
your selves, do ye this in my remembrance? All this was said to a certain
number, as to twelve. By these textes therefore, if these textes be a
Commandment, you must have no less then twelve at a Communion. Now three by
the Communion book are sufficient. But as ye urge al these textes, so we may
urge you, with vespere facto, Matt. 26.
Caenantibus eis, discumbebat cum duodecim At evening time, as they supped, he
sat down with the twelve, and so forth, we may urge you I say, with these,
and say, You break Christ's institution, You do it not at evening time, You
do it not after supper, Luc. 22. Mar. 14. Mat. 26.
You sit not but knele at it, You have sometime less, sometime more then
twelve to communicate, and those not all ways priests as the Apostles were.
What answer you to this? Is not all this the Scripture? Is not all this written
of the Evangelists? Is not all this reported in the gospel even in the very
same place, where the rest of Christ's Institution touching this blessed
Sacrament is written? Why then are not these parts also of Christ's
Institution, or why omit you them as no parts thereof? Why is not the fact of
Christ as well a Commandment, as his words, Divide ye, etc? What can you
say here, The Practice of the C^urche.
but that the Practice of Christ's Church has declared that al these of time,
and place be no substantial Parts of Christ's Institution, but Circumstances
accidental, and casull Ceremonies? Even so we answer you that the Church also
has declared us by the Practice of many hundred years, the number to be no
part of Christ's Institution. We answer I say, that as no certain number (as
you confess) is appointed by Christ, so no number at all is by him necessarely
prescribed. Both these points we learn of the Church, expounding to us the
Scripture when it is a Commandment and when it is not. The one of these you
have also learned of the Church, the other you learn of your selves, and of your
late vpstert masters of Germany and Geneua against the church. I say the
church of these last ix. C. years by your own confession, In the fortress
par. 1. per totum.
which is the true Church of Christ no less then the first vj.C. years, as I
have proved unto you out of holy Scripture otherwere.

Christ's example imports necessite off receiving only, the other rites, as
number, place, Diuisi. 9.
time etc. be of congruence and order.

page 22.




The 23. Untruth Slanderous. That the number of Communica^ts is no part of
Christ's Institution. Jewel. Page 202.
Though this Untruth serves but to make up the score, as being the same with
the last Untruth noted before, yet because M. Jewel stands so gladly on
this ground, we will try farther what sure holdefast he has to stay him self
thereon. I ask of M. Jewel, why is the number more a part of Christ's
Institution, then a certain number, then time, and place? He says Christ has
by special words appointed a number to receive, when he said, divide ye
among your selves, take ye, eat ye, break ye, do ye this etc, All this
says he, imports a number of necessite. I answer. First all this was said
to the Apostles as to priests. For none but Priests can do that which Christ
did, none Hoc facite, do ye this, because they were then made priests that
should so do, he said not Sic facite, do ye after this sort as ye see I have
done. For the^ not only the number, but also the time, and the manner in all
points ought precisely and inuiolably to have been observed.

Jewel. Page 22. The objection. The Answer.
Well, says M. Jewel, it was a commandment, and that appears well for
that the Apostles and holy Fathers of the primitive Church practiced it so.
Well say we, it was no commandment, and that appears well for that the
Apostles successors and holy Fathers of many a more hundred years did
practice it otherwise. I mean the bishops and priests of the church of Christ
these ix.C. years. What end now shall there be of this controversy? You
appeal to the first 600. years for example of a number. I appeal to the
later ix.C. years for the contrary. You say the first 600. years kept the
true Institution of Christ. And I say the later ix. C. years kept the same
also. No say you, these later times have broken the Institution off Christ.
For thus you say in the text.pagina 22. and 23.

The reply.
or being so many together, or standing, or sitting. But he said thus. Do ye
this, that is, take ye bread, bless it, break it, give it, in my remembrance.
This is not a Ceremonial accident, but the very end, purpose, and substance of
Christ's Institution.

How the^? The Answer.
Must a number take it, bless it, break it, and give it, in one place at
ones? The^ you must have not only a number to receive at ones, but also a
number to Minister the communion at ones. For as to Take it, pertains to a
number of Communicants, so to Bless it, to Break it, to Give it, pertains
to a number of Ministers, and Priests, not to all that communicate.

But to the matter brefely I say. The approving of the breach of Christ's
Institution is a damnable error. No damnable error could have been allowed in
the universal church these ix. C. years. Ergo the breach of Christ's
Institution could not possibly be approved these ix. C. years in the
universal church of Christ. In the Fortress etc. par. 1.
The minor or second proposition is proved abundantly out of the psalms, the
prophets, and the gospel, otherwhere. The mayor you can not deny. So the
conclusion is invincible. What then? Forsothe then it remains, that neither
the first 600. years in the communion of a number, neither the later ix.C.
years, in the Sole Receiving off the priest, which you call Private Mass, did
break Christ's Institution. Because the church can not universally err at
all, much less for any continuance of time. This being so, it remains
clear, that the number of communicants is no part of Christ's Institution, nor
commandment of Christ.

Diuis. 8.
In which things the Church has taken order, willing and charging that all
shall communicate that be worthy and disposed.



The 25. Untruth Slanderous.
The daily and continual Practice of the church of Rome, repelling none, that
are worthy and disposed, declares such Order to have been taken. Yea the
church has taken express order that ones in the year at the lest all
faithefull persons shall communicate. Again the embarring of this holy
sacrament from excommunicated persons, from notorious offenders, and open
penitents, declares that to other not so excommunicated, not such notorious
offenders, not yet continuing in their enjoined penance, this holy sacrament
is not embarred, but is free and open to be received of such as desire it.
Touching the first, if any well disposed person were ever repelled from the
blessed sacrament, let M. Jewel prove it, and then shall he prove his
Untruth. Touching the later, al Canons and Decrees, yea even the Practice of
the Protestants the^ selves in their pretensed religion, does witness it. True
it is therefore, that seeing none Worthy are repelled, and only the Unworthy by
decree is repelled, that for the admitting always of the worthy the Church
has taken order.

Diuis. 10
It is not called communion, because many or as M. Jewel teaches, the whole
Congregation communicates together in one place, but because of the effect of
the Sacrament, etc.

page 25. The.26. Untruth Slanderous.
The.19. Untruth. For of communicating together it was called Communio.

The.27. Untruth in abrydging D. Hardings words.
Yea forsothe, but not of communicating together in one place. These words in
One place, you leave out to make an Untruth where none is. For as we all
confess the word Communion to be used of the Fathers, for the communicating
together, either of each of us with and among our selves, or off us all with
God by the knot of this most heavenly Sacrament, So that this communicating
together ought of Necessite to be of the Whole Congregation in One place, that
M.D. Harding denies, that the Fathers never said, that you can never prove M.
Jewel. In that sense the word Communion is not taken.

diuis. 10.
Thus we see S. Hierom and S. Augustine were of one Communion, and did
communicate together, although they were far asunder.

page 26. The.28. Untruth Slanderous.
The.20. Untruth: Rising of the ambiguite or doubtful taking off this word
Communion.

A consent of religion (as after in the text you say page 28.) then yet upon
your own confession it will follow, that saint Hierom and saint Augustine who
consented in religion, were of one communion together, and communicated
together, in that sense of the word Communion, and so is it by your confession
no Untruth that in a sense they were of one Communion, and Communicated
together. For as you know, that saying is not Untrue, which in any one sense
or meaning is True. You could not therefore justly, note this for an Untruth,
being but of the mind that you are. But now D. Hardinges saying is so True,
that he says no more then S. Hierom him self said and professed. That is,
that S. Augustine was Episcopus communionis sua, In epist. ad Augustine.
A bishop of his Communion. If saint Augustine were a bishop of saint Hieroms
Communion, which saint Hierom him self says, M. Jewel notes that for an
untruth in D. Hardinge which is the very saying of S. Hiero^.
then were saint Austen and saint Hierom of One communion, which D. Harding
says. If then this be an Untruth which D. Harding says, then is it also an
Untruth that S. Hierom said. Go now M. Jewel and note a number of Untruths
upon saint Hieroms works, and let this stand for one, as truly as you have
noted D. Harding therefore. Again as they were of One Communion, so they
communicated both together: Wherein M, Jewel? In religion and faith only? If
they did so only, yet the^ were it true that they Communicated together. How
S. Hierom and S. Augustine communicated together though the one never saw the
other.
For in this sense they Communicated. But now not only so. For they were said
to be of One Communion, because they communicated together in the blessed
Sacrament. All Catholics in that sense were said to be of one communion.
Heretics M. Jewel, in that sense were not of one communion with the Catholic
Fathers. Heretics never communicated together with the Catholics in the
Church. A clear and most manifest example of this, is the daily
Excommunicatian used in Christ's Church. For what is Excommunication but
embarring from communicating in the Church with other Christians? But as one
excommunicated in London, if he be justly excommunicated, is excommunicated not
only in London, but through all England, yea and through all Christendom beside
(as long as in Religion England joins with the rest of Christendo^) so he
that co^municateth in London, and is of one communion with the faithful people
of London, he communicates also with all England, and all Christendom beside,
and is of one communion with them all. So were saint Hierom and saint Augustine
of one communion, so they communicated together, though they never received the
sacrament together, in all their life time, but lived in far distant
countries the one from the other, the one in Afrike, the other in Palestine.

diuis. 11.
The priest after that he has received the Sacrament in the Church, takes his
natural sustenance, and dineth, and then being called upon, carries the rest a
mile or two to the sick, in each house none being disposed to receive with
the sick, he does that he is required, (21) does he not in this case
communicate with them, and do not they communicate one with an other, rather
having a will to communicate together in one place also, if oportunite served?

The.29. Untruth Slanderous.
The.21. Untruth. M. Harding says, the priest does communicate and not
co^municat both together. Which is a co^tradiction in nature.

your logike. Omnis Contradictio est ad idem. Every co^tradiction is about one
self thing.

If this might not be accounted as a laufull and good Communion, either people
should be denied that necessary vitaile of life at their departing hence,
which were a cruel injury and a thing contrary to the examples and godly
ordonances of the primitive Church, or the priest etc.

The.30. Untruth Slanderous.
The 22. Untruth. This order was taken not for every sick party, but for
persons excommunicat.

Con. Nice. C^n. 12. Con. Carth.
Such order was not taken for persons excommunicat, but for such as being before
excommunicated, and after reconciled received it, being in sickness and
danger of death, as al other Christen men did, as appears by the Canons made
in this behalf. And who doubts, but much more for sick persons not
excommunicate? Unless the wisdom of M. Jewel will think the primitive
Church to have granted that benefitt to excommunicat persons, which to other
not excommunicated was not granted. Yes he says. Page 32. The.31. Untruth
Consisting in false Doctrine. Lib. 1. Epist. 2.
Such reconciliation was thought necessary at the end for solace of the party.
Yea truly M. Jewel would have this Sacrament to be but an outward Solace and
Token of his Reconciliation among the faithful. But Cum ad hoc fiat
Eucharistia, vt sit accipientibus tutela, seeing the Eucharist is therefore
made, that it might be a sauegarde and protection to those which received it,
as S. Cipria^ says, therefore not only to excommunicat persons in time of
Sickness for their reconciliation or Solace (as M. Jewel fancyeth) it was
granted, but also for their sauegard and protection. It was called their
Viaticum, their Vitail or food of life, not only a Toke^ of their
reconciliation to the Church. This being the reason of the decree, it is to be
thought the primitive Church provided not only for excommunicat persons, but
also for every sick party which though not for the bond of excommunication,
yet for other considerations might stand in need of this blessed Sacrament no
less then the other.

But what need many words? M. Jewel him self confesses, that Christen folcke
in their sickness had the Sacrament ordinarely sent home unto them. Page.32.
M. Jewel is contrary to him self
For the which he alleges Justinius Martyr Apolog. 2. If so M. Jewel, then to
deny to sick persons their housell, is contrary to the example and godly
ordonaunce of the primitive church by your own Confession, and the Authorite
of Justinius Martyr. Which is the thing that D. Harding said, and you most
untruly and contrary to your self have noted for an Untruth.

Diui. 12.
Now if we except those things which be necessarely required to this
Sacrament by Christ's Institution, either declared by written Scriptures, or
taught by the holy ghost, as bread and wine mingled with water for the matter
etc.

page 32. The.32. Untruth Slaund.
The.23. Untruth. The mingling of wine and water together is neither
Catholic, nor necessary. Scotus.

The.33. Untruth auouching a clear heresy. Cipria. li. 2. epi. 3.
Yes forsothe this is Catholic and therefore it is necessary. That it is
Catholic I prove by the consent of the Catholic Fathers of all cou^tres in
the primitive church. In Afrike S. Cipria^ B. of Carthage affirms it in these
words. Copulatio and coniunctio aquae and vini sic miscetur in calice domini,
vt commixtio illa non possit abinuice^ separari. The coupling and joining
together of Wine and Water is so mingled in the Cup of our Lord, that the
same mingling may not be separated the one part from the other. And again.
Sic in sanctificando calice domini offerri aqua sola non potest, quomodo nec
vinum solum potest. Nam si vinum tantum quis offerat, sanguis Christi incipit
esse sine nobis. Si vero aqua sola, plebs incipit esse sine Christo. Qua^do
autem vtru^que miscetur, and adunatione confusa sibi inuicem copulatur, tunc
sacramentum spirituale and caeleste perficitur. In sanctifying the cup of our
Lord so water alone can not be offered, as neither wine alone can be offered.
For if any offer wine alone, then the blood of Christ begins to be without
us. But if Water be alone, the people begins to be without Christ. Water
must be mingled with wine in the Sacrament.
But when both is mingled, and joined together, then the spiritual and
heavenly Sacrament is perfyted. Thus much S. Cyprian and much more in that
place disputing against those which used only water in consecrating the holy
mysteries, teaching the Institution of Christ to be, that both Wine and Water
be mingled to the perfyting of that heavenly Sacrament. S. Augustine an Africane
about two hundred years after S. Cyprian witnesses this practice of Christ's
church in his time also. Li. de eccl. dogmat. Cap. 175.
The sear his words. In Eucharistia no^ debet pura aqua offerri, vt qui da^
sobrietatis fallu^tur imagine, sed vinu^ cum aqua mixtu^. In the Euchariste
Only water ought not to be offered, as some under the color of sobriety are
deceived, Ad Quoduult deum haere. 64.
but Wine mingled with Water. In an other place he reckons these in the roll
of heretics, which offered Only water without Wine in the holy Sacrifice of
Christ's church. And against such heretics the 3. Counsel of Carthage unto
the which S. Augustine subscribed, made an express decree, not yet forbidding
utterly Water, but comma^ding wine and water Both to be mingled together. These
are the words of the decree. Con. 3. Carth. can. ^4.
Vt in sacrame^tis Corporis and Sa^guinis domini nihil amplius offeratur, quam
ipse dominus tradidit, hoc est, panis and Vinum aquae mixtu^. That in the
Sacraments of the Body and Blood of our Lord, nothing else be offered, then
our Lord him self delivered, that is, bread and wine mingled with Water.
This the Council decreed not as then a new Institution, but as a Tradition
coming from Christ him self. Thus we see in Afrike in S. Cyprians and S.
Augustins time, the mingling of Water and Wine in the blessed Sacrament was
accounted Catholic and necessary. In France how the Sacrament was there
celebrated, let Ireneus a very ancient writer and nigh unto the Apostles
wtnesse. Writing of this blessed Sacrament, and by the verite of Christ's body
and blood here in, proving the verite of his true flesh and blood walking here
on earth, he has these words. Quando and mixtus Calix, and factus panis
percipit verbum dei, fit Eucharistia corporis and sanguinis Christi, Irenaeus
Lib. 5.
ex quibus augetur and consistit carnis nostrae substantia. that is. When the
mingled Cup, and the made bread receaueth the word of God, it is made the
Euchariste of the Body and Blood of Christ, of the which the substance of our
flesh is augmented and consists. The Mingled Cup that Ireneus speaks of,
cannot be mea^t of any other, the^ of wine mingled with water. Of such a
co^mixtion in the blessed Sacrament a Council holden in France above vnleuen
hundred years past mencioneth. In Italy what the practice of the primitive
church was, by two witnesses it shall appear. Alexander the fifth Pope of Rome
after S. Peter, writes thus, not as a new decree of his own, Council.
Auraicense Can. 17.
but as he says, vt a patribus accepimus, as we have received it from the
Fathers. Repulsis opinionum superstitionibus, panis tantum and vinum aqua
permixtum in sacrificio offerantur. Laying aside all other superstitious
opinions, Epi. 1. To. 1. Conc.
let only bread and wine Mingled with water be offered in the Sacrifice. S.
Ambrose no Pope but a learned and blessed B. of Millain, writes thus. Lib. 5.
de Sacrament. Cap. 1.
Diximus quod in altari constituitur Calix, and panis. In Calicem, inquit,
mittitur vinum: Et quid aliud? Aqua. Sed tu mihi dicis. Quomodo ergo
Melchisedech panem and vinum obtulit? Quid sibi vult admixtio aquae? Rationem
accipe. Primo omnium figura etc. that is. We said before that upon the altar
is put a Cup and bread. In to the Cup, says he, wine is putt. And what
else? Water. But thou say unto me. How then did Melchisedech offer bread
and wine? Two causes given by S. Ambrose of Mingling the Water with Wine in
the B. Sacrament.
What means this Mingling of water? Harken to the Reason. First of all the
figure, and so forth, where S. Ambrose at large gives ij causes of mingling
Water with wine in the blessed Sacrament: The one to answer to the figure of
the Water running out of the rock, stricken by Moses, which was Christ, that
is, betokened Christ. An other, that as water and blood ran out of the side
of Christ on the Cross, both to redeem and to cleanse mankind, so in this
blessed Sacrifice being an express resemblance of Christ's passion, Wine and
Water be offered up to perfect the Sacrament of Christ's blood. Thus now we have
Catholic witnesses of the primitive Church in Italy, France, and Afrike,
touching the Mingling of Water with wine in these holy mysteries. In Spain
also within the compass of M. Iewelles 600. years, Conc. Braca^ ^. Can. 1.
we read the same confirmed in a Council holden at Braccara, and the very
words of S. Ciprian above alleged, brought in.

Is it come to that M. Jewel? page 34.
Must we try our Catholic faith, doctrine, and even the meanest ceremonies by
the consent of the first 600. years, and will you prove a doctrine not
Catholic by the practice of certain countres little more then 300. years past?
M. Ievvel claims by heretics.
For about that time lived Innocentius and Scotus. At that time the greeks as
they had many other errors, so no maruail if they had this also. And you do
but your kind to disprove the Catholic service by the example of heretics.
For the greek Church, M. Jewel, in the first 600. years remaining yet
Catholic and under the obedience of the Sea of Rome, used this Mingling of
Wine and Water as all the west Church did. You shall hear the learned Fathers
of the greek Church and of that time to say so. First in the Greek Synods kept
about a thousand years ago, and gathered by Martinus bishop of Braccara in
Spain within the compass of M. Iewelles 600. years we read thus. In
capituli^ g^acarum Synodoru^. Cap. 55.
Non oportet aliquid aliud in sanctuario offerri, praeter panem and vinum and
aquam, quae in typum Christi benedicuntur, quia de corpore eius dum in cruce
penderet sanguis effluxit and aqua. Nothing must be offered in the holy place
beside bread and Wine and Water, which are blessed for the remembrance of
Christ: because while he hanged on the Cross, blood and Water ra^ne out of his
Body. Justinius Martyr a greek writer and very nigh the Apostles, calls this
part of the Sacrament (as M. Jewel confesses and me^cioneth him self) (...).
Justinius Apolog. 2.
The Cup of water and mixture. Why, but because in the holy ministration
Water was mingled in the Cup with wine? S. Basil in his Liturgy and mass
Mingleth Water and wine in the Consecration of the holy mysteries, S. Basil.
saying at the Consecration time these words, Similiter and calicem de
genimine vitis accipiens, miscens, gratias agens, benedicens, sanctificans,
etc. Taking in like manner the Cup, of the fruit of the Vine, Mingling it,
giving thanks, blessing it etc. S. James the Apostle in his Lyturgie or Mass
at the Consecration time recording the fact of Christ, S. James.
has these words. Similiter post quam caenauit, accipiens calicem, and
permiscens ex vino and aqua, and caet. In like manner after he had supped,
taking the Cup and Mingling it with Wine and Water, and caet. By the which
words of S. James and S. Basil affirming that Christ him self mingled Wine
with Water in his blessed Supper, we believe verily he did so, though no mention
thereof be made in the gospel. Especially considering the consent of the
Fathers, above alleged, S. Cyprian, Alexander the fifte Pope after S. Peter,
the 3. Council of Carthage whereat S. Augustine was present, who al affirm that
it came from Christ him self, that in this blessed Sacrament, Water should be
Mingled with Wine.

Last of all Gregory bishopp of Nissa S. Basil his brother, Chrysostom upon
the Gospel of S. John, Homil. 84. and Theophilact repeting the very words of
Chrysostom in his commentaries upon S. John do note this manner of Christ's
Church mingling water with wine in these holy Mysteries. In sermon. ea techetico
apud Euthy ^nium lib. 2. Pano pliae tit. 21. In cap. 19.
Theophilact a greek writer about 800. years past in the same place touches
the Armenians for mingling water with wine in these words. (...) (...). Let
the Armenia^s be here confounded, which mingle not water with wine in the
Mysteries. These Armenia^s for this matter also were pronounced heretics in
the sixth general Council holden in Trullo. By this it appears, I trust,
Cap. 32.
M. Jewel that the mingling of water and wine is allowed for Catholic and
therefore necessary. If at the lest the diffinitio^ of a general Council, and
the consent of so many fathers from so many places of Christendom, may prove
any thing to be Catholic: To you M. Jewel, especially, which offer to yield to
the Sentence of any One old Father, or general Council in a number of
matters of as little importance as this is. By this also it appears that you
M. Jewel, and all the new clergy of of England by not Mingling water with
wine, do against the clear and universal Practice of the primitive Church, do
hold the heresye of the Armenians, and of the late greeks also if you will, do
also break a part of Christ's Institution, as you have heard. Finally by this
it appears, the saying of D. Harding not only to be no Untruth, but also
your opinion to the contrary to be a Clear Heresy.

And therefore that one may Communicate with an other, diuis. 14.
though they be not together in one place, and that it was thought lawfulll
and good by the Fathers of the ancient Church near to the Apostles time, it
may be well proved by diverse good Authorities.

page 38. The.34. Untruth Slanderous.
The.24. Untruth. There appears no such thing in any ancient Father.



Diuis. 15.
Irenaeus his words be these. The Priests (by which name in this place
bishops are understood) that were before thy time, though they kept not
Easter as they of Asia did, Eusebius lib. 5 cap. 24. ^ist. eccles.
yet when the Bishops of the Church there, came to Rome, did send them the
Sacrament 25. Thus those Bishops did communicate together before their meting
in one place.

page 30.
The.25. Untruth. Ireneus says not, they did Communicate together.

The 35. Untruth Slanderous.
No Sir: He says not so in these words alleged. But he meaned even so, and
brought it to prove a Communion, as by the whole process it shall now
appear. Thus was the case. The bishops of Asia dissented from Victor pope of
Rome in observing the feast of Easter. Eusebius hist. ^cc^es. li^. 5. cap. 24.
The pope (says Eusebius who writes this historye, and out of whom the
words off Ireneus are taken) totius Asiae ac vicinarum prouinciarum Ecclesias,
a Communionis societate abscindere nititur. Goes about to excommunicat the
Churches of all Asia and the provinces adjoining. This seuerite of the Pope
liked not other bishops, says Eusebius, and among the rest Irenaeus a
virtuous bishop then of Lions in France writes to Victor the Pope thereof and
complains of his seuerite. Among other reasons, whereby he persuadeth the
Pope not to excommunicat those bishops of Asia, but to admit them to his
Communion, he brings in the Examples of his Predecessors, the Popes before
him, who all notwithstanding that diversity did yet Communicate with them. For
proof whereof, he says, when such came ^o Rome, the Pope sent unto them the
blessed Sacrament. whereby he declared to all the world that he communicated
with the^. This was the Reason of Irenaeus to Victor the Pope persuading him to
communicate with the bishops of Asia as his predecessors had done before him.
For thus he reasoned. Your predecessors Anicetus, Pius, Hyginus, Telesphorus
and Xystus did communicate with foreign bishops, notwithstanding this diversity
of opinion in observing the feast of Easter, Therefore you ought not now so
sharply to excommunicat them. They dissented from your predecessors in this
opinion, Nunquam tamen ob hoc repulsi-sunt ab-ecclesiae societate, Yet they
were never for that matter removed from the fellowship of the Church. How show
you that Ireneus? How prove you they were never removed or repelled from the
fellowship of the Church? It follows immediately. Eucharistiam illis mittebant.
They sent unto them the Sacrament. What? Was this sending of the Sacrament any
Token or Argument of their Communicating together? Yea trul^. Or else did
Ireneus reason weakly and persuade wrongefully and utterly beside the purpose,
with Victor the pope. But an easier matter it is to let M. Jewel be ouersene
in this Untruth a^ he has been hitherto in all the rest, then to mar the
reason of Irenaeus so learned, and famous a writer, writing in so earnest a
cause, and to such a person as the Pope was. By this it appears though
Ireneus say not expressly, they did communicate together, to whom the
Sacrament was so sent, yet undoubtedly he meaned so and reasoned so. Thus not
only this Untruth is proved true, but also which went next before, where M.
Jewel very boldly s^ied, that there appeared no such Communicating together in
sundry places, in any ancient Father. For now we have one at the lest, in whom
such a Communion appears. Let us now considre an other.

Diui. 16. Apologia. 2.
Justinius Martyr says thus, When the priest has made an end of thanks and
prayers, and all the people thereto have said, Amen, they which we call
deacons, give to every one then present, bread and water and wine Consecrated
to take part of it for their housell, and for those that be not present, they
bear it home to the^. Thus in that time they that served God together in the
common place of prayer, and some others that were absent, let from coming to
their compaine by sickness, busynes, or otherwise, communicated together
though not in one place.

page 41. The.36. Untruth Slaund.
The.26. Untruth. Justinius speaks not one word of communicating together.

A Communion in distinction of places is proved.
If they had a several Communion by them selves at home, then were there two
Communions one day in one parish, one in the Church of such as received there,
an other at home of such as received in their houses. Let now M. Jewel chose,
whether he will grant that they which received at home communicated with the
other and made but one Communion with the rest which Communicated in the Church
(as M.D. Harding says, and as truth is they did) or else that, they in the
Church made one Communion by them selves, and they at home an other several
Communion also. For so shall we have by M. Jewels confession two Co^munions in
one parish upon one day, which is as much as ij Masses in one parish in one
day. The thing which he stoutely denies in an other Article. If they which
received their housel at home received it without a Communion at all, then the
private housell of sick persons at home, though none Communicate with them, is
proved by this example of the primitive Church. A Thing contrary to the
doctrine of M. Jewel and his fellow protestants in the Communion book.

Diuis. 17. Lib. 2. ad vxorem.
Tertullian says thus. Non sciet maritus quid secre to ante omnem cibum cibum
gustes? Et si scierit, panem, non illum credet este qui dicitur. Will not thy
husband know what thou eatest secretly before al other meat? And if he do
know, he will believe it to be bread, and not him who it is called.

Page 43. The. 37. Untruth Slanderous.


The.27. Untruth. The translation wilfully corrupted. It, violently turned
into, him.

illum, though it be referred as you would have it to Panem Bread, yet it
signifies not material bread, such as the baker makes, but it signifies,
that bread which came down from heaven, it signifies that Bread, Joan. 6.
which gives life to him that eats, of it. This Bread is Christ him self.
It may therefore well and truly be translated not only, it, that is, that
Bread, that I say, which came down from heaven, which gives life to the
receiver thereof, but also him, that is, Christ. For both come to one. Whether
you translate, illum, it, that Heavenly and lifegiuing Bread, or him, that is
Crist, which is heavenly and lifegiuing bread. Thus there was no cause to note
an Untruth (but if it were to make up a number) or to cry upon Wilful
corruption, or Violent translating of one word for an other, Seeing both
words mean one thing, being truly and sincerely taken.

He who it is said to be of Christen people, or who it is called, that is our
Maker and Redemer, or which is the same, our Lords body.

The.38. Untruth Slaund.
The 28. Untruth. The Sacrament was never called our maker or Redemer by any of
the old Fathers.

Pan^m illum Corpus suum fecit. Lib. 4. contra Marcione^.
He made that Bread his Body. If Christ made it so as Tertullian says, think
you M. Jewel it was not called so of the Christen people, as D. Harding says?
But what says our Savior himself in the gospel? Does not he say of that
Bread which he took in his hands, which he brake and blessed This is my Body?
Luc. 22.
Does he not in these words call it, his body? Think you M. Jewel Christen
people did not so call it also? If Christ so called it him self, and
Tertullian after him in express words witnessed it, how is it an Untruth so
to expound Tertullians words, as both him self otherwere expressly
speaks, and as Christ him self in the gospel pronounces? But you stand
upon these words. Maker and Redemer. Why M. Jewel? What difference is there
between Christ's Body, and our Maker and Redemer? Is Christ's Body any other
then Christ him self? Does not Christ say of his own flesh to be eaten of
the Christians, Qui manducat me, viuit propter me? He that eats me, Joan. 6.
lives thourough me? If then Christen people receiving the Body of Christ, do
receive Christ him self, if Christ him self be our Maker and Redemer, how is
this Untrue, that this most Blessed Sacrament is called of the Christen people
their Maker and Redemer? How the auncie^^ Fathers have so called it, which here
D. Harding said not, and therefore you do but peuishly, to build your
Untruth upon that reason, it shall hereafter be seen upon the Untruths of the
xxj. Article. For there it is proved out of the Fathers that it was called our
Lord and God, which is as much as our Maker and Redemer. You may not M.
Jewel Miscere in len^e vnguenium, confound questions together.

Diuis. 18.
vbi non est sacerdos, Communionem domi servants, a seipsis communicant. All
they which live a solitary life in wilderness, where no priest is to be had,
keeping the Communion at home, do communicate with them selves alone.

page 47. The.39. Untruth Slanderous.
The 29. Untruth. M. Harding has corrupted the translation. These words
(with them selves alone) are not in S. Basil.

Page 49. The.40. Untruth For it, may not be well so understood.
the english is, They receive of them selves. Which say you may well be
understood, that one of them received of an other for wtte of a priest. It
may so be understood, you say. Then it may also otherwise, I say. But that
not only it may, but ought also otherwise to be understood then you say, I
prove. These Eremites came not one at an other. But lived, as S. Basil says, a
Sole life. For between Eremites and Monks this was the difference that the one
lived as Anchorets did, utterly without company. The other lived by great
numbers under one Father. As it appears well by S. Augustine and S. Basil him
self other where. Therefore receiving at home, Aug. Lib. de moribus eccles.

Cath. c. 31. Bas. in Asceticis.


they received of them selves alone. But how then is the greek truly
translated? Forsothe well enough M. Jewel. For that preposition in Greek
(...), does not allwaies signify of or from, but sometime per, by and with it
self alone. Xe^opho^ in Cyro.
As where we read in Xenophon, (...). It is in Latin truly translated, per se
potens prodesse, a man able to do good by him self alone. And so has D. Hard.
expressed truly, the greek (...). Wi^h them selves alone. It seems you were
not utterly ignorant hereof your self: And therefore you say in your text,
I^well. page 49.
that you will not greatly strive about it. Yet must you needs note it for an
Untruth, to make up a number, specially in this first Article, that so even at
the first you might discredit your adversary for ever. Done, like a true
Rhetoricia^ M. Jewel but not like a good Divine, and searce like an honest man.

In this saying of Basil, it is to be noted. First that necessite here has
respect to the lack of Priest and Deacon. So as (30) in that case the
Sacrament might be received of a faithful person with his own hand.

The.41. Untruth Slanderous.
The 30. Untruth. S. Basil says. The Communicant received with his own hand
even in the presence of the Priest.

As concerning this, that it is no grievous offense for one to be driven by
necessite in times of persecution, The lewd dealing of M. Jewel.
to receive the Communion with his own hand no Priest nor Deacon being
present, it is a thing superfluous to declare, for that by long custom and
practice it has been confirmed and taken place. These are the words of S.
Basil which D. Harding alleged, and upon the which he notes most truly, that
in the lack of Priest and Deacon, in that case I say, the Sacrament might be
received of a faithful person with his own hand. The other words of S.
Basil me^cioning of an other sort of common people, not Eremites, which in
the Church takes it in their own hands even in the presence of the Priest,
are not noted by D. Harding in this place, but in the former, as I said. You
have done therefore most Lewdely in so clear words of S. Basil to note an
Untruth on D. Hardings part, You should have marked, that though S. Basil say
of some in the Later Part of his sentence that in the presence of the priest
the Communicants received with their own hands, yet he says of other before
in the Former part that no priest nor Deaco^ being present they received the
Communion with their own hands. You should also have marked that D. Harding
notes the First manner spoken of by S. Basil, not the Later, as his words
following do Clearly declare, where he says. And that for the ratyfying of so
doing he alleges continuance of custom. For, this Custom S. Basil
alleges in the Manner of the Eremites, which received Alone M. Jewel, not in
the Manner of those which Received in the Church in the presence of the Priest,
as his words above alleged do declare. Thus you should have marked, if you had
minded to deal Truly. But you will be allwaies like your self. Lewd, False,
and Untrue. God amend you M. Jewel, and give you grace ones to be Honest,
True, and Plain Dealing.

the 21. division.
Even in the Church of Rome it self (13.) where the true Religion has ever
ben most exactly observed above al other places of the world.

page 56. The.42. and 43. Untruths both Slanderous. For Rome is now the
Mother of Virtue
The.31. Untruth. Rome is now become the Mother of Fornication. Apocal. 17.

M. Iewelles Arguments.
From wanton Lewdenesse you proceed to Railing Ribauldry. You note it for an
Untruth that true Religion has ever ben exactly observed in Rome. But how
disprove you this universal proposition? You say. It is now become the
Mother of fornication. How holds this argument M. Jewel, you that have
framed so many lewd arguments against D. Hardinge, such as he never dreamed of?

Rome is the Mother of Fornication.

Ergo she lacks true Religion.

The fondness of this Argument may be tried by the like.

England is full of vice.

Ergo it lacks true religion. Or this.

Certain of the bishop of Sarisbury his me^ are f^^o^s and murderers.

Ergo, The Bishop of Sarisbury has no true Religion.

Is this Argument good M. Jewel? Verily as your Religion can not justly be
disproued, because some of your houshoulde commit Felony and Murder, so can not
now the Religion of Rome be proved naught or Untrue, because in that Cite
Fornication is used. Fol. 161.
Touching this matter M. Jewel, you have the answer of D. Hardinge in the
Confutation of your Apology more at large. Answer to that, and then prove
this Argument good. But what makes here your note of the Apocalypse the 17.
Chapter? Is it written there, that Rome is now the Mother of Fornication? This
is but a Blasphemy learned off Baudy Bale, and your fond notes in the English
Translation, which now for very shame you have left out in your later
editions. Rome is not there named at all. But you think, or at the lest would
have other men to think, that by the great whore of Babylon, Rome should be
meaned. Yea yea, prove this Master Jewel by the Fathers of the first 600.
years, by the Scriptures, or any general Council of that time, and then we
will believe, yield, and Subscribe to you in that point.

And from whence (he means Rome) all the Churches of the West have taken
their light. As the Bishops off Gallia, that now is called France, do
acknowleadge in an Epistle sent to Leo the Pope in these words. Epist.
proxima. post. 51. inter Epist. Leonis.
Vnde Religionis nostrae propitio Christo Fons and Origo manauit. From the
Apostolic See by the Mercy off Christ, the Fountain and Spring of our
Religion has come.

The.44. Untruth Slanderous. and the 45. Untruth touching the faith of the
West Church. Jewel. page 56. M. Jewel confuteth him self.
The Faith of the West Church came not first from Rome.

D. Harding says not so much. But that the West Church took their Light
from Rome. Whereby he meaned that all the West Churches, have had from Rome,
though not their very Apostles and first Preachers, yet (which you your
self Confess in the Text M. Jewel) the Confirmation of Doctrine, and also
other great conference and comfort. For all this M. Jewel, is it not a light
and help to Religion? This D. Harding saiyeth, the West Churches had from
Rome. This you confess they had and that you say at the beginning. Why then
note you D. Harding for Untruth in the Margin, which your self says and
confesses for Truth in the Text? But the Faith off the West Church (say
you, adding it in the margin for a reason of the Untruth) came not first from
Rome. First, they took their light, though not their first faith. And therefore
your Untruth is no Untruth on D. Hardinges part. But on your part how
Untrue it is, you shall see. France took their first faith from Rome.
First for France one of the greatest pillars of the West Church, you have in
D. Harding his words a Confession of the French bishops them selves above
xj.C. years past, that the Fountain and Spring of their Religion came from
the Sea Apostolic, recorded in the undoubted and Authentike works of Leo.
Therefore that you bring to the contrary in the text, off Nathanael, off
Lazarus whom Christ raised, and of Saturninus, that they should first preach
the faith in France, and yet as you say, no Commission from Rome appearing,
whereby they should be sent thither, it is a Vain Gheasse, against the
express Testimonye and Confession of the French bishops them selves above
vnleuen hundred years paste, that whether by Commission from Rome, by the
Mouth of those that you name, or whether by Romans them selves, or other sent
from Rome, S. Gregory witnesses, that the first faith of France came from
Rome. Lib. 4. epist. 51. Both England Scotland received their first faith
from Rome.

Beda Lib. 1. Cap. 4. Lib. 1. Cap. 13. How the faith came to us Englishmen.


and not these which without any Author or Writer, M. Jewel brings in here
upon his Own Credit, which way so ever it came I say, that from Rome it
came. Now not only France received their very first faith from Rome, as by
the testimonye of the French bishops them selves appears, but many other
principal countres of the Weste Church also.

Our own country being first called Britanny, and possessed of the Britons,
whose posterite now only remains in Wales, received the faith from
Eleutherius Pope of Rome, about the year of our Lord 156. as Venerable Bede
in the history of our Church of England records. In the year of our Lord
411. The Scottishmen received their first bishop Palladius from Celestinus then
Pope of Rome, as witnesses Bid also. Shortly after this time the Britains
being forsaken of the Romans, oppressed with the Peightes and Scotts their
evil neighbors, and last of all so ouerronne with the Saxons and English
people, sent for in to aid them, that with in less then ij. hundred years,
all that is now called England, was brought under the dominion of the Saxons,
and English people (the old Brittons being driven to the straightes, which
they yet keep) being all heathen and infidels, then to our country of England
and to us Englishmen living in paganism and idolatry, that holy and blessed
bishop of Rome S. Gregory directed the holy and virtuous Monk S. Augustine our
Apostle, who in his time converted Kent and Essex to the faith, whose fellows
and Scholars converted in short space all the realm of England, that is, all
the English people, to the faith of Christ. So that, as the old Brittons from
Eleutherius, the Schottishmen from Celestinus both holy Popes of Rome, so we
Englishmen from S. Gregory a blessed and learned Pope also, In the first and
second books.
received not only the Light of our religion, but also our very first Faith and
belefe in Christ Jesus. All which may further appear to him that will peruse
the History of Venerable Bede lately set forth in English. Not only England,
France, and Scotland, Germany received their first faith from Rome.

Platina in Sergio, and in Gregorio. 2.

Henr. Mutius lib. 7. Bedali. 5. Cap. 10. Vide Platinam and Blondum lib. 2.
dec. 2.

Lib. 7. Cap. 30.


but the most part of Germany received even from Rome their very first faith
and knowleadg off Christ. For as Saxony had their first faith of Sergius the
Pope about the year of our Lord 690. so shortly after (an. 716.) all the
inward parts of Germany received the faith from Gregory the second, a
virtuous Pope also, by the preaching of Bonifacius (a Schottishman borne)
directed thither from Rome. Friselande in like manner converted to the faith by
Willebrorde (an English monk) had him their first bishop confirmed from Rome.
So Norwaie by the preaching of Adrian the fourth, Pope of Rome, Bulgaria by
Nicolaus the first, Dalmatia and Sclauony, all much about a time, from the
Church of Rome also received the faith. Socrates writes that the Burgunyons
came to the faith of Christ, perceauing by them selves (...), that the God of
the Romans did mightily help such as feared him. How think you now M.
Jewel? Had not D. Harding good cause to say, and truly to say, that the west
Church took their light from the Church of Rome, yea and to say that the faith
of it came first from Rome, which is more then D. Harding said, and yet no
Untruth neither, as the learned do know?

As touching that the Oblation of the Body, Diuis. 23.
and blood of Christ done in the Mass is the Sacrifice of the Church, and
proper to the new. Testament (33) Commanded by Christ to be frequented
according to his Institution etc.

page 57. The 46. Untruth Slaund. 1


though he named none. And D. Harding says, it was Commanded by Christ, not
named. I refer the Reader to the next Untruth following. Though M. Jewel may
repete Untruths to make up a number, yet it is not our ease nor the profit of
the Reader, to repete idely one thing, being ones thouroughly proved.

Diui. 25.
The opinion of the Fathers is, that the daily and continual Sacrifice ought
(34) Daily to be Sacrificed, that the death of our Lord, and the work of our
redemption might always be celebrated, and had in memory.

page 60. The 47. Untruth Slaund. And the 48. Untruth, For no Fathers say
planely the contrary.
The.34. Untruth. The Fathers say not so, but plainly the contrary.

This Untruth, emplieth two Notorious and manifest Untruths on M. Iewelles
part. First by denying the saying of D. Harding. Secondarely by auouching the
contrary to be plain in the Fathers. This second point M. Jewel should not
only have auoutched, but have proved it also in his text, by the testimony at
the lest of some one Father. Now as it is a manifest lie, and can never be
proved, so no maruail if he brought nothing for proof thereof. As touching
the first point, because he says, The Fathers say not so, I will now bring
him the Fathers, which say so. M. Jewel in denying the Fathers to say, that
the Daily Sacrifice ought to be celebrated, denies it in the external
Sacrifice done on our part. For (says he) page 61. Linea. 16. Heb. 7. and 10.
the strength and virtue of Christ's Sacrifice rests in it self and not in any
diligence or doing of ours. And for proof hereof he allegeth S. Paul to the
Hebrews. That Christ Jewel. page 61. Lin. 58.
has offered upon the cross one sacrifice for all. Full and perfect. Therefore we
need none other. One, and everlasting. Therefore it needs no renewing. By
privilege given to him self only. Therefore it can not be wrought by any
other. These are M. Iewelles gloses upon S. Paul. These are his reasons, that
the Sacrifice of Christ's Cross is called the daily Sacrifice, Not for that it
must be renewed every day, but for that being once done, it stands good for
all days and for ever.

For these are his own very words. It shall be now proved against him out of
the fathers that not withstanding the words of S. Paul the Church yet offreth
a Daily Sacrifice, not as upon the Cross, but the self same thing which was
offered on the cross: nor to the derogatio^ of that, but for the remembrance
of that, which is the thing that D. Harding said, that the Church teaches,
that Christ him self in his last Supper commanded. The Doctors expounding
these words of S. Paul to the Hebrews, of one everlasting Sacrifice, ones
done for all, full, and perfyt, etc. do make thereupon them selves a doubt of
the daily Sacrifice of Christ's Church. How the Church offreth a daily
Sacrifice at the Altar, notwithstanding the One and Sufficient Sacrifice upon
the Cross.
How that may stand with the one Sacrifice of Christ upon the Cross ones
offered for all. This doubt, if no such Sacrifice had been, they would never
have moved. If there had been only a remembrance of that Sacrifice by the holy
Ministration, as M. Jewel says, there had been no cause of doubt, how that
remembrance might stand with the one Oblatio^ of Christ. For one thing may be
a thousand times remembered, and yet the thing remain One still. If none other
had Offered, as M. Jewel says, but Christ Ones for all, then had not the
doctors neded to move this question, how Christ alone Offered Once for all, and
yet how the Priests in the Church do offer daily. Now the doctors do move all
these doubts and questions (which M. Jewel brings as a plain and clear
doctrine) and do also resolve the same, writing their learned commentaries upon
S. Paul to the Hebrews. I will now bring their own words truly translated
in to English. First Chrysostom after he had declared according to the mind of
S. Paul, that the Sacrifices of the old law were often repeted, as being
weak and insufficient to purge sin, but the Sacrifice of Christ on the
Cross was a Full and Perfitte oblation for all Mankind, and therefore but
Ones offered for all, moving this doubt of the Daily Sacrifice of the Church
which M. Jewel denies, he says. Quid ergo nos? No^ne per singulos dies
offerimus? What the^ do we? Do we not Offer every day? Lo M. Jewel. Chrysostom.
Hom. l^ 1^. ad Habr.
Notwithstanding the One oblation of Christ, yet we, we bishops and Priests
(as Chrisostom was) do offer daily. For it follows. Offerimus quide^, sed ad
recordationem facientes mortis eius, We offer in deed. But making (that
oblation) for the remembrance of his Death. Lo again M. Jewel, not only a
remembrance, but an oblation is made, for that remembrance. But how then is it
One oblation? How One Sacrifice? Chrisostom goes forth and tells you. Et
vna est haec hostia non multae. And this is One Host, One Sacrifice, not many.
Yea? One Sacrifice done by us Daily, and yet One upon the Cross done Ones for
all? How can that be? Chrisostom will teach us this also. How One Sacrifice
upon the Cross, and ^ow One daily in the Church.
For he says yet farther. Quomodo vna est and non multae? Quia semel oblata
est insancta sanctorum. Hoc autem sacrificium exemplar est illius. Id ipsum
semper offerimus. Nec nunc quidem alium agnum, crastina alium, sed semper
eundem ipsum. Proinde vnum est hoc Sacrificium haec ratione. How is it One
Host, One Sacrifice, and not many? Because it was ones offered in to the holy
of holyes. But this Sacrifice (which we daily offer) is a pattern of that. (And
why or how?) we Offer allwaies the self same thing. Not now One Lamb, to
morrow an other, but every day the self same. Therefore it is One Sacrifice
by this reason. Understand you this reason M. Jewel how and why it is One
Sacrifice? Chrisostom says, it is one Sacrifice, because the Host, that is,
the thing Sacrificed, the thing Offered now, is but One with that which was
Offered on the cross. It is one and the self La^be, which was the^ offered and
which is every day offered. What is the la^be M. Jewel, that Chrisostom
speaks of, but the Body and blood of Christ? This says Chrisostom, is One
and the self same (.eundem ipsum.) But how does Chrisostom prove, it is One
Lamb which we do offer now, to morrow, and every day? He says in the words
immediately following. Alioquin quoniam in multis locis offertur, multi Christi
sunt? Nequaquam. Sed vnus vbique est Christus, and hic plenus existens and
illic plenus, Vnum corpus. Sicut enim qui vbique offertur vnum Corpus est, and
non multa Corpora ita etiam and vnu^ sacrificium. One christ every where.

One Body.

The Real presence proves one Sacrifice both upon the Cross and upon the
Altar.


Or else because it is offered in many places, are there many Christ's? Not so.
But there is one Christ every where being Full and perfitt here, and full and
perfitt there. One Body. For as he which is Offered every where, is One Body,
and not Many Bodies, so also this is One Sacrifice. Lo upon the real presence
of Christ's body (which is but One) Chrisostom defends the daily Sacrifice of
Christ's Church to be but One: and the One Sacrifice upon the Cross not to
exclude the Daily Sacrifice of the Church, which in the Host, that is in the
thing offered is One Self Same Sacrifice With the other: but in the manner of
doing (because it is Unbloody) it is in recordationem eius in the remembrance
of that. But you M. Jewel do deny the real presence because you can abide no
external Sacrifice offered by us. And you deny the external Sacrifice because
you will have no real presence. Here then is one Father, which says, We
do offer every day, and that Christ him self, in the remembrance off his
Passion. And how many Fathers do say the like? Theodoret a Greek Writer also
in his Commentaries upon this place of Saint Paul has these words.
Theodoret. In cap. 6. ad Hebr.
If both the Priesthood that is of the Law be ended, and the Priest according
to the Order of Melchisedech has offered a Sacrifice, and has made that other
Sacrifices be not necessary, why do the Priests off the new Testament
celebrate the Mystical Sacrifice, or Liturgy? It is manifest to those which
are instructed in the matters of God, that we Offer not an other Sacrifice, but
do celebrate the memorial of that One and wholesome Sacrifice: For this our
Lord has commanded us, saying. Do this in Remembrance of me. Hitherto
Theodorett. Where you see he teaches us that we do celebrat in deed a
Sacrifice, and that as Christ commanded us in his Last Supper, and yet no
other Sacrifice (as touching the thing Sacrificed) then that one Sacrifice on
the Cross. Primas^us In ca. 10. ad Hebr.
Primasius a learned scholar of S. Augustine writing upon this place of Saint
Paul, is for the daily Sacrifice most evident. I will allege his words in
English truly and sincerely. The old Sacrific^s
Why did God command (says Primasius) the old Sacrifices to be daily
offered? For the weakness of it. Because it could not perfectly cleanse. To
the intent (by that means) their sins might be remembered and rebuked. What
shall we say then? Do not our Priests do the very same daily? The daily
Sacrifice of our Priests.
Do they not offer a Sacrifice daily? They do offer truly, but for the
Remembrance of that death. And because we sin daily, and have need daily to
be cleansed, because Christ can no more dye, he has given us the Sacrament of
his Body and Blood, that ^uen as his Passion, Why it is daily.
was the Redemption and Cleansing of the world, so this Oblation also might be
a Redemption and cleansing for all such as Offer it in the true Faith, How it
differs from the old, being yet repeted as that was.
and have a good Intention. For herein does our Sacrifice which is also
repeted, differ from that old Sacrifice oftentimes repeted, because this is
the Truth, that a Figure: Here M. Jewel we have an other Father, which
affirms that the daily Sacrifice ought to be celebrated (nothwithstanding the
One Sacrifice on the Cross) and that for two causes. Note these two Causes.
First because we sin daily, and have daily need thereof. Seco^darely because
Christ commanded it so to be done for his Remembrance. The like cause gives
Eusebius Emissenus in these words. Eusebius Emissenus Homil. 5. de Pascha.
Colitur iugiter per Mysterium, etce. It is daily celebrated in a Mystery,
which was ones offered for our Redemption. To the intent that because the
Redemption for Mankind was Daily and never Ceasing, the Oblation also of that
Redemption might be Continual, An Oblation rightly One and perfect, to be
esteemed by Faith not by outward shape, and not to be judged by external
Appearance, but by inward Affection. Thus we have three Fathers affirming not
only a daily Oblation, but also that there ought so to be, partly for our
comfort and relief, partly for the Remembrance of Christ's death and Passion,
the only comfort of al our faith in Christ Jesus.

Again this Sacrifice is a daily Sacrifice and never cease because the
Priesthood of Melchisedech, The third Cause off a daily Sacrifice.
of which Priesthood this is the Sacrifice, is everlasting and never ceaseh.
This the Holy Fathers do teach us. Oecumenius, expounding how Christ is a
Priest according to the Order of Melchisedech for ever says. Oecumenius In
commentar. in Hebr. ca. 5
Allthough Christ offered not an unbloody Host (for he Offered his own body)
yet those which by him are made Priests (whose high bishop being God him
self he has vouches^fed to be) shall offer an unbloody Sacrifice. For this,
the word In aeternum, The ever lasting Order off Melchisedech proves a
continual Sacrifice.
For ever does signify. For the Sripture would never have said (he is a
Priest) For ever, having respect to that Oblation and Sacrifice Ones made off
God (upon the Cross) but having respect to the Priests that now are, by whom
as means Christ does Sacrifice, and is Sacrificed. Who also in that
Mystical Supper delivered unto them the manner of this Sacrifice. Hitherto
Oecumenius. Lo M. Jewel yet an other Father of the greek Church which
confesses an Everlasting and Never Ceasing Sacrifice, not that only which
Christ made Ones for all in the Cross (as you say) but that also which the
Priests of Christ's Church do now Offer. That I say, which in the last
Supper was taught us and delivered us by Christ him self, for a lively
remembrance of his death and Passion. In this sense as does Oecumenius,
speaks also S. Augustine, when he says that Christ, August. epist. 23. ad
Bonifaciu^.
semel immolatus in seipso, Ones being Offered in him self, which was upon
the Cross, tamen in sacramento non solum per omnes Paschae solemnitates, sed
omni die populis immolatur. Yet in a Sacrament not only in every solemnite of
Easter, but every day he is offered for the people. This Sacrament, he callethe
in an other place. Lib. 10. cap. 6. De ciu^. Dei.
Sacrificij in Cruce p^racti Sacramentum, id est, sacrum signum. The Sacrament,
or holy sign of the Sacrifice done in the Cross: But what? No Sacrifice
therefore it self? Yes he c^lleth it even there, Quotidianum Ecclesiae
Sacrificium. The daily Sacrifice of the Church. This daily Sacrifice of the
Church is a Sacrament or holy Sign of that excelling Sacrifice on the Cross.
The 49. Untruth standing in false translation.

Jew. page 61. Lin. 24.

Immolari populis. Lib. 10. per totum. M. Jewel makes the people his God.


In this Sacrament Christ him self is offered not only in principal feasts,
but Omni die every day and that, not to the people as you turn (populis
immolari M. Jewel) but for the people. For immolari does not signify to be
offered, as offering or profering a thing in to a ma^s hand, but immolari
signifies to be offered up, to be Sacrificed, to have that service which
appertains neither to man nor to Angels, nor to devils, but to God only, as
S. Austen at large disputes in his books de Ciuitate dei. But you M. Jewel,
making the people your God, and drawing the blessed Sacrifice of Christ him
self, to the offering of your piece of bread in to the peoples hands, you turn
Immolari populis, to be offered unto the people: which by the rules of all
grammar, not of divinity only, does signify to immolat or Sacrifice for the
people. For even as S. Austen said before, semelimmolatus est, He was ones
offered up, meaning in the Cross, Offered in the Cross, and Offered every day.
so now he says, omni die immolatur populis in Sacramento. He is offered up
for the people every day in a Sacrament. Immolari, in both places must have
one sense and meaning. Else the Comparison and reason of S. Auste^ had be^ fond
and foolish. O M. Jewel, leave ones for gods love and your own, this false
Iuggling and Lieger de main of youres, in matters of such weight and
importance. Turn not the daily offering up of Christ in a Sacrament for the
people, ^. August.
to the offering of a piece of bread unto the people. This change you force
them to make damnably for your self and them to, unless God call you and them
to repentance. Of this daily Sacrifice S. Austen writes of his Mother
quotidie Altari solitam assistere, M. Jewel. Augustine. Lib. 9. confess. Cap. 13.
that she was wont every day to stand at the Altar, that is, every day to be
present at the Sacrifice. Of the which S. Ciprian also says. Sacrificia dei
quotidie celebramus. We do celebrat the Sacrifices of God every day. lib. 1.
ep. 2. An Objection putt of.
And that this was not a daily sacrifice, such as the people daily celebrated
by recording the passion of Christ, and by Offering them selves unto God, The
daily Sa^rifice is Offered by priests.
but a daily External Sacrifice used of Priests Only by the way of
Ministry, it appears evidently, by that certain Fathers, for the Continual
and daily practice of this most dreadful and holy Sacrifice, have thought it
in no case meet for priests bound daily thereunto, to have Wives. In this
sense writes S. Ambrose, when he says: Nunc quia non carnalis successio, sed
perfectio spiritualis inquiritur, Ambrosius In cap 3.1. ad Timoth.
consequenter sacerdotibus vt semper altari queant assistere, semper ab
vxoribus continendum. Now because not a carnal succession (of Priests, as in
the old law) but a spiritual perfection is required, Priests, that they may
always serve at the altar, must always refrain from marriage. S. Hierom in
like manner. Hieronymus. li. 1^ in Iouinianum.
Sacerdoti cui semper pro populo offerenda sunt Sacrificia, semper orandum est*
si semper orandum, ergo semper carendu^ matrimonio. The priest which must
always offer Sacrifice for the people, must allwaies pray* If he must always
pray, then he must allwaies be unmarried. Innoce^tius the first agrees with
these learned doctors in the same manner of reasoning, and says. Tenere omnino
Ecclesia debet, Innocentius. 1. ad Decentium did. 31. Cap. Tenere.
vt Sacerdotes and Leuitae cu^ vxoribus suis no^ misceantur qui ministerij
quotidiani necessitatibus occupantur. The Church ought to observe that the
priests and deaco^s company not with their wives, which are occupied with the
necessary busynes of the daily Service. This daily service the first Council of
Toledo calls, quotidianu^ Ecclesiae sacrificium, as S. Austen before did, the
daily Sacrifice of the Church, and binds the clergy to serve thereat daily.
Go now M. Jewel, and deny the Fathers to say that the daily Sacrifice ought
to be daily celebrated. Jewel as before.
You have heard Chrisostom, Primasius, Eusebius Emissenus, Oecumenius, S.
Augustine to say that this daily Sacrifice is and ought daily to be celebrated,
Theodoretus also to witness an external Sacrifice on our part notwithstanding
that one Sacrifice on the Cross. S. Ciprian and the Fathers of the first
Council of Toletu^ to confess a daily Sacrifice in the Church. Page 43.


To leave S. Basil ad Caesaream patritiam Can. 49.
the Council of Laodicea, can. 52.
the Council of Constantinople holden in Trullo, and the Synodall Epistle sent
from the Bishops of the East part in the defense of Macarius. etc.



The Sacrament of this thing is prepared or consecrate in the Church, and
received of the Lords table in some places euer^ day, in some places upon
certain days.

S. Augustine says. In some places the Sacrament is consecrated every day. In
Joan. tract. 26.
And yet he is brought against the daily Sacrifice, and against the daily
Consecration. What? Thinks M. Jewel that Daily, and Every day is contrary?
Or thinks he the daily Sacrifice is either so avouched of the learned Fathers,
or so defended of the Catholics that in all Places there must be a daily
Sacrifice? Has he forgot that in mean parish Churches it was never customably
so?

In epi, and Timoth. 1. cap. The.50. Untruth.
Likewise says S. Ambrose. Every week we must celebrat the oblation, although
not every day unto strangers, yet unto the inhabitants at the lest twice in the
weke. For none says. Not every day.
S. Augustine says, the Sacrament was ministered at certain days. S. Ambrose
says sometimes twice in the weke, and (50) not every day.

in some places every day. And S. Ambrose says not, not every day, But at
the lest twice in the weke. Thus twice in the weke is the lest. But what?
Think you M. Jewel it may not be truly called a daily Sacrifice, though it
were but twice in the weke? You say your self in this very page of your
Reply. Which also (meaning the Sacrament) may be called the daily bread, not
for that it is daily received, page 36.
but for that there is no day excepted, but it may be received every day. Let
your wisdom I beseech you, instruct us M. Jewel, why the Sacrifice may not in
like sense be called daily both of the Fathers and of D. Harding, as well as
the Sacrament, M. Jewel confuteth him self.
though it were not precisely every day celebrated, which yet in some places
was so, as S. Augustine by you alleged expressly said? So properly you
allege the fathers to prove the Contrary. Again that is not Untruly called
daily which in respect of so many days in the year is done every weke twice at
the lest. as S. Ambrose says, the Sacrifice was. For in S. Augustins and S.
Ambrose his time the Sacrifice being wekely at the lest received, and yet the
people of duty then, as now a days, coming but once in the year to receive (as
both S. Augustine and S. Ambrose do otherwhere expressly witness) the daily
Sacrifice was after ministered without any company to receive with the Priest,
Au. Hom. 28. de ver. Dom. sec. Luc. Amb. lib. 5. de sa^r. Cap. 4.
for ought that appears. Again the priest of duty at the lest every Sunday
celebrating, and yet the people of duty but ones in the year receiving, if
without a company the priest could not receive, he could not celebrate the
Daily Sacrifice, yea he should perhaps celebrat it but once in the year. Thus
the meaning of a daily Sacrifice though it were but wekely, not daily, (as the
fathers expressly call it) yet in that sense also it should well serve the
purpose of Private Mass, as M. Jewel calls it. But now to your last
allegation.

Council. Tol. 4. ca^. 9. The.51. Untruth For this can not be well gathered.
But what record hereof can be plainer, then the Council of Toledo? The words
in english be these. There be sundry priests in Spain that touching the
prayer that the Lord taught, and commanded Daily to be said, say the same
only upon the Sunday, and upon no day else. (51) Hereof we may well gather, that
if the priests in Spain said the Lords prayer only upon the Sunday, for so
much as Communion is never ministered without the Lords prayer, therefore the
priests in Spain ministered not the Communion, but only upon the Sunday.

Pater Noster. And therefore M. Iewelles Conclusion is untruly gathered. The
Council in that Canon alleged concludes thus. Whosoever therefore either of
the priests or of the inferior clergy, do let pass our Lords prai^r either
in the public Service, or in the private Service, for his pride being cast le^
him be deprived. Thus those priests omitting our lords prayer in the public
service, in the other weke days, we may well gather, that they said Mass in
the other weke days (the Mass being the chiefest part of the public service)
and omitted therein the Pater Noster which that holy Council worthily
condemns in this place. These be the fathers which, M. Jewel avouches in
his Untruth, to say plainly the contrary, that is, to deny utterly the daily
Sacrifice. These be the picked Authorites which he has chosen, to leave such
and such, as you heard him say. Two of his allegations speaks directly
against him. The third is builded upon an Untrue collection, and upon a
condemned Abuse, if it were true.

S Augustine expounding the fourth petition of our Lords prayer, Give us this
day our daily bread, diui. 26. De verbis domini s^cundum Luca^ Homil. 28.
showing that this may be taken either for material bread, either for the
Sacrament of our Lords Body, or of spiritual meat, which he allows best,
would, that concerning the Sacrament of our Lords Body, they of the East
should not move question, how it might be understood to be their daily
Bread, which were not daily partakers of our Lords Supper, (35) Thse be the
ve very words of S. Augustine.


Where as for all that, this bread is called daily Bread.

page 62. The.52. Untruth Slanderous, and peuish.
The.35. Untruth. For S. Augusten says. In illis partibus non intelligitur
quotidianus panis. In those parts it (the B. Sacrament) is not understood to
be daily Bread.

where as for all that) as though D. Harding had said, where, that is, in
which countres of the East. Which in deed had not ben only contrary to S.
Augustine, but to him self also which confesses in the next line before that
they of the East were Not daily partakers of our Lords Supper. Cum iste panis
etc. not vbi.
But these words ( where as for all that) have no relation to the place, but
to the bread. And so I think every One that understands English perceives
well enoughe. Now M. Jewel will forgett not only all Divinity and Grammar (as
you saw before in turning the words, Populis immolatur) but also his very
English Tongue, rather then he will lack a number off Untruths to heap up
in this first Article. O miserable shifts, off wilful Malice.

Although many times the people forbear to come to the Communion, diuis. 28
so as many times (36.) none at all were found disposed to receive.

page 64. The.53. Untruth Slanderous.
The.36. Untruth. M. Harding is able to show no such case.



Diui. 29. Did. 1. hoc quoque.
Which ancient decree (the decree of Soter, that two at the lest must be
present at the celebration of the Sacrifice) requires not that all the people
off Necessite be present, (37) much less that all so oftentimes should
communicate Sacramentally.

page 66. The.54. Untruth Slanderous.
The.37. Untruth. For all that were present, were willed either to Communicate,
ot or depart.



page 68 Did 2. per acta. The.55. Untruth. For this decree is of the bishops
Mass. Sote^^ decree is of the Priests. De consecr. did. 1. Epis. Deo.
Consider this decree written in the name of Pope Calixtus. The Consecration
being done let all Communicate, unless they will be removed from the Church.
For so the Apostles appointed, and so holds the holy Church off Rome. By
this decree these two were bound, either to Communicate with the Priest, or to
depart forth of the Church.

I answer. This decree of Caliztus was made of the Clergy only and of the
bishop, when he executed. It is not made of the Priests and their Masses, as
the decree of Soter is, and therefore you deceive your Reader shamefully and
with a manifest Untruth. The whole decree of Calixtus is this. The bishop
sacrificing unto God, let him have with with him witnesses. In the more solemn
days; seven or v. or iij. Deacons. which be called the Bishops eyes, and
subdeacons and other Ministers. Which clothed in holy vestimentes before and
behind him, the Priests also on the sides of him, on the left and the right
hand, all with a contrite h^rte, and an humbled sprit, standing with their
face bowing to the ground, keeping him from evil willing men, and giving their
consent to the sacrifice. But the Consecration being done, let all communicate,
unless they will be removed from the Church. Lo M. Jewel. This is the whole
decree of Calixtus. You see it is all spoken of Deacons, subdeacons, Priests
and other Ecclesiastical Ministres. Now the two commanded to be present in
Soters decree, to answer to the Priest, it was indifferent whether they were
off the lay or of the clergy. But you will prove they ought to be of the clergy
that Soter speaks of. For this purpose you bring under the name of
Anacletus, this self same decree, M. Jewel makes two allegatio^s off one.
which you brought before under the name of Calixtus (so false and lewd) you
are to deceive your Reader) and you bring the former piece thereof, to wit,
that the Bishop must have about him a certain number of Deacons, subdeacons,
and other Ministres* I answer. The decree is made of a, bishop and that in
solemnioribus diebus, in the more solemn days, not of every Priest, in every
mean or low day. But the decree of Soter is de praesbiteris, of priests
expressly, and of their Masses. Yet you bring an other decree of Soter, to
prove that these two must be of the clergy* that is, you say, De Cons. Did.
1. vt illud.
That every Priest making the Sacrifice have by him an other Priest to assiste
him, and to make an end of the Ministration, if any quamme or sickness
happen to fall upon him. When will you leave to deceive your Reader M. Jewel?
This decree speaks not absolutely that all Priests ought off Necessite
always so to have. But the decree expressly says. Vbi temporis, vel loci,
sieve cleri copia suffragatur. The.56. Untruth Standing in f^lse Application.
When the time does serve, or when the place admits it, or when good store
of the clergy is present. Thus the decree provided not absolutely so to be
always, but when the time was more solemn, the place more public, or the
clergy at commodite to help: as having not said Mass them selves before, as
in solemn days and in Cathedral Churches most did, and now do. But that
Every Priest ought always so to have, that the decree says not. And
therefore you have not yet proved that they ought to be of the clergy. And more
then this proof hereof you have nothing in your text. Therefore farther they
might be of the lay: and then not bound to receive with the Priest. Which
being so, even in this decree of Soter a Private Mass is proved, and a case is
showed where mass is said of the Priest without any company bound to receive
with him. Yet you conclude most impudently in your text, page 68. The 57.
Untruth touching Soters decree.
that whether they were of the clergy or of the laite those two whose presence
Soter required, that the law constrained them to receive together with the
Priest. This I say you conclude most impudently, having no Law, or Decree, or
piece of Decree, that the Laite was bound to receive with the Priest, and
having brought certain apparent pieces for the Clergy bound to receive, which
yet in deed joined to the whole decree have made no deal for you, The 58
Untruth. For more then an inckling of Private Mass is found in Soters decree.


as has been proved. After this you conclude, that M. Harding has found a
Communion, and no manner token or inklinge of private Mass. Which how true it
is in this one point, I leave to the judgment of every indifferent Reader.

Diuis. 31.
In that Council of Agatha we find a decree, made by the Fathers assembled
there, whereof (38) it appears that priests oftentimes said Mass without
others receiving with them.

page 71. The 59. Untruth Slaund. The 60. Untruth For the Contrary does no^
appear. Can. 21.
but rather the contrary.

That we will now try M. Jewel. The decree of the Council is thus much in
English. If any man will have an oratorie or ^happell abroad in the country
beside the parish Chur^hes, in which laufull and ordinary assembly is, for the
rest of the holy days that he have Masses there in consideration of the
werynesse of the houshoulde, with just ordinance we do permit. But at Easter,
Christ's birth, Epiphanie, the Ascension of our Lord, Whitsonday and the
Natiuite of S. John Baptist, and if there be any other special festes, let
them not k^pe their masses, but in the Cities and parishes. And as for the
Clerks if any will do, or have their Masses at the foresaid, festes in
chapels, unless the Bishop so command or permit, let them be trust out
from the Communion. Hitherto the decree. By this decree. (says D. Harding) we
learn that then Masses were commonly said in private Chapels at home, at such
times as the people were not accustomed to be houseled. And the reason hereof
he gives in these words. The reason of D. Harding
For when by commandment and common order they received their rightes, as in
the before named feasts, then were the Priests prohibited to say Masses in
private oratories or chapels with out the parish Churches. The argument of D.
Harding shortly is this.

The cause why people was commanded to resort to the Cities and parish
Churches in principal feasts, was their Communicating.

Ergo being permitted to have Mass in private Chapels, it appears, that in
those private chapels they did not communicate.

it appears priests oftentimes said Mass without others receiving with
them. M. Jewel Replieth not to the reason of D. Harding, but apposeth of his
own.
You say, there appears no such thing, and therefore you make it an
Untruth. But how prove you M. Jewel that no such thing appears? What say
you to the reason or argument of D. Harding, whereby he gathers that such a
thinhe appears? You say to his argument not one word. You make an argument
or two of your own, which he made not, and against them you insult after your
facion. After that you appose him, and ask him, page 71.
what leads M. Harding thus to say? His reason that leadd him so to say was
in the text, but you would not hear it at all. Again you ask. Was there no
company at all in the Chapel to communicate with the priest? The 61.
Untruth, standing in manif^st falsyfying of the decree.
If there were any, show you. Truly there appears none, by any word of the
decree, either to have been, either to ought to have been. Yes say you. It is
provided by the decree it self, that there should be a lawful and an ordinary
company. And you note in the Margin. Can. 21. In quibus est legitimus
ordinariusque co^uentus, that is in English, in the which there is a lawful and
an ordinary assembly. In what which M. Jewel? Who is the Antecede^t to quibus?
M. Ievvel makes false construction to maintain his false reli^ion.
I will putt you the whole sentence, and then see how you can construe it. Si
quis extra Parochias, in quibus est legitimus ordinariusque conuentus,
oratorium in agro habere voluerit. that is in English, If any man will have a
Chapel in his ground, beside the parishes, in which (s^ parishes) there is a
lawful and an ordinary assembly. Now M. Jewel. This private Mass that is
said to appear by this decree, is in the Chapel. You disprove the private
Mass, because you say the Decree has provided that there should be a lawful
and an ordinary assembly in the parish churches. Thus by false co^structio^ M.
Jewel, you deceive again your Reader, wittingly and willingly, and do naught
else but wra^gle childishly, by some means or other to weary your adversary.

After this you leap from Agatha to Gangra, from France to Greece, to prove
that in these oratories and private houses, there was a Communion. And thus you
reason.

In Greece about a hundred and fifty years before, the Communion wa^ received
in private houses.

Ergo in France so long after, in their private Chappelles, M. Iewelles
Argument.
there was also a Communion.

The lewdenesse of this argument will better appear by the like.

In France within these fifty years all Churches had private Masses.

Ergo now in England all Churches have the same. As true is the one as the
other.

But now M. Jewel says, He will give a clear answer to M. Hardinges blind
gheasses. What is that trow we? The.62. Untruth joined with a Slander. Co.
Agath. Can. 60. Epist. decret. Siricij.
Forsothe an other Canon of the self same Council, which bids the
penitents to depart out of the Church with the Nouices that were not yet
Christened, Item a decretal epistle of Siricius, Commanding in like manner
notorious offenders to depart out of the Church. Ergo the rest that remained,
did communicate. I answer. All this was in Cities and Parish Churches unto which
the Nouices and open penitents resorted. This was not in Chapels of private
houses, of which this decree of the Councelle of Agatha speaks. This is M.
Iewelles clear answer.

They communicated in great cities and Parish Churches,

Ergo in Private houses. An other like unto that is this. M. Iewelles Argument.


In the Church of Sarisbury, the Minister at every Communion wears a Cope.

Ergo in all other Chapels at every communion a cope is woren. Let now every
indifferent Reader judge, whether any thing has been brought by M. Jewel, why
by the decree above mentioned, there should not appear, in those private
Chappelles to have been private Masses.

diuis. 23. In the words of Leontius.
At that time (39) he says Mass in his Chapel, having no other body with
him but his servant.

page 74. Stapleto^. The.63. Untruth Slanderous.
The.39. Untruth. There was never Private Mass said in Alexandria neither
before this time, nor at any time sythens.

Here it may be seen how true it is, that S. Paul says Scientia inflat,
Knowleadg puffs up. For what a pride is this of M. Jewel so stoutely and
peremptorely to pronounce that in Alexandria there was never private Mass
neither before the time of Leontius, The.64. Untruth, impude^tly avouched.
nor since. What? Has M. Jewel such a confidence in his Knowleadg, that he
is perfect of the Whole order of Gods Service that ever has been used or
practiced in Alexandria, a Cite (as he says him self) page 78.
a thousand miles beyond all Christendom, and where the faith of Christ has
continued so many hundred years before the time of Leontius, and long after
also? Is M. Jewel so sure that all that time in that great Cite there was
never private Mass, that though Leo^tius a writer of more then 900. years
since do write so, yet he is sure it was never so? Has M. Jewel seen all?
Has he read all? And Does he remember all things that were ever done in the
Church Service of that Cite? What is Impudency, what is Puffing Pride, what is
Presumptuous Rashenesse, if this be not? As for the words which he notes for
an Untruth, they are the words of Leontius alleged by D. Harding, they are
not the words as avouched of D. Harding. And then truly if there were never
private Mass in Alexandria, it was a great Untruth on Leontius part to write
so. This Leo^tius is much commended in the.7. General Council Act. 4.
Now whether M. Jewel be better to be believed herein then is Leontius, a
known approved writer these many hundred years, I leave it to the Readers
discretion. Leontius says plainly of Ihon the holy bishop of Alexandria.
Facit Missas in oratorio suo, Nullum habens secum nisi ministrum suum. He
says Mass in his Chapel, having None other body with him, but his
servant. Here is a clear witness of private Mass, He lived about the time of
S. Gregory, within the first 600. years.

Con. Nice. ^. Act. 4.


as M. Jewel terms the receiving of the priest without a company of
communicants. And that within the first 600. years. For this Leontius (as the
Fathers of the seventh general Council do say) floruit circa tempora Mauritij
Imperatoris, flourished about the time of Mauritius the Emperor. Whose reign
began in the year of our lord. 585. The witness being so clear, M. Jewel
though good to out face the matter, and stoutely to say that neither before
this Leontius, nor ever since there was ever private Mass said in
Alexandria. M. Jewel. outfaceth matters, when proofs fail him.
This shameless and impudent facing seems well to be resembled by the Gorgons
head with the Anticke that M. Iewelles printer has placed at the end of every
Article. Where spare room was. Frons perfricta, Os impudens.

Whereas in the text M. Jewel would make us believe that Missae here should
not signify Mass, but any other kind of prayer (for he cares not what he
make of it, The 65. Untruth, about the signification of Missas facere.

Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 33.


so it be not Mass) he may as soon persuade any that is learned that the Crow
is white, as that Missas facere in this place does not signify to say Mass.
For so he may tell us that Missa^ facere caepi in S. Ambrose, does not signify
I began to say Mass, but matins or euensong or some like thing. Any thing
M. Jewel, so it be not Mass. And when S. Gregory charged Maximus the intruded
bishop of Salona that being excommunicated, Missas facere praesumpsit it shall
not signify He presumed to say Mass, Gregor. lib. 4. epist. 34.
but he presumed to say his matins or even song, or any other kind of
prayer, which no person excommunicated is forbidden to say. In like manner when
the Council of Arels charge the bishops that for certain offenses, Anno
integro Missas facere non praesumant, Council. Arelae. Can. 2.
it shall not signify that for the space of a whole year they presume not to
say Mass, but that they presume not to say matins or euensong all the year
long, or some other kind of prayer, what ye will, so it be not Mass. But what
shifte is there so impudent that M. Jewel will not use, rather then to yield,
and acknowleadge his vanite and error? An heretic (says S. Paul) is suo
iudicio condemnatus, Tit. 3.
condemned in his own judgment. M. Jewel knows him self that in this
place he has kicked and striued against a manifest Truth. Yet he will not
yield. What other shifts he has used to defeat this clear Testimony, because
it is in the Confutatio^ of D. Harding, particularly refelled, I shall not need
presently farther to entermedle. And this little may seem sufficient to justify
the Untruth, of Leontius (if it were an Untruth) for his words they are,
not off D. Harding, whose words they are not.

Again M. Jewel denies the Conclusion. For whereas Leontius says, that
John the bishop of Alexandria said Mass in his Chapel, M. Jewel denies the
Conclusion.
having no other body with him, but his servant, and of this it is Concluded,
that in Alexandria there was private, Mass, M. Jewel denies the Conclusion and
says stoutely, there was never private Mass in Alexandria, neither before
the time of Leontius, nor at any time since, and puts that for an
Untruth, which is Concluded. Wherein he fares as a fool of Sanford by
Oxforde was wont to do. Who resorting to the university at Christmasse time,
and being by certain sophismes made in the way of pastime, proved to be an
Ass, would always deny the Conclusion, and say. Nay: but I am no Ass.
Wherein he showed him self to be an Ass in deed.

diuis. 33.
Even as our Sacramentaries do ascribe all to faith only, and (40) call the
most worthyest Sacrament none other but tokening bread, which of it self has
no divine efficacy or operation.

page 81. The.66. Untruth Slanderous. Articu. 6.
The.40. Untruth. We never called it so.

You Sacramentaries of Geneua do so call it, if you agree with the doctrine of
John Calvin your Master. Who in his resolutions upon the Sacraments, has
these very words. Although the bread be given unto us as a Mark or pleadge
of the Communion, yet because it is a sign, not the thing it self, nor has
not the thing included in it, they which stay their minds thereupon,
worshipping therein Christ, they make an idol of it. In these words Calvin
makes the Sacrament only a tokening bread, a sign without the thing included
in it, which is a bare sign and token. Now to judge the doctrine of the
scholars, by the printed and published doctrine of the Master, it is no
Untruth.

Now one place more for private Mass, diuis. 34.
and caet. (41.) This place is twice found in Chrysostom.

page 87. The.67. Untruth Slanderous. Stapleton
Private Mass is never found in Chrysostom.

The daily Sacrifice offered, without any to Communicate, is (in your sense M.
Jewel) private Mass. But that is found in Chrysostom. Ergo private Mass is
found in Chrysostom. The Mayor or first proposition is clear. The second is
the saying of Chrysostom. These are his words. Homi. 61. ad p^p. A^tioch.
The daily sacrifice is offered in vain. We stand at the altar for naught.
There is not one that will be houseled. Here lo is a daily Sacrifice offered,
and yet not one to Comunicate, This place M. Jewel, if you will stand to the
letter, (as you do in all other places alleged) you can never avoid while you
live. And therefore there is no remedy. You must Subscribe.

But all was in vain (42) for none came.

The.68. Untruth Slanderous.
There came many both of the people and also of the clergy.

Chrysostom says. Nullus qui communicetur. There is not one that will be
houseled. M. Jewel says it is not true, there came many. Then Chrysostom
lies, not D. Harding, who says no one word more herein, then Chrysostom
him self said. Then score up this Untruth upon Chrysostom, not upon D.
Harding.

In that great and populous City of Antioche, where the Scriptures were daily
expounded and (43) preached.

The.69. Untruth Slaundero^s.


And how shall that appear M. Jewel? Mary you allege in your text
Chrysostom which confesses that such open sermons were made to the people but
ones in the weke. What then? How the Sacrifice and the preaching is called
daily.
The^, say you, it is an Untruth, to say it was daily. No Untruth at al M.
Jewel. For when the saying of an Author is true in that sense which he meaned,
then is the saying true. Nor daily preaching, nor daily Sacrifice is so
avouched, that precisely every day in the whole year, either sermons were
made, either the Sacrifice offered. That is called daily in the old writers
which was often done and ones at the lest every weke. So was the preaching, so
was the sacrifice. You heard S. Austen before call the Blessed Sacrament, our
daily bread. And thereuppon you conclude your self, page 63. lin. 11.
The people then received the Sacrament every day. And yet in the next page
before disputinge against the daily Sacrifice, M. Jewel contrary to him
self.
you say. Neither was the Communion then Ministered every day. For proof
whereoff you allege an epistle sent from certain bishops, wherein it was
confessed that the ministration was only upon the Sondaies. page 62. lin. 3.
Now then M. Jewel if the people received the Sacrament every day, and yet
the Communion was only ministered upon the Sondaies, either you must grant that
they received without a Communiom which is by your doctrine a great abuse,
either that a thing may be called daily though it be done but ones in the
weke. And then if you may so interpret the daily Sacrifice, why may not we
interpret the daily preaching in like manner, because it was done ones in the
weke, as the place which you allege out of Chrysostom against D. Harding,
witnesses expressly? page 63. lin. 35.
Thus it was no Untruth for D. Harding to call that daily preaching which was
but ones in the weke, no more then it is for you to say The people received
every day, The 70. Untruth For before he said: The people received every
day.
and yet The communion was ministered only upon the Sunday.

Again to shifte away the daily sacrifice, you say the Sacrament may be
called daily bread not for that it is daily received, but for that there is no
day excepted, but it may be received every day. By this means also we may
say, The preaching in Antioche was called daily of D. Harding: because there
was no day excepted, but that there might be a Sermon made every day. Thus M.
Jewel by your own phrases and expositions, M. Jewel confuteth him self.
the saying of D. Harding is proved to be no Untruth. Wherefore you had very
little occasion to give out such a Solemn Sentence, and to say. I note not this
for that I mislyke with daily preaching, The 71. Untruth For there was no
Untruth so boldly presuued.
but for that Untruth so boldly presumed should not pass untouched. You
should rather have said, But for that otherwise the heart would have broken, if
malice this way had not uttered her venim. For truly M. Jewel you have showed
your self herein to be made even of the scrapinges of malice it self, which
in a matter by your self not mislyked (as you confess) would yet pick out a
fault, where none at all is. Which in your next Untruth appears yet more
evidently.

Either the Sacrifice ceased, and that was not done, which (44) Christ
Commanded to be done in his remembrance, etc.

The 72. Untruth Slaund.
The.44. Untruth. Christ commanded no such daily Sacrifice.

M. Jewel repeteth one Untruth four times.
and now again the fourth time have repeted only to make up a number of
Untruths, in this first article, wherein you thought to bring D. Harding out
of credit at the beginning for ever. For even here you Boast and Vaunt out of
measure, and that with such Impudency, as no man of lerning would use but you.
And you say. Page 91. The 73. Untruth joined with passing impudency.




To the which I answer. O M. Jewel. Is it not possible to defend your most
Vain Challenge, without such Impudent Lies? So many Untruths Charged upon D.
Harding in so little room, even at the entry of your Maine Labor, and not one
of them True? All returned back unto you? And have you done all this so
Impudently, so Facingly, so extreme Braggingly, without the Shame of the
world, Wihout Fear of God? You a preacher of Gods holy word, you an
instructor of the people, you a Bishop, and God will? Teach you Truth at
home, which have printed openly so many notorious Lies, so outrageous
Untruths, so facing fashoods? Are not your self now guilty of all these
Untruths ( lege talionis) which in so ^^tle room and so many you have forged
upon D. Harding?

By report of Chrysostom the Sacrifice in his time was daily offered, that is
to say, the Mass was celebrated. But many times no body came to communicate
Sacramentally with the priests, (45) as it is before proved.

page 88. The 74. Untruth the Slaund.
The.45. Untruth. This is not yet proved.



Private Mass proved out of Chrysostom.
Where the daily Sacrifice is made and none does communicate with the Priest,
there is Mass without communicants.

But Chrisostom says the daily Sacrifice was made, and no body did
communicate.

Ergo by Chrysostoms saying, there was a Mass without communicants. Of this it
follows.

A mass without communicants is private Mass.

Ergo there was private Mass.

Here M. Jewel to defeat this argument presses and wringeth him self, as
many ways, as art or wit could help him. And yet none will serve. First he
demands.

page 88.
Whether M. Harding will rest upon the bare words of Chrysostom, or qualify
them somewhat, and take his meaning.



The 75. Untruth For it follows not by Chrysostoms words that he him self
did not Communicate.
then Chr^^ostom him self did not Communicate. For he was Some body. And the
plain words be, No body did Communicate.

Who ever thought M. Jewel had been so very a fool, as to be ignorant, that
in an universal speech, s^mper excipitur persona loquentis. Ever the party
that speaks is excepted? Namely in such things which signify an Action not
touching the Speaker him self. As here. Chrysostom saying that No body did
communicate, speaks it of the communicating of Other with him, not of his Own
communicating. After this M. Jewel disputes upon Chrysostoms meaning by a
Gheasse utterly Untrue, as it shall now appear. He says. The.76. Untruth.
For S. Chrysostom speaks no one word of small compaines.


It appears Chrisostoms purpose was to rebuke the negligence of the people
for that of so poppulous a City, they came to the Communion in so small
compaines.

This Gheasse as it is utterly untrue, so it is utterly unproven. I will tell
you Chrisostoms purpose, and prove it to by his own words. His purpose was to
persuade the people from their usual ones receiving at Easter, and to come
oftener to receive the holy Sacrament. The purpose of Chrysostom in the place
alleged
These are his words even next before the words last alleged. I see great
inequalite of things among you. At other times when as for most part ye are
in clean life,, ye come not to receive your rightes. But at Easter though ye
have done some things amiss, yet ye come. O what a custom is this: O what
presumption is this? Homi. 61. ad Pop. A tioch.
The Daily Sacrifice is offered in vain etc? Lo M. Jewel you hear what
Chrisosto^s purpose was by his own words: not by a Vain Gheasse contrary to
his words. For you say, The 77. Untruth. as before.
upon your former Vain and Untrue Gheasse that he calls those Compaines, in
a vehemence of speech and cae, No body. Now he speaks against the custom of
ones receiving of all the people at Easter, as it is now, and says that for
all the Daily Sacrifice, yet Not One received. As for that you bring examples
of Scripture and of Chrysosto^, that Nemo, No Body, Does sometime signify a
few and small company, you must remember M. Jewel, that examples serve to
express and to make clear one matter by an other, not to prove and conclude
one thing upon an other. You know the rule. Exempla dilucidant non probant.
Examples do open that which is dark: they prove not. If you had first proved
that Chrysostom by the word No body had meant small Compaines, then for example
of the like, your allegations would have served well. Now to prove this can
not serve, but only to exemplify. Thus your simple gheasse upon Chrysostoms
meaning is found utterly Vain, Fond, and Untrue. So both the words and the
meaning of Chrysostom make directly against you and prove clearly that none did
communicate oftentimes in the daily Sacrifice, which is private Mass.

Yeat M. Jewel hunteth after other shifts, and sacketh every corner of his
old notes, to overthrow and obscure this clear testimony of Chrysostom for
private Mass. And says:

page 89.
And albeit, this only answer compared with the manner of Chrisostomes
eloquence, which commonly is hot and fervent, and with the common practice of
the Church then, The 78. Untruth. For this only Answer is in sufficient as
shall appear.
may suffice to a man more desirous of truth then of contention, yet I have
good hope etc.

had been very Fond, Childish, and Peuish. For what Child but you, would call
the words of Chrysosto^ in doubt, saying, There is no Body that Does
Communicate, Because he him self communicated, which was some body? For I pray
you M. Jewel, if these words ca^ not prove the Sole Receiving of the Priest
which you call private Mass, what words shall ever be able to prove it? Did
you Devise your Challenge upon Certain Terms, The Intent of M. Iewelles
Challenge.
which you thought could never be found in the Ancient Writers, or did you
seek after the Matter comprised in such terms? If the first, then you your
self M. Jewel are the man (that you speak of) more desirous of Contention,
then of Truth. If the last, then you have here a Private Mass. You have a
daily Sacrifice which the Latin Church has called the Mass eue^ before
Chrysosto^s time, without Co^munica^ts. If this, as I said, do prove no Private
Mass, I beseech you M. Jewel tell us by what words will you have it proved? Will
you deny we have had Private Mass these later 900. years? Will you deny, the
Catholics have it at this hour in Italy, France, Germany, Spain, Portugal
and other Christened Cou^tres? I dare say, you will not put us to prove this.
But if you should, I think verily we could never bring better record out of
any writer for any Country, Why Private Mass cannot easily be proved in plain
terms.
then is Chrysostom in this place for Antioche. For why? Many things are so
well known, so certain, so common, that therefore they are not put in
writing. What example can you bring M. Jewel out of all the first 600. years,
that ever any man said his Pater Noster Privately to him self alone, out of
the Church or Congregation? P^iu^t Pater Noster.
And yet who doubts but Thousands did so at that time? And truly in like
manner to prove by Records and writings of learned men, that Private Mass was
said in Spain (for example) forty years ago, would be a thing of as
great Difficulty, as to prove it in the first 600. years, if so plain words
as Chrysostomes are, may not be admitted. For what can be more plain then
this? We stand at the altar, we Offer the daily sacrifice, and none does
Communicate. Yet thus much said Chrysostom. Therefore against this Clear and
Evident Assertion of Chrysostom, we admit not your Pelting Exception off
Chrysostomes own person, nor the bold shifting off No body into small
companies, exemplified, not proved. This answer I say we admit not, not for
Contention sake, which do not defend herein any Private Particular Doctrine
of our own, but the Faith of our forefathers, and the Faith of all
Christened Countres, beside you and a few others, but we reiecte it M. Jewel
for Truths sake. The Truth I say of that Faith in the which both you and
we were baptized, both your parents and ours have yielded their souls to God.
But now let us see what is the hope that you have conceived although this
Answer be rejected. You say.

The.79. Untruth For it is Master Iewelles Nemo, not D. Hardings, nor
Chrysostoms neither.
I have good hope, it may be proved, notwithstanding Master Hardinges Nemo, that
Chrysostom neither was alone, nor could be alone at the holy Ministration,
and therefore could say no private Mass.

Behold good Readers, how M. Jewel deceives you. He will prove that
Chrysostom could not be alone at the holy Ministration, and therefore could
say no Private Mass. And how many Thousands of Priests do daily say
Private Mass, which yet be not alone at the holy Ministration? But if M.
Jewel will prove that Chrysostom could say no private Mass, M. Jewel
steals from the Matter.
he must prove that Chrysostom could not Receive Alone. For what is Private
Mass, as M. Jewel and his fellows take it, but the Sole Receiving of the
Priest? Prove then M. Jewel that Chrysostom could not Receive alone. Mark,
what the Answer of M. Jewel ought to be.
Truly if you can do so, you shall prove that upon Chrysostom, which
Chrysostom him self denies. For behold Chrysostom said. He has not one to
Communicate. M. Jewel will prove. It is not possible but he should have some
Body to Communicate. And so M. Jewel will prove that thing to be done, M. Jewel
will prove S. Chrysostom a liar.
which yet Chrysostom says in plain words, was not done. But because he
would not seem to fight against Chrysostom, and his words: but against D.
Harding and his words, he protests to prove this, Notwithstanding M.
Hardinges Nemo. He should have said, if he would speak truly. M. Jewel
iuggleth one word for an other to make pastime.
Notwithstanding S. Chrysostomes Nullus, Not one. For that word Nemo, No body
which M. Jewel sporteth him self so much with in this place, is not found
either in Chrysostom, or in D. Hardinge: But is devised of this Sir John Hicke
scorner to make sport, and pass time withal. In deed the word Nullus, Not
one: which so graueleth M. Jewel, is the word of Chrysostom, but not of D.
Hardinges invention. Thus he alters and iuggleth, proving and placing one
thing for an other, so to steal away and beguile the Reader. For you shall
see, M. Jewel with all his Allegations, Shifts and Euasions shall never be
able to prove, that Chrysostom could not Receive Alone at the holy
Ministration, which is the only way to prove that he could say no private
Mass. You shall see his words,

page 89.
and others of the Quiere. And if the whole Quiere would have forsaken him,
yet had he Company sufficient* of the people, as it may be clearly proved.





And yet all this that he brings hereafter of the clergy, is Utterly from the
Purpose.

Presbyterium, the sacred College, the Council and Company of the Bishop.



The Deacons bring the dishes with the holy Bread unto the holy Altar, the
Rest carry the holy Cups. By which words appears both a number of the
Ministry, and also provision for them that would Receive.



Again this was a solemnite in the Church of Constantinople, when S.
Chrysostom was bishop there. But the words of Chrysostom which we treat of
now, were spoken in Antioche when he was yet but a priest, no bishop.

Eusebius. lib. 6. cap. 43. Nazianzen in Apologet.
Cornelius writes that in the Church of Rome there were forty and six
priests, seven deacons, seven subdeacons, forty and two Acoluthes, Exorcistes,
Readers, and other officers of the Church fifty and two. VVydoues and other
afflicted people that were there relieved a 1500. Nazianzen complains of the
number of the clergy in his time, that they seemed to be more then the rest of
the people. Therefore the Emperor Justinian afterward thought needful to
abridge the number and to make a law that in the great Church at
Constantinople, where Chrysostom was bishop,

the words are taken, to the which M. Jewel now makes answer)







The effect of M. Iewelles former Allegations.
Ignatius a bishop of Antioche had a number of Priests to wait upon him,
Chrysostom when he was bishop in Constantinople had the like, Cornelius bishop
of Rome had so also, Nazianzen complains of the great number of the clergy,
and Justinian long after Chrysostoms time restrained the number of the clergy
in Constantinople, Ergo Chrysostom being no bishop but a Priest only at
Antioche, had in Antioche Always a Number to Serve and Wait upon him. For
thou must understand (gentle Reader) when Chrysostom spoke these words, which
we are now about, Hom. 6^. ad Pop. Antioch. Socrates. li. 6. cap. 3. Niceph.
li. 31. ca. 2.
( The daily Sacrifice is offered in vain: we stand at the Altar for naught:
There is not one that will receive) he spoke those words in an homily made to
the people of Antioche where he took the inferior orders as Socrates and
Nicephorus do write, where he was made Reader, deacon, and priest. He was then
no bishop at all, but only a Priest at Antioche. Therefore all this number that
M. Jewel has hitherto proved, is utterly beside the purpose. And that for ij.
causes. First because all his allegations being of bishops, of Rome, and of
Constantinople, Al M. Iewelles allegations have proved nothing.
they make nothing to the words of Chrysostom who was then but a Priest and
that at Antioche. Secondarely because, al these allegations proves a number to
Wait and Attend upon the bishop, but they prove not a whit, that such a
number ought allwaies to Receive with the bishop. Now let us see how M.
Jewel proceeds.

The 80. Untruth joined with a Slaund. scoff.
Now if we say that some of these priests, deacons, or other Communicated
with the Bishop, I tell them (says M. Harding) boldly and with a solemn
countenance, which must needs make good proof, This is but a poor shifte and
will not serve their turn.







The.81. Untruth joined with a scoff.
And because he sits so fast upon the bare words, and reposeth all his hope
upon Nemo, if we list to cauil in like sort.



The.82. Untruth. For these plain words of Chrisostom include no number to
Receive with him.
Frustra assistimus Altari. In vain we stand at the Altar. We stand,
says he, and not. I stand, and therefore includes a number and not one alone.

He includes in deed a number to stand at the Altar, but he includes no
number to receive at the Altar, unless M Jewel be of the opinion, that they
received standing. Again Chrysostom complains not only of him self and his
own flock, but of other priests also and their flocks. Nullus qui
communicetur.



Small Advantage, is the best hold he has. It follows.

that if any bishop or priest or Deacon, or any other of the Quiere, after
Oblation is made, do not receive, Ca^. Apost. 8. De Cons. Did. 1. Episcopus.
unless he show some reasonable cause of his doing, that he stand
excommunicat. The like law in the Church of Rome was after renewed by Pope
Anacletus.

The.83. Untruth in falsifying the Cano^ of the Apostles.
when he spoke the words which we now treat of, but a Priest in Antioche.
Again M. Jewel to stretche the Canon of the Apostles farther then it was
intended, has falsified a part thereof. For where he says ( or any other of
the Quire) it is in the greek (...) in Latin, aut alius ordinis eccl^siastici,
in true english, or any other of the Clergy. For of the Clergy only this Cano^
was made, who in the Apostles time, and many years after, when the bishop
celebrated, used customably to receive. For in that time many right holy and
learned men continewed in the inferior orders of the clergy all the days of
their life. And were not admitted to priesthood but being called, and in a
manner forced thereunto. Such at that time in the beginning of the faith
communicated with the bishop, because otherwise (as the Canon says) he
should seem to be, author offensionis populo, and suspicionem praebens in
offerentem. A cause of offense to the people, and to bring the party that
offered into suspicion As being such a one, with whom his Clergy would not
communicate. For this re pect at that time, such communicating with the bishop
was thought necessary. The state of Chrisostoms time four hundred years after
was otherwise.

page 90. Can. 14.
The Council of Nice decrees thus. Let the Dea^ons in order after the Priests
receive of the bishops, or of the Priest the holy Communion.



Carth. 6. Can. 18.
Likewise the Council of Carthage. Let the Deacons receive the Communion in
order after the Priests, either the bishop or the Priest ministering it.

etc.

Can. 59. T^l. 4. cap. 17.
So the Council of Laodicea. It is lawful only for the Priests of the Church
to enter in to the place where the Aul^ar stan^eth, and there to Communicate.
So the Council of Toledo. Let the Priests and Deacons communicate before the
Altar: the Clerks in the Quiere, and the people without the Quie^e.



This thing is specially to be noted, that the Priest did never celebrat
without a Deacon. A^ Cleru^ e^ literatos Bohaemie The.84. Untruth ^^uching the
time of Chrysostom. In liturgia.
And that in every Mass the Deacon received the Sacrament in the kind of
Bread at the Priests hand, and the Priest the Cup at the Deacons hand.

Yea forsothe they did so (as he says) but in the Apostles time only, and
certain years after.

But what needs much proof in a case that is so plain? Chrysostom him self
follows the same order. After that the Priests have received (says he) the
Archedeacon commands the Deacons to come fort^e and they so coming receive
as the Priests did before.







M. Jewel perceauing very well that for all his former Allegations he could
not prove the Clergy bound to the daily communicating, now he goes about to
prove it in the People. And that therefore Chrysostom must needs have some to
co^municat with him, yea though he said him self he had not one. These are
his words.

Poenitent some Negligent, and some Devout.

words off M. Jewel, Seems to divide. But let us hear forth.

The.85. Untruth For the devout Received not always.
The Penitent were commanded away, and might not Communicate. The negligent
sometime departed off them selves, and would not Communicate. The devout
remained and received together.

How proves M. Jewel, this later point? You shall hear.





Ad pop. Antioch. Homi. 61.
For thus Chrysostom says unto the people. Thou art come into the Church, and
have song praises unto God, with the rest, and have confessed thy self to be
one of the worthy, in that thou departedest not forth with the unworthy. By
these words he shows that some were worthy, and some unworthy. That the
unworthy departed, and the worthy remained.

Catechumins or Nouices in the faith, straight after the Sermon. And those
which remained were all the rest of the people, as well Devout as not
Devout. Again though they were all Devout, Ad Ianuarium. epistol. 118.
yet will it not follow that they all Received. For by S. Augustins judgment,
a man may both Receive and Refrain from Receiving with Devotion. The one he
compares to Zachaeus which gladly and hastily received Christ in to his house,
The other to the Centurion, which with no less love of Christ, Luca. 7.
said yet, Lord I am not worthy, that thou should enter under my ^oufe.
Yea Chrysostom in that place, After he had said in a great Vehemence, Homi.
61. a^ pop. Antoch.
who so does not Communicate, is one of the poenitents, straightwaye refrayning
him self, lest he should seem to condemn all that were present, he says,
At ex his non es, sed ex his qui possunt esse participes, and nihil curas, aut
magnum opus censes. O but you are not such a poenitent, but of the number of
those which may Communicate. Those which remained in the Church Received not.
But you care not much for the matter, or you think it is a great Busynes,
etc, In which words it appears plainly that those which remained, were such
as might Communicate: but yet such as partly of Negligence, partly of Fear and
Reverence did refrain. And therefore Chrysostom tempering his vehement talk
says unto such. Considera quaeso, Mensa Regalis est apposita, The drifte of
Chrisostom in the Homily alleged.
and caet. Consider I beseech you. The kings table is laid, and so forth in
many words, persuading them to come and Receive oftener. After all which long
persuasion he concludes at length, saying. Ne maius itaque vobis iudicium
faciamus, vos ex^ort^mur, non vt accedatis, sed vt praesentia vos and accessu
dignos constituatis. Therefore that we may not increase your judgment
(meaning, that the more they were warned, the more should be their Damnation,
if they obeyed not) we do exhort you not to come and receive, but to make
your self worthy both to be present and to receive. In which words he
leaves their Coming or not Coming to the Sacrament as free unto them, charging
them only to make them selves. Always Worthy thereof, to the intent that at
Easter, the Epiphanye, and such other principal Festes they should not be
found Unworthy. For so he disputes in few lines after saying. Dic mihi,
quaeso, post Annum Communionem sumens, Quadraginta ne Dies ad totius temporis
Peccatorum purificationem tibi satis esse putas? Et Hebdomade ipsa rursum ad
Priora reuer^eris? Tell me I pray thee. Ones Receiving in the year.
Thou cominge to Receive after a years space, think thou that forty days
(he means the Lent time) will be sufficient to purify thee of thy sins of
all that time? And then in that very weke thou returnest again to thy former
sins. For this cause that after Easter the people fell to dissolutnes,
Chrysostom exhorted them so to live the rest of the year, that they should
Always, though not Come and Receive, yet be Worthy to come and Receive. This
is the Drift and End of all Chrysostoms disputation in that homely, al most
directly with out Gheasse or Aim proving Private Mass, that is the daily
Sacrifice without Company of Communicants.

The deacon standing on high, calls some to the communion, The 86. Untruth
standing in the manifest Corruption of Chrysostom. Stapleton
and puts of some, th^usteth out some, and brings in some. Chrysostom
says. Some are called, and, some are brought in to receive with the priest.
Where then is now M. Hardinges Nemo?

Will you never leave to deceive your Reader and to abuse all the world with
Patched Sentences beside the purpose? Chrysostom in these words tells the
manner of the deacons at the Service time, how none but worthy are admitted. He
speaks not of any ordinary custom of the peoples receiving at every
Ministration, as M. Jewel would have it to seem. For Chrysostom after he had
(as I showed before) persuaded with the people to make them selves allwaies
Worthy to Receive, that they might not at Easter come Unworthy, telling them
therefore, that living in sin all the year Long, the forty days of Le^t
would scant serve to purge them, and speaking the same so earnestly, that his
hearers began to be afearde even of that ones coming to the Sacrament, he
says at last unto them. Haec dico non vno and annuo vos prohibens accessu,
sed vos semper ad sancta volens accedere. Ho^^lia 61. ad pop. Antioch.
I speak these things not forbidding you to come ones in the year, but
desirous to have you come always to these holy mysteries. After which words
it follows. Propter hoc and Diaconus acclamat tunc sanctos vocans, and per
hanc vocem omnium taxans maculas. For this cause (that ye may come worthily)
the deacon cries at that time (at the mass time) calling, the holy, and by
this word (Holy) rebuking the faults of al. After which words, discoursing
in a few lines by a comparyson taken of a flock of sheep, at lenght he says
of the Deacon. Stans erectus, omnibus appar^ns, and magnum in illa tremenda
quiet exclamans, hos quide^ vocat hos autem arcet, non manu hoc faciens, sed
per linguam quam per manum e^fica^ius. Illa nanque vox in aures incidens
nostras, tanquam manus, hos quidem pelli^ and ei^ci^, hos autem introducit and
assistit. He standing upright, in the sight of all the people, and crying
Alowde, in that dreadful Silence, some he calls, and some he puts of, not
doing it with his Hand, but by his toumge more effectuously, then with his
hand. For that word (Holy) falling into our ears, like as a hand, drives
out some, and brings in other. This is lo, M. Jewel, the thrusting out, and
bringing in, that the Deacon uses. Not as though he brought in some to Receive
as you would make your Reader believe, and as you expressly (but untruly) do
say, but because, Crying out Holy, he excluded all Unholy and unworthy
persons. Al which Chrysosto^ brought in only to set before the peoples eyes,
how none but Holy and Worthy might be admitted to receive those Holy Mysteries.
He speaks not one word of the peoples communicating with him in Small
Companies. But clean contrary, rebukes their Ones Coming in the year, not so
much for that they came but Ones, as for that they came even then Unworthy, or
else soon after Easter fell to their old negligence and naughtynes.

Therefore (to Conclude) notwithstanding all your vain Gheasses, Exceptions,
and Allegations, ^riuat ^asse Concluded.
it is Clear not only by the Words, but also by the Meaning and whole
discourse of Chrysostom in that Homely, that the People Received but Ones in
the year by any law, o^der, or Custom, and that oftentimes the Daily
Sacrifice was made, and yet Nullus qui communicetur. There was not one that
came to communicate.

Thus contrary to the Untruth noted by you upon D. Harding, The Daily
Sacrifice was celebrated when Not One came to co^municat Sacrame^tally with the
priest. Which is as much to say, there was Private Mass. Thus also the 36.
Untruth, where you said M. Harding is able to show no such case, page 64.
where none of the people were found disposed to receive, is justified and
proved no Untruth. For in this Mass of Chrysosto^ Not One was found. Thus
Again the 41. Untruth, where you noted that Private Mass is never found in
Chrysostom, is disproued also, and proved most true. Last of al thus we have a
Private Mass within the first 600. years, and thus you must Subscribe. There
is no remedy.

A RETVRNE OF VNTRVHES UPON M. JEWEL. etc.
The Second Article.
Diuis. 1.
WHereas under either kind (46.) whole Christ is verily present, this
healthefull Sacrament is of true Christian people with no less fruit Received
under One Kind, then under both.

page 89. The 87. Untruth. Slanderous.
The.46. Untruth. proceeding only of the Gross error of transubstantiation.

That Christ is wholly Received under either Kind, seems an Untruth to M.
Jewel. And why so? Forsothe because it proceeds of the Gross error of
Transubstantiation. Thus he salueth one sore with an other, and defends one
heresy with an other, and that condemned in a general Council. But for
Truths sake which here I defend, though this heresy of M. Iewelles be already
determined in General Council, In Council. Lateran^
and therefore of no good Christen man any more to be disputed or doubted of,
yet I will assaye shortly prove it. The rather because a great pith of this
Article lies herein. For if this doctrine of whole Christ to be Received under
either kind, proceeds (as M. Jewel says) of Transubstantiation, this being
proved, the other is Concluded. This being Concluded that to Receive under One
Kind, is not any Injury to the Receiver, but as healthefull and fruitful as
to receive under both Kinds, the are the great Outcries and Complaints of
the enemies of nods Church cut of, vpbrayding the universal practice of
Christendom these many hundred years by their own Confession, as guylty of
Cruel Injury Done to Gods people. And then have they less Cause in this
Sacrament of Unite, to raise up such a piteous storm of Variaunce and
Dissension. Though yet M. Jewel full wisely in his text says, (of Receiving
whole Christ under either kind).

page 98.


The.88. Untruth joined with a folly.
and to the whole doctrine of the Schoolmen Alexander de Hales, and Durandus,
whom he alleges very sadly in this place. But to be short, I prove
Transubstantiation by Scripture and by authorite of the Fathers. If they teach
us gross errors, for such let it be taken. Transubstantiation proved by
Scripture.

Luc. 22.


The Scripture says. Hoc est Corpus meum, This is my Body. Which this M.
Jewel? Can you say. This bread is my Body? You know, Hoc, this, is the
neuter gendre. Panis Bread, is the masculin. Then what this? This forsothe
which Christ had blessed, and made saying, This is my Body. For the saying of
God is making. God makes with his word. Genes. 1.
The word said: Let light be made and light was made. The word said This is
my Body. And we believe in so saying because it was not so before, he made it so
even then, For, Sine paenitentia sunt donae Dei and vocatio. Romans 11.
God repe^teth him not of his gifts and calling. If then that which God has
said, can not be revoked, and Christ true God said (holding in his hand which
before he spoke, was but bread) that it was his Body, undoubtedly as he was
true God, so by saying he made it his Body. Now because if Christ's true Body
were joined with the nature of Bread, as his true Godhead was with the Nature
of Flesh, then the nature of Bread should be assumpted and joined in one
person with the body of Christ, as his flesh and Humanite was joined in one
person with his Godhead (which to say is a most wicked and blasphemous heresy)
therefore it must of necessite follow, that the nature of Bread be utterly
changed in to the Body of Christ, and not to remain with it. This if it be so,
then is it a clear and undoubted Tra^substantiation, of the whole nature of
Bread in to the whole and perfect Body of Christ. Neither is it any gross
error, but a clear doctrine evidently gathered out of holy Scripture.

By authorite of the Fathers thus I prove Transubstantiation. S. Ambrose
says, speaking of the Sacrament. Forte dices. Aliud video. Quomodo tu mihi
asseris quod Christi corpus accipiam? Et hoc nobis adhuc superest, vt probemus.
Transubstantiation proved by the Fathers.
Quantis igitur vtimur exemplis vt probemus non hoc esse quod natura formauit,
sed quod benedictio consecrauit, maioremque vim esse benedictionis quam
naturae, quia benedictione etiam ipsa natura mutatur. Thou say perhaps unto
me. Lib. de ijs qui initiantur mysteriis. Cap. 9.
I see an other manner of thing. How then do you tell me that I receive
Christ's body? Then this yet remains for us to prove. And how many examples
may we use to prove, that it is not that, which Nature fashioned, but that
which the Blessing Consecrated, and that the Power of Blessing ouercometh
Nature, because by Blessing even very Nature is changed? Thus far S Ambrose.
In the Sacrament, that which Nature made, Nature is Changed.
is bread. This Nature says S. Ambrose is changed. And how? By Blessing.
Into what is it changed? In to that which Blessing Consecrated. Now what
does Blessing Consecrate, what is the end of the Consecration made by
Blessing? What else but the Body of Christ? Therefore by S. Ambrose his
judgment the nature of bread is changed in to the body of Christ. This is a
Clear Transubstantiation by the verdit of S. Ambrose. Eusebius Emissenus an
other ancient and learned Father speaks of this changing of Bread in to
Christ's body, more evidently. His words are. De Pascha Homil. 5.
Inuisibilis Sacerdos visibiles creaturas in substantiam corporis and sanguinis
sui, verbo suo, secreta potestate conuertit, ita dicens: Accipite and edite:
hoc est enim Corpus meum. The invisible Priest (Christ) turns by his word,
with a secret power, the visible creatures in to the substance of his Body and
Blood, saying. Take and eat. For this is my body. What are here the visible
Creatures turned into the Body and Blood of Christ, but the Bread and Wine
which he took in his hands at the last Supper? What is Transubstantiation,
if this be not? Go now M. Jewel and against the holy Scripture, and such
learned Fathers, call it a gross error, if ye list. Truly none but gross
Capharnaites can call this Doctrine gross, The Catholic Doctrine of Christ's
Real presence in the Sacrament.
which in deed is the kaye of all our Conjunction with Christ, the assured
warrant of our Resurrection, the continual Miracle of the Son of God, the
most heavenly and dreadful Mystery that Christ left to his Church. Of this
most assured Doctrine, because Christ is no more any dead body (for death
shall no more prevail over him) it follows evidently that his body is not
without Blood. M. Jewel requires some ancient Doctor to say so. Yea
truly he is full of his demaundes. But when all is said, and a number of
Doctors brought, it nothing moves him. Touching this point, if either
Doctors or Scripture can persuade him, that Christ's whole Humanite is really
in the Sacrament (whereof he says, page 98.
Bold Vauntes have been made, but was never yet proved) Let him read the book
lately set forth of our Lords Supper, By D. Sanders.
and the Co^futation of the Fifte Article of his Reply therein, he shall find
Doctors and Scriptures abunda^tly to auouche the same. Wherein being ones
persuaded, he will never ask. what Doctor in express words said, that whole
Christ is under one kind. Or if he be so Frantic and wilful as always to
strive upon Terms, when the Thing is evident, yet all well meaning folcke will
soon be persuaded, that receiving Christ really present under the form of
Bread, they receive not only his blessed Flesh, but Blood also, without the
which the Flesh of Christ is not. Wherein they shall see there is no injury
done unto them, as M. Jewel declaimeth, having it under one kind. Nay rather
(which I beseech al good Readers to Mark) M. Jewel and his fellows does most
open and cruel iniurye to al good Christen people of England, Protestants do
a thousand fold more Injury to the People, by their double kind, then the
Catholics in One Kind.
giving them but Bread and Wine, in the Remembrance of Christ's death,
whereas the Catholic Church beside the true Body of Christ really present
under form of Bread, gives also to the people a cup of Wine, and so
geu^th the other kind as much as they do, giving no more but mere wine at
their Communion table. Thus if we esteem the outward forms Catholics give as
much. If we esteem the thing it self, Catholics give the very true Body of
Christ really present, which Protestants give not, and Wine also no less then
the protestants.

diuis. 2.
Now concerning the outewarde forms of Bread, and Wine, (47) their use is
employed in signification only. And be not off Necessite, so as Grace may not
be obtained by worthy receiving of the Sacrament, unless both kinds be
Ministered.

page 99. The.89. Untruth Slanderous.
For the Bread and Wine signify the Body and Blood of Christ. The whitenes,
the roundnesse and other outward forms signify nothing.

why? For (says he) the Bread and Wine signify the Body and Blood of
Christ. This is in plain terms the Sacramentary heresy clearly overthrown
by the real presence of Christ in the Sacrament, which being (as I said
before) so clearly and abundantly proved against M. Jewel, it shall not need
here to stand about the confutation of it.

In distributing the blessed Sacrament to Christen people the Church has used
liberty (which Christ never embarred by any commandment to the contrary) so
as it has ever been most for the behoulfe and commodite of the Receivers. And
has ministered sometimes both kinds, sometimes one kind only, as it has been
thought most expedient in Regard of time, place, and persons.

The 90. Untruth Slaund. The 91. Untruth in belying the state of the question.
The.48. Untruth. The Church never thus ministered the Sacrament unto the people
in any open Congregation within the space of 600. years.

You alter the question M. Jewel, and in so doing you yield. Your first
Challenge was. Or that there was any Communion Ministered unto the people under
one kind. Thus it stands in your Sermon, and thus it is again repeted in
the fro^te or title of this Article. Now because you see your self clean
overthrown in that ouerbolde assertion of youres, you put in these words (in
any open Congregation) which is no part of your Challenge, and therefore of D.
Harding not intended to be confuted. So in the very entry of this article, you
tell the reader (and in so telling him, you mock him and deceive him) that the
question moved between D. Harding and you, was moved, thus. Page 96.
Whether the holy Communion at any time within the space of six hundred years
after Christ, were ever ministered Those words are not in in the Sermon, nor in
any part of the Challenge.
Openly in the Church: unto the people under one kind. This is a manifest and
notorious Untruth, M. Jewel. These words Openly in the Church, be not in
your Sermon, They be not in your Challenge. You never moved your question so.
Why do you so lie and deceive your Reader? If you had moved the Question so,
you had been by D. Harding so answered and satisfied. Now having never moved
your question with that condition (Openly in the Church) you cry out, M.
Jewel cries Guilty and yeldeth.
that D. Harding has brought private houses and private men to prove Communion
under one kind, and not done Openly in the Church. Whereby you cry Guilty,
and yield that your Challenge is overthrown. But now you will renew the
Combat, and make a new state of the Question: And when that shall be Answered
then you may yet ones again Renew it, and Add farther some other Clause or
Condition unto it, and so never have end of Quarelling. As touching this
Untruth, because D. Harding says only the Church ministered sometimes in
both kinds, sometimes in one kind, which you confess of private men he has
proved it, you note it an Untruth, because he has not proved it to have been
so ministered in open congregation. Which is no untruth on D. Hardinges part,
which has proved that which he says, and that which you craked no man alive
could prove. But it is on your part M. Jewel a double and a pregnant,
Untruth. First to note an Untruth where none is. And then so Impudently to
Alter the question. You have cried shame and Corruption against your self. God
amend you.

As touching the words of Christ, diuis. 3.
bibite ex hoc omnes. Drink ye all of this. They pertain to the Apostles only
and their successors.

The.92. Untruth Slaund. Stapleton Jewel. page 191.




If M. Harding will follow the letter, the words be plain. Drink ye all of
this.

I answer. If M. Jewel will follow the letter, then not only all the people
such as be of lauful years and discretion, but also all infantes and children
that are Christened, must receive both kinds. Which yet in the religion of
protestants is thought so great an abuse, that the Communicating of infants
being in S. Augustins time and long before a customable thing, they note it
for an error in the doctrine of S. Augustine, that infants ought to communicate.
And yet the words of Christ be plain. Drink ye all of this. Therefore the
letter as it forces not infants to receive under any kind at all, so neither
does it force the lay people to receive under both kinds. M. Jewel goes
forth.

The.93. Untruth For S. Paul there has not opened these words drink ye all
of this in that sense as M. Jewel fancyeth.
If M. Harding will leave the letter and take the meaning, S. Paul has opened
it. For writing unto the whole Congregation at Corinthe, he says thus. As
often as shall eat this bread, and drink of this Cup, ye shall declare the
Lords death, until he come. If he doubt S. Paul, yet the very practice and
continual order of the primitive Church fully declares what Christ meant. And
they say, Custom is the best interpreter of the law. If he will take neither
the words of Christ, nor Christ's meaning, then I know not how to deal with
him.

Doubt you not M. Jewel. D. Harding will take and obey both Christ's words
and his meaning with all his heart. As for the words, you see they can not be
precisely taken for all without exception. For then (as I said) children and
infantes should be forced to receive. Which you think a great abuse, The.94.
Untruth That practice declares no such meaning ^ is by ^. Jewel before
^uouched
and we are persuaded that it needs not. Now then for the meaning of Christ,
you bring S. Paul and the practice of the primitive Church which ministered
under both kinds to the people, and here you will have Custom to interpret
the law. I grant S. Paul and the primitive Church used so to do long and
many years. But after the same Church of Christ many hundred years also used
the contrary. As your self can not deny. Now then here be two Customs. Here
is a double practice of the Church. What then? Has one of these two broken
Christ's Institution? No M. Jewel. We hold (and I have proved it in an other
place) that the Church of Christ can never err damnably. In The Fo^tresse etc.
As truly to break Christ's Institution is a damnable error. Therefore by
these two customs of the Church of God, by this double practice of Christian
people, we gather the meaning of Christ's words (drink ye all of this) not to
have been precisely spoken as a commandment to all Christen people, but to the
Apostles and their successors, which should for ever Celebrat and receive that
holy Sacrament under both kinds. I will put you a clear example hereof
confessed by your self. In the primitive Church certain hundred years, the
Sacrament was ministered to infants and sucking Children being Christened, yea
even jointly with their baptim. The Church of many hundred years following,
altered this custom, and admitted only Christen folcke of ripe years and
discretion unto this holy Sacrament, as we see it in our days practiced. This
custom you have not altered, but keep it still, and think it no offense
either against Christ's literal words, Drink ye all of this, either against
the meaning of the words interpreted by the custom of the primitive Church.
Now as you would think him unreasonable M. Jewel, which would say to you,
Sir. Christ said drink ye all of this. The words be plain, and excludes
none. M. Jewel. is cast in his own turn.
VVerefore then do ye not admit babes and infants to drink thereof? If ye
will not follow the letter, yet the very practice and continual order of the
primitive Church at what time Babes did Communicate, fully declares what Christ
meante^ Therefore if you will take neither the words of Christ, nor Christ's
meaning, then I know to not how deal with you, As I say you would and might
well think him very unreasonable, specially if he were instructed by you that
the universal Church of Christ, used the contrary order many hundred years
after, whereby he might learn neither the words nor the meaning of Christ to
touch precisely infants or Babes, so truly are you M. Jewel very unreasonable,
and a trifling wrangler, to press the literal words of Christ, which your
self must needs limit, and so to urge the meaning of Christ upon the practice
of S. Paul and the primitive Church, dissembling the contrary practice of the
Church these many hundred years, whereby you know your self that neither the
letter nor the meaning of Christ's words do of necessite touch the lay
people, to do I say all this, and then to conclude, If he will take neither
the words of Christ, nor the meaning, I know not how to deal with him. Truly
with such a wrangler and Childish quareller as you be, with such a dissembler
and deceiuer of Gods people, I know not in the world how to deal.

Above one hundred years past (50) changing the old custom of the Church of
receiving the Communion under one kind by their private authorite. diuis. 4.


page 102. The.95. Untruth Slaunderours, and peuish.
The.50. Untruth. They changed not but restored the old custom.

M. Iewelles Argument.
are charged of the Catholics to break the accustomed law of the Church of
God. They answer and reason thus. We restore the old law of God testified in
holy Scripture. Ergo we change not the law of God. Who sees not the Fallacy
of this lewd Argument, by the aequiuocation, or similitude in terms of the
two old and accustomed laws of God? Howbeit those schismatikes of Bohem are
not so much charged by D. Harding for changing the old custom, as for doing
it by their private authorite. This was the cause of their schism: Not the
change it self.

Diuis. 6.
Luther instructed of the Devil with arguments against the Sacrifice of the
Mass, (51) that the memory of our redemption by Christ wrought on the Cross,
might utterly be abolished.

The.96. Untruth Slanderous.
Never man spoke more reverently of the oblation of Christ upon the Cross.

De Missa angulari. Which book also D. Harding alleged in the margent of this
place in his own book, though it be here by you or your printer omitted. You
put to the Untruth a slander. And why? Forsothe because Luther spoke
reverently of the oblation of Christ upon the Cross. So the Arrians spoke
reverently of Christ's Humanite, but yet denied his Divinity. And the Manichees
spoke reuerenly of Christ's Divinity. But yet denied his true flesh and
humanite. Heretics speak allwaies some things well and truly. Else they
should be infidels not heretics. That the Mass and daily Sacrifice of
Christ's Church is a clear memory of our redemption wrought upon the Cross it
may appear by the testimonies of the Fathers brought in the former Article to
prove a Daily Sacrifice. In the leaf. 21.
Therefore to abolish the Mass and the Daily Sacrifice of Christ's Church,
whether it were Luthers intent or the Devils that instructed him, certain it
is, the end thereof was to abolish the memory of our redemption. And how well
you keep that memory in your bread and wine, it shall appear by the
Confutation of M. Iewelles. xvij. Article.

A canon alleged for receiving under one kind out of the first Council of
Ephesus, Taken out of Vrbanus Regius a Doctor of Luthers school, in his book
De locis communibus.

The.97. Untruth Slanderous.
The.52. Untruth. There was no such Canon touched or once moved in that
Council.

Vrbanus Regius, your own pewfelowe, not off D. Harding. Let the shame be
his, if it were not true: And yet it is not proved false, but only because M.
Jewel never saw it.

Nestorius amongst other Errors held opinion, (53.) that under the Form off
Bread in the Sacrament is contained the Body off Christ without his Blood.

The.98. Untruth Slanderous.
The.53. Untruth. Nestorius never dreamed of any such folly.

The singular l^wdenesse of M. Jewel.
M. Jewel is so at square with all Writers and learned men that have been these
ix. hundred years (except a few sense Luthers time, which will say as he
says) that he will believe nothing at their Report, unless he find it
recorded in the first 600. years also. And then I maruail why he believes the
very Writers of the first 600. years, seeing he can not know that those
Writers wrote in that age, but by the Historyes, Chronicles and Testimonies of
these later writers, as by Thrithemius, Gennadius, Vrspergensis, Sabelli^us,
and such like. For as well might he say that these later Writers had forged
such books as S. Augustine S. Hierome, S. Basil, Chrysostom, Ambrose, and
other learned Fathers are said to have written, and all such Councelles, which
in those years are said to have been holden, as to discredit other parcels off
the Fathers, or Canons of Councels which are reported by them, though such
things in the Fathers and Counsels are not to be found. And so may M. Jewel
make a Religion off his own, believe him self no man and yet require all men
to believe him.

But because M. Jewel speaks so peremptorely, that Nestorius never dreamed
no such thing, you shall see how lykely he was not to dream only but even
to Speak and teach such an heresye or folly, as M. Jewel terms it, M.
Jewel confesses a foil in the Lutherans.
as to say that under the form of Bread in the Sacrament is contained the
Body of Christ without Blood. Which yet the Lutherans granting the real
presence of Christ's body with the bread and teaching withal that the people
receiving under one kind, have injury, and do receive less then if they
received both^, are not far from. For by their opinion it follows, that
lacking somewhat under the one kind, and having yet the Body of Christ, they
lack the blood which is under the other kind only. Now M. Jewel though he
be a Sacramentary, yet has he good cause to favor the Lutherans, Peter
Martyr.
for his old Masters sake, who at his first coming to Oxford, was an upright
Lutheran, and specially for Luthers sake who stroke the first sparckle of this
great glorious light, that M. Jewel and his fellows, so vaunteth of. As
touching Nestorius, his opinion was that we received the Flesh of Christ in
the Sacrament without his divinity. These are the words of Nestorius him
self, as Cyrillus records them. N^storius inquit, Audite attendentes verba.
Qui manducat car^em meam, Cyrillus ad Euoptium: In oppos^tione ad Anamathe
^ismum 11. Tom. vlii.
memores estote quod de carne est sermo: and quod non a me adiectum est carnis
nomen, ne videar sinistre interpretari. Qui manducat meam carnem and bibit meum
singuinem, in me munet and ego in eo. Non ditit: Qui manducat meam diuinitatem,
and bibit meam d^uinitatem. Qui manducat meam carnem, inquit, and meum
sanguinem bibit, in me manet and ego in eo. Memores estote, quod de carne
dictum sit. Nestorius says. Hear and harken to the words, He that eats my
Flesh. Remember that Flesh is here mentioned, and that the name of Flesh is not
added by me, lest I seem to expound amiss. He that eats my Flesh and
drinks my Blood, abides in me and I in him. He says not. He that eats
my divinity, and drinks my divinity. He that eats my Flesh, says he, and
drinks my Blood, abides in me and I him. Remember that this is spoken of the
Flesh. Thus far Nestorius persuading his hearers that we received the bare
Flesh of Christ in the Sacrament without the divinity or Godhead adjoined.
Against the which damnahle Heresye, Cyrillus disputing in the same place
says. Number hominis comestionem nostrum hoc Sacramentum pronuncias, and ad
crassas cogitationes vrges eorum qui crediderunt mentes? Do thou (speaking
to Nestorius) call this our Sacrament, the eating of man's Flesh, and provoke the
Hearts of the faithefull to gross cogitations? This then being the Opinion of
Nestorius, as it is here evident that it was, that in the Sacrament we did eat
the Flesh of Christ only, and drink the Blood only without the Divinity
adjoined, it must consequently follow that his opinion was, that the bare Flesh
was in the Sacrament a part by it self, and the Blood by it self. For (and
mark well this reason) the cause why the Catholic Church believes that under
one part of the Sacrament whole Christ is contained, Why the Catholics believe
that under either kind whole Christ is present.
and therefore the blood with the body, is because it believes that under that
one part of the Sacra^ent Christ is as God, and not as bare man or bare flesh.
Upon this belefe also it is grounded that whole Christ is at one time in many
places by the way of this most mystical Sacrament, as Chrysostom and Primasius
upon the 10. chapter to the Hebrews, do in express words declare. See their
words before fol. 22.
Now Nestorius not believing any such divinity to be joined with the body of
Christ in the Sacrament, but the bare flesh to be by it self, and the Blood in
like manner by it self, it is easy to judge that he was of this opinion, that
under the form of Bread in the Sacrament, was the Body of Christ without
Blood, which is the thing that D. Harding and those other learned writers do
report of him. And the which M. Jewel peremptorely denies without any proof
or Reason in the world to the contrary, but only by his Negative Proofs, Such
and such mention no such thing, Ergo there was no such matter. Thus whether D.
Harding spoke beside Truth and lerning, let the indifferent reader judge.

Diuis. 10.
For whereas Christ commanded the Apostles to baptize in the name of the
Father and the Son and the Holy Ghost, they baptized in the name of Jesus
Christ (54) only.

The.54. Untruth. A foul deprauation of the Scriptures. I^well. page 113.
The.99. Untruth Slanderous. not only to D. Hard. but to S. Hilary whose very
words those are.


This deprauation M. Jewel lays to D. Hardinges charge for putting the word
(only) in the last place. Truth it is, that the Only baptim mentioned in the
Acts of the Apostles, is mentioned to have been given in the name of Jesus. As
in the second, the tenth, the eight and the seuententh chapters it may be seen.
And so it is no Untruth, that by the letter of holy Scripture, the Apostles
baptized only in the name of Jesus Christ. The displacing of a word which
alters not the sense (unless M. Jewel ca^ prove it was done of fraud or
malice) is no Untruth in any upright judgment. The sense of holy scripture
being kept, the Scripture is not depraved, though some word be put out of
order. Now that the Scripture so says, both the only mentioning of such
form of baptim, in all the Acts of the Apostles, both the letter it self I
say, and the meaning also of the letter, if we believe the judgment of S.
Ambrose, co^uinceth. S. Ambrose disputing of this baptim mentioned in the Acts
of the Apostles, has these words. Cum dicitur, In nomine domini nostri Jesus
Christi, per vnitatem nominis impletum mysterium est. De spiritu S. lib. 1.
Cap. 3.
When it is said, In the name of our lord Jesus Christ, by the unite of the
name, the sacrament is complete. For (as S. Ambrose says also in that place)
he that is blessed in Christ, is blessed in the name of the Father and the
Son and the Holy Ghost. Thus by the letter and by the meaning of the letter
(if we believe. S. Ambrose) baptim was given in the name of Christ Only without
mencioning the Father and the Holy Ghost, and yet in deed, in the name of all.

A clear Example of M. Iewell^s Gross Ignorance, or else of VVilf^ll Malice.
But behold (good Reader) either the Gross Ignorance, or the Wilful Malice of
M. Jewel. This very saying and proposition of D. Harding, which M. Jewel
notes for an Untruth, and which Slanderously he calls, A foul deprauation
of holy Scripture, those very words I say, are the clear saying of that most
learned and most holy Father S. Hilary, uttered of him above twelve hundred
years past. For that holy Father alleging against the Arrians, as D. Harding
does here against M. Jewel and his fellows, that many things Commanded by
Christ, were altered by the Apostles, and their Successors, brings this very
matter for an example as D. Harding does, and utters these very words.
Apostoli baptisare in Nomine Patris and Filij and Spiritus Sancti iussi, In
lib. de Synodis aduersus Arrian^s.
Tantum in Jesus Nomine Baptisauerunt. The Apostles being Commanded to Baptize
in the Name of the Father and the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, they baptized
in the Name of Jesus Christ Only. Go now M. Jewel, take your pen, and
score up this Untruth upon S. Hilary, M. Jewel in Slaunderi^g D. Harding,
slau^dereth S. Hilary.
as you have done here upon D. Harding. Tell your Reader, whom you feed with
lies and Slanderous Untruths, that S. Hilary has made A foul deprauation of
the S^riptures as you Slanderously have told him that D. Ha^ding did make. Be
wise I pray you A^one, understand the Scriptures Alone, Believe your self no
Body, and yet look to be believed Alone. By such Impudency, you uphold your
Religion.

diuis. 10.
To the Apostles only, and their successors, and to none other the (55)
Catholic Church has ever referred the necessite of that commaundemeut, Drink
ye all of this: And that in the celebration of the Sacrifice.

page 118. The 100. Untruth Sl^und. The 101. Untruth For the Church of Rome
is neither late, nor particular
which is but late and mere particular.

The Church of Rome is at this day the most ancient Church in Christendom. The
succession thereof has continewed from S. Peter the Head of the Apostles
until these our days without interruptio^, by the number of 230. bishops
which yet M. Jewel calls a late Church, even as he calls the Catholic
religion a corruption of late years.

Again he says, it is a mere particular Church, and therefore no Catholic
Church. Yes forsothe M. Jewel it is called the Catholic Church of the learned
Fathers of the first 600. years. When S. Paul said the Church of God to be
the pillar of truth, what Church meant he M. Jewel? 1. ad Timo. 3.
Meant he any particular Church and not rather the Catholic and universal
church of all Christendom, which in deed can not swerve from the truth, as
particular chu^ches both may and have done? Yeat S. Ambrose expounding that
place of S. Paul, and speaking of that universal Church of God, says: In
commentar. in 1. ad Tim. 3.
Cuius hodie rector est Damasus whose ruler at this day Damasus is. This
Damasus was then Pope. Lo by the judgment of S. Ambrose (who I may be bold to
say, understood the Scriptures as well as M. Jewel) the bishop of Rome, is the
Ruler of the universal Church. And how then is the Church of Rome of which the
Pope is bishop a mere particular Church? Verily S. Hierom calls the faith of
Rome, the Catholic faith, writing against Ruffinus in these words, Fidem suam
quam vocat? In Apologia 1. aduersus Rufinu^.
Eam ne qua Romana pollet Ecclesia? an illam quae in Origenis voluminibus
co^tinetur? Si Romanam responderit ergo Catholici sumus. Sin Origenis
blasphemia illius fides est, se haereticum probat. What does he call his
faith? Means he that faith, The faith of Rome.
which the Church of Rome allows? or that which in the books of Origin is
taught? If he answer, it is the faith of Rome, then we be Catholics. But if
Origens blasphemy be his faith, he proves him self an heretic. Thus the
faith of Rome and the Catholic faith is to S. Hiero^ all one. Last of al S.
Cyprian calls the Church of Rome Catholicae ecclesiae radice^ and matrice^.
The root and mother church of the Catholic Church. Lib. 4. ^pist. 8.
Go now M. Jewel and call the Church of Rome a mere particular Church. It
shall be no Untruth neither for D. Harding, nor for any man else, to call the
determination of the Church of Rome, the determination of the Catholic Church,
as long as we have S. Ambrose, S. Hierom, and S. Cyprian to say with us.

Diuis. 12.
The two Disciples in Emaus as soon as they knew Christ in breaking of the
Bread, he vanished away from their sighter that he took the Cup into his
hands and blissed it, and gave it unto them, (56.) as it appears evidently
enough to S. Augustine, to Bid, and to all other that be not wilfully
opinatiue.

page 122. The.102. Untruth Slanderous. The.103. Untruth. For beside S.
Augustine and Bid S. Chrystom (one other ancient father) is of that mind.
The.56. Untruth. Neither S. Augustine, nor Beda, nor any other Ancient Father
has any such word, but rather the contrary.

Yeas forsooth. Both S. Augustine and Bid, and Chrysostom an other ancient
Father do teach the same Breaking of Bread to have been the Sacrament. Which is
the thing that D. Harding there affirms. And that Christ took not the Cup
at all, it was no deed to allege doctors. The Scripture in that place of S.
Luke is plain. Where no one word of the Cup is made. S. Augustine says of
this place. Non incongruenter accipimus, hoc impedimentu^ in oculis eoru^ a
Satana factu^ fuisse, ne agnosceretur Jesus: Sed tame^ a Christo facta est
permissio vsque ad Sacramentu^ ^is, August. In li. 3. de consensu
euangelistarum cap. 25.
vt vnitate Corporis eius participata remoueri intelligatur impedimentum
inimici, vt Christus possit agnosci. We think it not amiss to say, that
their eyes were blinded by the Devil, so that they could not know Jesus. Yet
notwithstanding that was done by the permission of Christ, until the Sacrament
of the Bread. To thentent that the unite of Christ's Body being participated,
the let of the enemy might be removed, and Christ acknowleadged. This
exposition yea and these very words of S. Augustine, Beda. li. 6. Theophyl. In
cap. Luc. 24.
Bid in his commentaries upon S. Luke follows and repereth. As also
Theophilact follows herein Chrysosto^ (whose words we shall In the.57. Untruth.
hereafter recite) and says, (...). He insinuates yet an other thing. That
these Discipes participating the blissed Bread, had their eyes straight ways
opened to know Christ. For the flesh of our Lord has a great and
unspeakable virtue. Thus lo by the judgment of S. Augustine and Bid, of
Chrysostom and Theophilact, that Bread which Christ gave to the disciples in
Emaus, was the Sacrament of his Body. Here is no one word neither in the
Scripture, neither in those Doctors off the Cup. And therefore by their
judgment here is a clear case of a Communion under One kind Ministered by our
Savior him self. And so it is proved true, that Doctor Hardinge said of a
Communion under one kind ministered to the disciples at Emaus. What says M.
Jewel to these Doctors? He says.

page 123. The.104 Untruth For it was the Sacrament, as it has been proved.
First, the Bread that Christ brake at Emaus, was common table bread, and not
the Sacrament.

S. Augustine, and Bid, S. Chrysostom and Theophilact say the contrary. Who
is better to be credited? M. Jewel, or these ancient Fathers? Truly he
offreth him self to yield unto them.

The.105. Untruth For it is gathered by good proof out of Gods word.
Secondely that, albeit some Writers seem to call it the Sacrament, yet none of
them says, it was Ministered in one kind, as M. Hardinge by his (105)
sclender Gheasses would seem to gather.

Not some writers, but some ancient Fathers, not seem to call it, but in
express words do call it the Sacrament as you have heard. And though none of
them say it was ministered in one kind, yet both they and the Scripture
making no mention at all of mo kinds then one, do give us to understand that
under one kind only it was Ministered. Lucae. 28.
And that by the rule off Master Jewel him self, page 68.
who says. Argumentum ab authoritate negative, is thought to be good, when so
ever proof is taken off Gods word. And is used not only by us, but also by
Saint Paul, and by many Catholic Fathers. Therefore it is no sclender
Gheasse, Luc. 28,
but a good Proof out off Gods Word. Saint Luke in that place mentioned but
One Kind. Ergo Christ Ministered at the time under one kind. M. Jewel says
and vnsaieth.
Yet here to this Argument M. Jewel says. This Argument may be good in
Master Hardinges Dyuinite, but it is off Small force in goodlogike. And thus
when it makes for M. Jewel, it shall be a good Argument, and such as both S.
Paul, and the holy Fathers have used. But when it makes against him, then it
is of small force, etc.

The.106 Untruth For Christ's example proves well our purpose. The 107.
Untruth For these two disciples in Emaus were the^ no priests.
Thirdly although he were able to prove that Christ Ministered so at that time
and in that place, yet were all this (106) nothing to prove his purpose. For
we join issue of the people. He (107) answers of the Priests.

Those two disciples in Emaus were of the.72. disciples, not of the Apostles:
And therefore at that time they were no Priests. Again if Priests may
receive under one kind, much more the people. For the order of Priesthood is
the more excellent.

I speak of the Church: He speaks of an Inn.

The.108 Untruth
In the tenor of your challenge you speak of no Church. You have so altered
the question sense. For in your challenge you speak not of the Church.
Because you see you are overthrown in your assertion. Again the example of
Christ (me thinks M. Jewel) should prevail with you whether it were in
Inn or Church. Unless by the like reason you will except against the example
of Christ in his last Supper. For that was also done in an Inn (Master
Jewel) and not in a Church.

The.109 Untruth For that appears not in the Scripture
Which one thing overthrows all that M. Harding has built.

How prove you M. Jewel that Christ Received with the disciples at Emaus
under One kind? It appears not in Scripture that with those disciples he
received him self at all, either under one kind, or under both. Again if he
did, will you teach Christ his duty? Though Christ commanded all priests to
receive under both kinds, when they ministered to others, yet you will not (I
trow) be so malapert, as to force Christ thereunto. Christ is God blessed for
ever M. Jewel. You are a Base Creature.

M. Jewel goes forth and because S. Augustine him self in an other place,
Bid, and S. Gregory do say, August. in caten^. in 24. Lucae. Greg. in Euang.
homil. 23.
that those two disciples used a kind of Hospitalyte in Emaus, strayning
Christ, (whom they took for a stranger) to come into the Inn and refresh
himself with the^, because I say, these Doctors say so, he infers that it
was not the Sacrament which Christ brake and gave unto them. His reason is
this. M. Jewels Argument


The Disciples in Emaus used Hospitalite to Christ in an Inn.

Ergo Christ did not give them at that time the Sacrament.

This fond argument will appear by a like.

Christ and the Apostles did eat the Jews passover in an Inn. M. Jewel
alleges late writers against the old Doctors.


Ergo he did not celebrat the Sacrament there.

Now that after all this, he alleges Dionysius the charter monk, Antonius
Iulianus, Nicolaus de Lyra, and Wildefordus in a contrary sentence to S.
Augustine and Beda, to Chrysostom and Theophilact, if we should do so, he would
Laugh us to scorn, and turn them of with his Common Prescriptions of 600.
years and so forth. Therefore trouble your self no more M. Jewel, with
heaping up these writers against the Ancient Fathers, unless you will believe
and say as they do in the Substance of our Faith. Which if you do, you
shall not mislike the diverse Judgments of diverse learned men, agreing yet in
One Faith. Howbeit in all such Diversity, both you and we must allwaies
prefer the Ancient Fathers by so Universal and Long Consent of the Church
allowed, and Authorized, before late writers not so allowed and authorized. And
thus I leave to the judgment of every indifferent Reader, not only how untruly
you have charged D. Harding, but much more how untruly you have quarelled
against this clear proof of Communion under one kind, out of holy Scripture
it self.

diuis. 13.
Chrysostom and other Fathers understand that Bread that S. Paul in peril
off shipwreck took, gave thanks over, brake and eat, to be the Holy
Sacrament.

Jewel. page 125. The 110. Untruth Slanderous.
The.57. Untruth. Chrysostom understands it of Common meat.

a Brief answer of D. Harding to this and other your Slanderous Untruths,
where with you charged him at Paul's Cross in your Sermon made there the viij.
of July this last Summer. Yet you have let it go forth stoutely for an
Untruth, dissembling utterly all that has been said in defense thereof. Yea
you vaunte further and you say in your text.

page 126. The.111. Untruth. ^or he gave it to S. Luke and his other disciples:
Who were no infidels pardy.

The.112. Untruth. For this exposition is not contrary to the other saying of
Chrysostom.


If S. Paul gave the Sacrament being at that time in the Ship, he gave it
(111) only to infidels, that knew not Christ.

No forsothe he gave it to Luke and his other disciptes, as Chrysostom says,
who were no infidels, you will your self confess. You shall hear anon the
words of Chrysostom.

And Chrysostomes exposition even in the same place is (112) plain to the
contrary. For thus he enlarges S. Paul's words that he spoke to the mariners.
I pray you take some sustenaunce, It is beboufull for you that ye so ^oo. That
is to say, take some meat, least perhaps ye die for hunger.

No man denies, but that the mariners were infidels. No man says that by
Chrysostoms mind, Paul gave them the Sacrament. And therefore you have proved
that no man denies. But what conclude you of all this? You say.

The.113. Untruth. For D. Harding. has made no untrue report of his doctor.
Now let M. Harding either say these words are spoken of the Sacrament, or
confess that he has made (113) Untrue report of his doctor.

No M. Jewel, he will say neither of these: and yet shall his first saying be
true. For how say you M. Jewel? Has Chrysostom mentioned this fact of Paul
in no place, but in his commentaries upon that place? If you had been a sobre
writer, and not a quarelling wrangler, you might justly have said. Sir I find
no such thing in Chrysostom upon that place, and therefore unless you name us
where Chrysostom so said, it may be thought, you have missereported him. Thus
or in some like manner, as you know best your self, M. Jewel, had not this
wilful heresy taken away all modesty, you might have laid to D. Hardinges
charge. Now you first put it for an Untruth in the margin, yea and repete it
again in the next Untruth following, then you charge him in your text for an
Untrue Reporter of his doctor, and al most Untruly and Slau^derously on your
part. For these are the words of Chrysostom, or as M. Nowell speaks, Hom.
17. operis imperfecti.
of an ancient writer printed with Chrysostom and long taken for him, Sed
quia de sanctis caepimus dicere etc. Because we have begone to speak of holy
things, it is not to be left unspoken, that sanctification is one thing, and
that which is sanctified an other. For Sanctification is that which sanctifies
an other. But that which is sanctified, can not sanctify an other, though it
self be holy. As for example: The sign of the Cross.
Thou make the sign of the Cross over thy bread, right so as S. Paul
says. For it is made holy by the word of God and prayer. Thou have
sanctified it, thou have not made it Sanctification. But that which the priest
gives with his hand is not only a thing sanctified, The Bl. Sacrament is a
sancticationfi.
but also Sanctification. For as much as not only that is given, which is seen,
but also which is understood. And so it is laufull to cast of the sanctified
bread to beasts, and to infidels, because it does not sanctify the receiver.
But if that which is taken of the hand of the priest were such a thing as
that which is eaten from of the board, all would eat from of the board, and no
man would eat of the priests hand. Wherefore our Lord also did not only
bless the bread in the way (he means at Emaus) but gave it also with his
hand unto Cleophas and his fellow. ^uc. 24.
And Paul as he was under sail did not only bless the bread, Act^. 27.
but also gave it to Luke and to his other disciples. Now that which is given
with the hand, is not to be given to beasts, nor to infidels, for that is not
only Sanctified, but also Sanctification and sanctifies the receiver. Thus
far Chrysostom. In which words he does both expound the place of the 24.
of S. Luke (whereof I spoke a little before) for the Sacrament, and also says
expressly touching this place which we now talk of, the 27. of the Acts,
that S. Paul in the ship gave the bread with his hand to Luke, and to the
rest of his disciples (not to infidels M. Jewel) and that the same was not only
a holy Thing, more then Common Meat sanctified by prayer, and the word of
God, but also Sanctification, which Sanctifies and makes Holy the Receiver,
which is the Blessed Sacrament M. Jewel, not Common Meat. And thus M. Jewel,
Chrysostom is not missereported of D. Harding, but D. Harding is Slaundered by
M. Jewel.

diuis. 14.
It is not to be maruailed at, albeit S. Paul delivered to the Corinthians
thinstitution of our Lords Supper under both kinds, that yet upon occasion
given, and when condition of time so required (58) he ministered the Communion
under one kind, etc.

page 126. The.114. Vntruth^ slanderous.


This depends upon the other Untruth that went before, which being by
Chrysostom justified, appears now no Untruth on D. Hardinges part, but on
Chrysostoms part, who reports that S. Paul in the shipp, gave to Luke and
his other disciples that Sanctification which sanctifies the receiver, which
is the blissed Sacrement. And in that place no mention is made of the Cup,
and therefore by M. Iewelles own rule, whereof I told you before, it may be
well gathered that he ministered under one Kind.

S. Paul took that holy mystery under one kind for the whole Sacrament, as we
perceive by his words, where he says, 1 Cor. 10.
One Bread and one Body we being many are, all that do participat of one
Bread (59) where he speaks nothing of the Cup.

The 11^. Untruth slanderous.
The Cup of bl^ssing, which we bless, is it not the Communion of Christ's
blood?

To this M. Jewel, you have the answer of D. Harding already in his Brief
answer touching certain Untruths with which you charged him at Paul's Cross
the viij. Day of July last. Yet because you vaunte here, as though you had
never heard of it, and provoke your Reader by your wont repetitions and
hypocritical exclamations (which it needs not here to insert) to take him for
a Deceiuer, etc. I will repete the very words of D. Harding, as they lie in
his Answer. These are his words, after his other words above alleged.

Now judge who list whether in respect of those words of S. Paul, One Bread
and one Body etc. I might not say as I did, Where he speaks nothing of the
Cup. And that my word (where) has relation to that sentence of S. Paul
Only, not to the whole Chapter. For neither could I be so blind, as not to so
see mention of the Cup made Next Sentence before, and how absurd had it been
by denying so known a troth to have given such advantage to the adversary?
Now that S. Paul in that sentence speaks nothing of the Cup, I will be
tried by the most ancient and truest copies both Greek and Latin, and by
judgment of them of M. Iewelles own sect them selves, yea by the English
Bibles and new Testaments of best authorite.

This was D. Hardinges Answer then, and this it is now.

diuis. 19.
Will not thy husband know, says Tertullian, what thou eatest secretly
before all other meat? And in case he do know it, he will believe it to be
Bread, not him who it is called.

page 131. The.116. Untruth Slanderous.
The.60. Untruth. Standing in the false translating of Tertullian.



Diui. 22.
It has been a (61) custom in the Latin Church from the Apostles time to our
days that on Good Friday as well Priests, as other Christen people receive
the Sacrament under the form of bread Only, consecrated the day before, not
without signification of a singular mystery.

page 135. The.117. Untruth Slanderous.
The.61. Untruth Without any color or show of truth.

Be bold and blushe not M. Jewel. It may well become a bishop of your
religion to scoff at the Mysteries of Christ's Church, and to say they have
no Color or show of Truth in them. Truly as you have in the whole process
of this your Reply rather moved your reader to Laughter and Contempt of the
Catholic faith, by making a sort of Lewd Arguments, such as you know D.
Harding did never make, then by reason persuaded him the Truth of the Cause:
so have you in this point played the right Hicke Scorner. But please not your
self herein to much M. Jewel. Porphyrius, Lucian, Julian the Apostata and
Celsus have far passed you in this Art, though they were never taken for
bishops of Christ's Church.

But to omit all your scoffing toys alleged out of Innocentius, Thomas
Aquinas, Gerson and other, which they writing only to the Learned Devout
Reader, thought it no such childishnes (as you make it) to Devise of a good and
Godly usage, Causes not evil nor ungodly, though not so proper and weighty, to
omit those I say, I will rest upon that Cause which Hugo Cardinalis by you
alleged, recites. Which is this, that whereas the daily Sacrifice of
Christ's Church, is a Memorial and Remembrance of Christ's death on the
Cross (as it has before out of no childishe fathers ben proved) upon good
Fridaye being the day it self, Why the Sacrifice is not celebrated on good
Frid^^e.
in which our Savior suffered, the Church M. Jewel (which you ought not to
scoff at, were you a Child of that Mother) thought good that day for the
better expressing of the thing it self to omit the Accustomed remembrance
thereof. Which omitting being Rare and Singular, did more lively strike the
Affection of Christen folcke, then the Accustomed Solemnities would have done.
For this cause also that day we see the Church without all pomp or
Solemnity, as though it were in heaviness and lamentation to express the
great sorrow and desolation off our Lady and the blessed Apostles, which then
at that time being the only Church of Christ, suffered, by the death of their
dear Master, whom they loved so tenderly, and of whose Resurrection they were
not then persuaded thouroughly. This is M. Jewel in few words: a part of
the singular mystery which the Church of God uses in omitting the daily
Sacrifice, on good Friday. 1. Cor. 2.
If this do not satisfy you, I maruail not. Animalis homo non percipit ea quae
Dei sunt. The Sensual man perceives not those things which are of God. Only
this may suffice to prove that this custom which D. Harding speaks of, is
not (as you Untruly charge him) void off all Color or Show of Truth.

diuis. 28.
Christ gave no necessary Commandment either for the one or for both kinds
(beside and without the Celebration of the Sacrifice) but left that to the
Determination of the Church.

The.118. Untruth Slanderous.
The.62. Untruth. Christ's Institution pertains as well to the people as to
the priest.

This Untruth has before at large ben answered, in this very article, being
before noted by M. Jewel, and now again repeted to make up a number. It was
before the 49. Untruth.

diuis. 31.
We believe steadfastly with heart, and confess openly with mouth, that under
each kind the very flesh and Blood off Christ and whole Christ him self is
present in the Sacrament (63) even as Gelasius believed.

page 147. The.119. Untruth Slanderous.
The.63. Untruth. Gelasius never believed so.

Ex Gelasio contra Eu^ic ben.
How are you sure of that M. Jewel? You are very bold and peremptory in all
your assertions. But you prove as little as he that says nothing. For
notwithstanding his words which here you allege, he believed as al other
bishops of Rome believed, he believed the real presence of Christ in the
Sacrament, as it is at large proved against you M. Jewel in the Confutation
of your Apologye, fol. 98. To that place I refer you for better
understanding off Gelasius his belefe herein.

diuis. 31.
Whereas before (64.) off some the Sacrament was received under one Kind, and
off some under both Kinds.

Jewel. page 148. The.120. Untruth Slanderous.. M. Iewellee challenge is
answered. But he Alters the Question page 69. and.142 page 132. page 148
No Catholic congregation ever received the Sacrament in one kind.

D. Harding says not so much, but that some have so received it, which he
said truly, and proved it before in the Article abundantly. Whereby your
challenge is also in this point answered. The tenor whereof was, that within
the compass of.600. years the Communion was never Ministered to the people
under One kind. Now that you add before Openly in the Church and then again.
The whole people, and now a Catholic Congregation, this often Altering of the
Question M. Jewel is but a mere wrangling, and a plain proclaiming of your
self Guilty. For had you ben able to have avouched your first assertion, you
would never have added so many new Conditions unto it. And had not D. Harding
utterly overthrown the same, you would not have sought such shameless
shifts, as to make a new Question of the whole matter, and to require a
proof of that which you had not yet denied: and which D. Harding, unless he
had had the Sprit of prophecye, to foresee these your alterations and
extensions of the question, was in no wise bound to prove. But M. Jewel, to
knitt up this mattter, to let pass your slanderous charging of D. Harding
with so many Untruths, and not one yet found to be such, finally to speak one
word shortly of this whole matter, thus you shall understand.

Untruths, The Institution off Christ, and Practice of the Church.
that the Institution of Christ in the last Supper binds not all lay
persons or other to communicate under both kinds. ministered unto diverse of
Gods people the blessed Sacrament under one kind. This being so proved, this de
Iure, and also De facto both by Right and by Practice appearing evidently, now
for you M. Jewel to quarrel, De facto alterius generis, of a practice more
general, for you to require proofs in Churches, in Open Assemblies, in an Open
Order and Usage off the Church, it is the part of a quareller and wra^gler. It
is not the part of one that seeks unite. It is no Bishoplike demeanor, no
charitable dealing, no Christian or Catholi^e usage. This is a Sacrament of
unite. The double Practice of Gods Church.
The Church of God has used it both ways, and has by that double usage,
interpreted us the meaning of Christ's institution, touching the people, to be
indifferent. For we believe M. Jewel (and let this be the end of al) that the
known Church of Christ not only of the first 600. years, but also of these
later 900. years is and has been always so guided and preserved of almighty
God, (according to the Clear Promises of God in the psalms, the prophets and
the ghospel) that neither in Doctrine of faith, See the Fortress annexed to
Venerable Bede.
neither in Practice of serving him, it ca^ or has at any time swarued, much
less broken his own Institution and ordona^ce, in so weighty and daily a
matter, as the Ministration of his holy Sacraments is. This is our faith
grounded upon holy Scripture, and the word of God. By thi^ faith we believe and
do, as the church believes and does, though we had no one testimony of the
ancient primitive Church, to confirm and witness the doings of this later
Church of our days. For M. Jewel, the Church of God is but One: And has
continewed without interruption (sense the coming of Christ) in a known
Multitude, and shall so Continewe even to the worlds end.

A RETVRNE OF VNTRVTHES UPON M. JEWEL. etc. The Third Article. Of Service in
the vulgar tongue.
IF you mean M. Jewel, D. Hard. Diuis. 1.
by the peoples Common prayers such as at that time they commonly made to God
in private devotion, I think they uttered them in that tongue, which they
understood, (65) and so do Christian people now for the most part.

The.121. Untruth Slanderous.
The.65. Untruth. For under the subjection of the bishop of Rome, the people
for the most part prays in latin.



About 900^ years paste (66) it is certain, the people in some Countries had
their service in an unknown tongue, as it shall be proved of our own country
in England.

The 122. Untruth Slaund.
The.66 Untruth. This certainte will never be proved.



At the first planting of the faith among us englishmen S. Gregory sent
church books to England from Rome for the Church Service of the new converted
Englishmen.

But those Church books sent from Rome were in the latin tongue.

Ergo the Church Service of the new converted Englishmen was in the latin
tongue.

The Mayor.

Bed^. Lib. 1. Cap. 29. Histor. Angl.


For proof of the Mayor, or first proposition, I bring the testimony of
Venerable Bede, a learned countreman of ours, written in the year of our lord,
730. His words be these. Farther more the said Pope, (he means S. Gregory)
for so much as Augustine had advertised him that there was a great harvest, and
few workmen, sent him with his said legates, more preachers: of the which
the chefest were Mellitus, Iustus, and Ruffinianus. By them also he sent al
such things as were necessary for the furniture and ministry of the Church:
As holy vessels, altar clothes, ornaments for the Churches, apparel also for
the priests and clergy. Also relikes of the holy Apostles and martyrs, and
many Books. Thus far Bid. In whose words we see for the Furniture and
Ministry of the church Books to have been sent from Rome: That this was done
at the first planting of Christen faith among us Englishmen (us Englishmen I
say, occupying at that time all that is now called England, the old Brittons
being driven in to the straights of Wales) let the whole History of Venerable Bede be a witness to all englishmen, though M. Jewel in this Article
afterward, most impiously, and impudently after his manner do deny it.

Now touching the Minor, or second proposition that these Church books sent
from Rome were ^n the latin tongue, The Minor.
it needs not I trust to prove. It is evident that our english Saxon tongue
was not at that time understood at Rome, neither of those which came from
Rome, at their first arriual in to our country, but the Latin tongue only. And
therefore those books sent from Rome for the Furniture and Service of the
Church were in Latin and not in English. Thus the premises being clear, the
Conclusion is undoubted. Other arguments are brought afterward in this
Article by D. Harding, to the which how well M. Jewel has replied, it will
appear in the Confutation thereof. Upon this conclusion, that the Church
seruiuice was in the Latin tongue, it shall not need I trow to infer. Ergo it
was in a strange and unknown tongue to English men. I trust M. Jewel will
not be so impudent as to say that all Englishmen then converted to the faith
understood the Latin tongue. Which if he will say, as truly with no less
impudency he denies the faith to have been then first planted among us
englishmen and most wickedly violateth the blessed memory of our Apostle S.
Augustine, the History of Venenerable Bid lately set forth in the english
tongue shall prove him a manifest liar in the one, and a most notorious
slaunderer in the other.

I say, as I said before, that the service was then (within the compass of
600. years after Christ) in a tongue which some people understood and some
understood not. Diuis. 3.


The.123. Untruth Slanderous.
M. Harding is not able to show one nation that understood not their Common
service.



Church Service proved in a tou^ge not understood.
All the inhabitans of Smyrna, Pontus, Cappadocia, Lyaconia, Caria, Thracia had
their Common service in the Greek tongue.

But all the inhabitants of those Nations understood not the Greek tongue.

Ergo all those inhabitans had not their service in a tongue which they
understood.

The Mayor.
For proof of the Mayor or first proposition, I will bring the testimony of S.
Hierom. S. Hierom writes thus. Alexandria and Aegyptus in Septuaginta suis,
Hesychium laudat authorem. Constantinopolis vsque Antiochiam, Praefat. in
Parali^.
Luciani Martyris exemplaria probat. Mediae inter has prouinciae palestinos
codices legunt, quos ab Origin elaboratos Eusebius and Pamphilus vulgauerunt,
totusque orbis hac inter se trifaria varietate compugnat. That is. Alexandria
and Egypt in their Greek copies of the Bible do use that translation of the
70. which Hesychius has set forth. From Constantinople unto Antioche the
copies set forth by Lucianus Martyr are allowed. Other provinces lying
between these, do read the books of Palestina, which Eusebius and Pamphilus,
being first corrected by Origin, did set forth, and all the world in this
triple variete of copies contendeth one with the other.

By these words of S. Hierom it is evident, that in all the East part of the
world (which he calls here the whole world) from Egypt to Constantinople,
and within all the countres lying between, comprehending al Asia the less,
these three copies only of the Greek Bibles were used. For in this triple
diversity, he says all that part of the world contendeth. Of those middle
provinces lying between Constantinople and Antioche, are those countres above
named of the lesser Asia, except Thracia which is of the proper Jurisdiction of
Constantinople and no part of the lesser Asia. As the skillfull in
Cosmographie do know right well. Now out of this place of S. Hierom for proof
of the Mayor or first proposition, thus I reason.

The common service of those countres was for the most part taken out of their
Bibles and holy Scripture.

But by S. Hieroms testimony their Bibles were only in the Greek tongue of the
70. translation, set forth either by Hysichius, or Lucianus the Martyr or
Eusebius and Pamphilus.

Ergo their common service was only in the Greek tongue.

The mayor of this Syllogismus, is evident both for that the Psalms and the
lessons are known to be the greater part of the Service, and also by diverse
canons of that age and time, Council. Carthag. 3. Ca^. 40.
commanding Scripture to be read in the Church service. The minor is S.
Hieroms. So the Conclusion is certain. Again, S. Basil celebrated the
Service in Cappadocia in the Greek tongue as it appears by his Liturgy yet
extant in greek: Chrisostom also in Thracia, as it appears by his Liturgy or
Mass yet extant also in Greek. Ergo the Public Service in Cappadocia and
Thracia were in the Greek tongue.

The minor or second proposition of the first Sylllogismus, which is, that
all those countres above named, The Minor.
understood not the greek tongue, is proved in this Article by D. Harding, by
diverse testimonies, First of Strabo and Pliny, as in the discussing of the
70. and 71. Untruths, I shall have anon occasion more largely to speak. And
to speak particularly of some of these. That the vulgar tongue of Lycaonia,
was not greek, it appears in the Acts of the Apostles, where it is said,
Act^. 14.
that the people of Lystra a City in Licaonia, cried out to Paul and Barnabas
in the Lycaonicall tongue. Saint Luke which wrote the Acts in greek, if that
cry of the Lycaonians had been in greek, would not have termed it a several
language from the greek, as he does, calling it Lycaonicall. Again that the
vulgar tongue of Thracia, was not greek, Chysostom him self bishop of
Constantinople in Thracia does witness. For he preaching in greek, In 1. Cor.
14. Homi 35.
reakoneth up among diversity off tongues, the tongues of the Scythians, of
Thracians, of Romans, of Persians, of Indians, of the Egyptians, and of
other. Thirdly, that the vulgar tongue of Caria was no greek but a foreign and
strange tongue from the greek, Strabo is a sufficient witness, who speaking
of the proper Language off the Carians, Strabo lib. 14.
faieth of it: Permulta Nomina Graeca per mixta habet. It has many greek Names
mingled in it. Wher^of it is evident it was a clean different tongue from the
greek. Like as our English tongue has a number of French words in it,
being yet a language utterly diverse from the French. Fourthely the people of
Cappadocia, Pontus, and Asia, of Phrygia, and Pamphylia: Actor. 2.
Audiebat vnusquisque lingua sua illos loqu^ntes, heard the Apostles to speak
every one in their own tongue. And the Miracle was such, that they said one
to an other. Are not all these that speak, of Galilee? Et quomodo nos
audiuimu^ vnusqu^sque linguam nostram, in qua nati sum us? And how have we
heard every one of us our tongue in the which we were borne? Unless the
tongues, of Pontus and Asia, of Cappadocia, Phrygia, and Pamphylia (al countres
of the lesser Asia) had been so diverse and distinct natural tounges, that each
one understood not the other, what Miracle or what cause of admonition had
there been in those peoples hearing the Apostles to pronounce and speak, every
of their natural and native tounges? What Miracle is it for the Notherne man
and the Western man to understand the Southern preacher at Poules? But if
the Spanyarde, the Italian and the French man (being only skillful of their
Mother toungues) could yet understand a Latin preacher, that were a Miracle
in deed. For so were the the tongues of Pontus and Asia, of Cappadocya,
Phrygia, and Pamphylia, derived and deducted out of the greek, as the French.
Italyan, and Spanyshe are derived out of the Latin. And these proprietes of
Languages were so diverse, and infinite, that although of certain, as of the
Atticke, the Ionicall, the Dorical, and the Aeolical tongues proprietes might
be gathered and collected in to some Orders of Rules, the other yet by no
means could be so reduced, but were rather taken for diverse and different
toungues, then for proprietes of tounges. Therefore Ioannes Grammaticus writing
hereof, says. I^an Gra^. (...).
Barbaras in multitudine existentes and incompraehensibiles non est facile
tradere. Alioqui neque dicendum ipsas Dialectos, sed linguas. The Barbarous
greek tounges being infinite, can not easily be brought to any rules to be
taught by. And they are not so much to be called Dialectes or proprieties, as
tongues. Such Diuers^tes, multitudes, and differences of tounges and languages
there were in the greek Church, in the lesser Asia, and in that which in
Ecclesiastical writers is called the East part of Chrystendome. Last of
Master Jewel him self confesses in this Article, that page, 166.
The Nations of the East part of the world, had several tounges and spoke not
all one only tongue. This then being so, and yet the East part of the world
(as it has been proved) having only the greek Service, it remains clear,
that a Nation, yea sundry Nations are showed which h^d their Service not in
their common known tongue, but in a learned tongue which they vnstoode not.

Again M. Jewel is of the mind in this Article that in Rome the Service was
ever in Latin. For he says, page 167.
they had their exhortations and sermons in Latin. True it is the Church of
Rome had the Service allwaies in the Latin tongue. The Sermons and
Exhortations also for a great space. But how long thinks M. Jewel? He
confesses that S. Augustine sent in by S. Gregory to preach the Faith to us
Englismen, prayed in Latin, and said Mass in Latin. And it is evident in
the works of saint Gregorye that the Church Service in Rome was in his time
Latin. Lib. 7. Epist. 63.
An^ he writes that the people of Rome answered to Kyrie ^leeson, at the Mass
time, as they do to this day. Yet what thinks M. Jewel? Did the people of
Rome understand Kyrie eleeson. Those words are Greek. But did they
understand Latin in Rome at that time? Verily the histories teach us the
contrary. Namely Sabellicus writes that before the time of S. Gregory, Aenead.
8. Lib. 5.
eue^ from the first coming in of the Longobardes to Italy, they left utterly
in Rome to speak latin. This was long before the six hundred years expired.
And no marvel. For before that time, the Wandalles and Hunnes had spoiled
Rome. The Goths inhabited the very cite of Rome and the rest of Italy many
years. The Longobardes also had their dwellinges and remaining there. Yet was
the Church Service until S. Gregory's time and ever since only in the
latin tongue. Thus both in the greek Church, and in the latin, the Church
service was in greek and latin, which soundry nations of greece, and the very
Romans them selves understood not. Thus the Untruth is justified, and a
nation, yea sundry nations showed, which understood not commonly their Common
Service, and thus in this Article even at the beginning M. Jewel must yield
and Subscribe. Which yet, before we come to the end, M. Jewel by Gods grace,
shall diverse mo ways be forced unto, if at lest he will stand and abide to
his large offers and over bold challenge.

diuis. 3.
If M. Jewel, or any of our learned adversaries, or any man living could
show good evidence and proof, that the public service of the Church was then
in the Syriacall or Arabike, in the Aegiptian, Ethiopian, Persian, Armenian,
Scythian, French or Britain tongue, then might they justly claim
prescription against us in this article etc. But that doubtelesse can not
appear.

page 154. The 124. Untruth Slaund.
The.68. Untruth, For doubtelesse it will soon be showed.

Here in this place you say somewhat. Afterward you say more. To that which
here you bring, I will here presently answer. To that which you bring
afterward, I will answer when I come to it, which will be in the Returning of
the.78. Untruth. Here you say.

Hieron in epitaphio Panloe.

The 125. Untruth For this was no part of the common Service, as it shall
appear both here and more at large in the 78. Untruth.


At her funeral all the multitude of the Cities of Palestine met together.
The psalms were song in order in the hebrew, greek, Latin, and Syrian tongue.
Here may he see that in one City four several Nations, in their Common
service used four Several tongues among which tongues is the Syriacal. Which
thing M. Harding thinks all the world can not show.

M. Jewel shoots fair, but far from the Mark. His purpose is to prove
that the Common service of the Church was in the Syriacall tongue. And he
tells us of certain psalms song at the funeral of a noble woman in the
Syria^ tongue. Of such psalms or songs we shall speak more at large hereafter
in the ^8. Untruth, about the allegation of M. Jewel touching Ephrem.
Presently let us consider shortly M. Iewelles Argument. Thus he seems to frame
it.

Psalms were song of the people at ones funeral in the vulgar tongue.

Ergo the Church service was altogether in the vulgar tongue. M. Iewelles
Argument.


Soothely (good Reader) if it had liked M. Jewel to have given the leave to
read forth the whole sentence of S. Hierom, thou should have seen this
singing of psalms was no part of the Church service, but an extraordinary
devotion of that people toward that good woman deceased. For thus it follows
immediately after the words by M. Jewel alleged. Psalms were song not only
for three days space, until the time she was buried under the Church nygh to
the vawte of our lord, but also through out the whole weke: all that came,
thinking it their own funeral and their own sorrow. Now unless M. Jewel
will say that all the weke long they were a saying her diriges, or that in a
set service of one Church there should be a confusion of so many tounges, or
that the Service was in all those four tounges at once, this can nothing help
him. Verily of such psalms as were song at her burial as a part of the
service, S. Hierom mentioned that before in these words. Being carried to her
grave by the hands of the bishops, Hieron. in Epitaph. Paulae.
carrying the b^ere upon their neck, while other bishops aryed candles and
tapers before her, other guided the quyer of the singing men, she was laid in
the middle of the Church, of our Savior. Here is the Service, here be lights
and tapers, here is a quyer of singing men. Thus M. Iewelles psalm helps
nothing his whole Service, but utterly overthrows the whole manner of their
naked funerals. He proves the whole by a piece, the ordinary usage by a
casual solemnite, the common Service by a private Funeral. Upon such bare
Gheasses, this great Alteration is builded. And here comes an other to
underprop it.

De ^a^e^hi sandis rudib. cap. 9. The.126. Untruth For it is spoken only of
latin tongue.
adds thereto this reason. That the people unto the thing that they pl^inely
understand, may say, Amen. This of S. Augustine seems (126) to be spoken
generally of all tongues.

It seems so M, Jewel. Yea forsoothe, he that sees no mark must shoot by
aim. D. Harding asks of the Syriacal, Arabike, Egyptian, Ethiopian,
Persian, Armenian, Scythian, French or Britain tongue, and you answer of the
Latin service used in Afrike. This is M. Iewelles argument.

M. Iewelles Argument.
The Latin Service was used in Affrike in Latin and the people thereto
answered, Amen.

Ergo the Arabyans, Scythians, Aethyopians, French men and other had their
service in their vulgar tongue.

This argument hangs loosely. Every child may see thourough it. The folly of
it will appear by the like.

In Rome at this hour the service is in Latin, and the people answeareth Amen.

Ergo Spain, France, and Dutcheland have their service in their vulgar
tongue.

The truth is. In all places and countres, the priest must so distinctly
pronounce the Service, that when the people of duty must answer, he may be
understood, what he say. So children and Parisheclarkes are taught to answer
the Priest, knowing well the words what he says, though not understanding
what the words mean. And as now for the whole people one or a few does
answer, being taught and instructed thereto, so in the primitive Church all the
people for the most part was so instructed and did so answer. Thus M. Jewel
has hitherto proved the Latin Service, but for Service in the vulgar tongue he
has brought nothing. But he goes forth, and says.

middot;
have from the beginning of their faith in their public Service used ever more
their own natural country tounges. Wherefore by M. Hardinges own grant, we
may justly claim prescription, and charge him with Antiquite, and require him
to yield to the Authorite of the primitive Church. The.127. Untruth for none
of these examples are of the primitive Church.


It is well, M. Jewel, that all other stories, Doctors, Counsels, and
witnesses faylyng you, yet D. Harding has stood your good friend, to serve
your turn in this distress. Howbeit D. Harding though he might gladly
pleasure, you yet could he in no casse so forgett him self, as to require you
to prove that thing, which he should after grant you. Therefore you shall
understand M. Jewel first that those Armenias, Russians and Aethiopia^s used
not such vulgar Service with in the first 600. years, but long after. His
question here is of that time and no other. Again he asks of such practice
allowed and taken for good. Your answer upon his grant is of such as used it
so in Schism. Thus hitherto it has not appeared that any Country had their
Service, Within the first.600. years in a vulgar Barbarous tongue.

I say that if I can show that the people of some Countries of the Greek
Church (69) which all had their Common prayers and Service in the Greek tongue,
for the more part understood not the Greek tongue, more then Englishmen now
the Latin tongue, then I have proved that I promised to prove. etc.

The 128. Untruth Slaund.
The 69. Untruth. For it is certain that sundry of the East nations had not
their Service in the greek tongue, as shall appear.

It is the 78. Untruth.
that he has proved nothing. But take heed good Reader, in the mean while.
Unless thou eye M. Jewel well, he will steal from thee. For in this point
lies the whole pith of this Article. The principal Issue of this Article.
D. Harding puts it here for clear and undoubted, that all the Greek Church,
and namely all the lesser Asia being a great part thereof, had their Service
in the Greek tongue. This being so clear and true that no learned man. would
ever have denied it (for whereof is it called Greca Ecclesia, the Greek Church,
or Congregation, but because in all their assemblies and Churches the Greek
tongue was used, Scriptures were read in Greek, homilies in Greek, and so
forth, as the writings of S. Basil, of Gregory Nazianzen, and Gregory of
Nissa, al bishops in Asia the less do clearly convince?) this I say being in
the judgment of all learned men so clear a matter, D. Harding neither proved
it, neither thought it need to prove. No nor M. Jewel does not then flatly
deny it. But (says he) page 160.
if it be denied, M. Harding with all his learning is not able to prove it. Yet
he will not grant it neither, because the granting thereof were a clear
overthrow of his assertion. This therefore being put for truth of D. Harding,
he proves that many cou^tres of Asia the less understood not the Greek
tongue. Whereof it should follow, that many countres of Asia the less had
their Service in a toungue which they understood not. Because of this
conclusion so directly following M. Jewel seeing the Minor or second proposition
to be directly and abundantly proved, and the Mayor or first proposition no
whit proved, to the Minor or second proposition, he says, page 162.
M. Harding over much paineth him self, to prove that thing that no wise man
will deny him. And then he brings some proufes him self to help forth the
matter. To the Mayor or first proposition, because it stood unproven, he took
his advantage, and now de^ied it utterly, though it were of it self most
clear and evident. Now because an universal proposition being denied, an
insta^ce in some particular must be given by order of reason, therefore he
takes upon him (as you hear him to say in this Vntrutruthe) to prove
afterward that sundry Nations of the East Church had not their Service in the
Greek tongue. that all the East or Greek Church had their service in the greek
tongue, D. Har.
shall be overthrown. This as I said he will prove afterward. In the 78.
Untruth I shall have occasion to answer unto the whole. Look (gentle Reader)
in that place, and mark how well he proves it, and remember that if his
proufes fail him (as I trust in God they shall every one) that then Some
Countres are found in the Greek Church of the first 600. years which had
their Service in a toungue that all the people understood not: That so M.
Iewelles Assertion will be overthrown, and he bound to Subscribe, if he
stand to his offer.

Strabo who trauailled over all the countres of Asia, Diuis. 8.
nere about the time of S. Paul's peregrination there, who also was borne in
the same, in his.14. book of Geographie writes, that whereas within that
Cherronesus that is the straight between sea and sea there were sixtiene
Nations by report of Ephorus, of them all only three were greeks, all the
rest Barbarous.



The.129. Untruth Slanderous..
It greueth M. Jewel, that D. Hardinge should speak any Truth in his whole
book. So often he notes him of Untruth, not only where none is (as he has yet
hitherto ever done) but also in such matters, which whether it be true or no,
nothing helps or furdereth the state of the question. D. Harding will prove
that in Asia the Less there were soundry Countres which understood not the
Greek Toungue. D. Hard.
M. Jewel says.

page 160.
To what end? For neither is it denied by any of us, neither is it any part of
our question. And yet notwithstanding is not M. Harding (130.) able to prove it
with all his Gheasses.

The.130. Untruth For by this Authorite of Strabo it is clearly proved.
Lo: He will disprove D. Hardinges proufes, though they make nothing to the
purpose, yea though he deny not the thing which is proved. And why so?
Forsothe to increase the quantite of his Reply, to deface (as he thinks) his
adversary, and to leave in the Reader some token of his learning and
knowleadge, though he leave withal a great blott of his honesty. For mark
good Reader I beseech thee, the demeanor of M Jewel in this point. The
singular lewdenesse of M. Jewel.
Because by no reason nor truth he could overthrow the report of D. Harding
out of Strabo, he in his text, repeting the text of D. Harding has put in one
word more, then either D. Harding spoke, or Strabo wrote, intending thereby to
prove D. Hardinge to Missereporte Strabo. What word is that? The word is.
Then. For whereas D. Harding out of Strabo reports, that, whereas there were
sixteen soundrye Nations in Asia the less by report of Ephorus, off them all
only three were Greeks, all the rest were Barbarous, M. Jewel, repetinge
these words, repeteth them in this sort, Whereas there were Then Sixtene
sundry Nations, The.131. untruth, i^altering the text of D. Harding. Jewel.
page 161.
etc. And then he cries out.

I know not whether M. Harding be un wittingly deceived him self, or wilfully
go about to deceive others. But well I know, that this is no part of Straboes
meaning. For Strabo speaks not this of his own time, etc. And a little after.
For if Strabo had meant this of his own time, to what end, etc.

Lo you see his proof is directed against the word, Then: which word D.
Hardinge wrote not. He will prove it was not so in Straboes time, which D.
Harding said not at all. For evidence hereof I report me to all the copies
extant, as well in both the printes of D. Hardings Answer, as also to the
Copy, inserted here in M. Iewelles Replye. If there be any lie in putting in
the word Then, you have made the lie, for you have put in that word. Then
beshrowe the liar. Thus M. Jewel, to fasten an Untruth upon doctor Hardinge,
and to prove him a deceiuer off the people, has dealed him self most
Untruly, has deceived the people, and much abused his Reader.

Likewise Plinius in the sixth Book. Naturalis Historiae. ca. 2. declares that
within the circuit of that land, were three greek Nations only, Doors, Jones,
Aeoles. And that the rest were Barbarous.

The.132. Untruth Slanderous.


In omni tractu eo proditurtres tantum gentes Graecas iure dici, Doricam,
Aeonicam, Aeolicam, Caeteras Barbaroru^ esse. Within all that circuit (he
means off Asia the less) it is written, that only three nations be rightly
called greeks, and that the rest are of the Barbarous. Now how has D.
Harding missereported Pliny his words? M. Jewel in his text to prove they
are missereported, says nothing. Let then the Reader judge, by conferring
together the words of Pliny and the words of doctor Hardinge, whether he
say any thing more or less in effect then Pliny does. In which two
points Missereporting consists. Pliny says. Proditur. It is written. And
D. Harding upon his auouching reports it. Plinye says. Three Only Nations
are rightly called Greek. So much says D. Harding also. Naie, says M.
Jewel.

page 160. The.133. Untruth For Pliny can not so mean.
In that he says, tres tantum gentes Graecas Iure dici, that only three
Nations be rightly or naturally called Greeks (133) he must needs mean that
the rest were called Greeks also, although not so rightly, and naturally as
the other: For else the exception of this word, Iure, that is, rightly or
naturally, had been in vain.

Not so rightly, as M. Jewel gloseth. But they were not rightly Greeks,
because they neither spoke the greek tongue naturally, neither had arrived into
that part of Asia the less, as had the other three, but out of other
Barbarous Countres. And the reason why only those three Nations Doors, Jones,
Aeoles, were rightly called greeks, is not (as M. Jewel fancieth) to make an
exception between rightly, and not so rightly, but it is (as Pliny expressly
tells us) to make an exception that the other were no greeks at all. And
therefore, he adds immediately to his former words. Caeteras Barbarorum esse.
That the rest were of Barbarous. Now Sir. The Barbarous and the Greeks are two
distincted Nations touching language at the lest, though living in one
Country. As the greeks are not called Barbarous, so neither the Barbarous are
called Greeks. And S. Paul makes a clear difference between the Greeks and
the Jews, Romans 1.
and the Barbarous. In that word Barbarous, comprehending all other Natyons
not Jews nor Graekes. So does Strabo as we shall anon hear.

And thus M. Harding seeking to prove that the people of Asia were no greeks,
alleges Plinius, The 134. Untruth For it appears not so by Pliny.
by whose words it appears necessarely that they were greeks.

It appears by Pliny three only were rightly called Greeks. All the rest
were mere Barbarous. But this is not yet the Conclusion of D. Harding. M. Jewel
saw well enough that he had first alleged Strabo in who^ the matter is more
plain, and that Pliny was brought but for the like. Therefore having hitherto
shot at Rouers, now he comes home to his long Buttes, and says.

Strabo says, that these three Nations excepted, the rest were Barbarous:
Ergo they understood no Greek. Vhe.135. Untruth Slaund.
And hereupon rests his whole proof. But this is an other falsification of
Straboes mind.

M. Harding falsifieth S^raboes mind. But now it shall appear that all this
is but a Slanderous Untruth. And that M. Jewel either understood not in deed
Straboes mind, or else, has wilfully falsified his mind. For lo thus he
follows the Matter.

The.136. Untruth.


This is a manifest Untruth. Strabo calls such, Barbariloquos, men of a
barbarous speech, not Barbaros, Barbarous, As it shall anon appear. But first
let us hear M. Iewelles proufes. He says.





Barbarismum in hijs dicere consueuimus, qui male loquuntur Greece, non au^em in
^^lis qui Cari^e loquunur. Lib. 14. Geograph.
Sic etia^ barbariloquos and barbari sermonis homines eos accipere debemus, qui
male Graeca pro^un^iant. We take a barbarismus, or a barbarous manner of speech
to be in them that speak the Greek d^sorderly, and not in them that speak a
strange tongue as is the tongue of the Carians. So we ought to take them to be
* barbarous, or men of barbarous speech, The 137. Untruth in false
tra^slatio^. Barbariloquus. is not barbarous, but a man of barbarous speech.

The.138. Untruth For Strabo says not so.


that ill fauouredly pronounce the Greek. Thou may see good Reader with what
faith M. Harding alleges the Authorite of old writers. He would prove by
Strabo that these people spoke no graeke because they were Barbarous. And
Strabo him self (138) says, not withstanding they were Barbarous, yet they
spoke Greek.

M. Jewel has said. But he has said many things untruly. As for the
faith which D. Harding is presumed not to have used, let it be tried by the
Truth that M. Jewel him self has used. Verily he understood not his
Author, or else he has wilfully dissembled the Truth. For thus it is. Strabo
calls not such men that spoke greek ill fauouredly, Barbaros barbarous (as M.
Jewel has wrongely translated Strabo) but he calls them Barbariloquos and
barbari sermonis homines, men of barbarous speech. You have deceived your
Reader M. Jewel wilfully, or else your self grossly and ignorantly, with the
similitude of terms.

For Barbari, barbarous, and Barbariloqui, men of a barbarous speech in Strabo
are not all one. Barbari and Barbariloqui.
For whereas the Ion^s (who spoke clean greek) called the Ca^ians
Barbariloquos, men of a barbarous speech, in contempt and co^tumely, because
(as Strabo writes) they had much contention and continual war with them,
and thereupon Anacreon their Poet termed them (...), Strabo Lib. 14.
men of barbarous speech, Strabo asks Quare eos barbarici sermonis appellat,
Barbaros vero nunquam? Why does he call the^ men of Barbarous speech, and not
Barbarous? And after he says. Omnes qui crasse loquuntur Barbari dicuntur,
quales sunt Nationes omnes praeter graecos. All which speak thick and gross
are called Barbarous, such as all nations are beside the graekes. Therefore
Chrysostom a Grecian reakoneth the Romans them selves inter barbaros, In 1.
Cor. 14. Hom. 35.
among the barbarous. In like manner Tully, Liuie, and other latin writers call
all other Nations (except the pure greeks) in comparison of them selves,
Barbarous. Lib. 14.
And therefore (says Strabo) A nacreon called the Carians properly Barbarous
at the beginning, because of their hard and roughe speech, But afterward we
abused that word as a common name to distinguish them from the greeks. Thus
much of the word Barbari, barbarous, or (in better english) foreign or
strange. After this he speaks of such as were called Barbariloqui, men of
barbarous speech (which M. Jewel confounds with the word barbarous,) and
says. Strabo. Ibidem.
Alia quaedam and quasi barbara loquendi prauitas in lingua nostra videbatur,
si quis non perfect graeca pronunciaret, quod and apprime Caribus contingit.
There seemed yet an other and a certain barbarous offense in our tongue, if any
pronounced greek not perfitly: which in these Carians is most evident. So he
concludes against Anacreon that the Carians were not called Barbariloqui, men
of barbarous speech for their own Carian tongue (for so they were called,
Barbari barbarous, as al other Nations beside the greek were) but because they
pronounced not well the greek tongue which they learned. Upon this he utters
the words which M. Jewel alleges, touching those which are properly called
Barbariloqui, men of barbarous speech. Which is, that they are such as speak
the greek tongue evil fauouredly: but barbari, barbarous are they whose
language is not greek at al, but a diverse tou^ge from the greek, as you heard
before in Straboes words. Now M. Jewel confounds the word Barbaros,
barbarous, and the word Barbariloquos, men of barbarous speech, together, and
so deceives the Reader (as I said) in similitude of terms. It is therefore
to be noted that both the words of Strabo before, reakoning by the report of
Ephorus but three greek Nations only in Asia the less, and all the rest to the
number of sixtene Barbarous, and also the words of Pliny affirming the very
same, are spoken not of Barbariloqui, but of Barbari: not of me^ of a Barbarous
speech, which spoke al Greek evil fauouredly, but of mere Barbarous, that is
(in better english) of foreign and strange Nations, having each their tounges
and languages several. For of the Greeks, as the same Strabo in an other place
reakoneth, there were in Asia the less but four La^guages: the Attica, which
yet he co^foundeth with the Ionica (making but three in substance) Dorica and
the Aeolica. Strabo. Libr. 8.
So that all that were called Barbarous in Asia the less, as the Carians, the
Lycaonians, the Cappadocians, the Phrygians, the Pamphylians, the Galathians
and other to the number of Sixtene Nations had their several and distinct
languages from the greek. As for example Strabo speaking of the proper language
of the Carians, says of it. Permultae nomina graeca permixta habet. It has
may greek names mingled in it. Like as our English tongue has a number of
French words and that of the best sort in it, Libro. 14.
being a language utterly diverse from the Fren^he. That the Lycaonians spoke
not vulgarly greek, but Lyc^^ni^e in the Lycaonicall tongue, Act. 14.
nether Attice nor Aeolice nor Dorice, and therefore no greek at all, the Acts
of the Apostles do expressly witness. Again Cappadocia, Phrygia and
Pamphylia, all provinces of Asia the less, spoke a diverse language, that one
understood not the other. Else it had been no miracle that al they (as the Acts
do mention) hearing S. Peter to preach, Cap. 2.
should each of the^ have thought, that he spoke their several la^guages. Last
of all this is afterward by D. Harding proved so clearly, namely by the
Galathians a part also of the lesser Asia, Hierom. in pro^m. 2. ad Gal.
Plinius li. 7. c. 24. Hist. Na^.
and by the.22. tounges learned of Mithridates king of that country, that he
might speak to all his people without an interpreter, that M. Jewel cries
out and calls all that labor Vanitas vanitatum, and a great toke^ of
idleness to prove that which no man d^nieth. Yet you see how he labors by
gheasses to overthrow the authorites of Strabo and Pliny, and to prove him
self the contrary, though yet he dare not affirm it him self,but says page
164. page 16^ 162.
it is not denied by any of us Whereby it appears that if D. Harding had not
proved it in deed at large and substancially, M. Jewel would utterly have
denied it, as he does utterly deny the other proposition, that all the Greek
Church had the greek Service, because there were no proufes brought for it, the
matter it self being to all the learned so open and manifest. Thus you see no
Untruth on D. Hardinges part, but a great wrangling folly on M. Iewelles
part, and such a pelting contention, as little becomes a divine, and much
less a Bishop as he would seem to be. Thus also you see the proposition of D.
Harding clearly proved, that sundry Countres in Asia the less understood not
the Greek tongue, but had a several language from the greek as well in
substance, as in speech and understanding.

Hitherto of the Greek, and of the Service in that language.

middot; The.139. Untruth Slanderous.
For he has not hitherto spoken one word of the^ Service.

middot;
That the Service was in the Greek tongue, and used in the greek Church I
grant. And again, Diuis. 7.
Thus much by us both conf^ssed M. Jewel, and agreed upon (touching the
limitation of the Greek Church) I say that if I can show, that the people of
some Countries of the Gr^ke C^urche, which all had their Common prai^rs and
S^ruice in the Gr^ke tongue and caet? And afterward. Diuis. 8.
That the people of the l^sse Asia being a principal part of the Greek Church
had their Service in the greek tongue, it is conf^ssed as manif^st, no learned
man will deny it. In all those places he speaks of the greek Service. And
yet M. Jewel says here stoutely, a matter conf^ssed, and such as no learned
man would deny. And M. Jewel him self does not deny it, but he says that

page 161. The.140 Untruth the people of Lycaonia and of Cappadocia understood
not the Greek tongue, as has befo^ been proved.
And the people understood them.

Now all these Countres are in Asia the less. Whereof it will follow that
they had the Greek Service, which the people also might understand by M.
Iewelles confession, in a great part of Asia the less, though not in the
whole greek Church. Which yet also he must be driven to confess being not
able (as it shall appear hereafter, when I come to the.78. Untruth) to give
any one instaunce or exceptyon in any one Country of the greek Church. And so
D. Harding though he have not proved it him self, yet M. Jewel has proved it
for him. For an Universal proposition is well proved by Order of Schools, and
Reason, when no Instance, or Exception can be brought to the Contrary.

Because the first preachers of the faith came to these west parts from Rome,
etc.

The.141. Untruth Slanderous joined with a gross ignorance.
The.73. Untruth. The first preachinge of the Faith in these Weste Countries
came not first from Rome.

This Untruth was noted before by M. Jewel in the first Article, and here it
is repeted to make a number. It was the.32. Untruth. In that place we have
satisfied it, and showed that France, Germanye, and the English Nation our
Forefathers had all their first faith from Rome. May it please thee gentle
Reader to have a recourse to that place, See in the leaf. 19. and 20.
and then judge what the impudency of M. Jewel deserves: not only in repeting
it now again for an Untruth, but also auoutchinge it in the text and noting
also in the Margin that M. Hardinge wittingly and willingly avouches Untruth.
He brings in surmises without Authority that Nathanael, Saturninus and
Lazarus preached first the Faith of France. For this surmise and Gheasse of
his, you had before alleged a testimonye of the French bishops them selves
above a thousand years paste, confessing they had their Faith first from
Rome. If that suffice not, behold the particular testimony of diverse the
principal Churches in France to record the same. Demochares a French Writer
of late days reakoning up the Bishops of every bishoprike and Archebishoprike
in France, De Sacrificio Missa lib. 2.
by the records of the Chapters of each Church, names us their first
bishops to be these. Of Senes the first Bishop was S. Sauinianus sent from S.
Peter, as also Antoninus witnesses. Cap. 25. tit. 6. primae partis Historiaru^.
Of Paris the first bishop was S. Denis sent by Clement, as the Monuments and
Antiquites of Paris do yet testify. Of Chartres Auentinus sent from S. Peter
was the first bishop. Of Orleans Altinus sent likewise with the other two by S.
Peter. By S. Clement Pope of Rome soon after S. Peter, were sent also diverse.
Nicasius the first bishop of Rhone, Exuperius of Ba, ieux, and Taurinus of
Brye. The first Bishop of Antissiodorum was S. Peregrinus sent from Sixtus the
Pope of Rome, in the year of our Lord. 30.

Whereas M. Jewel writes that Nathanael, Lazarus, The.142. Untruth For
Saturninus preached in France.200. years aft^r the first preachers Petrus de
Natalib. lib. ^. ca. 5. li 1. cap. 9. and lib. 10. cap. 41.
and Saturninus preached the Faith first in France, he has taken that by like
out of some Lege^da aurea, and yet has not al together truly reported it. For
as touching Saturninus, he was bishop of Tolose in France in the persecution
of Decius more then 200. years after Christ, and therefore could be none of the
first that preached there the faith. For Nathanael, Vrsinus is named to be the
first bishop of Burges. Of Lazarus arriving to Massilia with Marye
Magdalene, and Martha it is written, but that they planted the faith in
France it is very uncertain. As for the conjectures of M. Jewel, from whence
our country received the faith, I have before in the 32. Untruth declared the
contrary out of the approved Historye of Venerable Bede.

T^^tul co^tra Marci. lib 2. Esa. 2.
De Syon exibit lex and verbum Domini de Jerusalem. The law shall come forth
of Syon and the word of the Lord out of Jerusalem. Our Savior also
sending forth his Apostles, bids them to begin at Jerusalem, to preach
to Samaria, and so vsque ad extremum terrae. Acto. 1.
even to the uttermost of the earth. In that sense all the world had the
faith from Jerusalem. And so S. Augustine in the place by M. Jewel alleged,
when he says, August. Epist. 178.
The faith sprange first from the Greeks, by the greeks means not the
country of greece, but the country of Jury, who at that time was a part of the
greek Church, as by the greek Liturgy of S. James bishop of Jerusalem, by
the greek Homilies of Cyrillus bishop there also, before S. Augustines time,
l^st of all by the words of S. Augustine him self in that self same epistle
alleged by M. Jewel it is evident. For in that same Epistle showing that we
ought not to reject the greek word (...) expressing the consubstantialite of
Christ with God the father, because it was not written in holy Scripture, but
made by the greek Fathers, says thus. Non enim in Africa, aut in cuncta
Barbariae sed in Syria vel Graecia vbi and ipsa caro voluit de virgin nasci
dominica, decuit vel oportuit verba fidei compendiose firmare. For not in
Afrike nor in all the rest of barbarous and foreign countres, but in Syria or
Greece where it liked our Savior to take Flesh of the Virgin, the words of our
faith ought or might well be established. In which words he calls Jury
(where Christ was borne) by the name of Greece. The which also he does in an
other Epistle calling that country. August. Epst. 70.
Radicem Orientalium Ecclesiaru^ vnde Euangelium in Africam venit, vnde terra
si eis afferatur, adorant. The Root of of the East Churches from whence the
Gospel came unto Afrike, and from whence the earth if it be brought to them
is worshipped: which can be meaned of no Land but of the Holy Land. Yet
notwithstanding all this, that principally all Christendom has their faith
from Jerusalem: though she be the true Mother to us all, though S. Augustine
do confess that from thence the faith came to Afrike, yet I say
notwithstanding all this Saint Augustine in this very epistle, 70. in number,
confesses also that the Faith came to Afrike from Rome. For speaking off the
Donatistes condemned apud Ecclesiam transmarinam, which was at Rome by
Melchiades the Pope, he adds vnde ad istas parts Christianae fidei manauit
authoritas, from the which Church of Rome the authorite of Christen faith has been derived in to these parts. And so S. Gregory says that from Rome, Greg.
Lib. 7. ep. 32. Indict. 1.
in Africanis partibus sumpsit ordina^io saecerdotalis ^xordium, In the Coasts
of Afrike, the beginning of priestly Order did spring. Thus notwitstanding
that Jerusalem is the Mother of all Chrystendom, yet the Weste Church (as we
have particularly declared in France, in Germany, in our country, and last of
all now in Afrike) has taken their first faith properly and immediately from
Rome. And so has there ben no Untruth avouched by D. Harding, but a manifest
and wilful falsehood defended by M. Jewel.

They planted and set up in the Countres by them converted the Service of the
Church of Rome or some other very like, and that (74) in the latin tongue
only, for ought that can be showed to the contrary.

The 143. Untruth Slanderous.


If this be all that you can show to the contrary, then have you showed
nothing. For all those which S. Peter and S. Clement and other Popes sent unto
France, those which Eleutherins, Celestinus, and S. Gregory sent to Britanny,
those which other Popes sent to sundry parts of Germany and other the North
parts as we have before particularly declared, last of all those, which (as S.
Augustine witnesses) authorized the Chrystian faith in Afrike, think you M.
Jewel that all they sent from Rome, had not the Romain language, which is the
latin tongue? Because S. Peter was a Jew borne and a Grecian, think you
therefore they spoke no latin? Where was then the gift of tounges given to the
Apostles? You should have done well M. Jewel to have named the first preachers
of the west Church, which could speak no latin, and to have proved that also.
So you mihgt justly have charged D. Harding with an Untruth, affirming they
spoke al latin, for ought that can be showed to the contrary. You have noted it
for an Untruth: but you have showed nothing to the contrary. It is an easy
matter to deny a Truth. You know the proverb M. Jewel. Plus potest Asinus
negar^ quam Aristoteles probare.

He shall find in the old Fathers, that to Per omnia secula seculorum, to
Dominus vobiscum, to Sursum corda, and to Gratias agamus domino deo nostro, the
people answered (75) as now also they answer: Amen, and cum Spiritu tuo,
habemus ad dominum, dignum and iustum est.

The.144. Slaund. The 145. Untruth For D^ Harding knows the contrary.
The.75. Untruth. It is not so now. M. Hardinge knows, The people now
answers not the priest.

It appears M. Jewel, you heard not Mass many a day. If you had heard as
many Masses while you were on this side of the seas, as you were present at
Co^munions, no doubt but you should have seen the Catholic people to answer
the priest at Mass even now at this day, in all such words and terms, as D.
Harding here mencioneth. Doubt you not but these words and answers are kept
still in the Mass at this day in all Catholic countres, even as they were in
the old Fathers days, in the times of Chrysostom, of S. Ciprian, and S.
Augustine. Chrysostom. Homil. de Eucaenijs et Euchaecharistia. Ciprianus in expos.
orat. Do^. August. in epist. 57. and sermon. 44. de tempore.
Yea and the people answers the priest now as they did then. Come to Mass
and you shall see it so. But you say. Then all the people answered the priest,
and that in such sort, that Saint Bafill compares the sound of the people
to the sound of whaues beating against the sea banks, and S. Hierom compares
it to a thunderclappe. Then if this be all the difference that at that time the
whole people answered, and now a few only of the people, or the Quiere for the
people answeareth Amen, and such other things, it is no Untruth that the
people does answer, though not in so common and Large a manner as they did then,
yea though they answer not every one particularly, but some of them for all the
rest, or some other for them all: As in great churches the Quyer, and in mean
parish churches the parish clarke. And thus also the manner expressed in S.
Paul to the Corinthians (if that be spoken of the Church Service) is perfectly
observed. Epist. 1. Cap. 14.
For there it is not required that the people it self (expressed by the name
Idiota) do answer Ame^, but that he which supplieth the place of the people, do
answer Ame^. This place of the people is supplied either by the Quiere, or by
the parish clarke: And so the people answeareth, Ame^. For he is not Untruly
said to do a thing, which does it by an other. So the Commo^s give their
assent in Parliament by their Burgeoses, and so the Prince executes Justice by
his Depute.

The Constitution of Justinian for celebrating the holy oblation not closely,
Diuis. 14.
but with vtteraunce and sound of Voice was ordained only for the greek
Church, and thereto only it is to be referred for that some thought the
sacrifice should be celebrated rather with silence, after the manner of the
Church of Rome, specially at the Consecration.

The.76. Untruth. For it touched the whole Empiere.

page 171. The 146. and the 147. Untruths both Slaund.
Leo, Ambrose etc.







Justinian (says he) s^eaketh of the open vtteran^e, and soun^e of voi^e and
agrees with S. Augustine^ p^ace, de M^gi^^ro. T^e^efore it no^hinge touche^h
Prayers to be had in the vulgar tongue. The.148 Untruth. ^or this Conclus^on is
good and right.
H^re is a very vulgar Conclusion: as, I trust, hereafter shall a^peare. Good
Ch^istian Reader, if it shall please thee only to peruse these worde^ of the
Emperor Justinian and of S. Augustine by us alleged, I will make thee Judge
and Arbitrour of the whole.



We need not utterance of voi^e to pray unto God. For the Sac^ifi^e of
iusti^e is sanctifie^ in the temple of our min^e, and in the secre^e ^hamber of
ou^ heart.



Hereupon S. Augustine demands this questyon. Wherefore then does the
P^iest lif^e up his voi^e, and pray alow^e in the open assembly in the
Chu^che.

The.1^9 Untruth. S. Aug^stin demands no such question.
S. Augus^in moves no such question, as it shall straighte way appear.

He answers, Not that God, but that man may ^eare him, that the people by the
sound off his voi^e, and vnderstandi^g his meani^^ may be put in (...) and by
consent be ioy^e^ togethe^, an^ lif^ed up to God. This is the very meaning and
mind of S. Aug^stine.

The.150 Untruth in falsifying S. ^ugustin
so he makes here no answer. Again these words (and understanding his
meaning) ^re not the words of S. Augustine, but of M. Jewel pretely conveyed in
to the text of S. Augustine, the better to fu^nishe and fashion up his Vulgar
Se^uice. Last of all this is not the meaning of S. Augustine, as M. Jewel
affirms. And so in these few words of S. Augustine, M. Jewel has couched
four Untruths.

Vbi putas Sacrificium Iusticiae sa^rifi^a^i nisi in t^mplo mentis and in
cubilibus cordis? ^bi aut^m sac^^ficandum est, ibi and orandum. Lib de
Magistro. Cap. 1.
Where think thou the Sacrifice of righteousn^sse is sacrifi^ed but in the
temple of our mind, and in the se^rete chamber of our ha^te? But where we must
Sac^ifice, th^^^ we ^ust pray. And hereof he concludes in these words. Quare
non opus est locutione cum oramus, id ^st sonantibus verbis, nisi ^orte, sicut
Sacerdotes faciunt, significandae mentis suae causa, non vt D^us, sed vt
homines audiant, and cons^nsione quadam per commemorationem suspe^datur in
D^um. therefore we need no Vtteraunce of words, that is, no sound of voice
when we pray, unless perhaps as Priests do to signifye their mind, not
that God, but that men may hear them, and with a certain consent through
putting in mind, may be lyfted up unto God.

These are the true words of Saint Augustine. Here is no question demanded,
wherefore Priests do lift up their voices in the Church, as M. Jewel
alleges. But it is brought in of Saint Augustine as an exception against his
general proposition, that in prayer we need no vtteraunce of voice. Again the
reason why the Priest so lifted up his voice is not (as M. Jewel says) that
the people understanding his meaning may be put in mind, etc. Saint
Augustine has no such words: but he lifts up his voice Significandae mentis
suae causa, to signify his own mind. And what mind of the Priest is that?
No^ that God may hear him (who sees the heart and needs no vtteraunce of
voice) but that the people may hear him. And how? To understand what he
says? S. Augustine says no such thing. But Vt consensione quadam per
commemorationem suspendantur in Deum, to the intent that the people wi^h a
certain consent (not of understanding the Priest, but) through putting in
mind (by the voice of the Priest) may be lifted up unto God. This is the very
meaning and mind of S. Augustine and as M. Jewel alleges,

The Priest before Prayer prepares the minds off his B^etherne, In exposit.
orat. Dominicae.
s^yinge thus. Lift up your hearts. To the entente they may be put in
mind, they ought to think off nothing else, but off the Lord For not the
sound off voice, but the min^e and understanding must pray unto the Lord
with pure Intention. The 151. Untruth in Nipping of quite in the midst the
words of S. Ciprian.


S. Augustine as M. Jewel says, agrees with these words of Saint Cyprian,
which should the better have appeared, if he had not nipped quite in the
midst, these words. Dum respondet plebs, Habemus ad Dominum, while the
people answers (even as they do now in the Mass to Sursum corda, lift up
your hearts) Habemus ad Dominu^. We lift them up to our Lord. For the priest
saying, Sursum corda, and the people answering, Hab^mus ad dominum by answering
those words, Admon^ntur (as S. Ciprian says) nihil aliud quam dominu^
cogitare debere: they are put in mind, they ought to think of nothing else but
of God. And so are the people put in mind at this day, where the Curat does
his duty, though they understand not the vulgar sense of the words, no more
then the common vulgar people of Afrike (where S. Ciprian spoke these words)
did, who had a punicall vulgar tongue beside the latin, (as it is in this
Article at large proved) and yet the service in latin. But these words, while
the people answers, Habemus ad dominum M. Jewel thought good to nippe of
quite in the midst of the Sentence, knowing very well, that his New Corrupt
Doctrine, can not stand without the manifest Corruption of the Old Doctors.
Again the later words of S. Cyprian which M. Jewel alleges, as one
continual text, The 152. Untruth as appears.
of the Author, and as a reason of the words that went before, these words I
say, For not the sound of voice etc. are no part^ of that sentence nor do
pertain thereunto, but do close up an other Principal Sentence following,
which is this. Clandatur contra aduersarium pectus etc. Let our breast be
closed up against the enemy, and be opened to God only, not suffering the en^mye
of God at prayer to have access unto us. For he crepeth on oftentimes and
perceth in, and guilefully deceiving us calls away our prayers from God
making us to say one thing and to think an other: Whereas not the sound of
voice, but the mind and understanding ought to pray to God with pure
intention. Here Lo these words are placed of S. Cyprian, not to prove, as M.
Jewel would force them by wrong placing them, that we ought of necessite to
understand the Priest, but that when we pray, we should pray in heart and
mind, not in tongue or sound of voice only. Which heart and mind of us is
stirred up when the Priest lifts up his voice more at sometimes then at
other, as toward the time of the Holy Consecration of the most Dreadful
mysteries, when he cries out allowde to the people Sursum Corda, as the
Graecians also cried out (...): Chrysostom. in Liturgia.
though the common people neither in Afrike neither in Greece did allwaies
customably and generally understand the latin or the greek tounges. Thus with
two notorious Untruths committed in the allegation of S. Ciprian, M. Jewel
has brought S. Augustine and S. Ciprian both agreing not with him, but with
the Constitution of Justinian against him, as it shall anon appear.

The.153. Vn^r^the For D. Harding s^i^d no such thing.
All thi^ (says M. Hardinge) per^eine^h to the sense and understanding of the
prayer, and nothing to the vulgar toun^e.

As M. Jewel has corrupted S. Augustine and S. Ciprian, so now he corrupts
the very text of D. Harding. For the words which M. Jewel as and for the
words of D. Hardinge, alleges, are not to be found in his text. D. Hardinge
says that this Constitution of Justinian makes not for the Service to be had
in any vulga^ tongue, but only that the Service be pronounced by the priest
alowde, that it be vocal, not mental, speaking not whispering with the
breathe only. Which Custom agrees to the manner also of the latin Church as
it is recorded by S. Augustine and S. Ciprian both. Who do testify the
custom of the latin Mass as we have it now, that the priest speaks alowde
Su^sum corda, and the people answers, Habemus ad dominum. By which loud
speaking of the priest, the people is stirred to prayer. This D. Harding said
to be the meaning of Iu^^inians Constitution. Against this what does M. Jewel
Reply? Verily to the matter nothing. But having first corrupted S. Augustine,
nipped S. Ciprian, and then altered the words of D. Harding, he confuteth tha^
which was not avouched and fights with his own shadow, thus.

understanding of the tongue?

As the people is not bound to understand the prayer of the priest, so
neither is it needful that they understand the to^nge. Stapl^ton
Such understanding of the people neither Iu^tinian nor S. Augustine, nor S.
Cyprian do require, neither the words of D. Harding do affirm.

Vhe.154. Untruth t^ere is ^o cause of suc^ sha^e given.
would be ashamed to see such a Comme^t upon his words.

Ye^ M. Jewel not only S. Augustine but S. Ciprian also if they were alive,
would be ashamed and highly offended, to see their words so corrupted and
mangled, and so used of you to maintain a Schism in the Church which they so
grievously abho^red. Justinian if he were alive, how would he be ashamed to see
his Constitution so racked to prove a Vulgar Service, which he never dreamed
of? And had you any shame or regard of your self M. Jewel, you would be
ashamed and sorye to, thus to abuse both the doctors and ancient Fathers,
and also the very text which lies open for any man to read and peruse.

The pries^ lif^eth up his voice, The 155. Untruth in falsifying the text of
D. Hard.
not that the people may vnderstan^e him, but only for a toke^ to s^ewe, that
he prays.

What passing impudency is this? Is the^e nothing in you but Untruth and
falsehood M. Jewel? Is the answer of D. Harding so good that you can not Reply
without altering his words, or adding to his words? For first where you
affirm, that D. Harding says, The priest lifts up his voice not that the
people may understand him, true it is he means so, though he said not so.
But here you must remember you make D. Harding to say two contrary things.
Before you reason with him as though he had said, the people ought to
understand the prayer, when you said And does he think etc. Now you make
him to say, That the priest ^ifteth up his voic^ not that the people may
understand him. But now to come to your present Untruth, when you say But
only for a token to show that he prays, that is a manifest Vntru^he. For D.
Hardinge told you out of S. Augustine, that the priest lifted up his voice, to
the end that the people hearing the priest, might be lif^^d up unto God, and
how: By a certain cons^nt, through putting in mind of the priest.

The 1^6. Vntr^the ioy^ed with a Slaund.
which, if it g^ue no certain sound, as S. Paul says, no man can prepare
him self to war. This is the just judgment of God that who so seeks to
blind others, shall be given over, and become blind him self.

It is an easy matter, when a man's eyes be plucked out, to prove him blind. As
long as you make D. Harding to speak at your pleasure, no maruail if you
confute at pleasure. In deed if the Priest lifted up his voice only for a token
that he prayed, and neither prayed him self in deed, neither stirred other
thereby to prayer, then truly M. Iewelles collection might stand for good, and
then the Belles were as good as the Priest. But if the Priest lifting up his
voice at the Service time both prays him self unto God, The.157. Untruth
For those words of S. Augustine. are not spoken of the pr^^st August. de
Magistro.

The.158. Untruth For the people understands what is tokened according to S.
August. meaning.


and stirs also the people thereunto, as S. Augustine and S. Ciprian both
have said, then is the priest a true Minister of God, then he gives out a
certain sound, and both does well him self, and edifyeth other. And then M.
Jewel has lost a good argument.

And notwithstanding S. Augustines mind concerning the speaking of the priest
be plain in it self, yet afterward in the same Book he opens it in this
manner more at large. We are agreed upon this, that the (157) words we speak
be tokens. But a token, unless it betoken some thing, is no token. Now if
the priest after M. Hardinges construction utter his words, which are the
tokens of his meaning, in an unknown tongue, and (158) the people understand
not, what is tokened, according to S. Augustins meaning, he speaks, and yet
says nothing, and shows tokens, and yet tokeneth nothing.

All this comes to one end. The words of the Priest uttered in an unknown
tongue, do utter yet his meaning unto the people,. For his meaning is, not that
the people shall understand the words that he speaks (that has not been
yet proved), But his meaning is that the people thereby be stirred to devotion,
be put in mind of their duty in the Church, and with one consent pray with
the Priest. This is that which S. Augustine and Cipria^ report. This is the
meaning of Justinians Constitution. And this is so true that among such
infinite diue^site of tounges and languages as well in the East Church as in
the West, the Service has yet never been in any other tongue then Greek and
Latin, as it shall the next Untruth, at large appear.

The.159 Untruth For D. Harding said no such thing.
The Priest in the assembly speaks alowde. Significandae mentis causa, vt
homines audiant etc. To the end to declare his mind, that men may hear him
and by the sound off his voi^e be put in remembrance. But M. Hardinge says.
No. The P^iest speaks not alowde, to thentent to declare his mind, neither
that men may hear him, nor be put in remembrance, but (159) only to give a
token that he prays. And thus by his gloss, he utterly destroys the text.

S. Augustine said herein, D. Harding said it also, who alleged the whole
words of S. Augustine in his text, and by those words interpreted the
Constitution of Justinian. Now comes M. Jewel and after all other Shifts,
affir^^eth D. Harding to say all quite contra^y to S. Augustine. I can say no
more herein but desire the discrete and indifferent Reader to peruse the words
of D. Harding in his own text. D. Harding denies not (as M. Jewel says
here, he does) that the Priest speaks alowde to thentent to declare his
mind, that men may hear him. He denies not that the Priest p^tteth the
people in remembrance. Neither does he say that the Priest gives only a
token that he prays. But he says all the Contrary even as S. August in
says, and in S. Augustins own words. These three Untruths M. Jewel has
made again upon the words of D. Hardinge.





Amen. The.160. Untruth




Amen unto the prayer. The.161. Untruth. For by the doctrine of S. Paul the
people is not bound to answer Amen.


You should have added, or else one that supplied the Room of of the people.
For so run the words of S. Paul. If you will ground upon scripture,
diminish not the word of the Lord, M. Jewel.

Then must they understand the prayer.

Here your Resolution fails you: And that for.ij. Causes. For it is
sufficient that one do answer for the whole people, and the^ he only has need
to understand it and not the people. Again the people may answer though they
understand not, The.162. Untruth standing in an Vnture Collection.
without the breach of S. Paul's doctrine. And to prove the possibilite
hereof, we have the Confessed Practice of the universal Church these 900.
years. We have also the practice of the first 600. years. At what time the
Service was only in Greek and Latin (as it shall in the next Untruth appear)
and yet sundry Nations understood not at that time the very Greek and Latin.
This therefore is a very weak and false proceeding of M. Jewel, in auouching
that thing, the contrary whereof is by such an universal practice of Christ's
Church proved and justified. For every good Resolution M. Jewel, proceeding
from the causes to the effects, (as this your Resolution would seem to do)
ought to proceed A Causis per se and proximis. from proper causes, and those
the nearest, not of bastard surmised causes and those far sought. As you do
hear M. Jewel. For when you infer, The people must answer, Amen, Ergo they
must understand the prayer, making the understanding of the people, to follow
necessarely of the answering Amen, you make a Fallax, of Non causa pro causa.
For as I said, the people may and have these many hundred years answered Amen
to the priest, though they understand not the priest. But the cause why the
people must answer Amen, is as S. Augustine and S. Cyprian has told you M.
Jewel, partly to give their consent to Gods Minister, partly thereby to lift
up their hearts to God, and to pray with him. Thus therefore, as one link of
a chain being broken, all that follows, falls of, and will hang no more
together, so your resolution failing here in the midst, that which you draw
after, must needs dragge behind, and come short of the whole purpose. Howbeit
M. Jewel limpeth on, as well as he may, and says.

The people must understand the prayer: then must the priest utter the same
both with a loud voice, and also in the vulgar tongue.





The 163. Untruth standing in false Collection.




Yes forsothe the priest must speak alowde significandae mentis suae causa, to
signify his own mind as S. Augustine saie^h, Which is as S. Augustine
expounds that men may hear him, and by the sound of his voice be put in
remembrance, both to give their consent, and also to lift up their hearts to
God and to pray with him. All which may be done though the priest do pray in
a strange tongue. I say strange, that is, not Vulgar. For the Latin tongue
in that respect as it is no Vulgar tongue, is to the Vulgar people a strange
tongue. Yet to the Latin Church in an other respect it is no strange tongue.
The Strange tongue.
But that is strange to the latin Church, which in the latin Church was
never used. As is in deed all Service in the vulgar tongue, beside greek in the
greek Church and latin in the Latin Church. For this is so strange a thing
that these xv.C. years in the Church of Christ it was never used, but upon
special privilege, and that in this later age. As it shall in the next Untruth
appear. Thus the priest must speak aloude, and his so speaking shall not be
frutelesse, though he pray in a strange, that is, in an unknown tongue to
the Vulgar people. And thus M. Iewelles Resolution faltreth and shakes even at
the beginning.

The 164. Untruth For th^re is no breach of S. Paul^s doctrine committed.
He speaks not alowde, then ca^ not the people understand him. The people
understands not the priest then can they not sa^e Amen. Thus M. Hardinge must
needs conclude his gloss with the open breach of S. Paul's doctrine.

The people may answer Amen, as far as S. Paul requires them, though they
understand not the Priest. S. Paul requires not the whole people so to
answer, but qui supplet locu^ idio^ae. Him that supplieth the room of the
ignorant. Again to answer Amen requires not an Understanding of the words
which the Priest speaks, but it requires a Consent to the words spoken, a
lifting up of the heart at the words spoken, and a praying with the priest so
speaking. It is not to be doubted but the whole universal Church of Christ
these many hundred years, understood the words of S. Paul as well M. Jewel
does. And it is not D. Hardinges gloss, but the continual practice of the
universal Church which concludes with the open breach of S. Paul's
doctrine, if to have the Service in a tongue unknown to the common people, M.
Jewel condemns the vniue^s^ll Church with the open breach of S. Paul's
doctrine.
be a breach of S. Paul's doctrine. And thus M. Iewelles Resolution both
backewarde and forward, faltring and failing in the very beginning, falls
down right in the end, and proves his purpose nothing. Beside that in the
whole drifte thereof he rangeth clean wide from the words of S. Augustine and
Justinian, whose words he said he would resolve into their causes. For
neither S. Augustine nor Justinian speaks any one word that the people ought
to understand the Service. But both do say that the priest ought to speak
alowde. The cause why; out of S. Augustine yon have heard already. Justinian
also gives the same, whose words are these, as M. Jewel him self alleges
them. Authen. Constit. 123.
We command all bishops and priests to Minister the holy Oblation and the
prayer at the Holy baptism, not under silence, but with such voice, as may be
heard of the faithefull people: to (...), that thereof the hearts of the
heare^s may be sturred to more devotion, and honor giving to God. For so the
holy Apostle teaches, saying in the first epistle to the Corinthians. For if
thou only bliss with the Spirit, how shall be, that supplieth the room of the
ignorant, say, 1. Cor. 14.
Amen, to God at thy thanks giving? For he knows not what thou say. Thou
geuest thanks well. But the other is not edified. For these causes therefore
it behooves, that the prayer at the holy Oblation, and also other prayers be
offered with loud voice of the holy bishops and priests unto our Lord Jesus
Christ with the Father and the holy Ghost. Thus far the Constitution of
Justinian. His words do require (as S. Augustins also before) that the Priest
do speak alowde at the holy Oblation time. And the cause thereoff he gives.
Not that the people may understand him. For in Justinians time, few or none
of the common vulgar people understood the learned Greek or Latin wherein the
Church Service was then only said. But that the people hearing the priest,
might thereof be stirred to more devotion, and honor giving to God. To the
which devotion the people is stirred, when the priest lifts up his voice,
stretches his hands, and knocks his breast, with other such godly tokens of
the inward man, though they understand not the very words that the priest
speaks: Yea and better also then if they understood them, as the very
experience of devotion in old time, Vulgar Service Distracteth from Devotion.
and at these days does evidently declare. For now the people (as I have
heard them my self complain) harkening to the Minister reading the Scriptures
in English, and understanding the meaning thereof as much as if they were readd
in greek, they spend the little time which they abide in the Church rather in
wondering at such strange matters, then in private devotion and prayer. Yea by
that external noise of the English Service familiar to their ears, and
strange to their understanding, they are forced to harken to that which they
attain not, and remain distracted from that which they would do. But in the
old Latin Service when the priest said his Confiteor, all the Parish woule
knele down and lift up their hearts to God with him. Likewise somewhat before
the Sacring, when the priest speaking more alowde, began to say Per omnia
secula seculorum, and that which follows, the whole Parish would stand up,
and lift up their hearts also to God with the priest, deuoutely attending the
presence of their Maker in those most Holy and Dreadful Mysteries. Neither was
there any so ignorant in all the parish which did not at that time lift up his
heart to God with the Priest, though he understood no one word that the Priest
said. For they came then to the Service to pray unto allmighty God: They came
to Sermons to learn and to be instructed. In this devotion many a thousand of
englishmen, though they understood no one word of the Priest, have yielded
their souls to Cod and attained to the bliss everlasting, these nine hundred
years and upward, all which time the English Church has been Christened and
has had the Church Service only in the latin tongue. Thus much of the meaning
of Justinians Constitution, of the which M. Jewel for all his Reply can not
yet pick out his Vulgar Service. But now it shall farther appear, that though
that Constitution had been made of such Countres, where the people understood
the Service, yet it was no general Constitution nor touched not the latin
Church, as you have heard in the words of D. Harding before alleged, upon
the which M. Jewel though him self to have a good occasion to note a Couple
of Untruths. His Note in the Margin you have heard before. Now he prosecuteth
it in his text, and says.

This law took place only in Constantinople, The 165. Untruth as shall
appear. Stapleto^.
and not in the Church of Rome. And so he coucheth two manifest Untruths
together in one sentence.

First M. Jewel alleges not the words of D. Harding truly. D. Har. says,
Justinian ordained thus for the Greek Church only, and to that only it is to
be referred. Now Constantinople is but a part of the greek Church. M. Jewel
therefore after his manner, has restrained much the words of D. Harding,
thereby to make the Untruth more apparent, and the matter more odious. But
now M. Jewel: How prove you this to be Untrue. Thus he flourishes.





Almanie and Germany, etc.

Justinian does no where write him self Emperor of Rome. The 166. Untruth
Justinian writes not him self Emperor of Rome. In prefat. in lib. Novel.
Procopius lib. 3. Blondus dec. 1. li. 8. Joan. Fab. and ^oa. de P^a. Blood. li.
7. Les Annals de France. Gagn. li. 2. Gagn. li. 1.
And it is evident by the stories he had in Italy (as Contius notes) But
dubium Imperium, a doubteful and not settled Empiere. It is known that the
Gotthes then possessed Italy, that Belisarius the Captain of Justinian
ouerthrewe them in often battles, but did not yet utterly extinguish them.
And the first depute of the Greek Emperor at Rauenna in Italy, ^^lled
Exarchus, was in the time of Justinius successor to (...) Justinian. Neither
was Justinian Emperor of France. For though he be called Francicus, yet that
was not (as Blondus seems to say) of that we call now France, but of a
part of Almanie so called, as diverse other do write. And certain it is by the
Chronicles of France, and other, that in the time of Justinians Empire,
Chilperic and Clotarius were kings of France, succeding to Clouis who one
hundred years before the Empire of Justinian in the time of Theodosius the
second occupied the realm of France. Sense which time France was never
subject to the Empire, more then other realms were.

The.167. Untruth For not I^stinian ^eposed them but the wicked Empress by
her Captain Bel^s^rius viol^ntly banished them. Tom 2. Conciliorum in vita
Si^ue^ij.
And deposed two Bishops of Rome, Syluerius and Vigilius. Whereof it may
appear he had somewhat to do in the Church of Rome.

Verily a small power would serve to bring this to pass. The Emperesse
Justinians wife being an Eutychian heretic and offended with Pope Siluerius
for not restoring Anthemius the Eutychian bishop of Constantinople, whom
Agapetus the Pope, predecessor to Siluerius had deposed, and ordered in his
place Menna, found the means by her Captain Bellisarius, who occupied and
defended Rome at that time against the Gotthes, to banishe the Pope Siluerius.
This was no great Act for such a Capitain as Bellisarius was to banishe a holy
bishop. Such Imperial despositions you use. Vigilius in like manner being
placed in the room of Siluerius by the drifte also of Belisarius at the
Commandment off the Eutychian Empress, to whom he had promised that being
Pope he would restore Anthemius, Ibidem in vita Vigilij.
whereas being made Pope in deed he would not perform his promise, nor
contaminare that holy See with the approving of any Heresy, he was by a train
brought to Constantinople and so banished. Liberatus Cap. 22
And all this was done rather by the wicked Empress then by Iustinia^, who as
Liberatus w^i^eth restored again Siluerius (though by the means of Belisarius
he was carried away again into banishment) and Vigilius also as it appears
in his life, Tom. 2. Council. in vita Vigilij.
though he died by the way in Sicilia. But what will M. Jewel conclude hereof:
Will he reason thus?

Justinians wife being an heretic expelled two godly bishops of Rome by
violence.

E^go his Constitution of pronou^cing the Service alowde, was made for the
Church of Rome?

This argument hangs very loosely. Every child may see thourough it.

Generaliter dictum, The.168. Untruth for these laws do not touch this
Constitution of Justinian.
generali^er est accipiendum. The thing that is spoken generallly, must be
taken generally. And it is commonly said. Vbi le^ non distinguit nos
distingue^e non debemus. Where the Law makes no distinction, the^e ought we
to make no distinction.

These laws M. Jewel, are as good arguments for truantes, and as fit tools
for cauillers as can possibly be devised. And you know M. Jewel, Dolosus
ve^satur in generalibus. The Wrangler walks in generals. And will you see
how many exceptions this law, generaliter dictum, admits? It must be
restrained and understood, the words which went before, or which come after:
secundum rationem expressam, Baldus. L. Si. quis seruo. Cod. de fu^tis.
vel subsequentem, vel tacit inhaerentem, it must be understood according to
the cause expressed, or following after, or secretly pertaining thereunto. These
many Conditions and twenty more, if a man would play the Lawyer, might be
alleged to restrain this general rule of M. Jewel, under the which he
thinks to cloak his error.

L. i. Generaliter. ff D. leg praestand.
And to touch some of the^ particularly, the law says. Verba generalia
secundum sui natural generaliter intelligi debent. General words must be
meaned generally according to their nature. And so do the doctors expound the
law alleged by M. Jewel. Again the law says. L. plenu^. equitj. ff. d. vsu
et habit. L. ex militari. ff D. testa. milit.

L. cum pater.. dulcis simis. ff. D. leg. 2.


Verba generalia restringuntur, secundum qualitate^ person^ru^ ad quas
referu^tur. General words are restrained according to the qualitees of the
persons unto the which they are referred. And so this law of Justinian though
the words run generally, yet it is to be restrained only to such of the Greek
Church as it was made for. Farther the law says. Verba generalia regula^tur
a sua ratione. General words are ruled by their reason or cause. And so the
reason or cause of Iustinia^s Constitution being not the understanding of the
Priests prayer, but the stirring of the people to devotion, which may and has
long time been done though the prayer be not understood vulgarly, L. filius
familias. ff. D. act. et obligat. iuncta. L. j. ff. ad Sena ^us. Maced. and L.
iuris gentiu^,. si paciscar. ff. d. pact. iuncta L. tran sigere and ibi. glo.
de transact.
it makes nothing for M. Jewels Vulgar Service. Lex simpliciter and
indistincte loquens debet distingui secundum alias leges specialiter and
distinct loquentes. The law speaking plainly and without any distinction,
must yet be distinguished according to other laws speaking specially and
distinctly. So certain it is that M. Jewel has alleged. Where the law does
not distinguish, we must not distinguish. And therefore yet again the law
says, Lex generaliter and indistincte loquens non refertur ad casus
specialiter notatos. The law that speaks generally and indistinctly, is not
referred to cases specially noted. And to show briefly what a fickle and feeble
ground M. Jewel has laid to build his wrong construction of Justinians
Constitution upon notwithstanding his general rules, L. sanctio degu^. ff. de
poenis. L. doli clausula. ff. de stipulat. L. j. quod ait. ff. ne quid in loc.
sacr.
the law expressly says. Verba quantumcunque generalia ad consonum
int^llectum restringuntur. Words be they never so general are restrained to a
convenient understanding. By all which laws it appears that although
general words by their own nature be general, as it is proved in M.
Iewelles law, yet circunstaunces do quite alter, order, and dispose the sense
thereof. And thus the general words of a law are not unlike to a piece of
clothe not yet cut out to make any garment. Which by circunstances being
framed to some special thing, do then stand well and rightly for that
special thing. Otherwise it would happen which the law says. Plerumque
dum proprietas v^rborum attenditur, sensus veritatis amittitur. C. propterea
ex. de verb. signi.
Oftentimes while we stick to the propriete of the words, we lose the
understanding of the Truth. These rules therefore of M. Jewel, make no
argument to prove that Justinians constitution is general to all the World,
but is only a smothering smoke to dasell the light of the Truth, because in
deed (as M. Jewel has said him self) Dolosus versatur in generalibus. page
262.
The deceitefull and wrangler walks in generalles.

To come now more particularly to this Constitution off Justinian, the law
gives us yet an other Circunstance to lighten this matter more, and that is
this. The law says. L. si vno ff. locati.
Verba intelligi debent secundum subiectam materiam. Words are to be
understood according to the matter proposed. And in an other place it
speaks more expressly, saying of words even generally spoken. Generalia
verba non extenduntur ad non cogitata, L. Empto.. Lucius et ibi Bart. ff. de
pact.
sed ad id tantum de quo agitur. General words are not extended to that which
was never intended, but only to the matter whereof it is treated. And so
Justinian making this Constitution for the greek Church, though he spoke
generally, yet his words are to be drawn only to that which was of him
intended, which was only the greek Church, as it shall anon appear. As for
example. If a law were made: Whosoever draws blood with in the Court gates,
shall be hanged. These general words generally taken (according to the
wisdom of M. Jewel) will hang the poticary of surgyan that lets blood by
the Rules off his Art to some Noble man lying sick in the Court: In like
manner a general pardon given by the Clemency of the Prince, shall acquitte
traitors, by the wisdom of M. Jewel, though yet the Prince intended not
so. But as in both these laws, the general words are to be restrained to
the intent of the law maker, which is understood, either by the Common
manner of speech used in such laws (as in the Case of general pardons) or by
the persons intended in the law, as in the first Ca^e, where poticaries and
surgians were not meaned lettinge blood by their Art, even so in the law of
Justinian, though his words run generally, yet they are not therefore
generally to be taken. Again there is in the Constitution of Justinian a
Circunstaunce secretly included, which declares the law not to be so
general, as to extend to the Roman Empire. In the end of the Constitution
Commission is given to the Officier of Constantinople, Vt per prothemata in
consuetis locis R^giae Ciuitatis affixa in cognitionem omnium perdu^ere
festinet, In Authe^. Constable. 137
and manis^sta facere omnibus qui prouincijs praesunt. That by proclamations
set up in the accustomed places of Constantinople the law should be
published, and notise be given to all that gouuerne the provinces. Here the
Officer of Constantinople is appointed to publishe this Constitution. Now
would the Romans take notise of him, who had as high Officers to publish
such matters, as any was in Constantinople? And therefore Justinian in his most
general Constitutions when he will have them to extend to Rome, makes
express mention of Rome by name. As when he says. Et hoc non solum in veteri
Roma, vel in hac Regia Ciuitate sed in omni terra vbicunque Christianorum nomen
colitur, obtinere sancimus. This law we will to take place not only in old
Rome, Cod de Episc. and cle. L Generaliter.
or in this Imperial City of Constantinople, but also in in all the world,
where so ever the name of Christians is had in honor. Rome therefore in this
Constitution of M. Jewel, being not expressed, it seems by the law to be
omitted. For the law says. L. Item apud.. h^c edictum. ff. d. iniurijs.
Ea quae notabiliter fiunt nisi specialiter notentur, videntur quasi neglecta.
Such things as are notably done, unless they be specially noted, they seem
to be as though it were neglected. And thus it appears, notwithstanding the
general words of the Constitution, and the general rules alleged by M.
Jewel, not only that therefore the Constitution is not necessarely to be
generally taken, but also by the Circunstaunce of the law yt is gathered, that
it ought not generallye to be extended to Rome, or to the Empire thereof. If we
listed in other differences and Circunstances to use the advice of the lawyers,
many more reasons might be brought for this purpose, as the learned in the law
do know right well. But these few many suffice to declare that M. Iewelles
General laws can nothing help to prove this Constitution to be General.
Now let us consider whether in the residewe he bring any better laws.

The.169. Vnt^uthe For D. Hard. said not that O^^ly this law took no place,
etc.
or what witness more then his own that this only Law took no place in the
Church off Rome?

Forsothe he brought you a right good reason in his text, which you M. Jewel
thought good to dissemble utterly. For thus D. Harding said. As that
Constitution pertained to the gr^kes and not to the Latins, so was it not
found in the Latin book^s, vntell Gregorius Haloander of G^rmany of late years
translated the place. This is one reeson M. Jewel why this Constitution
appertains not to the Latin Church. That is. Because it has been only in
Greek and not translated into Latin until now of late years. For if it had
been made for the Latin Church, no doubt but it should have been translated
into Latin as the other Nouelles were even from the time of S. Gregorye
hitherto: xi. q. i. C. 35. Itemin Decretal. tit. de test. cap. 1. and lib. 11.
epist. 54. Contius in prefat. in lib. Novel.
as it appears by certain of these Nouel Constitutions alleged in Latin
after the old translation by S. Gregorye. And this reason also touched by D.
Harding, is noted before of Contius: who giving a reason why many of these
Novel Constitutions have hitherto lacked in the Common Latin translation,
says. Cur autem multae deperierint, in Causa haec sunt. Erant inter has leges
permultae constitutiones (...) and locales, quarum nullus fere vsus esse visus
est: illis praesertim Longobardis plus aequo Musas and humaniores literas
abhorrentibus, nihilque quod non (...) conduceret, magni facientibus. Why many
of the Novel Constitutions have perished, these are the Causes. There were
among these laws many Constitutions private, and proper to certain places,
whereof there seemed to be no use at all, specially to those Longobardes (who
upon the end of Justinians Empire possessed Italy) me^ abhorring from all good
lerning, and regarding nothing that made not for the penny. This is one cause,
why this law of Justinian took no place in the Church of Rome. And this
reason was so good, that you M. Jewel, in all your Reply would never come
nere it. But when the place came that you should have awnswered it, you turn
the Readers mind an other way, telling him that D. Harding seemed to touch
Gregorius Haloander with corruption of these laws, page 173.
and so you enter to defend him, whom no man found fault with, Only D.
Harding said.

As that Constitution perteined to the greeks, and not to the Latins, so was
it not found in the Latin books, until Gregorius Haioander of Germany off
late years translated the place.

At these words you startle and wince, as feeling perhaps some sore touched,
which you were loathe any man should come nere. And therefore you say.



What need so much a do M. Jewel, if there were not some suspicion in the
matter? Let every indifferent Reader Judge, whether, the words of D. Harding
do charge Haloander with any such matter as you have imagined. But the verse of
Cato will allwaies be true. Conscius ipse sibi de se putat omnia dici. The
guilty conscience thinks all is spoken of him self. You say: Haloander was
a faithefull translatour, and added nothing more then he found in the
Original. Yet Contius a learned lawyer, calls this translation of Haloander,
In praefat. in lib. Novel.
A quodam priuato homine propria authoritate contaminatam translationem, A
corrupted translation set forth by a private man by private authorite. And
again he says of it. Dum vitat barbariem incidit plaerumque in prauam
affectationem. While he coueteth to be Eloquent, he falls oftentimes in to a
corrupted affectation. This is the faithefull translation which M. Jewel so
much commends, and that beside all purpose. For this being brought in of D.
Harding, as a reason why that Constitution remaining all this while until late
years in the greek tongue and not translated in to Latin, as the other Novel
Constitutions were, should appertain to the greek Church and not the Latin,
M. Jewel to the reason and to the matter answers nothing, but seeks
occasion to procure envy to his adversary, charging him with that which he
neither said nor intended, which yet other learned men have both said and
written. Done truly like a shifting Rhetorician, but not like a true dealing
divine.

The 170. Untruth For many (...) them were (...) and ^ocales, proper to
certain places.
Certainly the rest of the same Novel Constitutions were made not only for
Constantinople, or for Rome, but also for the whole Empire.

If all the rest were so made, then were it very probable that this
Constitution should also be so made. But if some only were general, some other
were not, then this argument proves nothing. For as well may this
Constitution be of that sort which are not general, as of the other sort
which are general. Now M. Jewel speaks indefinitly, and doubtefully, as
not knowing him self what to pronounce herein. The truth is, some of these
Novel Constitutions were general and some were not, as it has been before
declared out of Contius, and as it shall by that which follows out of M.
Jewel farther appear.

The.171. Untruth For in the same ^itle which is Dediuer ^s Ecclesias^i.
capit. the words alleged are not ^ou^d.
And the Emperor Justinian in the same Title says thus, What so ever
things, touching this matter, were needful ^or this Imperial City off
Constantinople, we have comprised it in a special law ffor the same.

By this it appears that all the Novel Constitutions are not general. But
some made especially for Constantinople. But what leads M. Jewel to think
that this Constitution should be therefore general? He saw there was small
force in these words: and therefore he follows, and says.

In Authe^. Col. 1 vt def ^it. numerus ^^eri
(...).

It is true M. Jewel. He calls such a law a general law. But what law
meaned he? Meaned he this Constitution whereof we now treat? You perhaps would
have it so. But Contius a better lawyer then you are M. Jewel, notes that the
same Constitution was made. In lege Graeca de ordinatione Episcoporum quae non
exiat. In a Greek law touching the ordaining of Bishops, which is not
extant. Contius i^ marg. D. auth. vt def. etc.
Whereby it is evident, that the Constitution which we now treat of, by the
judgment of Contius is not that general law which the Emperor meaned. For
the Constitution which we now trete of was translated of Contius him self,
out of Greek into Latin. Again this Constitution of Justinian, In Authe^.
Constable. 137
which we now treat of, though it speak in deed at large, (...), etc. Of the
ordaining of bishops, yet it has no one word, Authent. Col. 1. vt def. sunt
numer. cler.
de ordinatione Mulierum Diaconissarum, of the ordayning and admitting of
Nonnes (for such were the Diaconissae, which the law speaks of) such as the
general law meaned by Justinian expressly treats of. For so the words do
report. Eo.. in alijs.
De ordinatione venerabilium Episcoporum, and reuerendissimorum clericorum, nec
non Mulierum Diaconissarum. We have enacted in general law touching the
Ordering of the Reverent bishops, and clerks, and also of Nonnes. This
Constitution therefore of Justinian though it concern the clergy, yet is it
not that other general law concerning both the clergy and Nonnes. This
therefore can nothing help M. Jewel, unless he mind to reason thus.
Justinian enacted by a general and a Common law concerning the clergy and
Nonnes, which is not extant. M. Iewelles Argument.
Ergo in this Constitution which is extant and of the clergy only, not off
Nonnes he enacted also by a general and Common law. This argument proceeds
very weakly. Unless Master Jewel look better to it, I trow it will prove
but a childish argument. Yet he limpeth forth as well as he may, and says.

Cod. de Epis e^ cler. General^ter.
he has these words. Et hoc non solum, and caet. This Law we will have to
take place, not only in the City off old Rome, or in this Imperial City off
Constantinople, but also in all the world, where so ever the name off
Christians is had in honor.

Such things as are notably done, L. Item apud.. h^c ^dictum ff.
unless they be specially noted, they seem to be as though it were neglected.
The special mentioning therefore of Rome in other laws (which of no other
province or Country is used) is an evident argument, that this law making no
mention of Rome, is not extended to Rome at all. As for example. Because in
some laws and certain statutes of our Country, the free Denyses and
sometimes other strangers not Denyses are especially comprysed, and mentioned,
it is an undoubted argument, that other laws wherein they are not so
mentioned, do not extend to such persons. And thus far M. Jewel has
pleaded the law. Wherein if he have missed the Cuishin, no marvel: his
Counsel perhaps had as much good law, as him self has good Divinity. Verily
his law has not yet been so weak about this matter, but his Diuinitye
which follows, is much more weaker. For thus he proceeds.



that Constitution of Justinian to be general, and to extend it self to Rome.

De Ieiu^. 7. me^s^ Sermon. 6. De Sacra. lib. 4. ca. 5 The.172. Untruth For it
appears not by any of these Fathers that the Church of Rome was subject to
this law.
and also by Saint Ambrose bisshoppe of Millain and other holy Fathers it
appears otherwise.

Behold good Readers the gross ignorance of M. Jewel. He will prove by Leo
and Saint Ambrose, that the Constitution of Justinian took place in the Church
of Rome. Now understand good readers, that Justinian was Emperor in the
year of our Lord five hundred and thirty. Leo was bishop of Rome in the
year of our Lord four hundred and forty, and S. Ambrose was bishop of
Millain threscore years before Leo. Thus by M. Iewelles wisdom the
Constitution off Justinian took place in the Church of Rome a hundred years
and more before it was made. Unless he will say that Leo and S. Ambrose wrote
of Justinians Constitution by the Sprit of prophecye. Ah M. Jewel. Remember
your own poetry. Vide Henr. Pantaleon^ in Chronograph. Ecclesia.
Nonsa^i co^mode diu^sa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. And what were they
likely to say of this Constitution of Justinian? M. I^well did well to bring
them forth dumb. Of like their words would have stood him but in small
stead. Howbeit seeing he has so diligently quoted them in the margin (for the
which quotation to fournish up the Margin I think they were rather alleged
then for any weight in their words to M. Iewelles purpose) I will lay the
words forth to the Reader, and leave it to his Judgment, how much they
touch either Justinians Constiturion, or M. Iewelles Vulgar Service. The
words of Leo are. Hoc ore sumitur, quod fide creditur, Leo de Iei^^io. 7.
men's. sermon. 6. fere in fine.
and frustra ab illis Amen respondetur, a quibus contraid quod accipitur
disputatur. That is received by the mouth (he speaks off the blessed
Sacrament) which is believed by Faith: and they do answer Amen in vain, who
dispute against that which they do receive. The words of S. Ambrose are.
Dicit tibi Sacerdos, Corpus Christi: Ambros. de sacram. lib. 4. cap. 5.
and tu dicis, Amen. Hoc est, verum. Quod confitetur lingua, teneat affectus.
The Priest says unto thee. The Body off Christ. And thou say: Amen, that
is, It is true. That which thy toungue confesses, let thy affection keep.
These be the words of Leo and Saint Ambrose, by the which M. Jewel will
prove that Justinians Constitution made a hundred years after took place in
Rome. Has not M. Jewel (trow ye) showed him self herein a trim Divine?
Thinks M. Jewel that wheresoever he finds the word, Amen, in the
Doctors, straightwayes he has found his Vulgar Service? Or thinks he that
because the people confessed the Real presence of Christ's Body in the
Sacrament, answering Amen to the Priest, and confessing it to be true that the
Priest said, therefore the people had their Service in the Vulgar toungue? By
such arguments M. Jewel may make his brethern believe that to this day in
these Countres here, we have also the Service in the vulgar toungue because in
the Mass books here, he may read the like. M. Iewelles Argument.
Now to lay forth brefely M. Iewelles argument, upon these places thus he
reasons.

S. Ambrose about the year of our Lord three hundred and four score, and Leo
about the year four hundred and forty do witness the people answered Amen
to the Priest.

Ergo the Constitution of Justinian made about the year five hundred and
four^y of the speaking alowde of the Priest, or (as M. Jewel would have it
to seem) off the Vulgar Service took place in the Church of Rome.

If such arguments may serve, I grant M. Jewel has Replied well. And
then if M. Jewel had come before his Father, he might have married his Mother.
Now let us consider the other holy Fathers which M. Jewel alleges to say
the like.

In psalm. 45
S. Augustine says of the Church of Rome. Vnum psalmum cantamus. Vnum Amen
respondemus. We singe one psalm, and we awnswer one Amen. The.173. Untruth
For S. Augustine said not those words of the Church of Rome.


Psalm. 54
S. Augustine said not those words of the Church off Rome, more then of any
other Church. Nay he speaks it properly of the Africanes, and of the
Donatistes, which had separated them selves from the unite of Christ's Church
in Afrike. For expounding the words of the psalm, Veniat mors super illos,
descendant in infernum viuentes. Let death come upon them, and let them
descend into hell alive, making the Catholic to speak to the Donatiste, thus
he writes. Quid pateris frater etc. What ayle you Brother? We are brethern.
August. in Psalm. 54.
We call upon one God. We believe in one Christ. We hear one gospel. We singe
one psalm. We answer one, Amen. We sound out one Halleluia. We celebrat
one Easter. Why then are you without (the Church) and I within? These are
the words of S. Augustine both that go before, and that follow the words of
M. Jewel alleged. By all the which we see he spoke those words especially
of the Africanes in his own Country, and touched therein Rome, no more then
any other Country. Yet says M. Jewel. S, Augustine says of the Church of
Rome. Thus he has taken such a custom to lie, that he cares not what he
utter. Again what is there here touching the Constitution of Justinian? We
singe at this day in all Christendom (all that remanye in the Catholic
faith) one psalm. We answer, one Amen. We sound out one Halleluia. And so
forth. What is this to M. Iewelles Vulgar Service, which upon Justinians
Constitution he would so feign build? Last of all S. Augustine living in the
time of S. Ambrose a full hundred years before Justinians Constitution was
made, how can he possibly witness any thing for that law to take place in
Rome? Where was M. Iewelles wit and remembrance when he wrote this? Will he
ever forgett him self, like to Dauus? Let us proceed and see whether his next
allegation be any better.

The 174. Untruth in falsifiing the words of S. Hierom as shall appear. Tom.
2. and 7. contra Julian. li. 2.
S. Hierom says. Even in Rome, at the end of the prayer, the people so
sounded out Amen, as if it had been a thunderclappe.

This touches Rome in deed, and therefore is so much better then the other.
But when lived S. Hierom M. Jewel? Lived he not in the time of S. Ambrose and
of S. Augustine more then a hundred years before Justinian was Emperor? Are
there not letters extant between him and S. Austen? And does not S. Augustine
allege his writings against the Pelagians? What a forgetful Dauus is M.
Jewel? He has alleged us here four Doctors to prove that Justinians
Constitution took place in Rome, who all were dead and buried before Justinian
was borne. It is now sense Justinian made that Constitution a full thousand
years. The singular folly of M. Jewel.
And in all this time among so many writers M. Jewel which spares none, be
he never so base, which alleges scholemen, gloses, lawyers of al ages, with
whom, Nicolaus de lyra, Thomas of Aquine, Durandus, Eckius, Hugo Cardinalis,
John Billet, Cusanus, Scotus, Innocentius the third, and all other late
writers are current, he can yet among them all find not one in the space of a
thousand years to testify that Justinians Constitution touched the Church of
Rome, but he is feign to run to Leo, to S. Augustine, S. Ambrose and S.
Hierome and to make them speak a good word for him that the law of Justinian
took place in Rome, who all as I said lived and died long before that
Constitution was made. Wherein he deals as if a man to prove the meaning of a
law made in Queen Mary's days would allege the Judgment of bishopp Warrham
that dyed in king Henry the eightes days. Verelye this was a mighty
Constitution that took place in Rome a hundred years before it was made.

Touching the place of S. Hierom, his whole words are these. Vbi alibi tanto
studio and frequentia, ad ecclesias and ad martyrum s^pulchra concurritur? Vbi
sic ad similitudinem coelestis tonitrui, Amen reboat, and vacua idolorum templa
quatiuntur? Non quod aliam habent Romani fidem, nisi hant quam omnes Christi
Ecclesiae: In proaemio li. 2. Comment. in epist. ad Gal.
sed quod deuotie in eis mayor sit, and simplicitas ad credendum. Where else are
the Churches, and the Sepulchers of Martirs with so fervent devotion and with
so great company resorted unto? Where does Ame^ give so loud a sound like the
thunderclappe out of the air, so as the temples emptied of Idols do shake
with it? Not because the Romans have any other faith, then that which all the
Churches of Christ have, but because there is in them a greater devotion, and
simplicite to believe. Thus far S. Hierom. His intent in this place was to
show that the faith of the Romans which the Apostle S. Paul commended,
remained still in the same fervor and zele, as it did from the beginning. For
proof whereof he brings in their frequenting of Martyrs toumes. How like you
that devotion M. Jewel? Then also their crying out Amen so loud and so thick
in the Church, that he compares it to the noise of a thunderclappe. Such a
noise I have heard in the Churches of France many times my self, and also at
Rome in the Lent time. Yet I never heard there or otherwhere the Vulgar
Service. If the crying out of Amen may either prouethe Vulgar Service or the
Constitution of Justinian to be general and to extend to Rome, then M. Jewel
has talked to the matter. If neither of these twain, then what has he done
but trifled and deluded the ignorant Reader, with idle allegations, and show
of lerning?

To further the matter, M. Jewel has the added to the words of S. Hierome,
these words: At the end of the prayer. For those words are not to be found
in S. Hierom. Such shifting and toyling is made to prove a Vulgar Service out
of Justinian, and yet it will not be. Let us proceed.

Again, if this Constitution served only for the Greek Church, and only the
priests there spoke alowde, and the others of the Latin Church spoke in
silence, The.175. Untruth. For it is not denied that the Latin Church spoke
aloude, at the Common prayers. The.176. Untruth For it is not supposed by D.
Hard. that S. August. in Afrike prayed in silence, but that in Rome the
Consecration was in silence.
how then does M. Harding expound this law by S. Augustine, who as he
supposes did the contrary, and was never subject unto that law? Or how can
he make contrarietes agree together? Has he so soon forgotte him self? Or
will he expou^de speaking by silence, or singing out, by whispering?

The very words of D. Harding being laid forth will soon answer all this
wondering of M. Jewel. His words in the text are these. And thus he ordained
for the greek Church only, and thereto only it is to be referred, for that
some thought the Sacrifice should be celebrated rather with silence, after the
manner of the Church of Rome, specially at the Consecration. In these words D.
Harding reports the manner of the Church of Rome specially at the
Consecration time to have been, to speak in silence, where as the greeks
uttered those words allwaies alowde. But the agreing of S. Augustins words
with the meaning of Justinian is spoken of the Church of Afrike not of the
Church of Rome. And again of uttering the words before the Consecration, as
Sursum corda and such like (as by the Conference of S. Cyprian alleged by M.
Jewel it appears) not of the very Canon of the Mass which in the Latin
Church has ever secretly been pronounced. Thirdly the agreing is this, that
neither Justinian nor S. Augustine, do speak any thing for the Vulgar
Service, but only for the loud speaking of the priest, which though it were
used in Afrike, yet will it not follow that it was used in Rome. Last of all
though we granted that both Afrike and also the Church of Rome used such
loud speaking of the priest at the Common Service in Saint Augustins time, yet
it will hardly follow that the same was done by the force of Justinians
Constitution made a full hundred years after, or that the Church of Rome
should therefore be subject to that the law made so many years after. The
expounding therefore of the sense and meaning of Justinians Constitution by
the words of Saint Augustine bredeth no Contradiction in D. Hardinges
Collection, unless M. Jewel will have this Argument to stand for good.

The Priests in Afrike spoke alowde in S. Augustins time according to the
meaning of Justinians Constitution, M. Iewelles Argument.


Ergo the Church of Rome a hundred years after was subject to that
Constitution.

If M. Jewel will this to go for an argument, then let him consider it
better. Else it will prove I trow but a childish argument.

The Constitutions were general. The.177 and.178. Untruths, as shall appear.
M. Harding alone says they were not general.

To conclude, Justinian said no such thing either of all the Novel
Constitutions (of the which Contius confesses many where (...), and locales,
proper and peculiar for certain places) either of this same Constitution of
which we have so long treated, which both the law proves it was not
general, and by the reason of Contius alleged, seems to be a mere particular
Constitution touching only the Greek Church. Therefore D. Hardinge not
alone, but with the law and with Contius affirms this Constitution to be not
general.

They took place in all the World. The.179 and.180^ Untruths, as shall
appearel
M. Harding alone says. They took place only in Constantinople.

In these words M. Jewel has committed two manifest Untruths. For neither
Justinian spoke those words of these Novel Constitutions of which this is
one that now is in Controversy, but he spoke those words in the Code of
other laws comprised there: Neither did D. Hardinge say that this
Constitution took place only in Constantinople, but he said, Only in the Greek
Church: of the which Constantinople is but a part.

The.181. Untruth joined with an extreme folly. Stapleto^.
S. Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, Leo, and others say. They were observed
in the Church of Rome. M. Harding alone says. They were never observed in
the Church of Rome.

Leo lived at the lest four score years, S. Ambrose, S. Augustine and S.
Hierome lived well nere two hundred years before these Novel Constitutions of
Justinian were made, and therefore they could not possibly (except it were by
Spirit of prophecy or revelation) speak any one word off or on of these
Constitutions of Justinian which were so many years after made and written.
Beside, the Words of these Doctors, as has before been declared, have no
like matter to the Vulgar Service which M. Jewel would so feign pick out of
this Co^stitution.



M. Jewel is cast in his own turn.
who were dead and buried many a score of years before the law was made, yea
before the man was borne that made the law? Howesaie you M. Jewel? Have you
not here deceived your Reader in a very plain and manifest matter? Have you
not alleged to prove that Justinians Constitution was observed in the Church
of Rome, and that the Church of Rome was subject to that law, the testimony
of four Doctors, who all were dead so many years before the law was
enacted? Can you deny that those four Doctors lived all and died (as I have
said) many a score of years before Justinian made that law? Do not all
Histories, yea Carrion, Pantaleon and your brethern of Magdeburge testify the
age of those Fathers all before Justinian the Emperor? Then by your own rule
Master Jewel, You that have deceived your Reader in so plain a matter, let
him not trust you in doubtefull matters.

It is written of an Envious man, that to make his neighbor to lose one eye, he
was content him self to lose both. Verily M. Jewel you have even in such
sort dealed here. So that you might by some means bring doctor Harding out
of some credit, you have (as it may seem) of purpo^e made a plain Exception
against your own Credit for ever. Pate^e leg^m qua^ ipse tuleris.

It appears by Arnobius upon the Psalms, by Epiphanius writing against
Heresies, and by S. Augustine in his books, De Doctrina Christiana, that by
account off Antiquitye there were.72. Toungues in the World. Psalm. 104
Haeres. 39 in Tusc. q.
Cicero says, that they be in number infinite. Off them all (.78.) neither M.
Iuell, nor any one off his side, is able to show, that the public Service of
the Church in any Nation, was ever for space of six hundred years after Christ,
in any other then in the Greek and Latin.

The.182 Untruth Slanderous.
For it shall appear that we are able to show manifest Examples to the
contrary.

Now is the time and place come that M. Jewel will acquit him self of his
Promise, made now Page. ^55 157.159. and.169.
the fifth time in this Article, that he will bring forth his Examples of such
Countres that have had their Church Service in a Vulgar known tongue beside
Greek and Latin for the space of the first six hundred years after Christ. But
mark here diligently good Reader, and for the better understanding of M.
Iewelles proufes, Fol. 61. b.
turn back to the.69. Untruth, and remember that his Promise in that place
is, not only to bring Examples of the Church Service in some other toungue
beside the Greek and Latin, (which is proper to this Untruth here noted) but
also to bring Examples of sundry Nations of the East Church, namely of the
lesser Asia, which had not their Service in the Greek tongue. For that before
was by M. Jewel auoutched in the.69. Untruth. That he must prove in this
Article. Or else his Assertion is overthrown. As thou may (good Reader)
clearly perceive if thou turn back to that we have said upon the.69. and
the.72. Untruths. But let us now hear what M. Jewel says, Fol. 61. b. and
fol. 66. a.
and how manifest Examples he can bring, that sundry Nations of the East
Church, namely of Asia the less, have had their Church Service in the vulgar
tongue beside Greek and Latin for the space of the first.600. years after
Christ.

The.183. Untruth For D. Harding alters not the case, but follows it.
Stapleton
M. Harding being required by me to show any one example that the people had
their Common Service in a strange toungue, and as it appears, not able to
show any, he alters conningly the whole case, and wills me to show.

No M. Jewel D. Harding wills not to you show that any Country had their
Service in their Vulgar tongue, which you yet affirm all the World had, and
which he having Tradition with him for the Learned tongue, might more reasonably
require you to show an Example of your Vulgar tongue, then you require him for
the Learned, having an universal Tradition of the^e 900. years by your own
confession against you, this I say D. Harding requires not of you, but (and
Mark well good Ch^istian Reader) whereas D. Hardinge has proved abundantly
that in the East or Greek Church, many Christened Nations understand not the
Greek, and in the West or Latin Church many Christened countres also
understood not the latin, he affirming that all the Greek Church had only the
Greek Service, and all the latin Church only the Latin Service (whereof it
follows that many countres had their Service in a tongue which they understood
not) requires you M. Jewel if you deny it, to give him some instaunce or
Exception of any one Country which had the public Service any otherwise then
in the Greek or Latin toungue. This is no Alteration of the Case Master
Jewel, but a right approved way of Reasoninge. For, to disprove an Universal
Affirmatyue, it behooves by Order of Schools to require an Instaunce in the
particular. Therefore you have no cause to complain and to say.

The.184. Untruth for by order of all Schools ^ou are forced to give an
Instance, denying the universal.
yet I am well content to yield to his request, both for the goodness and
pregnancie of the cause, and also specially, good Christen Reader, for the
better contentation of thy mind, not doubting, but of thee self, thou will be
able to find some distrust, and want in M. Hardinges side. Who
notwithstanding so many words, and so great vauntes yet is able to show
nothing.

On Gods name. Let M. Iewelles proufes try what weakness there is in D.
Hardinges side, and what assurance in his own Vaunting Challenge. He says.

The Indians had their Serui^e in the Indian tongue.

But when, where, and how M. Jewel? The 185. ^^truthe in mangling the wor^es
of ^ckius.
Do you remember the state of the question? See good Reader that M. Jewel
deceive thee not. He must prove that within the first 600. years in all the
East or West Church any other Service was used beside the Greek and Latin. And
behold forth comes Eckius a man living in our days, which tells us of
certain Indians which at this present have the Service in their Vulgar tongue.
But I will give thee good Reader the whole words of Eckius, whereof M. Jewel
has snatched a piece to serve his turn, concealing from thee the whole
circumstance both of time and of place, whereby the question is limited. The
words of Eckius are these. Non negamus Indis Australibus permissum, vt in
lingua sua rem diuina^ faciant, quod clerus eorum hodie ^bseruat, vt vidimus
and audiuimus ipsi. We confess it is permitted to the South Indians to have
their Service in their own tongue. Which their clergy observes to this
day, as we have our selves both seen and heard. In these words mark good
Reader three conditions, whereby M. Iewelles assertion is utterly overthrown.

M. Jewels Argument
The Indians of the South parts at this day have their Service in the Vulgar
tongue.

Ergo Sundry Nations of the East and West Church had their Service in a like
manner a thousand years ago.

The.186 Untruth For Durandus speaks not one word of Jews. De diuinis
officijs lib. 4. cap. 1.
Durandus says. The Jews that were Christened had their Service in the Hebrew
tongue.

Durandus says. In primitiua Ecclesia diuina mysteria Hebraice celebrabantur.
The divine mysteries were celebrated in the primitive Church in the Hebrewe
tongue. But neither he names the Jews that were Christened, neither speaks
of the Church Service: Both which Master Jewel affirms him to say.
proufes. For of the Service in some Vulgar tongue the question is, not of the
learned Hebrewe tongue, which of the common Jews them selves how little in
Christ's time it was understood, it appears by their well understanding of
Christ's words upon the Cross, Eli Eli lamasabathani: My God, My God, why
have thou forsaken me. For they thought (as the gospel witnesses) that
Christ had called upon Elias etc. Durandus immediately upon the words before
alleged, says. Sed tempore Adriani primi Imperatoris graece in orientali
ecclesia graecorum celebrari caeperunt. But in the time of Adrian the first
Emperor of that name (which was little more then a hundred years after
Christ) the mysteries began to be celebrated in greek in the East Church of
the greeks. This order of Service continewed, and of such is the question.



No truly. And so neither of your Examples serves your turn. For the one is
not within the first 600. years, but lacks more then 900. thereof, the other
is of no Vulgar tongue, nor of no Continewed public Service. So neither of
them is of any nation in the Latin or greek Church, but the one off South
Indians, the other of Jews, that I pity you to have sought so far and yet
missed of your purpose.

Nicolaus Lyra, and Thomas of Aquine say. The Common Service in the primitive
Church was in the Common Vulgar tongue.

The 187. Untruth for Thomas of Aquine says it with a Peradventure, which
word M. Jewel. has left out. In 1. Cor. 14.
It goes hard with M. Jewel when he brings such doctors. He was wont to
call them, the Black Guard. Now they are Sad witnesses and men of
Authorite. And yet God wot, they make as much for him, as does a Queste for
the Guilty. The words of S. Thomas are these. Sed quare non dantur
benedictiones in Vulgari, vt intelligantur a populo and co^forment se magis
eis? Dicendum est quod hoc forte fuit in Ecclesia primitiua, sed postquam
fideles instructi sunt, and sciunt quae audiunt in Communi officio, fiunt
benedictiones in Latino. Why are not the Benedictions (which S. Paul speaks
of) made now in the Vulguar tongue, that they may be understood of the
people, and they comforme them selves thereunto? I answer that in the
primitive Church Peradventure, it was so. But after that the faithefull people
were ones instructed, and do know such things as they heard in the Common
Service, the Benedictions are made in Latin. Lo what a witness M. Jewel has
brought for him self. He avouches not the matter, but says. Peradventure it
was so. And then if it were so, he gives a reason of it, which is: the
Necessary Instruction off the people at their first Receiving of the faith:
whereas now the faith being so long Rooted in the hearts of men, and the
People thouroughly instructed in all matters concerning their salvation,
neither is it necessary that they understand all things, neither do they
missedoubt of any thing which the Priest says, but answers unto all Amen,
and gives their consent to his prayers without all scruple or curiosite to
know what he says. What does all this help M. Iewelles Vulguar Service?
Unless he will form his reasons thus.

M. Iewelles Argu^ent.
The people is already sufficiently instructed.

Ergo they must have all t^inges in their vulgar language.

Or thus.

The prayers be made in Latin.

Ergo the people must understand them.

Verily these are very Vulgar Arguments. But now to his other doctor
Nicolaus Lyra, His words are these. In primitiua Ecclesia Benedictiones and
caetera communia fiebant in vulgari. Sed postquam populus multiplicatus fuit,
In 1. ad Cor. 14.
and consueuit se conformare Ministris Ecclesiae, vtpote stando quando dicitur
Euangelium etc. Fiunt in Latino in Ecclesia Latina. Et sufficit quod clericus
respondeat pro toto populo. In the primitive Church the Benedictions and other
common things were done in the Vulgar. But after that the Christian people
multiplied, and was ones accustomed to conform the^ selves to the Ministers of
the Church, as in standing when the Gospel is read, and so forth, things
are done in Latin in the Latin Church. And it suffiseth that the clarke do
answer for all the people. Nicolaus Lyra as in many other places, so here also
follows S. Thomas. And that which he affirmed with a peradventure, this man
puts out of peradventure. Yet all this proves not it was in any other
language beside the Greek and Latin. For at that time the primitive Church
wrote all in Greek or Latin as it appears by the Scriptures of the new
testaments and by the Fathers writings: Which are al together in Greek or
Latin, and none at al in any other vulgar toungue. Again the Greek and the
Latin were at that time and certain hundred years after vulgar tounges to
many Nations, as it is evident and undoubted to the learned. Therefore this
doctor helps the matter no more then the other did. Unless M. Jewel think
this reason good.

The Latin and the Greek tounges were in the primitive Church Vulgar tounges.
M. Iewelles Argument.


Ergo the Service was neither in Latin nor Greek.

If he conclude not thus, he concludes nothing against D. Harding. And if he
do conclude thus, you see how loosely it hangs together. Every child may
see thourough it. Yet he sets much by it, and pronounces it stoutely,
saying.

By these few it may appear, it was but a bravery, that M. Harding said.
The.188. Untruth For D. Ha^ding added ( for the space of 600. years) which
M. Iuell left out. Jewel. Stapleto^.
Neither M. Iuell nor any one of that side is able to show that the public
Service was in any other toungue then in Greek or Latin. For it is easy to be
showed, even by the Doctors of his own side.

By these few it may appear, M. Iuell has made but a simple brauerye in
this forewarde of his doctors. And if the body and rerewarde serve him no
better, he may wipe his bill and go to rouste. Let us see what follows.

But what if Doctor Harding him self have in plain words confessed the same?

But what if he have not? Then has M. Jewel lost a good argument.

The.189. Untruth joined with a slander. Stapleton
Although he have wantonly denied Christ, yet, I trow, he will not deny him
self.

He denies Christ wantonly, which forsakes his old religion that he was
baptized in, and embraces a wanton ghospel, planted by a wanton friar, yoked
with a wanton Nonne, not he which forsakes such wanton lewdenesse, to return
to his old and approved Faith.

But S. Paul (say they) requires that the people give assent, and conform
them self unto the Priest, by answering Amen to his prayer made in the
Congregation. Hereunto M. Harding answers thus. Verily in the primitive
Church this was necessary, when the Faith was a learning and therefore the
prayers were then made in a Common toungue known to the people. What can there
be more plainly spoken?

that in neither greek nor Latin, then had it ben more plainly spoken, then
had it been contrary to him self. Now it is no more then S. Thomas and
Nicolaus de Lyra said before. And therefore as we have proved before, their
sainges to make nothing for M. Jewel, so does not this of D. Hardinges
neither. As they spoke of no other vulgar toungue but of Greek and Latin which
then were Vulgar, so does here D. Harding speak of none other tongues but of
greek and and latin also, which the^ were Vulgar. What needs now all this
myrthe and triumph that M. Jewel makes, saying?

The.190 Untruth. For they stand well together. Stapleto^.
His sayings can not (190.) stand together, If he be true in one, in the
other he must needs be false.

Put up your pipes M. Jewel, and take your ease. D. Harding remembers him
self well enough. His sayings do stand well together, and both are true.

The.191. Untruth For the whole Congregation did never the Office of the
Minister.
the Common Service was not ministered by one man alone, but by the Priest and
whole Congregation altogether, as may appear by the general consent of the
old Fathers.

M. Jewel speaks fair. It is reason he be heard, and believed also if after
such smothe words, he brings us sound and substantial proufes. But if all this gaie talk wants matter, let him be known for an earnest trifler.

Clem. Alex. Strom. lib. 7. Stapleton The.192. and 193. Untruths committed in
salsifying Clemens.
In orationibus v^luti vnam vocem habent communem and vnam mentem. In the
(Common) prayers they have all as it were one voice and one mind.

M. Jewel has in these few words used two feats of his Art. He has
gelded the words of the doctor, and shifted in a word of his own, which
utterly alters the doctors mind. The whole sentence of Clemens is thus. Est
ergo quod est hic apud nos altar, terrestris congregatio eorum qui sunt
dedicati orationibus, qui veluti vnam vocem habent communem and vnam mentem.
The altar therefore which we have here (he talks of the Sacrifice of prayer)
is an earthly congregation of those, which are dedicated to prayers, which
have as though it were one voice and one mind. He talks of such as were
dedicated to prayer, of the clergy or other religious men who pray altogether
with one voice and mind, not of the people. He talks of their usual
Service, not of the Common prayer of the people. The Word (Common.) M. Jewel
has added of him self more then he found in the doctor. Now of the clergy
or religiouse men dedicated to prayer, that you may not think I feign or
fable, Clemens mencioneth in this same book, within little more then a leaf
after this place, where he says. Nonnulli certas ac definitas horas
constituunt orationi, vt tertiam, sextam, nonam. Many do appoint certain set
hours for prayer, as the third hour, the sixth hour, and the ninth howre^
But what if all this were spoken of the people, and that they all prayed with
the clergy? We know this Clemens was a preacher in Alexandria. And there the
Service was in Greek. Therefore this helps not yet M. Jewel any whit except
he mind to reason thus.

M. Iewelles Argument.
The people in Alexandria had their Common Service in Greek.

Ergo they had it in no Vulgar tongue b^side the Greek.

Such strange Conclusions become well this strange alteration of Gods Service.

Not only the Priest gives tankes to God, but also all the People, The.194
Untruth in mangling the words of Chrysostom.
And what do thou maruail to see the Priests and people in prayers talk
together.

Surely M. Jewel, no maruaill at all. But a great maruaill it is, that a
called bishopp as you be should blind Gods people, First with such patched
sentences of the holy Fathers, then with such Betle arguments as you make. For
the first, the whole words of Chrisostom are these. Again in the same
dreadful mysteries, the Priest wishes well to the people, and the people
wishes well to the Priest. For (with thy Spirit) is nothing else to say, then
this, that all that belongs to thanks giving, is common. For not only the
Priest gives thanks but also all the people. For taking first their answer,
and gathering them together that this Mystery might be done worthily and
rightly, he begins the Eucharist. And what do thou maruaill, if the
people speaks with the Priest? Whereas also with Cherubin, and other
heavenly powers, they sing those holy himnes in common. All this is but the
Accustomed answering of the people to the Priest, in the preface of the Mass,
as to this day it is used. Which will easily appear to the learned and discrete
Reader, d^ligently co^sydering the whole place. Now touching the Argument these
be M. Jewels reasons.

The people prai^th with the priest. And the priest prays in Greek.

Ergo the people had not their Service in Greek.

Understand good Reader. Chrysostom was bishopp of Constantinople a part of
the Greek Church. His Mass or Liturgy is yet extant in Greek. He prayed in
Greek, and preached in Greek. Ask M. Jewel when thou metest him next, if all
this be not true. And then if he grant it, ask how his Greek Mass can
prove the Service was not in Greek. Truly he shall have nothing to say,
unless he say that Greek is no Greek. Chrysostom is not Chrysostom. Nor
Jewel is not Jewel.

The 195. Untruth For he leaves not S. Hiero^, nor S. Basil, but alleges
the^ bot^e straightwaies for his matt^r.
Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita, with many other Fathers.

Here is brought in a whole troop of doctors in a rank. Augustine, Hierom,
Basile, Nazianzenus, Dyonisus Areopagita and many other Fathers. And who would
not be afraid to see such an army come against him? Howbeit (gentle Reader)
be of good ^heare. All this is but a Camisado. These be but visardes, they be
no faces. They are brought in like Mummers for a show, and say nothing. That
M. Jewel lacked in weight, he would needs make up in tale. But doubtelesse,
if any greater weight had been in these, then in the rest which come after, he
would never have forsaken S. Hierom. S, Augustine, S. Basil, and Nazianzenus,
to allege Isidorus, Aeneas Syluius, Innocentius tertius, and John Billet, or
(as he has already) Thomas of Aquine, Nicolaus Lyra, Durandus and Eckius.
Unless the gentleness of M. Jewel be such, that he will reserve the best
for himself, and give to his Reader the worste. Nowithstanding this one thing
I will say for M. Jewel in his behalf and for the Readers comfort, that
though here somewhat rigorously he spares his copy, and will not part (he
says) from such and such, yet afterward, (so kindness overcame him) he
has beside his promis given us two of his Doctors which here he says, he
will leave. That is S. Hierom and S. Basil. But now because M. Jewel is in
haste, and will leave so many good authorites, let us dispatche the rest that
he brings. He says.

De ecclesi. off. cap. 10
Isidorus describing the Order of the Church in his time, writes thus. When
they singe they must singe altogether. When they pray, they must pray
altogether. And when the lesson is readde, silence being commanded, they must
hear altogether.

Vide Sigebertum de viris illustr. ca. 55. page 80.
Even about that time that John the Alms geuer lived, whom M. Jewel
rejects before for proof of private Mass. Lo thou see good Reader what
stuff M. Jewel has chosen, to leave (as he says) S. Augustine, S. Hierom,
S. Basil, Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita with many other like Fathers.
The.185. Untruth For all these exampl^s of the old Fathers were of Service in
the learned tou^ge
Let us go forth and see the rest.

It were very much for M. Harding to say. All these things were done in a
learned tongue, and that the Vulgar people in every Country understood either
the Greek or the Latin.

Truly that were very much in deed. But neither have your examples ben of every
Country, nor of all the Vulguar people, but of three Cities only: of Alexandria
in Egypt, of Constantinople in Thracia, and of Hispali in Spain. And then
partly not of the people at all but of the clergy, partly of such people as
understood the learned tounges Greek and Latin, in which ij. tounges only these
mentioned countres had their Service. Alexandria and Constantinople in Greek,
Spain in Latin. Therefore as it is no need to say that the Vulgar people in
every country, understood, either the Greek or the Latin, so shall it be enough
to say, that all these things were done in a learned tongue, and so shall all
your authorites sufficiently be answered, vntell you prove it otherwise.

Yet for that nothing seems hard for him to say let us see what the old
Fathers will report in that behalf. Jews.




(...) Vnt^^^h^ For that has not been showed, as it s^^ll now appear.


Yet more posting and delaying M. Jewel? You know the pith and ground of
this Article lies herein. And therefore you ransack all the corners of your
rusty Rhetorike to beautify the matter as well as may be. First you brought
new Doctors, them D. Harding him self, after him old Doctors a couple.
This done, you tell us of your Copy which for haste you leave: and yet
Isidorus must not be forgotte. Then you shuffle in a shifte to save all that
went before, if it might be, and so you renew the battaill again, and provoke
your Reader to farther expectation. Which before you come to perform, you
put him in mind of your former feats, and stratagemes, thus to persuade him,
before you bring any thing. But go to. Let us make the most of it. Where
have you showed already in Theodoretus and Sozomenus, that the Service was in
the Syriacall tongue? I remember in this Article before, you allege them both
together for that purpose. These are your words in that place.

page 157. T^eodoret. lib. 4. cap. 29. The.198 Untruth. Ephrem made neither
hymns nor psalms.
If M. Harding think this conjecture to be weak, let him understand further,
that as Theodoretus reports, the same Ephrem made hymns and psalms in the
Syrian tongue. And that, as Sozomenus says plainly, the same Hymns and
psalms were song in the Churches of S^ria.

M. Jewel would feign prove the Church Service by singing of songs and
sonnets. It seems he Understands not that in the primitive Church there
were beside the psalms of David song in the Church out of holy Scripture
Vulgares psalmi, psalms or songs made in the Vulgar tongue, which were made
of private men of devotion or of some other occasion (as it shall anon appear)
and were sometime song in certain Churches. Council. Laodic. cap. 59.
Of such the Council of Laodicea has a Canon in these words. Non oportet
ab idiotis psalmos compositos and Vulgares in ecclesiis dici. Psalms made off
private men and in the Vulgar tongue shall not be said in Churches. Con. Cart.
3. Can. 47
This restrainte was made at that time because only holy Scripture should be
read there, extept the lives of holy Martyrs which in their festes were
readen. For of the Church psalms that all the people did not singe that
listed, men women and boys, as it is now in the deformed congregations, but
only such as were admitted thereunto, it appears by a Canon of the fourth
Council of Carthage holden in the year of our Lord.436. Where we read thus.
Psalmista, id est, Can. 10.
Cantor potest absque scientia Episcopi sola Iussione Praesbyteri officium
suscipere cantandi, dicente sibi prae^sbytero: vide, vt quod ore cantas, cord
credas, and quod cord credis, operibus comprobes. The Psalmiste or singing man
may take the office off singinge by the only commandment of the Priest
without putting the bishop to knowleadge, the Priest saying unto him thus.
See that which thou singest with the mouth, thou believe it with thy heart.
And that which thou beleuest in thy heart, thou perform it in thy Works.
Thus by Order he was admitted that song Psalms in the Church, and thus the
Vulgar Psalms made of Private men as they were for a time suffered in some
Churches, so we see by Order off Law they were at an other time forebidden the
Church.

This being premised, let us now come to those Hymns and Psalms, which
Master Jewel says, Ephrem made, and which he says, were song in Churches
in the Syrian tongue. Whereof he seems to frame this argument.

Ephrem made songs in the Syrian tongue. M. Iewelles Argument.


E^go the Service was in the Syrian tongue.

Unless he will have this to go for an argument, he has proved nothing.
What Ephrems Psalms were.
For the Psalms and Hymns which he speaks of, were no part of the Church
Service, but certain songs containing. Catholyke doctrine, which that good
Deacon made, for the people to singe in place of other songs containing
Heretical doctrine, which one Harmonius an Heretic had made before, and
infected the people withal. This was Ephrems song, and this to be so
Theodoretus in his Ecclesiastical History tells us, even in that place
which Master Jewel has alleged. These are his Words. (...). T^eodor. li.
4. ca. 5.
Whereas one Harmonius the Son of Bardesanes of whose Heresy Epiphanius has
written, had lately made certain songs, Tom. 1 lib 2. haeresi 56.
and mingling wicked doctrine with the pleasant Harmony intised the hearers,
and hunted after their corruption, this Ephre^ following the note and melody of
the other, made a godly dittye: and gave to the hearers both a pleasant and a
profitable Medicine. These songs also do yet to this day make more royal the
festes of the triumphant Martyrs. Here we see what Hymns and Psalms they are
which M. Jewel speaks off. They are by a strange Metamorphosis turned into
songs and sonnets, and used to displace songs off Heretykes. They are neither
Hymns nor Psalms pertaining to the Church Service, (which were only taken
out of holy Scripture) but godly songs made for the peoples instruction
against Heresy and wicked doctrine. Now that these Syrian songs were song at
Martyrs festes, it proves no more that the Service was in the Syrian toungue
then Christmas carolles song in English, French, and Dutche do prove the
Service at Christmas to be in English, French, or Dutche:

And thus M. Iewelles Syrian song does nothing, prove his Vulgar Service,
except he mind to reason thus.

M. Iewelles Argument.
English Carolles were song at Christmasse.

Ergo the Service was in English.

Now where M. Jewel adds that Sozomenus says plainly that such Hymns and
Psalms (he should say songs and sonnets) were song in the Churches of
Syria, If the words be so plain, he should have alleged them, or at the lest
have noted in the margin where they were to be found. But no maruaill if he
noted not that, which he could no where find. And yet is this Sozomenus at
the least iiij. times auoutched in this Article, to be a witness of the
Service in the Syrian toungue. But remember your self M. Jewel. page 10.
If Sozomenus bears witness to your Vulgar Service, why speaks he not? Why
comes he forth so dumb? What? Has he naught to say in this behalf? Or is
his word not worth the hearing? Or is he so old that he can not speak? Or
must we needs believe M. Jewel without evidence? And thus much of Theodoretus
and Sozomenus, by whom M. Jewel says he has showed that the Service was
in the Syrian toungue. Hereunto he adds S. Hierome. To the place of S. Hierom
I have answered before in the 68. Untruth. He did well to join Theodoretus
and S. Hierom together. For they speak both of Vulgar songs, Fol. 60. ^.
not off the Psalms song in Church Service, as I have before declared. Now
I trust M. Jewel will come to the matter directly; and bring us some clear
Example of the Church Service in some Vulgar tongue beside Greek and Latin for
the space of the first.600. years. He has told us what he has left, and
what he has said, now I trust he will to the Matter. Let us see.

The.199. Untruth except he mean, they are very plain beside the purpose.


Blessed be that old Father which speaks so plainly for M. Jewel, to save
his poor honesty in this great distress. For now or never D. Hardinges
Assertion shall be confounded.

The Greeks name God in the greek toungue, and the Latins in the Latin
toungue. Lib. 8. contra Celsum
And all several Nations pray unto God and praise him in their own natural
and mother toungue. For he that is Lord off all tounges, hears man praying
in all toungues, none otherwise, then if it were one voice pronounced by
diverse tounges. For God that rules the whole World is not as some one man,
that has gotten the Greek or Barbara^.
Latin tongue, and knows none other.

Page 35.
or in any of all his works once used the name of Service in a vulgar tongue,
I will as gladly yield to the whole. But if Origin never spoke word of Service
in the vulgar tongue, how is he here brought in to prove the Service in a
vulgar toungue? August. Epi. 178.
that vna rogatur vt mis^reatur a cunctis Latinis and Barbaris vnius Dei
natura, the one nature of God is prayed unto for mercy of al people both
Latins and Barbarous. And yet we say with S. Augustine also: Amen and
Hallelulya, quod nec Latino nec Barbaro licet, in suam linguam transfer,
Hebraeo cunctas gentes vocabulo decantare, that Amen and Halleluya (proper
words of the Church Service) are song of all Nations in Hebrewe terms,
which it is not laufull for neither the Latin or Barbarous to translate into
their own tongue. I thought good to accompany S. Augustine with Origin for the
better understanding of his meaning.

Hereof M. Jewel seems to reason thus.

M. Iewelles Argument.
All Nations do pray unto God in their own toungue.

Ergo al Nations have their Church Service in their own tongue.

And then against S. Augustine thus.

All Nations do pray unto God.

Ergo Amen, Halleluya, and such other parts off the Church Service must be
translated into the tounges of all Nations.

This makes well For M. Jewel: but this utterly overthrows the doctrine of
S. Augustine. Jewel. Page 36.
Little thought that old Father, that ever his words should be thus used or
so violently forced to such Conclusions.

In 1. Cor. 14. The. 200 Untruth In nipping of the last words of S. Ambrose.
page 62.
S. Ambrose speaking of the Jews that were converted to Christ, says thus.
These were Jews, which in their Sermons and oblations, used sometime the
Syrian tongue, and sometime the Hebrewe.

M. Jewel finds small force in old Father Origin to prove that he seeks
for. And therefore he runs to S. Ambrose for help. Howbeit for him, I must
needs say, he has taken wrong, and is ill used at M. Iewelles hand, as
being by violence and perforce made both to suppress that he would say, and
also to say that he would not say, and yet in the end says not one word
for the Vulgar Service. S. Ambrose expounding the words of S. Paul, In the
Church or Congregation I will rather speak five words with judgment to
instruct other, then ten thousand words in the tongue, says that the
Apostles meaning is, that it is far more profitable to speak a few words
In apertione sermonis.
in preaching that all may understand, then to use a long talk in an
unknown language. And then he adds, who they were that used such long
talk in strange tounges, when the Christians were assembled to pray, and
says. These were Jews which at Sermons and Oblations, used sometime the
Syrian tongue, sometime the hebrew This M Jewel left quit^ out
ad Co^mendatione^, for a vain glory, and commendation. For they gloried to
be called H^brewes because of the merit of Abraham. These words of S. Ambrose
as they prove nothing that the Jews had their Service, in the Hebrew or
Syrian tongue, so it blames openly the Jews for using these tounges at the
Service and oblation time. If M. Jewel had given thee (good Reader) the whole
words and sentence of S. Ambrose, thou should easily have seen, how little
they made for the Vulgar Service, unless M. Jewel will reason thus.

S. Paul blames the Jews for using the Hebrewe or Syrian tongue in the
Service.

Ergo the Service was in the Hebrewe or Syrian tongue.

For of this premisse it will rather follow.

The Jews are blamed for using the Hebrew and Syrian tongue in the Service. M.
Iewelles Argument.


Ergo the Jews had not their Service in the Hebrewe and Syrian tongue.

And thus M. Jewel has brought S. Ambrose against him self, and has not yet
found his Vulgar Service.

In epist. ad Clericos Neocaesarienses. The 201. Untruth For the Common people
of Cappadocia understood not the greek tongue as has been before proved
S. Basil writing unto the learned men of Neocaesarea and showing in what order
the people used to resort to the house of prayer in the night season, and to
singe psalms in sides, and to pray together, toward the end thereof, has
these words. As it were from one mouth and from one heart, they offer up
unto the Lord the psalm of confes^ion, and the words of repentance every of
them applies parti^ularlye unto him self. Hereby it is plain that the people
in S. Basiles time, song the psalms together, and understood what they song.

Here M. Jewel remembers him self better, and whereas he said before he
would leave S. Augustine, S. Basil, S. Hierome, and other, (such copy he
pretended then to have) now he alleges notwithstanding S. Basil and S.
Hierome both, declaring in this point, both his former bravery and his
present want.

These words of S. Basil as they make nothing for the Service in the Vulguar
tongue other then the greek, so do they very well declare, the ancient
custom of the primitive Church of the clergy rising at midnight, and singing
psalms together with the people. But what will M. Jewel gather hereof? Will
he reason thus?

The people song the psalms together in the Greek tongue.

M. Iewelles Argument.
Ergo the s^ruice was in neither Greek nor Latin.

Unless he conclude thus, he concludes nothing against D. Harding. M. Jewel
confesses before that S. Basil preached in Greek and the Vulgar people
understood him. Jewel. page 161.
And thinks he by the Greek Service which the people (as he confesses)
understood (the Greek Service and the Greek sermons of S. Basil being both in
like Greek as his Liturgy and homilies yet extant do testify) to conclude
that the Service was not in Greek? Thus by M. Iewelles reason Greek and not
Greek, Vulgar and not Vulguar, something and nothing shall be all one. But he
felt him self the weakness of this argument. And therefore he labors to
add some more force unto it, and says.





If ye fli^ us for thus singing and praying together, then must ye fly the
Egyptians and both the countres of Lybia, and the Thebanes, and the
Palestines, and the Arabians, and the Pheni^ians and the Sy^ians and the
borderers of Euphrates, and generally ye must fly all them that have
watchinges and prayers, and common psalmodie in estim^tion, I trow M. Harding
will not say: All these nations spoke Greek or Latin.



In Egypt Lybya, Syria and other countres common psalmodie was had in
estimation. M. Iewelles Argument.


Ergo the Service in all those countres was in the Vulgar tongue.

With the like reason you might conclude against the Service which with our
own ears we hear to be in Latin, that yet it were not in Latin. As thus.

In Dutcheland France and Italy the common psalmodie i^ both practiced and
highly esteemed specially in monasteries.

Ergo in Dutchelande France and Italye the Service is in the Vulgar tongue.

We see and know the contrary of the conclusion. We see and know the premisse
to be true also. Therefore we see and know the argument to be naught. And why?
Forsothe because you conclude the whole by a part, and the part by a Surmise.
As the whole Service you conclude of the psalmodie. And the psalmodie you
Gheasse, was understood. Which yet if it were granted, there remains for
you yet to prove that they understood nor Greek nor Latin, and then that the
Service was in neither another. Thus you see M. Jewel, how Soon ye Conclude,
and yet how much you lack to make up the Conclusion.

The 202 Untruth For S. Hierome is not so much as apparent.
S. Hierom writing unto Heliodorus, of the death of Nepotianus, seems to
auouche the same.

Yet have you but a Gheasse then. Howbeit all that S. Hierom says, is not so
much as a Seeming Gheasse to prou^ M. Iewelles purpose.

These be his words. Now both the voices and letters off all nations do
sound out Christ's passion and Resurrection. I leave the Jews, the Greeks and
the Latins, which n^tions the Lord has dedicated with the title of his
C^osse. The savage nature of the Bessians, and people that f^r their wildenesse
go cladde in skins, which sometimes made sacrifices of men's bodies, have
turned their barbarous speech in to the sweet harmony of Christ. Christ is
now the voice off the whole world.

proof. S. Hierom as M. Jewel well knows, has neither here nor else where,
Jewel. Page 64.
either the name or the sense of any Service in the Vulguar toungue. Only he
says that all the world sounds Christ, confesses Christ, praises
Christ. Now if M. Jewel think he may found his vulgar Service upon this
place, he may also presume the like upon David's Psalm, that where he said,
In omnem terram exiuit sonus eorum, The Noise of the Apostles preaching the
Gospel, went through out the whole earth, he meant to erecte a Service in
the Vulguar toungue, through out the whole earth. Or else upon the words of
saint Gregory, saying of our Forefathers, as saint Hierom said of the
Bessians, Exposit. in Job. lib. 27 Cap. 6.
Behold the toungue off Britanny which knew nothing but to rore rudely, has
of late begone to singe the Hebrewe Alleluya, giving praise to God, he may
also conclude, that Britanny had the Service in Hebrewe. Truly at this present
Italy, France, Spain, Portugal, Dutchelande, Burgundy, and diverse other
Catholic countres do sound out Christ's passion and resurrection, do turn
their Barbarous speech into the sweet Harmony of Christ, and Christ is the
voice of them al. Yet no one of these Nations has the Service in the Vulguar
known toungue.

In the ye^re of our Lord.860.
and great stay was made therein by the Pope and his Cardinals a voice was
heard, as it had been from heaven. Let every Spirit praise the Lord, and
let every toungue acknowleadge him. And that thereuppon they were suffered to
use their own language.

page 75.
This is the best proof of all other. A short answer may well serve it. For
being but a little vewed, it is able to answer it self.

countres had it not so.

Extra. de Officio Iudicis ordinarij. Quoniam in plerisque.
His words be these. Quoniam in plerisque partibus intra eandem Ciuitatem
atque Diaecesim permisti sunt populi diuersarum linguarum, habentes sub vna
fide varios ritus, and mores, districte praecipimus vt pontifices huiuscemodi
Ciuitatum and Diaecesum prouideant viros idoneos qui secundum diuersitatem
rituum and linguarum diuina illis officia celebrent, and Ecclesiastica
Sacramenta ministre^t. The.203 Untruth, Standing in the notorious and wilful
falsyfying of the Author alleged.
For so much as in many places with in one City and one Diocese there be
Nation^ mingled together of many toungues having diuer^ orders and Customs
under one Faith, we do therefore straightly command that the bishops of
such Cities or Dioceses provide meet men to minister the holy Service,
According to their Diuersitye off manners and tounges.

Jewel. Page 81.
If this serve not the turn, nothing I trow, will serve. The Authority of
the Popes Canon or rather of the whole general Council of Laterane, wherein
this decree was made, is so great, the words so clear, the Commandment so
straight. But two things only considered, all this mighty Forte, will prove
but a Paper wall. The one is the time and Circumstaunce of the decree. The
other, the legerdemaine off M. Iewelles translation. Touching the first, this
decree is far benethe the first six hundred years after Christ, as being
made in the Council of Laterane more then twice six hundred years after
Christ. Therefore M. Jewel has herein maruailously missereckoned him self.
Again the decree is not made for Service in the vulguar toungue which at that
tywe in all the West Church was in Latin by the witness of S. Thomas of
Aquine, S. Thom. I^ 1. Cor. 14.
whom Master Jewel alleges living about that very time. The meaning of the
decree is, that whereas at that time the great City of Costantinople being
subdued to the Latin Church out of the Greeks Dominion by the French men
and the Venetians, so that in that one City both the old Grecians and the
new Latins inhabited, whereas also their Patriarche at that time was either
of the Frenc^ men's appointement or of the Venetians, and so a Latin (for so it
was agreed that when the Emperor was French, Blondu^ li. 6. dec. 2
the Patriarche was a Venetian: as at that time Balduin of Flaundres was the
Emperor and Maurocene the Venetian was the Patriarche) the Patriache (as I
said) being of the Latin Church, the Grecians coueted to have an other
Bishop beside to serve their Churches according to their toungue and manner.

The Council therefore to avoid this Inconvenience that one City and one
Diocese would have two bishops, commanded straightly that one Bishop
being appointed, he should provide to have Pastors and Curats underneath him
such as might serve both the Latins and the Greeks, and again every
several Nation of the Latins and Greeks, with their own accustomed Service
and usual Administration off the Sacraments, and that according to the
Diuersitye of their toungues and manners. Not that every Nation should have the
Service in their own toungue; but that both, the Sacraments should be
ministered to every Nation in their own toungues, and the Service celebrated to
every Nation, after their accustomed rites and Ceremonies. This to be the
meaning of the decree, both the History of that time considered, and the very
construction of the words (which M. Jewel has corrupted), does make
manifest. And this is lo the Legerdemain of his false translation, which now
shall be opened. The Latin has, Qui secundum diuersitates Rituum and
Linguarum, diuina illis officia celebrent, and Ecclesiastica Sacramenta
ministrent. The true English is this. Which (he speaks of meet persons to
be provided by the Bishop in such Cytyes where diverse Nations do concur)
according to their Diuersitye of their Rites or Ceremonies and toungues do
celebrate to them Gods Service, and do minister the Sacraments of the Church.
Here by the order of al good Construction, the first accusative case (
Diversity of Rites or Ceremonies) is to be referred to the first verb (do
celebrate Gods Service) and the second accusative case ( Diversity: of
toungues) to the second verb, Do minister the Sacraments of the Church. So
that the literal meaning of the decree must be, that where diverse Nations do
concur in one City or Diocese, each Nation have diverse Pastors and
Ministers, partly to celebrate the Service according to their own Rites,
Ceremonies, manner and Facion (for in that point not only the Greeks and the
Latins, but the very Latins among them selves do differ and varye in some
Certain Ceremonies and Rites) partly and that chiefly to minister the
Sacraments of the Church: as Baptim, Confession, Matrimonye, and such other
to every Nation in his own toungue. For in such Sacraments the Vulguar
toungue is used. Now Master Jewel knowinge right well that if he had put the
whole English with the Latin, every Child would have seen the true
Construction and the true Relation of the accusative case with the verb, he
therefore has utterly left out one of the Verbes in his English, which is,
to minister the Sacraments of the Church. Thus he has beguiled the English
Reader, making him to believe that the Decree spoke only of saying the Common
Service, and nothing at all of Ministering the Sacraments off the Church:
unto the which as I said, The Diuersyte off toungues must be referred. This
is the plain dealing of ghospelling Bishops. Thus must an evil cause be
defended. And thus is our dear Country abused by such as occupy the place of
Reverend bishops.

The.240 Untruth or rather a bragging Lie.
Here I might allege much more out of diverse writers, even out of Abdias him
self, whom M. H^rdinge so much estemeth.

Jew.ll page 166.
He will allwaies seem to have much store, and that he leaves more behind
then he brings forth. This is a great face set upon nothing. M. Jewel
will leave Abdias a writer in the Apostles time, and whom trow ye, will he
allege us in his place? You shall see.

The.205 Untruth For a Co^plainte is no prous^
But I will only note the complainte of one John Billet concerning this case,
and so make an end.

Alas, what tool is there so weak that M. Jewel will refuse to strike
withal? To prove his imagined Vulgar Service, he leaves Abdias, and (as he
said before) S. Augustine, Gregorius Nazianzenus, Dyonisius Areopagita and
many other Fathers; and brings us forth one John Billet, a good honest man
of late years. Well, you are well come home M. Jewel. Now your Antiquites
are spent, a poor man's tale may be heard. But what says this honest man?
Let us hear.

It was forbidden in the primitive Church, In summa de Diuinis officiis.
that no m^n should speak with tongues, unless there were some present to
expound it. For what should speaking avail without understanding? And hereof
grew a laudable custom that after the gospel was read literally, it
should straight way be expounded in the Vulguar tongue. But what shall we do
in our days, when as there is none at all, or very seldom that rea^eth or
hears and understands? It seems it were better now to hold their peace,
then so to singe.



When the gospel is read in Latin, M. Iewelles Argument.
it must be expounded in the Vulgar tongue.

Ergo the Service was in neither Greek nor Latin within the first 600. years.
Or thus.

No man understands the Service.

Ergo it is in the Vulguar tongue.

This is a very Vulguar Conclusion.

The 207. Untruth For none of all these Fathers have proved M. Iewelles
purpose. The.208 Untruth For this has not yet been showed.
Here have I alleged for prou^e (207) of our purpose of the old Fathers,
Clemens Alexa^drinus, Origin, S. Basil, S. Hiero^, Theodoretus, Sozomenus, and
Isidorus: of the later writers, Aeneas Syluius, Innocentius tertius, John
Billet, Thomas of Aquine, Lyra, Durandus, and Eckius. Therefore I trust, M.
Harding will no more deny but we (208) are able to show somewhat, that the
Common Service in the primitive Church, was in some other tongue, and not
only in Greek or Latin.

Now the Battaill is fought. M. Jewel cries a Retraict, and blows up the
Victory. You see the Rank of his Capitaines both young and old: you have
felt the dynte of their weapons. Some have given dry blows, Some have
stricken never a stroke. Other came utterly to late. Not one has stricken right
down. And all by the default of M. Jewel, shamefully Abusing so faithefull
Captains. Yet he renews the Challenge and says.

The 209 Untruth For M. Jewel will never yel^^.
If M. Harding be able to show any such sufficient example of his side. I will
yield according to promise.

To the which thus I answer. M. Jewel has brought nothing. Less then
nothing M. Harding could not bring. Ergo he has brought as sufficient
examples as M. Jewel. And then: Ergo M. Jewel must yield according to
promise. Again M. Jewel has brought no example of any other Service then
in Greek and Latin in the first 600. years. Ergo it is no Untruth to say,
that M. Jewel can bring no such thing. Ergo In the primitive Church the
Service was only in Greek and Latin, Ergo many countres of Asia the less
which (as D. Harding has proved) understood no Greek, France and great
part of Afrike which understood no Latin, had their Service the one in Greek,
the other in Latin, both in a tongue which they understood not. Ergo Some
countres in the first 600. years had their Service in a strange tongue. Ergo
ones again M. Jewel of necessite must yield and Subscribe.

The people off Gallia or France had their Service then in Latin, as all the
west Church had.

The 210. Untruth slanderous.
The 79. Untruth. Boldly auoutched, but no way proved.

It is proved M. Jewel by the place which your self alleges out of
Sulpitius, especially if you had put in the whole words, and not broken it of
in the middle, as if you had had the Choynecough. The whole place is this. At
what time S. Martin should be created bishop of Tours in France, Sulpitius
says. Lib. 1. in vita S. Martini.
Inter episcopos qui affuerant praecipue Defensor quidam nomine dicitur
restitisse. Vnde animaduer sum est grauiter illum lectione prophetica tunt
notatum. Among the bishops that were present, one whose name was Defensor, is
reported to have resisted above the rest. Whereof it was perceived he was
checked by the prophet, then readde. And then it follows which M. Jewel
alleges. Nam cum fortuitu lector, cui legendi eo die officium erat,
interclusus a populo defuisset, turbatis ministris, page 184.
dum expectatur qui non aderat, vnus e circumstantibus sumpto psalterio quem
primum versum inuenit, arripuit. Psalmus autem hic erat. Ex ore infantium and
lactentium perfecisti laudem, The.211. Untruth In nipping of the last words
of Sulpitius.
propter inimicos tuos, vt destruas inimicum and Defensorem (these words M.
Jewel brake of) quo l^cto clamor populi tollitur, pars aduersa confunditur.
For whereas by chance the Reader, whose office was to read in the Church that
day, was shut out by mean of the throunge, and the ministres were troubled,
looking about for him that was not there, one of the company took the psalter
and readde that verse, that came next to hand. The verse of the psalm was
this. Out of the mouth of infantes and sucklinges thou have wrought praise, to
destroy the enemy and Defensor. Which being read (the name of Defensor being
heard) the people made a shoot, and the contrary part was confounded. page 184.
Here (says M. Jewel) whether it were in the Vulguar tongue or in the Latin,
it was a tongue known to the people. To the which I awnswere, that whether
the people understood it or no, certain it is the psalm was read in Latin.
For the cause of the shoot that the people made was, the word of the verse
Defensorem, which is a Latin word and no french. Because thereby they took
the bishopp (whose name was Defensor) to be noted in that verse. Now as I will
not contend but that some of the people there present understood that verse
being read in Latin, so is it most manifest that the common french people had
their proper french tongue for their Vulguar tongue beside the Latin. This is
evident not only by that which D. Harding alleges in this Article, but by
this same writer him self Sulpitius Seu^rus, testifying that then at that time
and in that country where the Service was in Latin, as it is before manifest,
the people spoke yet Gallice and Celtice the french tongue and the Celticall.
For in this Dialogue of S. Martins life when the course came to Gallus to
speak, excusing his rusticite of language, his fellow said unto him. Lib. 3.
Tu vero, vel Celtice aut si mauis Gallice loquaris, dummodo iam Martinum
loquaris. Speak unto us either in the Celtes language, or if thou had
rather, in the Galloes language, so that thou speak of Martin. And afterward
he calls sellulam rusticanam, a country stool, in the french tongue
tripetiam which the learned call tripodem. Thus in Sulpitius his time all most
xij.c. years past the Latin Service was used in France, and yet the Latin was
not the Vulgar tongue. Whereof it must follow that either all the people
understood Latin beside their mother tongue, or else had their Service in a
tongue which they understood not.

Sn^ygoudanus in praefat. in psalm.
For farther proof of the Latin Service in France it is to be remembered that
the Latin psalter which S. Hierom translated at the request of Damasus is of
the old writers called Gallicanum exemplar, because the Churches of Gallia
followed that copy.

The faith has continued in this land among the English people from the
14. year off the reign off Mauritius the Emperor, almost these.1000. years.

The.211. Untruth Slanderous.
The 80. Untruth. His examples reach nothing so far.

Mauritius began his reign in the year of our Lord 582^ In the xiiij. year
of his reign, Saint Augustine was sent to our country to preach the faith. The
History of Bid in the first book the xxiij. chapter witnesses so. Therefore
it is no Untruth for D. Harding to say so. Touching the first coming in of
the faith to us Englishmen, when I come to the 91. Untruth, I shall speak at
large.

As concerning the order off Common prayers and public Service in such sort
as we have now and that age had not, Saint Paul mentions nothing, neither
speaks one word in that whole Chapter, but off the use of the miraculous
gift as is said before. And therefore his sayings out of that chapter be not
fittly alleged of M. Jewel, and the rest of our adversaries, against the
manner of prayers, and Service off the Church now received, and of long time
used.

The 212. Untruth Slanderous. The 213. Untruth For no old Doctors do
The 81. Untruth. For Sundry Doctors both old and new allege these words
to this self same purpose.

This Untruth was well noted M. Jewel, if you be able as well to prove it.
Consider good Readers, the whole Accusation which these disobedient Children
of Gods Church, have laid in against their Mother for the public Service in
the Latin tongue, the only Scripture, by which the^ charge all Christendom
beside wi^h the breach of Gods commandment, (...) w^rdes to that purpose.
is the place of S. Paul in the fi^ste epistle the xiiij. Chapter to the
Corinthians. It behooves therefore M. Jewel and his fellows openly,
plainelye, and abundantly to prove that the words of S. Paul in that Chapter
do prove and Command a Vulgar Service. Upon this place of S. Paul lies the
only Stay of all this Alteration of Gods Service. This therefore ought
clearly, plentifully and without all ambiguite be proved and discussed. But
(good Readers) such is the weakness of their grounds, that they can bring no
one old Doctor expounding that place as a Commandment of the Service to be
had in a Vulguar and known tongue to the Common people. This weakness, this
feblenesse shall now appear in M. Jewel who will seem to be able to say as
much herein, as any of all the rest. For in all that he has Replied against
this place of D. Harding, where this place of holy Scripture, is by him opened
and declared, he has not brought one old Doctor to expound the place as he
and his fellows does expound it. Let us consider M. Iewelles whole Reply to
this place.

The.214. Untruth For by-this grant your cause is much hindered, as shall
^ppeare.
We may safely grant some part of M. Hardinges long talk, without (214)
prejudice of our cause. In deed S. Paul in the place alleged, spoke of the
gift of tounges as it was a special miracle enduring only for a while, not
gotten by labor or study, but freelye inspired by the Sprite of God.

Lo M. Jewel grants that S. Paul in that place to the Corinthians spoke
of the gift of tounges etc. This gift off tounges the Corinthians abused,
whiles in Common assemblies not at prayers proper to the Christians, but at
Prea^hinges, to the which infidels and all other resorted, they talked in
strange tounges, which the assistants understood not, and were not therefore
edified thereby. This S. Paul found fault withal, because in such
assemblies it was a time of homilies and exhortations, where the people ought
to be edified. This then being granted to be (as it is) the principal purpose
of S. Paul in that place, let us see how M. Jewel can pick out his Vulguar
Service out of the rest. He follows and says.

The.215. Untruth For D. ^. said. It is not by way of miracle. He said not
It is no^ any Miracle at all. M. I^w^ll altered the words to make matter for a
scoff. The.216. Untruth joined w^the a Slander and open Injury to the
Vniu^rs^ll C^urche of (...) many h^n^r^d y^^r^s. ^ipr. lib. 4. epi^t. 9.
But the Latin tongue (says M. Harding) as it is now commonly used in the
Roman Se^uice, is not given by any such prompting of the holy Ghost, nor is
now (215) any Miracle at all. Therefore the place of S. Paul cannot be applied
unto i^. We grant well, it is no miracle, as it is now used, nor any way
sauoureth of the Sprit of God. But this is a great miracle to see either any
man so (216) wicked, that so will use it: or so impudent that so will defend
it, or so patie^t that so will suffer it. This verily is a marvelous miracle.

Now M. Iewelll does his kind. Now he does his Father the devil good
Service. Now he plaieth the right Protestant. He charge the Church of God
with wickedness, that has used these xv.c. years the Latin Service in the
Latin Church. He calls it an Impudency to defend the universal practice of
so many hundred years, and says they are very patient which can so suffer
it. If it be wickedness that has so long and so universally been committed,
then let us say to you M. Jewel in defense of our forefathers off xv.c.
years, that which S. Cyprian said to Pupianus the heretic in defense of six
years only. Nisi apud te purgati fuerimus and sententiae tua absoluti, etiam
sex annis nec fratern^^as habuerit episcopum nec plebs praepositum, nec grex
pastorem, n^c eccl^sia gubernatorem, nec Christus antistitem, nec deus
sacerdotem. Subueniat Pupianus and s^ntentiam dicat etc. Unless we be judged
innocent of thee, and absolved by thy sentence (o Pupianus said S. Cyprian,
and o M. Jewel say I) then not all these six years (I say allmoste these
sixtene hundr^d years) neith^r the brotherhood had a bishop, neither the people
an oue^seer, neither the flock a Pastor, nor the Church^ a gouuernour, nor
Christ a bishop, nor God a priest. Let then Pupianus come help and give
sentence etc. Let then M. Jewel of pity sucour the poor departed Christians
of fore time, which have wickedly used the Latin Service, and none other. If
it be impudency to defend such an universal and Continual practice of Gods
Church, then what will M. Jewel pronounce of S. Augustine, Ad ^anu^rium
^pist. 18.
who says, De hoc quod tota per orbem frequentat Eccl^sia, quin ita faciendum
sit, disputare, insolentissimae insaniae est. To dispute or call in doubt that
which the universal Church through out the world frequenteth, whether it
ought to be done or no, it is the point of a most arrogant madness. It is
like that M. Jewel will say that S. Augustine him self was impudent and
mad to write so. Such wickedness we committ, (M. Jewel) that use the
Latin Service, and so impudent we are that defend the same. For we defend
and practice herein that, which the whole Church off God both East and
weste, both Greek and Latin has ever in the public and approved Service
used and observed. As it has evidently appeared by that hitherto M. Jewel
with all his labor, Conference, and help of his fellow protestants that have
written before him, has not yet alleged one poor Country that had the public
Service in any other tongue then Greek and Latin, unless he will take part
with Schismatikes and heretics. Thus M. Jewel by his Miracle, has proved
him self a very Monster. For never was there a more Monstrous saying of any
Christen man, and one that bears the room of a bishop, then the words of M.
Jewel lastly avouched.

The 217. Untruth Slaundero^s. For D. Harding made no s^c^e Argument.
M. Harding hereof seems to reason after this sort. S. Paul forebadde the
Corinthians to use the spe^iall miracle and gif^e off God without pr^fiting the
Congregati^n. Ergo, Now h^uing the Latin tou^ge without miracles, we may
mini^ter the Service therein although the Congregation ^aue no profit by it.
Thi^ reason is strange and holds as simply as the rest.

This reason is your own M. Jewel, It is not D. Hardinges. It is strange in
deed, and holds as simply as the rest do in this your Reply, all of your
own making, all slanderously forged upon Doctor Harding, all peuishely and
childishly framed of your self. Such lewd shifting becomes Boys and
Children, or rather Co^tentious Sophistes in schools. But of this your
Demeanor I trust you have heard more particularly in an other place. The
reason of Doctor Hadinge is this.

S. Paul in that Chapter to the Corinthians speaks not one word off the
Public Service but off the use off their miraculouse Gift. D. Har. Argument


Ergo Master Jewel and his fellows have not fittely alleged those words off
S. Pawle to prove the Vulguar Service.

This is the Argument of D. Hardinge, as to him that will consider his words
above alleged it may evidently appear. To this Argument because. Master
Jewel either would not or could not answer, therefore he thought good
utterly to dissemble it, and to make an other off his own in place thereof.
Let us proceed with M. Iewelles text.





The.218 Untruths. For no old doctors take this place in M. Jewel les senc^.
If this Note be so certain, and so Authentical as he would seem to make it,
then were the Doctors both new and old that took it otherwise, not well
advised.

This is a small Absurdite in you M. Jewel, specially with your brother
Calfhill, who sets so little by the doctors Judgment upon holy Scripture,
that he appealeth from them, and protests to the Reader (full protestant
like) that he will not be bound unto them, as being able (he says) to charge
all the Fathers every one of them from Christ's time hitherto with some gross
error or other. In his answer to the first Article of the Cross.
And your self Master Jewel when you were ones pressed with the universal
consent of all the Fathers, touching the Invocation of Saints, did you not
answer these words. Est communis error Patrum, It is a Common Error of the
Fathers? Thus you answered then, yet now you will seem to hold sadly by them.
Thus you lay on both sides, and like as the Stoikes of Athens before the
people worshipped the Gods and confessed a multitude, but at home in their
houses disputed against all such vanities, so in your challe^ge and here you
will seem to Reverence the Fathers, but an other time when it shall like you,
you set naught by them, and care not for them. And thus one of you says one
thing, another says an other thing. In answearing to M. Jewel we must
stand to the Fathers Judgment, which we most gladly do and ever have done. In
answering to Calfhill, we must prove the Fathers Judgment to be good, and
require him to stand to the^. But what are those Fathers which took that place
of S. Paul as you do, to prove a Vulguar Service thereby? You go forth and
say.

The.219. Vntruin mangling the words of Lyra, as shall appear.
For Lyra writing upon the same, says thus. If the people understand the
prayer off the Priest, they are the better brought unto God, and with greater
Devotion they answer Amen. Therefore S. Paul says. If thou being a P^ieste
b^^sse with the Spirit and the people understand thee not, what profit then
has the people being simple and not understanding thee? Therefore in the
primitive Church, both the blessings and all other things, were done in the
Vulgar toungue. The vulgar toungue, says Lyra, was used in the Primitive
Church, upon occasion of these words of S. Paul.

he lived about about two hundred years ago. He was learned and is so
accounted: but yet far under the estimation of any Doctor or Father of the
Church. To this place I have before answered in the 78. Untruth, and have
there declared how little it makes for the vulgar Service. But now to say
somewhat more therein, Nihil aut modicum: quia nescit se conformare tibi, qui
es Minister Ecclesiae respondendo, Amen. Nothing or little. For he can not
conform him self unto thee which art the Minister of the Church, by
answering, Amen. the blessings and all other things were done in the Vulgar
toungue, the words of Lyra are, Benedictiones and caetera communia. The
blessings and other Common things, not, and all other things were done in
the Vulgar toungue.

C^ncil. Aqu^sg^an. C^^. 132.
The voice and mind off the^ that singe unto the Lord in the Church, must
agree together. The reason thereof is taken out of this place of S. Paul. I
will singe with my Spirit, I will singe with my mind.

The.220 Untruth This Coouncel of Acon does not apply this place of S. Paul
to the Vulguar Service.
This is a moral application, this is no literal Deduction. He that
celebrateth the Service (and of such the Council speaks) and prays for the
whole flock, ought to understand that which he says, to the intent he may
pray with spirit and with mind. But the ignorant lay people who are not
bound to celebrat the Service, but to assiste and give their assent unto it,
and of whom that Council in those words speaks not, are not bound
particularly to understand what is said or done, being ones first instructed
of the whole sufficiently. And therefore in the next Canon of the same
Council it is provided who, and what men, and with what Moderation the
Synginge in the Church should be used. The words are these. Tales ad
legendum, cantandum, and psallendum in Ecclesia constituantur, Can. 133.
qui non superbe sed humiliter, debitas Domino lauds per soluant: and
suauitates Lectionis ac Melodiae and Doctos demulceant, and minus Doctos
erudiant. Plusque velint in L^ctione vel cantu populi Aedificationem, quam
popular^m vanissimam Adulationem. Let such be appointed to Read and to singe
in the Church, which may praise almighty God not vain gloriously, but humbly:
which with their sweet Melody and soft reading, may both delight the learned,
and instruct the unlearned, desyringe rather by their reading and singinge to
Aedifie the people, then to seek after a vain applause and Commendation of the
people. By this it appears, the Council applied the words of S. Paul not
to prove a vulgar Service, as M. Jewel and his fellows do, but to move those
which did singe and read in the Church, to do that thing from the heart
not by mouth only. Wherein they did but renew the ancient decree off the
fourth Councelll of Carthage, where the Priest appointing one that should
singe in the Church, This was in the y^re of our Lord 430.
(for not every one that lifted, song at that time, as in your disordered
Congregation Master Jewel, now they do) says unto him these words. Vide
vt quod ore Cantas, Cord Credas, and quod cord credis, operibus comprobes.
See that that which thou singest with thy mouth, thou believe in heart, and
that which thou beleuest in heart, thou perform in deeds.

Chrisostom says, S. Paul drives (221) the whole tenor of this matter unto
the profit of the hearers. These be his words. Conc. Cart. 4. Can. 10 The 221.
Untruth For Saint Paul does not by Chrysostoms mind drive the Celebrating
off the Service to the profit of the hearers.
S. Paul's saying stands thus. Unless I utter my words so as they may
clearly and plainly be perceived of you, but only show me self to have the
gift of tounges, ye s^all have ^o fruit of those things which you know not.
For what profit can ye geate of a voice, that ye can not vnderstan^?

M. Jewel has sone done with his new Doctors. Now he comes in with his
old. And yet of all the Doctors, he alleges only Chrysostom. And he is in
deed an old Doctor, but yet no old Doctors. Now how does Chrysostom
apply this place of S. Paul to prove a Vulgar Service? Mary he says, that
S. Paul drives the whole tenor of this matter unto the profit of the
hearers. Of which Matter M. Jewel? Of celebrating the Church Service? No M.
Jewel. You may not so deceive us. Chrysostom expounding this fourtenth
Chapter of S. Paul in the first to the Corinthians, declares the purpose of
the Aposte in the beginning of the Chapter to be thus. Comparat inter se dona,
Chrysostom. In. 1. Cor. Homil. 35
extenuans illud linguarum, non inutile prorsus quidem, nec vtile tamen
vehementer per sese ostendens. The Apostle compares the gifts of the holy
Ghost between them selves, extenuating the gift of tounges, showing that it
is not utterly unprofitable, yet by it self not very profitable. S. Paul
persisting in this comparison, soon after the beginning of the Chapter,
transferring the matter to him self says. 1. Cor. 14.
Now brethern if I come to you my self speaking in tounges, what shall I
profit you, unless I speak unto you either by revelation, or by knowl^adge,
or by prophecye, or by Doctrine? Upon these words of the Apostle Chrysostom
said the words which Master Jewel has alleged, ^s expounding the
literal meaning off the Apostle, Saint Paul's saying stands thus. unless I
utter my words so that they may clearly and plainly be perceived of you, and
so forth, as they lie in the text of M. Jewel last alleged. Now I would M.
Jewel him self would Judge whether these words either of the Apostle or of
Chrysostom do speak or mean any thing at all of celebrating the Church
Service. Here in this place, Donum linguarum, and prophetiae the gift of
tounges and of Interpretation are compared together. But prophetare, to have
that gift of Interpretation, is (as the Apostle him self in that place
expounds) hominibus loqui, ad ^dificationem, exhortation^m, consolationem. To
speak unto men, to aedifie them, to exhort them, to comfort them. This is
done in homilies and sermons, not in the Church Service, not in public
prayers and blessings. If there be in this Chapter any words spoken of the
Church Service, they are the other which follow many sentences after, where the
Apostle says, If thou bless in Spirit, how shall he that supplieth the
room of the ignorant, answer Amen to thy thanks giving? they are I say these
words, not the other above recited, upon the which Chrysostom made that
exposition which M. Jewel brought. Therefore these words of Chrysostom are
by M. Jewel brought beside the purpose, as the which speaks nothing of the
Vulgar Service, nor of applying the words of S. Paul thereto, as M. Jewel
and his fellows do apply them.

The.222. Untruth For this is S. Paul's own text, not the saying of
Chrysostom.
And again the same Chrisostom says farther. Even so you unless you give a
sound that may be known, as the proverb ^^, you shall throw for the your
words into the wind, that is to say, ^e shall speak to no man.

Here M. Jewel notably betraieth him self, and opens in some part the
great affected vanite which he uses in this whole Reply to allege And
multyplie Doctors without purpose. For these words which are here laid
forth for a show of Chrysostoms words, are no words of Chrysostom at all:
but they are the words of S. Paul and of that text which Chrysostom there
handles. And M. Jewel straightwayes will allege them for Saint Paul's (as
you shall hear) but presently he alleges them solemnelye both in Latin and
in English, as the words of Chrysostom to make a show (as I said) of
Doctors. This is but a part of that vanite in the which he a bundeth through
this whole Reply, as has been in good part declared and published to the
world already. Touching the matter they appertain expressly to the words
above alleged, as to him which will consider but the text of the Apostle it
is evident. They appertain to that which the Apostle calls Donum linguarum,
the gift off tounges, which except it be joined with prophetia or
Interpretation, whereby the Congregation may be edified, exhorted and
comforted, it avails little to the Audience, but are as though it were words
thrown to the wind. All this is spoken of preaching and opening the words,
In comment. in 1. cor. 14.
Apertionem sermonis Saint Ambrose calls it. For as he says upon this
place. Docere nemo poterit n^si intelligatur. No man can teach unless he be
understood of the hearers. And Chrysostom upon this place inmediatly says.
Chrisost. ibidem.
Ita nihil habere magnificu^ linguas vndique fere monstrauit. Thus he shows
every way (meaning the similitudes of the Musical instrument and of the
Trumpet before alleged) that the gift of tounges is of no great value. And he
compares that gift to a singer. For as if you pluck one finger away from
the rest, it can do you no more Service, so if they used the gift of tounges,
without prophetia, that is, the Interpretation of tounges, it were but a vain
and unprofitable matter. This therefore that M. Jewel has hitherto alleged,
touches nothing the Vulguar Service, nor is not any whit by Chrysostom
applied thereunto. And yet is Chrysostom the only Ancient Doctor that M.
Jewel here alleges, promising before to allege Doctors both old and new.

The 223. Untruth For Justinian applies not this place to the Vulgar Service.
So likewise the Emperor Justinian, where he commands all bishops and
priests to minister the Sacraments and other prayers alowde, and with open
voice, he avouches the same by this place of S. Paul. For thus he says. So
the Apostle says: If thou only bliss or pray with thy Spirit, how shall
he that supplieth the room off the unlearned, say, Amen, unto thy blessing?
For he knows not what thou say.

Justinian was an Emperor, he was no Doctor of the Church such as M. Jewel
promises to bring. And he applies this Scripture not to the Vulguar Service,
which he never knew other then Greek in the Greek Church, and Latin in the
Latin Church. But he applies that place of S. Paul to the loud speaking of
the priest at Service time. Of the which matter we have treated before at
large in the 78. Untruth, where the meaning of this Constitution is expounded,
by the like sayings of S. Augustine and S. Cyprian. It makes no more for the
Vulgar Service (unto the which M. Jewel and his fellows most impudently upon
their own heads, without the Authorites of the Ancient Doctors do apply
this place) then does loud speaking of the priest at this day in the Mass,
where the people also answers Amen.

The.224 Untruth For it appears never a whit so.
It appears by these Authorities, notwithstanding M. Hardinges note, that S.
Paul makes somewhat for our purpose.

It appears not by any of all these Authorities that the Service ought to be
in the English tongue (that was D. Hardinges note) or in any other Vulguar
tongue. It appears by none of them all, that the place of S. Paul is applied
to prove a Vulgar Service. It appears thereby M. Jewel can bring not one
old Doctor to prove it. And so it appears that M. Jewel has noted a
wrong Untruth, and that he and his fellows do most Untruly apply this place
of S. Paul to prove their schismatic alteration of Gods Service. But now M.
Jewel because all Doctors do fail him, because he can not build upon them,
he says he will build upon holy Scripture it self. For thus he follows the
matter.

A Burden of Untruths. which particularly shall be noted in the Answer
hereunto following.
Howbeit we build not our proufes upon the Miracle and gifts of tounges, that
lasted but for a while, but upon these express and plain words of S. Paul,
which no man can deny. He that speaks with tongue speaks not unto men, but
unto God. For no man hears him. If the Trumpet give an uncertain voice, who
shall prepare him self unto the war? Even so you, onelesse ye utter such
words, as have signification, how shall it be known, what ye say? For ye
shall speak into the wind. I will pray with my Spirit, I will p^aie with my
mind. I will singe with spirit, I will singe with my mind. If thou bliss
with thy Spirit, how shall the ignorant say, Amen, unto thy thanks geuinge?
For he knows not what thou say. In the Church I had lever to speak five
words with my mind, so that I may instruct others, then a thousand words
with my tongue. Let al things be done to the profit of the people. These words
be evident. The exposition of Lyra, of the Council of Acon, of Chrysostom, and
Justinian is plain. And yet must we upon M. Hardinges warrant in the needs
believe that all this makes nothing for the English Service in the Church of
England.

Ergo, etc. Your end and intent in this place is to persuade your Reader that
for the Service to be had in the Vulgar tongue, you have the word of S. Paul
to build upon, and to have it in a Strange tongue, you have the same words
against us. Is not this your intent and purpose in this place? Go you not
about in this place (as you did before out of Lyra, the Council of Acon,
Chrysostom and Justinian, so now out of the words of S. Paul him self to
prove that the Service ought not to be in a strange tongue? The Read^ which
has perused the whole issue which I join with you in this Untruth can not be
ignorant hereof. Then I say you bring certain words of S. Paul which may
seem to lead that way, and you leave out other of his words which do
expressly declare that he means no such matter.

The.225. Untruth in guilefully leaving our the words of the Apostle.
As now to come to your words, first you allege S. Paul's words thus. He
that speaks with tongue, speaks not unto men, but unto God, for no man
hears him. It follows immediately which you leave out, Spiritus autem
loquitur mysteria. But the Spirit speaks mysteries, or as the greeks do read
that text, Spiritu licet mysteria loquatur. Although he (which speaks with
tongue,) in the Spirit speaks mysteries. I say if you had added these
words, it should have appeared that S. Paul neither spoke those words of
uttering the Service in a strange tongue, neither did utterly discommende
speaking with tongues. Chrysostom. et Theodoret. ibidem.
For as Chrysostom and Theodoretus upon this place do say, those words are
added, ne vel supernacaneum, vel inutile, temereque concessum put^mus. Lest we
should think the gift of tounges to be superfluous, unprofitable, or to be
given of God without cause. And again this being added (The Spirit speaks
mysteries, or, In the spirit he speaks mysteries) the Reader might soon have
conceived, that neither that speaking of tounges was utterly to be
discommended, neither that same did any thing appertain to the Service in the
latin tongue, where every man knows, there is no such speaking of mysteries
in Spirit. These words therefore have been by you guilefully left out M.
Jewel thereby to blind the judgment of the Reader, and to make him believe
that S. Paul had spoken those words, of speaking the Service in a strange
tongue. For to that purpose you alleged those words. Now to omit the long
process of S. Paul which here follows, as is by you with the like fraud
utterly left out M. Jewel, to omit I say the Comparison that S. Paul
makes between Loqui lingua and prophetare, to speak with tongue, and to
Interpret, the one edifying him self only, the other edifying the whole
Congregation, whereby also the former words should the better have been
understood of the English Reader, let us consider that which you next
immediately allege following in S. Paul not immediately, but after many
sentences between. You allege.

If the Trumpet give an uncertain voice, who shall prepare him self unto the
war? Even so you unless ye utter such words, as have such signification how
shall it be known what ye say? For ye shall spe^ke into the mind.

Chrysostom. ibid.
is (as Chrysostom expounds) pulchrum necessariumque donum, sed tum si qui
interpretari possit, accedat. A commendable and necessary gift, but then if
one that can interpret the toungue be added also. Here therefore M. Jewel (I
do not say, has corrupted the Scripture) but has deceived the Reader. For
all this by the Judgment of Chrysostom and Theodoret being spoken of the gift
of Interpretation to be joined with the gift of toungues, what makes it here
against the Latin tongue in the Service of the Latin Church, for the which M.
Jewel alleged it?

To proceed with M. Jewels Allegation out of S. Paul, The.226 Untruth, in
omitting yet other word^s of the Apostle.
behold good Readers how much he has omitted, necessarely appertayning to
the understanding of S. Paul's mind. For after these words the Apostle
concludes. Et ideo qui loquitur lingua oret vt interpretetur, And therefore he
that speaks with tongue (that is, he that has that gift) let him pray that
he may Interpret. For (as says Chrysostom) si diligenter postulabit,
potietur. If he ask it diligently, he shall obtain it. And the reason why this
gift of Interpretation or understanding is to be prayed for, the Apostle
adds, saying. Nam si orem lingua, spiritus meus orat, men's autem mea sine
fructu est. For if I pray in the Tongue, my Spirit prays, but my Mind or
understanding is without fru^e. What means saint Paul hereby? Speaks he of
saying the Service in the Latin or Greek tongue, which are both common
toungues to the Latin or Greek Church? Nothing less. Chrysostom upon this
place says. There were off old time many which had the gift of praying and
the gift of tounges joined together, Chrysostom. ibidem.
and they prayed and founded out the Toungue, as the Persian or the Roman
toungue, but in Mind they understood not what they said. Therefore (says
the Apostle) if I pray with the toungue the Spirit prays, that is the gift
which is given unto me and which moves my toungue: but the mind has no
profit thereby. What then is herein best to be done? What ought we to ask
off God? Forsothe to pray both with the Spirit and with the Mind. Thus far
Chrysostom. In commentar. ibide^.
Thus also Theodoretus, and S. Ambrose do expound this place. All this
therefore being so spoken of the miraculous gift of tongues, not of the
Service it self in any strange toungue, M. Jewel (alleging a long the text
of S. Paul) utterly let out. For as before the gift of speaking with
toungues, the Apostle called, Mysteria spiritu loqui, aedificare seipsum, to
speak Mysteries in the Spirit, to speak to God, to aedifie him self, so
now he calls it Spiritu orare, to pray in the Spirit, Plena sine dubio
Consolationis verba, al words full of Consolation undoubtedly (as Chrysostom
says), and all commending the speaking in toungues, though the gift of
Interpretation, be much preferred before it. Because it edifieth more. Which
edifying of the Congregation was the chief and only scope of the Apostle in
this Chapter. This being so concluded of the Apostle, he goes forth, and
says. Quid ergo est? The.227. Untruth For addinge to the Apostle. The word
What then is it? Or, as you have heard Chrysostom before to expound it,
What is best and most profitable to be done.? The Apostle answers. And here
come in the words that Master Jewel alleges.

I will pray with My, is not in the text of Saint Paul.
my Spirit, I will pray with My, is not in the text of Saint Paul.
my Mind, I will singe with My, is not in the text of Saint Paul.
my Spirit, I will singe with My, is not in the text of Saint Paul.
my Mind. These words what they mean, you have heard before out of
Chrysostom. Let us go forth with the text of S. Paul as M. Jewel alleges
it.

If thou bliss with thy Spirit, how shall the ignorant sue Amen unto thy
thanks giving? For he knows not what thou say. In the Church I had lever
etc.

In these words Lo, M. Jewel has wickedly corrupted and mangled S. Paul.
First, where he says, The.228. Untruth in adding to holy Scripture
If thou bliss with thy Spirit^ For the word, Thy, is not in the text of the
Apostle, but is presumptuosly added to holy Scripture by Master Jewel. For it
is a matter that skilleth much, and that alters much the meaning of the
Apostle. The Apostle means here B^nedicere Spiritu, to bless in Spirit, as
he meaned before, orare spiritu, to pray in Spirit. That is, as Chrysostom
says, P^regrina lingua gratias agere. To bless or give thanks in a strange
tongue, even as before to pray in Spirit, was to use the gift of strange
tongue in prayer. in a tongue utterly strange and unknown how shall etc.
This much for the word Benedicere Spiritu, to bless in Spirit, according to
the meaning of Chrysostom. Now if the Apostle had said (as Master Jewel
alleges him) If thou bless in thy Spirit, it could not have been taken, for
blessing by the gift of tounges, as Chrysostom takes it: For that gift
proceeds not of our Spirit, but of the Spirit of God. And it is a kind of
blessing not in our Spirit, but in that Spirit, which as Chrysostom says, is
Donum concessum lingua^que mouens. A gift that is granted, and that moves
the tongue. Verily a Miraculous gift, given as Chrysostom says, Olim, in the
old time, in the very primitive Church, not given then in his time, or at any
time sense.

The 229. Vnthruthe A foul and wicked depriuatio^ of holy Scripture
But now to an other most manifest corrupting of this text committed by M.
Jewel: If thou bliss with thy Spirit, (says M. Jewel out of S. Paul) how
shall the ignorant say, Amen? Saint Paul has not so, but thus. The true
words of S. Paul
How shall he that supplieth the room off the ignorant, say Amen? So have
all Copies both Greek and Latin, that are known to be extant. Behold
therefore good Reader, a most manifest Corruption of holy Scripture by M.
Jewel. It is great skill whether we read, the ignorant, or, he that
supplieth the room of the ignorant. Indoctum, says Chrysostom promiscuam
plebem voca^. Primasius in 1. Cor. 14. Idiota qui. Idio^a ^antu^ propriae
linguae tenet. Se^ ^ius in 1. Co. 14
By the ignorant the Apostle means the Common people. But he that supplieth
the room of the ignorant, and of the Common people, he that (as Primasius
says) pro idiota, id est pro ignaro respond^t, Amen, answers Amen for the
ignorant, he is him self no ignorant, but learned. He is called Idiota, which
has skille only of his proper and Mother tongue: But whosoever has learned
the Common learned tongue beside, as the Greek in the Greek Church, the Latin
in the Latin Church, he is no more Idiota, but accounted among the learned,
and such a one as may supply the room of Idiota, and answer for the
ignorant. Again, Idiotam appellat eum, qui in laicorum ordine constitutus est.
The Apostle (says Theodoretus) calls that man Idiota, which is yet in the
order of the lay people. But he that supplieth the room of the Idiota,
Theodore^u. in 1. Cor. 14.
is or ought to be of the clergy. Thus much difference there is between the
Ignorant, and him that supplieth the room of the ignorant. Why therefore does
M. Jewel thus wickedly corrupt the words of the Apostle? Why does he
allege, the ignorant, instead off him that supplieth the room of the
ignorant? Is not this an evident and manifest Corruption of holy Scripture?
Had it not been much for the vauntage of M. Jewel to conceal those words of
the Apostle, he would not so shamefully have nipped them of, quite, in the
midst. And who will trust you now (M. Jewel) in doubtefull matters, which
do so deceive us in plain things? In deed M. Jewel would have S. Paul to
say that the Ignorant him self should answer, Amen: whereby he thinks he
might conclude that they ought therefore to understand the priest. But neither
Saint Paul requires the ignorant to answer, but him that supplieth the room
of the ignorant, neither does S. Paul speak here of the Service done in a
Common learned tongue, but in a strange tongue used by the way of the
miraculous gift of tounges.

For (and mark well gentle Reader) there was in the primitive Church in the
Apostles time beside the Common prayer and set Service of the Church, a
certain peculiar gift of praying in a strange tongue, of the which the
Apostle here speaks, and Chrysostom in an other place thus writes. Vna cum
his omnibus (Prophetiae, sanitatum, linguarum donum dicit) erat and precum
donum, In epist. ad ^om. Hen^^. 14
quod and ipsum Spiritus dicebatur. Quo qui praeditus erat, pro pl^be vniuersa
preces fundebat. Beside all other gifts (of prophecy, of healing, and of
tounges) there was also a gift of prayer, which was called, the gift of the
Spirit. He that had this gift, prayed for the whole multitude. And he gives
hereof the reason, showing also the manner in these words. For whereas not
knowing what is good for us, we ask many things of God that are not
profitable for us, this gift of prayer came upon some one of them which then
lived, who for such things as might be profitable for the whole congregation,
both stood him self and prayed for all the other, and also taught the other.
The Apostle therefore In the v^^j. to the Romans.
here calls by the name of Spirit both such a gift, and also that soul
which received such gift, and prayed unto God and mourned. For he that was
found worthy of this gift, standing up with great compunction off mind,
and also with much lamentation, such lamentation I say, as from the heart
lies prostrat before God, and prays for all such things as are behoofull
for the congregation. Of the which manner, the deacon at this day is a token
praying for all the people. Thus far Chrysostom. This praying by the way of
a miraculous gift, was no set, ordinary, and appointed Service, to be readen
out of the book, as now we have it, and as in Chrysostoms time it was, but a
manner of miraculous praying upon the sooden, so as the Spirit moved. Again he
that had this gift of praying, did not only pray him self, but also alios
edocebat, he taught and instructed other. To pray, it was not requisite he
should be understood. For that was done gemitibus ijs qui ipsa quidem mente
deo se prosternunt: by sighynges, such as from the heart do prostrat them
selves before God. But to teach other, it was necessary that he should be
understood. Therefore when any man used that gift of prayer with the gift
of tounges together, praying in a strange tongue, without prophetia the gift
of understanding added thereunto, he spoke mysteries, he prayed to God, he
edified him self, he prayed in Spirit. But he edified not the hearers, he
prayed not ( mente) in mind and understanding. When he so prayed, the learned
him self which supplied the room of the ignorant did not understand him,
nor could not answer Amen to his prayer. Why? Because he prayed in a strange
tongue, because he used or rather abused (touching the edifying of other) the
miraculous gift of tounges. The.230 Untruth in leaving out again other
wo^d^s of the Apostle Chrisost. hom. 35. In. 1. Cor. Theodoretus in. 1. Cor.
14. Oecumenius in. 1. Cor. 14.


And therefore the Apostle immediately says (which words also M. Jewel has
quite in his text left out, and so deceuied ones again his Reader.) For thou
geuest thanks well, but the other is not ed^fied. that is, as Chrisostom
expounds, spiritu concitatus sonas, thou geuest out a sound, being stirred
up with the Spirit: as Theodoretus expounds it. Thou prais^st God being
moved with that divine gift, but he that hears thee, is no whit edified. So
Oecumenius says. The Apostle referring worthy praise to the gift of tounges
says, For thou geuest thanks well, etc. Thus by the mind of these learned
Fathers, all this giving of thanks and blessing in the Spirit, or in a strange
tongue, is a giving of thanks or blessing by the way of that miraculous gift
of tounges, not by using the set and ordinary Service in any learned or Common
tongue known to the learned that, supplieth the room of the Ignorant. The
Apostle in all this Chapter speaks of no such Matter. You see therefore good
Readers how fittely and truly M. Jewel and his fellows do allege this place
of S. Paul against the Service in a common learned tongue, such as the Greek
tongue is to the Greek Church, and the Latin to the Latin Church.

But let us grant a while to M. Jewel that S. Paul has all this while
spoken of the Service in a learned tongue unknown to the Common ignorant
people, let us I say for a while grant it against the exposition of so many
learned Fathers, and against the very evidence of S. Paul's text. Yet S. Paul
says of such a one as so prays. Tu quidem been gratias agis. Thou geuest
thanks well, Nay, says M. Jewel, It is a maruailous miracle that any man
will be so wicked as so to use it. M. Jewel calls that thing wicked of the
which S. ^aule by his opi^ion speaking, sai^t^ was w^l do^e.
These are your very words M. Jewel about the beginning of your text upon
this Untruth. Now I ask you M. Jewel.

Did S. Paul speak in this place of praying in a strange tongue by way of
the miraculous gift, which the speaker him self sometime understood not, and
which was done by some one man moved thereunto upon the soden? Did he speak it
of praying in a learned tongue though understood of the speaker him self, yet
not understood of the Common people, and ordinarely used for the Service of
the Church? If the first, then what makes this for your vulgar Service? then
why do you bring it here against the Service in a ler^ed tongue? then why do
you and your fellows all, so stoutely apply this place to prove that the
Service ought to be in the Vulgar tongue? A. dilemma to M. Iew^l.
Last of all then how do you bring that miraculous praying of some one man
moved thereunto by the Spirit against the Ordinary set Service of Gods
Church? If the second why do you call that wicked so to be used, and those
men impudent which w^l^ defena ^^, which the Apostle in express words says,
was Well done. Answer to this dilemma M. Jewel with all the shifts, phrases,
gloses, and euasions that you can possibly devise. I think the best answer
that you can make, is to provide that our books be stayed at Grauesende, and
the world may never see your nakedness, wickedness, and abominations.

The.231. Vnt^^t^e in o^itti^g yet other ^orde o^ the ^po^tle.
Before I come to the rest of the words which you have alleged out of S.
Paul, I must put the words which go before, left out by you again
fraudulently M. Jewel. I say, Fraudulently, because the concealing of them
has hindered the truth, as it shall now appear. After that S. Paul had
said, Thou geuest well thanks but the other is not edified, it follows. I
thank God that I speak (my self also) with the tongue of you all. In
co^^^e^tarijs I^id^m
that is, as Chrysostom expounds it, Theodoretus also and Oecumenius, I have
the gift of tounges more then any of you all. But I had lever (here begins
M. Jewel, The.232. Untruth For Saint Paul says not. with my tongue, but In
lingua. In the tongue that is, by the gift of strange tounges.

The.233. Untruth in adding again to S. Paul's text.


leaving out also the word, But) to speak five words with my mind, so that
I may instruct others, then ten thousand words with my tongue, Then it
follows after many sentences, which M. Jewel straight adioyneth, let all
things be done to the ed^f^ing of the people. And yet the words, of the
people, are not the words of S. Paul. Now what means the Apostle in these
words? Forsothe he prosecuteth the using of the miraculous gift of tongues. I
my self, says S. Paul, can speak in as many strange tounges as any of you
all, or as the greeks do read, Magis quam omnes vos linguis loquor, I speak
in tounges more then all you. Yet I do not affect this speaking, with tounges.
I had rather speak five words to edify other, then ten thousand of words,
(not with my tongue, as M. Jewel has falsely translated it, but) in lingua,
in the tongue, that is, by the miraculous gift of tounges alone, where the
gift of Interpretation is not also used, whereby the Congregation might be
edified. Now who sees not that all this discourse of the Apostle is far
wide from uttering the Ordinary Service of Gods Church in any tongue known or
unknown? Yet that the matter may be more clear and evident even to all men,
let us produce and prosecut yett farther the words of S. Paul which do
follow: though not alleged by M. Jewel at all, vntell we come to his last
words. Let all things be done to edify.

It follows in S. Paul. The.234. Untruth in o^itt^ng, (...) of the Apostle.
C^rysost. H^n. 36. i^ 1. Cor.
Brethern, be not like Children in understanding. But in evil doing be
childern, in understanding be ye perf^ct. For (as Chrysostom upon this place
says) Childern use to gape and wonder at small matters, but at weighty
things in deed they wonder nothing at all. Therefore seeing th^se Corinthians
having the gif^e of tounges thought they had thereby all things, allthough
that were the v^ry lest of all the other gift^s, the Apostle sai^th unto them.
Be not like children etc. You see the Apostle prosecuteth the matter of the
miraculous gift of tounges, and speaks yet nothing of the Common Set
Service. Let us go forth with the text. Esa. 28.
For it is written in the law. For I will speak to this people in other
tounges, and in other lips: and yet they shall not so hear me neither,
says the Lord. All this is to debace the gift of tongues when it is used by
it self alone. The Apostle goes forth. Therefore tounges serve for a token
not for the faith^full, but for the vnfaithefull. But prophecies (or
interpretation) are not for the vnfaithefull but for the faithefull. Such a
token or provocation to admiration, the gift of tounges was to the gentiles of
Parthia, Theodoretus ibidem.
Media, Mesopotamia, and diverse other nations, when they heard the Apostles to
preach in all tounges upon Whitsondaye. But prophecies, which consiste in
interpretation or revelation do serve for the faithefull, do move and strik
them. So by the gift of prophecy Ananias and Saphira (says Chrysostom) were
stricken to death of S. Peter. Chrisost. Homil. 36.
Now to put an example of all this, the Apostle says. If therefore the whole
Congregation come together, and all speak in tounges, and some infidels or
ignorant men do enter, will they not say, you are mad? For so, many of the
infidels upon Whitsondaye hearing the Apostles to speak in tongues mocked the^
therewith, and said, they were droncke. But many other also wondered thereat.
Ibidem.
Therefore (as Chrisostom here says) Non signum, sed ruditas accusatur
increduli: Not the sign of speaking with tounges, but the rudeness of the
unbeliever is here blamed of the Apostle. Thus the speaking of tounges is
allwaies debaced, but yet not utterly reproved. But if all do prophecy (that
is, do interpret or reuele that which is spoken in tongues) and then any
infidele or ignorant do enter, he is convinced of all men he is iudg^d of all
men for the secrets of his heart are made open: and so falling on his face, he
will adore God, and pronounce that ver^ly God is in you. All this is spoken,
says Chrisostom, vt interpretem adiungere cogat, to force the Corinthians, to
add to the speaker in tongues, an Interpreter. Now therefore the Apostle
concludes, and says. What is it then brethern? When you come together,
every on of you has a psalm, has doctrine, has revelation, has the
tongue, has Interpretation. Let all things be done to edify. Thus far the
whole text of S. Paul from the beginning of M. Iewelles allegation to the end
thereof.

The drifte of S. Paul is this. You come together, one of you has the gift
of singing. For (as Chrisostom says) psallere sic quondam doni diuini fuit,
sicut docere. In old time, singing was of the gift of God, even as teaching
was. An other has the gift of Revelation, an other of speaking with tongues,
an other of prophecy or Interpretation. But to be short. Non est longo donorum
dis^rimine opus. Vna res est quam volo, quam quaero: vt proximus edificetur.
Chrisost. homil. 36. Ibidem.
There needs not such a long distinction of gifts. It is but one thing that
I desir, that I seek for. That your neighbor may be edified. Lo here is
according to the doctores Judgments, the whole issue, process and discourse,
of the blessed Apostle in that Chapter, which also in that which follows he
prosecuteth yet more, giving a particular order how they shall speak with
tounges, and how they shall interpret one after an other, not talk confuselye
without an interpretour. We see the whole drifte of the Apostle is that the
Corinthians in using the gift off tounges, should add also the
Interpretation thereof unto it, that the Audience might be edified. Here it may
be objected. If the Apostle require the Corinthians to have an interpretation
and exposition of that which was spoken in strange tounges, at the time of
Common Prayer: does not the same reason bind us also to have our Common prayer
either in no strange tongue at all, or else to have with all an Interpretation
thereof, to the intent that the people now also may be edified? To this I
answer diverse ways. And Mark well gentle Reader our answer herein. First I
say the Apostle speaks not of the strange tounges used at service time, at
the Oblation time, at the time of celebrating and Ministering the holy
mysteries, but at the time of preaching. Prove this you say. Thus I prove it.
First, the Apostle persuadeth in all this Chapter, the Corinthians not to
affecte so much the gift of tounges, as the gift of Interpretation. And the
reason he adds, saying. He that speaks in the tongue, speak^th not to men,
but to God. For no Man hears (that is, understands) him. But in the sprit
he speaks mysteries. Now he that prophecyeth (that is, which interprets
and expounds) he speaks to men, he speaks to edify, to exhort and to
conforte. Now who doubts but this edifying, which consists in
Exhortations, and in Counforte giving, apperteineth properly to homilies,
sermons, and preaching? In this case therefore it is necessary that the people
understand that which is said. Now in the Oblation, and holy ministration,
it is a time of prayer, not of exhortation and preaching. This to be the end,
intent, ad drifte of the Apostle it appears by this entry and beginning which
he makes. To this purpose has he alleged all that before has been said, as
the comparisons of the musical instrument, of the Trumpet, and so forth. At
the end also of his disputation it appears yet more evident. For thus he
says. Si ergo conuenit vniuersa ecclesia, and omnes fore loquantur, intrent
autem idiotae and infideles, nonne dice^t quod insanitis? If there the whole
Congregation do mere together, and all speak with tounges, and then both
ignorant men and infidels do enter, will they not say, that you are mad?
Lo, that which the Corinthians did in these assembles, where they spoke in
tounges and so forth, was so open, that infidels and all might enter and both
have and see what was done. But such might only come to Sermons, not be present
at the holy ministration. Therefore that which the Corinthians did in those
assemblies was no part of the holy ministration or oblation, wherein the
mystical prayers were uttered. The mayor or first proposition of this argument
is the express saying of the Apostle. The minor or second proposition is
evident and manifest to all that are learned and expert in the practice of the
primitive Church. For as the Catechumins, so much more all infidels departed
out of the Church as soon as the sermon was done. To the sermons the very
infidels came sometime, and to nothing else. To certain prayers also the
Catechumins were admitted, but not to all. Whereof we read of Missa
Catechumenorum, August. fer. de ^e^p.
the Mass or service of the Catechumins. Post sermone^ (says S. Augustine)
fiet Missa Catechumenis. The Sermon being ended the Catechumins are dimissed.
By these therefore it is evident that this using off strange tounges was not
at the time of Prayer and oblation, but at the time of sermons and
exhortations. And this be the first answer.

Secondarely I make this answer. The Apostle in deed among other examples, as
of the Musical instrument, of the Trumpet, of private comunication, of private
prayer, brings also for example, the Common prayer used in a strange tongue,
when he sayethe: If thou bless in spirit, how shall he that supplieth the
room of ignorant, answer, Amen. That is, as has been before declared, if thou
give the Benediction in a strange tongue, by that miraculous gift of tounges,
how shall etc. But here (and mark well gentle Reader) it is to be
understood, there are two sorts of strange tounges. One is prorsus
peregrina, utterly strange and foraine as well to the learned as to the
unlearned, as well to him that supplieth the room of the ignorant, as to the
ignorant him self. So Chrisostom a greek Father, reakoneth up for such
strange tounges, the Persian and the Roman, Homil. 35 in 1. Cor. 14.
not the learned greek tongue. which yet to the common people of greece was (no
doubt) strange and unknown. This kind of strange tounges was used of them
which had that miraculous gift, not only at the time of sermons, but also at
the time of prayer. Of such S. Ambrose speaks, qui aliquando Syra lingua,
plerunque Hebraea in tractatibus aut oblationibus vtebantur ad commendationem,
Amb. in. 1 Cor. 14.
which used sometime the Syrian tongue, oftentimes the Hebrewe tongue both in
their Sermons and in their Oblations, as well at prayer time as at preaching
for a vain glory. This kind of strange tounges used in Common prayer, where
the gift of prophecye or interpretation is not added with all, the Apostle
brings in for an example, to show how absurd it is to use the same in
preaching. For as in the prayer the learned which supplieth the room of the
ignorant, can not answer, Amen, to that which he knows not: so in preaching
much less can the people be edified when such strange tounges are used
without an Interpreter. An other kind of strange tongue is that, which to
the ignorant only, is strange. For to him every tongue is strange beside his
natural and mother tongue. Sedulius. in. 1. Co. 14.
For he is in S. Paul called idiota, an ignorant, which understands no more
then his own tongue, such as are men of the Country and handy cratftsmen, but
he that supplieth the room of the ignorant, he has knowleadge of more then
his own natural tongue. For there is and allwaies has been in the Church
of Christ a Common learned tongue, which tongue, though to the ignorant it is
strange, yet to the Church it is not strange. That tongue in the which, the
Scriptures, decrees, the laws, the Councels, the Fathers writings, and the
public prayers of the Church are contained, is the Common tongue of the
Church, and is no strange tongue to the Church. Such is the greek tongue to
the greek Church, and the latin tongue to the latin Church. Bessarion in
epist. ad Graecos.
Tertia enim dari non potest. For a third Church beside these two can not be
given, says Bessarian a learned writer and a greek borne. Of the Common Greek
tongue to all the Greek Church, S. Hierom witnesses, In pr^emio ^. ad Gal.
saying that the Galathians, excepto sermon Graeco, quo omnis Oriens loquitur
propriam linguam eandem quam Treuires habuere, beside the Greek tongue the
which all the East spoke, had also their proper Mother tongue, the very same,
that the people of Treuires (a part of old Gallia) had. This was called the
proper tongue of the Galathians, because the Greek, which the Galathians as the
rest of the East Church used, was not their proper and natural tongue but a
Common tongue to all the East Church. Common to all, not particularly, but
generally, not to every one of every part of Greece, but to some of all
parts thereof. Common gentium sapientibus, to the wise men of the gentiles,
Tractat. in Ioa^. 117.
for whose sake as S. Augustine says, the Greek tongue was so esteemed, and
made Common. Last of all the Greek was a common tongue to the East Church, as
the Latin tongue was to the Weast Church. Of the which Venerable Bede a learned
light of our Country, writes very notably, speaking of our own Country of
England. Lib. 1. Histor. gentis Angl. ca. 1.
Hec in presenti quinque gentium linguis vnam eandemque veritatis scientiam
scrutatur and confitetur, Anglorum videlicet, Britonu^, Scotorum, Pictorum and
Latinorum, quae meditatione scripturarum omnibus est facta Communis. This
Island at this present with five sundry languages, does study and set forth
the knoweleadg of one perfect Truth, that is, with the language of the
English, of the Britains, off the Scotts, off the Peightes or Redshankes,
and of the Latins, which Latin tongue by the study of holy Scripture is
made Common to all the rest. Lo the Latin tongue was the Common tongue, and no
strange tongue to those people of diverse languages: and how? by the study of
holy Scriptures. For in that tongue they had their Scriptures, their Doctors,
their Councelles, and their public Service. Yea this learned tongue was then so
Common to us Englishemen, that under Theodore that learned Archbishop of
Caunterbury about nine hundred years ago, Beda. li. 4.
they could speak the Latin tongue (as Venerable Bede reports) yea and the
Greek also as readely as their own mother tongue. Cap 2. Histor. genis Anglor.
And as this was in our own Country, so out of all doubt it was through all
the west Church. I mean the Latin tongue was common and familiar to them all.
This common tongue he that understood not was called Idiota, In 1. Cor. 14.
the ignorant, says Sedulius. Upon this distinction of strange tounges it is
evident that though the Apostle by the way off an example, blames the
blessing at Common prayer made in a strange tongue, that yet he means not by
that strange tongue, that which is the Common learned tongue of the Church,
and which he that supplieth the room of the ignorant is acquaynted with all,
though it be a tongue of the ignorant him self not understood, but that he
means thereby such a strange tongue, as was used by the miraculous gift of
speaking with tounges, and which was so strange, that neither the ignorant,
nor he that supplied the room of the ignorant understood, yea and the which
the Minister or priest him self understood not. Therefore Chrysostom says.
If thou give thanks in a strange tongue, Hom. 35 in 1. Cor. 14
which neither thou do understand thy self, nor do interpret unto other
(such was not the Common learned tongue, which every Minister in the Apostles
time understood right well) subijcere Amen plebis non potest. He that is of the
people can not awnswere Amen, and when thou say, secula seculorum, which is
the end of the prayer, he that hears thee, will not say, Amen. For why? Thou
talkest in a tongue utterly strange, which thy self understand not. This
was not the Common learned tongue, which both then and now every priest
understands, but it was a strange tongue, used by the miraculous gift of the
holy Ghost. To awnswer therefore shortly to the objection made, I say. The
Chief disputation of the Apostle in that Chapter is not of strange tounges
used at the Oblation and prayer, but at the Sermons and preaching. Therefore his
disputation in that place touches nothing the Service of Christ's Church now
used in the Common learned tongue. Secondarely the Apostle though he speaks by
the way of an example of the Common prayer used in a strange tongue, yet he
means that strange tongue which was used by the way of mirac^^ous gift,
he means not the Common learned tongue, which to him that supplieth the room
of the ignorant (whose duty it is to awnswer Amen.) is not strange, though to
the ignorant him self it be perhaps strange. that is, not utterly unknown,
but not distinctly understood. The third awnswere may be, that the same
blessing in Spirit in a strange tongue (which the Apostle by the way of
example brings in) though it was done in the Common prayer, yet that blessing
was no part of the Common prayer, set in books, and ordinarely used (as we
have it now, and as in Chrysostomes time they had it) but it was a blessing or
thanks giving that some one of the Congregation used upon the soden being
moved and stirred thereunto by the Spirit, as we have before out of Chrysostom
proved at large. By all this it may appear that this fourtenth Chapter of the
first to the Corinthians, as of M. Jewel and all his fellows not only
vnfittely, but very grossly and ignorantly applied to prove their Vulgar
Service.

What will they say, if it may now be proved out of Saint Paul, that in the
publicque prayers of the Church, as no strange tongue is to be used, which he
that prays or he that instead of the ignorant does answer, can not
understand, so also no mere Vulgar tongue must be used? Let us consider the
rest of Saint Paul's comparisons and examples in this place of the which
B^nedicere Spiritu, to bless or pray openly in Spirit, that is, in a
strange miraculous tongue is one. Trumpet gives out a certain, propre, and
distinct sound. idiota, but, qui supplet locum idiotae. Not the ignorant,
such as promiscu^ pl^bs common people (says Sedulius) is, but it is he that
supplieth the room of the ignorant, which is learned, which has skill of the
Common learned tongue. He must make awnswer, to him I speak in the public
prayer. He therefore must understand me. Now that he may answer me and that
he may understand me, I need no more to use the Vulgar tongue, then the
Musicion, the Trumpetter, the talker, or the private prayer, need to apply his
music, to blow his trumpet, to utter his talk, and to pray after such a
sort as all other may understand and take profit by. But only it suffiseth,
that he which supplieth the room of the ignorant, do understand me, it
suffiseth that I speak in the Common learned tongue, which he is acquaynted
withal, even as the Musicion plaieth to please the skillful, the Trumpetter
blows to give warning to the soldier, and so forth. Mary to preach, as I
then direct my talk to the whole people, so it is nccessarye that I speak in
such a language, as all the people may understand me. And so the Church of
Christ does and allwaies has done, as well in the one as in the other. Thus
the disputation of Saint Paul in this place, not only helps nothing your
Vulgar Service M. Jewel, but, I may say to you, it gives a great crack
thereunto: Let now every indifferent Reader Judge, whether the Latin Service
be used in the Latin Church with the breach of S. Paul's Doctrine, as you
most wickedly and fondle do babble at Paul's Cross, and as you M. Jewel in
this your facing Reply do impudently brag and crake.

The.2^. Vntr^^^. For not upon D. Hardinges warrant, but upon the Doctors of
Christ's churches warrant you must so believe.
And yet must we upon M. Hardinges warrant needs believe that all this makes
nothing for the English Service in the Church of England.

Not upon D. Hardinges warrant, but upon the warrant off the holy Fathers,
Saint Chrysostom, Theodoretus, S. Ambrose, Primasius, Sedulius and Oecumenius
above alleged, you must so believe, if you will be a Child of those
Fathers, M. Jewel.

And for as much as all the people can not hear the priests prayers at the
Altar, (which has from the Apostles time hitherto ever ben a place to
celebrat the oblation at) turning him self for the most part to the East,
according to the Apostolic tradition, in what tongue so ever they be uttered
for distaunce of the place they remain in, it is no inconvenience (such
admitted in to the Quire as have better-vnderstanding of that is said or
song) that the rest re^a^ne in semely wise in the neither part of the Church
etc.

The.236. Untruth. Slanderous.
The 82. Untruth. The Aultars or Common Tables stood in the mids of the
Church, as shall appear.

No man says the contrary M. Jewel. We know in Ancient Churches, at Ments
in Germany, and in diverse Cities in Italye, especially in Rome it self, diverse
Aultars sto^de at this day toward the middle of the Church, so that the
priest at Mass has his face to the people, as we have seen in those places.
Neither does D. Harding say that the Aultars stood otherwise in the Apostles
time. Only he says. Aultars have been ever sense the Apostles time. Now M.
Jewel to show his good will to D. Harding, and to utter some Copy of his
knowleadg, makes D. Harding to say that he does not say, to make an untruth
where none is, and to pro^e that no man denies. Therefore in repeting the
words of D. Harding he alters them in to sundry Frames and facions, to pick
matter of quarelling, and to multiply untruths, and says.

There have been Aultars (says M. Harding) even from the Apostles time.



The.237. Untruth. In falsifying the text of D. Hardinge Jewel. The 23^.
Untruth. as before.
And that as it is used now far of from the Body of the Church.

That is not true. D. Harding says it not. His words may be seen before
alleged.

The.239. Untruth.
Neither could the people beneathe hear the priest standing above at the
Altar

The.240. Untruth.
This is an other Untruth. D. Harding speaks of no such manner in the Apostles
time.

Or understand what he meant.

This is the third Untruth touching the Astostles time.

But only were instructed by holy reverend Ceremonies.

This is the fourth Untruth. Neither D. Harding says so, nor any mane^^. For
beside Ceremonies, the people by preaching is taught.

The.241. Untruth in like manner.
And gave consent unto all that was said by the priest, and yet knew not what
be said.

This makes the fifte Untruth. D. Harding says no such matter. Now after
that M. Jewel has charged D. Harding with all these propositions, as if he
had affirmed them each one, printing them all in a distinct letter, as the
words of D. Harding, then he cries out and says.

The 24^. Untruth joined with a Slander.
This man could never utter so many Untruths together without some special
privilege.

O M. Jewel. You could never have avouched so many Untruths of your own,
nor so untruly have charged D. Harding with such a Number, but that your
book was printed Withdraw Special Privilege. And now we understand M. Jewel
why your book is come forth, more then other books are, Withdraw Special
Privilege. Forsothe (as it may seem) because you might utter your Untruths
with some special privilege. For without some special privilege, you say, The
cause why M. Ievvelles Reply is printed. With Special Privilege.
D. Harding could never have uttered so many Untruths. You did well therefore
M. Jewel to get you a Special Privilege, For the better auouching of your so
special and so many Untruths. Now touching Aultars which D. Harding says
have been sense the Apostles time, and you deny, what have you to the
contrary? You say.



For how say you M. bishop? Your brethern of France, how minister they the
Communion without Churches. With you (as you say after) an altar and a holy
table is al one. How say you then? Think you they minister without tables
because they have no Churches? Or if they have holy tables without Churches
because they have a Communion, think you the Apostles had no Aultars, because
they had no Churches, having yet a Sacrifice. You know M. Jewel. An altar in
greek is (...). as much English, as The place of a Sacrifice. Then to prove the
Apostles had no aultars, if you will reason like a divine, this is a good
reason. They had no Sacrifice, ergo they had no aultars. But you knew it was a
harder matter to prove that they had Churches, then that they had a Sacrifice:
And therefore you had rather to reason like a Mason, then like a divine. How
beit that there were Churches built even in the Apostles time, certain old
Churches yet standing in France do bear witness. As at Orleans a Church
called yet S. Pierre le vif. because it was builded S. Peter yet living. And an
other at Paris called S. Estienne de gr^^s, because it was builded by S. Denis
and his co^panyons which were greeks, in the honor of S. Steven. Verily of
aultars in the Apostles time, Martialis, Dyonisius Areopagita, and Ignatius
living all with the Apostles do testify. In epist. ad Burdegal.
Martialis says. Sacrificium deo creatori Offertur in ara, no^ homini neque
Angelo. A Sacrifice is offered unto God the Creator upon an Altar, ^pist. 6.
not to man nor to Angel. Ignatius says. Vnum est altar toti Ecclesiae. The
whole Church has one Altar. Dyonisius Areopagita writes of the bishopp going
Down from the Altar to the nether part of the Church, with incense, ac
rursum ad altar ipsum sacrificij consummandi causa reremeantem, Hierarch. par.
3^ ca. 3^
and then returning up again to the Altar to make an end of the Sacrifice.
That Origin and Arnobius (whom M. Jewel alleges) affirms the Christians to
have neque aras neque templae, neither aultars, nor churches, they mean the
Christians had none such in honor of stocks and stones, not that they had
none at al. Else by the same reason M. Jewel may pluck down churches as he
has done aultars, because those doctors say, the Christians had no churches.
S. Augustine herein speaks very notably saying. Augus. Epis. 49.
They which understand Christian letters of both testamentes, find no fault
in the wicked rites of Paganes, they build Church^, ordain priesthoods, and
offer sacrifices, but for that they do these things in the honor of idolles
and devils.

Last of all we confess and know, the Altar is commonly called the holy
table among the Doctors, because of the heavenly banquet ministered therein.
But an altar or (...) it is called (...) for the very sacrifyce. Therefore the
plucking down of aultars is not heretical because the stone is broken, but
because the external Sacrifice is denied, Augu lib. 17 ca. 20. and lib. 10. c.
6. et 20 De Ciuit. Dei. Harding.
the true proper and due worship of Allmighty God, as S. Augustine vehemently
and at large proves in his books de Ciuitate dei.

For the priest understands it for the better part, if he be learned, and (83)
the people be not utterly ignorant. Because of often preaching, long custom,
solemn feasts and sundry Ceremonies.

The.243. Vntr^uhe Sl^undero^^. Stapleto^.
The 83. Untruth. For the simple people understands not one word or syllable
of the latin tongue.

How hangs this reason of youres M. Jewel? The people understands no one
Syllable of the latin tongue, Ergo neither by often preaching, nor by long
custom, nor by solemn festes, nor by Ceremonies they understand not the
Service. The fondness hererof will easily appear by the like. The people
understands not one word or syllable of the latin tongue, Ergo by no
preaching nor instruction they can understand the doctrine of S. Augustine, S.
Hierom and other Fathers written only in the latin or greek tongue. Or thus,
Ergo the people can not understand a great part of M. Iewelles Reply, which
has so much latin in it. Although the english be annexed straight, and the
whole expounded unto them. No doubt but the people both may and does
understand great part of the Service, where the Curat does his duty. But if
the Curats do not their duty, or rather because in deed off long they have
not herein done their duties, therefore God whippeth us justly with these your
heresies and schisms M. Jewel. Howbeit we trust of his mercy, he will at
lenght cast the rod in the fire, and restore us to unite.

And when we shall appear before Christ in that dreadful day of judgment
(84) we shall not be required to give an account of our understanding, but
faith presupposed, of our Charity.

The.244 Untruth Slanderous. Stapleto^.
The 84. Vnt^uthe. For it is written. He that knows not, shall not be known.
1. Cor..14.

It appears hereby M. Jewel, that either you have small divinity or little
charity, either you are a petite doctor, or else a very malicious wrangler, and
a pelting hicke scorner. For as touching this matter whereof you note here D.
Harding as speking untruly, you may take your pen Master Jewel, and score
it up also for untruth upon holy Scripture which says that in the day
off judgment God shall reward every man according to his works, not
according to his knoweledge. And again. opera illorum sequuntur illos. their
works do follow them. And in the ghospel where our Savior describes unto us
the form of his judgment, he ^aieth to our charge the lack of good works,
as not visiting the sick, not clothing the naked, not feeding the hungry, and
such like. S. Paul also after he had declared, that in the Church were
Apostles, prophets, teachers, the gifts of miracles, of healing the sick, of
speaking with tounges, of interpretation of tongues, yet he says adhuc
excellentiorem viam vobis demonstro. I tell you yet of a more excellent way.
And that is Charity M. Jewel, Matt. 2^.
which S. Paul in the next chapter following commends above all knowleadg,
all gifts, all speaking with tounges, yea above faith it self, 1. Cor. 12,
concluding at the end of the chapter these words. Now therefore remain
these three. Faith, ^ope, Charity. But the greater of these is Charity. Cap. 13.
And is it now an Untruth M. Jewel to say that we shall give an account of
our Charity (faith presupposed) and not of understanding? You know S. Paul
again says knowleadge puffs up, but (...) edifi^th. And the inferiors are
commaunden to obey their overseers, which watch and ward for their souls.
But you allege us a text of S. Paul, where he says. 1 Cor. 14.
He that knows not, shall not be known. What knowleadg is that M. Jewel?
Let S. Paul him self teach you. He says. I have judged my self to know
nothing among you, but Jesus Christ and him crucified. To know Christ is the
sufficient knowleadg (for salvation) for every Christian man, not called to the
charge of others. And so according to the saying of S. Paul, he that knows
not Christ, he that has no faith, shall not be known of God. But faith
presupposed, not knowleadg but Charity shall be required of the people.

For as much as the Service consists in manner altogether of the Scriptures.

The.245. Untruth. Slanderous two w^ie^.
The 85. Untruth. In the Romish Service there are infinite vanities besides the
Scriptures.

This is but a slanderous lie M. Jewel. I have perused your whole text in
this place, looking to have found some one of these infinite vanities, noted by
you. But I find not one word thereof. Therefore M. Jewel as it was soon
said, so, vntell you prou^i^, it will be thought to be a lie, as it is in
deed, and a very slanderous lie against the Church of God. Malice made you
speak it. But Truth choked you; not able to prove it.

Though we understand not the (86) words of the Scripture, which we utter
with our mouth, yet the heavenly powers and Angels (says Origin) understand
them, and thereby be invited, and that with delight to help us.

The.246. Untruth. Slanderous.
The.86. Untruth. For Origin speaks of the ignorance of the Allegory, not of
the words.

As among the infidels (says Origin) the Contrary powers (he means devils)
by such and such names in verses or enchantments, do serve and attends, and
apply that, unto which they are called by such and such names, perfo^rming at
though it were their bounden duty therein even so and much more the heavenly
powers and Angels of God, which ac^^mpanie us (as our lord in the gospel of
the little ones of the Church says, that their Angels do allwaies assiste in
the sight of God beholding his face) do take it gratefully and gladly if we
always utter out off our mouth the words of holy Scripture, and the sound
of these names, like as certain verses and enchantments. For though we
understand not that which we utter with our mouth, yet those heavenly powers
which assiste us do understand them, and are delighted, as invited with a
certain verse to help us and succor us. Thus far Origin. By this similitude
it is evident he meant of words and not of the allegory first because the
similitude consists in enchantme^ts. These enchantme^ts are done by bate
words, not by any allegory, and that when those words are not understood.
Then by Origens mind the Angels are also delighted to hear us pronounce the
words of Scripture though we understand them not. Secondarely Origin speaks
of the ignorance of that which we utter with our mouth. But that are the
words only, not any allegory. Therefore he speaks of the ignorance of the
words not of the allegory

The 247 Untruth For Origin spoke off the Scriptures read in homilies and
lessons, a part of the Service.
Now whereas Master Jewel says, Origin his purpose was here to speak of
reading the Scriptur^^, not of the church Service, and notes therefore both
in the text and in the Margin very solemnly, that D. Harding wresteth Origin,
having cast such a blott upon him, he says it only and proves it nothing.
But that Origin spoke of the Scriptures read in the Service, it appears
probably first for that the Scriptures were at that time in Alexandria first
read in the Service as lessons, and after expounded by the way of homilies:
and also that Origin him self was at that time the Common and ordinary maker
of such homilies: and last of all that these very words of Origin are a
part of such an Homily ordinarely made after the Service. Let now the truth
speak, whether D. Harding has wrested Origin, or M. Jewel slaundered D.
Harding.

If all prayers made in an unknown tongue be a mocking of God (as Beza says)
then were the prayers uttered by miracle in the primitive Church with tounges,
which the vtterers them selves understood not (after the mind of Chrysostom)
a mocking of God. For I see nothing, whereby they are excluded from his (87)
general saying and universal proposition.

The 248. Untruth Slanderous and peuish.
The 87. Untruth. This general saying of Chrysostom is Untruly reported.

Here M. Jewel for lack of better game, hunteth after letters and rippeth up
syllables. Upon the term ( His) he would found an Untruth, him self
construing untruly the saying of D. Harding. For D. Harding by these words
(his general saying) meant not any general saying of Chrysostom, but the
general saying of Beza, which went but few lines before, and is this. What
Prayers so ever be made off any man in a tongue that he understands not, they
be to be taken for a mockery of God. From this general saying off Beza M.
Jewel, they are not excluded (says D. Harding) which in the primitive Church
uttered the prayers with tounges which the vtterers them selves (after the
mind of Chrysostom) understood not. For even these also by the general
saying of Beza were mockers of God. This is no bishoplike demeanor M. Jewel,
but a childish behavior: no sad writing, but a rascal wrangling: no show
of honesty but a mere scurrilite, to fight upon terms, and quarrel about
sillables, either contrary to your own knowleadg and iudgegement, or else
without all judgment, with much oversight, lightness and rashenes.

As the Vulgar Service pulls their minds from private devotion, to hear and
not to pray, to little benefit of knowleadge for the obscurite of it: so the
Latin giving them no such motion, they occupy them selves, whiles the priest
prays for all, and in the person of all, in their private prayers, all for all
and every one for him self.

The 249 Untruth Slanderous.
The 88. Untruth. For the vulgar Service increases devotion, as by sundry
Authorities it shall appear.

people it self confesses, they are much distracted from their devotion, by
attending to the Minister reading the Service and not understanding it. Yea do
not your own doings M. Jewel confess it? You have taken order in certain
places of the realm (as we certainly understand) that between your matins
and the Communion there be a stay made of half an hour or so, to thentent
the people in that mean while may attend to their private prayer and private
devotion. Why is this order taken, but because at Service time the people is
distracted from private prayer, and private devotion? And truly herein, whether
the private devotion of the people be not much more now distracted by harkening
to there english Service which yet they understand not altogether, then it
was at the latin Service, when they understood nothing, I dare to make the
people itt self judge thereof. The reason M. Jewel, why you esteem the
english Service to increase devotion, more then the latin, is because you
imagine for certain that the people understands it. As I will easily grant
they do sometimes understand some part thereof: so that they do allwaies
understand the whole, though you would grant, yet no wise man will grant it,
and the people it self, I dear well say, will deny it. Verily I have heard of
a Gentleman which reading the Book of the Statutes in english, confessed he
oftentimes understood not what the Statutes meaned. And doubtless Holy
Scripture if it were not much harder then the english Statutes are, so many
learned commentaries should not have been made thereupon: so many heresies had
not ben grounded upon the doubtefull interpretation thereof. Brefely itt had
not been so many hundred years read only in the learned tounges greek and
latin. The Scripture therefore being not allwaies understood though in the
mother tongue, no maruaill if the people be some times distracted. For when the
Minister reads on still, and the people Harkening thereunto knows not what
it means, what shall they do? Shall they harken? It is to no profitt. Shall
they let the Service go and fall to private prayer? Your order is against it,
whereby if any harken not to the Service, he shall be taken for a papist. Thus
by your vulgar Service the people oftentimes either is forced to be idle, or if
he will be well occupied, incurrech displeasure. What is distraction from
private devotion, if this be not? Thoching your Authorites, the saying of
Chrisostom (that praying together in the Church with our brethern, De
inco^prehensibili dei natura Hom. 3.
avails more then when we pray alone etc.) makes directly against your
first protestanticall doctrine off praying under headges and in chambers when
you should come to Church, but for common prayer in a vulgar tongue itt makes
not so much, as for the private prayer of each one praying in the Church each
by him selue, and all with the priest. Lyra saying that the people answers
Amen to the priest with more devotion when he understands the prayer, says
truly touching the duty of answering. 1. Cor. 14.
But that (according to the Doctrine of S. Paul) stands not in the whole
people, but in him qui supplet locu^ idiotae that supplieth the room of the
ignorant, which words M. Jewel in alleging the whole place of S. Paul page
194. guilefully and fraudulently left out, to make the reader believe that the
whole people was bound to answer Amen. Justinian speaks of the loud speaking
of the prist, not of the Service to be understood as we have before at large
declared. In the 70. Untruth
The saying of S. Augustine ( how can he singe duly which knows not what he
sings? In prologo super psalm.
) pertain evidently ad Psalmistas to such as were appointed by order of the
priest to singe (as we have before declared out of the 4. Counsel of Carthage)
not to all the people, whose duty it was to pray in the Church, not to singe
psalms. The particular application of the psalms which are song to our own
selves (whereof S. Basil speaks) may as well be done of devout people in
the latin Service as in the english. Ad clericos Neocaesarienses.
Certain it is the people of Cappadocia (of whom S. Basil there speaks) had
not the greek for their vulgar tongue, as has been before proved in the 69
Untruth, and yet were these psalms, (as all the other Service under S.
Basil) song and said in the greek tongue, as appears by the prayers yet
extant in greek in the Mass or liturgy of S. Basil. Then as the people of
Cappadocia applied the greek service to them selves, so may the people of
England apply the latin Service to them selves, if they will assiste
deuoutely, give their assent to the priest gods Minister, and lift up their
hearts to God with him. So has the Church these many hundred years used. It is
not now to learn of you M. Jewel. She has, and at all times has had (mark
this well M. Jewel) the holy Ghost to prompte her, to guide her, and to
assiste her, and shall so have in aeternu^ for ever, Joan. 14.
if Christ be true of his promise. Thus are your authorites answered. Thus is
the truth avouched and proved M. Jewel: and you found a slaunderer not so
much of D. Harding, as of the Truth, which shall at lenght confound all that
be against her.

The nations that have ever had their Service in the vulgar tongue, the people
thereof have continued in Scismes, errors, and certain Judicial obseruances,
so as they have not been reakoned in the number of the Catholic Church. As
the Christians of Moscouia, of Armenia, of prester Joan his land in Aethiopia.

The 250 Untruth Slanderous, and peuis^.
The 86. Untruth. For the Service in the Vulgar tongue never was cause of
Schism or heresy.

D. Harding says not so much. Their Vulgar Service was not the cause of their
Schism. But there schism and other heresies were the cause of their Vulgar
Service. For having ones divided the^ selves from the Church in Doctrine, they
chose also that order of Service, which was contrary to the Church. I perceive
M. Jewel. It is all one with you, whether a man bid you drink ere you go,
or go ere you drink.

Wherefore to conclude, seeing in six hundred years after Christ the Service
of the Church was not in any other, then in the greek and latin tongue, for
that any man is able to show by good proof, etc.

The 251. Untruth Slanderous. The 252. Vntr^the For the Contrary has not
been proved at all.
The.90. Untruth. The Contrary is sufficiently proved in the 15. division of
this Article.

All M. Iewelles proufes are sufficiently and particulary at large disproued
in the same division. See the answer to the 78. Untruth. So the conclusion of
D. Harding is sure, and M. Jewel according to promise must subscribe.

The heap of Untruths, which M. Jewel says in his margin are here laid
together in the Conclusion, have been all before particulary examined and
justified.

As the bold assertion of M. Jewel is plainly disproued, so the old order of
the Latin Service in the latin Church whereof England is a province, is not
rashely to be condemned: especially whereas (91.) being first committed to the
Churches by the Apostles of our country, and the first preachers off the Faith
here, it has been authorized by the continuance off almost a thousand years
without control: etc.

The 253. Untruth Slanderous. Capitain and Notorious. page 190.
The 91. Untruth. For the first preachers off the Faith in this I^elande we^e
greeks and Hebrews, and not Latins.

This has been told us twyse or thrice before, and now to awnswere it fully, I
think it good, both for Country sake, that the State of her touching the
first cummyng of Religion unto her may be known, and that Truth also may
not be suppressed, by any alleging of an other truth. And first, what M.
Jewels discourse is about this matter we shall consider. After that, we will
shortly declare who were in deed the Englishemens first Apostles, with
defense of their honor and worthynes. Touching the first.

190.
Ghildas says, that Joseph of Arimathea, that took done Christ from his
Cross, being sent hither by Philipp the Apostle out of France, began first to
preach the Gospel in this Realm, in the time of Tyberius the Emperor.





Niceph. lib. 2. cap. 40.
For Simon Zelotes (says he) in preaching the Gospel went thourough
Aegypte, Cirene and Aphrica, and afterward, through Mauritania and all Lybia,
and brought the same doctrine even to the weast Occeane, and to the Isles of
Britannie. So that it appears he went a pace like a Cursor that tells good
news, but he converted not (I trow) every country through which he went.

The 253. Untruth For Theodoretus makes no singular mention of S. Paul or
the time of his cu^myng.
Theodoretus says, that S. Paul Immediately after his first delyuerie in Rome,
under the emperor Nero, preached the Gospel in this Ileland, and in other
Countries of the weast.

It is wonder that he should not hear, that Joseph of Arimathea and Simon
Zelotes had converted it already: if, as you imagine, Britanie received the
Faith when they preached there. But does Theodoretus say, that S. Paul, by
name, preached the Gospel there?

I beseech the (gentle Reader) to consider in this place, how particularly and
distinctly M. Jewel sets forth unto the, the cummyng of S. Paul in to
Britannie. He names him singularly (S. Paul) he notes the time ( after his
first delyuery in Rome) he sets it forth by the name of the Emperor ( under
the Emperor Nero) and all this he does, to make the believe, that Theodoretus
speaks so distinctly of S. Paul's cu^myng in to our country and preaching
there, in his own person, that it were impossible to doubt thereof. Now, if
Theodoretus say so much, then is M. Jewel discharged: if he do not, what a
bold and shameless fellow is he that dares so to make witnesses speak at his
pleasure, and so to abuse the credulity of the unlearned. Theodoretus words
are these. Nostri illi piscatores, Lib. 9. de curat. Grecaru^ ^ffect.
ac Publicani, sutorque ille noster, cunctis nationibus, leg^ Euangelicam
detulerunt etc. Those our fisshers, and Publicans, and that owr sower (of
tents) have brought the law of the Gospel unto all nations. And they have
persuaded, not only the Romans, and them that live under the Roman Empire,
but the Scythians also, and Sauromatas, and further, the Indians, the
Aethiopians, the Persians, the Seres, the Hyrcanians, the Britanus, the
Cymmerians and Germans, and (at one word) al man kind, and al nations they
have persuaded, to take the Laws of the Crucified, (Christ.) And they have
not used herein harness or weapons, nor infinite numbers of peeked shouldiars,
nor Perficat and Barbarous Violence, but persuasion of words, declaring by
them, the Utility and Profitablin^sse off the law which they preached. Thus
far Theodoretus.

And where now is here, that special cummyng of S. Paul in to Britannie. And
that after His first delyuerie in Rome? Where is it M. Jewel? And being not
here, why report you it so, as though it were here? What singular thing here is
attributed to S. Paul, which may not be said of every of the Apostles? And
think you, that every one off them, went through out and about the world, and
that every one of them preached personally in the I Will of Britannie?

If you had said (as of Theodoretus Authorite) that all the Apostles came at
the beginning to this Ileland, It would have seemed incredible. For, there
were more Countres (beside Britannie) to be gone unto, and all the Apostles
neither could nor would go to every place, nor it is likely they would al of
them go to one little Ileland, so far from the most populouse nations of the
world. But now, craftily, you cul out S. Paul out from the rest, and to make
it probable, that he should have time and leisure to do it, you say, that it
was after his first delyuerie in Rome. That he came to Britannie. Yet not only
S. Paul, but all the Apostles are mentioned by Theodoretus.

But what to have done? To have gone personally over the world? No truly, but
to have instructed the world and to have brought them unto him that was
Crucified. And how think you, might not that be done without their presence.
Who doubts thereof, but he that has no experience. For even at this day the
Fishers and Publicanes and sowers of Tents, whom Theodoretus speaks of,
which are S. Peter, S. Andrew, S. John, S. James, and S. Matthew, And S. Paul,
these do instruct the world at this present. But how? By their successors by
their Gospels and Epistles by their Prayers, and not by personal and visible
presence of body.

See then how openly M. Jewel deceaueth thee (Christian Reader) by drawing
that specially to S. Paul, which is spoken of all the Apostles generally. And
by referring that to the Persons them selves, which is understood of their
writings only or their succession.





For, besides the manifest account of years, which will not suffer either
Tertullian either Origene to have be^ hable to write upon the Scriptures, or
speak as in the place by you alleged, they do, before king Lucius received
the faith: how unreasonable and absurd were it, that (as you say out of
Tertullian and Origene) when the Ileland of Britain was subject unto Christ,
then should Lucius send to Rome and receive the Gospel.

For what needed any sending to Rome, if the Realm were already now
subjected unto Christ?

Bu^ here also, your Craftines appears, that whereas the truth is, that
before Lucius reign the Gospel was not by public Authorye received in the
I Will of Britain, you to make the matter less, Craft in placing of witnesses.
set Tertullian and Origin before to say that it was subject unto Christ in
their time. So that by alleging of Lucius after them, it should be thought,
that his sen^ing to Rome, was not for any Gospel to be planted in his
Realm, but only for some certain Advise of Eleutherius bishop, touching the
ordering of his Church and Realm. So that, as much as he can, M. Jewel
seeks always, how to diminishe or take away the praise, Thanks, Obedience,
and Reverence, that are due to the Bishops of Rome, for their labors taken in
converting of Britains and Saxons both.



Fugatius and Damianus sent from Rome by Eleutherius, had established the Faith
there, and before the Saxons had utterly destroyed it, by chasing away the
Britains.

But note here (gentle Reader) what difference there is betwixt Protestant and
Protestant, Civil and Frantike, sp^aking by Authority or prating of his
sense. I praise you in this place (M. Jewel) that you commend that Godly
Emperesse Helena ^o notably, and that you agree so well in that point, with
Saint Ambrose, Eusebius, Sez^menus and others. It is well done of you, to
honor her with your Testimony, whom Saint Ambrose and others, do notablye
praise for her Faith and Religion.. And what beast then must he be that calls
that A Tale, Calfe. arti. 3. page 86.
which Saint Ambrose and other, whom you allege, do not only take for a
true Storye, but also worthy to be readen and regarded? The Storye I mean of
her, goinge a pilgrimage to Jerusalem. and seeking of the holy Cross, and so
devoutly ordering it when she had found it, and caet. Certain it is (says
he) Superstitius she was. Again, She was a Concubine to Constance. As for her
Superstition, it is to evident. O worse then beastlynes. to Object unto any
person A fault forgeauen. Small Grace surely is in that mind, which without
cause will speak to the dishonor of Excellent personnages, and deprave the
good gifts of God in any off his Servants, what should a man say to such
fellows as wise as Calves or as wanton as Calves? A little soap of the good
milk, which you (Master Jewel) have geauen in this place, would profit him
much. For, if he will be instructed off you, then can you tell him of Saint
Ambrose, Eusebius, Sozomenus, how they praise her notably for her faith and
Religion. And if he will not, it shall be known, I trust, how obedient the
inferior ministers are to their Superintendents. But you perchance your self
will play the shreude Cowes part, and kycke down with your heels, this fair
deal of praises which you geaue here to Helena if you shall be asked whether her
pilgrimage to jerusalem, and seeking and honoring of the Croosse, were
commendable. Well, how so ever you esteem of her in deed we deny not but she
was an English woman and Christian, and that in her time the Faith was there,
as afterward also itt was in S. Chrisostomes time, whom for that purpose you
allege. The Conclusion is: that as before Lucius time the Catholic faith was
not openly received in England, so we wonder not if it remained there
afterward, as you have proved by Tertullian, Origene, Helena, and S.
Chrysostom.

But that it was not altogether geauen to Idolatry at the cummyng in of S.
Augustine what say you thereunto?

surmiseth the whole faith was utterly decayed.





touching Religion at the cummyng of Augustine. To that point speak I pray
you and show against D. Hardinge that the Faith was not utterly decayed.





A Gheasse.
Whereof it may be thought the king was no great enemy unto the Faith.





as it may be thought, Which argument is not grounded upon any others
Autho^ite but a Gheasse of your own. It follows.

Thus much shortly of the first planting of the Religion^ of Christ within this
Ileland etc.

Now let us consider in what state this R^alme Stood touching Religion, at the
cumming of Augustine: I thought you would have disproued D. Harding by good and
substantial Record, and showed thath in the English Nation the Faith was not
utterly decayed. But now, before you had well begonn, you have sodanely made an
end; and can say no more, but that, as it may be thought, the Saxons were
not enemies to the Gospel. By which it appears, that A short horse is soon
curried, and that a Faint cause can not strongely be mainteyned.

Thus then ends M. Jewels discourse. He shows that the Faith was among the
Britannes, from the beginning: but that is nothing to us which speak of
Englishemen and not of welchemen. he cummeth to the Englishemen, and geaueth a
great Gheasse at a matter nothing tending to any purpose, Concluding that as
it may be thought the Englishemen were not enemies to the Faith, because
forsothe the Queen a stranger borne served God after the Catholic and true
manner: but when they were made frindes of God, and partakers of Christ's Faith
he says nothing. Let us therefore now declare that, which M. Jewel is
afraied to have known and credited. And let us show, how the Faith has come
to us Englishemen only from Rome, that the unkind and cruel Childerne against
their only parents, may in time, whiles Repentance will b^ taken; return
again to the Obedience of that See, by whose Authority and provision the
English were first converted unto the Faith. Which to make the more open, let
us shortly rehearse in what State Religion was in Britannie before the cumming
of the Saxons in to it.

Of the cumming of Joseph of Arimathea, of Simon Zelotes or of any other, in to
this Ileland, there shall be no question between us and M. Jewel. For who so
ever came, and how so ever they came, The first open and known profession of
the faith in this Ilelande was by the preaching of Fugatius and Damianus, sent
from Eleutherius then Pope of Rome, at the req^^st of Lucius king of Britanny,
as Polidore writes. The faith openly profe^sed among the Britans. P^l^dorus
lib. 2.
For at the coming in of those ij. preachers, notwithstanding the faith
preached by Joseph of Arimathea, there were in Britany at that preasent, eight
and twenty Flamines of in^idels and three Arche flamines, in whose room Lucius
the first Christian king of Britanny placed so many bishops and Archebishops.
These three Archebishoprickes were of London, of York and of Gloucester. This
was done about the year of our Lord, Clxxxij.

From this time the faith continued in Britanny vntell the time or the raging
persecution of Diocletian and Maximinian, which fell in the year of our Lord
three hundred and odd. In that persecution S. Albane with sundry other
Britains suffered martyrdom, Beda lib. 1. the 6. and 7. chap. The faith
d^ca^eth among the Britannes Lib. 2.
as Polydore, and Bid do witness. Through the rage and fury of that
persecution (says Polydore by the report of Gildas a Britain him self) ita
relegio refrixerat vt sit pene extincta, the religion waxed so fainte that it
was well nere extinguished.

After being received somewhat in the time of Constantin the great, Beda lib. 1
the 8. and the 17. chap.
it was much infected with heresies, first of the Arrians, and after of the
Pelagians. The faith notwithstanding remained among a number of the Catholic
Britains, sound in substance and perfitt. Before the infection of the
Pelagian heresy, the Britains being forsaken of the Romans, and ouerpressed
with the invasions of the Scotts and Peightes or Redshankes, The first book,
the xv. chapter. Britans driven out of their Country.
called to their succor out off the high Germany, Saxons, English and Wites.
For these three nations (as Bede calls them) arrived in to Brittany out of
Germany. This their arrival fell in the year CCCC. xxix. These peoples as they
delivered the Britains from the foreign invasions of the Scotts and the
Redshankes, so in short time, they drove away the Britains them selves in to
the straightes off wales, which their posterite now occuieth, and possessed
them selves all the rest of Brittanny, except Scotland,

All these peoples that come out off Germany were utterly heathens and
infidels. The greatest number of them were Angli, English. they possessed for
their share at the first spoil, all that is now called England, except
Kent, Essex and Sussex. Which the Saxons possessed, and except the i will of
Wit, England out of the knowledge of God. 150 years.
Hampshere and part off the westcountre, which the Vites or Wites possessed.
In time the whole was called England and the people English. These peoples
English or Saxxons continewed heathen and infidels for the space of a hundred
and fifty years. All which time the Britain Christians (as Gildas a
countreman of their own bitterly complains) never vouchesafed to preach the
gospel of Christ unto them. But the goodness of God (says Venerable Bede) did
not so forsake his people, The xxij. Chap.
whom be foreknew to be called to salvation. But provided for the English
people much more worthy preachers, to bring them to the faith, then those
unmerciful Britains were. And who were they M. Jewel? Were they Hebrews or
Greeks? It follows in the History of Venerable Bede a learned and holy man by
the verdit of all Christendom, these many hundred years, in the sort. The
year off the nation of our Lord VC.lxxxij. Mauritius the 54. Bid the first
book, the xxiij. Chap.
Emperor after August reigned Emperor of Rome xxj. years. In the tenth year
of whose reign, Gregory a man of the greatest virtue and lerninge of his time,
was Bishop of the Roman and Apostolic See, which he gouuerned xiij. years,
vj. months and x. dais. This Gregory the xiiij. year of the reign of the said
Emperor, and about the hundredth and fifty year of the coming in of the
English men in to Britanny, being moved by inspiratio^ of god ther^u^to, sent
the servant of God, Augustine, and certain otheer Monks, which feared God, with
him, to preach the word off God unto the nation of the Englismen. Who obeying
the bishops commandment etc. The first conuersi^ of england to the Faith.
(as in the History it self it may at large be seen in many Chapters
following.) This man of God (as Bede oftentimes calls him) Augustine, arrived
into Brittanny then possessed for the most patt of the Saxons and englishmen
our forefathers, he preached unto Ethelbert then king of Kent, he converted him
and all his people to the faith. His companions and scholars in few years
after converted the whole nation. This Augustine with other monks that
accompained him, at their first coming, expressed (as Bede writes) the very
Apostolic order of living of the primitive Church, serving God in continual
prayer, watching and fasting, and preaching the word of life, to as many as
they could, despising the commodity of the world, as things non^ off their
own. taking off them whom they instructed, only so much as might serve their
necessites, A^^i. 8. fol. 151.
living them selves according to that they taught other and being ready to
suffer both troubl^s, and death it self in d^fense of the truth that they
taught. By these means God so wrought, that (as I said) the king and his
people were converted and Christened. The 255. Untruth. For he converted
thousands of infidels, but killed no godly.


This was a sh^rte Victory saeth M. Jewel Peter and Paul could never so
easily conquer kingdoms. But this matter stood not so much in winning the
unfaithful, as in kil^ing the godly.

O impudent, shameless and blasphemous Jewel. I speak in Gods cause, in the
quarrel of our Apostle blessed S. Augustine, in the defense of all our
forefathers the Christen inhabitants of the realm of England. The planting of
that Christen faith, by the which, so many hundred years, the whole estat of
England, the Noble Princes, the honorable Nobilite, the holy bishops, the
learned clergy, the devout people have yielded their souls unto God, the
preaching of that faith which all Christendom beside, of Italy, France,
Spain, Portugal, Afrike, Germany, of all the Northecountres, of Greece it
self in great part have holden with us and we with them, the planting and
preaching I say of that faith, shall impudent and blasphemous Jewel, bring
out of credit, calling it, a killing of the Godly? Let here that impudent
varlet answer, not worthy no more the name, either of English man or of
Christen man, let him answer I say, what godly did Augustine kille. Is the
converting of infidels to the faith of Jesus Christ, a killing off the Godly*
Is this the voice of a Christen man, of a preacher of Gods word, of a bishop?

Venerable Bede says of S. Gregory which sent this Augustine to preach the
Faith. Lib. 2. ca. 1
We may well and are also bound to call him our Apostle. For he being high
bishop over the whole world (says Venerable Bede) made our Nation the
Church off Christ, which had been ever unto that time the bondslaue of
Idolles. And how was that ( os impudens) but by the means of holy Augustine
whom he sent to preach and to convert us? Let the Epitaphe written upon
the toume of that holy man testifye. Which (as S. Bid records) was thus
conceived.

Here lies Blessed Augustine, The.3. Chap.
the first Archebisshoppe of Caunterbury, who was sent hither off holy Saint
Gregorye Bisshoppe of Rome, and strenghthened of God by vvorking of miracles.
Who converted king Elbert and his realm from the worshipping of Idolles to
the faith of Christ. Was this no winning of the vnfaithefull, was this a
killing off the Godly? Who would so speak and write, but some infidel him
self or Jew, M. Jewel? Has heresye so rooted out all shame and honesty
from your heart, that the converting from infidelitye and paganism unto
Christ, and that of your own Countremen and Forefathers, you call the killing
of the godly?

Let us I pray you, consider your scoffing Sprit. This was a short victory,
say you, Peter and Paul could never so easily conquer kingdoms. O Sir. Must
the Spirit of God be measured with the wisdom of your brain? Must God work
at your leisure and appointement? Go Sir and scoff in like manner at S. Paul,
Romans 15.
that he (as he witnesses him self) had filled all places with the gospel
of Christ, from Jerusalem as far as Illyricum. An other Jewel may scoff
and say here also: This was a short victory, and cet. But think you by the
cancred malice of your scoffing Sprit, to blotte the Blessed memory of our
Apostole, the signet of whose Apostoleship we are in our Lord, who though
not to other, yet to us, is an Apostle: For by the Gospel he begotte us in
Christ.

page 185.
Is there now, after the continuance of that faith well nere a thousand years
planted by him and his companions or scholars, vpstert one, and that in the
room of a bishop, in that self country, and of that country and nation,
which writes him an Hypocrite, a superstitious man, cruel, Blowdye and
proud above measure?

Know you the words M. Jewel? Remember you whose they are? They are the
Cancred words of the Spirit that speaks out of you. The Spirit of Malice,
Rancour and Contradictio^. They are your own words M. Jewel. In the third
Article, page 185. Thus you speak of Saint. Augustine our blessed Apostle.

The.256. Untruth. For none that knew him ever sa^ed so of him. Galfrid. li.
8. cap. 4.
He was a man, as it was judged by them that saw him and knew him, neither of
Apostolic Spirit, nor any way worthy to be called a Saint: But an
Hypocrite, a superstitious man, Cruel, Bloudye, and proud above measure.

^s^i^. 1.
Filios enutriui and exaltaui: Ipsi autem spreuerunt me. I have brought up my
Children, yea and I have exalted the^ to high vocations. but they have despised
me. What England has done for you, and how much you are bound to that
country, you know best your self, and we ca^ not be ignorant. And have you now
for all reward, blased out the Apostle of that people, with these Charitable
Titles: Hypocrite, Superstitious, Cruel, Bloody, and Proud above measure.
You, you M. Jewel have uttered this blasphemous Slander, and Slanderous
blasphemy, (against our blessed Apostle) A Blasphemy I say, not to be
comptrolled with the pen, but to be whipped whithe the Scourge. For they are
(as I have said) your own words. They are not the words of Galfride of
Munmouthe, whom you allege in the Margin. He has no such words. You belie
Galfride and you slander our blessed Apostle. Galfrid off all his nine books
wreten of the Acts of the kings off Britanny, only in the eight book the
fourth Chapter (the place by you quoted) speaks of our Apostle S. Augustine.
The 257. Untruth For Galfride has no such words as M. Jewel refers unto
him Galfr. lib. 8. cap. 4.
In that whole Chapter he has no such words, nor any like or leading
thereunto. Only he tells. how Augustine was sent in to britanny by S.
Gregory, to preach the Gospel unto the Englishmen, which were panymes at
that time. And how he required subjection of the Britones, and that they
would together with him, take the pains to preach the Gospel to the
Englishmen: And how Edelbert king of Kent seeing their disdainfulness,
stirred king Edelfride king off Northumberland, and other princes off the
Saxons against them: And how the Britones where ouercummed and a great number
of monks slain. But to S. Augustine he geaueth not one Title good or badd,
and much less such cruel and bloudieones as M. Jewel alleges.

If Galfride had so reported being A Welcheman, and one that lived at the
lest iiij. hundred years after the time of S. Augustines arryuing unto
Enlande, and being a writer otherwise, (I report me to Merlines prophecyes
libr. 4. to king Arthures Conquestes againg the Emperor Leo, and his host of
C C C C. and LX. thousand men, to the two Gyantes etc) so fabulous, vain and
poetical, lib. 7.
that he resembles more the Beuis of Hampton or Guy of Warrycke, then a grave
or true historiographer, you might certainly without any partialyte, have
judged, that being of that Country he speak of Affection, or living so long
after, might well miss the Truth, or at lest, that he was not worthy to be a
witness against Venerable Bede and holy S. Gregory, who both do highly
commend our Apostle S. Augustine, as partly I have before declared, partly
shall strayte ways declare. But now seeing that Galfride, your alleged
Author says no such thing, of what a facing and desperate Sprit be you, so to
Slander our Blessed Apostle, and then to father your Slander upon an other.

185.
But it makes you to be the more bold to say as you do off S. Augustine,
Because they that saw him and knew him, Judged him to be a man neither of
Apostolic Sprite, nor any way worthy to be called a Saint. And what are
their names I pray you then? Or from whence came they, or whither will they?
was Galfride one of them? It were hard for you so to say, considering that he
lived iiij C years after S. Augustine the monk, and by reason therefore could
not see him or know him. And if it were some other, why named ye him not in
your text or the margin?

Yet who so ever he were did he see him or know him better than Saint Gregory,
who choose him, who sent him, who commended him, who honored him? If there were
nothing in all S. Gregory's works to the praise off S. Augustine, yet, this
being so well testyfied, that himself first, (before he was Pope,) was minded
to go in to England to convert it, and that afterward he continued in his
holy and merciful and gracious intent in sending an other to do that Office:
who but insensible could Imagine, that so wise A man, would committ so great
a cause as the conversion of a whole Country is, either to him whom he never
saw, or whom he did not know? Undoubtedly therefore, If we had no other
argument, yet this alone, that S. Gregory trusted him in so great a matter and
so greatly tendered of his holiness, is sufficient enough to prove, that he
knew S. Augusti^eth right well what he was. But we have other Arguments out of
S. Gregory him self, by which it shall be perceived not only thath he knew S.
Augustine, but also lyked and praised him.

For he commends him to Desiderius and Sigarius bishops or France, by
special letters, Gregor. li. 5. ep. 54.
requiring them to help and cumfort, Augustinum seruum dei, praesentium
portitorem, cuius zelus and studium been nobis est cognitum, Augustine the
servant of God, the bearer of these present leters, whose Zeal and good will is
well known unto us. By the self same words he commends him also to
Theodoricus and Theodebert kings of France calling him The servant of god:
lib. 5. epist. 58.
whose Zeal and good mind is well known unto us.

Besides this, he calls him, his brother Augustine, lib. 7. epist. 5. ep. 30.
And in an other place testifies that he was A Monk of his Monastery, and
sent by him into England, which unto that time continued wicked and naught, in
cultu lignorum ac lapidum, in the worshipping of Stocks and Stones. And
further, he testifies that either Augustine himself, or they that were Sent
with him, did shine by so many miracles in that Country, that the notable
things which they do, may seem to follow and resemble the works and Power
of the Apostles. And again. That at Christmassetyde, S. Augustine baptized
more than ten thousand Englishmen,

He says further, to the praise of S. Augustine, that so great a multitude of
the English nation was turned to the grace of the Christian Faith, Lib. 9.
ep. 52.
that he had need to send more laborers thither, And in that epistle he
calls him, epist. 58.
our most Reverent brother and felowbishope Augustine To be short, God so
wrought by the hands of S. Augustine, to the conversion of England, Who would
think that any man would dare think him Cruel, bloody or proud above
measure, whom God, commends by gift of miracles and S. Gregory by so many
good words?
that S. Gregory thought it good to write unto him, a most wise and loving
letter, least the greatness of his gifts and miracles should extol him, For
after he had wo^dered at the might Grace of God which had brought great
things to pass in England, by the means of simple and weak men: yet (says
he) there is in this heavenly gift (most dear brother Augustine.) a thing
that with, great will, ought to be feared most vehemently. For I know, that
almighty God, has showed, by means of the great wonders, toward that
Country which he would to be Chosen, Wherefore it is necessary that of the
self same heavenly gift thou both rejoice with fear, and be also afried with
gladness. I mean that thou should be glad, because the sowles of Englishemen
are drawn by the outward miracles unto an inward grace, and that thou
should, fear least among the signs and miracles which are wrought, the
weak mind should lift it self up, with presumyng upon it self

Now least any perverse interpretour, should think S. Gregory, by this care
over S. Augustine least he should be puffed with any vanie glory, to signify;
that he was a proved and high minded fellow, it follows in the same epistle.
Haec autem dico etc? But I speak these things, because I would lay down the
mind of my hearer upon humility. As for thy humility (says he to S.
Augustine) Let it have her proper hope and trust, for Sinner as I am, I hold
this most Sure hope, that, by the grace of our almighty maker and redemer, God
and lord Jesus Christ, thy sins are already forgeaue^, and that thou art an
Elect and Chosen, to the end other men's Sins might be forgeauen through thee.
Thus far S. Gregory.

Let M. Jewel now come forth and show, either that there is One which better
saw and knew Augustine than S. Gregory Or that S. Gregory did ever count him
Superstitious, Cruel, Bloody, or Proud above measure, Or that ever any man
that knew S. Augustine has reported so wickedly, Cruelly and Proudly of him.
Galfridus to whom only M. Jewel refers us could not know S. Augustine, and
again he has no such words against him, as are objected by M. Jewel. On the
other side S. Gregory knew his co^uersatio^, allowed his behauyour, sent him of
Trust in to England, Commended him to bishops and kings, wondereth at the
works that God showed by him, calls him servant of God, most Reverend
felowbisshoppe, most dear brother, and hops most certainly that he shall
have no account to be made after this life for any fault or gyltines
remaining. And dares a wretched heretyke laden with Sins, either to burden
an holy and Virtuous Father with Slanders unproven, either to refuse the
testimony of true and well deserved praises geauen to S. Austen, by S. Gregory
him self which knew him so well?

Page 186. The ^58. Untruth pregnant and full.
Now that which M. Jewel alleges out of the History of Beda, to bring that
holy man S. Augustine our Apostle out of credit, is with passing impudency
auoutched of him. I beseech thee (good Christen Reader) to have recours to the
History it self, it being now set forth and published in the english
tongue. If thou be learned and missetrust the translation, confer the latin
therewith all. Read the whole second Chapter of the second book, out of
which M. Jewel has culled a piece for his purpose, and thou shall easelye
see, that Venerable Bede in recordinge that Historye had a far other
judgment in it, then the spiderlike venim of M. Jewel has sucked out. But
one thing I may not presentlye omit to warn thee of. M. Jewel alleges
out of Bid, that upon the refusal of the Britains accord with S. Augustine,
Ethelbertus the king raised his power, and slew great numbers of the
Britains, and a thousand and two hundred godly Religious men. For in this one
sentence he has couched three most manifest Untruths. First that the same
slaughter was made upon the refusal of the Britains accord. For long
before that slaughter the holy bishop Augustine departed this life, Lib. 2. Cap.
2.
as Bede in that Chapter records. Whereby it is evident that. S. Austin was
not the cause of that slaughter, Polidore also witne^seth the same Libro. 4.
as M. Jewel would have it to seem. Secondarely it was not Ethelbertus the
king of Kent whom S. Austen had converted, who made that slaughter, but
Ethelfridus the king of the North parts of England, whom Bid in the last
chapter of the first book compares to Saul for his great Victories. M. Jewel
named for Ethelfridus the heathen, Ethelbertus the Christened king, that it
might seem to have been done by S. Augustins procurement. Thirdly he calls
them godly Religiouse Men, who were in deed obstinate schismatikes, as the
which being gently admonished of their schismatical Obseruatio^s, co^tinewed
notwithstanding peruersely in the same, Lib. 2. Cap. 2.
as appears more largely in Bid.

Thus much by occasion of M. Iewelles blasphemies I have said in Defense of
our Apostle blessed S. Austen, and of the faith first planted by him among us
Englishemen.

She Service of England that now is, lacks some things necessary, and has
some other things repugnant to the Faith and custom off the Catholic
Church.

The 259. Untruth Slanderous.
The 92. Untruth, joined with a slander. Our Service contains nothing
contrary to the faith.



But I pray you M. Jewel, are the homilies part of your Church Service or
no? You will not deny but they are. man is justified by works not by faith
only. Iconomachi, your forefathers. Jacob. 3.
Fol. 12. and seq.
as I have before in the first Article at large proved. In these many points
Master Jewel your Service partelye lacks some things necessary, partly
has some things repugnant to the Faith and custom off the Catholic
Church, as D. Harding most truly said. And thus M. Jewel you were
slaundered with a Truth.

Now good Christian Reader for the better contenting of thy mind, and for a
full declaration that in Justifying only these Untruths, which it has
pleased M. Jewel to score upon D. Harding (most slanderously, as now thou
see) the chief and principal points of this Article have been discussed,
and M. Iewelles Reply in the most waightiest points answered, I beseech thee
to look back and to consider the whole substance of these M. Iewelles
Untruths in this Article, Fol. 56. b. and 57. b. e^ s^q. item fol. 100. ^
and to remember what has by occasion thereof been said. First it has been
showed and proved that not only in our Country from the first beginning of the
faith among us Englishmen, but also long before both in the greek Church, and
in the Latin namely in Rome, and France, the Service was in the greek and
Latin tounges, which the common Vulgar people understood not. And herein M.
Jewel is forced if he will abide to his promise, to yield and Subscribe. Next
the Constitution of Justinian which has so long served M. Jewel and his
fellows for a mighty and principal Achilles to fortify their Vulgar Service
withal, Fol. 69. b. and seq.
is proved at large to make nothing therefore: and M. Iewelles long lying
Reply in that behalf at large confuted. Fol. 86. et seq.
Thirdly M. Iewelles Examples (as he calls them) wherein he labored to show
that within the first 600. years some Countres had their Service in the Vulgar
tongue, are all and every one particularly answered, confuted, and proved no
Examples of any Vulgar Service in that age. Whereby it remains, that no
Vulgar Service in all that time in any one place appearing, the Only Service
was then in the learned tounges Greek and Latin, as it is now. Fol. 101. and seq.
Fourthely the Only place of holy Scripture that M. Jewel and his fellows have
to maintain their Vulgar Service by, namely the fourtenth Chapter of the
first to the Corinth. is proved at large to make nothing for the Vulgar
Service, but rather to overthrow the same. And M. Jewel in that place is
found ten times to have corrupted the text of S. Paul. Last of all the
blessed memory of our Apostle holy S. Austin the Monk sent by holy S. Gregory
to preach the faith to us Englishmen then Heathens and paynims, is defended
and delivered from the most impudent lies, Fol. 122. and se. q.
detestable Slanders, and desperate Reproaches, wherewith the tender heart of M.
Jewel has with passing Impudency charged him. Other Untruths as they were of
less weight, so they are with less labor, sufficiently yet and thouroughly,
discharged. It is now thy part, gentle Reader, indifferently to Consider the
vprightnes of M. Jewel, and the Truth of the Cause.

THE FOVRTHE ARTICLE. Of the Supremacy of the B. of Rome.
D. Hard. Diuis. 1.
THe Primacy of the Bishop of Rome, that is to say, Supreme power, and
authority over and above all Bishops, and chief gouuernement of Christ's
flock in matters pertaining to Faith and Christen Religion, was in the first
six hundred years, acknowleadged and confessed.

Page 220


The.260. Untruth Slanderous.
This power is confessed by S. Gregory a Bishop of Rome within the first six
hundred years. I allege him to you M. Jewel though he be a bishop of Rome him
self, because you have in this Article alleged him so Plentifully and so
stoutely against D. Harding, as if he had clearly condemned such Supreme
Authorite him self. I will allege and urge the very place that D. Harding
brings, and answer to all that you say against it, that the Christen Reader
may see with what Passing Impudency you allege S. Gregory against him self,
and yet cry out with open mouth against D. Hardinge, as though he had done
so. The words of S. Gregory are these. Cunctis Euangelium scientibus liquet,
Gregorius lib. 4. epist. 2.
quod voce Dominica Sancto and omnium Apostolorum Petro Principi Apostolo
totius Ecclesiae cura commissa est. Ipsi quippe dicitur: Petre amas me? pasce
oues meas. Ipsi dicitur. Ecce Satanas expetiuit cribrare vos sicut triticum:
Joan. 21 Luce. 22
and ego pro te rogaui Petre, vt non deficiat fides tua: and tu aliquando
conuersus confirma fratres tuos. Ipsi dicitur. Matthew. 16
Tu es Petrus and super hanc petram aedificabo Ecclesiam meam, and portae
inferi non praeualebunt aduersus eam. Et tibi dabo claues regni coelorum etc.
Ecce claues regni coelestis accepit, potestas ei ligandi and soluendi
tribuitur. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae and principatus committitur. Et tamen
vniuersalis Apostolus non vocatur. It is evident to all (says S. Gregory)
that knows the gospel, that the cure and charge of the whole Church has
been committed by the words of our lord to the holy Apostle Peter, Prince of
all the Apostles. For to him it is said. Peter love thou me? Feed my sheep.
To him it is said. Behold Satan has desired to sifte you as it were wheat,
and I have prayed for thee Peter that thy faith fail not. And thou being once
converted strengthen thy brethern. To him it is said. Thou art Peter and upon
this Rock I will build my Church: and the gates of hell shall nor prevail
against it. To thee I will give the kaies of the kingdom of heaven: etc.
Behold he receives the keys of the heavenly kingdom, the power of binding
and loosing is given unto him. The charge of the whole Church and principalite
is committed to him. Yet Peter is not called the Universal Apostle. Thus far
Gregory. In whose words I beseech thee gentle Reader consider three things.

Touching the first point, note the matter and pithe of this Article to be
confessed, which is the chief gouuernement of Christ's flock in the Bishop of
Rome. For as Peter was Bishop of Rome, as the Church to him committed endures
for ever, as that Authorite was not given for Peter only, so are the Bishops of
Rome his successors, so does that commission endure for ever, and so does that
Authorite take place, force, and effect for all the Church of Christ, from that
time forewarde for evermore. Therefore Chrisostom says expressly, that
Christ did shead his blood, vt pecudes eas acquireret, Lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
quarum curam tum Petro, tum Petri successoribus committ^bat to win those
sheep, the charge of whom he did commit both to Peter, and to the
successors of Peter. Of the which charge in an other place he says.
Ecclesiae Primatum gubernationemque Petro per vniuersum mundum tradidit, Homil.
1. de p^enitentia. Tom. 5.
that Christ delivered to Peter the Primacy and government of the Church
throughout the whole world. In which words we see M. Jewel the chief
gouuernement in Christ's flock to be confessed in Peter the Bishop of Rome,
and in his Successors.

Touching the second point, that this chief gouuerneme^t so confessed is
grounded upon the Scriptures, and Authorite of our Savior him self. For S.
Gregory after he had affirmed this chief gouuernement in Peter, he added the
reason thereof and said. Ipsi quippe dicitur. For to him it is said: Feed my
sheep. Lo upon this Commission of Christ given in holy Scripture to Peter
Only, Gregory groundeth the Authorite of Peter. So does also Chrysostom in the
place above alleged.

Touching the last point, mark I beseech thee (good Reader) diligently, that
though such principal Authorite over the whole Church be granted in Peter,
yet he is not for all that called an Universal Apostle. The Power is
confessed, the Name or Title is denied. Right so of any Bishop of Rome ever
sense Peter, that title or name of Universal Bishop, was neither desired nor
usurped. And yet the Authorite notwithstanding has been both confessed and
practiced. Never Pope more practiced this universal Authorite then Gregory him
self. His writings, decrees, and Epistles yet extant do most evidently
declare it. Yet no man ever more abhorred the name then he. M. Jewel in all
this Article has not showed One Pope that ever called or wrote him self
Universal Bishop. It is therefore a great vanity and but a point of a
co^tentious sprit in M. Jewel, to cry and call upon the name of Universal
Bishop in the Pope, the power and Authorite universal being confessed, the
name also by the Pope him self neither desired, neither usurped. For as S.
Augustine most truly tells you M. Jewel. Quid est contentiosius quam vbi de re
constat, certare de nomine? What is more Contentious then to strive upon the
name, Epist. 174.
when the thing is confessed? Let us see therefore what you answer to this
place of S. Gregory alleged by D. Harding. You say.

Page 225.
The.261 Untruth Slanderous.
If S. Gregory were now alive, he would charge M. Harding with open injury,
not only for altering his whole meaning, but also for mangling and maiming his
very words.



The.262 Untruth as appears.
M. Harding to prove that the Bishop of Rome was called the universal Bishop
alleges these words of S. Gregory.

By what name so ever the Bishop of Rome was called etc. this is clear, his
Primacy and Supreme power is confessed. Which thing being so, whether then he
were called by either of these names (he means of the Universal Bishop, or
Head of the Church) or no, it is not of great importance. And yet for the one
of them (he means the name of Universal Bishop) somewhat, and for the other
(of head of the Church) an infinite nu^bre of good authorites may be alleged.
But thereof Hereafter. Harken M. Jewel. Of these Names D. Harding says he
will speak Herafter. What then will he prove now at this present? He tells
you. Now Concerning the chief point of this Article, which is the Primacie of
the Pope Peter's successor. First it has been set up and ordained by God.
This, this, M. Jewel is the thing that D. Hardinge first will prove. For this
matter he alleged before Anacletus, and now he alleges Gregory. For this
point I say, to prove that the Popes supremacy was ordained by God, Gregory is
alleged. And we have heard Gregory to prove it in Peter, whose successor the
Pope is, The Shameless Impudency of M. Jewel.
by no less then three several authorites of holy Scripture. Here therefore I
beseech thee (gentle Reader) consider and mark the shameless impudency of M.
Jewel. Which not being able to answer to the Matter it self of the Popes
supreme Authorite, tells thee that these words were alleged to prove the
Name and title. He deceives thee, he mocketh thee, he abuses thy patience
gentle Reader. He turns thy mind away form the Matter, to make thee behold
only the Name. For thou shallt see that upon this Name and against this Name he
drives all his talk that follows, utterly beside the Purpose, and quite out
of the Matter. For now he alleges the words of S. Gregory.

The.263 Untruth Capitain and Notorious, in falsyf^ing. S. Gregory. Stapleto^.
Ecce Petrus claues regni coelorum accepit, and potestas ei ligandi soluendique
tribuitur. Cura ei totius Ecclesiae and principatus committitur. Behold, Peter
receives the kayes of the kingdom of heaven. To him is given power both to
bind and to loose. The charge and chief rule of the Church is committed to
him.

Here is an other notable and exceeding legerdemain of M. Jewel. He has left
out in his English, the word Totius Whole. where he should have said, the
charge and Chief rule of the Whole Church, he turns it, of the Church, and
leaves out, Whole. O M. Jewel may we not most justly and truly turn over to
you your own words, both that which go before, and these which follow now?
If S. Gregory were now alive he would charge M. Jewel with open injury, not
only for altering his whole meaning, but also for mangling and maiming his very
words. For in taking away the word Whole from the Church, you have maimed
his words, and altered his sense. Which was, that to Peter the Charge and
chief rule Totius Ecclesiae of the whole Church was committed by Christ him
self. But now let us hear forth your words.

The.264. Untruth Slanderous and Scornful.
Thus far Gregory, says M. Harding. And why no Farther? was he stayed with
the Choynecough, and forced to break of his tale in the midst? But mark
well gentle Reader, and thou shall see S. Gregory set to Schole, and kept in
awe, and not suffered to utter one word more, then M. Harding will give him
leave.

Mutato nomine de te fabula narratur. Change the name, and all ths tale is
told of you M. Jewel. For when you Englishing the words of S. Gregory,
said the charge of the Church, for, the charge of the Whole church was
committed to Peter, when you could not coughe out that word Whole, were you
stayed with the Choynecough M. Jewel, and forced to break of that word in
the midst? Have we not seen S. Gregory set to Schole by M. Jewel, kept in
awe by M. Jewel, and not suffered to utter one word more then M. Jewel would
give him leave? S. Gregory would feign have said in English the whole Church,
as he said in Latin, Totius Ecclesiae, but M. Jewel would not give him leave
to say so much. Thus M. Jewel, you have told a good tale for your self. Now
let us see how you have told it for D. Harding. It follows in your text.

Tamen Petrus vniuersalis Aposto^us non vo^atur. Yet Peter is not called the
universal Apostle.

reported, and nothing concealed that might alter, weaken, or diminish the
same? If they do, then by like you will show it. Let us see how you follow the
matter.

The.265. Untruth as appears.
M Harding says, The Bishop of Rome was called the universal bishop.



Peter him self being the Apostle of Christ yet was not called the universal
Apostle.

The.266. Untruth for D. Hard. has not broken of any part of the Sentence
alleged.
This does not derogate from the Power before confessed in Peter, but from the
Name which is not the quaestion at this present.

The.267. Untruth Slanderous. These words do follow: they were not in the
mids. Council Constantinopol. 8. ^^^ione. 8.
And would M. Harding have the world believe, that the Popes power is greater
and more universal then S. Peter's?

S. Gregory. We will not have the world to believe that the Popes power is
greater then S. Peter's, but that the Pope being successor of Peter has the
same power which Christ gave to Peter, and not only to Peter, but to his
successors, as we have heard Chrisostom expressly say.

These words M. Harding thought good to nippe of in the mids. Such is his
dealing in the allegation of the Ancient Fathers. If I list to use his own
terms, I might well call this Foysting or Cogging, or I know not what.
Certainly the holy Fathers in the Council off Constantinople say thus. It
is not meet for Catholic men thus to choppe and to pare the sayings of the
holy Fathers. It is rather the very property of heretics.

You teach us still M. Jewel how to answer your own demeanor. This word
(Whole) wherein the effect of S. Gregory's meaning stood, M. Jewel thought
good to nippe of in the mids. Such is the dealing of M. Jewel in the
allegation of the Ancient Fathers: So he corrupted before Clemens
Alexandrinus, S. Ambrose, Seuerus Sulpitius, S. Hierom and others. If I list
to use M. Iewelles terms, I might say he had the Choynecough etc. Certainly
the holy Fathers in the Council of Constantinople say thus. It is not mete
for Catholic men thus to choppe and to pare the sayings of the holy Fathers.
It is rather the very property of heretics. Exore tuo te iudico serve nequam.
Luc. 19.


As for the sentence which M. Jewel charge D. Harding to have nipped of in
the mids, neither was it in the mids, but a sentence following, neither did
the omitting thereof any thing derogat from the meaning of S. Gregory. M.
Jewel therefore has talked hitherto against him self pleasantly and largely,
but to the matter he has yet said nothing. Neither does he say any thing in
many words after. He imagines D. Harding to object that S. Gregory though he
blamed the name of universal B. in John of Constantinople, A feigned objection
of M. Jewel.
yet he claimed the same to him self, as a title only belonging to the Sea of
Rome. Hereupon he heapeth up a Mayn number of sayings of S. Gregory against
the title of Universal bishop as well in him self, as in any other. All that
is to no purpose. For it is not here defended by D. Harding. And it is not in
this place at all disputed of, nor at al in any other place vpholded in that
sense as S. Gregory blames it. It is neither required nor used of any Pope.
Therefore M. Jewel I may well call your labor therein Vanitas Vanitatum. For
it is a great token of idleness to be so earnest and so copious in disprouing
that thing that no man affirms. And yet M. Jewel so forces this matter, as
if all the right of the cause lay upon it. It is a lewd kind of logic so
stoutely to disprove that no man defends, and to leave that thing untouched,
which only should be answered. Therefore you conclude nothing against D.
Harding, when you say.

Page 227
By these it may appear that S. Gregory being Bishop of Rome would not suffer
the Name of Universal Bishop to be given neither to any other Bishop nor to
him self.



The.268 Untruth For S. Paul spoke not in like Sense. 2. Cor. 11 The.269
Untruth in missereporting the Text of S. Paul.
And whereas S Gregory says: The char^e and chief^y of the whole Church is
committed unto Peter, in the sense it is spoken in, we deny it not. S. Paul
likewise says of him self in like sense. Incumbit mihi quotidiana cura
omnium Ecclesiarum. There lies upon me the Daily charge of all Churches. And
further says. I reken my self to be nothing infe^iour in t^auail to the
highest Apostles.

Praeter ea quae extrinsecus sunt, insta^tia mea quotidiana, Sollicitudo omniu^
Ecclesiaru^. Beside the forain troubles and aduersites, my daily occupatio^,
the care of all co^gregations. And how? It follows. Who is troubled, and I am
not troubled, who is offended, and I am not offended? 2. Cor. 11
In this sense M. Jewel every good Bishop, and Priest, yea every good Christian
man has a care of all the Churches in the world. But (...) is sollicitudo not
cura and principatus, a hofulnesse and care, not a charge and Principal rule,
such as is confessed in Peter. Again if Paul being a chosen vessel, beside
all the other Apostles, had also such a care and charge as Peter above the rest
had, yet he had no Successor therereof, except at Rome, where it pleased God
he should take the crown of marrtyrdo^ with S. Peter. Gregor. li. 1. Epist.
24. Petrus Authore Deo ^anctae Ecclesiae principatu^ ^e^^ens.
Wherefore that Authorite either died in him, or if it had any Successi^n after
him, the Sea of Rome has it. But M. Jewel that S. Gregory spoke of a far
other charge and chiefty over the whole Chur^he in Peter, then was in Paul or
any other Apostle, (though other holy Fathers, as S. Hierom and S. Ciprian seem
to make all the Apostles equal) it appears evidently by an other Epistle of
S. Gregory, which your self alleges in this place. Lib. 4 Epist. 38
Thus he says. Certe Petrus Apostolus primu^ membru^ sanctae and vniuersalis
Ecclesiae est. Paulus, Andreas, Ioannes, quid aliud quam singularium pl^bium
sunt capita? Et tamen sub vno capite omnes membra sunt Ecclesiae. Truly the
Apostle Peter is the chiefest membre (under Christ) of the holy and Universal
Church. Paul, Andrew and John what other thing are they then the heads of
Particular flocks? And yet all are the members of the Church under one head,
Christ. The charge therefore and Preeminence given to Peter by S. Gregory's
confession, is greater and more ample, then the charge of Paul, or any other
Apostle. Peter had the charge of the whole Church, Paul and the other, of
particular flocks. And does M. Jewel think to persuade the world that. S.
Peter had the charge of the whole Church, in the like sense, as S. Paul had
the carfulness of all Churches? Or is it likely that M. Jewel knows S.
Gregory's mind better then ever S. Gregory knew it him self? This shifte
therefore can not serve M. Jewel. What other has he? We shall see by his
words.

The.270 Untruth in forging a false Argument upon D. Harding.
And will M. Harding hereof reason thus, Peter had the charge of the whole
Church. Ergo the Pope is an universal Bishop?

Iure domino by Gods law, not only by man's law. Ergo the power and
Authorite over all Christ's flock is acknowleadged and confessed in the Bishop
of Rome. And that not only by S. Gregory, but by Chrysostom also. Ergo then the
Untruth which you noted, is no Untruth, but you M. Jewel stand guilty
thereof. Ergo whether the Name of Universal Bishop were given or no, it is not
of great importance, the Authorite and Power being confessed.

The.271 Untruth Slanderous. For the Pope at this day chalengeth no such
title.
Certeinely S. Gregory says* Peter him self notwithstanding he received the
whole charge, yet is he not called the Universal Apostle. And can the Pope be
that thing, that S. Petre him self could not be? S. Gregory dreueth his
reason thus. If this title of Vniuer^alite might belong to any man, it should
ch^f^ly belong unto S. Peter, but it belong^th not unto S Peter. Therefore it
can belong to no man Hereby it is plain that the Bishop of Rome challenges
this day a title S Peter never had, that no holy, nor godly man would ever take
upon him, that S. Gregory utterly refused and detested and called blasphemy.

Seruum sernorum Dei. the servant of the servants of God. D. Harding goes not
about to prove it. Therefore you fight with your own shadow.





And now because M. Jewel has heaped out of the Epistles of S. Gregory a
main number of allegations against the title of Vniuersal^ Bishop, quoting
them with such Ambition in the Margin, that one very allegation he quoteth
Jewel. Pagina. 226, thus
three times immediately one after the other, lib. 4. Epist. 39
lib. 4. Epist. 39
and in the same sentence two other allegations, lib. 4 Epist. 39
as lib. 4. Epist. 32. and lib. 4. Epist. 38. he quoteth thrice also (each of
them) where as for these nine several quotations in the margin of both book
and Epistle, one only quotation of the book and three several quotations of
the Epistles had been sufficient, because I say, he has with such extreme
Ambition so heaped and multiplied his Allegations against that Title, which (as
it has been said) is of no Bishop of Rome usurped, required, or mayntayned in
that sense as S. Gregory reprou^th it, (that is, to be a Bishop Alone excluding
all other) I will now (by Gods help) declare by the Epistles of S. Gregory
him self, that notwithstanding he so abhorred that Name, calling it a puff of
arrogancy, a new Name, a Rash, Grego. li 6 Epist. 2. and.24. Item li. 4
Epist. 32.38. and.39
a Foolish, a proud, a pompouse, a Perverse, a Superstitious, an ungodly, and
a wicked title, a Name of error, a Name of singularite, a Name of vanite, a
Name of Hypocrisy, and a Name of blasphemy, notwithstanding he says, that
Whosoever ever calls himself Universal Bishop, Lib. 4. Epist. 38
or desires so to be called, is in his pride the forerenner of Antichrist,
last of all, notwithstanding, he vttertly refuse that Name, to be given either
to any other Bishop or to him self, that yet I say all this notwithstanding,
he practiced him self the Universal Authorite over the whole Church, and
every part thereof, through out all Christendom, as occasion served. M. Jewel
says.

Page 226 Grego. lib. 4. Epist. 38. The.^72 Untruth For the reason that S.
Gregory forces, serves not against the Bishop of Rome.
The reason that S. Gregory forces against the Bishop of Constantinople, may
serve as well against the Bishop of Rome. For thus he says. What answer will thou make unto Christ, that in deed is the head of the Universal Church, at
the trial of the last Judgment, that thus go about under the Name of
Universal Bishop to subdue all his members unto thee? This is the very
definition of an Universal Bis^op. Thus the Bishop of Rome attempteth to
subdue the whole Church of God, and all the members of Christ unto him self.
Therefore by S. Gregory's judgment he is the forerunner of Antichrist.

unto their Pastor, S. Gregory him self shall anon be witness sufficient,
that it was so, and ought to be so. Though therefore John of Constantinople,
who was no head of the universal Church, might worthily be blamed of S.
Gregory, for subduyng the whole Church unto him, under pretense of that proud
and unlawful Title, yet the Bishop of Rome (whose Supremacy over all the
Church none more then S. Gregory him self practiced) can not be blamed if he
claim that universal authorite. But this is not the chief or only reason that
S. Gregory forces against John of Constantinople for usurping that Name of
universal Bishop, that thereby he would make him self head of the universal
Church, but that thereby he would make him self, the Only Bishop of all the
Church, and all other no bishops at all. In this sense S. Gregory reproved
that Name not only in John of Constantinople, but also in him self or any
other. Therefore writing to the Emperor Mauritius he uses these words.
Gregorious lib. 4. epis. 32.

This Nestorius and Macedonius were both Bishops of Constantinople.


What man is this which against the commandments of the gospel, and decrees
of the Canons, presumes to usurp to him self a new Name? Would God, the same
man might well be one Bishop, without the hinderaunce of other, which desires
to be called the universal ^ishopp. Certainly it is known that many bishops
of Constantinople, have fallen in to the whirlepoole of heresy, and not only
been heretik^s but also Archeher^tikes. For from thence came Nestorius, which
teaching that Our Savior Christ was two persons, not believing that God could
be made man in one person, fell even to Iuish infidelite. From thence came
Macedonius who denied that the holy Ghost was God consubstantiall with the
Father and the Son. If therefore any man in that Church (of Constantinople)
do take that Name unto him (of universal bishop) what was the judgment of all
good men? Then forsothe the Universal Church lost her state and being (which
God forbid) when he which is called Universal f^ll. But God keep this
blasphemous name from the hearts of all Christ^n men. In the which the honor
of all priests is taken away while it is of one man arrogantly usurped.
Verily for the honor of S. Peter Prince of the Apostles that Name of
Universal bishopp was offered to the bishop of Rome by the Reverent Council of
Chalcedon. But no bishop of Rome did eu^r take that Name of Singularite unto
him, or ever consented to use it. And why so S. Gregory would none of your
predecessors use this Name or title? It follows immediately. Ne dum priuatum
aliquid daretur vni, honor d^bito sacerdotes priuarentur vniuersi. Lest that
whiles any Singular thing should be given to one, all priests should be
defrauded of their dew honor. In this sense S. Gregory abhorred that Name, as
it was a Name of Singularite, as a Singular title defrauding other of their
right, as a name in the which the honor of all other priests is taken away.
For so did this John of Constantinople affecte this Name of universal bishop,
as it signified the Name of one only bishop for all. Therefore S. Gregory in a
letter written at the same time to Constantia the Emperesse says thus. Lib. 4.
Epis. 34.
Triste valde est, vt patienter feratur, quatenus despectis omnibus praedictus
frater and coepiscopus meus solus conetur appellari episcopus. It is a heavy
hearing, that it should be patiently tolerated, when the said John my brother
and fellow bishop, coueteth to be called The only Bishop, setting all other at
naught. And again in an other epistle to this Io^n him self of Constantinople
he says. Lib. eodem epis. 38.
Ad hoc quandoque perductus es, vt d^spectis fratribus episcopus appetas solus
vocari. Thou art brought at length to this point that setting thy brethern at
naught, thou couetest to be called the Only bishop. And in the same epistle
again. Generalis pater in mundo vocari appetis. Lib. 7. epis. 69.
Thou couetest to be called the General Father in the world, as desiring in
deed to be the Father and Master of all alone. And to the Bishop of
Thessalonica he writes of Cyr^acusthis John's Successor coveting in like manner
that Title, Si vnus (vt putat) vniuersalis est, restat vt vos episcopi non
sitis.

If one (as he supposes) be an universal bishop, it remains that you be no
bishops at all. In this sense that Name was so grievously abhorred of S.
Gregory, and for that cause (because it emplied such a sense, as might do
injury to all other bishops and rulers of the Church) never used of S.
Gregory, or of his predecessors, or of any Pope since, that M. Jewel is
able to name. And therefore S. Gregory (giving the same reason) says
expressly in an other epistle to Eulogius the Patriarche of Alexandria, in
this wise. Your holiness knows, Lib. 4. Epis. 36.
that by the holy Council of Chalcedon this name of Vniuersalite was offered to
me as bishop of the Apostolic See, But none of my predecessors ever consented
to use this profane title: Because verily if one Patriarche be called
universal, other are made no Patriarchs at all. Which reason also in the same
epistle he repeteth yet again, Patriarcharum nomen coeteris derogatur.

Honor patriarcharu^ omnium negatur.


as being in deed the chief and only cause why he and his predecessors other
bishops of Rome, utterly refused and abhorred that Title. Thus it appears
that S. Gregory forced not that reason only or chiefly against the bishop of
Constantinople, which M. Jewel imagines, because by that Title he would
become Head of all the Church, but the reason which S. Gregory principally
forces against the bishop of Constantinople, and for the which he him self
and his predecessors refused that Title, is, that by the same Title he would
be the bishop Alone, the Patriarche Alone, the priest Alone. To Conclude. S.
Gregory forces two reasons against the bishop of Constantinople, why he may
not be called the Universal Bishop. And he gives one reason why he and his
predecessors have refused that Name. The two reasons against the Bishop of
Constantinople are these. First and principally because appetit solus episcopus
vocari, he coueteth to be called the only Bishop: because by that Name,
Patriarcharum nomen coeteris derogatur. Other Patriarchs are made no
Patriarchs at all. This was a new, a profane, a blasphemous, and an
Antichristian attempt. The second reason is by a consequence. For so it would
follow that he would subdewe all the Church to him, whose Church is known
to have been oftentimes the Ringleader and founder of wicked heresies: Which
were the greatest absurdite that might de devised. For thereof it would follow
that the whole Church should perish, the Universal Bishop perishing. The one
only reason that S. Gregory gives, why he and his predecessors, though by
the whole general Council of Chalcedon Vniversals oblato honor vocati sunt
they were called Universal Bishops that honor being offered them, Lib. 4.
epist. 38.
Why the Pope is not called universal.
would yet never use or enjoy that title, is (not because he and his
predecessors should thereby become heads of the universal Church, as if
that Authorite were injurious, but) lest that (as in four several epistles he
repeteth) si sibi in pontificatus gradu gloria^ singularitatis arriperet, Lib.
4. epist. 32.36. and. 38 and lib. 7. epist. 30. Meus honor est fratrum meoru^
solidas vigor.
hanc omnibus fratribus denegasse videretur. if any of his predecessors
should take unto him that singular preferment in the degree of bishopric, he
might seem to deny the same (preferment of bishopric) to al his brethren,
that is, the Pope by that means might seem to become the Only Bishop over all
Christen people, as that John of Constantinople attempted to be. For this
reason, for this inconvenience emplied in that Name, no bishop of Rome ever
usurped, or desired that name, though of other men before Saint ^regories time
they were so called, as it shall in the ^.8. Untruth appear. Now the other
reason off being Head over the universal Church of Christ, Saint Gregory
fo^ceth not against him self or his predecessors the bishops of Rome, both
because the Sea of Rome fell never to heresy, but by the especial prayer of
Christ for Peter the first bishop thereof is preserved, vt nunquam deficiat
fides eius that their faith may never fail, Luc. 22.
as in the 108, Untruth we shall more particulary declare, (whereby the
absurd consequence falling in the bishops of Constantinople has here no
place) and also because S. Gregory him self as his predecessors before him,
was in deed the Head gouuerner of the Universal Church of Christ, and
practiced that Headship and Jurisdiction in all parts of Christendom, as
occasion served. Which now according to promise, out of the very Epistles of
S. Gregory him self, I entend God willing to declare.

To omit the particular Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome in all Italy it
self, where he is the Metropolitan, and where only at this present M. Jewel
and his fellows would limit his Authorite, if at lest they will grant him so
much (for by some of their judgments he should rule only his own dyocese,
and by some other not them neither, for such would have no Bishops at all
touching Order and Jurisdiction) but to omit the practiced Authorite of S.
Gregory within the bonds of Italy it self where in Rome stands, let us
consider how the same was extended, as well over the Alps to us ward North
and West, as over the sea to all the world beyond, both southe and East.

The Jurisdiction and Supreme Authorite of S. Gregory over the Realm of
France appears evidently in one of his Epistles directed Vniue^sis Episcopis
Galliarum, Gregorius lib. 4. Epist 52
to all the Bishops of France. Where thus he writes word for word. Because
the place is long, France.
and the book is common to be had, I leave the L^^ine, and give thee (gentle
Reader) the English thereof faithefully and sincerely translated. Because
(says S. Gregory) eue^y duty is then semely performed, 1. S. Gr^go^y the
Pope has his Legate in France.
when there is one Ruler, to whom recourse may be had, we have therefore
thought it conu^nient to appoynte our brother Virgilius Bishop of Arles our
Legate according to the old Custom, in those Churches which are subject to our
most Excell^nt Son Childebert the king (of France, 2. According to the old
Custom.
) to the intent that both the right Catholic faith (that is, such as by the
four general Counc^ls is d^fined) may with hofull devotion by Gods help be
preserved, and also that if perhaps any contention arise among our brethern and
fellow Priests he may appease it by virtue of his Authorite, as occupying the
room of the Sea Apostolic, according to his discrete moderation. To whom also
we have enjoined that if such questions of certain Matters do arise, for the
discussing whereof the presence of many is ned^full, let him with a competent
number of our brethern and fellow Bisshops gathered together, discuss the
matter with equite and according to the Canons uprightly determine it. But if
any Contention or question arise touching the faith (which God forbid) or a
Matter spring up that is of some weighty controversy, so that for the
greatenes of it, the Judgment of the Sea Apostolic seems necessary, the
truth of the Matter being diligently examined, let him by his own relation
bring it to our knowleadg, to thentent that from us it may with an agreeable
and undoubted sentence be determined. Also because it is necessary that before
our Legate, as often as he shall think it behouefull, the Bisshops at
convenient times do appear, for conference to be had, we exhort you, that none
presume to disobey his commandments therein, neither slack to be present at
such Common assembles, except perhaps either bodily sickness, or some other
just impediment do stay him from thence. In which case who so ever is so
absent, let him yet direct in his place some Priest or Deacon, to thentent
that such things as by our Legate through Gods help shall be determined or
decreed, may by faithefull relation come unto him that is absent, by the party
so sent, to be of him firmly and surely observed. And let not the excuse of
any occasion presume to violat such things as he shall decree. Thus far S.
Gregory to the Bishops of France, lib. 4. Epist. 52. How say you now M.
Jewel? Wonder I pray you no more hereafter, that D. Harding will maintain the
Popes estate by the Authorite of this holy Father. Jewel. Page 227
1. Here S. Gregory the Pope has his Legate in France. 2. and that according
to the old custom. 3. to preserve the faith. 4. to appease controversies
arising, either by him self, 5. or if they be more wayghty, by a number of
other Bishops, 6. or last of all if they touch the faith, by referring up the
Matter to the Pope him self, 7. Finally all Bishops are commanded to obey his
Legate. Such was the supreme and Universal Authorite of S. Gregory being Bishop
of Rome, over all the Bishops of France and their Churches though yet he
would not be called, saluted, or entitled their Universal Bishop. Other
examples of his practiced Supreme Authorite in the Realm of France, Lib. 11.
Epist. 8. and. 10. li. 7. Epist. 112. and 115.
as of granting Privileges to Monasteries and Hospitals, of preferring
Bishops, etc. are in other of his Epistles to be seen, which for breuities sake
I omit. That he had the like Authorite and Jurisdiction in Spain, it
appears also in his Epistles, Spain.
as well by the Palle (a Bishoply preferrement granted only by the Pope) sent
to Leander a Bishop of that Country, Lib. 7 Epist. 125
as also by his Commissioner John sent thither with Instructions touching cases
and controversies to be determined among the clergy. Lib. 11. Epist. 54. and
50.
And namely of the restoring of one Ianuarius unto his Bishopric, who had
appealed to the Pope being wrongefully deposed by a number of other Bishops and
had one Steven placed in his room. S. Gregory by John his Commissioner sent to
Spain for that Purpose, restores Ianuarius to his Bishoprike, inioyneth a
half years penance to those Bishops which had presumed to Consecrat Steven in
his place, and the said Steven he commands to be degraded, and so either to
remain a^ presonner to Ianuarius, or else to be sent to Rome. Lib. 11. Epist.
53.
John the Commissioner executes the Sentence. And the very tenor of the
execution is yet to be seen in the Epistles of S. Gregory. Such Authorite
practiced S. Gregory over the members of Gods Church, and yet feared not to be
any forerunner of Antichrist therein.

To pass from Spain to Afrike, the Authorite that S. Gregory practiced over
all the Bishops there, Afrike.
is evident also in the Registre of his Epistles. Where as in Numidia certain
which had been Donatistes being promoted to Bishoprics would also be
Metropolitanes, he rebukes and expressly forbids that disorder: writing to
all the Bishops of Numidia in this sort. Peti^stis per Hilarium Cartularium
nostrum, a Beatae memoriae decessore nostro, vt omnes vobis retro temporum
consuetudines seruarentur, quas a beatae Petri Apostolorum principis
ordinationum initijs hactenus vetustas longa seruauit. Lib. 1. Epist. 75
Et nos quidem iuxta seriem relationis vestrae, consuetudinem, quae tamen
contra fidem Catholicam nihil vsurpare dignoscitur, inuiolatam permanere
concedimus, sieve de primatibus constituendis, caeterissque capitulis, exceptis
his qui ex Donatistis ad Epis opatum proueniunt, quos prouehi ad primatus
dignitate^, etiam cum Ordo eos ad locum eundem deferat, modis omnibus
prohibemus. You had required by Hilarious our Notary, of our Predecessor of
blessed memory, that all your ancient Customs might be reserved, which from
the beginning of the Constitutions of blessed Peter Prince of the Apostles,
long Antiquite had continewed. And we verily according to the tenor of your
relation made unto us, do grant that the Custom remain inuiolated, except
it be such as may seem to usurp any thing against the Catholic faith,
whether it be of making of Primates and Metropolitanes, or other matters,
except such as from Donatistes come to be Bishops. For such we utterly forbid
to be made Metropolitanes, yea though by order they were called to that degree.
Let it suffice t^em to bear the charge of their own flock, and not to be
preferred in obtaining the Metropolitanship, before those Bishops, which the
Catholic faith has brought up and instructed allwaies in the Church. Thus
far Saint Gregory. In whose words it is easy to be seen, both what
Authorite he practiced him self over Numidia, and also what Orders his
Predecessors, the Sea Apostolic from the beginning, had appointed in that
Country. By virtue of the like Authorite whereas Paulinus the Bishop of Rhegium
in the coasts of Afrike, had committed symony in giving of orders, and certain
other outrages, as his clergy complained of him to the Pope, S. Gregory
appointed Commissio^ers over that bishop, Victor and Columbus bishops of
Numidia, with Hil^rius his notary, for Justice to be done in that behalf.
Grego. lib. 10. epist. 33. and 34.
Again whereas the primat of that Country admitted boys and Children to holy
Orders, Lib. 2. epi^ 47. Indic. 11.
he made this Columbus a bishop of Numidia his legate and Co^missioner to see
that disorder punished and corrected. The like also he did for the extirping of
the Donatistes heresy, springing up again then in Afrike, willing this
Columbus, Lib. 3. epi. 35. lib. 2. epist. 33. Indict. 10.
to send unto him to Rome, Paulus the bishopp of Rhegium, who seemed to be a
promoter of that matter, to be examined and corrected according to the Canons.
Also to depose one Maximianus a bishop for committing symony. And whereas
Bonifacius a noble man of Afrike took part with heretics, S. Gregory wills
him to come to Rome, there to be instructed, or at the lest in any wise to
beware that he dye not out of the faith of that See. His words be these. Lib.
eodem epist. 41. Matthew. 16.
Hortor vt dum vitae spatium superest, ab eiusdem beati petri Ecclesia, cui
claues R^gni caelestis commissae sunt, and ligandi ac solu^ndi potestas
attributa, vestra anima non inueniatur diuisa, ne si hic beneficium eius
despicitur, illic vitae aditum claudat. I warn you, that while your bodily
life endures, your soul be not found separated from the Church of S. Peter,
to whom the kayes of the kingdom of heaven are committed, and the power of
bi^ding and loosing is given, lest that while here in this life, you despise
his benefyt, in the life to come he shutt you out of life. So necessary is it
(gentle Readers) by the judgment of learned and holy S. Gregory, to be joined
and united to the Church of Rome. Therefore he commends in an other place
Dominicus the Metropolitan off Carthage for his diligent duty that he declared
to the Sea Apostolic, writing thus unto him. Lib. ^. epist. ^2. Indict. 1.
You knowing very well from whence the beginning of priestly Order has spronge
in Afrike, do co^mendably, in that by tendering the Sea Apostolic, you have
recourse to the spring of your Office, by discrete remembrance thereof, and
with laudable co^stancy do pers^uere in the love of it. For certainly, it is
the increase of your honor what soeu^r Reverence and priestly devotion you
show to that See. For so you provoke her to tender you again. Thus the Church
of Afrike in like manner as France and Spain was a child of the mother
Church of Rome, was subject to that holy See and directed by the Authorite
thereof, under S. Gregory the Pope at that time. Neither feared S. Gregory
notwitsta^ding such Subjection and obedience on their part, or such Authorite
and government on his part, to be a forrunner of Antichrist over them, as M.
Jewel would make S. Gregory him self to say and Judge.

Before we pass to the other side of Italye, and the East part of the world,
let us consider what Authorite S. Gregory practiced in the Islands lying about
these Continent lands of France, Spain, and Afrike. And first of our own
country of England which under this blessed Pope and by his holy means was
converted from paganism and infidelyte to the faith and Christianite.

The Supreme Authorite that S. Gregory practiced over all that part of
Brittanny which is now called England, In Interrogationi^^s B. Augustini Cap.
9. and Be^a lib. 1. ca. 27
appears by that he writes to S. Augustine our blessed Apostle the first
Archbishop of Caunterbury, in these words. Britanniarum omnes episcopos tuae
fraternitati committimus, vt indocti doceantur, infirmi persuasione roborentur,
peruersi authoritate corrigantur. All the Bishops of Britanny we commit to thy
Brotherhood, to thentent the unlearned may be instructed, England.
the weak may by thy persuasion be strengthened, and the froward by Authorite
be corrected. In these words the Archebishopp of Caunterbury is constituted
and appointed by Pope Gregorye his Legate in the Church of England, and to
occupy in all the provinces of the same the place of the Sea Apostolic. And
what childishnes were it for S. Gregory to appointe one that him liked, by
whose Authorite other Bishops might be corrected, if he him self had no
Authorite in the Country, but were a mere foreign Bishop, as his successors
now (after the quiet possession of so many hundred years), are called and
esteemed of such, as have forsaken not only that obedience, but also that Faith
and religion, in the which we Englishmen were first made Christen men, and in
the which we have co^tinewed almost these thousand years?

In Corsica and Sardinia two other Islands lying in this west part of the
world, between Italy and Afrike, Corsica.
what Supreme Authorite S. Gregory practiced, his epistles do witness. By
virtue of this Authorite whereas the bishopric of Sagon in the Island of
Corsica had been a long time vacant, he charge Leo a bishop of that Country
to take charge of the same writing thus unto him. Lib. 1. Epist. 76.
Quoniam ecclesiam Sagonensem ante annos plurimos obeunte eius pontifice omnino
destitutam agnouimus, fraternitati tuae visitationis eius operam duximus
iniungenda^. Because we understand the Church of Sagon by the decease of the
bishop, has these many years been utterly desti^uted, we thought good to
enjoin to you the visitation thereof. And in the next epistle following he
transferreth Martinus bishop of an other dyocese in that Island to this
bishoprike of Sagon in these words. Lib. eodem Epist. 77.
In ecclesia Sagonensi quae iam diu pontificis auxilio destituta est,
cardinalem te secundum petitionis tuae modum hac authoritate constituimus sine
dubio sacerdotam. In the Church of Sagon which has this long time lacked her
bishop, we do appointe you by this Authorite according to your request the
Chief priest, that is, bishop thereof. By the like Authorite in the same
Island, whereas a certain bishop through infirmite was not able to do his
Office, he writes to the fore said bishop Leo, willing a new election to be
made, Lib. 7. Epist. 50.
and then (says S. Gregory) ad nos veniat ordinandus. Let him come to us here
to be consecrated. The like he writes to the same bishop of Corsica Leo,
touching an other bishop upon the like occasion in the Incumbents infirmity, to
be newly elected, Lib. eodem Epist. 51.
of whom thus he writes. Dum fuerit postulatus cu^ solemnitate decreti omnium
subscriptionibus ro^borati, vestrarum quoque testimonio literarum, huc
sacrandus occurrat. When such a one shall be nominated by the solemn decree
confirmed with the subscriptions of each one, let him come hither to be
consecrated, with the testimony also of your letters. Such Authorite practiced
S Gregory over the bishops of this Island of Corsica.

In Sardinia to Felix a bishop thereof disobeying the Popes legate in those
parts the Archbishop of Iustinianea, Lib. 4. Epist. 7.
S. Gregory writes these words. It is come to our hearing that your
brotherhood refuses to obey according to the custom, John our brother,
Sardinia.
bishop of Iustinianea the first, and that you will not subscribe n^yther to
his decree, neither to the relation which he made unto us according to the
Custom. If this be so, we are very sorry to see such manifest token of pride in
you. We exhort you therefore that laying aside this proud stoma^he,
Distri^tam canonica^que disciplinae correctione^ contumaciae tuae nos s^^to
vlcisce^ter i^aponere.
you cease not to obey and show your self lowly to our foresaied brother and
fellow bishop, of whom you have been made bishop: so that both God may rejoice
in the agreement of your brotherhood, and other also may take good example of
you. For if (which we mistrust not) you continewe in this pride, know you that
we will surely punish your stubbornes, according to the straight and Canonical
order of dis^ipline. It appears I trow by these words, that S. Gregory in
this Country also of Sardinia exercised a Supreme Authorite, howesoeuer he
mislyked the name and Title of universal bishop. By the like Authorite whereas
Ianuarius a bishop of this Country had injured Nere^a a Noble woman, and she
had complained thereof to the Sea Apostolic, S. Gregory writing to the bishop
of those complaints and accusations made against him, has these words unto
him. Hortamur vt aut pacifica (si fieri potest) ordinatione definias, aut certe
ad deputatum a nobis iudicium personam instructam dirigere non omittas. We
exhort you either to end the matter peasably between your selves, or else not
to fail to direct some instucted party (in your behalf) to the judgment
appointed by us. Lib. 7. Epist. 55.
And for this purpose I have directed Redemptu^, our Commissioner the bearer
hereof, that he may both call the parties to judgment and by the virtue of
his trauaille, put in execution the Sentence. Thus far S. Gregory, and thus
without fear of any Antichristian presumption he used a Supreme Authorite over
the bishopps off Sardinia, as he did over other af all the west part of the
world, as it has particulary in sundry provinces appeared.

To pass now to the other side of Italy, the next adjoining land on the East
part, is Dalmatia and all the coasts of Illyricum. Dalmatia.
In those parts what Supreme Authorite this learned and holy Pope Saint
Gregorye (whom Master Jewel imagines to stand most against the Popes
primacy, and wondereth that D. Harding will maintain the same by this holy
fathers authorite) used and practiced him self, it shall now in like manner as
before by his own epistles commonly extant in his works appear. To all the
Bishops of Dalmatia S. Gregory writes concerning the disobedience of one
Natalis a Bishop there, in promoting one Honoratus an Archedeacon to the Order
of priesthood contrary to his mind and pleasure. For the which disobedience in
his letters to the said Bishops S. Gregory pronounces this sentence against
Natalis the disobedient bishopp, in these words. Lib. 2. Epist. 15. Indict. 10.
We therefore have thought good by the bearer of these presents to warn ones
again the said Natalis bishop, being with so many letters warned already and
yet persisting obstinat, that he restore again Honoratus the Archedeacon to
his former room at the presence of the bringer hereof. Whom if he restore not,
continuing in his contumacie, first we deprive him of the use of the Palle
(which by the grant of this See he obtained) for his former contumacie paste:
But if after the loss of this dignite, he continewe yet in the same
co^^umacie, we command him to be removed from the Communion of our Lord^s
Body and blood. The which his sentence in effect he writes to Natalis him
self threatening him farther a deprivation from his Bishoprike, Lib. eodem
Epist. 14.
if he obeyed not. By this one example it may appear what authorite S.
Gregory being pope of Rome had and used over the Bishops of Dalmatia.

To all the Bishops of the coaste of Illyricu^ he writes sundry letters in
which his Authorite over them is most clear and evident. Whereas about those
parts certain bishops by foreign invasions of the Enemy had benespoyled of
their Churches and all other liuelyhoods, Illyricum.
he writes to the Bishops of Illyricum, being commanded by the Emperor, to
receive and harbor those desolat bishops, providing them victuals and all
things necessary, that yet they should have no Authoryte in their dyoceses,
and says. Nullam eis nos in vestris ecclesijs Authoritatem tribuimus, Lib. 1.
Epist. 43
sed tamen eos vestris solatijs co^tineri summopere hortamur. We give them no
Authorite in your Churches. But yet we greatly exhort you to relieve them.
This had been a very fond favor of S. Gregory, if he had had no power over
them. But what the Authorite of S. Gregory was over the bisshops of Illyricum
it may well appear by the cause of Maximus bishop of Salona, Lib. 4. Epist. 34
Lib. 5. Epist. 25.
whom for his disobedience S. Gregory suspended, and excommunicated. About
whose excommunication when certain of his City had communicated with him, S.
Gregory blaming them therefore, says. Debuistis filij charissimi pensare
ordines: Epist. 26.
quem seeds Apostolica repellebat, repulsum iri cognoscere. You ought derely
beloved children consider the orders (of the Church.) You ought to know that
whom the Sea Apostolic repelleth, he shall be repelled. But for most evident
proufes of his practiced Authorite over the whole provinces of Illyricum,
Slauony, Dalmatia, Pannonia, Mysia and all the rest, it is to be considered
how far the Archbishop of Iustinianea prima, the Metropolitan and primat
of all those countres according to the appointment of Pope Vigilius in the
days of Justinian the Emperor, was subject to S. Gregory. First whereas all
the bishops of Illyricum had elected John to be their Archbishop and
Metropolitan of Iustinianea prima, Authen. de Eccles. tit. Coll. 9. Ideoque
Sancimus.
he confirms their election, writing unto them in these words. Iuxta
postulationis vestrae desiderium, praedictum fratrem and coepiscopum nostrum in
eo in quo est sacerdotij ordine constitutus, Lib. 4. Epist. 9
nostri assensus authoritate firmamus, ratamque nos eius consecrationem habere,
dirigentes pallium, indicamus. According to your request we do Confirm by the
Authorite of our Consent our foresaied brother and fellow bisshopp (John) in
the order of priesthood in which he is placed, and sending unto him the palle,
we declare that we do ratefie and ^llowe his Consecration. To the same John
also he writes, sending him the Palle, and making him his legate in those
countres as his predecessors had been before made of other Popes. Lib. eodem
Epist. 15
Pallium ex more transmisimus, and vices vos Apostolicae sedis agere, iterata
innouatione decernimus. We have sent you the palle after the Custom. And we
decree again of new that you shall occupy the room of the Sea Apostolic.
And whereas the same John had unjustly deposed Adrianus a bishop of those
quarters, Pope Gregory restored him, as he witnesses in his epistles, where
thus he writes. Quia ab antefato Ioanne primae Iustinianeae Episcopo contra
ius canonesque depositus honoris sui gradu carere non potuit, Lib. 2. Epist. 7.
Indict. 11.
in sua eum reformari ecclesia, atque in propriae dignitatis ordine decreuimus
reuocari. Because this Adrian being against right and order deposed of John the
Bishop of Iustinianaea, could not so lose his degree, we have decreed that he
be restored to his Church and to the degree of his former dignity. In the same
letter he wills that if any other matter can be laid against Adrian the
Bishop accused, it be either tried by his Officers or sent over to him, saying.
Vel per eos qui nostri sunt vel fuerint in vrbe regia responsales, si mediocris
est question cognoscatur, vel huc ad Apostolicam sedem si ardua est, Ibidem.
deducatur, quatenus nostrae audienciae sententia decidatur. Either let it be
tried by our Officers that are or that shall here after be in the Cite, if it be
a mean question, or else if it be of some difficulty, let it be brought hither
to the sea Apostolic, by our Audience and Sentence to be decided. Thus all
manner of ways, in Confirming of bishops newly elected, in restoring of bishops
unjustly deprived, and in final decision of matters of controversy, the
Authorite and Supreme Jurisdiction of the Bishop of Rome (which now is so
much abhorred of the disobedient children of Gods Church), is by S. Gregory
in all Countres practiced. And yet will M. Jewel and his fellows by this holy
Father go about to overthrow the Popes Primacy.

Jurisdiction practiced in the East. Church.
Hitherto of the West Church, and of the Provinces and Countres thereof,
France, Spain, Afrike, Illyricum, the Islands of Britanny, Corsica, and
Sardinia, we have out of the Epistles of S. Gregory treated, and declared the
Supreme Authorite by him practiced over them in Matters Ecclesiastical. Now of
the East Church and of some parts thereof for examples sake, Corinthe.
I purpose to do the like, as far as by the Registre of his Epistles I shall
for this present be informed. S. Gregory writing to all the Bishops of
Corinthe, touching Adrian a Bishop accused of certain Crimes, and suddenly
dismissed by an agreement made with the party playntif, showing him self
nothing pleased with that soddain Agreement commands the Matter to be farther
examined, and says in his letters unto them these words. Gregor. li. 2.
Indict. 11. Epist. 38.
Quoniam ea quae dicta sunt, indiscussa remanere non patimur, Sedis nostrae
Diaconum ad ea inuestiganda dirigimus, etc. Because we may not abide those
things that are said, to remain undiscussed, we direct for the Examination
thereof a Deacon of our See: And why? It follows. Because the qualite of the
Crime signified unto us does vehemently move us not to dissemble that which we
have heard. And what neded S. Gregory to send to Corinthe in Greece a Deacon
from his See, to examine Matters a fresh, which had been there agreed? Forsothe
he says. Cum accusatores and Accusatum inter se fecisse gratiam indicastis,
hoc nobis necesse est subtilius perscrutari, ne fortasse eorum sit comparata
concordia. Because you have signified unto us that the Accused Bishop and the
Accusers have agreed between them selves, we must needs search this Matter more
narrowly, lest perhaps this their Agreement be a wrought Matter. Why what if it
be? What would you S. Gregory have to do there in those parts, being but a
Bishop of Rome? We shall hear by his own words immediately following. Quae si
(quod absi^) non ex charitate, sed ex praemio facta constiterit, maiori hoc
emendatione plectendum est. If this Agreement shall be found to have proceeded
not of Charity (which God forbid) but of bribery, this is with more rigor to
be punished. Yea. But who shall punish these Greek Bishops, or what pertayneth
that to you? This learned Father nothing doubted of this Authorite, And
therefore he says farther. Nos qui Canonice reuelante Deo, mala si quidem
verasunt resecare praecedentia festinamus, commissam postmodum culpam sine
vindicta nulla ratione dimittimus. We which labor to cut of the former
mischiefs according to the Canons, God willing, if they be true, can in no wise
suffer a trespass after and a fresh committed to escape with out punishment.
Thus far S. Gregory writing Vniuersis Episcopis Corinthijs, to all the
Bishops of Corinth. It appears hereby that the Pope at that time had a
Supreme Authorite over those Bishops, more then M. Jewel would gladly he now
had over him and his fellows, which bear them selves to for Bishops forsothe.
With the like Authorite writing to John the Bishop of Corinthe of a Redress to
be had about the Simony that he and other used, he utters these words. Si
quid tale aliquid deinceps fieri senserimus, iam non verbis, sed Canonica hoc
vltione corrigemus. Et de vobis (quod non oportet) aliud incipiemus habere
Iudicium. Gregorius lib. 4. Epist. 55.
If we shall perceive any such thing hereafter to be done, we shall correct it
no more with words, but with such punishment as by the Canons is prescribed,
and we shall begin to conceive of you an other Judgment, which behooves not.
Such Authorite practiced that holy and learned bishop S. Gregory over the
bishops of Greece, and yet feared not to be accounted therefore an Antichrist
over them. And therefore in his next epistle writing Vniuersis episcopis per
Helledam prouinciam constitutis, Lib. eodem Epist. 56.
to all the bishops placed in the province of Greece, properly so called, about
the same matters as he wrote before particularly to John the Bishopp of
Corinthe, he says unto them these words. Si aliter factum denuo senserimus,
districta ac Canonica illud noueritis vltione compesci. If we shall perceive
again that you do otherwise (then I have willed you to do) know ye, that it
shall be punished straightly and according to the Canons.

In like manner and about the very same matter of Simony and bribery committed
about Spiritual preferments, Epirus.
writing to the bishops of Epirus an other part or Greece, S. Gregory after his
exhortatyon, concludes in this sort. Si (quod no^ credimus) fieri tale
aliquid senserimus, Gregori. li. 5. epist. 7.
Canonica illud (vt dignum est) seueritate corrigemus. If we shall perceive
that you commit any such matter (as we trust you will not) we shall (as it is
mete) see it punished by the rigor of the Canons. Thus in Greece it self as
well generally as particularly S. Gregory bishopp of Rome not only intermedled
by way of exhortation but also Gouuerned, Corrected, and Punished by way of
Authorite.

What Authorite and Jurisdiction S. Gregory practiced in Corcyra an Island
adjoining to Greece and pertaining properly to the Metropolitan of Nicopolis in
Thessalia the determination of a long Controversy between the bishop of
Corcyra and the bishop of Isauria touching the Jurisdiction of Cassiope a town
of that part or Greece, may serve for a sufficient Example. For notwithstanding
the determination of the Metropolitan, Corcyra.
yet the Authorite of the bishop of Rome was required to Confirm the same.
Therefore S. Gregory writing to Alcysonus the bishop of Corcyra, to whom the
Metropolitan of Nicopolis had adjudged the Jurisdiction of Cassiope,
confirms the Sentence of the Metropolitan in these words. Grego^ius lib.
12. Indict. 7. epist. 2.
Quoniam Andreas venerabilis memoriae frater noster Nicopolitanus Metropolita,
innitente quoque sibi Principali iussione, in quaei causae huius fuerat
iniuncta cognitio, prolata (sicut nobis patuit) noscitur statuisse sententia,
antefatum Cassiope Castrum sub Jurisdiction ecclesiae tuae (quemadmodum semper
fuit) debere persistere, Formam eiusdem Sententiae comprobantes, Apostolicae
Sedis Authoritate eam fauente Iustitia Comprobamus, Confirmamus, atque per
omnia robustam manner Decernimus. Whereas Andrewe our brother of Reverent
memory the Metropolitan of Nicopolis, by virtue of the Princes letters, whereby
he was set in Commission over this matter, hat^e determined by Solemn
Sentence (according as we be informed) that the foresaid town of Cassiope
ought to remain in the Jurisdiction of your Church, (as it has always
been) we Allowyng the Form of that Sentence, do in regard of Justice by the
Authorite of the Sea Apostolic Approve it, Confirm it, and do determine that
it remain in his full force and vigor thourough out. And because Mauritius
the Emperor had intermedled in this matter, more then the Canons would well
bear, and both at the beginning upon Miss information had pronounced against
the bishopp of Corcyra, Lib. e^dem epist. 3.
Nec iussio eius (quia contra leges and Canones Data fuerat) habuisset
effectum, though yet his Sentence took no place, because it was given against
the laws and the Canons, and also afterward had put the bishop of Isauria in
possession of the town, notwithstanding the Contrary Sentence of the
Metropolitan of Nicopolis (whom yet the Emperor him self had put in
Commission both to examine and to end the matter) because I say the Emperor
Mauritius had thus far intermedled against right and Order of the Church,
this learned and holy Father S. Gregory using a discrete and wise moderation, to
thentent he might neither exasperat his Prince, neither yet let fall the Right
of the Cause, would neither precipitat his Sentence against the Emperors
commandment in the behalf of the bishop of Corcyra, lest (as he says of
him self) contra iussion^m clementissimi domini Imperatoris, vel (quod absit)
in despectum eius al quid facere videamur, Epist 3. lib. 12.
He might seem to do any thing either contrary to the commandment of his
most gracious Lord the Emperor, or (which God forefende) in contempt of him,
neither yet would forsake either the Right of the party, or his own
Authorite. Therefore writing to Bonifacius a deacon of Constantinople, thus he
wills him to do. Dil^ctio tua pietati eius cuncta diligenter insinuet, Lib.
and Epist. praenot.
atque constanter astruat hoc omnino illicitum, omnino prauum, omnino iniustum
and sacris esse valde Canonibus inimicum. Et ideo hoc peccatum temporibus suis
introduci in eccl^siae praeiudicium non permittat. Sed quid de hoc iudicio
iudicatum an tefati quondam Metropolitae iudicium contineat, vel a nohis
qualiter ea quae ab illo decreta sunt, Confirmata fuerint, suggerat, atque id
agere studeat, vt cum eius iussione nostra illic s^ntentia transmit tatur.
Quatenus and serenitati ipsius (si^ut dignum est) reseruasse, and
rationabiliter correxisse quae malae presumpta sunt videamur. Qua in re
omninodanda opera est, vt si fieri potest, etiam iussionem suam ipse tribuat,
in qua ea quae a nobis definita sunt, s^ruari praecipiat. Do you diligently
signify to his highness all things, and declare unto him boldly that this his
doing is utterly unlawful, utterly naught, utterly unjust, and directly
repugnant to the holy Canons. And that he suffer not therefore this offense to
take place in his days, to the prejudice of the Church. But put him in mind
as well of the Judgment passed by the foresaied Metropolitan of Nicopolis, as
also of our Co^firming of his said Sentence, and do what you can that our
Sentence with his commandment may take place. To thentent that it may
appear, that both we have reserved the matter to his highness (^s mete is)
and also that we have with good reason and right corrected that which has
been done amiss. Wherein you must also labor to get out (if it be possible)
a commandment from him, by the which he command to be kept, that which we
have determined. By this dealing of that learned Bishop of Rome, we see
evidently what Authorite he had in the east Church, in Greece it self, both
to Correct, and to Confirm, and also to Moderat the unadvised and wrongefull
attempts of Mauritius, an Emperor more wilful and busy against the Church
then many of his Predecessors were. Abbas V^spergensis in Mauritio.
For the which also (as it may seem) God punished him sharply at the end, when
his wife and all his children being murdered before his face, of one of his
own subjects, he was last murdered him self also.

With the like Authorite he absolved Athanasius a Priest of a certain Monastery
in Lycaonia (a part of the lesser Asia) appealing to the Sea of Rome. Lycaonia.
This Athanasius was accused of heresy, and because a certain heretical book
was found about him, John the Bishop of Constantinople his Patriarche was
moved against him. Athanasius speeding him self to Rome and clearing him self
there before the Pope, the book also being sent from John of Constantinople to
S. Gregory, and information made, how he had dealed therein against the said
Athanasius, all things debated and pondered, Gregor. li. ^. Epist. 64.
the Pope absolved him in these words. Ab omni te Hereticae peruersitat^s
macula iuxta professionem tuam liberum esse decernimus, atque catholicum and
sincerae fidei in omnibus professorem, atque sequacem (Christi Jesus Saluatoris
gratia) claruisse pronunciamus. Liberam quoque tribuimus licentiam ad tuum
Monasterium in tuo te loco vel ordine nihilominus remeare. We decree you
(according to your professyon) to be free from all spotte of wicked heresy, and
we pronounce you to be Catholic, and to profess in all points the right
faith, and to show your self to have followed the same by the grace of Christ
Jesus our Savior. Also we give you free liberty (notwithstanding this
Accusation) to return to your Monastery in your former place or Order. Thus S.
Gregory the Pope Corrected in Corinthe and Epirus, Confirmed in Corcyra, and
Absolved in Lycaonia (all East parts of the Church) as occasion served, with
just right and Authorite, not fearing to be accounted an Antichrist therefore,
or to do any injury to the proper Jurisdiction of other Metropolitanes and
Patriarchs there. Thessalonica.
In Thessalonica an other great City of Greece what the Authorite of the Bishop
of Rome was, and how S. Gregory practiced the same, it appears in sundry of
his Epistles. In a place charging Eusebuis the Bishop thereof with diverse other
Bishops of that Country, how they should demean them selves in a Synod which
was called at Constantinople about the proud Attempt of Cyriacus the
Patriarche there, and declaring unto them particularly what they should do,
and how they should deal therein, Gregor. li. 7. Indict. 2. Epist. 60.
he concludes with them in these words. Vnde iterum coram Deo and sanctis
ipsius admonemus, vt haec omnia summo studio, and tota mentis intention
seruetis. Nam si quis (quod non credimus) scripta praesentia aliqua in part
neglexerit, a beati Petri Apostolorum Principis pace se nouerit segregatum.
Wherefore yet ones again we do warn you before God and his Saints, that
with all endeavor and whole Intention of mind you keep and observe all these
things. For if any man (which we trust not) do neglect these present writings
in any part, let him know, he is separated and cut of from the Peace of S.
Peter Prince of the Apostles. As much to say, he is excommunicated. It had
been a great folly, or rather an extreme impudency for S. Gregory thus to
have threatened those Bishops of Greece, and so far to charge them to obey and
observe his Writings, if his Authorite over them had been no other, then M.
Jewel would have the world believe, it was then, or ought now to be. In an
other place charging the same Eusebius Bishop of Thessalonica to see corrected
certain offenders of his clergy, he writes thus unto him. Hoec igitur frater
charissime diligenter attend, and ita stude, Gregor. li. 9. Indict. 4. Epist.
69.
vt filios vestros vnitos ac deuotos (sicut decet) habere possitis, and hac de
causa denuo ad nos querela non redeat. These things therefore derely beloved
Brother mark diligently, and take such head, that you may keep your children
in peace and love (as it becomes) and that of this Matter there come no more
Complainte unto us. It had been a great vanite for them which feeled them
selves grieved in Greece, having there their Metropolitanes and Patriarche, to
run and Complain to Rome and to seek succor there against their own
Bishops of the Pope, if the Pope had no Authorite over their Bishops, or no
power to see such Matters redressed.

Here Perhaps it may be surmised of some that likes no deal this practiced
Authoryte of the Bishop of Rome, An Objection.
exemplified in S. Gregory him self (who of all other Fathers seems most to
help M. Iewelles cause against the Popes Supremacy) in so many particular
Countres and Provinces, not only of the west Church, but also of the East, and
of Greece it self, that all this was but of other particular Bishops and
Metropolitanes, and that the Bishop of Rome as a Patriarche had Authoryte to
Correct, to Absolve, to Confirm, to Excommunicat and so forth, but yet over
the other Patriarchs them selves, S. Gregory perhaps practiced no such
Authorite or Supreme Gouuernement in Matters Ecclesiastical. And therefore his
Authorite was not Universal, but they were equal to him, and he to them, and
so he was not the Head of all. To this I answer, that all were it so, he
practiced no such Authorite over any Patriarche, yet his Authorite extending to
other Bishops subject to those Patriarchs, The Answ^r.
and at this day, no other Patriarche of those four Ancient Patriarchs
remaining but only the Bishop of Rome and such as he appoynteth, both it
should yet stand that S. Gregory practiced an Authorite Universal over all
those Countres, and also the objection for this present time should nothing
help M. Jewel and his fellows, all the Supreme Power resting in the only
Patriarche of Rome at this day.

But that it may Evidently and Clearly appear that Saint Gregory practiced an
Universal and Supreme Authoryte over all, Two things yet to be to^ched.
None excepted, two things yet farther I will touch, and then return to M.
Jewel and his Reply.

Constantinople.
coueted to be called the Universal Bishop, and that in such a sense as being
the Only Bishop over all and for all, as we have before out of S. Gregory
declared: who is to be thought neither to have been ignorant what meaning that
John had in that Name or Title, neither to have been so unwise or uncharitable
as to charge him with a wrong meaning, not intended by the Patriarche. For
thereby both a great folly would have appeared in him before all other
churches, which had that Matter in debate, and also he had but increased the
Emperor Mauritius his displeasure and indignation who both assisted and
vpholded John of Constantinople herein, and was otherwise all ways to S.
Gregory a heavy Lord. In this Matter therefore, in this proud unlawful
attempt of the Patriarche of Constantinople, what did the Bishop of Rome, or
how demeaned he him self therein? We shall see. First Pelagius the Pope
predecessor to S. Gregory under whom this John of Constantinople attempted
this Title, and assembled a Synod for the establyshing thereof, Directis
literis ex Authoritate Sancti Petri Apostoli, Gregor. lib. 4. Epist. 36.
eiusdem Synodi Acta cassauit, Directing his letters thither made utterly void
the Acts of that Synod by the Authoryte of S. Peter the Apostle, Responsalis.
and forbadde his Deacon which remained as Legate or depute of the Sea
Apostolic at Constantinople not to keep him company. This did Pelagius under
whom that Ambitious Title of John the Patriarche of Constantinople was first
attempted. But what did Saint Gregorye his next Successor, a man of such
humilite and lowlynesse, that he would not suffer (as Master Jewel alleges)
the word of Commandment to be used to him? Did he think you (Master
Jewel) not practice the like Authorite, as his predecessors did? Or because
he was a holy and learned Father, abhorred he (think you?) such kind of
Superiorite and primacy over other? As the bishops of Rome, his predecessors
used? Nay he says expressly, speaking of the proud disobedience of Maximus
a bishop of Salona in Illyricum, who had in the open Cite rent in pieces, the
Popes letters, Ante paratus sum mori, Gregori. li. 7. Indict. 1. epist. 1.
quam beati Petri Ecclesia^ meis diebus degenerare. I will rather suffer death
it self, then that the Church of blessed Peter should degenerat in my days,
meaning and writing expressly of the Authorite and obedience dew to the same.
Therefore in this Cause of John of Constantinople, wherein the Emperor
Mauritius also (a heavy Lord allwaies of S. Gregory) took part, and
commanded the Pope, Vt pro appellatione friuoli nominis inter eos scandalum
generari no^ debeat, that upon the Title of a trifling Name there should arise
no Offense between them, Grego^ius lib. 6. epist. 30.
John the Patriarche and the Pope, as first he dealed with the Patriarche by
all gentle means, so at the length he followed the Sentence of his predecessor
Pelagius. First he wrote to John him self the Patriarche, a long, learned, and
loving letter, laboring with him by all means possible, that he should leave
that vain and odious title, which so fondly and wickedly he attempted: Contra
euangelicam sententiam, Lib. 4. epist. 38. Lib. eodem Epist. 34.
contra beatum quoque Petrum Apostolum and contra omnes Ecclesias, contraque
Canonum statuta. Against the Sentence of the gospel (breaking humilite)
against the blessed Apostle S. Peter (affecting unlawful Superiorite) and
against all Churches (coveting to be a bishop Alone) and last of all against
the decrees of the Canons. And of this his dealing thus he says. Ego per
Responsales meos semel, and bis verbis humilibus hoc, Lib. eodem Epist. 38.
quod in tota ecclesia peccatur, corripere studui. Nunc per me scribo. Quicquid
facere humiliter debui, non omisi. I have by my deputies ones, and by humble
words twice, labored to redress this matter, wherein the whole Church is
offended. Now I write my self. Whatsoever I ought to have done by the way of
humilite, I have not omitted. And because the Emperor (as I said before)
bolstered up this John the Patriarche in his Attempt, and would not hear the
Pope to the contrary, S. Gregory not making any account of his own person,
but having an eye to the place and room that he occupied, writes thus to
Constantia the Emperesse. Haec in causa nequaqua^ me pietas vestra despiciat.
Gregorius lib. eodem. Epist. 34.
Quia etsi peccata Gregorij tanta sunt, vt pati talia debeat, Petri Apostoli
peccata nulla sunt, vt vestris temporibus pati ista mereatur. Let not your
godliness despise me in this matter. For allthough the sins of Gregory be so
great, that they ought to suffer these things, yet the sins of the Apostle
Peter are none at all, that in your days he should so suffer. Thus that holy
and meke Father dealed both with John the Patriarche him self, and with the
Emperesse, at the first. Whereof also he writes to the Emperor himself
Mauritius these words. Lib. 4 Epist. 32.
Ego dominorum iussionibus obedientiam praebens, praedicto consacerdoti meo and
dulciter scripsi and humiliter. Vt ab hac inanis gloriae appetitione sese
eme^det, admonui. Si igitur me audire voluerit, habet deuotu^ fratre^: Si vero
in superbia persistit, ia^ quid assequatur aspicio. I obeying the
Commandments of my Lords have written to my foresaied fellow priest both
softely and humbly. I have warned him to amend him self of this Ambytion and
vain glory. Therefore if he will hear, he shall have me a loving brother. But
if he continewe in his pride, I see what will become of him. Thus far S.
Gregory proceeding with that Patriarch by the way of gentleness and humility.
But in fine what did he? Forsooth as his predecessor Pelagius had done before
him, so he did. That is. Whereas after the death of this John, Cyriacus his
successor in Constantinople, had called a Synod upon some other pretense,
minding in color thereof, to establish this vain Title of Universal bishop,
as being the One Only Bishop for all, S. Gregory writing thereof to Eusebius the
bishop of Thessalonica and many other bishops together, and signifying unto
them how Pelagius his predecessor had condemned a former Synod called about
the matter, forbidding his Legate to keep company with John the Patriarche at
that time, he says. Gregor. lib. ^. Epist. 69 Indict. 2.
Cuius rectitudinis zelo per omnia inhaerentes, statuta ipsius sine
refragatione Deo protegente seruamus. Whose upright zele we cleaving unto in all
points, do keep also his determinatyons without denial by Gods help. In
which words he protests to do as his predecessor had done. And therefore
writing to Anianus a Deacon of Constantinople that he should in no wise keep
company with John the Patriarche there, according to the Sentence of his
Predecessor, he says. Sicut tibi iam transactis epistolis scripsi, nunquam
cum eo procedere praesumas. As I have before in other letters passed between us
written unto you, see that you never presume to come abroad in his company.
Lib. 4. Epist. 39.
And because the Emperor Mauritius at the same time by the procurement of John
the Patriarche had written to S. Gregory to be at peace with the Patriarch,
whereby this Anianus the Deacon for fear of the Emperors high displeasure
doubted what he might do, Ibidem.
S. Gregory writes thus unto him. Tua dilectio in nullo trepidet. Omnia quae
in hoc seculo videt alta esse contra veritatem, pro veritate despiciat: In
omnipotentis Dei gratia atque B. Petri Apostoli adiutorio confidat. Vocem
veritatis recolat Dicentis. Mayor est qui in caelis est, quam qui in mundo. Et
in hac causa quicquid agendum est, Joan. 14.
cum summa Authoritate agat. Fear not. All things that you see in this world
to be lofty against the Truth, for the Truths sake despise it. Trust in the
Grace of Allmighty God and of his blessed Apostle Peter. Remember what Truth
him self said. He is greater which is in heaven, then which is in the world.
Last of all whatsoever is to be done in this Matter, Do it with Full Authorite.
It had been more then a Vanite for S. Gregory thus to charge that Deacon of
Constantinople not to keep company with his own Patriarche, but to deal with
him with full Authorite, notwithstanding the high displeasure of the Emperor
likelye thereof to ensewe, if he had not a power and Authorite over the
Patriarche, and a good ground to stay him self on, against ^he Princes
Indignation. Verily his ground was the Supreme Authorite over the whole
Church granted to S. Peter whose successor he was, and by virtue whereof this
Holy and learned Father knew right well that the Church off Constantinople was
subject to the Sea of Rome. And so expressly this holy Father writes in an
other place, saying. De Co^stantinopolitana Ecclesia (quod dicunt) quis eam
dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiecta^? Quod and dominus pijssimus Imperator,
and frater noster Eusebius eiusdem Ciuitatis Episcopus assidue profitentur. As
touching that they say of the Church of Constantinople, who doubts but she
is subject to the Sea Apostolic? Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 63.
Which thing both our most Gracious Lord the Emperor, and our brother
Eusebius Bishop of the same City do daily profess. So far this Matter was
confessed and undoubted at that time. And to give the, good Reader, a clear
example hereof in few words, harken what S. Gregory writes in the very next
Epistle following. Thus he writes to John the Bishop of Syracusa, touching the
Bishop of Constantinople, as the superscription and title of the Epistle
lelleth us. Gregor. li. eodem. Epist. 64
In quodam Crimine Byzancenus primas fuerat accusatus, and pijssimus Imperator
eum iuxta statuta Canonica per nos voluit iudicari. Sed acceptis december auri
libris tunc Theodorus Magister obstitit vt minime fieret. Tamen pijssimus
Imperator admonuit vt transmitteremus, and quicquid esset Canonicum faceremus.
The Primat of Byzance (otherwise called Constantinople) ^ad been accused of a
certain Crime. And the most virtuous Emperor willed him to be Judged by us
according to the decrees of the Canons. But Theodorus the Master being brybed
with ten pow^des of gold found the means to stay the matter hitherto. Yet
notwithstanding the most Virtuous Emperor warned me to send over, and to do
whatsoever was agreeable to the Canons. This is that which S. Gregory said,
both the Emperor and the Bishop of that City acknowleadged the Church of
Constantinople to be subject to the Bishop of Rome.

By reason of this Authoryte and Jurisdiction the Bishop of Rome had customably
a Legate remaining at Constantinople, to execut such Justice, as thereunto
appertayned. So S. Gregory him self in the days of his Predecessors was
Legate at Constantinople, at which time he wrote his exposition upon Job, as
both he him self writing to Leander a holy Bishop of Spain, and Venerable Bede in the History of our Country records. So also when Phocas came to the
Empire violently and by outrageous treason, and therefore not finding there a
Legate from the Sea Apostolic, seemed to be offended therewith, In Epist. ad L^a
idrum prefixa expos. in Job.
S. Gregory writes unto him thereof in this wise. Quod permanere in palatio
iuxta antiquam consu^tudinem Apostolicae Sedis Diaconum vestra serenitas non
inuenit, non hoc meae negligentiae, s^d grauissimae nec^ssitatis fuit. Whereas
your highness found not in your Court a Deacon of the Sea Apostolic according
to the Ancient Custom there to remain, Beda lib. 2. Cap. 1
it proceeded not of any my negligence, Gregor. li. 11. Epist. 43.
but of a most urgent Necessite. Such was the Custom, and such was the
Authorite of the Bishop of Rome in the time of S. Gregory and by him self
Confessed, P^actysed, and of his Auncetours Received. Authorite I say not only
over all chief Provinces of the West and Latin Church, but of the East and
Greek Church also: yea and over Constantinople it self, such an other Check
mate to Rome in Spir^tuall Jurisdiction, as Carthage of Afrike was in Temporal
Empire.

Thus far hitherto of particular Provinces (a few for example) of the West
and East Church, Supreme I^^^^dictio^ over the w^ole Chu^che.
and of the Supreme Jurisdiction in Matters Ecclesiastical, practiced by the
holy Father S. Gregory Bishop of Rome, over them. To come now to the last
point, for a Clear and undoubted witness of a Supreme Authorite over the whole
Church, let us consider a few sayings of this holy Father, as M. Jewel him
self calls him, and that often. First for receiving Appe^le from any other
M^tropolitane or Patriarche, in case that any such wanted, Gregor. li. 11.
Epist. 54.
he says. ^i dictum fu^rit quia nec Metropolitam habuit, nec Patriarcham,
dicand^m est, quia a Sede Apostolica, quae omniu^ Eccl^siarum Caput est, causa
audienda ac dirimenda fuerat. I^ it be said that (the party accused) had not
any Metropolitan or Patriarche, it is to be said, that the Cause ought to be
heard and determined of the Sea Apostolic, which is The Head of all Churches.
Here lo by the way M. Jewel you have the Clear Sentence of One holy Father
(by your self so confessed and called) and that with in your first 600. years
which in plain terms calls the Sea Apostolic, The Head of all Churches, as
much truly, as Head of the Universal Church. Head of all Churches.
Wherefore you must, if you will stand to your promise twice repeted in Pulpit
and more them twice set forth in printe, enen here Yield and Subscribe. Or
else say plainly, that you stand upon Terms, and seek not the Matter. So you
shall proclaim your self an earnest trifler, and an open Mocker of Gods
people. In an other Epistle written to S. Gregory by John a bishop, and
registered among his Epistles, thus we read. Lib. 10 Epist. 56
Quibus ausibus ego sanctissimae illae Sedi, quoe universally Ecclesiae ^ura sua
transmittit praesumpserim obuiare? With what attempt should I presume to
withstand that most holy See (of Rome) which sends forth her laws to the
universal Church? As much to say. Of whom the Universal Church of Christ
is directed, instructed, and gouuerned. But let us hear again S. Gregorye him
self speak. Thus he says. Ea quae semel Apostolicae Sedis Authoritate
sancita sunt, nihil ege^t firmitatis. Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 115.
Such things as are ones decreed by the Authority of the Sea Apostolic, need
no farther strength or Confirmation. In like manner in an other place, speaking
of a Synod which the Patriarche off Constantinople would have kept, with
other Bishops, and writing thereof to certain Bishops that they should in no
wise consent thereunto, he says. Gregor. li. 7. Epist. 69.
Sine Apostolicae Sedis Authoritate atque Consensu nullas quaecunque acta
fuerint, vires habent. Whatso ever things shall be done (or pass in that
Synod) they are of no value or effect without the Authoryte and Consent off the Sea Apostolic. And to show that all Bishops (none excepted) were subject to
the bishop of Rome, when any thing was committed against the Canons, for
otherwise they were Brethern and equal, this One place of S. Gregory does
sufficiently and expressly declare it. Writing of the Bishop of
Constantinople, how being accused of a certain crime, first by bribery he
found the means the Matter came not to the Popes hearing, but afterward he
seemed to submit him self to judgment, and to speak fair, S. Gregory
writes thereof in this sort. Valde dubium est vtrum pure, an certe quia a
coepiscopis suis impetitur, Lib. eode^. Epist. 64
nobis modo talia loquatur. Nam quod se dicit Sedi Apostolicae subijci, si qua
culpa in Episcopis inuenitur, n^scio quis ^i Episcopus subiectus non sit. Cum
vero Culpa non exigit, omnes secundum rationem humilitatis aequales sunt. I
doubt very much, whether he speak now thus unto us simply and truly, or else
because he is driven thereunto by his fellow Bishops. For as for that he
says, he is subject to the Sea Apostolic, verily if any Trespass be found
in Bishops, I know no Bishop, but he is subject unto it. But as long as no
Trespass committed requires (such Subjection) all by the way of humilite are
equal. In these words S. Gregory teaches us three points all worthy to be
noted in this great time of schism and disobedience. Trhee things to be not^d.


Of this Authorite and principalite not only in Correcting that is amiss,
Grego^ius lib. 2. epist. 30.
but also otherwise, S. Gregory in an other place thus writes. Quanto
Apostolica Seeds Deo Authore Cunctis praelata constat Ecclesijs, tanto inter
multiplices curas and illa nos valde sollicitat, vbi ad consecrandum Antistitem
nostrum expectatur arbitrium. As far as the Sea Apostolic is well known to
be set over all Churches by the Appointment of God him self, so far among
other manifold cares, this also makes us very ho^full, when to the
Consecrating of a bishop, our Arbitrament is attended. In this point therefore
also of Confirming bishopps to be consecrated and ordained, we see the
Authorite of the bishopp of Rome was required, and that because Cunctis Deo
Authore praelata constat ecclesiis, it is known to be set over all Churches
(without exception) by the order and appointment of God him self. Of the which
we heard before out of the words also of S. Gregory that in three several
places of holy scripture, Christ had so appointed it: Before. fol. 1. b.
making Peter head of the rest. These places of holy Scripture are of S.
Gregory in an other epistle applied so again, where thus he writes.
Gregorius. Lib. 6. Epist. 37.
Quis nescit sanctam ecclesiam in Apostolorum Principis soliditate firmatam?
Qui firmitatem mentis traxit in nomine: vt Petrus a Petra vocaretur? Cui
veritatis voce dicitur. Tibi dabo claues regni caelorum. Cui rursus dicitur. Et
tu aliquando conuersus confirma fratres tuos. I terumque, Simon Ioannis amas
me? Pasce oues meas. Itaque cum multi sint Apostoli, pro ipso tam^n principatu
sola Apostolorum principis Seeds in Authoritate conualuit. Quae in tribus locis
vnius est. Ipse enim sublimauit sedem in qua eti^m quiescere, and praesentem
vitam (agere) dignatus est. Ipse deco^auit sedem in qua euangelistam discipulum
misit. Ipse firmauit s^dem, in qua septem annis quamuis discessurus sedit. Who
knows not that the Holy Church is stre^ghthened in the solidite and fastness
of the Prince of the Apostles? Who the sure steadfastness that he had in mind,
took also in his Name, that he was called Peter of Petra, the Rock. To whom by
the Mouth of Truth it self it is said. To thee I will give the k^yes of the
kingdom of heaven. To whom again it is said. M^th. 16. Lu^. 22.
And thou b^ing sometime converted, Confirm thy Brethern. And again. Sin on
the Son of John, love thou me? F^de my sheep. Therefore whereas there are
many Apostles, yet for the Principalite it self and Chiefty, Only the Sea of
the Prince of the Apostles has praeuailed in Authorite. Which See in three
places is one persons. For he exalted the Sea of Rome wherein he Rested. He
honored the Sea of Alexandria, sending his disciple the Evangelist thither. He
established the Sea of Antioche, remaining there him self 7. years, though to
depart.

To Conclude, evident it is by S. Gregory, that the Sea Apostolic (whereof he
says, Li^. 5. Epist. 64. Li^. 6. Epist. 37. Lib. 7. Epist. 64 Lib 11 Epist.
54.
Cui praesidemus in the which we do Gouuerne) Pro ipso principatu sola in
Authoritate co^ualuit. Only praeuayled in Authorite, to have the Chiefty and
Principalite. To that See he says, All bishops are subject, si qua culpa in
ep^scopis inuenitur: if any fault be found in bishops. This See he calls
Caput omniu^ ecclesiaru^ the Head of all Churches, and Cunctis praelatam
ecclesiis. Li. 2. epist. 30. lib. 7. Epist. 115.
Set over all Churches. What soever this See does determine, nihil egent
firmitatis they need no other strength, and without the Authorite of this See,
Nullas quoecumque acta fuerint vires hab^nt, Li 7. epist. 69.
whatsoever does pass in Synod, shall have no force. Of the which also
(agreing with S. Gregory) S. Augustine says, A^ Honora^u^d^ v^^lu. Cred. Cap.
17.
Cui primas dare nolle, vel summae prof^cto impi^tatis est, v^l praecipitis
arrogantiae to the which not to give and grant the primacy, soothely it is a
point either of most high wickedness, or of headling arrogancy. And thus is
in deed the estate of the Sea of Rome maintained by the Authorite of this holy
Father. Brefely thus much is D. Hardinge furthered by the Authorite of S.
Gregory.

And that every English heart that any thing regards the benefyt of his
Faith, that reioyseth in the profession of Christianyte, and that thinks him
self bound to allmyghty God, that ever he and his forefathers were brought to
the faith of Jesus Christ, and to the knowleadg of a better life hereafter
after to come, that every such I say may have the better cause, the more to
consider, the sooner to acknoweleadg, the gladlyer to embrace the Primacy of
the bishopp of Rome so universally practiced of this holy and learned Father S.
Gregory, I beseech every English Reader diligently to mark and bear away the
testimony and witness, that Venerable Bede the most of learned light that ever
shined in our County, gives to this holy Father, and how much by his
Judgment we are bound and beholding unto him above all other men. Thus Beda
writes of him in his ecclesiastical History, which for the confort of my
dear Country in this storm of schism I have of late set forth in the
English tongue. B^l^^li. 2. Cap. 1.
Of this holy Pope Gregory it becomes me in this our history of the Church of
England more largely to speak. Because by his diligence he converted our
nation, that is, S. ^regor^ our Apostle.
the Englishmen from the power of Satan to the faith of Christ. Whom we may
well, and also must call our Apostle. For as soon as he was high Bishop over
the whole world, and appointed gouuerner of the Churches lately converted to
the faith, he made our Natyon the Church of Christ, which had been ever
vn^ill that time the bondslaue of Idols, So that we may lawfully pronounce of
him the saying of the Apostle. 1. Cor. 9.
That although he were not an Apostle to others, yet he was unto us. For the
signet and token of his Apostl^ship we are in our Lord. Thus far Venerable
Beda. This is that holy Pope, our Apostle, which Practiced this Universal
Authorite over all the parts of Christendom. Let us never think (Christian
english Reader) that an Antichrist (as the Pope for his universal Supremacy is
called) should bring us Englishmen to the Faith of Christ. Neither let us
doubt, but whose godly Foundations God has so many hundred years prospered,
his doctrine, Religion, and practiced Authorite, was good and godly.

page 227.
If S. Gregory were now aliu^, he would cry out, as he did to the Emperor
Mauritius. O tempora, o Mores. O what a time i^ this? O what manners are these?

Gregor. li. 5. e^ist. 54 59. l^b. 7. epist. 5.30.1^3. li. 9. epist. 52.58.
lib. 12. epist. 31.
whom he in his epistles commends and extolleth, not against us which
continewe in the obedience of the Apostolic See, whereof in his time he was
the gouuernour through out all Christendom, as has been declared. Which
celebrat the holy Sacrifice of the Mass, Pray for the souls departed, Call
upon the blessed Saints, Adore Christ in the blessed Sacrament, Acknowleadg the
seven Sacraments of Christ's Church, all which things holy S. Gregory
practiced him self, but he would cry out against you M. Jewel, which call
the works of our Apostle whom he sent, Jewel. page 187.
the killing of the godly, which deny the greatest benefit that ever God gave
to our nation (the converting of us from infidelite to the faith) to make your
selves the Apostles of the same, which call that holy man S. Gregory him self
an Antichrist, and all his successors downewarde for usurping (not that name
which both he abhorred, and no other Pope ever used) but the Authorite of
supreme gouuernment over the whole Church of Christ, of S. Gregory so clearly
Practiced, which being in the room of a bishopp, do condemn all the bishops
that ever sat in that room before you, against you M. Jewel, which corrupt
the sayings of S. Gregory, which call his writings Fables, which call him an
obscure and a late Doctor other where, against you he would cry out, and
might most justly cry out, Jewel. page 420.
O tempora O Mores. O what a time is this, O what manners are these?





Diuis. 5
S. Ciprian declaring the contempt of the high Priest Christ's Vicar in
earth, to be cause of schisms and Heresies, writes thus to Cornelius Pope
and Martyr. Neither have Heresies or schisms risen of any other occasion, then
of that, the Priest of God is not obeyed, and that one Priest for the time not
be Church, and one Judge for the time, insteede of Christ is not thought upon.

Page 227 The.273 Untruth Slanderous.
The.94. Untruth. For S. Ciprian speaks these words of every several
Bishop, not only of the Bishop of Rome.



To whom if the whole brotherhood (that is, the whole number of Christian
people which be brethern together and were so called in the primitive Church)
would be obedient etc.

The.204 Untruth mere Slanderous.
The.95. Untruth. Standing in the manifest corruption and falsifying of S.
Ciprian.

whole brotherhood subject to the Bishop of Rome, is the whole number of
Christian people, to interpret that whole brotherhood, as D. Harding does for
the whole number of Christen people, it is so far from any manifest
corruption or falsyfying, that it is no corruption o^ falsyfying at all. If M.
Jewel will say, that this presupposed opinion of the whole brotherhood, that
is of the whole number of Christian people subject to the Bishop of Rome, is a
wrong and false opinion, he shall understand our opinion herein is such as we
have learned of the holy Fathers of Christ's Church. Chrysostom says,
Chrysostom. lib. 2. de sacerdotio.
Christ did shead his blood, to redeem those sheep, the charge of whom he
committed both to Peter, and to the successors of Peter. I trust M. Jewel
will exclude no part of Christen people from these sheep, which Christ with
his blood redeemed. Then by Chrisostoms judgment, are all Christen people the
flock not only of Peter but of Peter's successors also, who are the Bishops
of Rome. S. Ambrose speaking of the Church which S. Paul calls the Pillar
and ground of truth, adds, Cuius hodie Rector est Damasus. Ambro. In
Commentar. in 1. Timo. 3
The ruler of which Church at this day is Damasus, who then was Pope of Rome.
This Church which is the pillar and ground of truth, is no particular
Church, or part of Christ's flock, but the Universal Church and the whole
number of Christen people. Venerable Bede calls the Pope S. Gregory, Beda
lib. 2. cap. 1. Histor.
praelatum Ecclesijs iamdudum ad fidem conuersis, gouuerner of the Churches
lately converted to the faith. From those Churches none are excluded. S.
Hierom says that Christ made Peter the Master of his house, Hieronymus in
cap. Mar. 14
that under one shepherd there may be one faith. In the house of Christ and
under one shepeard is one brotherhood, the whole number of Christen people.
Thus then to interpret the whole brotherhood subject to the Bishop of Rome for
the whole number of Christen people, as D. Hardinge does is no Untruth at all,
nor no falsyfying of S Ciprian at all, seeing that by M. Iewelles own grant S.
Ciprian speaks there as well of the Bishop of Rome, as of other Bishops.

Diuis. 6
Among the Canons made by the 318. Bishops at the Nicene Council, which were
in number 70. (96.) and all burnt by Heretics in the East Church save xx. etc.



The.275 Untruth Slanderous.
If this be an Untruth, and that joined with a folly, then have you your self
M. Jewel uttered an Untruth, and that with a folly. For these are your own
words M. Jewel, in your text following.

Page 234 The.276 Untruth For that Athanasius in that place says no such
thing.
The true Athanasius, him self, of whom we make no doubt, says, that the
Arrians of Alexandria, burnte the Catholic men's books and (276) therewithal
the Canons of the Council of Nice, in the time of the Emperor Constantius,
Julius being then Bishop of Rome.

Athanasius in Epist. ad Orthodoxos. Now M. Jewel though this be a manifest
Untruth that you report of that Epistle of Athanasius, (for in that whole
Epistle there is no one word of the Canons of the Council of Nice, read and
see the Epistle who list) yet it is a far oversight in you to note that for
an Untruth in D. Harding which your self avouches afterward for certain
and true. Thus we might shortly Return upon you this Untruth by your own
assertion affirming the same. But because one Untruth is not well defended by
an other Untruth, though the adversary may so be answered, we tell you
therefore again that such Canons and in the number above mentioned were burnt
in Alexandria, by the Arrians. In the disproufe M. Nowelles Reproufe. Page 95. b
Diverse of which Canons are particularly mentioned, gathered together and set
forth of late against M. Nowell. It shall not need here to repete them. To
that place I refer the Reader. Is not all this sufficient to prove that such
Canons were lost? Is not Athanasius and Julius sufficient to clear D. Harding
of this Untruth? No. M. Jewel will find a shifte for them both. What is
that? First as touching the Epistle of Athanasius to Marcus, he says it is
forged. But how does he prove that? For sothe after that he had affirmed (as
you heard in his words before) that the true Athanasius writes of the
burning of these Canons to Julius the Pope, he adds.

The.277 Untruth in Slaundering Athanasius. The.278 Untruth For Marcus was
Pope only. 2. years. Platina.
But M. Hardinges Athanasius, is either so forgetful or his (277.) lies or so
impudent and careless what he say, that he makes piteous complainte of the
same burning unto Marcus, that was Bishop in Rome before Julius and was dead
(278.) at the left.ix. years before the Canons were burnte. By such Doctors M.
Harding vpholdeth the state of Rome.

of the Council of Nice. Is it not possible that those Canons were twice
burnte in two sundry Copies at two sundry times? Might they not be burned first
in the days of Marcus, and then (having of him an other Copy of the Canons,
as by his letters to him Athanasius required) that other Copy be burned in the
days of Julius? What Contradiction, or what Impossibilite is there in this
matter? Or how is M. Jewel ever able to prove that such Canons were not
burnte before the time of Julius? Socrates l^. 1 ca. 35.30. et seq.
Certainly the heresy of the Arrians troubled the Church of Alexandria where
those Canons were burnte before the days of Pope Julius, and Athanasius was
banished in the reign of Constantin the Great, by the means of the Arrians,
Eusebius, Theognis, Maris and other, having grievous and sundry accusatyons
laid against him. It is not impossible nor incredible that those which found
the means to banishe the Bishop, were also able to spoil his library, and to
burn his books, especially those Canons, wherein their wicked heresy, was
with most weighty Authorite condemned. Considered also, that in the Canons now
extant of that General Council of Nice, there is no one word nor half word
against the Arrian heresy, against the which yet that Council was principally
and chiefly assembled. Thus though it were true that the Canons were burnte in
the time of Julius, and that Athanasius wrote thereof unto Julius, (as M.
Jewel untruly says, he did) yet were not Athanasius the^fore a forgetful
liar, impudent, or careless what he say (as it pleases the grave head of M.
Jewel to call him) but both sayings might right well be true, and stand
together, the troublous estate of the Church of Alexandria considered as well
in the days of Marcus, Constantin yet living, as of Julius in the reign of
Constantius his Son.

But now seeing Athanasius writes no such thing of these Canons to Julius,
at the lest in the place by M. Jewel alleged, how forgetful of his lies, how
impudent is M. Jewel, and how careless what he say, or what he write? And
who will trust M. Jewel in doubtefull matters, which thus deceaueth us in
plain things? What is Impudency, if this be not? For as I told you before M.
Jewel, Athanasius in his epistle, Ad Orthodoxos, written in the time of Julius
successor of Marcus, Athanasius most Impude^tly belyed of ^aster Jewel.
has no one word of the Canons of that Council of Nice. You report him
untruly. You deceive your Reader. Or else you were deceived by some other, whose
eyes, not your own, it may seem you used in this matter. For Read the
Epistle. M. Jewel. And if Athanasius write any one word of the Canons of the
Council of Nice, in all that Epistle, let me never be taken for Christen man
more. He says in that Epistle. Ecclesiis and baptisteriis flammae iniectae.
Fire was cast upon the Churches, Athanasius in epis. ad Orthodoxos.
and upon the fountes. And again. Sacros Scripturarum libros quos in Ecclesiis
inueniebant comburere. That the heathen and infidels burned the books of holy
Scripture, such as they found in the Churches. Of any other burning or of the
Canons of the Nicene Council, there is not one word, nor half word. By
such Impudent Untruths M. Jewel will deface and bring out of credit the
wrytinges of the old Fathers.

Now whereas you say farther that Marcus, which was bishop of Rome before
Julius, was dead at the lest ix. years before the Canons were burnte, if it
were true that in the time of Julius those Canons were burnt, yet it will ill
follow that it was jx. years after the death of Marcus. For by the best and
most exact accomptes of Chronographers, Damasus and Platina in Marco.
even of Henricus Pantaleo^ of Basil, this Marcus was Pope but two years, and
8. months. Which account is found first in Damasus, and after in Platina,
and diverse other. The Arrians therefore committing those outrages and spoils
above named in Alexandria, about the beginning of Pope Julius in the days of
Constantius, if they had at that time also burned the Canons of the Nicene
Council (which yet Athanasius said not) it would well lack the better
half of jx. years after the death of Marcus, that those Canons were burnte.
Yet you add before to prove that in the days of Julius the Canons were burnte.

Which observation of time appears also by Socrates in his story.

page 234. The 279. Untruth There appears no such thing in Socrates.
You quote in the margin of this place. Socrat. lib. 2. cap. 14. Now verily
what observation you can pick out of this place, touching the burning of those
Canons, the Reader shall see and Judge. Because the Chapter is but short, I
will allege the whole as it lies. Thus lie the words of Socrates. About
this time the Arrians removed Gregory (their Arrian bishopp) from Alexandria,
as one odyous to the people both for the burning of a Church, and also for
that he was not earnest enough, in defense of their opinion. And in his room
they placed George, who came then from Cappadocia, one that held the doctrine
of their religion. This is the whole.14. Chapter of Socrates in that second
book. Of the Canons of Nice he speaks no one word. Of a Church burned he
speaks. But what? Thinks M. Jewel that the Canons of Nice were there
burnte? In deed such lewd Gheasses are mete to maintain such a lying Religion
as M. Jewel defends. But neither Socrates in any other place, Ruff. lib. 1
cap. 19. Theodor. li. 2. cap. 4.
neither Ruffinus, nor Theodoret nor Sozomenus all writing of this Arrian
bishop Gregory and of his deposing do make any mention of such Canons burnte in
his time. Only Sozomenus opens a little more this matter, and declares more
then any of all the other does, what Church and what burning that was for the
which this Gregory was of his own fellows deprived. For first of the Church
which was burned thus he writes. Gregorius sedem Alexandrinam inuasit.
Sozomenus lib. 4. ca. 6
Quod populus moleste ferens, ecclesiam quam Dyonisij vocant, qui episcopus
illic fuerat, incendunt. Gregory invaded the Sea of Alexandria. Which thing
the people taking grievously they set a fire a C^urche called by the name of
Denis, who had sometime been bi^hop there. This was the Church which was
burned by the intruding of that Arrian bishop, and for the which also he was
afterward partly deprived. For of his deprivation thus the same Sozomenus
writes in the same book. Lib. eodem Cap. 7.
Interca Arriani dogma^is fautores etc. In the mean while the Arrians removed
Gregory (their bishop) as being but negligent in establishyng their doctrine,
and one much hated of the Cytyzens of Alexandria, by reason of the mischiefs
that happened to the Cite at his entering in, and the burning of a Church. This
is all that is written of these ecclesiastical writers touching any loss done
by fire in the time of the Arrian bishop Gregory. What observation of time can
M. Jewel find here, to prove that in the days of Pope Julius the Canons were
burnte, and not in the days of Marcus, as Athanasius him self writing to
Marcus reports? The words of Athanasius to Marcus are plain. M. Jewel will
prove the contrary by a Gheasse.

And yet the whole number (of the 70. Canons) was kept diligently in the Church
of Rome in the original it self sent to Syluester the bishop there from the
Council subscribed with the said 318. Fathers hands.

The 280 Untruth Slanderous.
The 97. Untruth: For there was no such original kept in the Church^ of Rome.

Athanasius ad Ma^cum.
copied out, and sent to Syluester Pope of Rome from the Council by the hands
of his legates, it is evident by the epistle of Athanasius unto Marcus, where
he and the other bishops of Lybia, of Thebais, and of Egypt do expressly
confess the same. Also the Epistle of Pope Julius to the Bishops of the East
reakoneth up the.xviij. th. the.xix. the.xxi. the.xxiij. the xxvi. the.xxvij.
the.xxviij. the.xxxiij. the.xl. the.xlv. the.xlvij. the.xlix. the.lj. the.lij.
the.liij. the.liiij. the.lv. the.lvij. the.lviij. the.lix. the.lx. the.lxj.
the.lxiij. and the.lxvj. Tom. 1. Con. Epist. ad Orient.
Canons of the Council of Nice, all at that time kept and reserved in the
Original Copy at Rome. This Julius was alive at the time of the Nicene
Council. He wrote this letter to the Bishops of the East Church, to many of
them which were present at that very Council. He rebukes them in this letter
for thrusting out of Athanasius from his Bishopric. And by his Authorite he
restored not only Athanasius, but also Paulus the Patriarche of Constantinople,
Marcellus Bishop of Ancyra, Histor. tripart. li. 4. cap. 15 Socrates lib. 2.
cap. 15.
Asclepas Bishop of Gaza, and Lucius Bishop of Adrianopolis al expelled by the
Arrians, unto their Bishoprics and Sees again. And can M. Jewel persuade us
that the same Pope, to whom such holy Bishops appealled, (Athanasius, Paulus,
Marcellus, Lucius and Asclepas) at that time and against those stubborn
Arrians would allege false forged Canons of his own devising, or belie the
Council of Nice, the Matter being yet so fresh in memory? And what says M.
Jewel against these so express witnesses, Athanasius and Julius? What he
said to the Epistle of Athanasius you have heard already. By a mere manifest
Untruth he would deface it. Other Matter he brings none but scoffs, as
mocking at the Bishops for reducing the number of.lxxx. Canons to the number
of.lxx. to represent the.lxx. disciples of Christ, or else the.lxx. tounges
known to the world. To the which no other answer needs (for any thing that
it proves) then that M. Jewel does not well to measure the doings of that
ancient Council with the light estimation of man's fancy. But to this Epistle
of Julius what does M. Jewel answer? Forsothe whereas D. Harding said, that
Diuis. 6
these Canons being mentioned by Julius, writing to them which were present at
the making of the Canons, might take away all suspicion of Untruth, M. Jewel
answers.

Page 237
This removing of suspicion, I know not how, seems somewhat to increase
suspicion. If there were not a soar, what should it thus need to be salued?



The.281 Untruth Captain and Notorious.
In deed, Julius alleges a Canon: But M. Hardinges Canon he alleges not.

Non debere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis vllo modo Concilia celebrari,
nec Episcopos damnari. That without the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome,
neither Counsels ought to be kept, neither Bishops be condemned. How say you
M. Jewel? Does not Julius allege this Canon? Will you never leave your
Untruths? An. 1551
In the first tome of the Councelles, fol. 309. after the Collen print, you may
read that Canon if you list.

Lib. 4. cap. 9. Hist. trip.
It is also touched in the Ecclesiastical History by Socrates. The other Canon
of the Nicene Council the.xliiij. in number, Lib. 3. de Dogmat. Character.
D. Harding alleged not out of Julius, but out of Franciscus Tirrianus, as he
noted unto you in the margin, who as he writes saw many things of the Nicene
Council which are not commonly extant, The.282 Untruth for that Note touched
not this Canon.
(...) Niceni Concilij, in the Ecclesiastical Acts of the Nicene Council.
But let us see how M. Jewel prosecuteth the Matter of the Canon of Julius. He
adds.

And the compiler of the Councelles gave this Note in the margin (2^2.)
touching the same. This de^ree may only be reduced to the v. and si^t chapter
of the Council of Nice. But expressly it is not found. Such credit is to be
given to this Julius in his allegations.

The Impudency of M. Jewel.
Such credit is to be given to M. Jewel in his allegations. What passing
impudency is this M. Jewel, first to go about to discredit the writings of
the Ancient Fathers, and then to do the same by open and manifest Untruths?
Especially you which charge not only D. Harding, but in manner all sorts of
writers, with Fables, Forgeries, Dreams, Untruths, and so forth, when you
can not answer to the Matter it self.

To the whole Matter of the Popes Forgerie which M. Jewel here so blaseth out,
and so impudently avouches, it is already sufficiently answered: and proved
against M. Nowell, and against the lying Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, whose
steps M. Jewel has followed even at the hard heles, that Zosimus the Pope
was no forger, that the Africanes laid no such thing to his charge, that they
renounced not their whole obedience unto that See of Rome, but only stood upon
the Matter of appellations, (wherein it seems by the writings of S. Cipria^,
they had been of old time Priuileged) that many Canons are alleged out of the
Nicene Council not only by the Popes, but by diverse others holy Fathers, as S.
Ambrose, S. Hiero^ S. Augustine, Epiphanius and others without suspicion of
fayning or forgery, all this I say is already at large proved by M. Dorman in
his answer to M. Nowell. I beseech the reader to have recourse to that place.
Notwitstanding because M. Jewel, as he has been more large, so has dealed
herein also much more impudently then M. Nowell, In the disproufe of M.
Nowelles Reproufe the.16. chap. fol. 92.
I have thought good somewhat to examine his Lying tale and to note his
Untruths therein, for the better justifying of this his Untruth scored up
here upon D. Harding. Thus M. Jewel enters his process.

Touching the forgerie of this Council of Nice, the very beginning of the
quarrel and the whole story stands thus.

Page 235 The.283 Untruth Capitain and Notorious.
I will note to the Reader the names and times of the Popes that lived about
this time, in which the forgerie is said to be committed.

Siluester then Pope of Rome, whose place his two Legates Vincentius and Victor
occupied there. To this Siluester succeeded Marcus and was Pope ij. years. Hist.
tripart. lib. 1. cap. 8 Niceph. lib. 8. cap. 14.
Unto this Marcus Athanasius directed his letters above mentioned. To Marcus
succeeded Julius, whose Epistle was before alleged to the Bishops of the East,
in defense of Athanasius, and other. Some write that this Julius was at the
Council of Nice him self. Certain it is he was Pope in the later days of
Constantin the great, Platina.
in whose reign the Council was holden. Julius sat in the Sea of Rome.xvi.
years. To him succeeded Liberius, Hieronimus in Catal.
who ruled partly in that Bishopric, partly in banishment the space of.xvij.
years, Felix in the mean time occupying the Sea one year, under the banishment
of Liberius. To Liberius succeeded Damasus unto whom S. Hierom wrote certain
Epistles, and ruled the Church.xviij. years. To Damasus succeeded Siricius, and
sat.xvj. years. To Siricius succeeded Anastasius, who sat three years. To
Anastasius succeeded Innocontius, and sat in the Chair of Peter.xv. years. To
this Pope Chrysostom Appealed being in banishment, who thereupon excommunicated
the Emperor Arcadius. To this Pope S. Augustine and the Bishops of Afrike in
the condemnation of Celestius and Pelagius submitted their decrees. Palladius
in vitae Chryso. Nicephor. lib. 13. cap. 34. Aug. epist. 90.
To this Innocentius succeeded Zosimus, and ruled the Church only one year, who
is the man that is accused here of M. Jewel for a Forger, of certain Canons of
the Nicene Council. Athanasius writes to Marcus for the copy of those 70.
Canons, confessing that so many were made and sent to Rome to Siluester then
Pope, and also that Julius the Successor of Marcus alleges a great number of
such Canons to the number of.xxiiij. more then are commonly read in the
Council of Nice, both which Popes lived at the lest fourscore years before
this Zosimus. See those Canons in the disproufe of. M. Nowelles Reproufe. fol.
95. b.
S. Ambrose who wrote in the time of Pope Damasus, that S. Augustine and
Epiphanius in the time of Innocentius, do allege certain Canons of the Nicene
Council not extant in the xx. Canons commonly readde. Therefore Zosimus who
lived after all these Popes, if he were a Forger, yet was he not the first
Forger. Now as it were to great impudency for M. Jewel to charge S. Ambrose
S. Hierom, S. Augustine and Epiphanius with Forgerie, though he has gone about
to deface the testimonies of Athanasius, but that with manifest Untruths, as
you have seen, so truly shall he never be able to prove Zosimus or any other
Pope a Forger. This therefore touching the beginning of the Forgerie (if there
were any such) is the first Untruth. Let us go forth.



All this is true. Let us hear farther.

The 284. Untruth Boldly auouc^ed but no way proved.


This M. Jewel says of his own head. There appears no such thing in the
Acts of the Councels. This only appears, touching this Apia^ius that after
his Appeal to Rome, Zosimus sent his legate to the Council of Aphrike, the^
assembled, that he was restored to the Communion by the Africanes them selves,
Zosimus in the mean while departing this world, Council. Car. 6. cap. 101
and Bonifacius succeding him. This is evident in the epistle of the Aphrican
Council sent to Bonifacius successor to Zosimus. That which M. Jewel
tells, not appearing in the Council, may stand for an other Untruth,
until it be justified.

The 285. Untruth as appears. Stapleton
And understanding there was a Council gathered in Africa touching the same.

Cap. 76.
Pelagians, Cap. 75.
the Donatistes, and for the preservation of the Cap. 1.
Nicene Council. But for the matter of Apiarius no Council was gathered.

The 286. A burden of Untruths.
Sent thither Faustinus the bishop of Potentia, with two other priests of
Rome, Philippus and Asellus, not only to see that the said Apiarius without
any further trial might be restored unto his right, but also to make plea in
the open Council that it should be lawful for any priest to appeal from his
own ordinary or Metropolitan or Council unto the Apostolic See of Rome.

should be inuiolatly kept and observed, in that part of the world as it was
other where. The Council of Nice was readde in the Synod of the Aphricanes,
and established by their whole consent and agreement thereunto. Cocil. Car. 6.
cap. 1. and 2.
Faustinus the Popes Legate brought forth a write from Zosimus, containing a
decree touching Appellatio^, made in the Council of Nice. That decree not being
found in the copies which the Africanes had, the Africanes desired a time of
deliberation, Cap. 3.
before they subscribed thereunto. A deliberation was taken the Popes Legate
consenting thereunto. Cap. 4.
They wrote to the Bishops of the East Church, to see their copies. Thus far
have we gone with M. Jewel, following the tenor of the Council. Now that
Apiarius should be restored without farther trial, or that such plea should
be made as M. Jewel speaks of, it is not mentioned in the Council: it is a
double and Pregnant Untruth of M. Jewel. Let us go forth.

The 287. Vntr^the For they made no s^che Answer.


Council. Sard. Cap. 7.
the very same decree which Faustinus the Popes legate alleged, was and is to
be found word for word. Though then they answered, it was not found in the
Nicene Council, yet they answered not, there was no law it should be so. This
therefore is a Facinge Untruth on M. Iewelles part.

The 288. Untruth joined with a slander.
Faustinus laid forth this Canon of the Council of Nice, not made by the
Authorite of the bisshops there, but only devised by the bishop of Rome.

This is a slanderous untruth, to say it was divised at Rome. It was made
long before in the Council of Sardica. Therefore the modesty of John Calvin in
this point is more, who confesses that the Pope alleged this decree of
Sardica, as a decree of the Council of Nice, and makes it an error of the
Pope, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 7. Sect. 9.
not a diuising of his own, as the modest sprit of M. Jewel has devised.
Forth M. Jewel. Perge Mentiri.

The 289. Untruth sauouring of Malice.
The bisshoppes there, among whom was S. Augustine that famous learned Father,
thought it was a forged Matter.



The 290. Untruth For not Therefore they sent etc.
And therefore they said, they would send unto Alexandria, Antioche, and
Constantinople for the very Original copies of the said Council, and
desired the bishop of Rome to do the same.

Therefore they did it, it is not true. And Therefore I can not excuse you here
of an other Untruth.

The 291. Untruth For they were not the true Authentike copies. The 292.
Untruth joined with a slaun^er.
And said, that in the mean while they would do, as they had done before.
Upon this message and return of the answer with the (291) Authentike copies
from Cyrillus the bisshopp of Alexandria, and Atticus the bisshopp of
Constantinople, it appeared plainly to the world that the Canons were
corrupted, and that the Pope had falsified the holy Council.

Here be two Untruths, and the one joined with a slander. The first is, that
the true Authentike copies were sent from Alexandria and Constantinople. True
it is, they sent the truest that they had. But that those were not the very
Authentike copies, made and left by the Fathers of Nice, it is evident by many
reasons.

and Constantinople. Therefore the other that lacked so many could not be the
Authe^tike and perfect number of the Canons.

Secondarely between the time of the Nicene Council and those bishops
Cyrillus of Alexandria and Atticus of Constantinople, certain Arrians occupied
those Sees, That the Copies of the Nicene Council sent from Alexandria and
Constantinople were not the true Authentike Copies.

Socrates. lib. 2. Sozom. lib. 4. Theodoret. lib. 2. Nicephor^^ lib. 9. and 10.


and therefore no maruail, if the Council were corrupted.

In the Church of Alexandria, after Alexander, who was present at the Council
of Nice, succeeded Athanasius. This Athanasius being often bannished, first
Gregorius, then Georgius both Arrians ruled that See certain years. After
Athanasius being restored and dying in his bishoprike, Petrus a good Catholic
bishop succeeded, who being expelled and flying to Rome, Lucius an Arrian was
intruded, who occupied the Sea many years under Vale^s the Arrian Emperor. But
under Theodosius and Gratian he was expelled, and Timotheus brother to that
Peter succeeded, after Timotheus, Theophilus, and after Theophilus, this
Cyrillus was bishop of Alexandria. Thus under the three Arrian bishops
Gregorius, Georgius, and Lucius, no maruaill if the Councelles were corrupted
and destroyed. Especially whereas Athanasius, complains thereoff him self,
in his epistle to Marcus, the Pope, which M. Jewel would disprove but he can
not.

In Constantinople after Alexander bishop thereof in the time of the Nicene
Council, Socrat. Sozom enus, Theodoret. and Niceph. vbi supra.
Paulus a good Catholic bishop succeding was twice banished, and in the end
murdered. In the mean Eusebius the Arrian, and after him Macedonius, Eudoxius,
and Demophilus all Arrians occupied for the space off forty years and more,
during the Empire of Constantius, Julian and Valens, the Sea of Constantinople.
This Demophilus under Gratian was deprived, and Gregory Nazianzene by
Theodosius made his successor, who not continuing in the Sea, Nectarius was
chosen to whom succeeded Chrysostom, and to Chrysostom this Atticus here
mentioned in the Africane Council. Now in so long a time of the Arrians
Dominion, who doubts but they corrupted the Council of Nice being specially
called against them? Namely seeing that in the Council now extant, Note this
Reason.
there is no one Canon against the Arrian heresy, For the which yet that
Council was expressly called and assembled.

Hereunto may be added that in Antiochia also, whither the bishops of Africa
sent for the Copy of the Nicene Counsel, certain Arrians had ruled between
the time of the Nicene Council and the bishops then living. As Eustathius the
Catholic being banished, Histor. Ecclesiast. Nicephor. and tripart. per totum.
Eulalius, Euphronius, Phlacitus, Stephanus, Leontius, Eudoxius, Euzoius,
Theodorus Perinthius all Arrian Bishops: Whereas in all that time not one
Arrian seat at Rome, but all Catholic and all defendinge the Nicene Council.

Athanasius Apolog. 2.
Episcopi in magna Synodo Niceae congregati non sine Dei Consilio permiserunt,
prioris Synodi Acta in alia Synodo examinari. The bishops assembled in the
great Council of Nice permitted not without the will of God, that the acts
of a former Synod, might be examined in an other Synod. Which Appeal from
one Synod to an other that it was to Rome, appears well both by that Julius
by virtue thereoff called those Arrian bishops to appear before him at Rome,
and also by that long after, Leo that holy and learned Pope alleged the very
decree of the Nicene Counsel by occasion of an Appeal of Flauianus to Rom^.
For whereas in that outrageous injury done to Flauianus in the pretensed
Synod of Ephesus the Popes legates (as Leo writes) fideliter reclamarunt, and
eisdem libellum Appellationis Flauianus Episcopus dedit. Did faithefully resist
that injurious decree, and to the said legates Flauianus the Bishopp made a
libell of Appeal, Leo epist. 25. ad The odosium Augustu^.
Leo writes thereof to Theodosius the Emperor, and chalengeth by virtue of the
Nicene Council a greater Synod after the Appeal made, in these words. Quam
autem post appellationem interpositam hoc necessario postuletur, Canonum Niceae
habitorum decreta testantur, quae a totius mundi sunt sacerdotibus constituta,
quaeque subter annexa sunt. How necessarely we require now to have a greater
Synod, after the Appeal laid in, the decrees of the Nicene Canons do
witness. Which have been made of all priests in the world. And which are
here under annexed. Julius against the Arrians, yea such of whom some had been
present them selves at the Nicene Council, and Leo to the Emperor Theodosius
alleges a Canon of the Nicene Council, yea and a Canon of Appeal, which
those Aphricane Copies have not, and yet shall we think (because M. Jewel
says the word) that those only were the true and Authentike Copies and that
Zozimus was a Forger, because he alleged a Canon, which they had not?

Fourthely (as I noted before) diverse holy Fathers and Ancient writers have
alleged in their learned writings yet extant and not doubted of, certain
Canons of the Nicene Council, which a^e not extant at all in the Copies sent
from Alexandria and Constantinople to the bishops of Africa. S. Ambrose says,
it was decreed in the Nicene Council, Ne bigamus in clerum asciscatur,
Ambrosius Epist. 82.
that one twice married should not be admitted to be of the Clergy. S. Augustine
writes it for a decree of the Nicene Council, Ne episcopus sibi Successorem
sufficiat, Augustine. Epist. 110.
that a Bishop yet living should not appoynte his Successor. And therefore he
repents him that he was of Aurelius his predecessor made bishop, he yet
living, saying that at that time he knew not so much. S. Hierom writes that
the book of Judith was by the Nicene Council decreed to be a part of the
holy Scripture. Last of all, all the Fathers of the second General Council
of Constantinople holden above thirty years before this Zosimus was Pope, In
prefat. Judith. Theodoret. lib. 5. cap. 9. Histor. Ecclesiasti.
do mention in their letters written to the bishops of Italy Damasus and other,
Veterem sanctionem and definitionem Nicaenorum patrum, an old decree and
determination of the Fathers at Nice, vt in vnaquaque prouincia, illius
prouinciae cultores, assumptis etiam si videatur, finitimis, conferant
ecclesiasticos honores ijs quos vtiliter gesturos esse confidunt, that in every
province the inhabitants thereof, taking unto them (if they thought good) their
neighbors also, might bestow Spiritual promotions upon such as they thought
worthy thereof. Not any one of all these matters appears in any of the
Canons, or any part of the Acts of the Nicene Council. What then? Shall we
say therefore according to the wisdom and Charity of M. Jewel, that S.
Ambrose, S. Augustine, S. Hierome, yea and all those Fathers of that second
General Council of Chrystendome, were all Forgers and Falsifyers of the
Nicene Council? Or shall we not rather say that those Fathers, and that holy
Council spoke truly, but those Copies sent to the Aphricanes, are not the full
and perfect Copies? Though verily I think they were the best that those good
bishops of Alexandria and Constantinople, Cyrillus and Atticus had at that time.

Fiftely your own Apology of England M. Jewel alleges a Canon of the
Council of Nice, 5. The Apology off England.
touching the Sacrament, that we ought not to be humiliter intenti ad panem
and vinum, over basely bent to bread and wine. If this be a true Canon of the
Nicene Council, show it in the Copies sent from Alexandria and Constantinople
to the bishops of Africa. Ift it be not, then either confess that you have
belied that Council, or else that the Copies sent from the East were not the
true Authentike and original Copies.

Eusebius. lib. 3. de vita Constantini Epiphanius lib. 3. ^om. 2. here is. 70
Yet in these copies which M. Jewel calls Authentic, there is not one
Canon or half Canon either against the Arrians, or touching the observation of
Easter. And thinks M. Jewel against all these most evident reasons, with the
only warrant of his mouth to persuade the world that those Copies lacking so
many Canons, and sent from such suspicious places, are the true and Authentike
copies of the Nicene Council? I trust by these few every wise and indifferent
Reader is able to descrie this manifest Untruth of M. Jewel, and to mark
withal the whole ground of this pretensed Forgerie of the Pope to be
overthrown.



A slanderous Untruth it is, because M. Jewel has no Author thereof but his
fellow protestants of Magdebourg and such like, and because it tends to the
discredit not only of Pope Zosimus a man commended and reverenced by the
Africanes them selves, but also of the whole See Apostolic from that time
hitherto. Prosper, contra Collatorem cap. 10. and 41.


The 293. Untruth mere slanderous
And to the intent to auaunce his Apostolic See of Rome, had divised privileges
and prerogatives of his own.

Lib. 2. de Sacerdotio
M. Jewel continues his slanderous reproaches. But it appears already by S.
Gregory and Chrysostom, and it shall hereafter in this Article yet more
appear, that the prerogative of the Sea of Rome was given to Peter by Christ
him self, and to his successors, as Chrisostom expressly confesses. Truly
touching this matter, neither did the Africanes here utterly refuse the
Authorite of the bishop of Rome, but only in this case of appellations, neither
had Zosimus any cause to feign a Council for the prerogative of his See,
having for the same beside express Scripture the great Council of Sardica,
Cap. 7.
and as Justinian the Emperor confesses the very Council of Nice it self
(being one of the four first Councelles) though not in that Canon,
Constitut. 131.
yet in some other.

The 294 Untruth In Nypping away a great pa^te of the Se^t^nce.
The bisshoppes in the Council of Aphrica having thus thoroughly examined the
truth hereof, wrote unto Caelestinus then bishop of Rome in this wise.
Decreta Nicena etc.

If a man should ask M. Jewel, why he began this his allegation out of the
Aphricane Council in the mids of a sentence, omitting all that went before,
I think the best answer that he could make would be to say he followed
therein the precepts of his Rhetorike, to bring as much as made for his
purpose, and to omit the rest that made against him. Well though his
Rhetorike taught him that Art, yet his Divinity taught him not that Deceit. I
will therefore note certain sentences in the same epistle going before, and
then proceed with the words of M. Jewel alleged. The Fathers of the
Aphricane Council declaring to Celestinus the Pope that though Apiarius by the
means of his legate had been restored to his order of priesthood (from whence
he had been deposed) yet now again for other notorious crimes by him confessed
he was justly excommunicated, do write thus unto him. In epist. Council.
Aphricani ad Caelest. Papam.
Proefato itaque debitae salutationis officio etc. Our due commendations being
remembered, we desire you earnestly that from hence for the you admit not to
your hearing over lightly such as come from hence, neither that you r^ceiue any
more to your Communion such as are by us excommunicated, Nicen. Con. cap. 5.
because your Reuerentnes shall easily see that this is not d^fined by the
Nicene Council. For if it be there provided for the infe^iour clergy or the
lay, how much more would it provide for the bish^ps, that being suspended
from the Communion in their own provin^e, they should not look to be restored
of your holiness, either hastily or rashely or unjustly. Also let your holiness
repel the wicked refuges of priests and the other clergy (as it becomes
you.) Because this privilege is not denied to the Church of Africa, and (Lo
here begins the allegation of M. Jewel.)

Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. ^.
wherein it seems both then and long before in S. Ciprians time the province
of Aphrike wa^ priuileged. Improba refugia, wicked refuges, of naughty men
abusing the benefit of appellation, and again they require him not in no case
to with such as they do exco^municat, but they desire him, vt non facilius ad
aures suas admittat, not to admit them to his hearing over lightly, vt non
praepropere, non indebite restituat, that he restore them not rashely or
unjustly, before the cause be thouroughly examined. And so in S. Ciprian it
appears, the excommunicated persons fled from Afrike to Rome, Ciprianus lib.
1. epist. 3.
quasi (says S. Ciprian) veritas post eos nauigare non posset quae mendaces
linguas rei certae probatione conuinceret, as though the truth could not
sail after them, which by certain trial might convince their lying tounges.
Wherein it is evident, that appellation was made from Afrike to Rome, though
the bishops them selves of Afrike, as S. Ciprian in that self epistle
complains, were troubled and offended therewith. But all this M. Jewel, as I
said, following the precepts of his art, has thought good to omit, making
the Reader to believe, that the Council of Aphrica utterly abandonned at that
time the Pope, and pronounced him guilty of manifest Forgerie. Hitherto you see
how little they charge him withal. Let us proceed with the words of the
Council even as M. Jewel has alleged them.

Epist. 3. li. 1. Cu^ statutu^ sit omnibus nobis etc.
For it was discretely and rightly considered that all matters are to be
determined in the pla^es where they began.

These very words and reason S. Cyprian long before the Nicene Council was
assembled, uses, and that as a Canon, Statute, or Ordonnaunce. Whereby it
seems this determination of matters at home was an ancient privilege of the
Aphricane Church, beside other countres of the west.

Out of the Aphricane Counsel
And that no province can lack the holy ghost, whereby the bisshoppes off
Christ may be able, both wisely to see, and also constantly to mayntaine the
right. And specially for that it is lawful for every man that shall mislike
the discretion of his Judges, to appeal either to a particular Council within
the same Province. The 295. Capitain and No.
realm or to a general Council. On less perchance some man will say, God
is able to inspire the trial of Justice into one man Alone (because he is
bishop of Rome) and will not inspire the same in to a great number of
bisshoppes meeting together in Council.

Nisi forte quisquam est qui credat vni cuilibet posse Deum nostrum examinis
inspirare iustitiam, M. Jewel taken in manifest Forgerie.
and innumerabilibus in Concilium sacerdotibus denegare. In English truly
translated they are thus much. Unless there be any man that will think that
one God is able to inspire the trial of Justice to any one, and that he will
deny it to a great number of Bishops meeting together in Council. Let us
now consider the manifest Forgerye of M. Jewel. His Forgerye is great and
stands in these words. Into one man alone because he is Bis^oppe off Rome.

First for vni cuilibet, to any one, he has put, into one man alone, and then
to declare what one man, he adds in a parenthesis, Because he is bishop of
Rome. Which words are not at all in the Council. And therefore he changed
the words before, that they might seem to lead to such a sense. As though the
Council had expressly and namely spoken against the judgment of the bishop
of Rome being One man alone. Which sense persuaded to the Reader under the
glorious name of the Aphricane Council he thought would make gaily against the
One supreme gouuerneme^t of Christ's vicar on earth. By such manifest Forgerye
M. Jewel will prove the Pope a Forger. Let us now proceed with the words off
the Council.

out of the Aphricane Counc^l.
And how may such beyond sea Judgments be thought good whereunto the
persons off the witnesses, which in trial off truth are thought Necessary,
either for that they be women, or for the Infirmitye off their age, or ffor
many other incident lettes can not be brought?

For such like considerations the trial of certain suits out of the realm at
the Court of Rome were embarred, under the reign of king Edward the third
in our own country, and yet neither the Popes authorite thereby disanulled,
Ed. 3 an. 27.
neither any breach of unite committed.

out of the Aphric. Council.
Now that any should be sent abroad, as it were from your holiness side, we
find it not decreed in any Council.

Hist. tripa. lib. 4. cap. 23. and Theodoret. li. 2. cap. 7.
as Socrates and Theodoretus both in their Ecclesiastical Histories record.
Though here the Fathers of this Council seem to have no knowleadge thereof.
And truly as well they might miss the Canons of this Council off Sardica, as
they missed the Canons of the Nicene Council, as it is already most evidently
proved.

out of the Aphr. Cou^.
As for that you sent us lately by our Brother Faustinus, as part off the
Nicene Council, we must do you to wit that in the Veriorib. truer.

The.296 untruth. False translation.


true Councelles, which we received from our holy fellow bishop Cyrillus of
Alexandria, and the Reverent Father Atticus the bisshoppe off Constantinople,
taken out off the very originalles it can not be found. And send you not
any your Clerks hitherto execute Justice Quibusque potentibus.
at any man's request, lest we seem to bring the smokie puff off the world
into the church off Christ. Thus far the words of the Council.

Apology (if ever for shame you will printe that lying libell any more). The
Apology of England taken in manifest Forgerie: Because you allege there a
Canon of the Nicene Council, touching the blessed Sacrament, which is not to
be found in the Originalles sent from Alexandria and Constantinople. But M.
Jewel, beside these absurdityes, I have said I trust sufficiently before, to
prove these Originalles could not be, nor were not the very true and perfect
Originalles off the Nicene Council. Though verily I think they were the best
that those good bishops then had. This being so, M. Jewel has stoutely said
but nothing yet proved, that the Pope is a Forger. Let us see what follows.

The.297. Untruth Slanderous, fond, and Maliciouse.
The Bishop of Rome when he saw he was taken with the manner and found an
open falsarie, for that the Canons of his making disagreed from the very
Originalles (297.) thought It good police, to say the Originalles were burnt
by the Arria^s, and so no true copy remaining, but his only.

Vno absurdo dato sequitur quodiibet. Upon a false ground it is easy to build
Untruths apase. Howbeit yet we will see what they are. He says.

The.298 Vntrut^e Slanderous, fond and Malicious.
And therefore he (298) imagined a letter to be written in the name of
Athanasius, and other bishops of Egypt, unto Marcus the bishop of Rome,
wherein they besought him a Copy of the Nicene Counsel for that all their
books were utterly destroyed. But this shifte was to simple.

so simple these many hundred years, neither are we at this present (thanked
be God therefore) but we can descrie the clear light of Gods truth from the
misty clouds of heretical devises. This Epistle of Athanasius to Marcus, was
no devised matter of the Pope M. Jewel, but the true epistle of Athanasius,
for ought you can bring to the contrary. And for such it has been taken before
you were borne, and shall be (doubt you not) after you are gone. Yet let us
hear the reason that you give of this simple shifte. You say.

The.299 Untruth ^or M. Jew* him self says The Counsel of Nice were worth
the showing.
wherewith (.299.) either to relieve him self in that case, or else to molest
or grieve his adversaries.

Then the trial hereof (M. Jewel) stands not in any thing that you can
bring for your self, but in the trial of your adversaries might and abilite
against you. You dispute against this Epistle of Athanasius, as if an infidel
would dispute against S. Lukes Ghospel, not by any reason of his own against
the gospel, but by examining the Christian what reason he can bring to prove
it S. Lukes gospel. M. Jewel reasons like an Infidel.
Will Somer if he lived, by such means might dispute with the best Scholar in
England. But M. Jewel for the authorite of that Epistle of Athanasius (it
being already received and allowed for his, by the consent of our elders) it
is not to be tried by that which we can say for it, who do trust herein our
forefathers Judgment, but by that which you can prove against it, if you will
infringe the authority thereof. Howbeit you might of your self M. Jewel (were
you not blinded with some corrupted affection) see easily a right good reason
why Athanasius should require of the Pope the Copy of the Nicene Council,
seeing your self confesses in this same article, that the Council of Nice
were well worth the showing.

Though here M. Jewel have ended all he can say in effect to prove the Pope a
Forger, yet he interlaceth other things a great many to amplify the matter,
and to seem to the Reader to say much. Therefore reproving by the way Julius
and the Canon by him alleged (to the which we have before answered) he
returns to Athanasius, and repeteth again his Untruths, as one that took
great pleasure in lying. For having done with Julius, thus he follows.

page 237. In epist ad Orthod. Socr. li. 2. cap. 14. The 300 Vntruth^ as before.
he writes unto Marcus the B. of Rome of the burning of the books, and yet
Athanasius him self certainly knew that Marcus was dead at the lest ix. years
before that burning happened.

This is but a repetition of the former Untruths. For (as it has before been
declared) neither in Athanasius Ad Orthodoxos neither in Socrates any such
thing appears.

The 301 Untruth joined with a slander and a folly.
Even so the vain Forger of the Emperor Constantines Dotatio^, imagines him
to decree that the bishop of Constantinople should be subject unto the Sea of
Rome. And yet neither was the City off Constantinople at that time builte, nor
any such name yet known in the world, nor any bisshopricke there erected. A
man might say. Non satis commodee diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec.

Lib. 1. Cap. 14.
S. Gregory says expressly of the Church of Constantinople. Quis eam
dubitet Sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? Who doubts but that Church is
subject to the Sea Apostolic?

Lib. 7. epist. 63. The 302 Untruth For both sayings do agree.
Again the same Athanasius writing unto Felix, says. The Arrians had
falsified the Nicene Council. But writing unto Marcus of the same matter, as a
man that had utterly forgotten him self, he says. The Arri^ns had burnte the
Council of Nice. But if it were burnte, how was it falsified? If it were
falsified, how was it burnte? These tales hang not well together.

In epist. Marci. ad Athanasi^m.
Athanasius wrote for an other Copy to Marcus, and as it appears by the
letters off Marcus, Athanasius received them. Now Sir after him, Julius was
Pope and Liberius also. In whose times Constantius the Arrian Emperor
afflicted Christendom, and the Arrians many years prospered, Athanasius all
that time yet living, and after, Vide Chronologiam Henr Pantaleonis.
under Julian the Apostata restored to his bishopric, about what time Felix
was the B. of Rome. Neither was it impossible that in all that mean while the
Arrians so long prosperinge had falsified the better Copies sent from Rome to
Alexandria, neither that Athanasius should certify the Pope thereof.
Therefore a man might here most justly say to you Sir Comptroller. Non satis
commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec.



hitherto, and the effect of that which follows. Thou shall see, that when M.
Jewel speaks truly, they are but bare Gheasses and sely Surmises. When his
reason forces, he speaks beside the Truth. Thus it has hitherto appeared,
and thus it shall hereafter appear.

Theod. li. 1 ca. 9. et lib 2. cap. 8. The 303 Untruth For in Theodoretus
there appears no such thing. Lib^ 2. The 304 Untruth For the Arasrine
burned in deed the Canons, as is avouched.
For first it appears by Theodoretus that the whole Acts and Copies of the
Council of Nice, were sent abroad unto all bisshops that were away.



And Marius Victorinus writing against Arius says that the same Acts were
sent abroad into the whole world, and that many thousand bishops subscribed
and agreed unto them. Which thing being undoubtedly true, it were very much
for M. Hardinge to say that all these copies, in all parts of the world,
could be destroyed upon the sudden. And that altogether in one place, and
with one fire and at one commandment. The Arrianes neither were so mighty to
atchieue it, nor so foolish to attempt it. Certainly the like never happened
to any other Council.

Where be your wits, and where is your remembrance M. Jewel? Who says
that these Canons were burnt in all parts of the world, altogether in one
place, and so forth? We talk only now of Canons burnte in Alexandria, in
Antiochia and Constantinople, the three great Cities of the East Church, where
the Arrians ruled all the roste first twenty years and more under Constantius,
then under Valens allmoste twenty years more. In all this time they were both
able and wise enough in malice to burn those Canons which directly and
expressly condemned their heresy. This Amplifiyng of the matter proves you a
Fabler. The matter avouched is proved yet no Fable.

But what needs words where the matter is plain? The bisshop^ of Africa had
the very Copies of these Canons.

In deed this is to the matter. But this is stark false. They had not the full
and perfect Copy of the Canons as it has been before at large proved. Namely
by many Canons of that Council alleged of most approved Fathers, not extant
in these pretensed Copies of the Aphricanes.

Council. Car. 6. cap. 4. The 306 Untruth in false tr^nslating.
Alypius the bishop of T^gasta in this Conference with Faustinus said.
A^^uet^men me mouet, quoniam cum i^spi^eremus greca exemplaria huius Synodi Ni
enae, ista i^i^escio qua ratione non inuenimus. But this one thing much
moves me, that confer^ing and examining the greek examples of this Nicene
Counce^l, these matters (off the superiorite off the Sea off Rome that is
alleged) I know not how we found not there.

Of the Superiorite of the Sea of Rome, that is alleged. This is the untrue
dealing of M. Jewel. For neither are those words in the latin, neither are
they meaned of the Africane bishop. The Controversy then was not utterly to
refuse all obedience to the Sea of Rome, but to have no Appeals out of Afrike
to Rome. Which thing before they had decreed in the Milleuitane Council:
Can. 22. August. epist. 90. and. 91.
and Pope Innocentius had confirmed that Council.

page 238. C^ncil. Car^^ag. 6 can. 102. and 103.
made awnswer in this sort. I tho^ght it needful to send unto you the true
examples off the very A^^hentike Coun^el. Likewise Atticus the bisshopp of
Constantinopl^ to the same request answers thus. I have sent unto you the
Canons in the whole, even as they were made and ratified by the Fat^ers in the
Ci^ie of N^^e. Now if these Canons were quite burnte, as M. Harding says,
how were they afterward found whole, as the godly Father Atticus and the
l^rned bishop Cyrillus says? And if they were afterward found whole, how
then were they quite burnt before?

Ruffinus li. 1. ca. 6. Histor. eccles.
do differ and vary from the Canons alleged by the bishops of the East both
in number, and in order, and in the matter it self. As the learned Reader may
easily see by conferring both together. Therefore again, either those Copies
were not perfyt, or the Ecclesiastical History of Ruffinus must be condemned
for a Forger as the Pope here is.

The 307. Untruth Slanderous.
Or how is it, that no man, neither Africa, nor in Europa, nor in Asia, neither
in the East Church, neither in the weast was ever able to see these Canons,
but only the bishop of Rome, that so (307.) ambitiously claims by them?



The 308 Untruth. For that is not avouched.
And if he have them in deed and that of such Authentike record, under the
hands of the three hundred and eyghtene bishops, (as it is boldly avouched)
why a^e they not showed? Why have they been for the space of these thirtene
hundred years still kept unvisible? Verily the Council of Nice were well
worth the s^ewing.

alleged them to the Africanes, and that he was no Forg^ him self therein,
but had them in his Custody from his predecessors Siluester and other, to whom
they were sent from Nice, this is avouched, and this you have forgotten.



Quid Stulti proprium? Non posse and velle Nocere.

The Canons all were quite burnte, Which thing he only says and no man else
but because he saw wise men would Reply, There were no such Canons ever made,
therefore he took pains further to show the consideratyons and causes, and
the whole order, and circumstance of the making, whereat, he says, he him
self was present.

There were no such Canons ever made. For it is now more then a thousand years
that any man replied so, before the holy brood of f^yer Luther among whom M.
Jewel has learned this wit. And how wisely he has Replied, it appears I
trow, by the Grave and True process that he has hitherto made. And shall yet
better appear by the Deep Consideration which follows.

Four score canons (says he) were divised in the whole: whereof 40. were
laid in Latin by the Latins, and 40. other in Greek by the Grecians. Off
this whole number of Canons (says he) the Fathers there took of ten Canons
and divided them as they might, most handsomely among the rest, and so made
up only the number of 70. Canons. thereby mystically to represent the 70.
Disciples, or else the number of the. 70. tounges that be known in the worl^e.
Thus of wholesome and godly Rules of Faith and Manners, M. Hardinges Athanasius
has leisure to fancy preaty Mysteries.

made to represent the three score and ten disciples, or else the three score
and ten tounges that be known in the world, Ergo that was not the true
Athanasius that wrote it, but some idle fansyer of preaty Mysteries. How truly
said S. Paul? Animalis homo non percipit ea quae sunt Spiritus dei. 1. Cor. 2.
Stultitia enim est illi. The Sensual man perceaueth not those things that
are of the Spirit of God. For it sounds to him as a folly. And again,
Sapientia Carnisinimica est deo. Romans ^.
The wisdom of the flesh is contrary to God. For were you in deed M. Jewel
affectioned as it becomes a Bishop and sheapherd of Gods flock to be, yea had
you any portion of that holy Spirit directing your thoughts and writings, as
but a sober Christen man ought to have, you would n^uer have uttered such a
lewd toye to discredit the writing of an Ancient and most learned Father, such
as Athanasius thourough out all Christendom is known to be. For by the like
vain of your singular wit and wisdom M. Jewel, you may discredit many a
learned work of the best and most approved Fathers of Christ's Church. S.
Ambrose in his learned work De fide ad Gratianum makes a mystery of the number
of the Fathers of the Nicene Council (as Athanasius reports the Fathers them
selves to have made of the number of their Canons,) and compares the.318.
Fathers to the.318. fighting men under Abraham when he conquered the four
kings, saying. De con^ilijs id potissimum sequar, Genesis 14. Ambros. de fide ad
Gratianu^ li. 1. in Pr^^logo.
quod trecenti december and octo sacerdotes ta^quam Abrahae electi iudicio,
consona fidei virtute victores velut trophaeu^ toto orb subactis perfidis
extulerunt. Vt mihi videatur hoc esse diuinu^, quod eodem numero in Concilijs
fidei habemus oraculu^, quo in historia pietatis exemplum. Of all councels I
will follow that chiefly which the three hundred and eightene Priests as if
they had been chosen by the mind of Abraham (who with that number conquered
the iiij. kings) by the Agreement of faith triumphed by conquest over all
faithelesse folcke. That it seems to me this matter was by Gods providence,
that we have an Oracle of our Faith in Councels under the same Number, as we
have an example of virtue in the Story. This observation and likelihood of
Number seemed to S. Ambrose, Diu^num, a Matter done by God, a Mystery, a Secret
work of the highest. And yet is he not therefore accounted a fancyer of pretty
Mysteries (as full pretely M. Jewel bableth) neither is therefore that learned
work of his rejected or doubted of. In like m^ner S. Hierom in his Apology ad
Pammachium, make^^ ^ Mystery of these three numbers, thirty, three score, and a
hundred, which our Savior in the ghospel speaks, of the increase that comes
of the sede falling upon good earth, and says of these numbers. I^ Apologia
a^ Pammachium pro libris aduersus Iouinia.
Triginta referuntur ad nuptias, Septuaginta vero ad viduas. Porro numerus
centesimus exprimit vi^gin^tatis Coronam. Thirty are referred to Marriage. Three
score to widows state. And the number of a hundred represents the garland of
Virginite. What now? Will M. Jewel here either therefore deny this work to
be of S. Hieroms making, or else say that of Gods holy word he h^d leisure to
fancy preaty Mysteries? In like manner when S. Augustine makes Mysteries not
only of Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, and their so many wives, but also of Lothes
lying with his own daughters, and of the fornication committed by Judas with
his daughter in Law Thamar, Lib. 22. contra Faus^um Man^chaeum. cap. 82. and
^^.
and such other matters against that heretic Faustus the Manichee, will M.
Iewelles modesty serve him trow we, to say, that that learned piece of work
is none of S. Augustines, but of some Fabler that had leisure upon holy
Scripture to fancy preaty Mysteries? Or shall we rather say that all this
grave and deep consideration of M. Jewel, which he brings, as he says, to
satisfy his Readers mind, is but a lewd scoff of his idle brain against
that holy Council more mete truly for a Sir John hicke Scorner, then for a my
L. bishop. And for such I let it pass.

the famous donation of Constantine writes thus. Even in the writing of it, I
have found manifest tokens of f^lsehood.



The.309. Untruth Slaund. as shall appear.
The like may be said of these M. Hardinges new Canons. Even in the very
vtteraunce and writi^g of them we may find plain contrariete and therefore
undoubted tokens of Untruth.

This like is untruly said of M. Jewel, except he prove it. And not only
Untruly, but also Slanderously. Let then his proofs try.



Petitio Principij. For that is brought to prove a Conclusion, which ought it
self to be proved and Concluded. M. Jewel will prove that the Canons were
divised by the Pope, because they were divised by the Pope. As much to say.
Why is it so? Mary because it is so.

The bishop of Rome has the rule and Souerainte over all Patriarche^.

Lib. 3 de cha^a^t dogma^.
whom M. Jewel goes about to prove a Forger. But it is alleged of
Franciscus Turrianus and out of him by D. Harding. Thus M. Jewel confounds
and iumbleth things together, But let us see what he will infer hereof.

Council. Nicen. can. 6.
But the very true and undoubted Council of Nice says far otherwise.
Antiqua consaetudo seruetur per Aegyptum, Lybiam and Pentapolim, vt
Alexandrinus horum omnium habeat potestatem. Quia and vrbis Romae Episcopo
parilis mos est. Let the Ancient cu^tome be kept through out Agypte, Lybia,
and Pentapolis: that the bishop of Alexan^ria have the government of all
these. For the bishop of the City of Rome has the like order. By this Canon
the B. of Rome has (310) no Soueraynte over other Patriarchs, The 310.
Untruth as shall ^ppeare.
As M. Harding fantasieth, but only a fellowship, and equalyte with the rest,
to walk carefully with in his own division, as others were bound to do
within theirs.

Quia and vrbis Romae episcopo parilis mos est. Because the bishop of Ro^e has
the like order. The Canon Commands not as a new matter but as an Old
Custom that the bishop of Alexandria shall gouuerne all Egypt, and
Pentapolis. And why shall that old Custom be kept? The Canon says. Quia and
vrbis Romae Episcopo Parilis mos est. Because the Bishop of Rome has the like
Order. The Popes Primacy in the Nicene Council.
As much to say, because the bishop of Rome has so of long time appointed it
and ordered it. Else the reason of the Decree were void, and fond. For a fond
thing it were to allege for a reason of the law the Custom, Manner and Order
of an other, if his Order and Manner did not importe an Authorite, sufficient to
Rule and direct the Law. That holy Council therefore, alleging expressly
the Order before taken by the bishop of Rome, as a Reason why the other
Patriarchs should be thus and thus limited, gives us to understand, that
such their limitation proceeded of the Bishop of Romes former Order and
appointment, and that the Decree of the Canon of that Council was but a
public Testimony and Ratification of the Ancient Order before by the Pope
taken and used. And thus this Canon imports a Souerainte of the B. of Rome
over other Patriarchs, as by whose Order the others Jurisdiction was limited
and restrained. Thus also the other Canon alleged by Franciscus Turrianus and
men^ioned by D. Harding is not contrary to the true Copies or Canons of the
Nicene Council, but sounds agreeable to the same.

Parilis mos are specially to be noted: which cannot (311.) otherwise be
expounded, page 239. The 311. Untruth For these words. ought otherwise to be
expounded.
but only of like manner, order, and Authorite of Jurisdiction.

So says M. Jewel. But then let us consider the reason of the Canon. The
Canon says. The Patriarche of Alexandria shall have Egypt, lybia, and
Pentapolis allotted to his Jurisdiction. And why? Forsothe by M. Iewelles
reason, Because the bishop of Rome has ^he like manner, order, and authorite of
Jurisdiction. What? has the bishop of Rome the like Jurisdiction over Egypt,
lybia, and Pentapolis, and shall therefore the Patriarch of Alexandria have the
same? Do those two words Parilis mos necessarely infer so much, and can
they not otherwise be expounded? Then two several Patriarchs must have one
and the like Jurisdiction. Then which what ca^ be more absurd? What then?
Shall therefore the bishop of Alexandria have such and such Countres allotted
unto him, because the B. of Rome has such and such other Countres? And what
reason is this to make a Decree, I appeal to al men of reason and
understanding. This might perhaps serve for a like and similitude, as that the
B. of Alexandria should be the Patriarche over such Countres, Even as the
Bishop of Rome is the Patriarche over other Countres. But now the words of
the Canon, are not Even as the B. of Rome, and so forth. But the words of the
Canon are: Quia^ and Episcopo parilis mos est. Because the Bishop of Rome has
the like Order. The like Order taken. by the bishop of Rome is given as a Cause
and Reason of the Decree. It is not brought as a Like or Similitude to
exemplify the decree. Therefore it can not be taken as M. Jewel fantasyeth, to
signify a like manner and Authorite of Jurisdiction in the bishop of Rome. But
it must of necessite signify a Superior Authorite of the B. of Rome. Verily
such as the which was a sufficient warrant and Reason to that Holy Council, to
establish the old Accustomed Jurisdiction of the Patriarche of Alexandria,
over Egypt, Libia and Pentapolis. And thus far do the true Copies of the
Nicene Council agree with the other not commonly extant among the twenty, and
confirm in like manner the Supreme Authorite of the bishop of Rome over the
Patriarchs them selves.

The.312. Untruth as it shall anon appear.
M. Hardinges Canon says. S. Pete^ was master and ruler over all Christen
Princes. And yet is not M. Hardinge able to prove that while S. Peter lived,
there was any one prince Christened in the whole world.

What a Manifest, Notorious, and Capitain Untruth this is, it shall anon
appear, in the Returning of the next Untruth fathered by M. Jewel upon D.
Harding. But now let us consider how M. Jewel can Gheasse to the Contrary.

The 313. Untruth joined with a so lie.

Homil. 1. de paeni^. Tom. 5. Primatum illi gubernatione^que per vniuersum
mu^dum tradidit.

Matthew. 8.


And if Peter had had power over kings and Princes, it is not likely he would
have taken up his lodging with Cornelius the poor Tanner.

Well gheassed and wisely. As though S. Peter's power committed to him by
Christ, and the Primacy which he had (by Chrysostomes Judgment) over the whole
world, was to command him self a lodging and such like temporal
p^eferments. Some foolish Jew might reason as wise M. Jewel here does, and
say. If Christ was the Son of God and king of al, it is not likely he would
have lived in such sort that he might say (as he said) of him self. Foxes
have their holes, and birds have their nestes. But the Son of man has not
where to rest his head. By such godly Reasons M. Jewel f^^eth Gods people.
But S. Paul soluteth well this whole matter, 1. Cor. 9.
saying. What is my reward? For sothe that preaching the gospel, I may
deliver the gospel without cost. That I may not abuse my Power in the
Gospel. So dealed the Apostles at the beginning, and so they planted the
gospel, not yet leesing therefore their Spiritual Jurisdiction.

If any man repine against this Statute, accursed be he.

In deed to all heretics, Sorom. li. 3. cap. 8. Co^c. Chal. Act. 3. Optatus.
li. 1.
a Terror it is to obey their Superiors: and specially to be subject to the Sea of Rome. So the Arrians defied Pope Julius, the Eutychia^ Dioscorus
presumed to excommunicat Pope Leo, the Donatistes would not stand to the
Judgment of Pope Melciades. And so to M. Jewel the Statute of the Nicene
Council confirming the Popes Supremacy is a Terror.

The.314 Untruth For the Africanes never saw this Canon.
and also to all the Bishops of Aphrical, Numidia, Mauritania, Pentapolis and
Byzancena. Who not only repined (.314.) openly against this Cano^, but also
said, It was falsified, and rebuked the Pope of Pride and Ambition for the
same.

the Pope to be over al Patriarchs, which says, that S. Peter was Master and
ruler over al Princes, and the which (as M. Jewel says) concludes with a
terror, this Cano^ the Africane bishops never saw. But it is one of those
Canons which Franciscus Turrianus a learned man of our days has found out. Is
there any regard of shame or honesty in M. Jewel that multiplieth Untruths,
and droppeth lies, so fast?

To be short, what leads M. Harding thus to say? The 315. Untruth Slaund.
For D. Harding said not so.
The bishop off Rome has these three score and ten Canons in safe keeping.
Why does he thus dissemble and mock the world?

And Alas. What leads M. Jewel thus to belie D. Harding? why does he thus
dissemble and mock the world? What shall he hope to win or get hereby, but
if it be to have the VVhetstone? The words which D. Harding says of those
three score and ten Canons kept in Rome, are these.

diuis. 6. page 232. in M. Iewelles Reply.
Among the Canons made by the.318. bishops at the Nicene Council, which were
in number 70. and all burnt by heretics in the East Church save xx. and yet
the whole number was kept diligently in the Church of Rome in the Original
it self, Sent to Syluester the Bishop there from the Council subscribed with
the said.318. Fathers hands etc? In these words D. Harding said, the whole
number, Was kept. And how? Sent to Syluester by the Council it self, but
that the bishop of Rome now has them, as M. Jewel makes him to say, he
says not at all. Who so believes not me herein, let him peruse the whole
words of D. Harding in this place in the very text inserted in M. Iewelles
Reply, and if he find it otherwise, let me never more be credited. Now M.
Jewel with more impudency then ca^ well be expressed, Did. 16. viginti.
reasons very sadly out of the decrees, and proves that many a year ago,
the Pope had but twenty Canons of that Council: and thus he concludes.

The 316. Untruth As before
The Pope says there are but twenty Canon extant, M. Harding says (316.)
^here are three score and ten Canons. I trow, (...) no reason, we should
believe M. Harding, and leave the Pope.



After this wholesome and fruitful Process M. Jewel has a flinge again at
an other Epistle of Anathasius to Felix. All out of season, and all beside the
purpose. Leaning therefore his Untrue allegatio^s of certain doctors, about
that matter of (the which his untrue dealing he shall yet hear by some other,
God willing, er it be long) let us consider M. Iewelles Conclusion and winding
up of this great Process of the Popes forgerie.

The.317. Untruth. peuish.
Now, gentle Reader, shortly and simply, to lay all the effect hereof before
thine eyes: M. Hardings Canons were burnte before they were ever made.





The.318. Untruth peuish.
So the field was won, and the field was lost. The field was lost, and yet
it was won. But twenty years came between.

This Athanasius informs Marcus the Bishop of Rome of the burning of them,
nine years before the fire was made.



The.319. Vntruthe^ Slanderous.
and that by the witness of the Patriarchs of Constantinople, and Antioche,
and off all the bishops, and the whole Council of Africa, S. Augustine him
self being present.



The.320 Untruth Slaund. as before.
The Pope has the custody of these Invisible Canons. The Pope him self
says, he has none of them.

D. Harding said not so. But even as that Pope Steven said, that they were
all at Rome to the number of.70. and sent thither by the Council it self to
Pope Syluester..

These Canons be plain Contrary not only to the old Catholic Fathers but
also to other Canons of the same Council. The.321. Untruth as appears.




The bishops in the Council of Africa openly mislike the Popes attempt in
this behalf, and call it worldly pride and vain Ambition.







Now for a surplussage, because M. Jewel with all the help of the lying
Centuries, patched up by his brethern of Magdeburge, with all his study and
conference with his friends, has not yet been able to fasten any Forgerye upon
Pope Zosimus, but the more he has talked therein, the more Untruths he has
multiplied, let us consider how the Africanes them selves after the death of
this Zosimus (who was Pope but one year) spoke and reported of him, whether as
of a Forger and Falsyfyer, as the impudent face of M. Jewel had blased it out,
or otherwise. First the whole Council of the Africane bishops in their letter
to Bonifacius the next Successor of this Zosimus, even talking of this matter
of appealing to Rome, and of the Nicene Canon alleged by Zosimus therefore, do
call him Beatae memoriae Zosimum. Zosimus of blessed memory. And again
Venerabilis memoriae Zosimum, Con il. Aph^ic in epist. ad Bonifaciu^.
Zosimus of Reverent memory. If these Africane bishops had (as M. Jewel most
lewdely lies) descried such a Forgery of the holy Council of Nice in Zosimus,
and if they had also been of the Sprit, that this ghospelling Prelatis of, they
would I trow, have blased him out in their letter thus. Zosimus the Forger,
Zosimus the Falsyfyer of the holy Council. Zosimus of infamous memory. But we
see in these Fathers both an other opinion and an other Spirit, then appears
in these wicked Chams, whose whole glory and pleasure is to Accuse their
Fathers, holy and learned bishops of Christ's Church before them.

S. Augustine one of the Africane bishops that was present when Faustinus legate
to this Pope Zosimus alleged the same Canon of the Nicene Council, let us
consider how after the death of Zosimus, he reports of him in his learned
writings against the Pelagians, condemned especially by this learned Pope
Zosimus. He says of Celestius the Pelagian heretic, In vrbe Roma libellum
dedit beatissimo Papae Zosimo. De Gratia Christili. 2. cap. 2. Cap. 6.
In the City of Rome he gave up a libel (of his faith and belefe) to the Most
holy Pope Zosimus. And because this learned Pope Zosimus did not D^strictam
far sententiam pronounce a straight Sentence against this Pelagyan heretic,
but suis interrogationibus and illius responsionibus furentem colligare, donec
(si fieri posset) resipisceret, moderat the fury of the heretic by his
questyons and the others answers, until, if it were possible, he might amend,
because I say the Pope Zosimus thus dealed with him, S. Augustine calls him
Multu^ misericorde^ Apostolicae Sedis Antistite^, A very merciful bishop of
the Sea Apostolic. In the next Chapter following he calls him Venerabilis
Papa Zosimus The Reverent Pope Zosimus. And in the next after Beatissimus Papa
Zosimus. The most Blessed Pope Zosimus. Cap. 7. Cap. 8.
And again in the same Chapter. Venerabili Papae Zosimo Synodus Africana
respondit. The Africane Council answered to the Reverent Pope Zosimus. In few
Chapters after, recording how Pelagius went about ad fallendum etiam
Apostolicae Sedis Epis^opale iudicium, to deceive the bishoply Judgment even
of the Sea Apostolic, he tells of letters which Pelagius sent to
Innocentius, but Quoniam eum in corpore non inuenerunt, Cap. 17.
Sancto Papae Zosimo datae sunt Because they found not Innocentius then
living, they were delivered to The Holy Pope Zosimus. These and such like
Titles gave that holy and learned Father S. Augustine, one of the Africane
bishops in whose presence that Canon of the Nicene Counce was alleged, to Pope
Zosimus. He calls him A Holy Pope, A most Blessed pope. A Reverent Pope, a
very mercifully Bishop, and so forth, but by the name of Forger, Contra duas
episto^as Pelagianorum lib. 1.

Cap. 4. and Contra Iulianum saepe.


Falsyfyer, or any such like terms he calls him not. Had he been guilty of
such a heinous Crime, as M. Jewel and his fellows do lay against him, he
would not so reverently have spoken of him, and that so often. Almost as often
as he names him.

Now because M. Jewel fantasieth a Forgerie descried in the Pope by the
Africanes and by the East Churches, let us a little consider their dealing
therein. First the Aphricanes sent to all the three Churches of the East, In
epist. ad Bonifaciu^ Cap. 101.
Alexandria, Antioche, and Co^sta^tinople. From Alexandria and Co^sta^tinople
they received Copies. From Antioche they received none. Or at the lest in the
Aphricane Council there appears no Copy sent from thence. How chanced that
trow we? Were there not to be sound any in that Church, but destroyed by
heretics, or was there a Copy sent, but not published by the Aphricanes? If
the first, as likely were the other to have the Copies corrupted and imperfect,
as that Patriarkeship utterly to lose them. If the second, then dealed not the
Aphricanes so uprightly as they might have done. Verily the Aphricanes them
selves in their letters to Caelestinus the Pope, certifying him of the receyte
of those Copies from Alexandria and from Constantinople, do not auouche them
for the absolute true and only Copies, but do call them Concilia veriora, the
truer Copies of the Nicene Council, Council. Aphricanum Cap. 104.
giving us to understand that other copies there were, which to them seemed
not so true. Else if other Copies had not then been extant, they should not
have called them Veriora the truer: but absolutely Vera, the True Copies,
Before in the leaf. 37. B.
as M. Jewel in deed before turned the same word, declaring his good will,
how he would have had them written.

Again the Copy sent from Cyrillus of Alexandria refers it self to the
Ecclesiastical history. For there it is said. Quae et in ecclesiastica
historia requirentes inuenietis. Which Canons ye shall find also in the
Ecclesiastical history. Consil Aphr. Cap. 102.
Now no Ecclesiastical history has any such Canons of the Nicene Council,
but the history of Ruffinus. But those Canons by him mentioned, and the Copy
of Cyrillus do vary not a little. Ruffinus, beside the order and placing of the
Canons is not like, has also xxij. Canons. The Copy sent by Cyrillus has but
xx. Ruffinus. lib. 1. Cap. 6.

Tom. 1. Council. fol. 498.


Therefore either Cyrillus was ouersene in referring the Africanes to that
history, or else the very letter of Cyrillus is but for^ed or at the lest his
Copy not perfect.

Again Marcus the bishop of Ephesus, one that of all other forces most this
dealing of the Aphricanes against the Sea of Rome, affirms that the
Aphricanes sent not to Cyrillus and Atticus, but to Cyrillus and Proclus. And
that the Controversy between the Africanes and the Pope was not about
Appeals, but whether the Pope might be called universal bishopp. Thus these
Grecia^s agree not in their tales. And thus we might say according to the good
remembrance of M. Jewel, as Nicolaus Cusanus said, Vide Conc. Florent. Sess.
20.
Even in the very utterance of the matter we may find manifest tokens of
falsehood.

To end this matter of the Aphricane bishops demeanor toward the Sea of
Rome, though it was at this present done (as it may seem) without breach of
Charity, or of their whole obedience to the Sea of Rome, standing only upon the
case of Appeal, yet that all was not well on their part, the Success, which
is Gods judgment (as S. Augustine notes) Declared. For even immediately after
(S. Augustine yet living) the Wandals ouerpressed the Country, Victor. lib. 1.
de persecut. Vandalorum.
the Arrians used extreme persecution (as the history of Victor particulary
expresses) and the whole estate of Christianite for the space of a hundred
years was in that Country miserably afflicted, and persecuted. After which time
a General Submission and Reconciliation was made off the Africane Bishops, Tom
1. Council in Bonifacio 2.
by Eulalius the Archbishop of Carthage, unto the Sea of Rome Bonifacius the
second then sitting in the Chair of Peter. Again whether the Pope was a
Forger, and his so long after continued Authorite grounded thereupon (as M.
Jewel of his brethern of Magdeburg has learned to say) or the Africanes to be
blamed in that Contention, to leave other trial, we see God has given the
Sentence. The Moors and Infidels possess Afrike. Christians and Catholics
live yet at Rone. And have so done without interruption ever since.

As Peter Christ's vicare at the beginning being set in Authorite over
religion, over the Churches, and over al things pertaining to Christ, was
Master and Ruler of Christian Princes, Provinces, and al nations etc.

The 98. Untruth. For there was no Prince or province Christened in S. Peter's
time.

The 322. Untruth Slanderous. The.323. Untruth For there was One prince and
province Christened in S. Peter's time, at the lest. Nicepoh. li. 2. Cap. 7.
Homi. 55. in Matthew. Hierem.
It is written in the Ecclesiastical history. Augarus Edessenorum princeps in
initio, Thaddeo vno ex septuaginta veniente fidem cum tota illa regione
recepit. Augarus the Prince of Edessa received the faith with all that
province, even at the beginning by the preaching of Thaddeus one of the 70.
disciples. Lo here is One province Christened in S. Peter's time. Thus by a
manifest Untruth M. Jewel has noted Untruth upon others. And how say you
M. Jewel? Does not the psalm say of the Apostles, Constitutes eos principes
super omnem terram. Thou shall make the^ rulers over the whole earth? And yet
you know the whole earth was not Christened in their time. Again Chrisostom
says of Peter by name that Christ made him gouerner of the whole world. These
are his words. God the Father said unto Hieremie the prophet. I have set the
as a pillar of iron, and as a brazen wall. But God the father did set this
prophet over one nation only (of the Jews) but Christ set Peter gouuerner
over the whole world. And this preeminence of Peter Chrisostom in that place
does prosecut, to prove, that the Authorite and Power of Christ is no less,
then of God the Father. Now then as Peter is truly called gouuerner over the
whole world, though the whole world were not Christened (his gouuernement yet
extending to Christians only, for off those which are without, we judge not, 1.
Cor. 5.
says S. Paul) so is Peter truly called the Master and ruler of Princes,
though in his time few princes were Christened.

Again as Peter was truly and by right the Gouerner of the whole world by
Christ's appointment, although not he in person, but his successors in time
have so governed the whole world, and shall (before the end come) gouuerne
through out every corner thereof, donec impleatur plenitudo gentium, until the
fullness of gentiles be accomplished, so Peter is truly called the Master of
all Christen Princes, because though not he in person, yet his successors had
and shall have the spiritual gouuernement of all Princes in the world.

Last of all what lets that the Council of Nice might not call the number
of converted Christians and Countres in S. Peter's time (who were not I trow
all beggars or of base degree) but some Potences some Nobiles, 1. Cor. 1.
some me^ of power and nobilite, by the name of Princes and provinces, as S.
Peter called Herod and Pilate persecuting the Christians, by the names of
Princes and Kings, when he said the prophecy was fulfilled in them spoken by
David, where it is written: Kings of the Earth and Princes have risen together
against the Lord and his annoyn^ed. Act. 4. Psalm. 2.
Neither Herod was King, neither Pilat was Prince in respect of the Jews,
which professed and said, We have no king but Caesar, Joan. 19.
and yet they are called without Untruth in general terms Kings and princes.

The Christen Princes that ratified and confirmed with their proclamations and
edictes, the decrees of the Canons concerning the Popes primacie and gave not
him first that authorite (as the adversaries do untruly report) were
Justinian and Phocas the Emperors.

The.324 Untruth Slaund.

The 325. Vntrut^e Captain and ^mpudent.

Cod. de Summ^ Tria. and fid. Cath. Tit. 1. No Red^en^es. Au^he^ vt Eccles.
R^c^nt (...). ga^. pri^i.


The 99. Untruth. Phocas gave this Title to the bishop of Rome, but Justinian
gave it never.

M. Jewel is not contented to auouche an Untruth upon D. Harding, but he
adds also a manifest and Captain Untruth of his own making beside. For
first Justinian the Emperor writing to John the second Pope of that name
calls his holiness by these very words: Caput omnium sanctarum ecclesiarum:
The head of all holy Churches. And in an other Constitution he says
expressly. Vt legum originem anterior Roma sontita est, ita and Summi
Pontificatus Apicem apud eam esse ^emo est qui dubitet. Vnde and nos
necessarium duximus Patriam legum, fontem Sacerdotij, speciali nostri Numinis
lege illustrare. As from Old Rome the laws have spronge forth, so the very
Topp of the highest bishoprike to be in that City there is none that doubts.
Therefore we also thought it necessary to honor the Mother of our Laws, and
the Well ^pringe of Priesthood with some special law of our highness. In those
two places Justinian first calls the Pope of Rome Head of all Holy Churches:
and then confesses him to occupy the Top of the highest Bishoprike, and
that not as any Privilege by him or his predecessors granted, but as a matter
that no Christen man doubted of. This therefore is one most Manifest, most
Impudent and Captain Untruth of M. Jewel to say so peremptorely and so
facingly Justinian gave this Title never. For here is both the Title, and the
Authorite of the Title expressly confessed. Again the very words of
Justinian are plain alleged here by D. Harding. Which are these. Sancimus
secundum Canonem d^finitiones, Sanctissimum Senioris Romae Papa^, primu^ esse
omnium Sacerdotum. We ordain according to the determination of the Canons,
that the most holy Pope of the elder Rome, be formest and chief of al Priests.
How say you M. Jewel? Is not here the chiefty or Primacy of the Pope over al
priests confirmed by the Emperors edict? Is it not true that the Emperor
gives him that Title, and calls him Primum omnium Sacerdotum, the chiefest
of all Priests? And that not by his own authorite or commandment, but
Secundum Canonum definitio^es. Acco^ding to the determinatio^s of the Canons.
What say you to this place? This is within the compass of your six hundred
years, six times farther then Phocas is out of tha^ compass, whose testimony
you reject therefore. No no, You will never yield, You must with often
impudency defend, that which was ones impudently spoken. Let us see what you
say.

priests, was not to bear the whole sway and to over rule all the world.

S. Gregory and Chrysostom have auoutched no less of S-Peter and his
Successors (as it hat been already declared) Ergo this is one Manifest
Untruth to begin withal. The.326 Vntru^he For touching Sp^ritu^ll
go^uerne^ent his priuileg^ was s^^h.

Lib. 4. ep. 3^ lib. 2. d. s^cerd. (...) 55 in M^^th.

The.327. (...). Si quis seruo, Col. de furtis.


Now to an other.

But only in general meetinges and Councelles to sit in place above all
other, and for avoiding of confusion to direct and order them in their doings.

This is an other Untruth. Justinian refers his edict to the constitution
of the Canons. Therefore as the Canons do expou^de this chiefty or Primacy, so
must the edict of Justinian be interpreted. For the learned lawyer Baldus
says, that the law must be understood, secundu^ rationem expr^ssam etc
according to the reason expressed in the law. Now as touching the Canons, unto
the which the law is expressly referred first by the Canons of the Can. 21.
and 3 in ep. Iulij.
Nicene Council not only by that which Zosimus alleged to the Aphricane
bishops, but also by the Canons alleged by Julius to the bishops of the East,
it is evident that all causes might be referred out of all countres to the Pope
of Rome for the time. Can. 7.
The Council of Sardica decrees the same touching appellations in criminal
causes. The Canons of Councelles (as the Lib. 4. cap. 9. Hist. tripar.
Ecclesiastical history witnesses) have ordained that without the Authorite of
the bishop of Rome, no Council should be called. And for that cause the
Council of Antioche (being assembled without the agreement of Julius the Pope)
was disanulled. In the Counsel of Chalcedo^ the Po^es legate was president, and
subscribed in these terms. Paschasinus epis^opus, Council. Chalced. Act. 3.
vice domini mei beatissimi atque Apostolici vniuersae ^cclesiae P^pae vrbis
R^mae Leonis, synodo praesidens, statui, consensi and subscripsi. I Paschasinus
bishop, being President over the Council in the place of my most blessed
Lord, and the Apostolic Pope of the universal Church, Leo of the City of
Rome, have decreed, have agreed, and have subscribed. In like manner and terms,
Lucentius bishop, and Bonifacius priest, both legates of the Pope subscribed
before the Patriarche of Constantinople and all the rest. This was in the great
General Council of Chalcedon, holden in the year of our Lord four hundred
and odd, in the assembly of six hundred bishops, meeting there from all
parts of Christendom in the presence of Martianus the Emperor. This was all
before Justinians time. The meaning therefore of Justinians Edict having
relation to the Canons of the former Councelles, do give a far other
preeminence to the Pope, then M. Jewel will yield.

(...) Sacrosa^^lis Eccl^^^. d^c^rnimus The 328. Vn^^^t^e For those word^s of
the emperor are ^ot spok^n ^f the Pop^.
Themperours words be plain. Praerogati^a in Epis^oporum Concilio vel extra
Co^^^^um ante altos resiaen^i. A prerogative in the Council of bishops or
without the Council to sit in order above others. This prerogative in greek is
called (...), that is, the privilege of the first p^^ce.

Here M. Jewel notably betrayeth him self, laying forth For a Countenance a
few of themperours words, and that nothing to the purpose, beginning in the
mids of a Sentence, leaving out the principal verb, brefely hewing and
mangling them as him lists best. Soothely, good Reader, if it had lyked M.
Jewel to have given the leave to read the next lines going immediately before,
or to have laid out before thee but the whole and full sentence of the
Constitution, thou might easily have seen, that all this pertains nothing
in the world to the bishop of Rome, nor to the Decree of Justinian touching
the Popes Primacy before mentioned. For first this Constitution is not of
Justinians making, but was made threscore years before him, by Leo and
Anthemius, as in the Code it is easy to be seen. Again the words of the
decree speak not at all of the bishop of Rome. For thus they stan^e.
Dece^nimus vt antiquatis ac infirmatis fund^^us que contra ipsam orth^doxae
religionis d^um quodammodo facta sunt in integrum ^^s^^^uantur vniuersa: and ad
suum ordinem reuocentur, Cod ^e Sacr^ a^ is (...)
qu^ ^nte proj^ct^one nostrae mansu^tudinis de orthodoxae religionis fid^ and
sanctiss m^^u^ ecclesiarum and martyriorum statu firmiter obtinebant. Hijs quae
contra hoc tempore tyrannidis innouata sunt, tam contra venerabil^s ecclesias
quarum sace^dotium gerit beatissimus and religiosissimus Patriarcha nostrae
pietat^s pater Achattus, quam contra caeteras, quae per diuersas prouinci^s
collocatae sunt, nec non and reuerendissimos ^arum Antistites s^u de iure
sacerdotalium creationum seu de expulsione cuiusque episcopi a quolibet illis
temporibus facta seu de * Praerogatiua in episcoporum con^i^o vel extra
concilium ante alios residendi, vel priuilegio metropolitano vel Patriarchico,
sub ijsdem temporibus penitus antiquandis. We ordain and decree (say those
Emperous Leo of the East and Anthemius of the west) that all such things being
broken and disanulled, which have been committed as though it were against God
him self, all things be a new restored, and brought to their former Order,
which did take place before our coming as well touching the Catholic faith,
as touching the most holy Churches and Chapels. All those things to be
utterly repealed which against this, in the time of Tyranny were altered, as
well against the Reverent Curches subject to the most holy Patriarche our
Father Achatius, as against other Churches placed in diverse provinces, and
also against the most Reverent Bishops of those Churches, whether it be of
the right of making priests, or of the deprivation of any bishop in that time
committed, Or of Here begin the word^s that ^. Jewel ^ath picked out.
a p^erogatiue in the Coun^^ll of bis^oppes or without the Council, to sit in
order abo^e others, or of the privilege of any Metropolitan, or patriarche, in
those times. Thus far the Constitution, not of Justinian (of whose law the
matter is now in question) but of Leo and Anthemius, who reigned three score
years and more before Justinian. And in all this Constitution the bishop of
Rome is not mentioned, nor any word spoken of his Privilege or Prerogative.
But the Prerogative of sitting in order above others (as M. Iew^ll turns
praesidendi, putting for it in his latin, residendi, and so ones again
falsifying the very decree,) is here spoken of other bishops, and that by the
way, not expounding what that Prerogative was, or to whom it belonged. Yet M.
Jewel with his accustomed modesty and shamefastness, tells us: This
privilege granted to the bishopp of Rome, to be the first of all priests
(which are the words off the emperor Justinian) was only in general meetinges
and Councelles to sit in place above all others. And to prove that he
infers stoutely. Themperours words be plain. As though he h^d a^leaged the
words of Justinian the emperor, and as though those words had been expressly
spoken of the Popes Prerogative, and Primacy. Thus with out all shame and
regard what he says, he alleges either he cares not what, or else, he can
not tell what.

Now whereas M. Jewel to prove this Prerogative of place in councelles,
brings his greek phrases, herein truly his grecia^ helps him no more, then
did before his lawyer. For this edict must needs be refered to the Canons off
former Councelles which the edict expressly names saying, Secundum Canonum
definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons. And this M. Jewel
perceiving him self very well, would not stay upon these poor shifts of his
patched piece of law, and his gr^ke phrases, But has added an other trick of
his own accustomed Divinity, cutting quite away, those words of the Edict,
Secundum Canonum definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons,
and following his purpose this.

The.329 Untruth For the contrary is manifest.
and none otherwise it is (329.) manifest even by the self same place that M.
Harding has here alleged.

That were gaie in deed. But do it cleanly M. Jewel, and I will say you are
your Crafts master. Let us behold your play.



the mids? To it ones again.

The 330. Untruth in nipping twice the word^s of ^^stinian.
Sanctmus ^c. Senioris Romae Papa^, primu^ esse omnium Sa^erdotum, beatiss^mu^
aute^ (...) Con^tantinopoleos now Romae secundum habere locum. we ord^^ie that
the Pope.

Where is now etc. M. Jewel? You did put it in the latin, confessing that some
what lacked, and as though it were somewhat staying your false play in the
beginning, but now being ones entered, you go away roundely in your english,
as though all were smothe a board. Well forth then. Let us hear your english.

(...) the first. The ^31. Untruth standing in fal^^ tr^nslation.
We orde^^e that the Pope of the elder Rome, shall be the first of all
priests, and that the most holy Archebis^op of Constantinople which is named
new Rome, have the se^ond pla^e. Hereby it is plain that this privilege
stands only in placing the bishop of Rome in the first seat above others.

Hereby it is plain that Danus will always de Danus, and Jewel will always be
Jewel. For where is (...) the first. The ^31. Untruth standing in fal^^
tr^nslation.
Secundum Canonum definitiones, according to the determinations of the Canons.
Where is The words omitted by M. Jewel in the place alleged.
Sanctissimum the most holy? Show al on Gods name, and play above board. Why
shuf^lle you those words out of the text, and yett as though your play had
been fair and good, tell us saddely, His words stand thus? Here was a fair
face, but your fingers be to quick. I auise thee, good Reader look better
unto them. Who will trust you now M. Jewel in your pulpit talk, in your private
Doctrine, yea in worldly affairs and communication, if in your printed works,
in your doctrine so published to all your Country, and that in the cause and
state of soul health, in the question of our due obedience to such as God has
set over us, whom as often as we despise, so often we despise Christ him self
in this I say so weighty a matter, do deal so doubly, do iuggle so falsely
and deceive your Reader so perniciously? You knew these words (According to
the determinations of the Canons) did utterly overthrow this childish
privilege off only places in Councelles, which you imagine, as I have before
proved unto you. You knew those words imported a far other preferment then
of places, and therefore falsely, deceitefully, and wickedly you omitted them.
Again you love the Pope so well, that though the Emperor called him
Sanctissimum, Most Holy, not for the person then sitting, but for the room
that he occupied, yet M. Jewel will not call him so. Yet the Title of the
archbishop of Constantinople, Beatissimum, where the Turk now reigns, M.
Jewel could gladly keep. What? Were those four words either so cumbrous
for you to write out, or so troublous to your printer, that needs for have they
must be left out? Or did they importe more, then you were glad to express?
Thus the Pope and the Emperor, S. Gregory and Justinian be set to School,
kept in awe, and not suffered to speak one word more, the^ M. Jewel will give
the^ leave. Last of al for esse primum omnium Sacerdotum, that the Pope is the
chiefest of all Priests, you turn it, shall be the first, etc, as though
before he were not so, but only by that Decree of Justinian had been made so.
Thus by leaving out of some words and altering other, by nipping and wrong
translating, by false and Untrue dealing you think to bring all the world a
sleep, to abuse and deceive your Reader. Let us yet see whether you will
hereafter amend it. Thus you say.

But I beseech thee gentle Reader, The 332. Untruth Slaund.

The.333. Untruth For the contrary appear^th ^y that which folow^th (...).


weigh well the words that follow in the same law, and thou shall see, both
that M. Hardinges dealing (.332.) herein is not upright, and also that the
bishopp of Rome was then (.333.) excluded by plain words from that universal
power, which he now ^o deeply dreameth of.

And I beseech thee also gentle Reader to do the same, assuring thee herin,
thou shall see both that D. Hardings dealing herein has not been faulty at
all, (unless for a man to omit his own advantage it be a fault) and also that
(...) Bishop of Rome by this place which M. Jewel with (...) Supreme
Jurisdiction evidently testified above a thou^and years past, not as a matter
lately dreamed of.

The.334 Untruth. For it ^oloweth immediately. According as the Holy Pope
Vigilius h^th appoint^d.
It follows immediately. We ordain that the most holy Arche^ishop of
Iusti^iana the f^^st, which is our count^e shall have for ever under his
Jurisdiction, the bishoppe^ off the p^ouinces of Da^i^, Dan^a, D^rdania, Mysia
and Pannonia, and that they shall be invested by him, and ^e only by his own
Council, and that he in the Provinces subject unto him shall have the place of
the Apostolic See off Rome.

These be the words of Justinian. What will M. Jewel gather hereof? He says.

Here we see, The bishop of Iustiniana set in (.335.) as high Authorite, and
power within his own Jurisdiction, as the Bishop of Rome within his.

The.335. Untruth. For the B. of Iu^^iniana had his Authorite from the B. of
Rome.
Yea M. Jewel. But how came he by that Authorite? Whose place occupied he in
that Authorite? Does not the Decree say, He shall have the place of the
Apostolic See of Rome? And yet farther? Secundum ea quae sanctus Papa Vigilius
Constituit? According as the holy Pope Vigilius has appointed? These words M.
Jewel your stomache could not bear. And therefore, you used a sleight of
your faculty, to nippe them from the whole decree, being yet the cause and
reason of the whole decree. For those words M. Jewel do teach us that not the
Emperor, but the Pope gave that Jurisdiction to the Bishop of Iustiniana, over
the Provinces above mentioned. And again that this Decree of the Emperor was
but to confirm the Popes appointment, M. Jewel has twice nipped Iustinia.
eue^ as his former Decree, Sancimus etc, was to confirm the Canons. But M.
Jewel both in that decree and in this (such is his dealing) has nipped of the
principal words of the decree to make all the matter to appear a Lay
constitution, not a law of the Church. And yet will this man seem to hold of
the Church. Now touching the matter. Understand you not what all this means
M. Jewel? Every Archbishop of Canterbury duly called to that room has the
same Authorite in England as the bishop of Iustinianea had in the provinces
above named. Every Archbishop of Caunterbury is and has been almost these
thousand years Legatus Natus (as they call it) the Popes Legate by the right of
his dignite. S. Gregory the bishop of Rome, by whose fatherly zele the Christen
faith was first brought to us Englishmen, gave the same Authorite to S.
Augustine our Apostle, the first Archbishop of Caunterbury. So Venerable Bede
records in the History of our Country. These are the words of the Pope unto
him. Britanniarum omnes episcopos tuae frat^rnitati committimus, vt indocti
doceantur, infirmi persuasione roborentur, peruersi authoritate corrigantur.
Lib. 1. Cap. 27.
All the bishops of Britanny we commit to your brotherhood, that the
unlearned by wholesome doctrine may be instructed, the weak by good persuasions
may be strenghthened, the froward by just authorite may be corrected. After
this sort in the late reign of Queen Marie the Reverend father of blessed
memory Cardinal Poole had in our country the place of the Apostolic See of
Rome. And think you M. Jewel that either that authorite of the Bishop of
Iustiniana, in the provinces above mentioned, or the Authorite of the Bishop of
Caunterbury in our country, both occupying the place of the Sea Apostolic and
both having that Authorite by the Popes appointment, does any thing empaire
the Supreme and universal authorite of the Pope? And what does more confirm
or establish the same? Verily I fear me M. Jewel, some of your brethern will
take you here for a doubl^ ^aced Proctour, as a man pleading for the cause
which you seem to impugn. For behold M. Jewel has brought us the witness or
Iustinia^ the Emperor reigning above a thousand years past for the authorite
of the Popes legate in the provinces of Mysia, Dacia, Dardania, and Pannonia.
Every legate in all provinces from the Popes, have the place of the Apostolic
See of Rome. And what could that place avail them if the Sea Apostolic had
no place there? The effect of M. Iewelles argument is this.

The bishop of Iustiniana occupied the place of the Sea Apostolic in such and
such prouin^es. M. Iew^lles Arg^me^t.


Ergo the S^e Apostolic had no authorite in th^se places.

The Iewdenesse of this argument will easily appear by the like.

The Queen's Majesty's Lieutenant in Ireland occupies the place of her Highness
in that country.

Ergo the Qu^nes Majesty has no authorite there. This is a rebels argument
against his Liege Souuerain. And the other is the heretics argument against
his lawful Pastor. By such Arguments M. Jewel maintains his Schism and
Disobedience.

In like sort the Emperor Justinian says. The Church off the Cite of
Constantinop^e enjoys Now the praerogatiue of Rome the elder.



Constantinople enjoys the privilege of Rome.

Ergo Constantinople is as of good Authorite as Rome.

By such Arguments every Peculiar would be as good as his Bishop, M. Iewelles
Arguments.
every priuileged College, as the Founder by whom the privilege came, every
Liberty as good as the Prince which granted it. By such arguments also, the
free Denyson in England, having the privilege of a Natural borne Englishman,
will be in all points as free as he, yea though the law bind him to pay a
double subsidy to the Prince, when the natural subject pays but half as
much. By such lewd reasons an evil cause must be mayntayned.

The.336. Untruth For the law sp^aketh not of ^ll prerogatives.
Now if the bishop of Iustiniana and the bishop of Rome, in their several
divisions have their like authority, and if the Church of Constantinople in
(.336.) all prerogatives, and privileges be made equal with the City of Rome,
then is not the bishop of Romes power universal, neither can he justly be
called the head of the vnuersall Church.

Yea M. Jewel, if the Sky fall, we may hap to catch Larkes. But now M.
Jewel, if the bishop of Iustiniana and the bishop of Rome, in their Several
divisions have not their like Authorite, but the one has it of the other, the
one occupies the place of the other, and that by the appoyntement of the
other, that is of the B. of Rome (as the decree expressly says) and if
again the Church of Constantinople, be not made equal with the City of Rome
in All prerog^tiues and privileges (as M Jewel says) but do enjoy only a
privilege of Rome, as the decree says, then neither is the bishop of Romes
Universal Power empaired, but so far the more defended, neither then any
thing lets why he may not be called the Head of the Universal Church. Last
of all then M. Jewel has lost a couple of good arguments.

Verily Iustinia^ him self writing unto Epiphanius the bishop of
Constantinople, calls him the Universal Patriarche, The.337. Untruth. For
that Title in a since might belong to both.
which thing he would not have done, (337) if he had thought that Title of
right had belong^d to the bishop of Rome.

Neither does the bishop of Rome challenge that Title, neither was it
commended in any bishop, though it was used not only to the Pope, but to
diverse other, some time of custom, sometime for honor and reverence to the
party. It seems the word (...) was taken for (...), universal, for
Catholic: As you your self expound that word afterward, page 299.
and as all true bishops are called.

The.338. V^^r^t^e m^re Slaund. and ^eui^h.
The argument that M. Harding gathers of Justinians words is this. The bis^op
of Rome had the first place in general Councels, Ergo he was an universal
bishop. Which argument what weight it bears, I leave to M. Harding to
consider.

Untruth M. Jewel. For D. Harding gathers no such argument: But the argument
of Hardinge is this. Justinian by that decree or edict ratified that chiefty or
primacy in the bishop of Rome, which the Canons had determined. D. Harding^s
argu^ent.
Ergo the Emperor confirmed the Popes Primacy. To this purpose he alleged the
Decree of Justinian and the Ordonnaunce of Phocas. This argument bears such
weight, that all which M. Jewel has wrote and persuaded to the contrary, is
not able to bear it down. For it contains a double proof of the Popes
Primacy: The determinations of the Canons, and the Confirmation of the
Emperor. Al within the compass of M. Iewelles.600. years.

Hilarious speaking much to the extolling of Peter and his Successors in that
See, says: Supereminentem fidei suae confefsione locum promeruit: that for
the Consession of his blessed faith, he deserved a place of preeminence above
all other.

The 339. Untruth Slaund.
The.100. Untruth. For Hilarie speaks not one word of Peter's successor.

Though S. Hilarie speak not of Peter's successor, nor of the Sea of Rome, yet
that which is spoken to the extolling of Peter, may truly be said to be spoken
also to the extolling of his Successor. So Chrysostom says, that Christ
committed his sheep Tum Petro, tum Petri successoribus. Both to Peter, and to
the Successors of Peter, Lib. 2. de sacerdo. io. In epist. ad Dam.
when he said to Peter, only, Feed my sheep. So S. Hierom calls Damasus the
Pope, the chair of Peter, upon the which he confesses the Church to be
builded. And so Hilarie extolling Peter and confessing a preeminence above
other in him, is not Untruly said to confess the same in his Successors.
Especially seeing that Christ builded a Church not to remain in Peter only, but
for ever. Now whereas M. Jewel says Hilarie only commends the faith of
Peter, he commits a great Untruth against S. Hilarie. For in the same book
he confesses that upon Peter him self Christ builded his Church, De Trinita
te lib. 6.
where he says. Post sacramenti confessionem, Beatus Simon aedificationi
ecclesiae subiacens. Blessed Simon after the confession of the mystery, lying
under the building of the Church. For what means Hilarie, to make Peter lie
under the building of the Church, but that he is the rock and fou^datio^ upon
which it pleased God to build and erect his Church? And so of S Ciprian. S.
Hierom, S. Augustine, and other fathers, Peter is called Fundamentum Ecclesiae,
the foundation of the Church, not to exclude the only principal foundation
which is Christ, but to confess and signify a strength and power never to
fail, in him and his successors. It is not therefore only the Faith of Peter,
but, also the Person of him which Hilary extolleth, which also is no less sure
then his faith, because Christ has prayed and no doubt obtained, Luc. 22.
Vt fides eius non deficiat, that his faith may not fail.

A place of preeminence above all other.

The.340. Vntr^the Slanderous.
The.101. Untruth standing in false translation. For M. Harding adds of his
own: above all other.

Supereminentia imports a Preeminence not mean nor common, butt above all
other. And herein I dare to make any grammarian Judge. How be it what so ever
the grammarian say herein, the Divinity teaches us plainly so. Chrisostom
says. God the Father set Hieremie over one nation. Homi 55. in Matthew.
But Christ made Peter governor over the whole world. Which proposition he
takes to be so true, that here of he makes an argument, to prove the Equalite
of the Godhead of Christ, with God the Father. And Gregory says. Cura ei
totius Ecclesiae and principatus committitur. The charge and chiefty of the
whole Church is committed unto him. And all writers both greeks and latin do
call Peter, Lib. 4. epist. 32.
the Prince, Head, and chief of the Apostles. If he were over the Apostles, no
doubt but he was over all the rest of the Church beside. And so the Divinity
is true, and the translation not Untrue, which gives a true sense to the
latin word, no more then the word, it self bears.

The same S. Augustine speaking to Bonifacius bishop of Rome, This care (says
he) is common to us all that have the office of a bishop: albeit therein thou
thy self have the preminence over all being on the top of the pastoral
watchetoure.

The.341 Untruth Slanderous.
The 102. Untruth. standing in the false translation, and corruption, of S.
Augustines words.

I perceive M. Jewel, we must go to co^struing, we must leave our divinity, and
go to our grammar a while. Go to then. Let us first put our latin, and then
see what construction may be made of it. And let us take the words, as M.
Jewel alleges them. He says thus.

Communis est nobis omnibus, qui fungimur epis^opatus offi^io, quamuis ipse in
eo praeemineas celsiore fastigio, specula pastoralis.



T^^.342 Untruth m^re Slaunderou^.
Which words M. H^rding by wilful deprauation has altered thus, Ce^siore
f^s^^^io speculae pasto^alis.

This is a wilful and cancred untruth M. Jewel. You know your self right
well that all the editions of Paris print, do read those Very words in that
very sort, letter for letter, and syllable for syllable, as you have in this
place put them, and as you say D. Harding has altered them. And what
shameless, Ruffianlike impudency is this in you, to say that M. Harding h^th
altered them, and that by wilfu^l d^prauat^on? O M. Jewel why do you so
deceive, abuse, and mock the unlearned Reader? Is it not possible to maintain
your heinous heresies without such manifest and cancred Untruths?You proceed
in your Untruths, and say.

The.343. A Burden of Untruths al slanderous.
And so has left the Adjective Communis, without a substantive, and the
principal verb without a nominative case. And to serve his turn has caused
S. Augustine to speak false latin.

In these three sentences, you have made three Untruths. For all were it true
touching the words of S. Augustine, that there lacked a nowne substantive, and
a nominative case, and that S. Austen is made to speak false latin, yet not D.
Harding, but the printes of Paris have done all this. Thus you have trifled and
multiplied untruths upon your self, no untruth yet appearing in D. Harding,
who has done no more then followed his book. Let us now come to the matter,
and see how you will english this place, and whether in your own translation,
the matter which we seek for may not be found: that so it may appear what a
wrangler you are to fall a scanning off your tenses, to rippe up sillables, to
hunte after letters, to trifle upon terms, the matter it self remaining
sound.

The 344 Untruth standing in false translation.
This place of S. Augustine may thus be englished, The pastoral watch tower is
common to us all, that bear the office of bishops, albeit thy preeminence is
greater, as sitting in the higher room.

Nay M. Jewel though I am contented to take your own construction, and to
read Specula pastoralis. for speculae pastoralis, as our books of paris print
do read, yet I may not suffer you by your false translation to leave out the
pithe of the sentence. For you leave out ( in eo sc. epis^opatus officio) in
the some bishoply office. And thus S. Augustine says, to follow your own
construction. The pastoral watch tower is common to us all, that bear the
office of bishops, quamuis ipse in eo praeemineas Celsiore fastigio, albeit in
that Office thy praeeminence is greater, as sitting in the higher ^oome. In
which words S. Augustine acknowledges the Pope to have a praeemine^ce above
other in the office of a bishop, and to sit in a higher room. What is this
but to have a Primacy or superiorite over other bishops? Thus the matter which
was here sought for (the Popes primacy) is by S. Augustine witnessed and
confessed. Now if M. Jewel will allwaies wrangle and say.

The 345. Untruth. Slaund.
These words (over all) are not found in S. Augustine, but only divised at
pleasure by M. Harding.

praeeminere Celsiore fastigio may truly signify to have a preeminence over
all. If there be no more herin the^ his Nay, and my Yea, then let a Queste of
gra^marians be called to decide the construction. Howbeit for the matter it
self there needs no queste of divines. S. Augustine being a Doctor within the
first 600. years is a sufficient Judge in this plea, by the yelding of M.
Jewel him self. And if this place be not clear enough, let us take the other,
which here M. Jewel has utterly drowned in silence, and not answered one
word or half word thereunto. The place is this. What shall we doubt
(says S. Augustine) to repose our selves in the lap off that Church, Lib.
de vt litate cre-i dendi. Cap. 17.
which (though heretics bark at it in vain round about, condemned partly by
the judgment of the people them selves, partly by the grauite of Councelles,
and partly by the Majesty of miracles even to the confession of mankind) which
(Church I say) from the Sea Apostolic by succession of bishops, has obtained
the Top or highest degree of authorite? Unto the which Church (continuing by
Succession of bishops in the Apostolic See) if we will not give and grant
the Primacy, soothely it is a point either of most high wickedness (note M.
Jewel) or of hedlonge arrogancy. Here is a Primacy, here is Culmen
authoritatis, the top of authorite, here is expounded Celsiore fastigio, the
higher Room (which in Pope Boniface he confessed) and that in. eo sc.
episcopatus officio, in that Office of a bishop, the top of Bishoplicke
Authorite is here confessed. Here is Primas dare. Your Judge M. Jewel, a Learned
Father of the first 600. years, has pronounced Sentence against you. To this
place you have not said one word or half word. And why, but conscientia
imbecillitatis, because you knew nothing could be said? No shift of
construction, no comparison of Phrases, no sleight of your Rhetorike, no gloss
of schoolmen could here be had. Trifle now no more upon words and sillables.
Answer to the matter if you can. Truly because you can not, therefore you do
not. Thus the world may see the weakness of your side. It may see your most
high wickedness and hedlong arrogancy (as S. Augustine tells you, not we M.
Jewel) which will not yield to the Sea Apostolic and to that succession off
bishops, the Primacy, the Preemine^ce in bishoply office, and the Very Top or
highest degree of Authorite. Thus they may See and Beware hereafter of you,
which tender more their soul health, then their new conceived opinions. I
wish al my dear countremen (none excepted) they may do so.

The safety of the Church hangs of the worship of the high Priest (he
means the Pope Peter's successor) to whom if there be not given a power
peerless, and surmou^ting all others, in the Churches we shall have so many
schisms as there be Priests.



should have peerless authorite over others, is the avoiding of schisms. If
this reason do force that every several Dyocesse must have one head bishop, it
forces a great deal more that the whole Church, being the greater in number,
and the more in danger of Division, have also one Head bishop. Which in no man
else appearing but in the bishop of Rome, to whom the Scriptures, the
Councelles, the Emperors, and the Fathers have granted the Primacy, it makes
(as I said) by a right good consequence, for the supreme Authorite of the
Pope. Thus S. Hierom, by the force of his reason may mean the Pope, though in
his words he speak not of the Pope.

To ordeine and appoint the vicaire of Christ, it pertains to none other then
to Christ.

The 346 Untruth Slaund. The 347. Untruth For Christ appointed such a
vicaire.
The 104. Untruth. For Christ never appointed any such vicaire.

First this, For, follows not. The consequence I say is Untrue. Christ
appointed no vicaire. Ergo it pertains not unto him to do so. As by the like
it shall appear. The king of England never appointed any high Constable, or
general Lieutenant over the whole Realm of England. Ergo it pertains not
unto him to do so. This hangs very loosely: He never did it, ergo he can not
or ought not to do it. Especially when we talk of God who can do all that him
pleases.

Again the proposition of M. Jewel is an other most manifest and wicked
Untruth. Which for Truths sake I will now by Gods help, That Christ
appointed a Vicaire General. Ephesians. 1.
evidently prove. That Christ him self was the Head of all the Church
appointed by God the Father, the Apostle says plainly. God gave him (to be)
the Head over all the Church, which is his Body. That Christ gave the same
authorite or Headship over all the Church unto Peter, I prove. Christ said to
Peter. Thou art Peter, and upon this rock I will build my Church: and hell
gates shall not prevail against it. Upon this place thus I reason.

To be the Foundation of the whole Universal Church, under Christ is to have
the pow^^ and strength of Christ over it, is to be in Curistes place, is to be
his Universal Vicair. But Peter is the Foundation of the whole Universal
Church, Ergo Peter was made Christ's Universal Vicaire. The Mayor or first
proposition thus I prove. Christ is Head of the whole Church because he is the
foundation thereof, because he fedeth the whole flock, because he vpholdeth
the whole house: Ergo to whom Christ gives all this, that is, whom he makes
the foundation of the whole Church, Mat. 16. Joan. 21. Luc. 22.
whom he sets to be the feder of al his Church, who^ he strengthens to
Confirm the Apostles and Bishops them selves, he has Christ's place and
power, he is his Vicaire. The minor or second proposition I prove by the words
of the gospel alleged, which words to have been properly spoken to Peter I
prove by the expositions of the Fathers upon that place.

That the Person of Peter was made the foundation and Rock of the whole
Church, by those words of Christ, Chrysostom expressly teaches us. His
words are these upon that place. Quae deus concedere solus potest etc. Homilia
55. in Mattheum.
Those things which God only can grant, as the power to forgive sins, and
that the Church might remain immovable, notwithstanding so many and so great
whaues beating against it, and that a poor fisher man might be made stronger
the^ any Rock, though all the world striued against him, these things I say
which only God ca^ give, Christ promis^th in this place that he will give.
Hierem. 1.
Even so God the Father said to Hieremy the prophet, I have set thee as an
iron pillar, and as a brazen wall. But God the Father set him over one nation
only, but Christ set Peter over the whole world. Thus far Chrysostom
expounding that place of S. Matthew. In whose words we see Peter to be set
over the whole world: and the poor fisher man to be made stronger and more
durable against all storm of the world then any Rock against the whaues.
Homil. 1. de penitentia.
Again in an other place he says of Peter, Ecclesiae primatum
gubernationemque sibi per vniuersum mundum tradidit. Christ gave unto him the
primacy and gouuernement of the Church throught out the whole world. What is
to be Christ's universal vicaire if this be not? Hilarie expounding also this
place of S. Mathewe, Thou art Peter: etc. where Christ first gave him that name
(for before he was called only Simon Bar Iona) uses this exclamation, to
Peter. O in nuncupatione Noui Nominis faelix Ecclesiae fundamentum etc.
Hilarious in Matthew. Can. 16.
O happy foundation of the Church in the Title of that new name, O worthy
Rock of that building, which dissolved the laws of hell, the gates of the
Devil, and all the bo^des of death. O Blessed porter of heaven gates, to whose
arbitrament the kayes of the everlasting entry are committed, whose judgment
on earth is a preiudicated Authorite in heaven? Thus S. Hilarie acknowledges
the person of Peter to be that foundation and Rock upon the which Christ
builded his Church. In Matthew. can. 6.
And therefore this learned writer, as he calls Christ, the Rock of the
Church, and Validum excelsi aedificij fundame^tum, De Trinitate lib. 6.
the strong fundation of that high buildyng, so in an other place he calls
Peter also, Aedificationi ecclesiae subiacens, one that lay under the building
of the Church, that is, as one upon whom the Church is builded. Lib. 2. de
Spir. Sancto.
Which also S. Basil confesses of Peter even in the very same words in
effect as S. Hylarie does. Al which is no more to say then that Peter was in
the Church in Christ's place and room, to hold up the Church, to build it,
and to stay it. In like manner S. Ambrose by this place of S. Matthew declares
Peter to be the Rock of the Church, though differently from Christ, when he
writes thus of Peter. Sermon 67. Tom. 3.
Pro soliditate deuotionis ecclesiarum Petra dicitur etc. He is called the
Rock of Churches because of his strong devotion, as our Lord Says. Thou
art Peter and upon this Rock I will build my Church. For a Rock he is
called because he first laid the foundation off the faith among the
gentiles, and because he holds together the whole frame and buyldinge off
Christen religion, like unto a Rock that can not be shaken. So Peter for the
fortitude off devotion is called a Rock: and our Lord for his Power and might
is called a Rock. Thus far S. Ambrose. Thus both Christ and Peter are
called the Rock of the Church by S. Ambrose his judgment, but Peter through
Christ, and for Christ. For (as it follows in S. Ambrose) Recte consortium
meretur nominis, qui consortium meretur and operis. He is well joined in
fellowship of the name, which is also joined in the fellowship of the work. S.
Hierom upon this place of S. Matthew expounds Peter to be the Rock upon the
which Christ builded his Church, saying. Sicut ipse lumen Apostolis donauit
etc. As Christ gave all the Apostles light, Comme^tar. in Matthew. 16.
that they might be called the light of the world, and had their other names
of Christ: so unto Simon, which believed in Christ the Rock, he gave the name
of Peter. And by the metaphore of a Rock, it is well said of Christ unto him.
I will build my Church upon thee. And how many Fathers may be here alleged,
which all with one mouth do confess that upon Peter, not only upon the faith
or Confession of him, the Church is builded? Tertulliam says. Latuitne
aliquid Petrum aedificandae ecclesiae petram dictum? Was there any thing kept
hid from Peter which was called the rock of the Church to be builded? In
praescript.
S. Cipria^ almost as often as he speaks of Peter, so often he calls him the
foundation of the Church. Petrus, says he, super quem aedificata ab eodem
domino fuerat Ecclesia etc. lib. 1. epist. 3. lib. 4. epist. 9.
Peter upon whom our lord builded his Church. And again. Loquitur illic
Petrus, super quem aedificanda fuerat Ecclesia. Peter speaks there, upon whom
the Church should be builded. ^xpounding also the Authorite which Christ gave
to Peter in this place of S. Matthewe, he says: that although the Apostles
had aequal power, yet, vt vnitate^ manifestaret, De simpliprela^.
vnitatis eiusdem origin^m ab vno incipientem sua authoritate disposuit, to
express an Unite in the Church, Christ by his Authorite disposed that the
fountain and spring of that Unite should proceed of One, which was Peter.
Therefore also in the disceptation of Peter with Paul touching circuncision,
S. Ciprian Commending the humilite of S. Peter toward S. Paul, says. Nec
Petrus quem primum Dominus elegit, In epist. ad Quintinu^.
and super quem aedificauit Ecclesiam suam se vindicauit etc. Neither did Peter
whom God chose to be the chefest, Orig. li. 5. Cap. 6. In epist ad Romans
and upon whom he builded his Church, revenge him self etc. Old Fater Origens
words in this matter seem very plain. Thus he says. Petro cum summa rerum
de pascendis ouibus traderetur, and super ipsum velut super terram Fundaretur
Ecclesia, nullius confessio Virtutis alterius ab eo, nisi Charitatis exigitur.
When the chief government of feeding Christ's flock was committed to Peter,
and the Church was builded upon him, like as upon earth, the profession of no
other Virtue is required of him, but Charity. For after Christ had three times
asked him, Peter love thou me, yea and ones, Diligis me plus his? Joan. 21.
Do thou love me more then these other do? and to every question Peter had
answered Yea, Christ concluded with him and said, Pasce oues meas. Feed my
sheep. In these demaundes only love was required of him. And at this time
says Origin, Summa rerum de pascendis Ouibus traditur: The chief and
principal government of feding Christ's sheep, was delivered up unto him, and
Super ipsum velut super terram fundata est Ecclesia. The Church was builded or
founded upon him, upon Peter him self, even as upon earth. That earth truly
which our Savior called a Rock, and made it by his special prayer for him,
that his Faith should not fail, stronger and stedfaster then any Rock or
Quarre of what ever stone it be. Therefore Cyrillus an other greek Father said
expressly. Nulli alij quam Petro Christus quod suum est plenum, Lib. 12. in
Johan. Cap. 64.
sed ipsi soli dedit. Christ gave his whole full power to none other then to
Peter. But to him only he gave it. And what is to be Vicair of Christ if this
be not? If he have Summam rerum traditam, the Chief gouuernement and Authorite
left unto him, as Origin says, if Christ gave to him full power, and to none
other, as Cyrillus says, if upon him the Church was builded, as so many
Fathers do witness not only S. Hilary, S. Cipria^, S. Ambrose, S. Hiero^, and
Tertullian of the West Church, but also S. Chrysostom, Epipha^. in anchora^o. et
2.1.56 and 2. ^8.
S. Basil, Origin, and Epiphanius of the East Church, how can it be doubted
but that Peter succeeded to Christ (by his own most blessed appointment) in
full power and Authorite, and was therefore his true Vicaire?

It will here be said. Many other Fathers, yea and some of these alleged do
expound this place of Matthewe in such sort, that not upon the person of
Peter, An Obi^ction.
but upon the faith of Peter, the Church is builded. To this I answer, that
both is true. And that I declare by two causes. First by most evident reason,
next by Authorite. The reason is this. The Church is builded upon the faith of
Peter, The Answer.
and yet upon the person of Peter because the person of Peter, touching his
faith is no frail mortal creature, but is a strong vnshakeable Rock, as the
faith it self is. And why so? Forsothe because to the person of Peter it is
promised, that his faith shall not fail. Christ said. I have prayed for thee
Peter, that thy faith may not fail. We believe this prayer is obtained. Luc.
22. How the Church is builded upon Peter's person, and yet upon the faith of
Peter.
And therefore upon this warrant of Christ's prayer the person of Peter and his
faith shall never be severed. Thus the fathers calling sometimes the faith of
Peter, sometimes Peter him self the Rock of the Church, do mean one self
thing. By Authorite thus it is proved. No writer does more often and more
earnestly interpret that place of the faith of Peter or of Christ him self,
and call that faith and confession of his and sometime Christ him self the
Rock upon the which Christ builded his Church then does S. Augustine. Lib. 1.
retract at. ^ 21.
Yeat the same learned Father in his Retractations, remembering that he had also
expounded the same of Peter him self, quod in eo tanquam in petra fundata sit
Ecclesia that the Church was builded in Peter as upon the Rock, Co^tra
epistolam Donati.
which sense also he says was song by many in the hymns of S. Ambrose,
where it is said of the cock, hoc ipsa petra ecclesiae canente culpam diluit,
At the crowing of the cock, the Rock of the Church (Peter) lamented his
fault, he concludes the whole matter of those two expositions, either off
Peter to be the Rock, either of Christ, with these words. Harum duarum
sententiarum quae sit probabilior eligat lector. Of these ij. sentences which
is the more probable. I leave it to the Readers choice. Wherein as he
conde^neth none, so he allows both. And thus much out of the learned Fathers
for confirmation of the Minor or second proportion of my former Argument that
the words of Christ in S. Matthew, were properly spoken to Peter, and that he
was made by Christ the foundation and Rock of the whole universal Church.
Which with the Mayor or proposition being thus proved, the Conclusion I trust
will well follow, that Christ has left and appointed in his Church a Vicair
universal, and that S. Peter. And so far is the rash assertion of M. Jewel
overthrown and proved utterly Untrue, where he said that Christ had never
appointed any such Vicaire. Last of al thus far a Truth is proved sufficient
to destroy the principal assertion of M. Jewel in this Article, fighting
against the universal and Supreme authorite of the bishop of Rome S. Peter's
successor. For Christ leaving Peter his Vicaire, Lib. 2. de sacerdotio. Homil.
1. de paenitentia.
committed not only to him, but to his Successors also (as Chrysostom
expressly says) the sheep which he had redeemed with his blood, the
Universal Church through out the world, as you have heard also Chrysostom to
affirm.

But because our adversaries do wrethe and wrest the Scriptures, (be they never
so plain) by their private and strange constructions, to an understanding quite
contrary to the sense of the Catholic Church, etc.

The.348 Untruth Slaund. and Facinge.
The 105. Untruth joined with a slander.

Scriptures wrested by Protestants. Luc. 22.
then the words of Christ in his last Supper, Take and eat. This is my Body:
And again: Drink ye all of this. This is my my blood of the new testament?
And yet how is it wrested and wrethed off you? The Lutheran says, This Bread
is my Body and makes Hoc, (this) the neuter gender to agree with Panis (bread)
the Masculin gender, confessing yet a real presence. The Sacramentary, of
Zurich will have est is to stand for significat, Does signifiee. Because he
will have a sign only off the Body in Sacrament, The Sacramentatary off Geneua
will have the verb est is, to stand for, is in value, not, is in substance,
and so (est) must not be a verb substantive, but a verb valuatiue, inuenting
a new grammar to maintain their new divinity. Likewise in the words of
Christ. This is my blood, they make false greek, joining (...) with (...):
false latin joining hic, with vinum, to make at the length false english, and
to drive Christ to say. This wine is my Blood, page ^26.
which were a repugnaunce in nature as M. Jewel him self confesses. Again
to speak of M. Iewelles dealing herein, first he says we construe datu^ for
dabitur, is given for shall be given, Ibidem M. Jewel Contrary to him self
page 561.
and yet afterward, quite contrary to him self, cries out at D. Harding for
pressing the word datur, is given, (calling it scanning of tenses, ripping up
of syllables, and hunting after letters) and goes about to prove that it
should be dabitur, not datur, the future, tense, not the present tense. Thus
he choppeth and changes his mind to wreste and wrethe Scriptures at his
pleasure. But to proceed to other examples, what is more plain for the
Sacrament of extreme Unction, then the words of S. James. Is any sick among
You? Let him cause the priests of the Church to come in to him, Jacob. 5.
annoynting him with oil, in the name of our Lord? What is more plain for
absolution of the priest in the Sacrament of penao^ce, then the words of
Christ in the ghospel, whose sins ye forgive, Ioa^. 20.
they are forgeuen to them, whose ye retain, they are retained? What can be
written more plainly against the Justification which you teach by faith only,
then the saying of S. James, Man is justified by works, not by faith only?
What can more plainly overthrow the certainty of grace and salvation which
you teach every Christen man to have, Iac. 2.
then that which S. Paul says, Philipp. 2.
With fear and trembling work your salvation? What does more manifestly prove
that by the Sacrament of baptim sins are taken away (which Calvin and his
scholars expressly deny) then the words of S. Peter in holy Scripture, Act.
2.
Let every one of you be baptized in the name of Jesus Christ, to remission of
sins? What can be more expressly spoken for the authorite of unwritten
traditions, 2 Thessalonians. 2.
then the commandment of S. Paul, keep ye the traditions which ye have
received either by mouth or by lettre? What can more plainly prove the
Sacrament of holy Order, that is, that in giving holy Orders, to the sign of
imposition of hands grace is annexed, which things (the sign and the grace)
make a Sacrament, 2. Tim. 4.
then the words of S. Paul, Neglect not the grace which is in thee, which was
given thee through prophecy, with the laying on of hands of priesthood? 1.
Petr. 4.
What other thing means the Apostle, when he says, Charity covers the
multitude of sins, the^ to teach us that good works done by Charity do
redeem sin, and are meritorious? And yet M. Jewel have not you and your
fellows abolished Extreme Unction? Do you not utterly deny the Absolution by
the priest? Teach you not Only faith to justify? Preach you not that a man
may be assured without al doubt of his salvation? Commend you not the
blasphemous doctrine of Calvin touching Baptim, setting forth his Institutions
in the english tongue by public authorite, Cap. 17. in fine.
wherein this pestilent doctrine against the necessite of baptim is maintained
and set forth? Refuse you not unwritten traditions, cleaving only as you
protest, to the written text of Gods word? Do you not utterly deny the
Sacrament of holy Orders, publishing in your last Convocation only two
Sacraments, Baptism, and the Supper of our Lord? Last of al do you not
impudently declaime against the doctrine of Merit calling it a Pelagian heresy?
And how do you all these things so expressly and directly against holy
Scripture, but by manifest wrething and wresting of holy Scripture to your own
private Interpretation, from the Catholic sense and meaning? If I would
proceed after this manner in the rest of your manifold absurd and wicked
heresies, what a large scope might I here take to discourse upon the whole
rabble of your ragged and wretched wrestinges of Gods holy word?

But good Sir, you that so facingly uphold the matter, noting it so solemnly
for an Untruth that you should be called the wresters of holy Scripture, you
that startle and wince so at it, was your kybed hele touched, or are your self
clean and not guilty of any such matter? I assure thee good Reader it would
make a just treatise it self alone, the only discovering of such infamous
wrestinges of holy Scripture, as this honest man, innocent forsothe, and true
in all points, has used. And that I may not seem to say this only of
affection or otherwise then truth, behold gentle Reader for a taste of his
whole lewd Reply, Scriptures wrested by M. Jewel in this 4. Article.
what a number of textes of holy Scripture in this one Article which we now
have in hand, M. Jewel has wrested and wrethed by his private and strange
Construction, to an understanding quite contrary to the Catholic Church.
There is no great occasion in this question of the Supremacy (the discussing
whereof stands most upon the history and practice of the Church) either to
use or to abuse any Scripture. Yet by occasion how many M. Jewel has abused,
it shall now in part appear.

2. Cor. 11.
First, these words of S. Paul, Sollicitudo omnium ecclesiarum, the hofulnesse
of all Churches, how violently you have wrested it, to prove a Chiefty and
power over all Churches in the like sense, Jewel page 227.
as the same is in S. Peter confessed by S. Gregory, you have heard before
toward the end of the first Untruth of this Article. sol. 5. A.
In the same place you allege to the like sense these words of the Apostle. I
reckon me self to be no thing inferior in trauail to the highest Apostles.
The 349 Untruth in wresting of Holy Scripture ^. Corinth. 11.
Now what is wresting of holy Scripture if this be not? S. Paul travailed as
much as any off the Apostles, ergo he had Chiefty, Power, Jurisdiction over
the whole Church, no less then S. Peter had. By the like reason M. Jewel may
prove that S. Paul was Head and Chief over S. Peter him self, contrary to
al holy Fathers and learned writers which have ever called S. Peter the Head,
the Chief, and the Prince of the Apostles, which also is by M. Jewel him
self in this Article otherwhere confessed. For S. Paul says speaking of him
self and of the Apostles, Jewel. page 302. 1. Corint. 15.
abundantius illis omnibus laboraui. I have travailed more then al they. But as
S. Paul though he travailed more then all the Apostles, yet he was not
therefore the Head or chief over them all, so much less it will follow, that
he had the Chiefty or the Charge off the whole Church because he travailed as
much as the other Apostles. Jewel. page 233. The.350 Untruth in w^sting. of
Holy Scripture Esa. 2.
If trauail and pains may prove a Jurisdiction, perhaps some busy Minister in
England might claim to the bishoprike that M. Jewel occupies.

With the like vain of wit M. Jewel to disprove the epistle of Athanasius
unto Felix, because he said, that from Rome the Churches received the first
preaching of the gospel, alleges the saying of the prophet Esaie. From Sion
the law shall proceed, and the word of the Lord from Jerusalem. How
vnfittely this place is wrested of M. Jewel to prove it false, that many
Countres received the faith of Christ from Rome, Esa. 2.
it has been before declared in the third Article, upon the 73. fol. 67. B.
Untruth. Immediately and properly many Churches (as almost all the west part
of the world) received their faith from Rome, though Rome it self received
it of S. Peter who preached first off all in Jerusalem.

In the same page M. Jewel wresteth two other places off holy Scripture at one
time, thus S. Paul says, The.351. Untruth and.352. in wresting at ones two
places of holy Scripture Iew^ll. page 233. 1. Corinthians. 3.
Other foundation none can be laid but only that which is laid already which
is Christ Jesus. And finds great fault with the Corinthians that said, I
hold of Apollo, I hold of Paul, I hold of Peter. but M. Hardinges
Athanasius says, Thou art Peter, and upon thy foundation the pillars of the
Church, which are the Bishopps, are surely set, and thus he devise than other
foundation besides Christ, and Contrary to S. Paul's doctrine would have all the
bishops of the world to hold of Peter. Thus far M. Jewel. Will thou see
good Reader, how ignora^tly and grossly these places of holy Sripture are
wrested and abused of M. Jewel? S. Paul in the first place speaks of the
principal foundation, which only is Christ. Peter is called of Athanasius not
the principal and absolut foundation of him self, but such a foundation as is
laid by Christ. Else the worthy wisdom of M. Jewel may comptroll S. Paul
and prove him contrary to him self, which in an other place says, that the
Ephesians were superaedificati super fundamentum Apostolorum and prophetarum,
builded upon the foundation of the Apostles and the prophets. Of the which also
S. John in his Revelation says, the holy City of God had fundamenta
duodecim, Ephesians. 2. Apoc. 2^.
and in ipsis nomina duodecim Apostolorum, twelve foundatyons, and in those
foundations the names of the twelve Apostles. Thus unless M. Jewel will
admit the distinction of a principal foundation, and of a secondary
foundation, not only Athanasius but S. Paul him self, and S. John also may be
accused of M. Jewel to have devised an other foundation besides Christ. In
like manner also may be accused of M. Jewel, S. Hilary, S. Ambrose, S.
Ciprian, S. Hierom, S. Augustine, S. Chrysostom, Epiphanius, Origin and
Tertullian, who all (as you heard in the next Vnthe before) do call Peter the
Rock upon the which Christ builded his Church. Neither is S. Peter laid as
any other foundation beside Christ, because he was laid and made so off Christ
him self, as all the said holy Fathers have witnessed.

In the second place alleged by M. Jewel out of S. Paul he not only wresteth
S. Paul to a contrary meaning, M. Jewel. falsifieth S. Paul.
but he falsifieth him also. For those words I hold of Peter, are not in S.
Paul. And if they were, it made no more against the saying off Athanasius
calling Peter the foundatyon off the Church, then it makes against all the
other Fathers which did so call him, or then it makes against the Authorite
and Jurisdiction either off lay princes and lords, either of spiritual
pastors and Curats. For as the subject holds of his Prince, and the Tenent
of his lord, as the dyocese is subject to his bishopp, and the parish to the
vicair by S. Paul's Doctrine, Hebr. 13.
commanding us to obey our overseers, and to be subject to those which have
charge of our souls, and yet neither the subject, nor the dyocese so holds
either of Prince or of bishop, as S. Paul rebuked the Corinthians to hold of
Apollo, and of Paul, so neither Athanasius nor the old Fathers calling Peter
the foundation of the Church, and confessing thereby the Authorite of Peter
over the Church, do make (as M. Jewel says) contrary S. Paul's Doctrine all
the bishops of the world to hold of Peter, as the Corinthians held of
Apollo and of Paul. For the Corinthians made a schism in the Church, and
such as were baptized of Apollo, they held of Apollo, such as were baptized of
Paul, they would hold and craof Paul. This schism and division S. Paul
rebuked, as both in the text it shall evidently appear, to him that will but
read it over diligently, and also as S. Augustine expounds that text. This
text therefore M. Jewel you might better have applied to your self and your
brethern, In expositione in Math. ser. 13. and in Psa. 54.
which do hold some of you of Luther, some of Zuinglius, some of other, even
as S. Augustine applied it to the Donatistes, who held some of Donatus, some of
Rogatus, some of Primianus, some of Maximianus, all Donatistes, but yet divided
among them selves as protestants are at this day, into Luthera^s,
Sacramentaries, Anabaptists, Suenckfeldians, Osiandrins and so forth. Peter
is the foundation and Rock that Christ builded his Church upon, as set to
govern and direct the same under Christ, by Christ, and through Christ. Al
Christendo^ holds by him, not as a sect by his patron, but as the flock by
their Pastor, vt sit vnus Pastor and vnum ouile, that there may be one
Pastor, and one flock, and as S. Hierom says, Joan. 10. Li. 1. Co^^.
Ionini^.
vt schismatis tollatur occasio, that schism might be avoided.

In like manner, where it was alleged out of Irenaeus, that to the Church of
Rome all the Church, that is to say, Lib. 3.1.3.
all that be faithefull any where, ought to repair Propter potentiorem
Principalitatem; For the mightier principalite of the same, M. Jewel here
says.

page 244 The.353. Untruth in wresting. holy Script^re. Math. 20.
Of these words grows their error. They dream of a kingdom and
Principalite. But Christ says to his disciples. The kings of Nations rule
over them. Vos autem non sic. But you may not s^.

Behold how shamefully Christ's holy word is abused. In that place of the
gospel the Apostles not yet replenished with the holy Ghost, thought that
Christ should have a temporal reygne, and therefore when they heard that John
and James the sons of Zebedee sued to sit the one of (...) right hand the
other on the leafte, Indignati sunt it de duobus (...). They took an
Indignation against those two brethern. ^^th. 20
The Christ calling them unto him said the words alleged, signifying unto
them that they should not look for any temporal honor, rule or preferment,
such as Kings of the Nations exercised, but who so would be greatest among
them should be their servant. Now Ireneus speaks of a Principalite in the
Church off Rome (not temporal or Civil as full grossly M. Jewel imagines,
following therein that rude ghospeller Andreas Smidelinus) but a Spiritual
Jurisdiction, Contra Hosium in d^fens. prologum Bre^tij.
such as all the Church (not all the world) and all faithefull (not all
pagans and infidels then subject to the Roman Empire) ought to repair unto.
The humilite that Christ commanded his Apostles in that place, takes not away
the Spiritual Authorite and Jurisdiction of Prelates in Christ's Church. The
Bishop off Rome rules the Church of God, Act. 20.
as S. Paul said of such as he had appointed Regere ecclesiam Dei, to rule
the Church of God as In 1. Timoth. 3.
S. Ambrose said that Damasus was the Ruler of Gods house, as Hom. 1. de
paenit.
Chrisostom says that to Peter Christ gave Primatum guber nationeque per
vniuersum mundum. The primacy and gouuernement thourough out the whole world:
as, Li. 4. epist. 34.
S. Gregory says that to Peter, The charge and Principalite of the whole
Church was committed. All this is not to rule as Kings of Nations rule over
them, Hebr. 13.
but as such to whom we must obedire and subiacere tanquam rationem reddituris
pro animabus nostris obey and be subject, Math. 20.
as unto such which shall give account for our souls, but they them selves must
be Sicut ministri as servants, not in subjection, but in humilite. And thus
both Scriptures must stand together. M. Jewel must not overthrow one Truth
by an other, neither wrest that to Spiritual Jurisdiction, which was expressly
spoken of the temporal and civil.

De vocat^ Gent. lib. 2 Ca. 6.
With the like vprightnes and sincerite, whereas D. Harding alleged the saying
of S. Ambrose, that Rome was more advanced Per Apostolici Sacerdotij
Principatum: By the Chiefty of the Apostolic Priesthood in the Tower of
Religion then in the Throne of temporal power, M. Jewel for answer hereunto
wresteth a place off holy Scripture, and says.

^ap. 248
Peter's whole power in Rome was Spiritual, and stood only in the preaching of
the Gospel, with which armor God is able to pull down kings and Princes to
the obedience of his Christ. Thus says God unto Hieremie. I have set thee
over Nations and kingdoms. The.354 Untruth in false tra^slating S Peter, and
false aplication also.
And S. Peter speaking generally to all Christen people says. Vos estis
Regale Sacerdotum. You are the Kingely priesthood. This principalite and Tower
of Religion was not only in Rome, but also in every place where the Name of
Christ was received.

1. Pet. 2.
In this later place, out of S. Peter M. Jewel has falsely translated the
text. For where the Latin has, Vos estis regale sacerdotium. and the greek
(...) a kingely priesthood without the Article, (...) that or illud, M. Jewel
to make it serve his turn, has translated the words thus. You are that
Kingely Priestood. And so has put in the word That more then he found in the
Text. And upon the veheme^cy of the word That he infers, This principalite
and Tower of Religion was not only in Rome, but also in every place, where the
Name of Christ was received. But false translation makes no proof. S. Peter
in that place after the mind of S. Sermon. 2. de bapt. ca. 8.
Basil and lib. 20. de ciuit. dei. Ca. 10.
S. Augustine (who are to be thought to have understood the text as well as
M. Jewel) calls all Christen men Regale Sacerdotium, A kingely Priesthood,
because as of the mystical unction we be all called Christians, so as the
members of Christ, the true and everlasting priest, we be all Priests. S.
Contra. Luciferianos.
Hierom calls this general and Common priesthood of all Christen men,
Baptim: expounding shortly that which the other Fathers spoke by circumstances.
Again as S. Peter calls here Christen men Regale S^cerdotium, a kingely
priesthood, so S. John in his Revelation says. Fecisti nos deo nostro Regnum
and Sacerdotes, Apocal. ^.
and regnabimus super terram. Thou have made us a kingdom, and Priests to our
God, and we shall reign over the earth. Exodus 19.
And in the old law the like was said to the Jews. You shall be to me
priestly kingdom, and a holy Nation. But as it will not follow therefore that
every Christen man is a king, and all Christian men rule and reign alike, nor
that every Jew was as rightly a priest, as was the Tribe of Leui, no more it
will follow that every Christian man is a priest in one kind and manner of
priestood, or that the Principalite of Priesthood is in every man alike.
Thirdly albeit al Christen men in respect of the internal Sacrifice of a
Contrite heart, be priests, yet in respect of the Apostolic priesthood, and
of the external Sacrifice of Christ's Church, none are priests but such as
are Ordered thereunto. And of such Apostolic Priests, the B. of Rome by S.
Ambroses Judgment had the Principalite. And by that Principalite Rome was more
glorious then ever it was by the Imperial Throne. Last of al because at Rome
by S. Ambrose his Judgment was the principalite of Apostolic priesthood, and
Rome for that was more glorious then for the Imperial Throne, it follows that
as the Empire of the Romans was through out the world, but the Chief Rule
and Authorite thereof came from Rome, so the faith of the Romans was
preached through out the world (as S. Paul says) but the Principalite of
Apostolic priesthood, Romans 1.
the rule and Authorite came from thence. This is the comparison of S. Ambrose
in that place, and this he notes as a Special and principal prerogative of
that Church. Wherefore M. Jewel does both great wrong to that holy Father
so to debace his saying, and much more villainy to this holy Scripture so to
rack it and wreste it.

page 25^. 2 Thessalonians. ^. The 355. Untruth both fond and wicked.
For an other example of your lewd wresting of holy Scriptures (M. Jewel) let
us consider what Scripture you bring to prove that Christ left no Universal
Vicaire over his Church. Thus you say.

Other Universal Vicaire of Christ, there is none in the Scriptures, unless
it be he, of whom S. Paul forewarne^h v^. Homo ille s^eleratus, filius
perditus, etc. That wicked man, that Child of perdition that sets him self
up against God, and that so far forth, that he will sit in the Temple of
God, and show him self as if he were God. But this Vicaire Christ shall
destroy with the spirit of his mouth.

The Antichrist.
and is, I trow, not a little esteemed of a great many. But Gods name be
blissed. Though your gaie glistering Inuentyons dafeled the eyes of a great
many at the first (you stealing upon us in our dead sleep, and ouermuche
rest) yet now we being waked with your heresies, and stirred up to a nerer
consideration of matters by you called in doubt, we have (thanked be God)
easily discovered, the vanite of them.

For, as touching this place of S. Paul, the very text laid forth and
considered, opens your lewd and wrested interpretation thereof, and shows
to the eye, that it proceeds utterly either of gross ignorance or else of
wilful Malice. S. Paul says thus. 2. These. 2.
We beseech you brethern by the coming of our Lord Jesus Christ, and of our
meeting with him, that you be not lightly carried away from your understanding,
nor conceive any fear, either by revelation of Spirit, or by word of mouth,
or by any letter as sent from us, that the day of the Lord should be at
hand. Let noman deceive you in any wise. For unless the defection come first,
and that wicked man be reveled, that Child of perdition, that sets him
self up against God, and is exalted above all that is called God, or that is
worshipped, so that be s^^^eth in the temple of God, showing him self as God.
Remember you not, that when I was yet with you, I told you of these matters?
And now what does stay it, you know, that it may be reveled in dew time.
For the mystery of iniquite works even now, only that he which holds now
may hold, until it be out of the way. And then that wicked man shall be
reveled, whom our Lord Jesus shall kill with the Spirit of his m^uthe, and
destroy him in the brightness of his coming. Him I say whose coming is in all
power, in Signs and false miracles by the working of the devil. Thus far the
Apostle. All this to be spoken of Antichrist most men do agree. S. Ambrose is
expressly of that mind. And so would you also and your fellows M. Jewel
have it to be meante. Ambros. in Comme^tar. ibide^.
Herein therefore we vary not. But who is now this Antichrist that shall come,
that shall work such false miracles, that shall proclaim him self God, and
that shall at length be destroyed at the glorious coming of our Savior? It is
the Pope say you. It is he that bears him self for the Universal Vicaire
of Christ. Answer then M. Jewel to these few reasons, which I bring to the
Contrary.

That the Pope is not AntiChrist.
on Continuance. Therefore the Apostle speaks of One wicked man, and of One
Child of perdition. The Pope in this Universal Supremacy has had a
Continuance and Succession of many hundred years, even from the time of S.
Gregory at the lest, who practiced such Authorite of Universal vicaire through
out all Christendom, as has been before particulary declared. Therefore the
Pope can not be the Antichrist that S. Paul speaks of.

a defection come first. This defection S. Ambrose expounds to be of the
Roman Empire. That is when the Roman Empire is utterly lost and gone, then
or shortly after (at the lest not before) the Antichrist shall be reveled. The
Roman Empire stands yet, and without an Emperor descending from the first
Romain Emperor the Church has not yet been at any time. Therefore this
Antichrist is not yet come. And so it can not be the Pope that came so many a
day a go.

that wicked man must be reveled, says the Apostle. Show then M. Jewel when
that was. That is. When this Anchrist the Pope began to play the Antichrist.
What Pope it was. When he lived, and how he was reveled. This can not be
shown, therefore the Pope can not be he.

he shall show him self as God, and shall be exalted above all that is called
God, or worshipped for God. Such honor was never practiced by any Pope, given
to any Pope, or so much as attempted or coueted of any Pope. Therefore he can
not be that Antichrist, that the Apostle speaks of.

shall work signs and miracles by the devil. The first Pope that practiced
this universal vicaireship, whom so ever you name M. Jewel, whither it be
Zosimus, S. Gregory, Leo, or Bonifacius the 8. you can show no such false
miracles wrought. Therefore the Pope is not this Antichrist.



at large proved. Therefore it is by no means possible, that the Pope should
be Antichrist. Yea it is a most heinous and horrible blasphemy so to think,
teach, or write. So well and truly, so godly and clerckly has M. Jewel
applied this place of holy Scripture. Now to an other.

page 275. Luc. 22. The 356 Untruth in wresting the Prophets words. Mich 3.
I have prayed for thee that thy faith not may sail. The like confidence and
trust in them selves the Priests had in the old times, as it may appear by
these words of the prophet Micheas: The priests taught for hiere. and the
Prophets prophesied for money, and yet they rested them selves upon the Lord,
and said. Is not the Lord in the midst amongst us?

It follows immediately in the Prophet. Non venient super nos mala etc. There
shall no harm befalle unto us. Therefore for your sake Sion shall be plowed
like the filde and Jerusalem shall be turned into a heap of stones: and the
hill of the temple, into a high wodde. These words if M. Jewel had added, and
not broken of so upon the sudden, it would have appeared in what sense the
Priests craked of the Lord among them, and what their confidence and trust
was. Their confidence and trust was, that, did they never so ill, yet God
would not punish them. The trust which we have upon the Sea off Rome is,
that it shall not fail in the faith, grounded upon the words off our
Savior, spoken particularly to Peter in the presence of all the rest. It is of
the Faith to continewe. It is not of any temporal confidence of escape
harmless in iniquite. Therefore you said untruly, The like confidence and
trust etc. and therefore also you have to a wrong, and contrary sense wrested
the saying of the Prophet.

The.357. Untruth as before.
With like confidence the priests said, as it is written in the prophet
Hieremie. The Law shall not decay in the Priest, nor Counsel in the Elder.

With like confidence or rather impudency M. Jewel has both wrested to a
contrary meaning, and also pared the very words of the Prophet Hieremy, as he
nipped before the words of Micheas. For thus stand the words of Hieremy. Et
dixerunt, Venite and cogitemus contra Hieremiam cogitationes (no^ enim peribit
lex a Sacerdote, neque Consilium a Sapiente, nec sermo a propheta) venite and
percutiamus eum lingua and non attendamus ad vniuersos sermones eius. And the
Jews said. Come. Let us devise devises against Hieremy (for the law shall not
decay in the Priest, nor the Counsel in the wise, no the word in the
Prophet) Come and let us strike him with our tongue, and let us give no ear to
all his sayings. These are the whole words of Hieremy in that place, whereof
M. Jewel has picked out a piece only, and that which stood in a parenthesis,
to persuade a sense which the whole place being opened, confuteth it self. For
those words are not spoken as of the Priests only, but as of all the Jews.
As the whole drifte of the Chapter declares. Again the Prophet in this place
rebukes not their belefe or doctrine, but expresses their wicked conspiracy
to destroy him, which had rebuked their evil life and had foretold them of
Gods vengeance to come upon them. He speaks not of any Council touching the
observation of Moses law. Last of all because the Priests upon a confidence
of Gods promise made unto them, that all ambiguites and questions between blood
and blood, Cause and Cause, Deute. 17.
Lepre and not Lepre should be determined by them, thought therefore that in
all other things their Judgment and Council should stand in like manner,
because I say they abused this Authorite of deciding questions of the Law, to
live and do in manners what them listed, therefore the prophet Jeremy used
those words against them. If in like manner any Pope for the defense of his
Lewd life would allege the promise made to S. Peter that his Faith should
not fail, then were the Confidence and trust of such a Pope in such a case
like to the Confidence and trust, that those Iuish Priests had. But now seeing
the life and behavior of Popes is not desended to be innocent, but their
faith is defended to be Sure and not able to fail in determining matters
touching Faith, therefore we trust truly to the promise of Christ, that Peter's
faith shall not fail, therefore the confidence of us is not like to that
vain confidence of the Priests that Hieremy speaks of, and therefore you M.
Jewel have lewdely and wickedly wrested this place of holy Scripture, as you
have done the others.

But God answers them far otherwise. Ye shall ^aue dark night instead of
Vision, The.358 Untruth as before.
and ye shall have dark^esse in steed off Prophecye.

In this prophecy the Prophet foretold the Jews of the fall of their
Synagoge, and of the blindness that they should be in at the coming of the
Messiah. The Church of Christ is contrary wise promised to have the holy Ghost
for ^uer to remain with it, Ioan^ 14. Math. vlt.
and Christ has said. I will be with you all day^s even to the end of the
world. Therefore this i^ wrongefully applied to the Rulers of Christ^s
Church, whose faith shall no more fail, then the Church it self. And
therefore ones again you have wrested the holy Scripture.

In like manner M. Jewel having alleged a number of gloses out of the Cano^
law that the Pope can not err, for a b^iefe solutio^ to them al he abuses a
place or two of holy Sc^ipture, and so concludes that matter thus.

page 276. The.359 Untruth as before.
Thus ^hey feast and chere them selves, and smoth the world with vain talk.
But S. Ihon says. No^ite a^ e^e, Pat^em habemus Abraham. Never say (Peter
or) Abraham was our Father.

See we not here what a smothe Solution M. Jewel has made, Math. 3.
and how feately he has glosed S. John's Text? S. John said to the Jews.
Crake not of your Father Abraham. Therefore we must think that the Popes
faith may fail. For that is the matter which M. Jewel labors to prove in
that place, and which the gloses immediately before recited, do witness. Again
M. Jewel to fournish the matter shufleth between S. John's words ( Peter or) as
though S. John had spoken or meaned there of Peter also. By such glosing as M.
Jewel teaches us, we may say, S. John says. Never say (this man, or that
man, or) Abraham was our Father. And so by this gloss of M. Jewel, the Child
shall be taught to deny his Father. Certainly S. Paul who is to be thought to
have understood S. John's meaning no less then M. Jewel, not withstanding
those words, says to the Corinthians. Though ye have ten thousand of
Masters in Christ, yet ye have not many Fathers. 1. Cor. 4.
For in Christ Jesus I begotte you by the ghosp^ll. In which words he fears
not to be taken for their Father, though the Jews by S. Ihon were forebidden
to crake of their Father Abraham. So properly and sincerely M. Jewel alleges
the Scriptures. It follows in the same place of his text immediately.

Acto. 20. The.360 Untruth as shall appear.
S. Paul speaking of his successors, says thus. I knew that after my
departure from you, there shall ravening wolves come amongst you that shall
not spare the flo^ke.

This was spoken to the clergy of Ephesus. This makes nothing to the
Succession of Peter in the Sea of Rome. Again they were not properly his
successors. For at Ephesus though S. Paul taught and preached, yet he
remained not there, he had not his proper See and abode there. Eusebius. lib. 3.
cap. 31.
S. John the Evangelist is reakoned of the Ancient writers to be the First
Bishop there. Therefore this place is both Untruly wrested against the
Succession of S. Peter and Untruly reported touching S. Paul's successors. If
S. Paul had any Succession, it was at Rome where he preached the gospel also:
and beside, suffered there the Crown of Martyrdom.

These few may suffice to Justify the Untruth noted by you (M. Jewel) upon
D. Harding, to prove you in deed a wreaste^ of Gods holy word, as your fellows
are, and to satisfy also your expectation, where you say.

page 292.
Where as it likes M. Harding to say, that we wreathe and wreaste he
Scriptures, if it would have pleased him also particularly to show how and
wherein, he might have had the more credit, But it is commonly said. Dolosus
versatur in generalibus. He that walks in generalites, means not plainly.

You have some now particularly showed, not only by your doctrine generally
committed, but also by you in this your Fourth Article, unadvisedly avouched.
If you think these to few, take one more. You grant that Peter was head of
the Apostles. Then you ask what is in the Pope that was in Peter, whereby he
should be the head of others. And seeing well what might be answered, you say
of D. Harding.

page 304 Matthew. 23. Stapleton Matthew. 23.
He will say Succession, and sitting in Peter's chair, which is in Rome. A man
may answer. The Scribes and Pharisees sat in Moses Cha^re.

A man may Reply. Quae dicunt facite, que aute^ faciu^t nolite facere. Do
what they say unto you, but do not as you see them do. And then what does
this Answer help you? Nay, does not this Answer make quite against you?
Does it not clean overthrow you? For if the Scribes and Pharisees, so
naughty men sat yet in Moses Chair, and their sayings and precepts were to
be observed, kept, and obeyed, though their doings and life was not to be
followed, is not trow you the Successor of S. Peter, sitting in his Chair,
that is, occupying his Office, place, and dignity, to be obeyed, though he
lack the Qualites of S. Peter? So properly you allege the Scripture even
against your own self. For you bring a piece of a Sentence, for the Answer,
whereof the other piece, makes a perfyt Reply or Solution. What is to wreaste
Scriptures, if this be not?

Now that you labor by certain gloses, and by the sayings of two certain
men in their declayming Oratio^s to show some Scriptures otherwise applied
then their literal meaning gives, to that I answer. First they conclude
nothing against the faith, or against Truth: and so they are not wrested.
Seco^darely they are not so used in the way of doctrine, but by allusion so
applied as not properly, so neither wickedly. Last of all you know M. Jewel
the law says. Retorsione Criminum non probatur Innocentia. To prove an other
guilty, proves not your self Innocent.

diuis. 20.
The bishops of every Nation have made their Appeals in their weighty affairs
to the Pope, and always have sued to the Sea Apostolic, as well for succor
and help against violence, injuries, and oppressions, as for redress of all
other disordres.

page 261. The.361. Untruth Slaund.
The.106. Untruth, As it shall afterward appear.

Here you give me occasion M. Jewel, to open a Number of your most manifest
and impudent Untruths, touching the matter of Appeals, which in the next
Division you handle at large, and to the which you refer the proof of
this.106. Untruth. Go to then. Let us see the proufes that you bring. You
say.

page 265.
that there lay no such ordinary Appeal from al countres of the world, to
the bishop of Rome, and that therefore the same is by M. Harding untruly
avouched. That done, I trust, it shall not be hard to answer these places of
Chrysostom, Athanasius and Theodoretus here alleged.



The 362. Untruth threefolde, as shall appear.
it is plain by the consent of General Councelles, by the Authorite of holy
Fathers and by the laws and Ordonaunces of Emperors and Princes. By which
grounds it is easy, to to understand the Practice, and order of the Church
in those days.

Three proufes against Appeals to Rome, M. Jewel in these words has
auoutched. The laws and Ordonaunces of Emperors and Princes. But M. Jewel
has not brought any one of all these three proufes truly and sincerely, as it
shall afterward appear. Therefore he has avouched here three manifest
Untruths.

Cap. 5. The 363. Untruth For they stand both well together.
In the Council of Nice it is decreed thus. Ab alijs excommunicati ab alijs ad
Comniunionem ne reciptantur. Let not them that stand excommunicat by one
bishop, be received again to communion by an other. M. Hardinges Appeals and
these words (363.) can not stand well together.

Yes forsothe M. Jewel, if you understand them well. For first he that
Appealeth, the Appellation yet hanging, does not stand exco^municat. Therefore
this decree being made of such as stand excommunicat, does not speak of such
as do Appeal. And thus D. Hardinges Appeals (as you call them) and the words
of this decree may stand well together. Therefore you add more force to the
argument and say.





Council. Nic. c^n. 5. The.364 Untruth False Translation.
In this case the same Council has provided remedy of Appeal, not unto the
bishop of Rome, but unto a provincial Synod within the Country. These be the
words. Therefore that these things may be well examined, it is well provided,
that every year in every province at ^wo several times there be holden a
Council of bis^ops, that they meeting together out of all parts of the
province, may huiusmo di que^tiones examinent.
Hear and determine such complaints.

You add in the end one word more then the Decree has. That is the word,
Determine. The Decree speaks not of Determination but of Examination and
enquiry upon such complaints. Howbeit let us grant that the provincial
Synod might determine the complaints of their clergy? Is it not so at this day
in all Catholic countres, where no Appellation is made? Your part is to show
M. Jewel that by the Council of Nice no Appellation should be made from the
bishopp or from the provincial Synod to Rome. Think you the argument good?
They speak of Appeals only to a Synod. Ergo they forbid Appeals to Rome?
This is a Gheasse. This is no proof.

Again this Decree referringe the Appeal to the Synod, does refer it also
to the bishop of Rome. And why? Because no Synod ca^ be holde^ without the
Authorite of the Bishop of Rome. Julius the B. of Rome, Appeals to Rome
decreed in the Nicene Counsel.
who lived at the time of the Nicene Concel, writing to the Bishops of the
East, who also were present at the Nicene Council, reproving the^ for
condemning of Athanasius and other Catholic bishops, in a Synod holden at
Antioche in Syria, without the sentence and agreement of Julius the Pope,
charge them with the breach of this very Canon and decree, with these
words. Praeuidentes Sancti patres insidias et altercationes vnanimiter in
Nicena Synodo statuerunt, Epist. 1. ad Orientales.
vt nullus Episcopus n^si in legitima Synodo, and suo tempore Apostolica
authoritate conuocata, super qu^busdam criminationibus pulsatus audiatur, id
est, iudicetur vel damnetur. The holy Fathers foreseing the deceites and
altercations, did decree with one assent in the Nicene Council, that no bishop
being accused of certain crimes should be heard, that is should be judged or
condemned, but in a lawful Synod called together in due time by the
Apostolic Authorite. It is noted in the margin of this epistle, that this
decree though it be not expressly in the Nicene Council, yet it may be reduced
to the fifte Canon thereof, which is the Canon by M. Jewel alleged.

Again in the second epistle of the same Julius it is written thus, In
rescripto ad Orientales.
Canonibus in Nicena Synodo iubentibus non debere praeter s^ntentiam Romani
Pontificis, Concilia celebrari, nec episcopos damnari. Whereas the Canons of
the Nicene Council do command that without the Authorite of the Bishopp of
Rome neither Counsels ought to be holden, neither bishops be condemned. Where
again it is noted that this decree may be reduced to that 5. Canon above
alleged. Now if M. Jewel will except and say, this Canon, and the whole
epistle of Julius is a forged matter, let him remember that the ecclesiastical
history of Socrates, describing this schysmaticall Synod off the Arrians in
Antioche of Syria where Athanasius was excommunicated, makes mention of this
Canon or decree, that no Synod may be kept without the Authorite of the bishop
of Rome. These are the words. Sed neque Julius affuit maximae Romae praeful,
Histor. trip. lib. 4. cap. 9.
neque in locum suum aliquem destinauit, cum vtique ecclesiastica regula iubeat
non oportere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis concilia celebrari. Neither
was Julius the bishop off Rome present at that Synod, neither was any sent
thither in his place, whereas yett the ecclesiastical decree does command,
that no Synodes ought to be holden, without the consent of the Bishop of Rome.
The Appeals then in the Nicene Council being referred to the Synodes of the
Province, and no Synod in any province being good and lawful without the
authorite of the bishop of Rome, are they hereby removed from the judgment of
the bishop of Rome? Nay are they not expressly submitted and put under the
same? And thus M. Jewel has brought a decree of the Nicene Council by a good
consequence against him self, and by no color or reason making for him
self. He has brought that against Appeals to Rome, which does necessarely
infer Appeals to Rome.

For farther proof out of the Nicene Council that Appeals lay to Rome, I
might here allege certain Canons of the same Council, avouched by Julius the
Pope in his epistle to the Arrian bishops of the East, who were them selves
present at the Council of Nice, and who (if the Pope had beelyed the Council)
would not have let to have told him of it, expressly decreing Appeals from
all other bishops to the bishop of Rome. But M. Jewel denies this to be the
Epistle of Julius. This is the extreme and last refuge, when all others shifts
do fail. But by what reason does he deny it Forsothe because it is not the
same which Athanasius in his works talks of. page 264.
For (says he) They ought to be all one without difference. And why so M.
Jewel? May not Julius write two or three sundry epistles, and that to the
bishops of East, and those of different matters, except your good mastership
allow it? As well might you quarrel, and say: The epistle to the Hebrews is
not S. Paul's, because it contains no like matter, nor bears not the like
style to his epistle to the Romans. Such reasons uphold your religion.

In that Epistle then of Julius, among other Canons of the Nicene Counsel there
reackoned up, this is one. Vt omnes Episco^i qui in quibusda^ grauioribus
pulsantur vel crimina^tur causis, quoties necesse fuerit, In rescripto ad
Orie^tales

To^. 1^ Co^c.


libere Apostolicam appell^nt sedem atque ad eam quasi ad matrem confugiant, vt
ab ea (sicut semper fuit) pie fulciantur, d^f^ndantur and liberentur. That al
bishops, which are conuented and accused, of certain greuouser crimes, may
freely Appeal to the Apostolic See, and fly to hi^, as to their Mother, that
they may by it be succored, defended, and delivered, as it has allwaies been:
Lo an express decree of Appeal to Rome in the Nicene Council, which though
it be not among the twenty Canons commonly extant in that Council, yet it
ought not therefore to be thought a fained or forged decree, no more the^ a
number of other Canons and decrees of this Nicene Council alleged by S.
Hierom, S. Ambro^e, S. Augustine, Epiphanius and other, are to be esteemed for
forged and fained decrees, because those also are not to be found among the
twenty now commonly extant.

Beside that, both this Julius in his undoubted Epistle recorded in the wo^kes
of Athanasius, See before.

Fol. 33. B. and 34. A.


mencioneth a decree of Appeal from one Synod to a greater, made in the Nicene
Council, by virtue whereof he cited the Bishops of the East to Rome, and also
Leo by virtue of a decree made in the Nicene Council, requires expressly upon
the Appeal of Flauianus, a new Synod to be assembled, as has before been
declared.

But touching this matter of Appeal from al bishops to Rome, we have a most
express Decree in the great Council of Sardica holden within few years after
the Nicene Counsel, holden for the renewing and confirming of the Nicene
Counsel, which at that time was by the Arrians impugned, holden by the
assembly of three hundred bishops from all parts of Christe^dom except the
Arrians of the East, who also came at first to that Council to the number of
76. bishops, but seeing them selves so few in number, they departed, pretending
the presence of Athanasius and Paulus two Catholic bishops, Historia tripart.
lib. 4. cap. 23.
whom they had excommunicated, and would therefore have had them and all theirs
thrust out of the Council. Other of the East which came not pretended, some
infirmite, some lack of leisure to come to the Council, and blaming therefore
the Pope Julius for not summoning them in time, though yet (as the
ecclesiastical History witnesses) they had a year and a half warning thereof.
Thus beside those Arrians, and the other which drew back, there were at that
Council assembled.300. bishops out of these parts of the world, (as the
epistle of that Council yet extant in the ecclesiastical History of
Theodoretus does witness) out of Rome, Theodoret. li. 2. ca. 8. Hist.
of Spain, off France, of Italy, of Campania, Calabria, Aphrica, Sardinia,
Pannonia, Mysia, Dacia, the other Dacia, Macedonia, Thessalia, Achaia, Epiros,
Thracia, Asia, Caria, Bythynia, Hellespontus, Phrygia, Pisidia, Cappadocia,
Ponto, Cilicia, the other Phygia, Pamphylia, Lydia, off the Islands Cyclades,
off Egypt, Thebais, Lybia, Galatia, Palestina, and Arabia. In this great
Council so assembled from all parts, except of the Arrians, we read this
Decree. Placuit vt si episcopus accusatus fu^rit, Council. Sard. Cap. 7.
and iudicauerint congregati episcopi regionis ipsius and de gradu suo eum
deiecerint, si appellauerit qui deiectus est and co^fugerit ad episcopum
Romanae Ecclesiae and voluerit se audiri, and iustum putauerit, vt renouetur
iudi^ium vel discussionis examen, scribere his Ep^scop^s dignetur, qui in
finitima prouincia sunt, vt ipsi diligenter omnia inquirant and iuxta fidem
veritatis definiant. Quod fi is qui rogat causam suam iterum audiri,
deprecatione sua mouerit epis^opum Romanum vt e latere suo praesbyteros m^ttat,
erit in potestate ipsius episcopi quid velit and quid estimet. Et si decreuerit
mittendos esse, qui praes^ntes cum episcopis iudicent, habentes eius
authoritatem a quo destinati sunt, erit in suo arbitrio: Si vero crediderit
episcopos comprouinciales sufficere, vt negotio terminum imponant, faciet quod
sapientissi^o consil o suo iudicauerit. It has seemed us good to Decree that if
a Bishop be accused, if the bishops of the province being gathered together
have judged the matter, and have deprived him, if the party dep^iued or deposed
do Appeal, and fly to the Bishop of Rome, if the Bishop will have his cause
to be heard, and think it good to renew the Judgment, or the trial of the
matter again, let him vouchesafe to write to the bishops of the next
province, that they may enquire more diligently off the matter and determine
it. But if the party accused desiring his cause to be heard ones again, do
entreat the Bishop off Rome to send legates from his side, it shall be in the
power off the Bishopp to do as he shall think good. And if the Pope determine
to send such as may judge the matter with other bishops, having his Authorite
from whom they are sent, that also shall be at his arbitrament. Last of all if
he shall judge that the bishops of the same province with the party accused,
may suffice to end the matter, he shall do, whatsoever by his most wise
Council he shall think good. Thus far the decree of the great Council of
Sardica made anon after the Nicene Council, for the establishing and
confirming of the same, by the consent of 300. Catholic bishops of well here
all parts of Christendom. In this decre, we see the other Canon mentioned by
you M. Jewel out of those imperfect copies which are extant, to be expounded
and exte^ded to that sense of Appeal, which we gathered before by the decree
mentioned by Julius, and the ecclesiastical history, where it is said that no
Synod may be holde^ without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. In this Decre
we see a plain and large Appeal to the Sea of Rome, to determine the matter
either by his own Legates, either by such other judgment as he shall appointe.
This decree of so great a Council, holden so shortly after the Nicene Council
ought to be of more weight and authorite to expound unto us the meaning of the
Nicene Council, then the bare negative argument of M. Jewel, when he
gathers thus.

M. Iewelles baren Argument
That decree mencioneth of an Appeal to the Synod.

Ergo it excludes all Appeals to Rome.

For now we see both that the Synod it self can not be good without the
Authorite of the bishop of Rome, and therefore the Appeal to the Synod
emplieth an Appeal to the bishop of Rome, and also that from the Synod the
party plaintiff may appeal to the bishop of Rome expressly and particularly,
that also by the judgment of the said Bishop the matter shall be determined.
And thus much of that Decree. Let us now see the rest of the General
Counsels, which M. Jewel promised he would allege.

The 365. Untruth For in that Council appears no such decree. The 366.
Untruth False translation.
The bishops in the Council holden at Tela in Spain ordained thus,
Presbyteri and clericine appelle^t nisi ad Africana Concilia. Let it not be
lawful for priests and clerks to Appeal (to Rome) but only to the
Councelles holden in Africa.

The first of M. Iewelles three Untruths which I noted before does now
appear. For whereas he promised to allege against Appeals to Rome, the
decrees of General Councils, he made an Untruth in the number to amase the
Reader withal, and alleges only One, and that also to no purpose as you have
seen. Now for lack of General Councelles he tells us of particular Synods
in particular provinces. And yet all that he brings is only out of the
Country of Afrike. This that he alleges of Tela in Spain, is a great and
manifest Untruth. In that Council there is no such decree, but only a Rescript
to an epistle of Siricus, speaking not one word of appeals of or on. Again
he has added in his english more then is in the latin, Vide tomom. 1. Council.
page 420.
and so committed an other Untruth in false translation. For the words (to
Rome) are not mentioned or signified in the words alleged. As touching the
Decree it self, when you tell us M. Jewel where it is to be found, and lie
not, then we shall shape you an answer accordingly.

Si ab Episcopis etc. So likewise in the Council, of Aphrica, S^ fuerit
prouocatum, etc. And again in the same Council, Non p^ouocent, etc. But what
can be so plain as the Epistle of the 217. bishops in the Council of Africa
etc.

Fol. 36. and s^q.
Though M. Jewel to enlarge his Reply has thought good to repete it, yet I
think it not good to abuse the Reader with the often and idle repeting of one
thing. Yet this one thing more then hitherto has been said I will note to
the Reader by the way. This Council of Milleuitum, Aug. epist.
90.91.92.93.95.96. Celest. ep. 1 ad gal. episc. Cap. 3.
and the Council of Carthage in Afrike were both allowed and Confirmed by
Pope Innocentius, as it appears in S. Augustine. And all the Aphricane
Counceles were confirmed of the Sea Apostolic, as Celestinus the B. of Rome at
that very time witnesses. Which matter shall at large appear hereafter, when
I come to the.112. Untruth, touching the Confirmation of Councelles by the
Pope. These Cou^celles therefore being Confirmed by the Pope, though they
Restrain Appeals from that One Province to Rome, yet neither it is against
Appeals out of other Countres to Rome, neither does it mayntaine their own
Restrainte with out the Authorite of the Sea of Rome, but rather confirms the
Popes Authorite about Appeals to Rome. And here lo ends all that M. Jewel
alleges out of Councelles against Appeals to Rome. This is all the stuff
that with so much conference of his brethern, of so many Councelles holden in
all places of the world, and of so solemn a protestation made before, has
issued. Mountains have cracked, and a Mouse has crept forth.



The passing Impudency of M. Jewel.
you promised to allege. Out upon this impudent Forehead off the Harlot Heresy
your dame and maistresse M. Jewel. Have you no shame, no respect, no
conscience? You confess these are Arrians (for you say of them, being
Arrians,) and yet you shame not, you blushe not, you fear not to bring their
schismatic disobedience for a president of your schismatic disobedience.
Have you no better proufes then Arrians, then cursed and detestable heretics?
Be these your Fathers, your Doctors, your Masters? Be it then proclaimed and
known to all the world, that M. Jewel is a child of the Arrians, a follower
of the Arrians, a scholar of the Arrians. The Fathers and Bishops of the
Council of Sardica assembled out of all the west Church and of a great part of
Greece, do condemn these very Arrian bishops for disobeying Julius the bishop
of Rome. M. Jewel a protestant prelat commends them therefore, and alleges
their doing as a Sad testimony against Appeals to the bishop of Rome. The
words of those Fathers and bishops of the Council of Sardica, written in their
General epistle to all other bishops and priests not present at that Council,
and declaring the Acts off that Council against those Arrian bishops of the
East are these, Theodor.
as Theodoret in his ecclesiastical history records them. Quum vtique
euocati a charissimo and consacerdote Iulio and non occurrentes (sicut scriptis
eiusdem episcopi Iulij comprobatur) aperte videantur calumniatores existere.
lib. 2. cap. 5.
Whereas being cited off our most dear and fellow priest Julius, and not
appearing (as by the letters of the said bishop Julius it is evident) they
show them selves manifestly to be Slaunderers.

The Council proves them Slaunderers off Athanasius, Paulus, and other good
Catholic bishops whom they had excommunicated because being cited by the Pope
they would not appear. M. Jewel alleges for a Sad and Substantial
proof their disobedience, not only refusing to appear, but checking also the
Pope for receiving again to Communion those good Fathers Athanasius, Paulus,
Marcellus, and other, which being by the Arrians excommunicated and expelled,
had Appealed to Rome. Thus M. Jewel takes part with the Arrians, that he may
have a weapon against the Pope, and lets go all the Catholic bishops for
taking part with the Pope. Thus did heretics then, and thus do heretics now.
The Arrians the^, M. Jewel now. Such Mates M. Jewel has picked out to
disprove his Appeals to Rome. The 367. Untruth In Nipping away the first
words of S. Cyprian.
These be his Fathers and Doctors that he promised to bring forth.

S. Cipirian finding fault with such running to Rome, and defeating of
Justice, writes unto Cornelius the bishop there in this sort. Seeing it is
mete and right that every man's cause be heard there, where the fault was
committed, and seeing that every bishopp has a portion of the flo^ke alloted
unto him, which he must rule and gouuerne, and yield account unto the Lord
for the same, therefore it is not meet that they whom we are appointed to
ouersee do thus run^e about (with their appeals) and so with their subtle
and deceitefull rashewe^ break^ that concord and consent off bishops,
Ciprianus lib. 1. epist. 5.
but there they ought to plead their cause, where they may have both accusers
and witnesses of the faul^e. Or less perhap^ a few desperate and lewd
fellows think the authorite off the bishops ^f africa, w^i^h have all ready
judged and condemned them to be less, then is the Authori^e of other
bishops. Hereby it is clear, that the godly Fathers and Bishops in old time
misliked much this shifting of matters to Rome, for that they saw it was the
hinderaunce of right, The 358. and 359. Untruth with the vauntage as shall.
appear.
the increase of ambition, and the open breach of the holy Canons.

Before I open the Untruths off M. Jewel in these few words alleged, Let
us first consider (gentle Reader) the matter a part by it felfe. M. Jewel
must prove, there lay no Appeal to Rome. For this purpose he alleges S.
Ciprian complaining of the rash and often running to Rome about Appeals. And
what other thing does all this prove, the^ that at the same time appeals lay
to Rome, but S. Cyprian was offended therewith? Thus M. Jewel tells us that
Appeals lay to Rome, and yet says he will prove that none lay to Rome.
Again S. Ciprian was offended, not with the Appeals it self simply and
absolutely, But (as his words do expressly say) with their sutle and
deceitful rashenes about Appeals. And ^o was S. Bernarde in his time (as we
shall anon hear) offended with Appeals, and yet no man more expressly
witnesses the Authorite of Appeals to Rome then he. So at this day the late
General council of Trident has cut of a number off Appeals from Rome,
Sess. 22. Cap 8. and. 10.
and committed to the bishops the de^ermination of most matters, not yet for
all that abolishing all Appeals to that See. Thus also S. Cyprian who lived
long before the Nicene council in a time of persecution, when less cause of
contention was offered, was worthily offended with the rash and unruly
behavior off cer^^ine which ran to Rome, and abused the good Pope Cornelius
with false and deceitefull tales, as in this epistle S. Ciprian mentions.
Again this seemed to be a decree among the Africanes even in S. Ciprians time,
that no such Appeal should be made out off their country. For so does S.
Ciprian begin this sentence, Cum statutum sit omnibut nobis, aequumque ac
iustum sit etc. Seeing it is decreed among us all, M. Iewelles true dealing.
and is also meet and right that the cause should there be heard where the
fault is committed. etc. godly Fathers and Bishops in old time, he has
made an Vntrutbe. For he has brought but one godly Father and Bishop, S.
Ciprian by name. The other were Arrian heretics, no godly Fathers. it was the
increase of ambition, and the open breach of the holy Canons, it is the third
and that a double Untruth. For S. Ciprian which is the only Father here
alleged, speaks neither off ambition, neither off the breach of any holy
Canon.

The.370. Untruth Slaund.
And therefore the Emperor Justinian foreseing the disorders, that hereof might
grow, to bridle this ambitious outrages, thought it necessary for his subjects
to provide a straight law in this wise to the contrary^ If any of the most
holy ^ishoppe, being of one Synod have any matter off doubt or question
among them selves, whether it be for ecclesiastical right, Authe^. de
Sanctiss. episc. Coll. 9. Si quis vero.
or any other matters, first let their Me^ropo^itane wi^h other bishops of
the same Synod examine and Judge the cause. But if both the parties stand not
to this and their judgments, then let the most holy Patriarche of the same
province hear and determine their matter according to the Ecclesiastical
laws and Canons. And neither of the parties may withst^nde his determination.
The.371. Untruth. For the Contrary shall now appear.
And immediately after. Let the Patriarche accor^i^g to the laws and Canons,
make an end. By these words (.371.) al Aappeales be quite cut of from the Sea off Rome.

and that the chiefest, as your self M. Jewel has already confessed out of
Justinian. The Pope also is Patriarche to all the west, and at this day is the
only Patriarche in respect of the other three Patriarchs of Constantinople,
Antioche and Aleandria, which now are under the Dominon of the Turks, Therefore
by these words (M. Jewel) al Appeals are brought to the Sea of Rome. And thus
your Conclusion is quite cut of.



Patriarcha secundum Canones and leges Causae proebeat finem, the Patriarche
according to the laws and Canons make an end of the matter, Lib. 11. Epist.
54.
he adds and says. Contra haec si dictum fuerit, quia nec Metropolitam
habuit nec Patriarcham, dicendum est quia a Sede Apostolica, quae Caput est
omnium Ecclesiarum, causa audienda ac dirimenda fuerat, sicut and praedictus
episcopus peri^sse dignoscitur, qui episcopos alieni Concilij habuit omnino
suspectos. If it be here objected, that the bishop had neither Metropolitan
nor Patriarche it is to be said that the Cause ought to have been heard and
determined of the Sea Apostolic, which is the Head of al Churches, even as
also the foresaied Bishop is known to have required, suspecting the judgment
of other Bishops which had no jurisdiction over him. Thus far S. Gregory. By
whose judgment it is evident that though the law of Justinian do say, that
the Patriarche shall end the matter, yett in the case that the Church lacks
a Patriarche, as either the Patriarche being dead, or the Church it self
exempted and being some peculiar, in that case I say, the Appeal is to be
made to the bishop of Rome, yea from the territory or country off any other
Patriarche. It is to be thought that S. Gregory understood this Nouel
Constitution of Justinian as well as M. Jewel does. And verily though S.
Gregory had not expressed that case, wherein the decision of the matter ought
to be ended before the bishop of Rome, notwithstanding the law of Justinian
commanded that the Patriarche should end it, yet other laws teach us that
such a case being omitted, the common law leseth not therefore her force.
Therefore the law says. L. si extraneus ff. d. condict. cause. dat. and l.
com. modissin^e ff. d. lib. and posth^mis.
Casus omissus relinquitur in dispositione Iuris communis. The Case that is
omitted is left to be disposed by the Common law. Now the Common law of the
Church being such (as by the Canons of the Counsel of Nice, and of Sardica it
has before been proved) that Appeals from all countres might be made to Rome,
though Justinian after made a law that the Patriache should end the matter,
yet in case that there is at that time no Patriarche (which case S. Gregory
puts) or that the party will yet farther Appeal to the Sea of Rome (as also
in the case of S. Gregory, praedictus episcopus petijsse dignoscitur the
foresaied bishop is known to have required) in these cases I say, that
particular law of Iustinia^ takes not away the Common law of the whole
Church enacted in General Councelles. As for example. From al Courts of the
Realm in civil matters, Appeals may be made to the Common Place. And in that
Court such matters shall be ended. Yet see we not that from thence such
matters are removed to the Kings Benche? Yea and from the kings Benche to a
Parliament? But now. Shall the particular law of the one, take away the Common
law of the other? Or shall it not therefore be lawefull to Appeal from the
Common Place to the Kings Benche? Or because you may App^ale to the Kings
Benche, be therefore all Appeals quite cut of from the Parliament?

To conclude therefore, though the law of Justinian said, Let the Patriarche
according to the laws and Canons make an end, yet S. Gregory alleging that
very law and words of Justinian, affirms that in a Case, a Sede Apostolica
causa audienda ac dirimenda fuerat: the cause ought to have been heard and
determined of the Sea Apostolic. And thus much is M. Jewel furdered by this
law. M. Jewel says that Justinian by this decree provided a straight law
against Appeals to Rome. S. Gregory says, notwithstanding this law, the
matt^r ought to be heard and determined of the Sea Apostolic. M. Jewel
says by these words all Appeals be quite cut of from the sea of Rome.
The.372. Untruth For this law speaks not of Ecclesiastical matters. C^d.
de Satr^sanctis Ecclesijs omni.
S. Gregory says of that See, notwitstanding these words: Which is Head of
all Churches. So properly M. Jewel alleges his laws, and so well he
understands them.

Likewise the Emperors Honorius and Theodosius have taken Appeals away from
the bishops of Rome, and have commanded the same to be entered before the
bishop and Synod of Co^sta^tinople. The law is written thus. All innovation
set a part, we command that the old order and ancient ecclesiastical
Canons which hitherto have holden be kept still through all the provinces of
Illiricum, that if any matter of doubt happen to arise, it be putt over to be
determ^ned by the holy judgment, and assembly of bishops, not without the
discretion of ^he most Reverend the bishop of the City of Constantinople,
which City * Now enjoys the prerogative of Old Rome. The.373. Untruth In
falsyfying the text of the law.


If you will be tried by the law M. Jewel, understand the law, as the
lawyers do, and then this law shall make nothing against Appeals to Rome
but rather confirm the same. The law says, All this is spoken of civil
matters and not of Church matters. For whereas in the next title before, Glosa
in verbo: Prae rogat. Cod. d^ summa T^init. e^ fid Cath. N^s reddentes.
Rome is called by the Emperor Caput omnium ecclesiarum, the Head of all
Churches, the gloss makes argument here, how then Constantinople has the
prerogative of Rome. His answer is. Ibi in eccl^sia quod subsit: Hic in
ciuitate quod non subsit. There the law says in matters of the Church it is
subject to Rome, here the law says, in matters of the City it is not
subject. And to this purpose he alleges diverse laws, which I leave to the
lawyers to examine. Truly Chrysostom who was bishop of Constantinople in the
time of this Honorius, appealed to the bishop of Rome, as it shall anon appear.

Here M. Harding may not forgeate, The 374. Untruth For the Church of
Co^sta^tinople is not in All Respects of preeminence etc.
that the Church of Constantinople had as great prerogative in all respects of
praeeminence, Superiorite, and universality of charge, as ever had the Church
of Rome. Wherefore if the bishopp of Rome were Head of the universal Church,
it must needs follow, that the bishop of Constantinople was likewise Head of
the Universal Church.

Here M. Jewel may not forgeate, that as before (page 242) so now again he
deceaueth his reader with a general conclusion upon a particular proof. The
law speaks of A prerogative, and that as the gloss expounds in civil
matters only. M. Jewel concludes All respects off praeeminence, Superiorite
and vniuersalite off Charge. The law speaks in the singular number, M.
Jewel concludes a pluralite. The law speaks of Vid, glosam in verbo,
vetu^tatem, v^bi supra.
special privilege. M. Jewel concludes an absolute and equal authorite. By
such false weightes falsehood would bear down Truth.

Again M. Jewel may not here forgeate that in this sentence of the prerogative
of Constantinople, he has shifted in the word Now, more then is in the law
to make the Reader believe, that such prerogative was then given presently by
that decree of the Emperors, whereas contrarely the whole Law tends only,
ad vetustatem and canones pristinos ecclesiasticos seruandos, that the old
privileges (for so the gloss expounds Vetustatem,) and ancient Canons of the
Church might be kept. Thus M. Jewel by multiplying Untruths deceives his
Reader, and maintains his heresies.

Cod. de episcopis and cler. Omnes.
And again the Emperor Leo in plain words. All that be or hereafter shall be
Priests or clerks of the Catholic Faieth of what degree so ever they be,
Monks also, let them not in any Civil Actions.
Civil Actions be drawn forth to foreign Judgment by the summon or
commandment of any Judge more or less: neither let them be d^iuen to come
forth of either the province, or the Country w^ere they dwell.



The Emperor enacted liberties for the clergy in civil matters: Ergo he
forebadde utterly all appeals to Rome in ecclesiastical matters? If he would
reason thus, he neded not to have sought so far as to the Empire of this Leo
for a law, he might have found laws enough at home in our own country for
such immunites and liberties of the clergy, and yet no embarring of Appeals to
Rome. Wherefore when he concludes upon this law so saddely and stoutely,
saying:

Thus, whether the Action were ecclesiastical or Civil, the party was to be
heard within his own province, The.375. Untruth For the law speak^th only
of Civil actions.
and could not be forced to a ^eare abroad,

He tells us the way to London by his pot full of plommes that hang at his
saddle bow. For the law tells him of Civil matters: and he tells us of
Ecclesiastical matters. Yet M. Jewel with his halting arguments limpeth on,
and says.

Bernard ad Eugenium de Considerat. lib. 3.
When will thy consideration aw^ke to behold this so great confusion of
appeals? Ambition and pride strives through thee to reign in the Church.
These Appeals be made beside all ^awe and Right, beside all manner and good
order. It was a^uised for a remedy. It is found turned to death. That was
triakle, is changed in to poison. I speak off the murmuring and common
complaint^s off the Churches. They complain they be maimed and dismembered.
There be either no Churches or very few, but either smarte at this plage or
stand in fear off it.

Innocentius. Bernard^s Epist. 190
Oportet ad v^st^um referri Apostolatum pericula quaeque and scandal a
eme^gentia in regno dei, ea praesertim quae de fide co^tingunt. Dignum namque
arbitror ibi potissimum res^r^iri Damna fidei, vbi non possit fides sentire
defectu^. Haec quippe huius praerogatiua Sedis. Al dangers and offenses rising
in the kingdom of God must be referred to your Apostleship, those especially
which concern the Faith. For there do I think it meet, that the decaie of
faith be amended, where the faith it self can not fail. For that is the
prerogative of this See. Now if matters of faith must all be brought to the
Judgment of the Pope by S. Bernardes mind, think you that Appeals to that
See, be thought by him unlawful? Again the words which M. Jewel alleges.
Repertum ad remedium reperitur ad mortem. That which was found for a remedy,
is found turned to death, do they not declare the right of Appeals, but
blame the Abuse thereof? No we upon this Abuse M. Jewel concludes thus.

The 376. Untruth as shall appear.
This is that worthy ground whereupon M. Harding has laid the first
foundation of his Supremacy.

Untruth. For his first foundation was upon holy Scripture, interpreted by the
holy Fathers, namely S. Gregory, to whose place you have not answered M.
Jewel, as I have before proved. Now forth with your Untrue Conclusion.

The.377.378. and diverse other Untruths as shall appear.
A confusion, a death, a poison, a terror, a dismembring of the Churches,
p^actis^d against Law against right, against manner, and against good order:
misliked by the holy Fathers, disallowed by godly Councelles: and utterly
abrogated by sundry worthy and noble princes. This is M. Hardinges principal
foundation of his Primacie.

Here is a heap of Great, Mighty, Maine, Huge words to Amase the Reader: But
in deed a Fardle of Open, Clear, and Manifest Untruths to Deceive the Reader.
For the Confusion, the Death, the Poison, the Terror, the Dismembring of the
Churches (that S. Bernarde speaks of) is all of the Abuses in Appeals, not
off the Lawful and dew Appeals. Again Appeals were not practiced Against
law, Against right, Against manner, and against good order, as M. Jewel
says, but Beside Law and right, Beside all manner and good order, as S.
Bernarde says. Now as M. Iewelles Philosophy can teach him that many
things are done Beside Nature which yet are not Against Nature, as the Course
off the Planetes from the East to the West, the Bringing forth of Monsters,
and such like things, so Daily Experience teaches us that many things are
done Beside the law, which yet are not Against the laws: as when good laws
are ill abused. Last of all it has been proved that Appeals absolutely and
generally have not been misliked by holy Fathers (unless Arrians be holy
Fathers) neither dissallowed by general Councelles, but rather approved and
commanded by the same, and lest of all abrogated and abolished by any Princes
that M. Jewel has yet named. Thus upon a number of Untrue Premises, no
maruall if he infer a number of Untrue Conclusions. Now where he says last
of al. This is M. Hardinges principal foundation of his Primacie, I must tell
him again. This is a principal Untruth twice repeted in one conclusion, as
has been before showed. Thus far has M. Jewel ranged about Appeals, and
we for Justifying of the general Untruth noted hereupo^, have followed the
Course, and found out the Fox. Verily a deceiteful and wily Fox, full of
lies and Untruths. Now he comes to the Allegations off D. Hardinge for
Appeals. And here lettinge slip the Appeals of Theodoretus to Leo the Pope,
and of Athanasius to Pope Julius, noting thereupon none Untruth, where no
Color of Untruth could be pretended, he teaseth the Appeal of Chrysostom to
Innocentius, because he found a hole in the euid^nce, as he thought. But first
let us see the words of D. Harding.

In the cause and defense of John Chrysostom, these bishops came from
Constantinople to Innocentius the Pope, Pansophus bishop of Pisidia, Pappus of
Syria, Demetrius of the second Galatia, and Eugonius of Phrygia. These were
suitors of Chrysostom. He him self treated his matter with Innocentius by
writing. In his Epistle among other things he writes thus. Least this
outrageous confusion run ouerall, and bear rule every where, write (I pray
you) and determine by your Authorite, such wicked acts done in our absence,
and when we vvithdrevve not our selves from judgment, to be of no force, as
by their own nature truly they be void, and utterly none. Furthermore, who
have committed these evils (107) put you them under the censure of the
Church. And as for us, sith that we are innocent, neither conuicte, neither
found in any defaulte, nor proved guilty of any crime, give commandment that
we be restored to our Churches again, that we may enioie the accustomed
charity, and peace with our brethern. Innocentius after that he understood the
whole matter, pronounced and decreed the judgment of Theophilus, that was
against Chrysostom, to be void and of no force. This whole tragedy is at
large set forth by Palladius bishop of Helenopolis, In vita Ioannis
Chrysostomi, who lived at that time.



his text touching this Untruth, which (after his general discourse against
Appeals before answered and discussed) follows in this wise.

The.380 Untruth. For not out of Chrysostomes own works, as M. Jewel
supposes.
But it is most certain and out of all question, that Chrysostom Appealed to
Innocentius. For M. Harding has here alleged (380.) his own words.

Mark gentle Reader how M. Jewel even at the beginning deceives thee. For
understand, that D. Harding alleges not Chrysostomes own words, out of
Chrysostomes own works, but out off Palladius bishop of Helenopolis in vita
Ioannis Chrisostomi, writing the life of Chrysostom, and reporting in his life
the words which D. Harding alleged. And think not that this is a shift to
avoid an inconvenience, or that M. Jewel knew not so much. For D. Harding
having alleged the words of Chrysostom and the whole manner of his Appeal to
Rome, he names expressly his Author from whence he took it, in these words.
This whole tragedy is at large set forth by Palladius bishop of Helenopolis,
In vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, who lived at that time. In these words (as I
said) D. Harding expressed his Author to be Palladius in the life of
Chrysostom, not the Epistle of Chrysostom him self, commonly extant in his
works. This being so expressed of D. Harding, what cause had M. Jewel to note
an Untruth in the Margin, and to declaime so against him in his text, noting
it also there again in the Margin, M. Harding falsifieth, and untruly
translateth S. Chrysostom, what cause, I say, had he to do so, The.381.
Untruth Slanderous.
but that either very malice pricked him so depely to dissemble, or at the
lest, very gross and rash ignorance made him so fondely to talk? For
behold how earnestly and saddely he prosecuteth the matter.

I grant M. Harding has here alleged Chrysostom, A Truth of M, Jewel.
but in such faithefull and trusty sort, as Pope Zosimus sometimes alleged
the Council of Nice.

This is well exemplified M. Jewel. For even as you have villainously
slaundred that holy Pope Zosimus (for so S. Augustine him self called him
oftentimes after he was dead, being one of those Africane bishops, which you
imagine to have taken him in open forgerie, August. de G^a^^a Ch^isti. lib. 2.
cap. 2.6 7.8. (...) 17. In epist. ad Bonifaciu^.
and the Africane bishops in their letters to Bonifacius next successor to
this Zosimus do call him Beatae memoriae Zosimum Zosimus of blessed memory, and
Venerabilis memoriae Zosimum Zosimus of Reverent memory) even as I say you
have villainously slaundred this holy Pope Zosimus of blessed and Reverent
memory, following therein your blind guides of Magdeburge (as has before been
declared) so you have in this place manifestly and wilfully slaundered D.
Harding. In the.97 Untruth
For he in this place alleged not any words out of Crysostomes works, but he
alleged the fact and words of Chrysostom out of Palladius (as he told you
expressly M. Jewel) which wrote his life. Out of your own words therefore
M. Jewel this is a clear Conclusion to prove you and all your fellows notorious
slau^derous of that holy Pope Zosimus in that infamous matter of the Popes
Forgerie. D. Harding has here faithefully and truly alleged Chrysostom, e^go
Zosimus faithefully and truly alleged the Council of Nice.



in vita Ioannis Chrysostomi, in the life of Chrysostom.

M. Hardinges dealing with thee herein is not plain.

M. Iewelles dealing with thee herein is a very plain mockery. The.382.
Untruth Slanderous. Epist. Chrysostom. ad Innocentium Tom. 5.


The very words of Chrysostom in latin stand Thus. Ne confusio haec omnem
quae sub caelo est nationem inuadat, obsecro vt scribas quod hec tam inique
facta and absentibus nobis, and non declinantibus iudicium, non habeant ro^ur.
Si ut neque natura sua hab^nt. Illi ^utem qui inique egeru^, paenae
ecclesiasticorum legum ^u^^aceant, No^is vero qui nec con^^^^, nec redarguti
nec hab^^ vt rei sumus, lite^i^ vestr^s and charitate vestra, a^^orumque omnium
quarum ante societate f^uebamur, (...). which words into english may truly be
translated thus, Lest this Confusion ouerrunne all nations under heaven, I
pray thee write ( The.383. Untruth in false translating, as it shalano^
appear.
or signify) unto them, that these things so unjustly done, I being absent,
and yet not f^^eing Judgment, b^ of no force, as in deed of their own nature
they be of none. an^ (write) that they that have done these things so
wrongefully, be punished by the laws of the Church. And grant you, that we
that are neither convicted, nor reproved, nor found guilty, may enjoy your
letters and your love, and likewise the letters an^ love of al others, whose
feloweship we enjoyed before. In these few words M. Harding has notably
falsyfyed three places, quite altering the words that he found, and shuffling
in and interlacing other words of his own. For these words in M. Hardinges
translation, that seem to signify Authorite in the bishop of Rome, and to
importe the appeal, The.384 Untruth Slanderous three ways.

The 385. Untruth For these words are oll to be found in Chrysostom.

The.386 Untruth Slanderous.




Write and determine by your Authority: Put you them under the Censure off
the Church. Give Commandment that we be restored to our Churches,

M. Hardinge falsyfieth and untruly translateth Saint Chrysostom.

These words I say, are (385.) not found in Chrysostom, neither in the
Greek, nor in the Latin, but only are pretely conveyed in by M. Hardinge the
better to fournish and fashion up his Appeal. He (386) sees well, this matter
will not stand upright, without the manifest Corruption and falsyfying of the
doctors. This therefore is M. Hardings Appeal, and not Chrysosto^s.

Lo: you have good Readers the whole and long process of M. Iewelles
Accusation against D. Harding, with his Note in the Margin, whereby he gives
the Sentence, and pronou^ceth the party Guilty. You have the whole text of
Chrysostom as M. Jewel avouches D. Hardinge to allege him. You have seen the
three places noted in the which he says, D. Harding Has quite al^ered the
words that he found, and has shuffled and interlaced other words off his
own. Behold then now gentle Readers the words of Chrysostom in Latin as they
do lie in Palladius writing the life of Chrysostom, whom Doctor Harding Namely
and Expressly alleged for his Author in this matter, as we have often said.
The words alleged by M. Jewel in Latin, are translated of Erasmus or some
such late Writer of our days. The words which now we will allege, are
translated out of Chrysostomes Greek Epistle to Pope Innocentius, by Palladius
sometimes the scholar off Chrysostom him self, and a learned Bishop off
Helenopolis. Whereby it is easy to be judged, which translation is worthy of
more credit. Palladius therefore writing the whole life of Chrysostom his
master, and co^prising in that the story of his great trouble, and banishment,
in the which he Appealed to Pope Innoce^tius, records the very letter that
Chrysosto^ sent to Innocentius, Palladius in vita Joan. Chrysostom. Et extat in
Aloysio Lipoma no. Tom. 2. lib. 3. par. 2.
and says. Erat autem epistolae Ioannis eiusmodi series. The tenor of the
epistle that Chrysostom wrote was thus. The^ follows the whole epistle, even
as it is in his works commonly set forth, though in a translation somewhat
diverse. The words that pertain to this matter alleged by D. Harding in
english, do stand thus in the Latin. Ne igitur immanis ista Confusio cuncta
percurrat, and vbique dominetur, scribite precor, and authoritate vestra
decernite, huiusmodi inique gesta nobis absentibus and iudicium no^
declinantibus, nullius esse roboris, sicut per suam naturam sunt profecto and
irrita and nulla. Porro qui talia gessere, eos ecclesiasticae censurae
subijcite. Nos autem insontes neque conuictos, neque deprehensos, neque vllius
criminis reos comprobatos, Ecclesijs nostris iubete restitui, vt charitate
frui, ac pace cum fratribus nostis consuetae possimus. The whole and perfect
english of this latin is in the text of D. Harding above alleged, placed in
the beginning of this Untruth. Now in this text of Palladius, the words
which by M. Iewelles own judgment do se^e to importe the Appeal, the words
which he says D. Harding has quite altered, and shuffled, and interlaced
other words off his own, these words I say,. Write and determine by your
Authorite. 2. Put you them under the Censure of the Church, Give commandment
that we be restored to our Churches, are evidently and manifestly to be found.
For the first. Scribite and authoritate vestra decernite: is in plain english:
Write and determine by your Authorite. For the second, M. Iewelles Untruths
particulary laid forth.
Eos ecclesiasticae Censurae subijcite, is likewise in plain gra^marian
english. Put you the^ under the Ce^sure of the Church. For the third and last,
Ecclesijs nostris iubete restitui, is in right good english. Give commandment
that we be restored to our Churches. Therefore where M. Jewel says, In these
few words M. Harding has notably falsified three places, it is now evident,
he has not falsified one, but M. Jewel has made a slanderous and triple Lie.
quite altering the words that he found, it appears now, he has altered
not one, but englished them al truly and faithefully as he found them, even as
truly as Zosimus alleged the Councll of Nice. shuffling in and interlacing
other words of his own, every man sees now he has neither shuffled nor
interlaced any one word more then is in the epistle of Chrysostom, as
Palladius his named and expressed Author reports it. these words are not to
be found in Chrisostom, we see now they are found there by one of his own
scholars, Palladius bishopd of Helenopolis. But only are pretely conveyed in
by M. Hardinge, the Reader sees now, they are truly alleged out of
Palladius, not by him conveyed at all. M. Harding falsifieth, and untruly
translateth S. Chrysostom, the contrary does now appear, and M. Jewel is
found falsely, and untruly to charge D. Harding and to have avouched therein

But now that D. Harding is thus clearly discharged, let us consider M.
Iewelles own translation of Chrysostomes words, whether he have not played a
lewd part him self therein, the better to disprouue the Appeal of
Chrysostom. Whereas the latin of Chrysostom has, Obsecro vt sc^ibas, M. Jewel
translaieth it thus. I pray thee write (or signify) unto them. In which
translation he puts his gloss to Chrysostomes text and expounds the
Writing that Chrisostom requires, to be a Signification, which Palladius
Chrysostomes own scholar translateth, Scribite and authoritate vestra
decernite: write and determine by your Authorite, expounding that Writing to be
a determination by the Popes Authorite. And thus M. Jewel by his wrong
translation has ^ltered the meaning of Chrysostom m^king that to be a
Signification to the offenders, which the Author would have to be A
determination and decision by way of Authorite over and against the offenders.
And that this was the very meaning of Chrysostom, and that he Appealed in deed
to Innocentius the Pope, not only by the words of his epistle (as Palladius
recites them) it is evident, but much more by the whole Process, and issue of
the matter, as it shall now appear.

It is evident by the Ecclesiastical History and by other words of this
Epistle, That S. Chrysostom Patriar^he of Constantinople Appealed to Pope
Innocentius.
that Chrysostom being bishopp of Constantinople and wrongfully deprived by
Theophilus of Alexandria, and other bishops of Egypt, appealed in this Case to
Innocentius the Pope of Rome, and desired his letters not for Signification of
the evil fact, as M. Jewel would have it to seem, but for a Determination
and Sentence Judicial against the offenders, as D. Harding has alleged it.
First that he Appealed to Innocentius being now the second time banished and
deprived, it appears by his own words in this epistle. Quia non satis est
plangere, Chrysostomus in epist. 1. a^ Innocenti^^ ^om. 5.
sed opus etiam vt cura geratu et spectetur qua ratione, and quo consilio
grauissima illa tempes^as sedetur, proinde necessarium esse duximus vt
persuadeatur Demetrio, Pa^sophio, Pappo, and Eugonio, Dominis meis maxim
venerabilibus, pijsque episcopis, relictis negocijs proprijs, pelagose
committere, susceptaque longinqua peregrinatione, ad vestra^ properare
charitate^ de omnibus vos manifest doce^tes, quo qua^tocyus rebus succurratur.
Because it is not enough to lament, but it is nedeful also to labor and
consider how and by what means, this most greauous storm may be alayed,
therefore we have thought it Necessary to entreat Demetrius, Pansophius, Pappus
and Eugonius my most Reverent Lords and godly bishops, that leaving their own
affairs they will take the seas and this long trauail to come spedely to your
goodness, certifying you at large of the whole matter, to the^tent these
matters may the sooner be redressed. Here we see Chrysostom being wrongfully
deprived of his bishoprike (for these letters he wrote in banishment,
Nicephorus li. 13. ca. 19
as appears well by Nicephorus) sends four of his bishops to the Pope to
instruct him off the whole matter concerning his deprivation, and to have his
speedy help and succor, for the Redress of the same. And therefore he
repeteth his request again and says. Sicut prius dixi, ea quae perperam
fiunt, non solum deploranda, sed and corrigenda sunt, and ideo charitatem
vestra^ obsecro, vt prouocetur ad condolendum faciendumque omnia quo mala haec
sistantur. As I said before, faults committed are not only to be lamented but
to be Corrected. And therefore I beseech your goodness, to be moved hereat,
both to lamente with us, and also to do all such things, whereby these
trobles may be appaised. Lo Chrisostom writes not to the Pope only to have him
lament the matter, and to Signify only to the offenders, that they had very
evil done but also to Cor^ect and amend the matter, and so to alaie the
trouble of the Church. He wrote not to the Pope desiring his letters of
Complaint only, as that he should write to Theophilus and the other Bishops of
Egypt which injuriously had expelled Chrysosto^, after this sort. I
understand you have done this and this, I am very sorry for it. I pray you
amend it: this is not well done. This does not become you: your doings be
wrongeful, I tell you so and put you to knowledge thereof. This was not all M.
Jewel, as you would make it. vt quantocyus rebus succurr^tur, that the matters
might have a sp^edy redress: and again Vt corrigantur ea quae perperam fiunt:
that the faults and trespasses might be Corrected, that the breach of the
Canons, which Chrysostom C^nt^^ omnes Can^^es and l^ge^. And ^ont^a to^ ac
(...) can^nes.
twice in that epistle repeteth, might be punished. This Chrysostom wrote and
desired by these letters, as it shall yet better appear by that which ensued
hereoff.

The Pope Innocentius at the sight of those letters of Chrysostom and of the
other bishops and clergy of Constantinople, Nicephosrus lib. 13^ cap. 32. cap
33.
first wrote back to Chrysostom and to his clergy letters of comfort and
exhortation off patience in that trouble. Forthewith he called a Synod, and
having made a determination of the matter, sent the same to Constantinople, by
the hands of Aemylius bishop of Beneuentum, of Cathegius, and Gaudentius,
Valentius and Bonifacius priests, the Popes legates in that behalf to the
Emperor Arcadius, by whose means Chrysostom was expelled. Li. 8. cap vlt.
Sozomene mencioneth five bishops and two Priests to have gone in this legacy
to the Emperor. These men going on their journey were stayed in Greece by a
Tribune there by the commandment of Eudoxia the wicked Emperesse who had been
all the cause of Chrysostomes trouble, Leo epist. ^^.
and not suffered to pass by Thessalonica, to deliver the Popes letters to
Anysius the bishop of that place the Popes Ordinary legate in that part of the
East Church. After this sort being shifted by that Officier in to two ships,
they were brought to Constantinople, and in one of the suburbs of that city
cast in preson: where after they were racked and grievously tormented, to force
them to give up their letters brought from the Pope. Which when they utterly
refused to do, saying they would not deliver the letters but to the Emperors
own hands, to whom they were sent, at the last one of the Emperors Court,
Valerius by name, to gratify (as he thought) the Prince, wrong out of the
good bishops hands by fine force the letters, breaking also the thomme of him
which held them, taking away withal certain plate of silver, and other their
necessary provisions: hoping to force them by extreme necessite to yield to the
Emperesse. This being done, and they yet refusing to yield, the next day after
certain other came to these poor emprisonned bishops, sent partly from the
Emperesse Eudoxia, partly from Atticus who occupied the room of Chrysostom,
ostering them three thousand pieces of money for a bribe, upon the condition
they would communicate with Atticus and forsake Chrysostom. All which they yet
refusing to do, and seeing no other remedy, entreating they might be dismissed
and suffered to return to Rome, the foresaied Courtyar Valerius, shifting them
out of preson in to an old filthy and broken vessel, set them so on the
seas, to return to Rome or to perish by the way. After four months trauaill
and sailing, they returned nothwithstanding, safe to Rome, and declared to the
Pope the whole tragedy of their trouble, the whole manner and order thereof.
Li: ^3. cap. 32. and 33.
Thus Far out of Nicephorus in his Ecclesiastical History almost word for
word.

Let us now consider I beseech you M. Jewel what manner of letters these were,
that, bishops sent with the letters to trauail from Co^sta^tinople to Rome
Quantum in vestra pietate fitum fuit etc. In epist. 2. ad Innocentium (...). 5.
As much as lay in your goodness, all things had now ben appaised and
amended, and all offenses had been taken away, and the Churches had been in
quiet, all things had prospered, laws had not ben despised, nor the decrees
of the Fathers violated. But they yet proceed in their wicked deeds, and as
though they had hithe^ to offended nothing, so they labor to pass their
former faults with new mischiefs. But I will not particularly re^ken up such
things as they have in this mean while committed. For so I should pass not
only the bo^des of a letter, but also the measure of an history. Howbeit I
beseech your diligence, that although they have dealed troublesomly, and have
procured to them selves incurable deseases, scant able to be cured by p^naunce,
that yet notwithstanding, if they will receive medicine, they be not fard^r
vexed, Neque cae^uabij^iantur.
nor excommunicated, considering the greatness and amplenesse of the work.
For this matter touches all most the whole world. Thus far Chrysostom
commending first his Fatherly diligence (as you have heard) and yet beseching
him not to use the extremity, with the offenders, being in deed so many in
number, and great of Authorite. For not only Theophilus the Patriarche of
Alexandria, and a great number of bishops of Egypt and otherwhere, but also
the Emperor and Empress with a great part of the whole Court and City of
Constantinople were entangled in this crime of dissension and outrage.

And truly Innocentius the Pope as long as Chrysostom lived in banishment
(which was for the space of three yer^s and more) used no such extremite, but
followed the advice of Chrysostom, seeking by fair means to quiet the matter.
Nicephorus li. 13. Cap. 30.
But after that Chrysostom by the anguish and misery of his banishement
departed this life, and all the good people of Constantinople that favored
Chrysostom, by sharp edictes of the Emperor and other means continewed in
great trouble and vexation, Innocentius the Pope used the Idem li. 13. Cap. 34.
Vox sanguinis fratris mei Ioannis clamat ad deum contra te, o Imperator, sicut
quondam A bell ius^i contra parricidam Cain: and is modis omnibus vindicabitur.
The Noise of the blood of my brother John Chrysostom cries unto God against
thee, o Emperor, as of old time the blood of the Just Abel cried against
Cain the murderer: And this Blood shall by all means be revenged. After this
the Pope declaring him more particularly the outrage and injury committed
against that blessed and learned Father Chrysostom, he comes to the words of
excommunication, and says. Itaque ego minimus and peccator, cui thronus Magni
Apostoli Petri cr^ditus ^st, Ibidem
segrego and reijcio te and illam etc. Therefore I the lest of all men and a
sinner, having yet the Seat of ^he great Apostle Peter committed unto me, do
separat and remove thee and her (he means the Emperesse) from the receiving
of the imaculat Mysteries of Christ our God. Also every bishop or any other of
the clergy, which shall pr^sume to minister or give unto you thos^ holy
Mysteries after the time that you have read the letters of my Bond, I
pronounce him or them void of his dignite or office. If now^, as persons of
power you force any man unto it, and do violat the Canons ^n^ decrees d^liu^red
unto you from Christ our Savior, by his holy Apostles, know ye, it shall be no
small trespass in that dread^ful day of Iudg^m^nt, when the Honor or Dignite
of this life shall help no man, but the secrets of al hearts shall be opened and
set before the eyes of eue^y on^. A^s^cius which you placed in the bishoply
throne in the room of Ch^ysostom, though he be dead, Ex^uthoramus
we depose, and command that his name be not written in the roll of bishops.
In like manner we depose all other bishops which Consulto
of purpos^d advise have com^unicated with him. To the deposing of Theopilus
(bishop of Alexandria) we add excommunication, anathematisation, and a
deprivation of all fellowship or societe of Christi^nite. Thus far the words
of Innocencius the Pope in his letter to Arcadius the Emperor, as Nicephorus
in his ecclesiastical history records. And was all this M. Jewel a
Signification only from the Pope, was it not a Determination, and final
Sentence of the Pope?

that the matters may be redressed, Item that the faults be cor^ect^d, Last of
all that he will write that such things as had pass^d between him and
Theophilus might be of no force. means foul, and fair, by force and
flattery, by violence and brybery moved to yield. Write or signify unto them,
is a mere Untrue translation, as the which diminishes and weakeneth the true
meaning of the Author. And thus much of M. Iewelles wrong translation, and of
the Matter it self concerning the Appeal. Let us now see what M. Jewel
says to prove all this to be no Appeal. He says.

page 268. Epist. 2. ad Innocentium.
and the miserable confusion of the East part of the world in those days.
Chrysostom there of writes thus. It is the contention of the whole worl^e. The
Church is brought v^on her knees: the people is s^atte^ed, the ministry is
oppressed. The bishops are banished: the Constitutions of our Fathers ar^
broken. Clerus


of Theophilus of Alexandria, and the faithefull people cleaving to Chrysostom
in Constantinople. Of those particular men it is spoken, and not off the whole
East part off the world. Now let us see how M. Jewel proceeds and what he
will conclude hereof. It follows in his text immediately.

Socr^tes li. 2. c^p. 11. Sozom lib. 3. cap. 6. Athanasius in epist. ad
solitariam vitamagentes. Theodoretus lib. 2. cap. 14.
The Emperors captain with a band of souldiars beset the Church, where
Athanasius was praying. Of the people that was with him, some were spoiled and
banished, some trodden under the soldiers feet, some slain where they went,
Paulus the bishop of Constantinople was hanged, Marcellus the Bishopp of Ancyra
was deprived. Lucius the bishop of Adrianopolis died in preson, Theodulus and
Olimpius two bishops of thracia, were commanded to be murdered. The Emperor
had commanded Athanasius to be brought ynto him either dead or alive.

page 151.
And great vessels (you know M. Jewel) the emptyer they be, the more they
sound. The wise Reader will be weighed mith reason and not with talk. Let us
see therefore to what issue you drive all these allegations. If in the end
they prove nothing, The.387. Untruth For these Fathers, Athanasius Chirsostom
and Theoret. were in no part of these miseries mentioned, when they Appealed
to Rome.
then have you but dased your Reader with great looks, and faced him out with
a card often. You proceed and say.

These godly Fathers being thus (387.) in extreme misery, and seeing their
whole Church in the East part so desolate were forced to seek for comfort,
where so ever they had hope to find any: and specially they sought to the
Church of Rome, which then both for multitude of people, and for purity of
Religion, and Constancy in the same, and also for healping of the afflicted,
and entreating for them, was most famous above all others.

Now your Iuggling and deceauing of the Reader shall appear M. Jewel. For
where you say, these holy Fathers being thus in extreme misery etc. You mean
and speak of Chrysostom, Athanasius and Theodoret. As touching Chrysostom and
Theodoret they lived at the lest the one a hundred and more, the other al most
two hundred years after those troubles and miseries happened in the East
Church. Those troubles above mentioned happened al in the reign of Constantius
the Arrian Emperor, and toward the end of his Empire. Chrysostom lived under
Arcadius and Honorius, Theodoretus under Theodosius the second, son to
Arcadius. Now between Consta^tius the Arria^ and Arcadius were Emperors
Julian, Iouinian, Valens, and Theodosius the first, the time almost of a
hundred and fifty years. Under Arcadius those troubles of the East Church
mentioned by M. Jewel utterly ceased. Now to allege those troubles so long
before passed and appaised, to be the cause of Chrysostoms, and of Thedorets
Appeals to Rome which so long after followed, who sees not that it was
impertinently and impude^tly alleged? Touching the troubles in the East in
Chrysostomes time, we have said somewhat before, but shall say more ano^, when
we come to M. Iewelles conclusion upon this place. It remains therefore that
all this must serve to bear out the Appeal of Athanasius, who lived in the
time of those troubles, or else M. Jewel (as I said before) shall be found to
have proved nothing, but utterly to have dased the Reader with empty words.

Touching the Appeal of Athanasius, The Appeal of Athanasius
though it be not our principal matter, having now in hand chefely the
Appeal of Chrysostom, yet because M. Jewel has so confounded all these three
diverse Appeals and of diverse ages all together, trusting by one general answer
to defeat them al, for Truths sake which now I defend, I will show also
that all this proves nothing against the Appeal of Athanasius to the Pope
brought in by D. Harding for a clear example of the Popes Primacy then at that
time and of so learned a man acknowledged and confessed.

It is to be known therefore that all those troubles of the East Church
mentioned before by M. Jewel, happened after the Appeal of Athanasius to Rome,
and therefore could not be the cause of that which before was passed. This to
be so I will evidently prove (God willing) by the orderly course and drifte of
the ecclesiastical History.

The Ecclesiastical History reports that at the beginning of the reign of
Constantius the Emperor (under whose reign, Histor trip. lib. 4. Cap. 1
and toward the end of whose reign the above mentioned troubles happened, as
it shall anon appear) many bishops of the East (which in the life of
Constantinus father to this Constantius, a good Catholic Emperor had
dissembled, and appeared for Catholics) began then openly to profess the
Arrian heresy, Cap. 2.
and to condemn the great general Counsel of Nice holden not long before. At
that time Athanasius (being banished before by Consta^tinus through the deceit
of Arrius and his fellows) returned to his bishoprike by the means of
Constantinus brother to Constantius Emperor of the west. Cap. 5.
The Arrian bishops, Eusebius, Theogonius, Theodorus Perinthius and other,
intending then as I said, to publish the Arrian heresy (having all ready
corrupted the Prince as the history declares) seeing this Athanasius the
Patriarche off Alexandria, to be a great block in their way, as being a right
learned Father and a most stout defender of the Nicene Counsel, labored by all
means to remove him from that place, and to deprive him of his bishoprike. For
this purpose they accused him to the Emperor, Cap. 6.
as one that had by unjust means returned to his bishopric. Athanasius
having intelligence of their doing, and of the Princes mind bent against him
fledd in to the west parts of Christendom. But Eusebius and his fellows the
Arrian bishopps not contented herewith thinking to work sure in the matter,
wrote also to Julius the Bishopp off Rome, accused him to the Pope, and hoped
by that means to have him utterly deprived. The Pope (as the history says)
ecclesiasticam sequens legem, etiam ipsos Romam venire praecepit, and
venerabilem Athanasium ad iudicium regulariter euocauit, following the law of
the Church, commanded them also to come to Rome, and called forth the
Reverent Athanasius to Judgment after the order of the Canons.

Here would I by the way learn of M. Jewel what law of the Church it was,
that the Pope followed, when he commanded the bishops of the East to appear at
Rome, and cited also Athanasius the Patriarche of Alexandria to judgment at
Rome, and that Regulariter (...), by order of the Canons. In Rescrip to Iulij
ad Orientales. Council. Sard. ca. 7.
What law, what Canons ca^ he name, but the laws and Canons of the Nicene
Counsel, the only Council General holden before that time, and confirmed
afterward by the great Council of Sardica holden somewhat after that time?
Well: Forth with the History.

Athanasius obeying the Summoning came. But his Accusers came not, scientes
facile suum capi posse mendacium, knowing that their lying tale should sone be
discovered. What did they then? Forsothe (the history says) seeing the
shepeheard away from his flock, they thruste in a wolf in his place:
Gregorius by name an Arria^ bishop. Under this Arrian Gregorius began the
troubles which M. Jewel before mentioned. Cap. 11.
As the besetting of the Church of Alexandria with souldyars, the murder and
spoil of the people. For whereas Athanasius after he had appeared at Rome,
Cap. 7.
by the means of the Emperors letters of the west, Constans brother to
Constantius, had recovered again his bishoprike, the Arrians persuaded the
other Emperor Constantius the Arrian to intrude this Arrian Gregoririus by
force and violence. Cap. 11.
Upon which Athanasius fled the second time to Rome, Cap. 12.
and Eusebius the Archearrian sent after him a legacy to the Pope, to accuse
Athanasius. At this second coming to Rome, Athanasius found there Paulus the
bishop of Constantinople, Marcellus bishop of Ancyra, Asclepas bishop of Gaza,
Cap. 15.
Lucianus bishop of Adrianopolis, all complaining in like manner to the Pope for
injuries done unto them by the Arrians. Now first let us consider that the
first flight of Athanasius to Rome was before the troubles mentioned by M.
Jewel: and that therein (as I said) he has deceived his Reader, making that
to be the cause of Athanasius flight which happened after his flight.
Secondarely that he brings of Paulus the bishop of Constantinople that he was
hanged, you perceive I trust already, that therein also he has brought that
for a cause which happened after the effect. Unless M. Jewel will say that
Paulus was hanged of the Arria^s, before he came to Rome to complain of the
Arrians. Likewise that he tells us of Lucius otherwise Lucianus bishop of
Adrianopolis that he died in preson, it must needs be after the first coming of
Athanasius to Rome, seeing that in his second coming he found the same Lucius
or Lucianus at Rome. Marcellus also of Ancyra who^ he found at Rome at the
same second coming could not be the cause of Athanasius first coming to Rome.
Now that which follows in M. Iewelles allegations of Theodulus and Olympius
commanded to be murdered, and of the Emperors fury against Athanasius
commanding him to be brought alive or dead, Cap. 38.
all this happened after the third flight of Athanasius, and a great many years
after his first flight to Rome, of the which only D. Harding here mentioned,
and against the which M. Jewel would drive all these troubles of the East
hitherto alleged, all befalling (as you see) long after the same. Thus you
see how that all these alllegations prove nothing against the matter alleged,
and therefore were brought in by M. Jewel only to Dase and Amase his Reader for
the time, that after he might work his feate at pleasure. For now, where it
follows in M. Jewel, as we have before told you his words, These godly
Fathers being thus in extreme misery, etc. sought to the Church of Rome, you
see neither Chrysostom nor Theodoret (who lived so many years after all these
troubles appeased) neither Athanasius whose flying to Rome talked of in this
place, happened before all these troubles, can be any of these godly Fathers
that M. Jewel concludes of. But only these godly Fathers Chrysostom,
Theodoret and Athanasius are alleged here to have sought to Rome. Ergo all
this has been brought utterly beside the purpose, only to deceive and abuse
the well meaning Reader. This is the sincerite of M. Jewel, when he seems to
talk most lernedly.

To show farther that Athanasius in his second flight to Rome, that Paulus of
Constantinople, Marcellus of Ancyra, Paulus of Constannople and diverse oath
Bishops of the East Appealed to Rome.
Asclepas of Gaza, Lucius of Adrianople all learned and Catholic bishops of the
East Church (who met there at that time all together) fled not thither (as M.
Jewel imagines) because they knew not whether else to fly, but to be
restored again to their bishopprickes by the Popes authorite, that therefore I
say, they fled and for no other cause, let us consider shortly what the
ecclesiastical history reports herein. The history writes thus. Cognoscens
ergo Romanus Episcopus etc. The bishop of Rome therefore hearing the accusations
and complaints of each one, Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 15.
and finding them al to agree to the Nicene Council, received them in to
Communion, as having charge of them al, through the dignite and praerogatiue of
his own See, and restored to every one their Churches: He wrote also to the
bishops of the east, that they had not well used innocent me^ driving them from
their Churches, that also they kept not the constitutions of the Nicene
Council. Some of them also he commanded to appear before him at a certain
day, that they might know he had pronounced a just determination of them. He
told them also he would not from hence forth suffer them, unless they
leaued such disorder and innouations in the Church. Thus wrote the Pope. And
Athanasius and Paulus sending the Popes letters to the bishopps of the East,
recovered each one again their bishopprickes. Thus far the Tripartite Hstory
out of Sozomenus. Whether all this declare not a Supreme Authorite in the Sea
of Rome over the East Church no less then over the west, I leave it to the
discretion off every wise Reader to considre. Let us now return to the
discourse of M. Jewel and see how he proceeds herein.

The.388 Untruth For Flauianus Appealed to Pope Leo, not to the Emperor.
In like sort sometimes they fled for help unto the Emperor. So Athanasius
being condemned in the Council at Tyrus, fled to Constantinus the Emperor.
Flauianus unto the Emperors Theodosius and Valentinianus. Donatus a casis
nigris, unto Constantinus. And the Emp^rours sometimes called the parties, and
heard the matter them selves. Sometimes they wrote favorable letters in their
behalf.

Much of this, is true: but nothing truly applied. Athanasius in deed (as
Socrates writes) in refellendis calumnijs contra Macharium productis,
legalibus vsus est paragraphis. in refelling the slanders laid to the charge
of Macharius his priest, Socrates. lib. 1. cap. 31.
pleaded with his adversaries by the law. Therefore he refused, according to
the law, their judgments who were known to be his enemies. Neither would
suffer that Theoguis, Maris, and such other Arrians should have the examination
of his priests matter Macharius, Ischyras his aduersarye being set at
liberty and keeping company with the Judges, while Macharius his Priest was
laid fast in Chains. Last of all protesting to the whole Synod, and Dyonisius
the Emperors officer there, that he had injury, and having no remedy thereof,
Cap. 32.
clanculum discessit, he departed away privily says Socrates. And a little
after. Secessione facta ad Imperatorem fugit. After his departure he fled to
the Emperor. All this was ex legalibus paragraphis following the order of the
law. Afterward he was accused to the Emperor of a Civil matter, as that he
had stopped the passage of Corn which was wont ordinarely to be sent from
Alexandria to Constantinople. Here was no question of Faith or Religion
decided by the Emperor.

Flauianus was by the heretic Dioscorus deposed. Flauianus Appealed to Pope
Leo.
He Appealed to Pope Leo, not to the Emperou^ as M. Jewel says. For proof
hereof, we have the letters of Valentinian the Emperor him self. These are
his words, to Theodosius the second them Emperor in the East. Epist valent.
ad Theodos. tom. 1. Con. page 731.
Fidem a nostris Maioribus traditam debemus cum omni competenti deuotione
defendere, and dignitatem propriae venerationis Beato Apostolo Petro
intemeratam and in nostris temporibus conseruare: quatenus beatissimus Romanae
Ciuitatis Episcopus, cui principatum sacerdotij super omnes Antiquitas co^tulit
locu^ habeat ac facultate^ de fide and Sacerdotibus iudicare. Hac enim gratia
secundu^ solemnitatem Co^cilioru^ and Consta^tinopolitanus Episcopus eum per
libellos appellauit, propter contentionem quae orta est de fide. The faith
delivered unto us from our forefathers (most honorable Father and Reverent
Emperor) we ought with all co^petent devotion defend, and preserve also in our
time unviolated to the blessed Apostle Peter the dignite of his dew Reverence:
so as the most holy bishop of Rome, To vvho^ Antiquite has given the
Principalite of Priesthood above all, may conveniently judge off the faith,
and of Priests. For, hereupon the bishop of Constantinople (Flauianus) after
the accustomed manner of Councelles has appealed to him by libels, upon a
certain question moved touching the Faith. In like manner also Galla Placidia
Mother to Theodosius wrote at that time, saying of Flauianus, that Libellum ad
Apostolicam Sedem mis^rit, Ibidem.
he sent a libel off Appeal to the Sea Apostolic. Thus as Athanasius appealed
to Julius in matters ecclesiastical, so did also Flauianus to Leo. And as
Athanasius fled for succor against heretics to the Emperor, so might also
Flauianus seek succor of the Emperor Theodosius. But neither of them fled in
like sort to the Emperors, as they Appealed to the Pope. Donatus a Casis
nigris was an heretic. Of him we shall speak more anon. Touching matters mere
ecclesiastical, the Catholic Emperors never judged and determined such
matters, they never restored bishops by their own absolut Authorite, as we
have heard even now the Pope restored Athanasius and Paulus. Emperors never
judged over bishops in matters of Faith.
This to be so without farther particular trial, Let the testimony of S.
Ambrose be a sufficient witness in this matter who lived after and in the time
of all the cases alleged by M. Jewel, and who was (no doubt) much more
skillful in these matters then is M. Jewel or any man that lives now. At
what time Valentinian the young Emperor would have called Saint Ambrose in
judgment before him, as M. Jewel would here persuade the reader that
Emperors of old time did, he says unto the Emperor. Quando audisti
clementissime Imperator in causa fidei laicos de episcopis iudicasse? Lib. 5.
epist. 32.
When did thou ever here most gracious Emperor, that lay men have judged
over bishops, in any cause pertaining to the faith? This was after the time of
Constantius, of Theodosius, and of Valentinianus the elder alleged before by
M. Jewel to have had ecclesiastical matters before them, in like sort as the
Pope had, which is to have judged and determined other them. Then if M. Jewel
had been by S. Ambrose when he wrote those words to the Emperor, and had been
of the mind that he is now of, he would perhaps have corrected S. Ambrose,
and said. No Sir? Never heard you that Athanasius fledd to Constantinus, that
Flauianus to this man's Father Valentinian the first, that Donatus also to
Constantinus, never heard you that the Emperors called sometime the parties,
and heard the matters themselves, and that in like sort, as the Pope
determined the causes of Athanasius and Paulus? Heard you never of all this? If
you did, how then say you to the Emperor. VVh^n heard you etc? If you did
not, then yet learn of me that you have miss informed the Emperor. This M.
Jewel might have as well instructed S. Ambrose then, as avouched it so
stoutely now. But. What trow we would S. Ambrose have answered here to this
painted prelat, ouerthwarting so such a learned Bishop? Truly S. Ambrose
notwithstanding all those examples alleged by M. Jewel, notwithstanding the
words of Constantinus Coram me, even before me, which M. Jewel makes so much
of, which he blaseth so forth with great letters both in the text and in the
Margin, notwithstanding I say all, that either Constantinus or Theodosius or
Valentinian did or had done before that time, he would have said to M. Jewel
farther as he wrote then to the Emperor, these words. Certe si vel
scripturarum seriem diuinarum, vel vetera tempora retract^mus, quis est qui
abnua^ in causa fidei, in causa inquam fidei episcopos solere d^ Imp^ratoribus
Christianis, non Imperatores de episcopis iudicare. In good sothe (M. Jewel)
if we call to mind the whole course of holy Scripture, or the practice of
ancient time passed, none I trow will deny but that in matters touching
faith, in matters I say (M. Jewel) touching faith, bishops are wo^te to
Judge over Christian Emperors, Emperors are not wont to Judge o^^r bishops.
Thus S. Ambrose has answered you M. Jewel. And this his answer that you may
the better like and content your self withal, I wish you to remember what
your old Master John Calvin has written of this very answer of S. Ambrose to
the Emperor. He says these words. Institut. li. ^. cap. 11. fere in ^^ne.
Worthily do al men prais his c^nstancy in this b^halfe. Then you M. Jewel I
trust, will not dispraise it. Then you will yield to the lerning of S.
Ambrose, who tells you in good earnest, that neither by holy Scripture,
neither by any practice of the Church Emperors have judged over bishops in
matters of the faith.

of their doings against Athanasius.

Socrates. li. 2 c. 22. Theodor. lib. 2. ca. 8
partly because of Pope Julius his letters written in that behalf, partly
because by the whole Council of Sardica they were Judged Innocent. The
Emperor herein did but execut the Popes request, and the Determination of the
Council.

The.389 Untruth joined with a folly.
The Emperor Honorius gave his endeavor, that Athanasiu^ might be restored.

M. Jewel, talks he can not tell what him self. Athanasius was dead and
buried at the lest twenty years before Honorius was Emperor. His endeavor at
that time could stand Athanasius in small stead.



Socrates. lib. 1^ cap. 26.27.28. Ibidem ca. 34.35. Theodoret. lib. 1. cap. 31.
He did so, animo commodandi ecclesiae nolens illa^ discerpi, as Socrates
writes, upon the desire he had to help the Church, and to bring it to
Unite. So he restored Arrius him self to Alexandria. So he threatened
Athanasius to depose him, if he received not Arrius. So he called those bishops
before him. And so in fine he banished that good Catholic Father Athanasius.
But in the end he repented him, and commanded in his last will that
Athanasius should be restored. These things done of Zele beside right, ca^ be
no prejudice to that, which is right. Let us now see what M. Jewel will
conclude hereof. The.390 Untruth The Conclusion follows not. Namely in
Chryso^^om.


Thus holy men being in distress, sought healpe, wheresoever they had hope to
find it. This seeking of remedy by way of complainte, a^ it declares their
misery, so is it not sufficient to prove an ordinary Appeal.

If your former talk had been true and to the purpose, this conclusion might
have had some likelihood. Now it is evident by that which has been brought,
that all this seeking to Rome, was not by way of complainte only, but by way
of Appeal, especially in Chrisosto^, and Athanasius as we have declared. And
touching Chrysosto^, upon whose words we have been occasioned to enter so
far with M. Jewel, this shifte of seeking to Rome by way of complainte, is
most ignorantly, or else very deceitefully alleged of M. Jewel. For what a
poor shifte were this, to seek for succor in distress at his hand, who was
him self in more distress then the party that sought for succor? And so was
it with Innocentius when Chrysostom being banished wrote and sent his legates
unto him. For at that very time the Goths wasted and spoiled Italy in most
miserable sort, first under Rhadagaisus, and next under Alaricus, Orosius ^^.
7. cap. 37. and 39.
who Innocentius yet living, sacked Rome it self, and afflicted all that cost
most cruelly. At that time the Wa^dales and Hunnes invaded the west Empire, the
French men entered in to Gallia, now called of them France, and the miserable
Emperor Honorius lurked at Rauenna, so careless and negligent of all these
matters, Baptist^ Egnatius lib. 1. Romans Prin.
that when word was brought unto him that Rome was undone, what, said he, is
Rome my Cock slain which fought while here so lustely? thinking it had been
spoken of a cock that he had so called, and having more mind of his
cockefight game, then of the great City of Rome. And in all these miseries of
the west part, of all Italy, of Rome it self, will M. Jewel persuade us that
Chrisostom sent thither for succor only and redress of his own private
mysery? Jewel. page 237.
A man may here say to M. Jewel, as M. Jewel says in this article to an
other: Non satis commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue haec. These matters
hang not well together M. Jewel. And this you knew your self well enoughe.
The.391. Untruth For this will never appear.
And therefore you add more matter hereunto and say.

That Chrysostom made no such Appeal to the bishop of Rome it may
sufficiently (391) appear, both by Chrysostomes own Epistles and by the
bishop of Romes dealing herein, and by the end, and conclusion of the cause.

It behooves thee here (gentle ^eader) to call to mind, what we have said
before of this matter. We have before declared by the two epistles of
Chrysostom to Innocentius, by the dealing of the bishop of Rome therein
(calling a Synod, and sending his legates to Constantinople about the matter)
Last of al by the end and conclusion of the cause, to wit, by the final
excommunication of the Emperor, and the other bishops guilty of those
troubles, by Innocentius the Pope, that Chrysostom made a just Appeal. Now
M. Jewel says he will prove the contrary by those very three diverse means
again. That were gaye. Let us see.

Chrysostom him self he makes no mention off any Appeal.









negative?

John to Innocentius bishop of Rome sends greeting.

To the Right Reverent Father in God etc? And yet M. Jewel knows him self,
he is no bishop at all, and therefore no Reuerente Fathet, for the which
respect he is so called. The Pope neither intitleth him self, nor ever did,
the bishop of the whole world or the universal Judge of all the world but he
intitleth him self, The servant of the servants of God. Yet if titles might
make proof, Gregor. li. 4. epist. 38

Vniversals obla^o honor v^ ca^i sunt.


we could bring the Authorite not of one only bishop (as Chrysostom was) but
of six hundred bishops assembled in a general Council from all parts of
Christendom which called Leo then Pope of Rome, an Universal Bishop. But of
this we shall have occasion to speak more hereafter, in the 118. Untruth. Let
us now proceed with M. Iewelles allegations out of Chrysostomes epistles, as
he says. Hitherto he has argumented of the title and superscription. Now
off like he will bring some weighty matter out of the epis^le it self.

The.392 Untruth as appears.
according to the determinations of the Councelles off Carthage, Milleuet and
Afrike.



It is not meet that they that be in Egypt should be Judges over them, that
be in Thracia.

lewdenesse off this argument will appear by the like. The bishop of London
refuses to be judged of the bishopps of France. Ergo he will not be judged by
his metropolitan the Archebishopp off Caunterbury. For as rightfully may the
Pope be Judge over all Metropolitanes; as every Metropolitan over the bishopps
of his province. Which Superiorite of the Metropolitan over his bishops,
though your religion in very deed (as it seems) no more acknowledges then the
Supremacy of the Pope over all, yet you M. Jewel through out this article, do
earnestly defend the Superiorite off Patriarchs, Primates and Metropolitanes
each in their provinces, to overthrow thereby the Supreme Authorite of the
Pope over all. And this is all M. Jewel which you have brought of Chrysostomes
epistles to prove (as you said) that he made no such Appeal to Rome. Which
now being laid abroad, is so bare and naked a proof, that your self I
think, if any shame be in you, does blushe thereat for very shame. But go
to. Though the epistles of Chrysostom can not help you, yet perhaps the bishop
of Rones dealing therein, and the end of the cause will help you. For by
these two ways more, you promised to prove that Chrysostom made no Appeal.
Let us then see, what the bishop of Romes dealing herein was.

The 393. Untruth boldly avouched but no way proved.
Neither do the Bishop of Rome his own words, importe any Appeal, but rather
the (393) Contrary.

This is stoutely said. I trust you will prove it as well.

For (394) he uses not his familiar words off bidding or commanding, but
only in gentle and friendly manner exhorts them to appear, and that not
before him self, but only before the Council of sundry bisshoppes summoned
specially for that purpose. The 394 Untruth This For, forces not. It was not
so in the cause of Chrysostom.


Let this proof stand for good. The Pope gave them fair words, and desired
them to Appear before a Synod. Ergo his words do importe no Appeal but
rather the contrary. You know M. Jewel by the like argument: A Prince writing
gently at a time to stubborn rebels, and willing them to appear before his
Council not before him, might be proved no Prince or Souuerain, because in
that case he does not exercise his Authorite. But as I said let the proof
stand for good, being in it self over weak and feeble. Forth to the matter.

For thus Julius writes unto the bisshoppes of the East.

The.395. Untruth as last before.
Why, where be you M. Jewel? Have you forgott your self? You promised to tell
us of Chrysostomes Appeal, and of the words of Innocentius to whom he
appealed. And do you tell us now of Julius and the bishopps of the East? You
know Julius and these bishops were dead and buried more then a hundred years
before this Appeal or complainte (call it as you list) of Chrysostom to
Innocentius. And will you prove that Chrysostom did not Appeal to
Innocentius, because Julius spoke fair to the rebellious Arrians of the East?
But thus it is gentle Reader. M. Jewel makes large offers, promises much,
speaks great, but he yeldeth nothing, he perfourmeth as much, and proves as
little. As for Innocentius his words (who was the Pope to whom Chrysostom
Appealled) and by whose words he promised to prove that Chrysostom made no
Appeal, he has not brought so much as one syllable or letter thereof. And as
touching the end and Conclusion of the cause, which was an other means by the
which he promised to prove that Chrisostom made no Appeal he has brought
touching Chrysostom nor word nor half word. Only having talked somewhat of
Julius the Pope that he wrote fair to the Arrians, and that he tried the
matter by a Synod, which two things M. Jewel takes for a great derogation
of the Popes authorite, whereas all wise men beside will, I think, rather
much commend the moderation and discretion of the Pope therefore, as neither
using roughe words, neither doing all of him self, but with the advice and
consent of other, as the Popes at this day do, and allwaies have done, M.
Jewel I say having somewhat enlarged those matters, at the length speaks
only these words touching the Appealle of Chrysostom to Innocentius, which
follow.

page 270. The.396 Untruth Innocentius prosec^ted the Appeal by his own
Authorite, as has before been proved.

The 397. Untruth For he pro^ounced hi^ self the Final Sentence of Excom.
against the offenders.


So likewise Innocentius the bishop of Rome, being very d^sirous to restore
Chrysostom, and to recover the unity of the Ch^rche, not of him self or by
his own Authorite, but by the dec^ee and consent of a Council holden in
Italy sent messingers in to the East. And sitting with others in the
Council, he took not upon him that ^niuersall power that now is imagined,
but had ^is voice (396) equal with his brethern.

If you had loved the truth, and had been a faithefull instructor of your
R^ader, M. Jewel, you would not thus have told a piece, and concealed the
rest, whereby the Authorite of the Pope might c^erely have appeared above the
Synod. Of this Synod, and of the decree thereof sent from Rome to
Constantinople not by messengers M. Jewel (as yo^ term them) but by bishops
and priests, by legates of the S^e Apostolic, by the Pope not by the whole
Synod, we have signified and talked before. But this was not all M. Jewel.
This was not the end and Conclusion of the cause, by the which you promised
(guilefully and untruly) to prove. Chrysostom made no Appeal. The end and
Conclusion was (as we have before showed) that the Legates of Innocentius being
evil treated, robbed, emprisonned, and ignominiously sent back, rather to
perish by the way then to return home, those legates also neither by force of
threats, neither by way of bribery made to yield or communicate with the
Emperesse, the end an^ Conclusion I say was, that Innocentius the Pope of
Rome he him self by his own Absolut Authorite as he p^otesteth, did
excommunicat not only Theophilus and the other malefactors the bishopps off
Egypt, but also the Emperor him self, and the Empe^esse. Thi^ was the end,
this was the Conclusion M. Jewel.

The 398 Untruth touching ^eltiades.
Yet (says M. Jewel) the Pope had but his voice equal with his brethren.
And that he proves thus.

As it appears by Meltiades bishop of Rome, that sat with three bis^hoppes
of Gallia, and xiiij. other bisshoppes of Italy to determine the controversy
between Cecilianus and Donatus.

M. Jewel ends this matter with a manifest Untruth. Innocentius (says
he) had but his equal voice with his brethren in the Synod. And why?
Because Miltiades the Pope had the like in the Judgment of Donatus. Now that
Miltiades had but his equal voice, it is a manifest Untruth. Optatus says.
Miltiadis sententia Iudicium clausum est. Optatu^ lib. 1.
By the sentence or verdit of Meltiades the Judgment was ended. Ergo his
sentence was more then the sentence off his fellow bishops. Ergo M. Jewel
has made an Untruth to say, that his sentence was equal with the rest.
Ergo he has made an untrue collection that the sentence also Innocentius was
but equal with his brethren. Ergo again he has brought nothing to disprove
the Appeal of Chrysostom to Innocentius the Pope. Ergo an Appeal is proved
and that of a Patriarche of Constantinople, a most holy and learned Father, S.
Chrysostom by name. M. Jewel though he have ended here with Chrysostom, yet
he has not ended with the matter of Appeals. Let us consider for Truths
sake the remnant of his long process about this matter.

The 399 Untruth ^. Harding knows well the contrary, as it s^all i^
M. Harding knows that the Bisshoppes of the East understood not this
singular Authorite, or prer^gatiue off the bishop off Rome, and t^erefore being
called, obeyed not the Summon, as it is many wai^s easy to be seen.

What Authorite and prerogative the bishops of the E^st Understood to be in
the Church off Rome, and how well D. Harding knows it to be so, it has well
appeared by the Appeals of Chrysostom and Athanasius two the Chiefeste
Pat^iarches in the East, the one of C^nstantinople, the other of Alexandria to
the Bishops of Rome, and shall yet better appear, in the 109. Untruth noted
by you M. Jewel, where this matter is at large and of purpose treated. Now
let us consider, by how many ways (for so you speak^) you will prove the
contrary.

C^ncil. T^m. 1.
Therefore they returned unto Julius this answer. If you will agree to ou^
o^^er^, we will have (...) Commu^i^n wi^h you, ^ut if you will otherwise do,
and rather ^^ree unto our a^uer^a^ies, then unto us, the^ we (...) the
contrary. And hence ^orthe ^eith^^ will we (...) Coun^e^l with you, no^ obey
you, neither bear good will ^i^her to you or to any of youres.

Council. Chalced. Act. 11.
Flauianus (whom the general Council off Chalcedon called Martyr) and diverse
other Catholic bisshops who all appealed to the Popes of Rome, and to join
elbowe with the wicked Arrians, deadly enemies to the Nicene Council, and
detestable denyers of the Godhead of our Savior Jesus Christ. Thus M Jewel
so he stand against the Pope, h^ will choose to st^n^e against most Catholic
and learned Fath^rs, The.400 Untruth For in this doing, there was no weakness
on the Popes part.
against the N^c^ne Council, and against the blessed Trinite it self.

This Imperfection and weakness of their own doings, the bishops of Rome
the^ selves understood, and confessed. (400) For thus Innoce^tius writes unto
S. Augustine, Alypius, and others in Africa touching Pelagius. If he con^inewe
still i^ one mi^^e, k^owing that I will pron^^^^e against him, as what request
of letters, or when will he ^ommute him self to our Judgment? Is it be good,
he were called to make answer, it were better some other called him, that are
near at hand: etc.

The Africane bishops S. Augustine, Alypius and others wrote to Innocentius the
Pope that, whereas the heresy of Pelagius multiplied secretly in many places,
either he should send for him out of the East where then he lived, August.
e^ist. 95. Innocent. epist. 27.
and was said to have purged him self, or else to write unto him to know the
truth thereof. Innocentius answered. Si confidit, nouitque non nostra a dignum
esse damnation^ quod dicat, aut iam hoc totum s^^^fut^sse quod dix^rat, non a
nobis acce^siri, s^d ipse debet potius f^stinar^, v^^^ssit absolui. Nam si
adhuc taliter sentit, quan^o se nostro Iudicio, quibusue acceptis l^teris, quum
sciat se damnandum esse, committ^t? If Pelagius do trust, and knows his
saying deserves not to have Sentence pronounced against him, or that he has
recanted that which he said before, he needs not to be sent for of us, but he
him self ought to ^pede hither to be absolved. But if he continewe still in
his former opinion, when will he commit him self to our Judgment, or with
what letters will he come, being sure that he shall have Sentence pronounced
against him? Thus far innocentius. There appears here no weakness in the
Pope, but a stubbornness in the heretic. If Pelagius had recanted, and had
been (...) Catholic man ought to be, the Pope doubted not, but he would gl^dly
come, and that with speed, to be absolved for his former naughty doctrine. But
if he continewed in his opinion, in his heresy, and wicked doctrine, being sure
that he should be at Rome condemned therefore, no maruail if the Pope doubted
of his not appearing to any Summo^ of lett^rs or otherwise. This declares the
ordinary and usual obedience of Catholics in those days. And this
represents to us the present stubbornness of heretics now a days. If the
Pope should presently cite M. I^well to Rome, would he appear trow we? But
what th^n? Is not the Pope therefore in his full Authorite, because M. Jewel
will not obey? Or was Innocentius of less power, because Pelagius was
stubborn? Or because many of the Jews believed not, was therefore Gods promise
weakened? Nun quid illorum incredulitas fidem dei euacuauit? Romans 3.
Absit. God forbid, says the Apostle. This declares a great Imperfection
and weakness in your doctrine M. Jewel, not in the Popes Jurisdiction, which
can bring no better Arguments against the same. For thus you force your
reason.

M. Iewelles Arguments.
Pelagius continewing in his heresy and being sure to be cast would not
appear before the Pope.

Ergo the Popes Jurisdiction was weak and imperfect.

If some Catholic man of the Church had so resisted, your argument had been
the better. Else let this go for good also.

Thousands of Jews believed not in the Messiah.

Ergo Gods promise made to Abraham and his sede was weak and Imperfect.

This is not only a weak argument but a wicked also. Let us proceed.

Sozom. lib. 3. cap. 10. The.401 Untruth For not the Popes infirmite, b^t the
st^bbornesse of the heretics was the Cause h^reof. E^seb. lib. 7. c^p. 30.
Niceph li. 6. cap. 39.
And therefore Julius the bishop of Rome, finding (401) his own infirmity
herein, wrote unto the Emperor Constans, and opened unto him the whole matter,
and ^esought him to write unto his brother Constantin^, that it might please
him to send the bis^oppes of the East to make answer to that, they had done
against Athanasius.

This was even now before alleged. It has before been answered unto. Yet
again I say the stubbornness of the Arrian bishop and the Arrian Emperor
Constantius caused the Pope thus to do. In like manner Paulus Samosatenus being
condemned by a great Council of bishops at sundry times and yet not obeying
thereunto, but continuing still in his bishopric, the matter was referred by
the bishops them selves to Aurelianus then Emperor being a heathen and
infidel. The extreme stubbornness of that heretic forced those bishops so to
do. Yet it is not therefore to be concluded that either bisshops ought not to
Judge upon heretics, or that the Prince especially being utterly an heathen
and infidel, ought to take that Judgment upon him. Again if the Pope at this
day use the secular Arm to the repressing of heresies, it is an argument of
the misery and wickedness of our time, it is no argument against the Popes
Supreme Authorite or Jurisdiction.

Conc. Constant. 5. Act. 1.

The 402. Untruth For the Popes Supremacy was known notwithstan^ing these
Co^plaintes. Niceph. lib. 17. cap. 2.


Even so the clergy of the City of Antioche in the like case of trouble and
spoil, wrote unto John the Patriarch of Constantinople, to entreat the
Emperor in their behalf. It appears hereby that this Infinite Authorite,
and Prerogative power over all the world, in those due (402) was not known.

This example is like the other, and concludes as well. Seuerus the Eutychian
heretic and bishop of Antioche, who defied the Council of Chalcedon, and had
therefore afterward his tongue cut out of his head by the Emperor Iustines
commandment, who had spoiled the Churches of Antioche, banished the bishops
and used much Villainy against the whole clergy, was for these excessive
outrages accused to a Synod assembled, and aid required against him with the
Emperors assistance and help, therefore the Pope had not then the Supreme
Jurisdiction. If such arguments may go for good, then because the french
bishops at the late Tridentime Council complained of their troubles and
spoils committed by heretics against their Churches, an^ required the
Council to entreat their Prince, that some redress might be had, the Pope at
this present lost his Jurisdiction etc. B^t the Ordinary suite in a quiet
state, and the extreme refuges of nec^^site are diverse. Again the redress of
temporal lostes, and spoil, and the decision of matters of Faith are two
things. In the one the temporal power and succor has ben^ sought. In the
other the Spiritual Jurisdiction has ever concluded.

The 403 Untruth This has not yet be^ee proved.

The.404. Untruth. Nothing hat^ be^ brought of the emperor Martian.


I think it hereby plainly, and sufficiently proved, first that the Bishopp of
Rome had no Authorite to receive Appeals from al parts of the world, and
that by the Councelles of Nice, of ^ele, and of Afrika: by S. Cyprian, and by
the Emperors Martian and Justinian.

It has appeared plainly and sufficiently, first that the B. of Rome had
Authorite to receive Appeals from al parts of the world, and that from the
greatest Patriarchs them selves, as from Athanasius of Alexandria, of S.
Chrysostom an^ Flauianus of Constantinople, and that by the Councelles of Nice
and of Sardica, by S. Cyprian, S. Gregory and S. Be^narde, by the Emperors
Justinian, Leo, and Theodo^ius, and that none but heretics, as Arrians,
Donatistes, and Pelagians repined at the same.

(...), o^ V^^ruthe mer^ Sla^^derous
Next that M Hardinge the better to fournish his matter, has notoriously
falsefied Chrysostoms w^rdes three times in one p^ace.

It appears that M. Jewel has notoriously slaundered D. Harding therein,
and that more then three times in one place.

The 405. Untruth: For Chrysostom m^de a ^uit Appeal.
Thirdely that Chrysostomes letter unto Innocentius contained matter of
complainte but no Appeal which thing is also proved by the very words and
tenor of the letter, by the bishopp off Romes own Confession, and by the
imperfection and weakness off their doings.

It has been proved by the very words and tenor off Chrysostomes letter, b^
the legacy sent from him to Rome, by the letters off his whole clergy, and of
forty bishops beside to the Pope, by the Synod holden of the Pope, about that
matter, Before in the lea^es. 85.8^* 87. and ^8.
by his legates sent to Constantinople, by the great means foul and fair
showed unto them, to win their consent, by the second letters of Chrysostom
to the Pope, and last of all by the final Sentence of Ex^^mmunication from the
Pope, not only to the bishops that had offended therein, but also to the
Emperor him self for bearinge them out, that Chrysostom made a Just and full
Appeal to the Pope, and that neither the bishop of Romes own Confession,
neither h^s doings do importe any Imperfection or weakness on his side, but
rather the contrary. And thus is appears M. Jewel has yet concluded
nothing against Appeals. Therefore he seeks yet other shifts, and says
yet farther.

The 407 Untruth This way of Co^promisse is but a Fable. In Ap^lo. 2. Athanas.
In d^de by way of compromisse, and agreement of the parties, matters were
sometimes brought to be heard, and ended by the bishopp of Rome, as also by
other bishops, but not by any ordinary process or court of law. And so it
appears this matter between Athanasius and the Arrians was first brought unto
Julius, for that the Arrians willing^ly desired him, for trial thereof to call
a Council. For thus Julius him self writes unto the bishops of the East,
as it is before al^eaged. If I had given advise unto (your messengers) Macarius
and H^^ych^^es, that they that had u^^en unto me, might be called to a
Council, and that inco^si^er^tion of our brethe^n, which complai^ed, they
suffie^ wrong, although ne^t^er of t^em had desired the same, yet had mine
a^uise ^en void of (...). But now seeing the same men, w^om you took to be
grave, and worthy of cre^it, have made (...) unto me, that I should call you,
verily, you should not take it in ill part. Hereby it is plain that Julius
took upon him to call those parties, The 408. For ^ulius cited t^ose parties,
and Athanasius both.

That Pope Julius I^dg^d not in the Cause off ^thanasius by way^ of ^o^promi^e
but by Authorite. Hist. tripa^t. lib. 4 Cap. 6.


not by any such universal Jurisdiction as M. Harding fansyeth, but only by
the consent and request of both parties.

If it had pleased M. Jewel to have uprightly and indifferently considered the
rest of this Epistle of Julius recorded in the works of Athanasius, of the
which he has here picked out a morsel for his own tothe, he should easily
have seen, but if partialite and faction have utterly blinded him, that this
Citation and Summon of the bishopps of the East to Rome, the Appearing of
Athanasius there, and the whole dealing of Julius the Pope therein, was not by
consent of both parties or by the way of Compromisse, as M. Jewel fan^yeth,
but even according to the law and by way of Authorite. It is evident (as we
^aue before declared out of the tripartit history) that the bishopps of the
East first accused Athanasius unto Pope Julius, desyring his Consent to his
deprivation and expulsion. The Pope thereupon Magnum Athanasium euocauit *
regulariter, (...). Nic^ph^li. 9. Cap. 6.
called forth, cited or summoned Athanasius the Great according to the Canons.
And commanded also the bishops his aduer^aries to appear at their answer.
Eusebius the ringleader and chief of them sent his legates to the Pope to have
the matter decided there though against his will, as Nicephorus records. But
he sone departing this life, the other Arrian bishops would not appear.
Julius the Pope in the mean restored Athanasius and Paulus with the other
banished bishopps, Sozom. li. 3. Cap. 8.
tanquam omnium curam gerens propter prop^iae sedis dignitat^m, as one that had
care of them all for the prerog^tiue of his own See, says the
Ecclesiastical history: He sent with all letters to the Arrian bishops
reproving them for their injuries committed against the Catholic bishops
Athanasius and other, as also that they had assembled a Council at Antioche
beside his advise. The bishops of the East exaspered herewithe, and perceauing
the Pope wholly bent to take their adversaries part, Socrat. li. 2. Cap. 15.
wrote again, sharp letters to the Pope, off the which M. Jewel has
alleged certain pieces, as Sad Authorites against the Popes Jurisdiction.
To this their sharp answer Julius the Pope makes reply in these letters, out
off the which the last words of M. Jewel are alleged. In the beginning he
writes with great humilite and submission, showing them indede that they them
selves had first moved him therein, wherefore they had less cause to grudge,
if he were earnest in the matter. But after all those so gentle and fair
words, which M. Jewel makes so much of, he writes that all that was spoken
only in respect of their quarelling and unjust complaints. For thus he says.
Let these be spoken to satisfy the quarelling and unjust complain^es of your
men against us. In epist. I^li^. In Apolog. 2. A^haa^si^.
After this prosecuting the whol^ matter off Athanasius and the other Catholic
bishops by them expelled, he declares that both they and Athanasius, had been
cited of him by his letters, by virtue of the which Athanasius appeared, but the
other would not. The Catholic and learned bishops did, the heretics and
Arrian bishops did not. Vos per li^eras Citauimus. Lib. 4. Cap. 6. hist. tripa.
In epist. I^ lij, vbi supra.
All which the ecclesiastical history in like manner records. At the end of
the epistle, the Pope expresselye tells them their duty, and what they ought
to have done, if Athanasius and the other bishops had been culpable and
faulty in deed. For thus he says. If, as you say, they had been faulty, you
ought to have done according to the Canon, and not after this facyon. You
ought to have written to all us, that so the right might have been tried of us
all. Was there no subjection now trow you M. Jewel dew off the East
bishops to the Sea of Rome? Was there not a Canon or decree that had so
appointed, that matters should be removed out of the East to Rome it self?
Let us yet go farther in this same Epistle. The Pope says farther to the
bishops of the East. Why would you not write unto us specially of the City
of Alexandria? Are you ignorant, that this is the custom, Vt pri^^ (...) nobis
scribatur, vt hinc quod iustum est, definiti posset.
that first of all you should write unto us, that from hence the right might be
determined. Therefore if you had had there any quarrel against any bishop, you
ought to have referred it hither to our Church. Now these men not putting us to
knowleadge, when they have done what them pleased, require us to approve their
damnation which we have not been made preuy unto, These are not the decrees of
Saint Paul. The Fathers have not so taught us. But this is a puffing pride and
a nouelty. I beseech you harken to me gladly. I write you these things for the
Common quiet. I signify unto you such things as we have received from the
blessed Apostle Peter, neither would have written to you these things, which
you know already, but that your doings had troubled us. I beseech you leave
these matters. Thus far Pope Julius in those letters to the bishops of the
East. In these words it appears that he cited them, that by order of law
and Custom they ought to refer their matters to him and his Church, that
there also a definition or determination ought to be sought for. After all this
these Arrians not obeying the great Council of Sardica was assembled, in the
which by three hundred bishops out of al parts of Christendom well nere, it
was pronounced against them, that because being Cited and called by the letters
of Julius they had not appeared, they declared them selves to be mere
slaunderers, and injurious oppressers of those Catholic bishops Athanasius and
other. These things considered, let us view, what token or show of
Compromisse may appear in this matter, as M. Jewel fansyeth, there was no
other thing in all this doing.

L. statutis. d. sentent. and breuicul. recit.
First Athanasius was cited to Rome, not having put up his matter thither, but
being accused by his adversaries, whereupon he appeared. In a compromisse or
arbitrament between dayesmen, no party can be cited, but they must appear
voluntarely.

L. inter stipul si. slichin. ff. d. verb. oblig.
Again Julius forced the bishops of the East to receive again Athanasius,
and restore him to his bishopric, with other, as appears in the tripartit
history. This was a Judgment by way of Athoritie not by way of comprimisse,
and forcing the adversary against his will, which in a Compromisse can not be,
as the law declareeh.

L. non di^ing.. no^ cegitur. ff. de recept. arb. and l. die^ proferre.. fi.
ibidem. L. 1. ff. d. Arbitr.
Thirdly because they appeared not to Julius cited, the Council pronounced
against them. But in a Compromisse the Arbiter can not punish, nor any other in
the Arbiters behalf. Therefore being condemned of the Council for not
appearing to Julius, declares that Julius was their Judge, not an Arbiter.

Last of all the Arbiter or Compromissary has no Jurisdiction. But the Judge
has. And such Julius challenged over them by virtue of a Cano^ and Custom of
the Church. Theefore Julius the Pope was their Judge not an Arbiter, and
dealed with them by way of Authorite and Judgment, not by way of Compromisse.

The 409. Untruth For not therefore that is not upon a Compromisse made, but
being accused, he cited him
And therefore Julius says. He caused Athanasius to be cited Regulariter that
is, according to order: for the order of judgment is, that a man be first
called, and then accused, and last of all condemned.

Lo M. Jewel confesses Athanasius was cited by order of Judgment, but in a
Compromisse no party can be cited, as has before been proved, and as the law
expressly teaches, therefore by M. Iewelles owde Confession this was no
Compromisse, or agreement of the parties. For such do meet together
voluntarely, not cited.

The.410 Untruth For he meaned so.
But he means nor thereby the order of Canons, as M. Harding expounds it.

Julius him self alleged a Canon therefore, as his words last alleged
declare. Therefore he means by the order of Canons. This also has before
been proved. It is nedelesse here to repete it.

The.411. Untruth as appears.
For touching Appeals to Rome there was no Canon yet provided.

Untruth. For in the Nicene Council such a Canon was provided, as it has
before been declared both out of the epistles of Julius, and of Leo, and also
by the testimony of Zosimus, who is now proved no Forger.



The.412. Untruth For his words to leo are certain testimonies of his
Judgment.
There is more to be answered then that Epistle M. Jewel, if you will defend
this untruth, as has abundantly before appeared.

Theodoretus was deposed, and banished, and cruelly entreated, as it appears
by his letters unto Renatus, and therefore the words that he uses, are rather
tokens of his miseries, and want of help, then certain testimonies of his
judgment. For every man is naturally inclined to extolle him, and to auaunce
his power, at whose hand he seeks help.

This is the third example of Appeal alleged by D. Harding. Theodoretus
Appealed to Pope leo.
The two other of Athanasius, and of Chrysostom, are now proved to have been
just and right appeals. To prove the like in Theodoretus that learned Father of
Christ's Church it is easy notwithstanding M. Iewelles gheasse to the
Contrary. His words in his own letters to Pope Leo be plain. And the whole
general Council of Chalcedon does witness this Restitution made upon his
Appeal. Thus he writeteth to Pope Leo, having first declared the injuries done
unto him etc. Behold after all this sweat and trauail, I am condemned being
not so much as accused. In epist. prefixa o^mentar. in Paulum.
But I look for the Sentence of your Apostolic See. And I beseech and require
your holiness to aid me in this case, Iustum vestrum and rectum Appellanti
Iudicium. Appealing to your right and just Judgment, and command me to come
before you, and to show that my doctrine and belefe follows your Apostolic
steps. In these words being condemned by Dioscorus the Patriarche of
Alexandria, and of the Patriarche also of Antioche Maximus, his own Ordinary,
yet he Appealeth expressly to Pope leo. And he says farther. Before all
things I beseech you I may know from you whether I ought to stand to this
wrongefull Judgment, or no. For I look for your Sentence. Si iudicatis me
stare iusseritis, stabo. And if you shall command me te Abide the judgment,
I will abide it, and never trouble man here about any more: but abide the just
Judgment of my God and Savior Christ Jesus. These words I trow declare
sufficiently, plainly and expressly that Theodoretus appealed to the Pope,
and rested upon his Final Sentence, as the Supreme Judge in earth. By this
Pope Leo he was restored to his bishopric, and set among other bishops in
the Council of Chalcedon, Act. 1. and Act. 8.
as in the Acts thereof it is evident. These are certain testimonies of his
Judgment, M. Jewel, and undoubted Arguments of his Appeal. What have you yet
more to say against Appeals? This practiced Authorite troubled much M. Jewel,
And therefore he labored long and many ways how to avoid it. His escapes
yet hitherto are found to be weak, insufficient and Untrue. Let us now
consider the remnant. The.413. Untruth For Ostiensis says not so, as M.
Jewel fancyeth Extrad. Appell in. Sexto. ^om. Eccles. in Glosa.

The.414 Untruth For by all law an Appeal imports a Superiorite.
Stapleto^. That Appeals do importe a Superiorite. L. q.. si. quis. ff. d.
Appellat.




But if it were granted, it was laufull then for the bishop of Rome to receive
all manner Appeals, in such order, as it is pretended, yet can not M. Hardinge
thereof necessarely conclude, that the Bishop of Rome was Head of the
Universal Church. For Ostiensis says. Appeals may be made not only from
the lower Judge unto the higher, but also from equal to equal. And in this
order, as it shall afterward be showed more at large, Donatus a Casis nigris,
was by the Emperor lawfully removed from the Bishop of Rome, to the bishop of
Arle in France. Ostiensis words be these. Non nocebit error, si appelletur ad
Maiorem quam debuerit, vel ad parem. The error shall not hurt, if the Appeal
be made either to a higher Judge then was mete, or to an equal. Where also it
is thus noted in the margin. Appellari potest ad parem si de hoc sit
consuetudo. Appeal may be made unto the equal, if there be a custom of it.
Hereby it is plain that the right of Appeal by fine force of law, concludes
not any necessary Superiorite, much less this infinite power over the whole
universal Church.

Well pleaded, and like a lawyer. But Like divinity, like law. For shame
understand your laws, better before you allege them, Or else follow the
Paynters Council Ne suitor vltra crepidam The words of the law upon which
Ostiensis groundeth, are these. Si quis ergo vel pare^, vel maiorem Iudicem
apellauerit, alium tamen pro alio, in ea causa est vt error ei non noceat sed
si minorem, nocebit. If any man therefore do Appeal to an equal Judge, or to
a higher then he should, as yet mistaking one for the other, the error shall
not hurt, but if he Appeal to an inferior Judge, it shall hurt. As in a
Case. John being cast by the Archedeacon, Appealed to the Archbishop, where as
he should first have appealed to the bishopp, as to a nerer Superior. But this
error does not hurt, because he appealed to a higher Judge. The same John
from the Archedeaco^ appealed to the Official of Canterbury, where as he
should have Appealed to the Judge of the Prerogative Court. This error
hurts not neither, because he Appealed to a Judge equal and off like
Authorite to that Judge to whom he ought to have Appealed. Therefore his
Appeal shall proceed before the Judge to whom he should have Appealed,
notwithstanding the error committed in meaning an other Judge, being his
equal. In the thierde Case John Appealed from his bishop to an other bishop,
where as he should have Appealed to the Archebishopp. In this case he loses
the benefyt of Appeal. Because he has appealed to a Judge, neither higher,
neither equal to that Judge to whom he ought to have Appealed, that is to the
Archbishop, butt to an inferior Judge. For the bishop to whom he Appealed,
though he be equal to the Judge who before had given the Sentence, yet he is
inferior to the Judge to whom the Appeal ought to be made. In this case
therefore the Appeal is void. The words therefore of Ostiensis and of the
gloss saying that the error hurts not when the Appeal is made to an equal
Judge, do not mean, The true meaning of Ostiensis his words.
a Judge equal to the party Appealing, or equal to the Judge from whom the
Appeal is made, but they mean a Judge equal to him to whom of right the
Appeal should have been made. It is therefore a manifest Untruth, contrary
to al law and reason that M. Jewel says. Appeals may be made not only
from the lower Judge to the higher but from equal to equal And to say that
Ostiensis or the law so says, it is a double Untruth. L. in p. ff. d.
Appellat.

L. ille quo. tempestinum. ff. ad Trebel. and L. nam magistrate. ff. de arb.
heart. L. 1. n. p ff. d. appellat L.. sic^^is d. appelat.


The law is plain to the Contrary both Civil and Canon. which is easy to be
proved. Appeals were admitted (says the law) to correct and amend the
iniquite, rigor or error of a former Judgment. But no Inferior or equal can
correct the Judgment of his superior or equal, because he has no rule over
such. Therefore no Inferior or equal can take an Appeal from his Superior
or equal. Again the learned lawyers define an Appeal thus. Appellatio est ius
quo interim primasententia extinguitur, and iterum causae cognitio ad Iudicem
superiorem deuoluitur. Appeal is a law by the which the former Sentence is
for the time made void, and the trial off the matter is removed to a
Superior Judge. So that the Superiorite of Judgment is off the very nature of
an Appeal. And therefore that every Appeal ought to be to a Superieur, it is
proved says Bartolus by infinite laws: And one law expressly says, L.
minor. magistr. ff. de. minori. gl. ibidem.
Minor magistratus contra sententiam maioris non restituet. The inferior Judge
or Magistrate shall not acquitte against the Sentence of an higher Judge. Nor
shall not sit upon any Appeal so made. And against al Appeals to equal
Judges the Authentikes speak expressly. The words are these. Cum non oportet
ad compares Iudices appellationes referri, In antent d. apell. et intr. que
temp illo col. 4.
sed a minore iudicio in maius tribunal ascendere.

Whereas Appeals may not be removed to equal Judges, but they ought allwaies
from an inferior Judgment, remove to a higher benche. Finally as certain a
principle it is in the law, that every Appeal is to a Superior, as it is in
divinity, that all that do swear, do swear by their letter, as the Apostle
says. Hebr. 6.
Therefore the Canon law admits Appeals but only to a Superior, where it
says. 29. q. 6. c. Omnis opp^essus etc. placuit.
Placuit vt si a quibuscunque ecclesiasticis iudicibus ad alios Iudices
ecclesiasticos, vbi est mayor Authoritas, prouocatum fuerit, audientia non
negetur. It has seemed good, that if Appeal be made from any ecclesiastical
Judge to other ecclesiastical Judges which be of a higher Authorite, that
Audience be given. This shifte therefore neither of Ostiensis and the gloss,
Neither of any other law Civil or Canon helping any whit against the Authorite
of Appeals: what other conuayaunce hith M. Jewel to dasel the Readers eyes
withal, or to blancke his evident and most assured Argument of the bishop of
Romes Supremacy over all bishops, as being one to whom all other, the chiefest
Patriarchs them selves have appealed? You see how many ways he had labored
against it, and what pains and trauail he has bestowed thereon, and yet has
brought no Argument, but such as if it were true, it was of no force, if it was
of force, it was not true. Lest al his labor therefore should be lost, he
dilateth yet the matter one way more and begins as if it were a fresh,
thus.

The.415 416. and 417. Untruths, as shall particulary appear.
But M. Harding might so have foreseen, that this his first principle of
Appeal would easily be turned against him ^^^fe. First for that it is well
known, that Appeals then even in the Ecclesiastical cause^ were made unto
the Emperors and civil Princes. Secondely for that the bishop of Rome
determined such cases of Appeal, by warrant, and Commission from the Emperor.
Thirdly for that matters being once heard, and determined by the bishop of
Rome, have been by Appeal from him removed further unto others.



The.418 Untruth For the contrary appears in S. Augustine Jewel.
As touching the first, that Appeals in Ecclesiastical causes were lawefully
made to the Prince, it is clear by Eusebius, by Socrates, by Nicephorus, and by
S. Augustine in sundry places.

Al these four Authors, are brought about one self matter. And that is this.

Donatus being condemned by three score and ten bishops in Africa, appealed
unto the Emperor Constantinus and was received.

Lectis literis, Constantinus pleno liuore respondit. In qua responsione et
eorum preces prodidit, dum ait. Petitis a me in s^culo iudicium, cum ego ipse
Christi Iudicium expectem. Et tamen dati sunt Iudices etc. The Supplications of
the Donatistes appealing from their own bishopps to the Emperor being read,
the Emperor answered in a great chafe, (in the which awnswer also he betrayed
their request) saying. You ask Judgment of me here in this world, which do
look for the Judgment of Christ my self. Yet he appointed them Judges. It
appears by this, Donatus with his fellows were received, as M. Jewel says,
but with what contentation of the Emperor they were received, and how well he
liked their dealing therein, it appears by his Answer.

Contra epist parm. lib. 1. cap. 5. Contra Crossed. lib. 3. ca. 71.
Parmenianus willingly suffered his fellows to go unto the Emperor
Constantinus. Again he says. Here I bring in the words off Constantine,
out of his own letters, wherein he confesses, that he heard the parties, and
found Coecilianus to be innocent.

This was done of Constantin as S. Augustine immediately after declares, quum
ad iudicium eius post episcopalia iudicia parts perductae fuerant, Stapleton
August. ibidem
when the parts were brought to his Judgment after the bishopps Judgment had
passed upon them. But how well he took that, and how he repented him after
thereof, it shall anon appear.

What, Contra epi. Parm. lib. 1. ca. 7.
is it not lawful for the Emperor or such as shall be sent by the Emperor,
to pronounce Sentence of Religion? Wherefore then came your Ambassadors to
the Emperor? And so Likewise again, If Emperors have nothing to command
in these cases, or if He speaks there of punishing heretics
this matter nothing touch a Christian Emperors charge, who then forced your
predecessors to remove Caecilianus matter unto the Emperor?

Aug. vbi supra.
quod eos Constantinus ad campum, id est, ad supplicium duei iussit, that
Constantin called them forth to the ca^pe, that is to punishment. He reasoned I
say against the Donatist, by his own doing. Not as allowing the Donatiste in
appealing to the Emperor, but as proving him unreasonable, which for their
vauntage would appeal to him, and then when he pronounced against them, and
badde them be punished, would strive and repine at his commandment, and say
he did them wrong, and ought not being a temporal prince to punish bishoops.
For in like manner when a Donatiste objected to S. Augustine, of one Felix a
Catholic bishop, saying. Non debuit Episcopus proconsulari iudicio purgari.
Augustine. epis. 162.
A bishop ought not to make his purgation before a temporal Magistrate, S.
Augustine in like manner answered, as he did here to Parmenianus. Si culpandus
est quem Iudex ter^enus absoluit, cum ipse sibi hoc non poscisset, quanto magis
culpandi sunt, qui terrenu^ regem, suae causae Iudicem esse voluerunt? If that
bishop Felix be to be blamed, because he was absolved of a temporal Judge,
whereas he him self sought not so to be absolved or examined, how much more
are they to be blamed, which desired them selves the temporal Prince to be
Judge in their Cause? In both these places S. Augustine confuteth the
Donatistes by their own doings, which is a kind of answer quoad hominem
sufficient. The App^^^^ of (...) is to the Emperor mislyked.
But how in deed both the Emperor liked that Appealing of the Donatistes to
him, and what S. Augustine him self has judged thereof, it shall now
shortly appear. That the Donatistes Appealed M. Jewel has proved. And it is
not denied. But how well they did in it, he says nothing. Behold therefore
gentle Reader how well it was liked, and Judge thereby what a grounded example
M. Jewel has brought to build this Principle upon, that Appeals in
ecclesiastical causes were made to Emperors and Civil Princes. Optatus
writes thereof thus. Optatus lib. 1. contr. Parmenianum.
Donatus appellandum esse ab Episcopis credidit, and reliqua. Ad quam
Appellationem Constantinus Imperator sic respondit. O rabida furoris audacia.
Sicut in causis gentilium fieri solet appellationem interposuerunt. Donatus
thought good to Appeal from the bishops and so forth. Unto the which Appeal
the Emperor answered thus. O desperate rage and fury. As in the suites of
heathen and Pagans, so these men put up their Appeal. So well the Emperor
liked their doing therein how well S. Augustine liked it, and how well the
Emperor received the Appeal of those unruly and furious Donatistes, it shall
now appear by his own words, which I beseech thee, gentle Reader,
diligently to consider and bear away. These are his words. Dedit ille aliud
Arelatense iudicium aliorum scilicet episcoporum, non quia iam necesse erat,
August. epist. 162.
sed eorum peru^rsitatibus cedens, and omnimodo cupiens tantam impudentiam
cohibere. Neque enim ausus est Christianus Imperator sic eorum tumultuosas and
fallaces querelas suscipere, vt de iudicio Episcoporum qui Romae sed^rant ipse
iudicaret, sed alios, vt dixi, Episcoposdedit a quibus tamen illi ad ipsum
ru^sum Imperatorem prouocare maluerunt. Qua in re illos quemadmodum detestetur
audistis: Atque vtinam saltem ipsius iudicio insanissimis animositatibus suis
finem posuissent, atque vt eis ipse cessit, (vt de illa causa post episcopos
iudicaret, a sanctis Antistibus postea veniam petiturus, tamen illi quod
vlterius dicerent non haberent, si eius sententiae non obtemperarent ad quem
ipsi prouocauerunt) sic and illi aliquando cederent veritati. Constantin the
Emperor (says S. Augustine) gave to the Donatistes (after they had been ones
cast by Meltiades the Pope with other bishops) an other Judgment at Arles in
France, of other bishops: Not because it was now needful, but because he
yielded to their stubbornness, and desired by all means possible to overcome
their outragyousnesse. For that Christian Emperor durst not so to admit
their seditious and feigned complaints, that he would him self sit Judge upon
the Sentence of those bishops which had decided and determined the matter at
Rome, but he appointed them as I said, other bishops: From whom yet ones
again these fellows Appealed to the Emperor him self. Wherein how he
detested them, you have In the words ^f Epitatus last alleged.
heard. And would God that upon Judgment and determination, they had ones
ended their most outrageous stubbornness, and as he yielded unto them (so far
that he took upon him to Judge of that Matter after the Bishops, minding yet to
ask pardon thereof of the holy bishops, so that at length yet they might have
no more to say, if they would not yield to his Sentence, to who^ they had
themselves Appealed) as he I say yielded to them, so they would ones to the
Truth. Thus far that holy and learned Father S. Augustine. In whose words I
answer to you and to your whole Argument M. Jewel thus. Would God M. Jewel
(and from the bottom of my heart I wish it) that as that good and virtuous
Emperor Constantin the great, yielded so far to those outragyous unruly, and
furious Donatistes, that being condemned in their own Country by three score
ad ten bishops he gave them yet (appealing to him beside all law and order
of the Church) two other Judgments of bishops one in Italy an other in
France) which last was more then need as S. Augustine expressly says) only
to stop, if it were possible, their outragions clamours and seditious
complaints, as he at the lenght was content to hear their matter him self,
after the Judgment of so many bishops, whereof he would afterward ask them
pardon, as having in deed passed therein the bounds of his Jurisdiction, as
this good Emperor I say did all this, not as by lawful Authoryte, but as
yelding to the Donatistes unruly appetit, so that you also M. Jewel would
ones yield to the Truth, that you would no more bring this and such like
examples (deceived herein undoubtedly by the writers of Germany especially
those of Magdeburge) for the Authorite of Civil Princes in Causes
ecclesiastical, whereas by the clear verdit of S. Ambrose neither by practice
of the Church, Ambros. lib. 5. Epist. 32.
neither by the doctrine of holy Scriptures, Emperors did ever Judge over
bishops in matters of the Faith. And thus I leave your example of Donatus,
whose example beside ca^ make no law, he being an heretic, and for
mayntenaunce of his heresy seeking all help and succor, by right and by
wrong, by order and beside order, by means good and badde. Now to that which
follows.

the East that had been in the Counsel of Tyrus, to appear before him, and to
render account of their doings. His words be these. I will you to make your
appearaunce, and to show in deed how sincerely and justly ye have delte, and
that even before me.



The 419. Untruth For by these examples such Jurisdiction in the Prince
appears not.
By these few examples it may well appear that Appeals in ecclesiastical
causes in these days were made unto the Prince, and that it was thought
lawefull then for the Prince to have the hearing of the same. Yet was not the
Prince therefore the head of the Universal Church.

Your examples have been but two. And both of one Emperor and Prince
Constantin by name. And with what conscience he took upon him to Judge of
matters decided before by bishops, you have heard S. Augustine tell you M.
Jewel. He did the first to pacify those outregious Donatistes, and ^he asked
pardon thereof afterward of the bishops. He did the latter to pacify
likewise the Arrians, and in a matter not mere ecclesiastical, as has before
been declared. Of the Issue whereof he repented him at lenght also. These be
your examples M. Jewel that in the time of so many Christen Emperors and
Princes you have chosen out as most worthy and especial. One more you recite
even after your Conclusion made, which is this.

Brunichi^da the French Queen, Notwithstanding it be noted thus in the gloss.
Fuit tamen (...) nim^^m papaliter disp^nsatum.

S. Gregory committed a Spiritual Matter to the Queen of France. Ergo Appeals
may be made to the lay Prince. Thus M. Iewelles reason proceeds. But does not
the Contrary directly Conclude? The Pope committed a Spiritual matter to the
lay Prince. Ergo the lay Prince was but the Popes Commissioner. Verily the
Commissioner is ever Inferior to him that gives forth the Commission. And
thus M. Iewelles reason ronneth roundely against him. As touching this
Commission S. Gregory had a reason for his so doing. But what his mind was for
any Appeal to be made to Civil Princes in Ecclesiastical matters, or for
their intermedling there withal, it may appear well both by the universal
Supremacy that he practiced over all Christendom, as has before been
declared, and also by these words of his to Mauritius the Emperor.
Sacerdotibus autem non extrema potestate dominus noster citius indignetur, Lib.
4. epist. 21. In the Fortress fol. 145. Ang. epist. 166. Greg orat. ad
subl^tim. Ambros. lib. 5. epist. 32.
sed excellenti consideratione propter eum cuius serui sunt eis ita dominetur,
vt etiam debitam reuerentian impendat. Let not my Sovereign for his worldly
power conceive quick Indignation against the priests, but by a worthy and
Princely consideration, for his sake, whose servants they are, let him se
rule over them, that yet he yield them also dew and Bounden Reverence. Of this
matter, how in Spiritual causes the Christian Princes are subject to their
spiritual Pastors and bisshoppes, I have otherwhere out of S. Augustine, S.
Ambrose and Gregory Nazianzen, ye out of Calvin him self and the right or
Zealous Luthera^s of Germany, Illyricus and his fellows declared. But because M.
Jewel puts it here for a principale that Princes received Appeals in
Causes ecclesiastical, and all his examples have failed him, let us consider
what may be farther yet brought to the Contrary. Athanasius that learned Father
says of the Arrians. Apolog. 2.
Qua front comentum Synodi appellare audent, Cui Comes praecedit. How dare
they call that an assembly of a Synod, where the Princes Officier was
president? Epist. ad so litariam vitam agentes.
And in an other place he says. Quando a condito aeuo auditu^ est quod
iudi^ium Ecclesiae authoritatem suam ab Imperatore accepit, aut quando hoc pro
iudicio agnitum est? When was it ever heard that an Ecclesiastical Judgment
took his Authorite of the Emperor? Or when was that taken for any Judgment.
Behold M. Jewel how contrary this is to your Appeals to Civil Princes in
Causes ecclesiastical. Yet behold an other. The Fathers of the Millenitane
Council in Africa whose Authorite so often and so gredely you have alleged,
decreed in this sort. Council. Mill^nit. Cap. 19.
Placuit vt quicunque ab Imperrtore cognitionem Iudiciorum publicorum petierit,
honor proprio priuetur. Si autem Episcopale iudicium ab Imperatore
postulauerit, nihil ei obsit. It has seemed good unto us, that if any sue to
the Emperor to have him hear and determine public Judgments, that he be
deprived therefore of his dignite. But if he require of the Emperor a
Judgment of bishopps, it shalll not hurt him. Semblably to these holy
Fathers, the bishops in the Counsel of Aquileia dealed. For whereas Palsadius
the heretic required the lay men of worship to come in to the Council, and
to hear the matters debated, saying. Sunt hic honorati multi. Here be many men
of worship, Ingesiis Conc. Aquil^iensis. tom. 1. Council. fol. 402.
S. Ambrose one of the learned bishops of that Council said. Sacerdotes de
laicis iudicare debent, non laici de sacerdotibus. Priests ought to Judge of
the lay, not the lay of the Priests. And because that heretic Palladius
persisted yet in his request, that the lay men off worship should enter and
be a part of the Council, S. Ambrose without any farther busynes, pronounced
out of hand the Sentence against him (which the whole Council followed) in
these words. Though Palladius has been taken in many faults, yet this m^k^th
us ashamed that he which goes for a Priest, should seem to be condemned of
the lay? And therefore because even for this point he is to be condemn^d,
that looks for the Judgment or S^ntence of the Lay men, whereas rather
Priests ought to Judge over the Lay, according to those things as we have
heard this day Palladius to speak, and for other things which he would
not revoke, I pronounce him unworthy of priesthood, and to be deposed, and that
some Catholic man be Ordered in his place. Thus the learned and godly Fathers in
those days dealed with such which would from bishops appeal to the Civil
magistrate. In like manner Dioscorus the Eutychian required in the Chalcedon
Council, to have the temporal magistrate to be a part of the Council at
their Examinations. but Cecropius a Catholic bishop answered him for the
Council in these words: Quando quaedam regularia examinatur, neque Iudices
neque alios aliquos laicos interesse oportet, nisi tantummodo tuam sanctitatem
que in propria persona accusatur. When any things touching the Canons are
examined, neither Judges neither any other of the lay ought to be present, but
only your holiness, whose proper person is here accused. Thus in matter mere
ecclesiastical the Godly Fathers and Catholic bishops of those days admitted
not at any time the lay Prince or Magistrate to the hearing and determining
thereof. Only heretics, the donatistes, the Arrians, the Eutichians and such
like have so done. Beware M. Jewel left in defending this your absurd
Principle so just concurring with the humor off old heretics, and so
directly repugnant to the Catholic and learned Fathers, S. Augustine, S.
Ambrose, Athanasius, S. Gregory, and the Fathers of the Councelles of
Millenitum, of Aquileia, and of Chalcedon, you prove your self to be of a
cousynage to the one, and no true child off the other. Thus much of your first
principle. Now to your second.

The 420 Vnttruthe Capitain, Infamous and Notorious. Hi^t. trip. lib. 4.
Niceph. li. cap.
As touching the Bishopp of Romes power herein, it is certain, he heard such
matters of Appeal by warrant of the Emperors Commission, and not as having
Authorite of him self.

This is certainly a lewd and a loud lie. Athanasius, Paulus Asclepas,
Marcellus, Lucius and diverse other godly bishops Appealed to Julius the bishop
of Rome, and yet had al of them the Emperor Constantius expressly against
them, Chrysostom appealed to Innocentius the Pope, and yet had Arcadius then
Emperor directly against him, so that the Pope was driven at the length to
excommunicat that Emperor. Flauianus an other Patriarche of Constantinople
appealed to Pope Leo, though Theodosius took the part of Dioscorus his
adversary. Theodoretus in like manner to the same Pope appealed, though the
Emperor of the East vpholded the faction of Dioscorus and Maximus of Antioche
by whom that learned Father was injured. Leo epist. 24. et valentin. in epist.
ad Theodos. In epist. ad Leonem. Liberatus Cap. 18.
John Talaida the Patriarch of Alexandria being removed from his bishopric by
Zeno the Emperor, and Petrus Moggus intruded in his place Romanum Pontificem
Simplicium appellauit, sicut and beatus fecit Athanasius, ppealed unto
Simplicius bishop of Rome, as his predecessor blessed Athanasius had done
before him says Liberatus. These many therefore of the greatest Patriarchs
and of right learned Fathers Athanasius, S. Chrysostom, and Theodoretus
appealing all to the bishop of Rome not only beside the Emperors warrant, but
even directly against the Emperors will and pleasure: how can M. Iewelles
principle possibly be true, that bishops of Rome heard such matters of Appeal
by warrant of the Emperors Commission? Yet let us behold his proufes.

But should not the bishop of Rome Meltiades etc.

Vna hirundo non facit ver, so one example makes no law. Again all that being
done only to satisfy and quiet, if it were possible, the most outrageous and
harebrayne stomaches of the Donatistes, only Bono Pacis, for the love and Zeal
of Unite of that godly and zealous Emperor Constantin, it must not be drawn to
make a general rule and Principle, but with such as will take president of
heretics doings. If you do so M. Jewel, I can but wish you a better mind.
Verily the examples of Catholic bishops above named, so many, so learned, of
such great Authorite in the Church of Christ, which practiced the Contrary,
which appealed to the bishops of Rome not only beside the warrant, but even
against the Emperors will and pleasure: may and ought with much more reason
serve to build a contrary rule and Principle upon. Yet you upon this Only
beggarly example of that Outrageous heretic so much misliked of the Emperor
him self, of the learned Fathers Optatus and S. Augustine, and of all the
Posterite sense, as the like thereof has not been Practiced but by heretics
and schismatikes, conclude solemnly and say.

The.421 Untruth past all shame and honesty. Stapleto^.
Here is evident to be seen that bishopp of Rome was the Emperors delegate, and
in Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction had his Authorite, not from S. Peter, but from
the Emperor.

With what face speak you this M. Jewel, or speak you it with any Face at
all? How would you Conclude and Triu^phe if you had copy of examples, and
that of Catholic bishops, yea and the most learned Fathers of Christ's Church
(such as I have brought you to the contrary) which do so mightily conclude and
so royally triumph, of One wretched example, done by One desperate Heretic,
myslyked by the Emperor him self, and by other godly Fathers beside, Optatus
and S. Augustine by name? But bold affeueration makes no proof. And you know
M. Jewel, great vessels be not always full: but the emptyer they be, the
more they sou^de. The wise and discrete Reader will be weighed with Reason, and
not with talk. And it must sone be concluded, that can but lightly be proved.
Your Report of Pope Clemens, because you speak it without book, only upon
Report, I let pass. Eadem facilitate negatur, qua asseritur.

The.422 Untruth. For that was never laweful^.
but that it was lawful then for the party grieved, to refuse his Judgment,
and to Appeal further.



The.423 Untruth. For not therefore j. not because it was lawful, donatus his
Appeal was admitted.
And therefore Donatus being condemned before Meltiades appealed from him, and
upon his complainte unto the Emperor, was put over unto the bishop off Arle in
France, and to certain others. And in Conclusion, understanding, that
judgment there would pass against him, last of all he appealed to the
Emperors own person. And the Emperor him self confesses by his letters
that he sat in Judgment and heard both parties.

Rabidamfurioris Audaciam. A desperate Rage and Fury. M. Jewel calls it a
Lawful Appeal. Optatus lib. 1.
After the bishop of Romes Judgment, the Emperor granted to Donatus yet an
other, S. Angustin says. Non quia iam nec^sse erat, August. epist. ^6^.
sed eorum peruersitatibus cedens and omnimodo cupiens tantam impudentiam
cohibere. Not because that was needful, but because that the good Emperor
yielded to their extreme frowardness, and desired by all means to overcome
their passing outragyousnesse. M. Jewel builds upon this fact a Principle
that all men might lawfully Appeal from the Pope to the Emperor. Constantin
satt in Judgment, and heard both parties him self. S. Augustine says A
Sa^ctis Antistibus postea veniam petiturus, Minding to ask pardon therefore
afterward of the holy bishops. M. Jewel says it was well and Lawfully done,
and so it should be. And this is he forsooth, which will yield to any One
Sentence of any One Father or Doctor, in a number of Articles, O M. Jewel. If
you mean plainly, if you will in deed yield to the Fathers, why make you a
ground of Doctrine upon such a fact as by their Judgment is so detested and
abhorred? You offered your Reader a Feast of three fair dishes. But all is
moved to a Calves tongue, diversely dreste. All is the desperate fact of one
outragyous heretic. Your Art is good. But Alas you w^nte Matter, For behold,
Of so weak proof, what a strong Conclusion you make.

The 424 Untruth Facing. and extreme Impudent.
Now if receiving Appeals necessarely importe this Universal Power, then was
the Emperors power Universal. For he received All appeals, out of all
Countres without exception, and that even in Causes ecclesiastical.

Lo. Of one desperate fact, Of One Rabida furoris Audacia, One presumptuous
fury, M. Jewel concludes All Appeals out of all Countres without exception.
I can say no more. But a whetston, a whetston for you.

The.425 Untruth As before.
Again, then was the bishop of Romes power not Universal, for it was lawful
then to refuse him, and to Appeal to some other.

Lose nothing I pray you, Conclude apase and as mightily as you can. What M,
Jewel? Think you to outface us with ioyly bragges and great vauntes, as if
ye were playing at post, and should win all by vyeing? No M. Jewel. You
may not so dor us. Jewel. page 302.
Your single sold fact of One desperate heretic, may not conclude a
Threefolde Principle and an Universal Proof for all Catholics to follow. If
you like such presidents, follow them. we like them not, we defye them. They
are the enemies of Gods peace, the Cancre of Christen common welthes, the
poison of our souls. We have better presidents, learned Fathers, Catholic
bishops and holy Councels to follow both in making Appeals to Rome, and in
refusing of all Appeals to the Civil magistrate, as it has in this Conflict
at large been proved, Now you make an end.

The 426 Untruth Slaund.
And this M. Hardinges reasons run roundely against him.

Thus M. Iewelles proufes have all failed him. His threefolde Assault in
Conclusion has proved but single sold.

Hitherto of Appeals from the chiefest Patriarchs of the world to the Sea of
Rome, whereby the Superiorite and Primacy of that See over all Churches is
vnuincibly proved. All that M. Jewel could possibly devise to say against
it, is answered, I trust, sufficiently. God grant my small labor may edifye,
and help to bring us to the dew Obedience of Christ's vicair here on earth,
without the which we shall never see end of heresies, schisms, and dissension.

The special grace and singular privilege (of the Church of Rome never to
fail in the faith) is to be imputed unto the prayer of Christ, by which he
obtained of God for Peter and his successors (108) that their faith should
not fail.

The.427 Untruth Slaund.
The.108. Untruth. For many Popes have erred faith as shall appear.

Then it behooves us to answer to the reasons, and arguments, by which you
will persuade that it will so appear. First you allege three places out of
the prophets, wickedly and notoriously wrested and wrethed, as it has before
been declared in the 105. Untruth, where you draw us to this common place of
holy scriptures by you wrested and wrethed from their due and right meaning.
And truly to this purpose they make nothing: Unless M. Jewel will frame his
reasons after this sort. Micheas said that the priests and Prophets being
wicked rested them selves upon the Lord. Hieremy says of the priests and of
the elders that they had a confidence in their Council and law as though it
should never fail. Item Micheas again says, that the priests of the Jews
should have night and darkness instead of their visions and prophecies. Ergo
many Popes have erred in the faith. Who ever made any such arguments in any
schole? what, will M. Jewel make folcke believe that Micheas and Hieremy the
prophets have written in their prophecies that many Popes have erred in the
says? page 6.
Or does M. Jewel think that these reasons must be taken because he speaks
the word? But he will say. Micheas an hieremy do tell us that the priests
did amiss, and yet craked that they could not be deceived. We deny it not.
But did they speak any thing of the Popes of Rome, did they testify so long
before that they should err in the faith? why may we not think rather that
Micheas rebuked the proud priests, and foretold of the fall of their
Synagoge, and of their blindness they should be in at the coming of the
Messiah. And that Hieremy rebuked their vices, not their belefe, Hierem. 18.
their conspiracy to destroy him (as he did in deed) not any Council of
theirs touching the observation of Moses laws? Thus M. Jewel wresteth and
wretheth holy Scripture at his preasure.

It is certain that the pope may err. And Alphonsus says. Every man may
err in the faith, yea although it be the Pope.

In what sense it is avouched, that the Pope can not err.
that the Pope may err and has erred both in faith and in manners, touching
his own private person. But the thing which is here avouched by D. Harding and
which is by us defended, is that the Pope as the Head of the Church can never
err, that is, he can never decree any thing erroneous or contrary to the
faith, he can never deliver any false doctrine to the Church contrary to the
faith. You know M. Jewel by the debating of this controversy among the
learned of this age, as well on your side, as among the Catholics, this to be
the State of the question. For so the faith of Peter was prayed for not only
for the person of Peter (in whom it was very weak, when he denied Christ, even
after that prayer made) but for the whole Church committed to Peter. This is
the State of the question. Now to your Proufes.

Alphonsus de Castro says. It is certain that Liberius was an Arrian. Iew^ll.
C^n^r. haer. li. 1. cap. 4. Stapleton. Lib. 2. cap. 17.

In epist. ad solitariam vitam age^tes.




By Theodoretus and Athanasius better Authors then is Alphonsus, it is certain
he was banished two years for not yelding to the Arrians and resisted also the
Emperor Constantius face to face in defense of the Catholic faith, against
the Arrian heresy. Of h^s yelding afterward though Athanasius do mention, yet
he excuses him expressly for no Arrrian. And certain it is he never decreed
for the Arrian heresy.

Council. Constant. 6. Act. 13.
off the sect of them which were called Monothelite, condemned for the same in
the sixth Council holden at Constantinople.

ben the manner of the grecians to feign writings of Popes off Rome, or to
corrupt the^ with heresies, it appears well by the complainte off Pope Nicolas
the first in his Tom. 1. Conc. fol. 748.
epistle to Michael the Emperor, of In praefat.
Athanasius in the 8. Synod. of Epist. 82.
leo the first in his letters to the bishopp of Palestina, and in Lib. 5.
Epist. 14.
S. Gregory. in his letters to Narses. But an invincible argument that Honorius
the Pope was no heretic nor condemned in that Council, are the words of
Agatho the Pope, whose legates were president at that Council, the words I
say off his epistle sent to the Council, and read in the Council, where he
has these words. Action. 4
Hec est verae fidei regula, quam and in prosperis and aduersis viuaciter
tenuit Apostolica Christi ecclesia, que per Dei gratiam a tramite Apostolicae
traditionis nunquam errasse probabitur nec hereticis nouitatibus deprauata
succubuit, quia dictum est Petro. L^cae. 22.
Ego pro te rogaui vt non deficiat fides tua: and tu aliquando conuersus
confirma fratres tuos. Hic dominus fidem Petri non defuturam promisit, and
confirmare eum fratres suos admonuit, quod Apostolicos pontifices meae
exiguitatis predecessores confidenter fecisse semper cunctis est cognitum.

This is the rule of the right faith, which the Apostolic Church of Christ
has earnestly defended both in prosperity and in aduersite, which also by the
grace of God shall never be found to straie from the pathe of Apostolic
tradition, neither has yet yielded to heretical novelties. Because it was
said to Peter. Lucae. 22.
I have prayed for thee Peter, that thy faith shall not fail. And thou being
sometime converted Confirm they brethren. Here our lord has promised that
the faith of Peter should not fail, and our Lord here commanded him to
confirm his brethren. Which the Apostolic bishops my predecessors to have
allwaies earnestly done, it is known to all men. Thus Far Agatho the Pope in
that epistle sent to the Sixth general Council, read in that Council, and
allowed by their commom consent all crying, in ea per Agathonem Petrum loqui,
that Peter speak in that letter by the mouth of Agatho. Now how is it
possible that Honorius the Pope who lived not three score years before that
time, Actor. 4.
should there presently have been condemned for an heretic, and yet the
epistle of Agatho then Pope, auouching constantly that none of his
predecessors ever were heretics, be allowed for Catholic. Therefore
undoubtedly either that Council is now corrupted, as the fifte general
Council was by heretics, or else Honorius was condemned not as Pope, nor as
decreeing and defending that heresy by public authorite, but as holding that
heretical opinion by him self, and as uttering the same in his letters to
Sergius of Constantinople. And then Honorius was in deed condemned there for an
heretic, but not the Pope: Else Pope Agatho had most impude^tly abused the
Council, and the Council no less wickedly dissembled his falsehood, when both
he avouched that none of his predecessors had been heretics, and that his
auouching the Council allowed. Hereunto may be added that Photius the bishop of
Constantinople, writing of the seven general Councelles, and reakoning up all that were in those Councelles condemned, makes no mention at all of this
Honorius Pope off Rome. In epist. ad Michaelem Bulgariae principem.
And thus far it appears that the example of Honorius does nothing weaken
the prayer off Christ, praying for Peter's faith never to fail, either in him
or his successors.



said to have erred in the faith, or to have lost his degree of Apostleship
because for fear of death he denied Christ, and by penance recovered again,
so neither can Marcellius be said to have erred in the faith or to have
corrupted the succession of Christ's Vicaires, seeing he repented of his
wickedness and suffered afterward Martyrdom in that cause. But such is the
good will of M. Jewel to the Sea of Rome, from which we englishmen received
our first faith and baptism, that he omitteth no one Pope that did amiss,
that so he may disgrace that succession. And truly if such exceptions may be
heard, M. Jewel may prove that S. Peter also lost his Apostleship, and erred
in the faith.

middot; The.428 Untruth Slanderous.
Pope John the.22. held a wicked heresy against the immortalite of the soul.

Melchior Canus lib. 6. de locis co^. cap. 8. Benedictus 11. in sua extrauag.
This opinion was holden of diverse learned men, as of Ireneus, Chrysostom and S.
Bernarde before the matter was defined to the contrary, and yet were not
accounted therefore heretics. Neither did Pope John ever decree that matter,
but before he could bring it to pass, was prevented by death. But if that
opinion M. Jewel be a wicked heresy touching the immortalite of the soul, how
many your brethern do preach at this day a wicked heresy in our country, while
they preach openly that the soul slepeth until the day off general
Judgment. That is a wicked heresy in deed M. Jewel, not of Pope John, but of
Protestant preachers.

^ewell.
Pope Syluester the.2. was a sorcerer, and had familiar conference with the
Devil, and by his procurement was made Pope.

De Missa angulari and unction sacerdotali reports it. And will you pronounce
Luther an heretic? Truly if you will say with your Saramentary brethern off
Zurich, you must not only pronounce him an heretic, but also an Archeheretike,
yea and say also that the Devil spoke in Luther. For so they say and write
to. Platina in Siluestro. 2
Touching Syluester as he was a naughty man, so he repented at the end. It is
written off him that in his last will he commanded his body to be laid in a
Coche and to be buried there, where so ever the horses should carye it:
beseching God thereby to show some sign thereby off his state after this
life. It was so done as he willed. The horses of their own accord carried his
body in to the great Church off S. John Lateran, where it lies buried at this
Day, as his toumbe there yet to be seen witnesses. And the Author hereof
Platina, is of a good credit as Holcot the schooleman whom M. Jewel alleges.

The 439. Untruth Slaund.
and therefore was foresaken of his clergy.

weighty proufes, and not so hunte like a wanton Spanyel, and range at riot,
and beat up butterflies.

The 430 Untruth For priests marriages have allwaies been forebidden in
Christ's Church.
Pope H^ldebrande that first of all others in these countries forebadde the
lawful marriages of priests etc.

I think it be natural for M. Jewel allwaies to report things v^truly. As
for marriage of priests, being priesstes and after holy orders taken, it was
never laufull neither before Hildebrandes time neither sithons in the Church
of Christ. You should have made that one of your Articles M. Jewel, and so
have tried what could have been said therein. Now for you to drop lies by
the way, and to say so only, it shall be enoughe to answer you with saying
the contrary, and by the way to note you a liar. Howbeit what may be said
herein I have somewhat touched otherwhere. But what was this Pope Hildebrande?
M. Jewel says.

The.431. Untruth There was n^ such Council holden.

The 432. Untruth Cancred and Slanderous


Both for his life and also for his Religion he is set out at large in a (431.)
Council holden at Brixia, where he is called and published to the world, to
be a vicious man, a burner of houses, a Robber of Churches, a maintainer of
murders and periuries, an (432.) heretic against the Apostolic doctrine, the
old disciple of Berengarius.

Then M. Jewel is an heretic against the Apostolic doctrine for he is a
disciple of Berengarius, and defends stoutely the opinion of Berengarius in
this his Reply, the fifte Article.

The.433 Untruth Slaund.
A Sorcerer, a Necromancer, a man possessed with the devil, and therefore out of
the Catholic faith.

This Council of Brixia that M. Jewel alleges, is not to be found in the
tomes of the Councelles. It was a conue^ticle of some such as he is him self,
conspyring against the Pope to flatter the Emperor. Platina in Greg. 7.
Truly this Hildebrande is described of Platina to be a man of great virtue and
wisdom. He was chosen Pope by the consent of all good men. He resisted
stoutely the wicked attemptes of Harry the fourth Emperor. He drew the
clergy of Germany especially of Ments from their concubines and Harlots. For
these causes he was much hated and much evil spoken of by such as were naught
them selves, and flattered the evil Emperor. Who yet notwithstanding at the
lenght repenting his former wickedness humbled him self to this Pope, and was
by him absolved. As for heresy or any such cancred matter as M. Jewel has
here heaped up, no approved Author charge him withal.



S. Bernarde when he declaimeth against the vices of Rome: but when he calls
the Pope for power Peter, fol. 420. he calls S. Gregory an obscure and late
doctor.
for his annoynting Christ the pastor of all pastors, and one to whom alone
the whole flocke^s is committed, then he is Bernard the Abbat. Likewise S.
Gregory, when he rebukes the proud title of Universal bishop in John of
Constantinople, then he is holy S. Gregory. But when he writes of Saints
lives, and of purgatory, then he is Father Gregory the dreamer. So Origin must
be Old Father Origin when he speaks for M. Jew. but when he speaks for the
Catholic faith, The 434 Untruth For the bishop of Rome says not those
words.
then Origin has many errors and heresies. And thus M. Jewel makes Fathers
and Saints, when and whom it pleases him.

And the Bishop of Rome him self says. Notwithstanding the Pope (...)
innumerable comp^ines of people by heaps with him in to hell, yet let no
mortal m^n once dare to rep^oue him, unless it be found that he straye from
the faith.

This is a flat lie. The Bishop of Rome says no such thing. They are
not the words of the Pope. M. Jewel thinks what so ever is written in the
lying libell of one of his brethren entitled. The Protestation off the Pope.
That it is cock sure, and undoubtedly true. But if M. Jewel had loved the
truth, and tendered his readers Instruction, he would have looked to the
original and have seen the words both whose they were, and what they were.
The words that M. Jewel alleges are in the decrees, and in the place by him
noted. But they are there reported to be the words not of any Bishop of Rome,
but of Bonifacius the Martyr. And the words do not say (as M. Jewel
reports them) Let no mortal man once dare to reprove him, Did. 40. Si Papa.
but: huius culpas istic redarguere praesumit mortalium nullus. No mortal men
does presume to ^eproue his faults here. declaring thereby rather the
obedience of Christen people toward their Superior, then commanding all
Christen people to hold their peace. And the reason follows. Because he must
Judge all men, but he is not to be judged off any. Which saying of that holy
Martyr, if it seem to M. Jewel over proud or unjust, he may remember that
the whole Council of 3000. bishops in Sinuessa in the year of our
Lord.300. presumed not to condemn Marcellius the pope having sacrificed to
Idolles, and being convicted thereof by the Testimony of.72. witnesses, but
after he had condemned him self before them all, Tom. 1. Council. in condemnat
Marcellini.
they confirmed it and said. I uste ore suo condemnatus est. Nemo enim vnquam
iudicauit Pontificem nec Praesul Sacerdotem suum: quoniam prima seeds non
iudicabitur a quoquam. He is condemned justly by his own mouth. For no man at
any time judged the bishop, nor the bishop his (high) priest. For the
chief See shall be judged of no man. Now where Bonifacius says that he may
not be reproved unless he be found to straye from the faith, that does
importe that a case may happen, when the Pope may err, but not that the Pope
may decree any error or establish any thing contrary to the faith.

We find that many Popes have forsaken the faith.



That the Bishop of Rome had allwaies cure and rule over all other Bishops
(109.) specially them of the East (for touching them of the West Church it
is generally confessed) beside a hundred other evident Arguments, this is one
very suffieient, that he had in the East to do his stead three delegates or
vicaires, now commonly they be nam^d Legates. The one was the Bishop off
Constantinople as we find it mentioned In Epistola Simplicij ad Achatium
Constantinopolitanum. The second was the Bishop of Alexandria, as the
Epistle of Bonifacius the second to Eulalius records. The third was the
Bishop off Thessalonica as it is at large declared in the 82. epistle of Leo,
Ad Anastasium Thessalonicensem. By perusing these Epistles every man may see
that all the Bisshoppes off Greece, Asia, Syria, Aegypte, and to be short off
all the Orient, rendered obedience to the Bishop of Rome, and caet.

The 435 Untruth Slanderous.
The.109. Untruth. For the bishops of the East never yielded such subjection
to the Pope.



It is not only untrue, but also utterly without any shadow or color of the
truth.

The 436 Untruth ^acinge.
This is boldly avouched. But if M. Jewel bring any one word to p^o^e these
allegations untrue, that let him be Aristotle, and not the Ass. For you shall
see what follows.

These Authorites of Leo, Symmachus and Bonifacius, The 437. Untruth For
Bonifacius condemned not S. Augustine.
for as much as they are alleged without words, may likewise be past over
without answer.

If they be untrue, why prove you it not? If they be true, why pass you them
over without answer? All that you answer is this that follows.

The 438.439. and 440. Untruths, as it shall particularly appear.
Howbeit this Bonifacius the second in defense of this quarrel is forced to
say, that (.437.) S. Augustine that godly Father, and all other the bishops
of Aphrica, Numidia, Pentapolis, and other countres adjoining, that withstoode
the (.438.) proud attempt of the bishops off Rome, and found (.439.) out
their open forgerie and falsifying the Nicene Council, were (.440.) altogether
inflamed and lead by the devil.



Bonifacius condemned the Bishops of Carthage wrongfully, M. Iewelles Argument.


Ergo the Bishop of Alexandria was not his legate.

But now let us see how many Untruths are couched in the former few words of
M. Jewel. the Aphricane bishops, that they were altogether inflamed and lead
by the devil, these be the cancred words of M. Jewels tender heart. Only he
says instigante diabolo. The Devil pricking them and moving them thereto.
Thus with a mess of Untruths and a heap of cancred malitiouslies M. Jewel
thinks to answer the places alleged and to prove them Untrue, yea and as he
says, Utterly without any shadow or color off truth. Which to be a most
impudent, shameless and desperate outfacing lie, let the words them selves
prove. Pope Leo writes thus to Athanasius the bishop of Thessalonica. As my
predecessors to your predecessors, Epist. 82. Vices mei mo^eraminis delegaui.
so I unto you (following their examples) delegated my room and Authorite, to
thentent that you after the example of our discretion might help that which we
owe unto all Churches principally by Gods institution, and that you might
supply the presence of our visitation in the provinces far distant from us.
Because you being there at hand may readely know, what things may by your
selfs be ended, and what things to our judgment may be reserved. These be the
words of that learned and most holy Father Leo so much commended and reverenced
in the fourth Council of Chalcedon. By these it appears that not only by
Leo but by his predecessors before the Bishop of Thessalonica was the Popes
delegat in that part of the East Church, and in the provinces adjoining. And
therefore the great Council of Sardica long before the time off Leo, for the
great resort off Priests and Deacons to Thessalonica about such suites to
the Popes legate, Act 6. Council. Sard. Can. 20.
made a decree that such Priests and Deacons should make no long abode in
that City. In like manner Simplicius writes to Achatius of Constantinople,
wondering that he had not yet certified him of the state of the Church of
Alexandria, Tom 1. Concilioru^.
being both required Vt participata sollicitudine literas apud principem
prosequeretur, and instituti veteris memor in orthodoxorum defensionem semper
incumberet, that taking part of his care and charge he would promote his
letters to the Prince, and also remembering his old office, should emplie him
self allwaies to the defense of the Catholics. Bonifacius the second
certifying Eulalius bishop of Alexandria of the reconciliation of the
Aphricanes says. Vota nostra charitatem tuam latere nolumus, ne qui particeps
fuit sollicitudinis, gaudiorum fructus reddatur extorris. We will not conceal
from you our good tydinges, lest that he which takes part of our charge, may
seem to lack part off our joy and coumfort. Thus as Leo calls Anastasius
his legate in Thessalonica, a helper off his universal charge, so Simplicius
and Bonifacius do call the bishops off Alexandria and Constantinople
Sollicitudinis particepes the partakners off their Universal charge, as being
their legates in that part of the world.

And thus far it is proved that the bishops of the East were subject unto
the Bishop of Rome. Which also by that which before has been said,
touching the Appeals of Athanasius bishop of Alexandria, of S. Chrysostom
bishop of Constantinople, and of Theodoret bishop of Cyrus. Also of Flauianus
an other patriarche of Constantinople, of John Talaida a Patriarche of
Alexandria, of Paulus, Marcellus, Asclepas, Lucianus and diverse others, al
bishops in the East Church, does appear clearly and sufficiently proved. Yet
M. Jewel ever better able to appose and make objections against a truth, then
to answer to the proufes brought for the truth, that is, as one that is full
off doubts, but resolved in nothing, ever lerning (as S. Paul says) but
never attaining to knowleadge, 1 Timo. 3.
and more expert in reproving the Catholics, then in confirming his own
positive opinion, (as S. Augustine notes of the Manichees) though he could not
answer to the place alleged, Lib. de vti litate crede^di. cap. 1.
yet he can say somewhat against the position. Thus he says.

off Rome, whosoever has read and considered the storye and the practice off
the times, may soon perceive. First the Council of Nice, appointed every
off the three Patriarchs his several charge, none of them to interrupte or
trouble the other. And willed the Bishop off Rome as Ruffinus reports the
storye, to ouersee Ecclesias suburbanas, which were the Churches within his
province.

Fol. 51.
How this is to be understood, I have before spoken in part, but more
largely you may read in the Confutation off your Apology. Such common
objections must have a common solution.



In e^ist. ad soli^arta^ vita^ agentes.
This therefore follows not. Athanasius in that place talking of the
persecution of pope Liberius by the Arrians, exaggerating their wickedness
says. They spared not so much as Liberius the Bishop of Rome, having no
reverence of him, n^ith^r as it was the Apostolical See, nor because Rome was
the chief City off the Romain Jurisdiction. By this disjunctive proposition,
making a distinction between the Apostolical See, and the City of Rome, it
seems Athanasius took not there the word Metropolis, for Mother Church as
M. Jewel has translated, but for the chief or head City. Otherwise if M.
Jewel will in good earnest have Rome to be the chief and Mother Church off the
Romain Jurisdiction by the verdit of Athanasius, then not only the Romain
Dyocese or province, but all Aegypte, and Greece, all the East Church, being at
that time of the Romain Jurisdiction, as all subject to the Emperor of Rome
Constantius, shall be subject to the Sea of Rome as being the Chief and Mother
Church of them all by Athanasius his witness and by the Confession of M.
Jewel. Hist. trip. lib. 4. ca. 6 Cap. 15.
And truly that Athanasius bishop of Alexandria in Egypt was subject to the
bisshoppe of Rome, it appears well both by that Athanasius being cited
thither by Julius the Pope appeared there and pleaded his cause, and was
restored by the Popes letters unto his bishopric, and also by his Appeal to
Rome the second time, through the often persecutions of the Arrians.

The 441. Untruth joined with a Folly, as shall appear. Ioa^. 20.
And for that cause the Bisshoppes of the East in their Epistle unto Julius
call him their fellow Seru^unte, And Cyrillus the Bishop of Alexandria,
writing unto Celestinus, calls him his brother. Fellows and Brothers be
titles (.441.) off equalite, and not of subjection.

Thou being converted confirm thy brethren. By this example of Christ our
Savior, the pope both then and now writing unto all bishops, calls them,
Fratres, Collegas, Consacerdotes, brethern, fellow bishops, fellow pristes. The
Metropolitan writing to a bishop of his province, the bishop writing to a
priest, uses the same title. And all this according to the commandment of
Christ. He that is greatest among you, shall be as the lest. The meanest
priest and the Pope him self in office of Priesthood are equal. In
Jurisdiction the one is subject to the other. Therefore of the Office they are
called brethern, fellow priests, fellow bishops and so forth. Saint Augustine,
writing to S. Hierom a priest, calls him brother. What then? Be Bishops and
Priests equal in Jurisdiction and authority? Celestinus writing to Cyrillus
calls him brother, and yet was Cyrillus his legate in the Ephesine Council. A
thousand such examples might be brought. Lo^ke in all Councelles, in all the
Epistles of Bishops to their Metropolitanes, or to their priests of their
Dyoceses, you shall find them all called brethern. And yet one is under the
other and an order is to be kept according to the Canons. You Master Jewel
when you write to any priest off Salisbery Dyocese, where you bear your
self for a Bishop, call you not them brethern? If you do not, then write you
more stately then true bishops do or ever have done: if you do, is not
therefore the priest under his bishop? I am ashamed to stand so long upon
such balde peuish arguments of M. Jewels. But it is easy to be seen what store
of good proufes he has which uses so often such a begarly shifte.

The 442 Untruth Slaund. F^cing, and impudent.
Certain it is that (442) sundry the bishops of Rome began very rathe to
seek this preeminence, even with manifest forgerie, and corruption of councels,
as is already proved, but the bishops of other countries never yielded to them,
nor understood these vain titles.

Certain it is that M. Jewel has slaundred the bishops of Rome, far within
his first.600. years, even of the primitive Church, most impudently, as it
has been already proved. Certain it is that all other countries has yielded to
the Sea of Rome not upon titles or terms, but of true obedience as to Christ's
Vicaire in causes of weighty importance.

The 443 Vntr^the For they said not so muc^e.
The bishops of the East writing unto Julius, allege that the faith that then
was in Rome came first from them.

They were Arrians, they lied in so saying. And M. Jewel has increased there
lie, by saying (the faiethe that then was) for no such words are in their
epistle.

Lib. 5. cap. 8. lib. 2. Cap. 15.
And that the^r Churches (as Sozomenus writes) ought not to be accounted
in^e^iour to the Church of Rome: and as Socrates further reports, that thy
ought not to be o^d^ed by the Roma^^ bishop.

of Adrianopolis, that famous father Osius of Corduba, and an infinite number of
other Catholic bishops of Thracia, Celosyria, Phenicia, Palestina, which all
fled to Rome, were subject to the Pope, acknowledged his supreme authorite, (
quoniam (as Sozomenus writes) propter Sedis dignitate^, omnium ad ipsum cura
pertinebat. Because for the prerogative of his See, Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap.
7.8. and 9.
the Charge of them all appertayned to him) and they all were persecuted by the
Arrians, were thrust out of their bishopprickes: all these you forsake utterly,
and join to those wicked and detestable Arrians, who beside their blasphemous
heresies expelled all good Catholic bishops, and defied the Pope for taking
part and upholding the Catholic bishops. You have an eye to the wicked doings
of heretics, you build upon the disobedience of the Donatistes, who appealed
from the Pope to the Emperor, and make thereof an argument (o passing
impudency) that the Emperor was above the Pope: Lib. 3. cap. 8.
whereas yet the Emperor extremely offended with that barbarous fury of those
Donatistes, when they appealed to him cried out in a great rage. O rabida
furoris audacia, Optatus lib. 1.
sicut in causis gentilium fierit solet appellationem interposuerunt. O
desperate and furious rage. They appeal to me, like as Pagans and infidelles
do. To these barbarous Donatistes, to these heathenish Appeals, to these
blasphemous Arrians M. Jewel casts his eye, their doings he beholds, them
he likes, them he embraces. Their furious disobedience he takes for a
pattern of right. But what did Julius the Pope answer to that impudent and
heretical disobedience of theirs? I wish thee gentle Reader if thou be learned
to peruse the answer of Pope Julius as it is reported of Athanasius him self
in his second Apology. He answers with fair words, with great
hu^blenesse, lernedly, mekely, and with such and so far yelding, that M.
Jewel has gone about with certain of his sentences picked out of that
epistle, to prove by the Popes own words that he had no authorite over the
bishops of ^he East. The words thou have seen before alleged by M. Jewel,
and by other words of that Epistle in that place answered. Thither I refer
thee gentle Reader for better consideration of his whole demeanor of the
Arrian Bishops of the East with Pope Julius. Verily there thou shall see, that
notwithstanding the proud disobedience of the Arrians, whose part M. Jewel
takes, that yet the Sea of Rome both by custom and by Canon or decree
challenged them of their duty, which the Catholic bishops of the East,
Athanasius and his fellows, gladly yielded to and acknowleadged. I can say no
more herein M. Jewel, but if you will needs claim by heretics, that you be
taken for such.

The 444 Untruth False Translation.
Gennadius the bishop of Constantinople together with the Council there, thus
writes unto the bishop of Rome. Cu^et sanctitas tua Vniuersas custo^ias tuas,
^ibique su^iectos Epis^opos. Let thy holiness see unto thine own charge, and
unto the bishops appointed unto the.

Gennadius speaks not as M. Jewel makes him to speak. He is by M. Jewel
untruly translated. Thus stand his words Let your holiness see unto all your
charges, and the bishops which are subject unto you. The word vniuersas, all,
M. Jewel omitted, and for subiectos (subject) he reads appointed, to enduce
a certain limitation of the bishop of Romes Jurisdiction. Thus much we see of
M. Iewelles iuggling by his false translation only, but if it had pleased him
to have quoted the place, and to have told us what Council it was, or when
this Gennadius lived, I doubt not but the very circunstance of the place would
have answered it self, and the weakness of M. Iewelles proufes would the
more have appeared. As for Gennadius, for the space of the first 600. years,
there was but one of that name bishop of Constantinople, soon after the time
of the Chalcedon Counsel, Nicephorus lib. 15. cap. 13. Trithem. in scriptor.
successor to Anatolius, and predecessor to Acacius a man of great virtue,
lerning, and holiness, as it appears in Nicephorus and Trithemius. Of him
there appears no such writing, neither any Council to be holden by him or in
his time. If this Gennad^^s therefore be a later writer, he bears no
Authorite in this matter, because as all the learned do know, the Church of
Constantinople has remained in schism these certain hundred years not only
for disobedience to the Sea of Rome but for diverse other particular heresies,
Actor. 4.
as for denying the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Son, and such
other. Beside the Church of Constantinople as it has been twelve times
reconciled to the Church of Rome, so has it long and many years continewed
in schism unreconciled. It was therefore necessary and convenient that M.
Jewel alleging the testimony of so suspicious a place, should have told us
when and in what age that Council was holde^, and where it might be found.
Certainly Chrysostom a learned and holy Bishopp of Constantinople far within
the first 600. years, confesses that to Peter and to the successors of Peter
Christ committed those sheep which he had redeemed with his blood, also that
Peter had the primacy over the whole world. And for proof of Supreme
Authorite, he appealed him self (being one of the greatest Patriarchs) to
Innocentius the Pope of Rome, as has before been declared. So did Flauianus a
holy Martyr and Patriarche of Constantinople Appeal to Leo the first.

Ruffinus lib. 1. cap. 29.30. ^^ 31. The 445 446. and 447. Untruths, as it
shall particularly appear.
The Council of Alexandria committed the visitation and reforming of all
Churches in the East unto Asterius. And of all the Churches in the west unto
Eusebius the bishop of Vercellae. By Authorite of which Commission Eusebius
together with Hilarious visited and corrected all the Churches of Illyricum,
France and Italy. A man might say where was then the Universal power of the
bishop of Rome.

Nay a man might say more, if your tale were true M. Jewel, where was then
the bishop of Rome him self? Where was his private jurisdiction, where was his
dyocese? Even now you confessed that both by the Nicene Council and by the
testimony of Athanasius, Rome was the fourth Patriarche of the world, and the
Chief Church of all the Romain I^risdiction. Now what was under the bishopp of
Romes Jurisdiction, if Italy it self were not in the which Rome stands. page
283.
Illi^ycum you confess afterward M. Jewel and prove by the Authorite of
Damasus that it was a part of the bishop of Romes jurisdiction. France if it
were not vnde^ the Patriarche of Rome, show under what Patriarche it was. This
then if neither Illyricum nor France, nor Italy it self be found to be
s^biect to the Sea of Rome, if this tale of youres be true M. Jewel, then not
only a man might say where was the universal power of the bishop of Rome then,
but also a man might say where was the power at all? And so M. Jewel to
disprove the Universal Authorite of the bishop of Rome, has now found a
knacke to prove him no bishop at all, no not of Rome it self. And verily as
well he may conclude the one as the other. But it is not possible for M. Jewel
to leave his lying. For Correct the Churches: that is the f^irst Untruth.
Ruffinus li. 1. ca. 27.
Iulianus succeding in the Empire not of zele to the faith, but for
ouerthwarting the decrees of Constantius, had called home the bishops from
banishment, a number of the good bishops meeting together forthewith (before
they returned to their own Churches) at Alexandria, took counsel and advise
together, what order were best to be taken touching such as in their absence
had yielded and subscribed to the Arrians. Some thought good that none of the
clergy should be received again to their offices which had subscribed. Other
thought better to remove only the chief authors and promoters of the heresy,
and to receive again all other which would abjure the Arrian heresy and
submitt them selves to the decrees of the Fathers. This sentence prevailed,
straight way, Cap. 28.
ex concilij decreto Asterio caeterisque qui cum eo erant Orientis iniungitur
p^ocuratio, Occid^ntis vero Eus^bio decernitur. by the decree of the Council,
Asterius and his fellows were commanded to see unto the East, and Eusebius to
see unto the west. Now what this commission was, whether it were to Correct by
way of Authorite or no, you shall hear by the words of the History in the
next chapter following. Cap. 30.
Eusebius circuiens O^i^ntem atque Italiam, medici pariter and sacerdotis
fungebatur officio. Singulas quasque ecclesias abiurata infidelitate ad
sanitate recte fid^i reuocabat. maxim quod Hilariu^ regr^ssum ia^ and in
Italia positum hec eadem erga instaurandas ecclesias sedemque patrum reparandam
reperit molientem. Eusebius (says Ruffinus) going about all the East and
Italy, did the office both of a Physician and of a priest. He called back
every Church to the wholesome right Faith, all infidelite being utterly
abiured. Especialy finding Hilarious who was now returned from bannishement and
was in Italy laboring in that same matter to the restoring again of the
Churches and of the Catholic faith. This is all that Ruffinus tells of them.
They labored to reduce men to the Catholic Faith. They found Hilarious so
doing of his own head without any commission. Here was no correcting or
visiting by way of authority, but only a zealous labor toward a reformation,
such as Hilarious took upon him without any commission or commandment, and
such as many a good man would perhaps take in our own country, if a time of
reformation were granted, without any breach or diminishing of every bishops
Authorite in his own Dyocese, or of the Popes primacy over all. Thus M. Jewel
by falsifying and wrong applying of histories will establish his schismatic
disobedience toward the Sea off Rome.

Epist. 48. The 448 Untruth in falsifiing S. Basiles text
S. Basil says. The state and safetye of the Church of Antioche depends
off Athanasius the Bishop off Alexandria, and not (as M. Hardinge here
says) of the Bishop off Rome. And therefore he desires Athanatius to see
unto it.

and not off the Bishop off Rome. are not in that place of S. Basil, neither
in the Latin nor in the Greek, but are conveyed in pretely by M. Jewel, to
fournish and fashion up his Untruth, that the Bishops of the East yielded no
subjection to the Bishop of Rome. The words of S. Basil are these. Basil.
epist. 48.
Ad reliquas equidem Orientis res componendas fortassis ampliore auxilio tibi
opus est, and necesse est expectare Occidentales. Antiochensis vero Ecclesiae
O^dinatio palam ex pietate tua dependet, vt alios gubernes, alios quietos
reddas, Ecclesiae vero robur per concordiam reddas. For the quieting of other
troubles of the East, it shall be perhaps nedeful for you to look for some
greater help, and it is necessary to tarry for the bishops of the Weste, but
the ordering or state of the Church of Antiochia depends manifestly of you,
that you may rule some, pacify other, and finally restore to the Church her
strenght by unite and concord. The meaning of S. Basil is to desire
Athanasius being then a man of great authorite, for his long and manifold
troubles suffered for the Church, and for his old age, to take the charge for
the time of other Churches being then by the persecution off Valens pitefully
mangled by the Arrians. He desired him before to send some men of his own
Church learned and discrete to the bishops of the West, to unto the^ their
troubles and adversities. But because Antioche was (as S. Basil there says)
the head and principal part of the East, he desires in the mean while
Athanasius to look unto that Church especially. This is all that S. Basil there
requires of Athanasius, Dimit^e aliquos exsacta Ec^lesia tua v^ros ad
occidentis ep^scopos. Basil. epist. 53.
not as though he had any jurisdiction over Antioche, but because as a man in
that time of more Autorite and years then any other, he might do much good (as
he writes in an other epistle to Athanasius) alloquendo, admonendo* scribendo,
mittendo semper aliquos qui optima suggerat. by talking with them, by
admonishing them of their duty, by writing, by sending allwaies some to
instruct them. Now because M. Jewel will gather hereof a negative argument,
yea and to make it bear the more authorite, will make S. Basil himself to say
that of Athanasius, and not of the bishop of Rome the state of Antioche
depends, let us see what S. Basil says about the quieting of these self
same troubles of the East, and writing thereof to this very same Athanasius,
thus he writes to Athanasius. not long after the fourmer epistle written as it
may seem by the placing of his epistles in his works, and also by the matter
it self. Visum est nobis etc. Basil. ad Athanas. epi. 52.
We have tought good to write to the bishop of Rome, that he will consider the
matters in these parts, and point us a Council, to the intent that because
it is hard to have some sent from thence by a common decree of any Synod, that
he will give authorite to the matter choosing some sufficient men able to bear
the pains of trauail, and able by gentle demeanor and upright behavior to
correct the froward among us, who also may skilfully govern and instruct us,
and bring with them all that was done at Ariminum for the dissoluing and
undoing thereof? Thus far S. Basil a bishop of the East Church acknowleadging
as it well appears the authorite of the bishop of Rome over the East parts,
more then M. Jewel would gladly he had done. So far is it that S. Basil by
desiring Athanasius to look to the Church of Antioche, would therefore exclude
the bishop of Romes Authorite, as M. Jewel not only would gather thereof, but
also has untruly made S. Basil to say, shifting in those words ( and not of
the bishop of Rome) into the text of S. Basil, which S. Basil never spoke.

The 449 Untruth As before. Cod. de S^cro San^tis eccles. lege 6.
The Emperors Honorius and Theo^osus appointed over all matters of doubt
arising within the country of Illyricum to be heard and ended before the bishop
of Constantinople, and not before the bishop of Rome. The Emperors words be
these. The Church of Constantinople enjoys now the prerogative of the old
Rome.

This notorious and manifest Untruth has before ben avouched and answered.
Now it is brought again to make up matter, and to bolster up an other Untruth
which is this.

The 450 Vntrut^e ^or the Gloss there expound^th not that s^^e l^we D^st. 22.
Re^ou^^tes: in glosa.
And the very Gloss upon the decrees expounding that same law of Honorius, and
Theodosius has these words. The Emperor s^^eth, the patriche of
Constan^inople has the same authorite over the people of his province, that
the Pope has over his.

I know not whether M. Jewel when he wrote his Reply intended to Win the
whetstome for ever, and to pass all the world in lying, but truly he so plyeth
that game, that it may seem he was not a little bent that way. The gloss in
that place expounds not this law of Honorius and Theodosius, but expounds
the decrees of Popes and Councelles, which are no Emperors laws pardye. And
in that, note though the gloss apply a law of the Emperor to the decree, yet
he means not there this law, or these Emperors. But he means an other
law of an other Emperor. He mean^th the Authentikes not the Cod^, ^ law of
Justinian not of Honorius and Theodosus. For so he quoteth his note: vt in
authen. d^ eccl. tit.. 1. ^c^lat. 9. And thus much touching the untrue
applying of M. Iewel^es gloss to the law Honorius and Theodosius. Now what
the gloss mea^eth ^et the text try. The text says out of the Sixth Synod.
Di^t. 2^. Ren^ua^^^s.
Renouantes Sancti Constantinopolitani d^cr^tae Concil^j poti^us vt
Constantinopolitana sed^s sim^lia priuil^gia que inferior Roma habet ac^ipiat:
n^n tamen in ^cclesiasticis r^bus magnificetur vt illa, s^d hec s^cunda ^ost
illam ^xistens ^rius quam Al^xandria numeretur. Renewing the decrees of the
holy Council of Constantinople, we desire that the Sea of Constantinople have
the like privileges, which the lower Rome has. Not yet that in ecclesiastical
matters she be prefered as Rome, but that being the second after Rome, she may
be placed before the Sea of Alexandria. This is the text M. Jewel. Ibid^m
(...).
Upon this text the gloss declares that Constantinople simile habet
priuilegium in quibusdam. has in certain things the like privilege that Rome
has. As that bishops may immediately appeal thither, that it may depose
bishops, and last of all that upon her own subjects she has the same power
and Authorite as Rome has in her subjects. Notwithstanding all this Rome is
preferred and Justinian him self (who made the same law which the gloser
alleges) call it Caput omnium sanctarum ecclesia^um, The head of all holy
Churches. Cod. de summa T^in. and fi. Cath Nos Reddentes.
And thus M. Iewelles laws, decrees, and gloses, run roundely against him.

Gregor. li. 1. epi. 24 and ^5. and lib. 6. epist 5. The 451. Vntrut^e Manifest
and infallible, as shall appear.
And therefore for more proof hereof, whenever any Patriarche, in any of these
four principal Sees, was newly chosen, he wrote letters of Conference and
friendship unto the other Patriaches, wherein ^uery of them declared unto other
their Religion and consent of faith. Thus did the bishop of Rome unto others,
and thus did others unto him. This is an (451.) Infallible token that their
authori^e was equal, and none of them had power and government over his
folowes,

If this be an infallible token, it is because M. Jewel says so. For truly
if any other man had made such reasons, all had been but a Gheasse, a Surmise, a
likelihood, a Conjecture. Such are all D. Hardinges proofs to M. Jewel, be
they never so clear and manifest. But now every gheasse that he brings must
be an infallible token. For how say you M. Jewel? Be these letters of
Conference an vnfallyble token of equalite? And where find you that letters of
Conference, and between whom? You find them in S. Gregory: For him only you
note in the Margin. And you find such letters of him to the bishops of
Constantinople, Alexandria, and Antiochia. How then if S. Gregory him self
which wrote such letters of Conference to the bishop of Constantinople, does
yet expressly say the Church of Constantinople to be subject to the church
of Rome: Shall not then M. Iewelles infallible toke^ prove an infallible
Untruth? Unless to justify M. Iewelles words, we must make S. Gregory
contrary to him self and to save his Untruth, make S. Gregory a liar. Let us
then hear what S. Gregory says. Gregor. epist. 63. lib. 7.


These are his words. Nam de Constantinopolitana Ecclesia quod dicunt, quis
eam dubitet sedi Apostolicae esse subiectam? For as touching tha^ they tell us
of the Church of Constantinople, who doubteh but that she is subject to the Sea Apostolic. Which also our most godly Emperor and our Brother Eusebius
bishop of that Cite do continually profess. Yet if she or any other Church
have any good thing to be followed, I am ready to follow my inferiors in good
things, whom I forbid from unlawful things. For he is unwise which
thinks him self therefore to be chief, that he may neglect to learn the
good that he sees. Thus far holy S. Gregory. In whom we see notwithstanding
he wrote letters of conference to the bishop of Constantinople, and calls him
here his brother, yet he calls him his inferior, and dissembleth not that
his Church is subject unto him. And in the next epistle he writes of the
bishopp of Constantinople, that being accused of a certain crime, the
Judgment was referred unto him of the Emperor iuxta statutae Canonica
According to the statutes of the Canons, not by the mere will or commission of
the Emperor. Now if M. Jewel do maruaill how such letters of conference, such
titles of brethern should pass between S. Gregory and the other Patriaches,
and yet they notwithstanding be subject unto him, S. Gregory will tell him soon
the cause hereof, in these words. Cum culpa non exit, omnes secundu^ ratione^
humilitattis aequales sunt. Where no fault is committed, Epist. 64. lib. 7.
all by the reason of humilite are aequall. And in that sense S. Paul says.
VVilt thou not fear the higher power? Do well. Romans 13.
And he will praise thee. For he is the minister of God to do the good. But if
thou do evil, then fear him. Thus S. Gregory was brother to al other bishops,
wrote familiarly and friendly unto them vntell they offended. Then he would use
and show his power over them, even over the bishop of Constantinople him sefe,
the chiefest of all the Patriarchs after the Pope. So he excommunicated John
of Constantinople: so he judge over Eusebius bishop of the same See: and so he
expressly professes and puts it out of doubt that the Church of
Constantinople is subject to the bishop of Rome. And thus M. Iewelles
infallible token is not found to be so much as a bare gheasse. But void of al
truth and weight. By such false sleightes and seely surmises M. Jewel
maintains his schismatic disobedience against Christ's Vicaire, and
draws other to the snare of his schism.

The.452. Untruth. For not therefore S. Gregory wrote so humbly. Lib. 7. epist
30.
And (.452.) therefore when Eulogius bishop off Alexandria, had written thus
unto Gregory being then bishop of Rome, S^utiusfistis as ye commanded,
Gregory utterly shunned and refused that kind of writing, for thus he
answers him. I pray you, have aw^y this word of Commanding from my hearing.
For I know both what I am and also what you are. Touching your place, you are
my brethern, tou^hing mane^s, are my Fathers. Therefore I commanded you not,
but only showed I what ^hought good.

Lib 7. epist. 54.
It Is declares the great humilite of holy S. Gregory. This proves true that
which he said before: Cum culpa no^ ^x^git, omnes secundum ratione^
humilitatis aequales sunt. Where ^o fault is committed, all by the reason of
humilite be equal. And thus the saying of the Apostle is verefied. Iusto ^on
est lex posita. The law is not made for the righteous. All this is true that
all bishops and Priests are brethern, the one commands not the other when
nothing is amiss. If I offend not the law, the magistrate has naught to do
with me. He can not command me. But the Master may command his servant, do
he well or evil. The Pope is not so primat over other bishops that he has
them at commandment as servants. But if they break the Canons he
commands them and forces the^ to their duity, or else remoueth the^ from
their Authoryte. So S. Gregory him self which shunned the word of
commanding, yet he putteh it out of doubt that the Sea of Constantinople who
was not inferior to the Sea of Alexandria was subject to the Sea of Rome. So
Athanasius bishop of Alexandria being cited to the Church of Rome, appeared
there as to his superior, So Cyrillus bishop also of Alexandria, was legate to
Pope Celestinus in the third General Council of Ephesus. Yet as S. Gregory
would not command Eulogius: so neither Julius commands Athanasius, nor
Celestinus in the third General Council of Ephes^s commands Cyrillus. Thus
M. Jewel for lack of matter and weight, hunteth after terms and phrases, to
build up his schismatic disobedience to our mother Church the holy See of
Rome.

The.453. Untruth. For not that only or principally. Paulus Aemilius in
Histor. gallorum lib. 8.
Fi^ally (453.) for that Michael Palaeologus The Emperor of the East parts, in
the Council holden at Lions, about the year of our Lord.1442. after great
entreaty made unto him by the bishop of Rome, hid acknowleadged the bishops of
the East to be subject unto him, after he returned home again in to his Empire
and was dead, his Cle^gie vvoulde not suffer him to be buried. Yet, says M.
Harding, All the bishops of Grecia, Asia, Syria, Aegypte, and to be short. all
the Orient, read and exhibited their humble obedience to the Sea off Rom^.

M. Jewel is miserably forced for the maitenaunce off his schisne not only to
falsefie councils, to take part with the Arrians and with Donatistes old
condemned heretics of the primitive Church, to gather gheasses and
conjectures upon titles and phrases, to falsifye S. Basil, to misalleage the
decrees, but now at the last (to such miserable shifts he is driven) the
poor creature is forced to claim by the late schismatikes and blasphemous
heretics of greece against the Proceeding of the Holy Ghost. Paulus Aemil. li. 7
For in that Council holden at Lions M. Jewel in the presence of Michael
Paleologus the Emperor, about the year of our Lord.1280. (you came short in
your rekening of allmoste two hundred years) the greeks wholly reconciled to
the latins not only touching the bishop of Romes supremacy, but also touching
the proceeding of the holy Ghost from the Father and the Son. Blondu^ Decad.
2. lib. 8.
For this reconciliatio^ (as Blondus reports) not only for acknowleadging the
Popes primacy, the Emperor after his death was so used of the schismatic
clergy. Now M. Jewel if you will needs hold by schismatikes, as you claim
by their example in the one, so may you in the other, so may you multiply your
heresies and schisms, so may you forsake the latins and become Grecians, so
may you at lenght come to Mahomets law, and be Turks as many of grecians
are become at this day. Our Lord send our country a better mind, and give
the^ all grace to beware in time of such perilous teachers, wh^ can not defend
their doctrine but by heretics and schism^tikes, by lies and Untruths, by
manifest and open corruption.

For the Popes Authorite concerning Confirmation of ^e Ordinations and
elections off all bishops, many exam^les might easily be alleged, as the
request made to Julius by ^he 90. Arrian bishops assembled in Council at
Anti^che against Athanasius that he would vouchesaue to cons^me those that
they had chosen in place off Athanasius, Pa^lus, Marcellus and others whom
they had condemned and deprived.

The 454. Untruth. Slanderous.
The 110. Untruth. For the Bishop of Rome confirmed the bishops of his own
province: but not all bishops thourough out the world.

Hi^^. trip. li. 4 ca. 6.
and of S. Gregory for the bishop of Salona in Illyricum. And yet shall it be
sufficient for M. Jewel to play still Aristotle's Ass and to deny all? Is it
not mete he give an Instaunce or Exception in some particular, if he will
destroy the universal? The order of scoles and reason require so. But M.
Jewel for lack of good arguments, hunteth after his gheasses, and having
nothing to bring, would disproufe that is brought. You shall hear what he
says.



Peter the Apostle, the East Church never received any other bishop consecrated
by the hands of the Pope, whereas yet Leo almost a hundred years before this
Agapetus had confirmed the bishop of Alexandria Proterius, and the bishop of
Constantinople Anatoleus. You know this is not to the purpose, and therefore
you add to excuse the matter.

The.455. Untruth. For D. Hardinge seems not so to do.
Let not M. Harding find fault that I place the ordering of bisshops instead
of their Confirmation, for he him self (.455.) seems to make Confirmation
and Ordering both one thing. or at least to join them both together. These
be his words. Leo would not in any wise Order and Confirm Anatolius.

At the least to join them together. Lo because they are joined together in
one sentence, M. Jewel will disproufe one by the other. Then if I put chalk
and chese together in a sentence, M. Jewel will prove I can eat no chese
because I can eat no chalk. Again though D. Harding talk of ordering, yet
he speaks not of ordering with the Popes own hands: such as the example by
M. Jewel alleged is. Thus he toyeth and trifleth, that he may seem to say
somewhat.

Here follows an other toye of S. Marks Cloak, out of Liberatus, as much to
the matter, as if one would prove that the Mayer of London has no authorite
from the king because he is chosen in the gilde hall, not in the Court.

The.456. Untruth. A manifest Corruption off the whole history.
And S. Ciprian writes unto the bishops of Spain, that Sabinus, whom they
had lawfully chosen bishop, should so continue still, yea not withstanding
Cornelius being then bishop of Rome, misliked him and would not Confirm him.

This is utterly untrue, false, and forged. Cornelius was dead when Saint
Cyprian wrote this epistle. It was Steven the Pope (who was Pope after
Cornelius) which had confirmed Basilides instead of Sabinus, moved thereto by
wrong information. This is the case. Basilides being bishop of Euerite in
Spain was deposed for committing idolatry in the time of persecution. Sabinus
was orderly and lawfully chosen in his place. Basilides after this sued to Rome
to be restored, and by wrong information got the Popes letters for the
recovery of his bishoprike. The clergy complained to the bishops of Afrike,
unto whom at that time appeals were made, as M. Jewel before confesses ex
Consilio Telenci. This untrue dealing of Basilides Saint Cyprian an Africane
bishopp misliked, Lib. 1. epist. 4.
and therefore he says. It can not dissolve the lawful ordering of Sabinus,
that Basilides after the detecting of his fa^ltes even by his own confession,
going to Rome, has deceived our follow bishop Steven dwelling far of, and
being ignorant off thecase and truth, coveting so to be unlawfully restored to
his bishopric, from the which he was lawfully deposed. These do prove that
the faults off Basilides are not so much wiped away as increased, adding to
his former offenses, the crime off deceit and wrong information. For he is not
so much to be blamed, which was stolen upon by negligence, as he is to be
abhorred that guilefully did steal upon him. Thus far S. Cyprian. Whose
words M. Jewel, do evidently confirm the Popes authorite in Confirmation of
bishops. For seeing the sentence of Pope Steven in the behalf of Basilides, was
unjust for no other cause, but because the suggestion was untrue: it follows
that if it had been true, the sentence had been good, and he lawfully restored.
Otherwise if the Pope had no authorite to restore Basilides, it might have
served for a quick exception, to say as no doubt M. Jewel (had he ben here
in S. Cyprians place) would have said: Pope Steven has no authorite in this
matter. He has naught to do here to restore or confirm any bishops. But now
the fault is laid not upon the Popes restoring, but upon Basilides his wrong
information. And this Sabinus continued bishop not contrary to the confirmation
of Pope Cornelius, but contrary to the restitution of Pope Steven. And yet not
because Pope Steven restored Basilides, but because Basilides had miss
informed Pope Steven. Thus M. Jewel alters and falsifyeth stories, choppeth
and mangleth S. Cyprian, and yet can name no one bishop whom the Pope confirmed
not. Now follows a decree of Anacletus touching the ordering of bishops, and
the question is of confirming bishops either already ordered or to be
ordered. And here ends all M. Iewelles proufes for this matter. But he will
disprove the allegations of D. Harding, and so establish his negative
proposition, off not all bishops confirmed by the Pope. First he answers to
the place of S. Gregory complaining to Constantia the Emperesse, that the
bishop off Solom was ordered, neither he, Gregor. Li. 4. epis. 34.
nor his deputy being made privy unto it, and saying farther, Herein that
thing has been done which never happened in the time of any Princes before
our days, and says.

The 457. Untruth. He meant of more then his own charge, as M. Jewel
takes the Popes Charge to be.
That Gregory meant this not of all bishops but only of the bisshoppes within
his own charge, it is evident by his words. For thus he writes. My bishops,
being Bishops within my cure.

S. Gregory says well M. Jewel, he calls his bishops and the bishops of his
Cure, not only the bishops of his own province as he was bishop of Rome, but
also of his Patriarkship as Illyricum and all the West, whereof he was
Patriarche, and so are we of England (specially brought to the faith by him)
subject thereunto. What have ye now got M. Jewel? Will you that England be
subject to Rome, as Illyricum was? Or will you break the order of the first
600. years?

The.458. Untruth For it was more then a general allowance, as shall
appear.
Where as it is alleged that the bishop of Rome was required to ratify the
election of Flauianus, Anatholius, and of the Arrian bishops, that was meant of
a general allowance, such as was common to al bishops, specially to the
four principal patriarchs, and not only to the bishop of Rome.

De ordinatione eius qui Constantinopolitanae caepit ecclesiae praesidere,
Hist. trip li. 4. ca 6. Leo ad Theodosiu^ Epist. 33.
^i^il interim in alterutram partem temere rescribendum putaui, non dilectionem
negans, sed manifestationem Catholicae veritatis expectant As touching the
Ordering of him, which has begone to gouuerne the Church of Constantinople,
I have thought it good as yet to make no certain answer thereunto, not denying
unto him my good will, but looking for a declaration of the Catholic Truth.
And the reason hereof he specifieth in an other letter where he says. Leo
epist. 34. ad diuersos
Et ipse Constantinopolitanus Episcopus, and qui eundem consecr^^ant, preter id
quod ad ordinationem noui Antistitis pertiuebat, nihil nobis de compressis vel
abdicatis erroribus indicarunt. Both the bishop him self of Constantinople
(Anatholius,) and those which had consecrated him, beside that which
appertained to the Ordering of the new bishop, have signified nothing unto us
of the wrong opinions in doctrine laid aside or condemned. This was the Cause
why the Pope would not out of hand Confirm him, before he knew he was a man
of a Catholic and right believe. And therefore in his letters to the Emperor
Theodosius, he wills this Athanasius to read over and peruse certain
writings of Cyrilius against the heresy of Nestorius, and his own epistle
written to Flauianus against the heresy of Eutyches. Ita sinceram Cummunis fidei
Confession^m, absolutissima Subscriptione coram omni Clero and vniu^rsae plebe
declaret Apostolicae Sedi, Leo. epi. 3^
and vniuersis domini Saecerdotibus and Ecclesi^s publicandam So that he
pronounce before all the Clergy and the people, the right Confession of Common
belefe, with a most exact Subscription, which after might be published to the Sea Apostolic, and to the Priests and Churches of God. Moreover in the same
epistle, he desires the Emperor thus. Agat cleme^tiae vestrae d^uotissimae
fides and c^. Let the most holy faith of your Cleme^cy bring to pass, that
the letters of the B. of Constantinople, as it b^cometh a Catholic and
approved bishop to write, be sent unto us, A pert^ a^que dil^^c^de pr^testantia.
openly and plainly protesting, that if any man do believe or tache any other
thing tou^hing the Incarnation of Christ, our God, Quam Catholicurum omnium
et mea ^^fessi^ p^ot^statur.
th^n al Catholics and I do profess, I^ do exclude him utterly from his
Communion, that so we may rightfully bestow upon him our brotherly Charity in
Christ. Upon such co^ditio^s and no otherwise would that learned and holy Pope
Leo Confirm this Anatholius, though the Emperor, the bishop him self, and
the other which had consecrated him, had written to the Pope the^fore. So
necessary and of such importance seemed at that time the Confirmation of the
Pope, even for the Patriarche him self of Constantinople, as light a matter as
M. Jewel would have the world to think it. Therefore also this Anatholius
having at lenght under Ma^tianus that Catholic and Zealous Emperor (of whose
virtue and Zele Theodosius the second his predecessor lacked much) subscribed
to the Catholic faith according to the ple^^ure of the Sea Apostolic, Leo
the Pope confirms his doings in an other letter written to the same
Anatholius, where he says these words. Societatem tuae dilectionis
amplectimur, and gestorum quae sampsimu^ serie^, necessarijs (sicut oportuit)
munita^ Subscriptionibus approbamus. We embrace the fellowship of your, and the
whole process of your doings, Eco. epist. 40. ad Anatholiu^.
which we have received, witnessed with the Subscriptions requisite thereunto,
as it behooved, we do approve and allow. And that this Approbation off the
Pope was in deed the Confirmation off this Anatholius in this bishopric, it
appears otherwhere. For at what time the General Council of Chalcedon being
ended, this Anatholius Patriarche of Constantinople by the persuasion of
certain had taken upon him the next preeminence after the bishop of Rome over
other Metropolitanes, contrary to the-Order taken in the first Council of
Nice, and contrary to the Popes legates consent in the Council of Chalcedon;
this learned and holy Pope Leo writing to the Emperor Martianus thereof, Can. 5.
both dissalloweth that unlawful attempt, and puts him in mind of the
former benefit, saying. Nos v^strae fidei and interuentionis habentes intuitum,
Leo epist. 54. ad Martianu^.
cum secundum su^ Consecrationis Authors eius initia our baren^, benigniores
circa ipsum quam instiores esse voluimus. We at the contemplation of your
promise and intercession (says Leo the Pope to the Emperor Martianus) though
the beginning of his bishoprike was out of order, touching those which did
consecrat him, used yet more favor and Clemency, then rigor or justice
toward him. And a little after in the same letter he says. Sati^ sit, quod
praedicto vestrae pietatis auxilio and mei fauoris assensu, Episcopatum tantae
vrbis obtinuit. Let it suffice that by the help of your goodness, and the
Consent of my good will he has attained to the bishopric of so great a Cite.
And at the same time in an other letter to Pulcheria the Emperesse thus he
writes. Leo epist. 55. ad pulcheria^.
My brother and fellow bishopp Anatholius has little considered, with what a
great benefy^ off your Clemancy, and Et (...) fauori^ assensu.
Consent of my good will ^e has obtained the Bishopric of Constantinople.
Thus lo these Emperors Theodosius and Martianus his successor had entreated
Pope Leo for Confirming of this Anatholius, (because as Leo in an other place
writes. Ordinationis eius non inculpa^a erant Inicia, the beginning of his
Consecrating bishop had been somewhat aginst Order) the Pope prescribed him
both to profess openly the Catholic faith, and to send his Subscription
thereunto to Rome, Anatholius did as the Pope had prescribed him. The Pope
thereupon confirmed him. And afterward (when he behaved him self ambitiously)
did put him in mind off the former favor showed unto him, and what is a
Confirmation by way of Authorite, if this be not? Or when shall the practice
off so many hundred years paste be sufficiently proved, if this be not? Again
this principal Patriarche of the East Church, being so Confirmed by the Pope
of Rome, who doubts but much more al other inferior Bishops, (especially
if they had not been ordered according to the Canons) were also necessarely to
be confirmed of the Pope? Yet says M. Jewel.

The 459. Untruth as before.
Neither was the bishop of Romes admission thought so necessary, a^ if ^e only
had a voice negative, to make in and to put out whom he lifted, but only of
Congruite and Consent, that it might appear, there was no bishop in the
Church, but was liked and allowed of his brethren.

of Cons^nt and Congruite was but a shifte for the present: But your Doctrine
of Luthers teaching, it is a plain discord and disordre, that any bishopp or
priest ^houlde be admitted or approved off others. And therefore you play the
bishopps your selves, without any regard or respect to the allowance of any
other Christen bishopps in the whole world. Verily it appears by this
example of Anatholius his Confirmation, that it was more then of Consent and
Congruite, and that it was both necessary, and obtained by long and special
suit.

Yet you will prove it was but of consent and congruite, and of no necessite
you say.

S^z^^ li. 3. Ca. 8.
For otherwise the bishops of the East wrote thus unto Julius. If you will
^llo^e the bishops that we have ordered, we will be at peace and ^om^uni^at
with you? If not we will pr^^laime the contra^y.

Hist. trip. li. 4. Ca. 6
and presently do say thus much. At the first they accused Athanasius, Paulus,
Marcellus and other Catholic bishops to Pope Julius, desiring him to confirm
such Arrians as they had placed in their rooms, Sozun. li. 3. (...).
declaring thereby how gladd they would have been to have had his Confirmation.
After, when they saw they could not speed, they defied the Pope and the
Nicene Council both, and maintained openly the Arrian heresy. The like
example may be seen in Luther. First he wrote to Pope Leo the x and submitted
himself unto him, Pontanu^ gal li. 1. page 10 (...) exposit. Art. ad Leo non.
An^ 15. ^ ^ib. eodem pa 15.
hoping the^ that for the matter off pardous, which only yet he has called in
controversy, that he should be heard and have favor. But a year after seeing
by Caietane the Popes legate that the Pope was ^^holy bent against him, and
minded to proceed with him according to the (...), then ^o he defied the Pope,
as all the world knows. This did the Arrians, and thus did Luther. M. Jewel
takes part with both.

The 460 and.461. Untruth as shall appears. Sozom. li. 7. ca. 8.
And the Emperor Gratian made Nectarius bishop of Constantinople contrary to
the minds of the most part of the bishops.

M. Jewel ouerreacheth his author Sozomenus. For he says not so much as M.
Jewel reports him to say, these are his words. (...). The Emperor
understanding that the same Nect^rius (whom before he had pricked, being first
named of certain the bishops) was not yet baptized, yet he continued in his
mind, many of the bishops again saying it. But after when all the bishops
agreed and accorded to the Emperors mind, he was baptized, and having yet his
baptism cote upon him, by the common voice and consent of the Synod, he was
created bishop of Constantinople. In these words we see first, that Nectarius
was not bishop at all contrary to the minds of the most part off the bishops,
as M. Jewel fableth, but by the Common consent and agreement of them all. Then
also, that at the first not the most part, as M. Jewel makes Sozomenus to
say, but many of the bishops resisted it which yet all afterward agreed, and
then by them so agreing and all their voices, he was made bishop. And this to
be so, the bishops them selves in that Council do expressly witness in
their letters to Damasus then Pope of Rome. where thus they say. (...),
Theodore^. li. 5. ca. 9.
(...)The most reverent and most godly Nectarius we have Consecrated bishopp,
in the general Council with Common agreement. This was not then against
their minds as M. Jewel fableth and faineth. Neither was all this done in the
presence of Gratian as M. Jewel ignorantly bableth, but as those bi^hops do
report to Damasus (...) Ibidem.
(...). in the presence of the most godly Emperor Theodosius. But what is all
this against the Pope off whose only Authorite the question is here, not off
other bishops? Verily this whole Council of Constantinople certified Damasus
the Pope of this their doing, (...). Leo epi. 34
and of other bishops whom they had at that time also consecrated and desired
his consent thereunto, Even as those which consecrated Anatholius certified
Pope Leo of the same, and required his Confirmation. And Gratian him self
(whom M. Jewel alleges) acknowleadgeth so much the Authority of the Pope,
that for a short ending of all controversies, he enacted by a public decree,
that all the world should follow that faith and Religion, which had
continewed from S. Peter the Apostle in the Sea of Rome, and which Damasus then
Pope held and professed. And thus far is M. Jewel aided by Gratian.

The ecclesiastical rule (as we read in the tripatit story) commands that
no Council be celebrated and kept, without the advice and the Authorite of
the Pope.

The 462. Untruth Slanderous.
The.iii. Untruth. Standing in wilful falsyfying of the text.

falsefying, but also with wilful falsyfying. He says,

The.463. Untruth pregnant For D. Hard. has avouched no such Untruth. The
464 Untruth For Cassiodorus made no such translation but Epiphanius.
Here H. Harding has avouched two great Untruths. The one in his translation
in the english: the other in the allegation of the story. Touching the first
Cassiodorus in his latin translation writes thus. Canonesiubent, extra
Romannu^ nhil decerni pontifice^, Socrates in the greek, out of which the
latin was taken, writes thus (...) The english hereof i^ this. It is
pro^ided by the Canons, that rules to bind the Church be not made without the
consent of the bishop of Rome.

Let your traslation stand for good M. Jewel a while. Let nihil decerni, be
truly englished, that no rules be made to bind the Church, without the
consent of the Pope. Have you not said as much for the Popes authorite, as
the translation of D. Harding says? What difference is there in effect
between the celebrating of a Council, and between making of Canons that bind
the Church: whereas such Canons are made only in Council. Unless you be such
a Papiste, that the Pope alone without a Council, may make Canons, to bind
the Church. If we had so largely translated the word decerni, off like you
would have crowed mightily. But let us now see the faults which you find in
the translation used by D. Harding, supposing he had translated, these words
which you allege. For the contrary shall anon appear.

The 465. Untruth facing and impudent as it shall appear. Stapleton
Wherein M. Harding has purposely corrupted and falsified altogether both the
greek and the latin, not reporting one word that h^ found in the Original.
(...) or decernere, he englisheth to keep, or as he terms it, to celebrat a
Council.

Yet that is better transsated then did your friend Wolfgra^gus Musculus, who
turned the word (...) Ecclesias consecrare, to consecrat Churches. Howbeit
touching D. Hardinges translation, if we take the whole sentence of the place,
we shall see his translation may stand for true and good. The whole place is
this. Julius rescripsit eis qui fuerant in Antiochia congregati, culpa^s eos
primum de iniurijs literarum, Hist. trip. lib. 4^ cap. 19.
deinde cur se ad Synodum suam non vocassent, canonibus nimirum iubentibus
pieter Romanum nihil decerni Pontificem. Julius (the Pope) wrote back to the
bishops of the East assembled together in Antioche, blaming them first of their
injurious letters, the^ because they called him not to their Council. Whereas
the Canons do command, that nothing be determined beside the bishop of
Romes sentence.

The story mentions, that the Pope blamed the bishops of the East which
called a Council, (...).
not making him preuy thereunto. And what was the reason why the Pope so blamed
them? The story says. Canonibus nimirum iubentibus etc. Because the Canons do
command that nothing be determined (how, but in Concell?) without the advice of the Pope. And is not this as much in effect, as to say. Without the advice of the Pope no Council can be summoned? But we shall see anon that the
very translatour of the Greek Epiphanius has translated in an other place
this very Greek, (...). Concilia celebrare, to keep and celebrat Counsels,
even as D. Hardinge has englished it. But now let us proceed with M.
Jewels corrections.

praeter sententiam, or as Cassiodorus turnet^ it, extra, he englisheth:
without the Advice and Autho^ite..

praeter and ext^a, you turn it your self M. Jewel, in your own translation
without. And why I beseech you, may not D. Harding so turn it? Is there such
partialite in the kind heart of M. Jewel, that he may translate (...)
without, and D. Harding may not translate it so? Then for the word (...):
sententia, which D. Harding turns Advise and Authorite, M. Jewel turns
consent, for that I remitt it to the Grammarians. I am right ^ure that the
dictionaries both greek and latin do confess that (...) in Greek, and
sententia in Latin, does rather, more often, The.436. Untruth. joined with
mere folly.
and more properly betoken Adu^se and Authorite, then Consent. Let us proceed.

No, he would not suffer, no not him in whose quarrel he thus fights, to
pass without a venwe. ^or where he saw ^im named (...) ^^e Greek, (...), and
in the Latin Romanum Pontificem, the Romain bishop, he thought it best to
l^aue both the Creke and the Latin, and to call him the Pope.

Certans de lana caprina. Behold a man that fights for gotes wolle. This
picture and posy may from Flaccus Illyricus be most rightly derived to M.
Jewel. For I beseech you M. Jewel what difference is there between the Romain
bishop, and the bishop of Rome? And then again between the bishop of Rome and
the Pope. Is there any other bishop of Rome, then the Pope? Or is there any
other Pope, then the bishop of Rome? Other bishops have sometime ben called
Popes. But the bishop of Rome allwaies has been so called. And these certain
hundred years none but the bishop of Rome. And is this a wilful falsifying
of the text, to call the Bishop of Rome, the Pope. O what a precise fellow M.
Jewel is? These be the hypocritical Pharisees, which strayning a gnatte, do
devour up camels. fighting and quarelling upon terms, do let slip the
matter. And yet he concludes as though he had fought a great battaill, and
killed God have mercy on his soul.

The.467 Untruth: For t^ere has no such falsifing b^ne committed.
And thus to increase the Popes Authorite, he had altered the whole place, and
not translated one word as he found it.

Thus says M. Jewel. But thou see now gentle Reader, that even taking the
words both of the Latin and of the greek as he has alleged them, and
withal the whole sentence of the place, which M. Jewel thought good utterly
to dissemble, there is no falsehood nor Untruth committed, but even that sense
and English delivered there which latin and greek both do bear. But now what
if M. Jewel all this while has harped upon a wrong stringe? What if the latin
which he alleges is not the text of that place that D. Harding means? What
if the same very greek be so translated of the very same writer in the very
same book as D. Harding has englished it? Has he not then all this while
sponne us a fair threede? Truly so is it gentle Reader. But yet I will not
therefore charge M. Jewel with any Untruth or falsehood. Only as I said in
the beginning of this place so I say now, if he had loved in deed the truth,
tendered sincerely and uprightly his readers instruction, and been of that
Ciuilite and gentle demeanor, as he seems to men to be, he would not thus
have dealed, he would not in such sort have stormed and quarelled for a little
error in the quotation: but, as his lerning served him, would soon have
espied what text and place of that history it was which D. Harding alleged.
For thus it is gentle Reader. The quotation of that place in D. Hardinges
Answer is thus. lib. 4. Cap. 19. It should have been lib. 4. cap. 9. It was the
same very book of the tripartit History, and the 19. Chapter instead of the
9. It was only the error of one iota. Neither could M. Jewel Undoubtedly
having read and seen so much, be ignorant hereof. But in deed either because he
would not be a known of the place to the which he could not answer, or else
because he owed but little good will to D. Harding, more careful how to deface
his adversary, then how to try the truth, he took the advantage as he
found it, and seeing the weapon out of his place, laid loode on, spared no
part, but used his force to every word and syllable of it. And that so far,
that Romanus Pontifex must not be translated the Pope. This kind of play as
in worldly combats it is but the part of a coward, and dastardly wretch, so in
Divine matters, to deal after such sort, and that for a man of ripe years, a
man of lerning and knowleadg, a man that bears him self for a bishop, I
know not who would do so, but M. Jewel. The place it self which D. Hard.
there meaned, in the greek of Socrates is thus. (...). word for word as the
Greek by M. Jewel alleged. Lib. 1. Cap. 8. Trix. Hist. lib. 4. ca. 9
The latin of Epiphanius the tranlatour not of Cassiodorus (as M. Jewel
ignorantly calls it) is thus. Cum vtique regula ecclesiastica iubeat no^
oportere praeter sententia^ Romani Pontificis Concilia celebrari. In english
thus much, even as D. Harding has most truly translated it. The
ecclesiastical rule comundeth that no Council be celebrated or kept without
the advice and authorite of the Pope. The greek of Socrates in this place, and
his greek in the other place alleged by M. Jewel is all one (as I said) Word
for word. The translatour Epiphanius in this place of the.9. Chapter, has
translated (...), Concilia celebrari, which is in english Councels to be kept
or celebrated. The same translatour in the 19. Chapter quoted by D. Harding
has translated those very words (...), Nihil decerni, nothing determined in
Council, for of a Counsel there he speaks holde^ in the East beside the
bishop of Romes knowleadg. And how is it now true that D. Harding has
forsaken both the Greek and the latin, which has englished the greek, even
with the same words in english, as the translatour Epiphanius has done in
latin, as well in the Chapter quoted according to the sense, as in the other
chapter meaned according to the very letter.

Thus far the lewd trifling or M. Jewel, has forced us to trifle touching
the translation: wherein though he said before that D. Harding had VVilfully
falsified the text, it appears now evidently that Master Jewel has
VVilfully mocked and abused his Reader. Now to the story it self.

The Counsels holden at Ariminum, at Sileucia, at Sirmium, at Antiochia, and
the second time at Ephesus, for that they were not summoned nor approved by
the Bishop off Rome, have not ben accounted for lauful Counsels, but as well
for that rejected, as for their heretical determinations.

The.468 Untruth Slanderous.
The.112. Untruth. For in those days the Bishop of Rome had no Authorite to
summon Counsels.

Hist. tripa. lib. 4. ca. 9
Egit Eusebius vt in Antiochia Syriae Synodus fieret, sub occasion quidem
dedicationis Ecclesiae quam pater Augustorum fabricare coeperat, and post eius
obitum Constantius decimo anno eam a fundationis tempore expleuerat, in
veritate autem ad subuersionem atque destructionem Niceni Concilij: Ad quam
Synodum conuenerunt ex ciuitatibus diuersis episcopi nonaginta. Maximus tamen
Hierosolymitanus Macarij Successor non affuit, cogitans quod ipsi posset
subripi, vt in damnationem subscriberet Athanasij. Sed neque Julius interfuit
maximae Romae praesul, neque in locum suum aliquem destinauit. Cum vtique
regula Ecclesiastica iubeat, non oportere praeter sententiam Romani Pontificis
Concilia celebrari. In English thus. Eusebius (the Arrian intruded bishop of
Constantinople) caused a Synod to be held in Antiochia of Syria, under the
pretense of dedicating of a Church which Co^stantin the Great had begone to
build, Dedication of Chir^hes in the year of our Lord.
and Constantius his son in the tenth year after the first foundation laid
had finished, but in deed for the overthrowing and undoing of the Nicene
Council. To this Synod there were assembled out of diverse Cities the number
of fourscore and ten bishops. Yet Maximus bishop of Jerusalem and
successor to Macarius, was not present thereat, fearing that he might be
forced by some guile, to subscribe to the condemnation of Athanasius. No
neither Julius the Bishop of the greatest Rome, was present, neither h^d sent
any legate in his place. Whereas yet the Ecclesiastical Rule does
command, that beside the Authority off the Bishop of^ Rome, no Councelles
ought to be celebrated. Lo M. Jewel. A Council holden of fourscore and ten
bisshops, a Concell holden in Syria in the East Church, well nere twice further
from Rome then England, holden in the year of our Lord.346. more then twelve
hundred years sense, and in that same Council holden of so many bishops, so
far from Rome, so many hundred years sense, the Authorite of the bishop of
Rome, by commandment of an Ecclesiastical rule or Canon, required. If his
Authority was required thereunto and that by the virtue of an ecclesiastical
Rule or Canon, shall it be yet untrue that the Pope had then Authorite to
summon and approve Councels? Is not this argument good M. Jewel?

No parliament can be holdem, without the authorite of the Queen's Majesty.

Ergo the Queen's Majesty has Authority to call a parliament.

And then is not this as good.

No Council ought to be celebrated without the Authorite of ^he bishop of Rome.

Ergo the bishop off Rome has Authority to call a Council.

Unless M. Jewel will say that though he have Authoryte to celebrat, yet he
has no authoryte to Summon it: the summo^ing being less then the celebrating,
and the authorite off celebrating without the authorite of summoning being none
at all. Else what a mockery were this? The Prince has authority to hold a
parliament: but he may not call a parliament except it please the subjects.
Such rebels arguments may help M. Jewel. Other help or shifte here he
has none. Again to put more force to this matter, the history says, that
the Ecclesiastical rule or Canon does command that no Councelles be holden
without the Authority of the Pope. Li. 4. Ca. 9. His^or. tripa^ttiae.
I ask M. Jewel. Where was this ecclesiastical rule or Canon decreed? There
was no general Council before that time but the first Nicene Council. The
great Council of Sardica was held certain years after, though in the time
of this Julius, as it appears evidently by the ancient stories, and by the
new Chronographies. It could be no Canon of any provincial Council, that
should make such a general decree, to bind Syria it self and all the East to
the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. I ask M. Jewel then by the way, where
was that Canon decreed? Let him scour out his note books, let him examine the
Centuries of the Magdeburgenses, let him look to the common approved tomes of
the Council, he shall find it no where decreed before that time, but in the
Nicene Council, and in the Nicene Council he shall find it decreed, not in
the imperfect copies commonly extant, nor in the corrupted authentikes alleged
of the Africanes against pope Zosimus: But he shall find it in the epistle of
Julius this same Pope here mentioned, to these same Arrian Bishops of the
East. For in that epistle complaining of their schismatic Synod, and
blaming them therefore, that neither he nor any in his place was present
thereat, he gives the reason saying, Canonibus quippe in Nicena Synodo
iubentibus, etc. Seeing the Canons in the Nicene Council do command, that
without the Authorite of the bishopp of Rome, Counsels in any wise ought not
to be celebrated, nor bishops be condemned. Now to this testimony of the
ecclesiastical story and to the Canon or decree off the Nicene Council (as it
now appears to be) alleged, what answers M. Jewel? He puts it for an
Untruth, that the Pope had no such Authorite. But what does he answer then to
the examples alleged by D. Harding, and namely to this testimony of the
Ecclesiastical story? Undoubtedly this testimony went even to the heart of M.
Jewel. And being not able otherwise to answer it, he stormed and took on
about the translation off it as you have heard, Tom. 1. Concilioru^ epist. 1.
but to the story it self what says he now?



Not summoned, nor approved. Not forcing so much the formal summoning, but the
material approving. Well. How prove you the contrary? How prove you that the
Arrians Councels were not disanulled for lack of the Popes authorite? How
prove you the Untruth which you have noted. Thus you prove it.

The 469 Vntruth^ it was principally his part so t^ do.
Yet, he knows right well, it was no part of the Popes office in those days,
to Sumon Councelles.

Must D. Hardinges knowleadge be M. Iewelles proof? Answer to the point M.
Jewel. Answer to the testimony off the ecclesiastical story. Prove the
examples alleged to be false. You told the readers before that D. Harding
has committed two Untruths. The one in his translation in the english, the
other in the allegation of the Story. The Reader see now that you have mocked
him before in the one. And will you mock him so now in the other? Verily you
deal herein as weak reasoners, and simple logicioners do in scoles. When they
are not able to answer to the argument, they will make arguments of their own
to the contrary and tell a long tale for the part they defend, and so seem to
answer. But the great philosopher Aristotle in his rules off reasoning has
taught you M. Jewel, that contra opponere, non est respondere. To make
argument of the contrary, is not to answer. Yet let us see what you can bring
to the contrary. And the law says. Retorsione criminum non probatur
innocentia. By recharging the Adversary, a man's own innocence is not proved.

The 470 Untruth for not he allone did so.
^o^ it is evident by the police and practice of that time, that Constantinus
the Emperor summoned the Council of Nice.

Not he alone, nor by his only Authorite, but as Ruffinus writes, ex sententia
sacerdotum, by the advice and Authorite off the bishops.

Ru^fi^us li. 2 Cap. 1. The 47^ Untruth as s^all appear. Theodor. li 5 Cap. ^
Theodosius the first, the Council of Constantinople.

The bishops of that Council auouche the contrary. For thus they write to
Damasus the Pope. (...). We assembled our selves to Constantinople by the late
letters off your honor sent unto the most godly Emperor Theodosius. In these
words they confess they were Summoned by the letters off Damasus the Pope to
the Council. M. Jewel saiethe the Emperor did Summon them, not the Pope. Let
the Reader consider, who is more to be credited.



lib. 1. ca.. 2 hist. scolast.
merito oportuit Theodosij Iunioris nutu tunc sceptra tenentis Orientalis
Imperij, primam in Epheso Synodum congregari etc. It behooved very much that the
first Synod of Ephesus should be assembled at the commandment off Theodosius
the Second, then Emperor off the East. And it follows that he directed his
letters to the bishops, and appointed them a day to mete together. The like
writes Socrates. But what of that? The Emperor then was of best abilite to
bestow such charges, as in summoning bishops from all parts of the world
are requisite. But the question of the Popes Authorite stands not so much in
summoning, In epist. Ephesians. Co^. ad Nesior^^^^.
as in ruling, directing, and confirming a Council. In this first Council of
Ephesus, Celestinus the Pope was president as the Epistle of the whole Ephesine
Council professes, Cyrillus the bishop of Alexandria being his legate there,
and Nestorius the heretical bishop of Constantinople was deposed by the
Council, In epist. Ephesians. Con. ad Nesiorium.

Conc. Chel. Act. 1. Cyrillus epist. 11. and 12. Euagrius li. 1. cap. 2.


iuxta dilationem literis praefinitam sanctissimi and reuerendissimi
consacerdotis nostri Romanae praesulis Ecclesiae Caelestini, according to the
delay and time appointed him by the letters of our most holy (says the
Council) and most reverent fellow priest Caelestinus bishop of the Church of
Rome. Of the which term appointed by the Pope, Cyrillus also makes mention,
in the letter of excommunication which he sent to Nestorius. And the Pope him
self Caelestinus in his letters to Cyrillus writes thus. Adiuncta tibi sedis
nostrae authorite, Cyrillus Epist. 10. and 11. Caelest inter epist. Cirilli.
epist. 12.
and vicis nostra successione and potestate vsus, istam exacta cum seueritate
exequeris sententiam, vt nisi intra december dies ab huius admonitionis die
numeratos prauas suas predicationes scripta confessione anathematisauerit, and
han^ se de Christi and dei nostri generatione fidem retinere affirmauerit, qua^
and Romana and tuae sanctitatis and vniuersalis regio predicat, conf^ssini
sanctitas tua Ecclesiae illius prouideat, vt sciat se quou^s modo a nostro esse
corpore remouendum. Taking unto you the Authorite of our See, and occupying our
place and power, you shall execut (upon Nestorius the heretical Patriarche of
Constantinople) this sentence exactly and straightly, that Unless within ten
days, reakoning from the day that he shall be warned, he do anathematise and
accurse by Confession in writing his wicked preaching and doctrine, confessing
him self to have the same faith touching the Incarnation of Christ and our
God, which the Religion of Rome, of your holiness, and of the Universal Church
does teach, let your holiness out of hand provide for his Church (off
Constantinople) and let him know that he is utterly to be cut of from our
body. Thus the Pope executed the final sentence in the Council over the
Patriarche of Constantinople, the whole Council followed the determination of
the and Cyrillus the Patriarche of Alexandria was the Popes legate in that
behalf. And that learned Father Cyrillus thought the Authorite of the Pope
herein so necessary, that notwithstanding by his lerning he knew Nestorius to
hold an heretical doctrine, and was as he protests in letters to the Pope,
Paratus synodicis id literis manifestum reddere ready to prove it by letters of
Conference (as the manner then was among bishops) yet he durst not to refrain
from communicating with Nestorius or to condemn him, Cyrillus Epi. 18.
therefore he wrote thus unto Celestinus the Pope in the same letter.
Veruntamen nos ipsi ab illius communione cum fiducia non eximimus, donec ista
pietati tuae communicemus. Quapropter quid videatur exprimere dignare, an
aliquando debeamus illi co^municare, aut in posteru^ confidenter edicere quod
talia and sentie^ti and doce^ti nemo nostru^ Co^municet. Nevertheless we have
not been so bold as to withdraw ourselves from his Communion, vntell we did
certify your holiness of these things. Wherefore vouchesafe to signify what
is your pleasure, whether we may at any time communicate with him, or else
boldly pronounce that from hence forth none of us do communicate with him
having such opinion and teaching such things. Thus far Cyrillus. Again
whereas the bishops of the East and specially of Macedonia did seem to consent
to the wicked heresy of Nestorius, Cyrillus writes also to the Pope, that his
pleasure also might be known to them, how they ought to deal with Nestorius.
For thus he writes immediately after the words which went before. Scopum vero
integritatis tuae perspicuu^ oportebit fieri per liter as etia^ religiogis
simis qui per Macedoniam sunt episcopis, Cryillus Ep. 5. inter Epist. Syn^dal.
and simul omnibus per Orie^tem. The intent also of your meaning must be known
in like manner by your letters to the most holy bishops of Macedonia, and
through ought the whole East. Such was the Authorite of the Pope in that
Ephesine Councel^, and to Cyrillus the Head and President of that Council
under the Pope, nothwithstanding the summoning made by the Emperor. Neither
did the Emperor Theodosius in that Council take upon him the approving or
determining any matter in the Council, but refers the whole to the Canons
and to the Council. For thus it appears in the Imperial letters off
Theodosius written unto Cyrillus, where the Emperor says thus. Sunt
exemplaria a nostra Maiestate de praedicta sanctissima Synodo deo dilectis per
vniuersas Metropoles Episcopis scripta, Inter epist. Crylli, tomo 4. epist. 17.
vt hoc facto and perturbatio quae ex controuersijs istis accidit, secundum
ecclesiasticos Canones dissoluatur, and quae indece^ter committu^tur
corrigantur, sitque and pietati erga deu^, and publicis rebus co^moda firmi
tudo, nec aliquid quacu^que in re ante sanctissima^ Synodu^ and futura^ illius
commune^ sententia^, a quoqua^ separatim innouetur. The copies of our letters
written to the godly bishops from our Majesty thorough out al provinces are
exta^t touching this holy Synod (holde^ at Ephesus) that hereby both the
trouble which by these Controversies has risen may be ended and determined
according to the ecclesiastical Canons, and such things as are done amiss,
may be corrected: that so both God may duly be served, and the Common wealth
furdered, nor any thing of any man privately be altered or changed before the
most holy counsel and the uniform sentence and determination that shall be made
by the same. By these it is evident, that the Emperor intermedled not defining
and determyning any matter in the Council, or in approving the decrees of the
same. And therefore the same holy Council, at what time one of the Emperors
Nobility, Ioannes C^ntes.
John by name, went about to bring John the Patriarche off Antioche with his
adherents in to the Council, from whence for taking part with Nestorius the
heretic they were excluded: the Council would none of it, not suffering the
lay magistrate to intermedle therewith, but told the same John the Emperors
high Officer these words. Non opus est Regi vt fidem discat, cum hanc sciat,
inque illa baptisatus sit. Cyril. epist. 22. tom. 4
The Emperor needs not to learn his Faith, knowing it well enoughe already,
as in the which he has been baptized. By which it appears that this
Theodosius the second though he summoned the bishops and appointed the
place where they might conveniently be assembled, yet he approved not, nor
confirmed the decrees off the Council in like Authority as Cael^stinus the
Bishop of Rome then did whose legate in that Council Cyrillus that learned
Patriarche of Alexandria was, and who in the same Council was the whole
President and chief doer, as has before been proved, and as the Greeks them
selves Marcus of Ephesus and Bessarion of Nice in the eight general Council
confessed. Come. Flor. Sess. 5. Marcus Ephesius. Sess. 8. Bessar. Nicen. Episc.
And as Caelestinus by his Legate and Vicegerent Cirillus directed that
Council, appointed the ten days of delay to Nestorius the Bishop off
Constantinople, and confirmed the decrees of the same: so Sixtus successor to
this Caelestinus in the Sea Apostolic, confirmed and approved that Council
also, of whom Cyrillus thus writes. Cyrillus Epi. 29. Tom. 4.
Scripsit Consona Sanctae Synodo, and omnia illius gesta confirmauit, ac
nobiscum consentit. He wrote agreably to the holy Synod, and confirmed all the
doings thereof, and consents with us. Of such Confirming and approving
Councels the question now is, not of only summoning bishops to a Council.

The 472 Untruth.
And Marcianus the Council off Chalcedon.



Socra. li. 5 in proaemio
And Socrates in his Story says thus. Therefore I have comprised the
Emperors within my Story, for that sythence they began to be Christened,
the state of the Church depends of them and the greatest Councelles have been
kept and be still kept by their Advise.

much then and does also now of good Emperors? And that general Councelles
are kept by their Advise? But what is this to the purpose? The Emperors help
then does no more exclude the Popes Authorite at that time, then the late
help and Advise of all Christened Catholic Princes. namely of the most
Catholic Emperors, Charles the fifte, and Ferdinandus his brother, in and
about the late general Council of Trent, does exclude the Popes Authorite
at this time. But touching the state of the Church dependinge of the Emperors
as Socrates writes, John Calvin him self will tell you M. Jewel that the
same takes not away the ecclesiastical Iurisdict^on of the Church. For he
speaking of the Ecclesiastical Authorite to bind and to lose sinners says
thus. Whereas many think that those things endured but for a time when the
Magistrates were yet strangers from the profession of our Religion: John Calvin
in his I^stitutions, lib. 4 ca. 11. par. 3
they are deceived in this that they considre not, how great difference and
what manner of unlikeness there is of the Ecclesiastical and Civil power. And
a little after in the next paragraphe he says. When Emperors and Magistrates
began to profess Christ, the spiritual Jurisdiction was not by and by
abolished, but only so ordered, that it should diminish nothing of the Civil
Jurisdiction, or be confounded with it. It seems here by Caluins judgment
that the state of the Church depended not so of Emperors after they were
Christened, that the Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction was thereby either abolished
or confounded.

By warrant of the Emperors letters: The.473 Vntrut^e as shall appear.
Theodoret. lib. 5. ca. 9
Not by any his own Authorite.

not by any his own Authorite, are avouched of M. Jewel only of his own
Authorite, beside the mind and true report of his Author which he has quoted
in the Margin. The whole words of Theodoret or rather of the bisshops in the
Concel of Co^sta^tinople me^cioned in Theodoret, whereof M. Jewel has
snatched a piece, and in that piece has said more to, the^ was in his author,
are these. Whereas you (say those bishops to Damasus the Pope) declaring your
brotherly love toward us, T^eodoret. lib. 5. ca. 9
assembling a council in Rome by the pleasure of God. (...), have also summoned
us as your proper members, by the letters of the most godly Emperor, to the
intent that whereas before we only have abiden the smarte (of the persecution
under Valens the Arrian) now in the godly Consent of th Emperors, (Thedosius
the first and Gratian) you might not raingne or reioyst without us, but
according to the saying of the apostle we might reign and rejoice with you, 2.
Cor. 1. 2. Tim. 2.
we desired verily, if it had been possible, all of us at ones to have left
our Churches, and to gratify this profitable request. Psalm. 54.
For who will give us wings like pigeons (as the Prophet speaks) that we
might fly and rest with you? But seeing by these means our Churches should be
left naked, matters being but newely set in order, and because the thing
seemed to many impossible, for we had assembled our selves but lately at
Constantinople by the late letters of your honor sent after the Council
holden in Aquileia to the most godly Emperor Theodosius etc. For these and
many other causes which stayed our coming, we have done yet that was next to be
done, both for the effect of this purpose, and for declaration off your love
toward us. That is, we have sent our most Reverent and holy brethers and fellow
priests, Cyriacus, Eusebius and Priscanus bishops, by whom you may know our
mind and accord in all things.

After this they make a profession of their faith in those letters, they
declare what was decreed and determined in the Council holden at
Constantinople, they signify of Nectarius ordered bishop off Constantinople,
off Flauianus made bishop of Antioche in Syria, off Cyrillus made bishop in
Hierualem, and such like matters. After all which they desire the assent of
Damasus thereto. Now touching this present matter, the bishops here do
witness, that to that Council off Rome the Pope called them, by the letters
of the Emperor, not as a warrant (they have no such word) but rather as a
means, (...). Council. chalced. Action. 3.
For they witness he called them as his proper members, in like manner truly as
the bishops of the great General Council in Chalcedon in their letters to Leo
the Pope do agnise, that he was over them as the Head over the Members, by his
legates. whereby it appears he called them by his own Authorite as he being
their Head, and they his members. Therefore also they excused so diligently the
cause of their not coming to the Council, therefore they sent him a profession
of their faith, and certified him of all other particular things done in that
Council, unto the which by his own letters, they confess also they had been
lately before summoned. The sending forth of the Emperors letters to summon
them proves no more M. Iewelles negative illation, and not by his own
authorite, then the late edict off Charles the French king made in Paris in
the year of our lord 1562. in the month of January, whereby he commanded the
bishops off France to repair to Trent to the General Council there, may
infer also, that the same Council was summoned Not by the Popes own
authorite, but by the warrant of the French kings letters. For as Damasus the
Pope summoned the bishops of the East then to the Romain Council, by the
means of the Emperors letters: so Pius the fourth summoned the bishops of
France to the late Council of Trent by the means off Charles the French
king at this present. And as the French kings letters now make no argument
against the Authorite of Pius the fourth over the late Council off Trent: no
more did the Emperors letters then make any argument against the Popes
authorite at that time over the Roman Council. Especially for that, not the
Emperor him self, but the Pope by his letters summoned those bishops to the
Council.

The 474 Untruth for no Theo^osius was the Emperor. Intera^t^ Conc. Co^st.5.
Your Majesty has honored the Church by the letters, wherewith ye summoned
us together.

For this place M. Jewel has quoted unto us the Acts of the fifte Council
of Constantinople. But in that Council not Theodosius or any of that name was
Emperor but Justinian, well nere a hundred years after both the Theodosiuses.
Theodosius the first was Emperor in deed in the first Council of
Constantinople, but in all the Acts of that Counsel, there appears not in
the volume off the Councelles any such letters of the bishopps to the
Emperor, or any such words as are here alleged any other where. Under
Theodosius the second no Council was holden at Constantinople, but only at
Ephesus, beside a provincial Council, which Flauianus held there against
Eutyches, off the which no Acts are extant. And thus M. Jewel must correct
his book, or else it will be thought he has forged the matter him self,
except he have some preuy store off Councelles in his poor library, which all the world beside knows not of.

Touching the place it self where ever it be found, the words importe no
more then that the Emperor Theodosius summoned the Council, which, as I said
before, does no more disprove the Authorite off the Pope in Approving and
Confirming General Councelles (especially in such sort as the Ecclesiastical
Canon mentioned by Socrates does report, saying that without the Authorite
off the bishopp off Rome no Council ought to be holden) then does the late
summoning of the French bishopps by Charles their king to the General
Council off Trent, Disprove or destroy the Souerain Authorite of the Bishop
off Rome that then was over the General Council then holden and celebrated.
For notwithstanding they were summoned by their king, yet were they before
summoned and also principally by the Authorite and will of the Pope that then
was Pius the fourth of blessed memory.

The particular proufes of M. Jewel now failing he gathers general
conjectures upon the Popes weakness in those days of the primitive Church.
And for proof hereof he alleges S. Gregory. Accompting him now in this
place for a bishop of Rome of the primitive Church, though he were well nere
600. years after Christ, page 420.
and though he call him in an other place of this Reply, a late and obscure
Doctor.

li. 4. ep. 34 The.475 Untruth. For herein is declared his Authorite no
weak^nesse.
Thus he writes by way of complainte unto the Emperesse Constantia. He
despised me, and set me at naught, and would not come unto me, according to my
lords the Emperors commandment.

Gentle Reader if it had liked M. Jewel to have given the leave to read the
whole place of S. Gregory and not to have nipped of the middle of the sentence,
concealing also the whole circumstance both before and after, thou should
have seen a very weak proof in this place of the Popes weakness, and a
great argument of his Authorite. His whole complainte to the Emperesse
Co^stantia is this. Salonitanae ciuitatis episcopus etc. Gregorius i. 4. ep. 34
The Bishop of Salona has been Ordered without my knowledge or my deputies.
And that thing is done, which never happened in the time of any my
predecessors. I having understanding hereof sent forthewith to the offender,
which without order had been so ordered, that he should not in any wise presume
to say Mass, unless I had first understood by my Lords the Emperors, that
they had so commanded him. And this I commanded upon pain of
excommunication. But he despysing me and setting me at naught In audaci^^
quorund^ seculari^^ hominum.
being vpholded by certain secular men, which are said to have great flyses
out of his Church, presumes yet to say Mass, and would not come unto me
according to my Lords the Emperors commandment. Notwithstanding I obeying
to their commandment, have so released that Maximus, so unlawfully made
bishop, without my knowleadg or my deputies, the fault of his vnlauefull
ordinatione, so sincerely as if he had been by my Authorite ordained. But his
other offenses and bodily mish^fes, which I have understood, of him, as that he
was by symonie choson, and that he presumed to say Mass being excommunicated,
I can not for Gods quarrel leave untried. But I do wish and pray our Lord, that
none of th^se things be found true in him of the which he is accused, and
that without the peril of my soul, his cause may be ended. Now whereas my
gracious Soueraines have sent commandment, that before the trial of these
matters, I should receive him honorably coming hither, truly it is a heavy
case that a man so infamous, and accused of such great crimes, should be
honored before his trial and purgation. And if the questions of the bishops
committed to my charge be in the disposition of my good lords the Emperoures
by the suit of other men, I unhappy man what make I here in this Church?
Verily that my own bishops do thus despise me, and do find refuges against
me at the hands of secular Judges, I thank allmighty God, my sins are the
cause thereof. Howbeit to be short, this much I signify to your highness. I
will tarry for him for a time, if he make long d^laies to come at me, In eo
E^erce redi^t icti^nem Canonica^ null^ modo Cessabo.
I will not fail to excute upon him ^xtremite of law. This is the whole
co^plainte of holy S. Gregory to the Emperesse Co^sta^tia, and thus it ends.
Such was the Popes weakness, that notwithstanding he complains that he was
despised of his own bishop, a bishop of Salone in Illyricum, and vpholden by
certain secular men which obtained the Emperors letters for him to the Pope,
notwithstanding the commandment of the Emperor, his weakness was such,
that he avouched stoutely, that he will not fail to execute the law upon him.
Thus by peeced and patched sent^nces out of the old Fathers, M. Jewel would
p^o^^ the thing which the whole place considered utterly overthrows. Thus he
deludeth his Reader and makes him believe he has store of Authorites and
doctors, because he can allege apase, and lie apase, and corrupt cleanly. For
behold here follows immediately an other.

Leo epi. 23 Liberat. Cap. 12. The 476 and 477. untruth committed in
allegation of Liberatus Stapleton
Therefore Leo finding this weakness in him self, wrote unto the cle^gie and
people of Constantinople, and willed them to crave a gene^ll Council at the
Emperors hand Ex pos^ite vt petitio^i n^strae ^ua plena^i (...) Syno^^m
^ostula^us, ^lemen^is^imus Imperator dignetur an^^ere. M^ke your request, that
the Emperors Majesty would vouchesafe, to grant my humble petition, wherein
I besought him to Summon a General Council. Liberatus says that Leo the
Bis^op of Rome, with other more bishops of Italy f^ll upon there knees, and
d^sired the Emperor Val^ntinian, and the Emp^resse Eudoxia to appointe a
Council, and yet could not obtain it.

In this alleagation out of Liberatus two Untruths are committed by M. Jewel.
For neither Leo the Pope s^ll on his knees to the Emperor Valentinian, neither
did they desire him to appointe a Council, but to write to Theodosius the
Emperor of the East, about it. The wo^des of Liberatus are these: Liberat.
Cap. 12.
Fortissimus Leo audiens l^gatorum suoru^ suggestionem and Theodoreti querelas
suscipiens, literis Theodosium Impe^atorem and Pulcheriam Augustam rogat, vt
fieret intra Italiam g^n^rale Con^lium, vt aboleretur error fidei per
violentiam Dioscori factus. Valetinianum autem imperatorem and Eudoxiam vxor^m
cius, ad memoriam beati Petri, cum multis episcoporum genibus prouolutis,
Romanus Pontifex deprecatus est Imperatore^ vt Theodosiu^ hortaretur, alia^
fieri Synodu^, ad retractandu^ illa quae a Dioscoro male acta atque perpetrata
fuera^t in da^natione^ Flauiani Episcopi, and orthodoxru^ depositio^e. Leo the
stout hearing the repotte of his legates, and receauinge the complaints of
Theodoretus (the learned B. of Cyrus) desires by his letters Theodosius the
Emperor and Pulcheria the Empress, that a general Council might be held
within Italy, to undo the heresye which Dioscorus by violence had wrought:
Also the Bishop of Rome beseched Valentiniam the Emperor and Eudoxia his
wife, at Saint Peter's Church, with many of the bishops kneeling on their
knees, to require the Emperor Theodosius, that an other Synod might be called
to revoke those things which Dioscorus (the heretic bishop of Alexandria)
had concluded in the condemnation of Flauianus the Catholic bishop of
Constantinople, and in the deposing of the Catholics. Thus far the words of
Liberatus. Where he says not that Leo the Pope fell on his knees to the
Emperor as Master Jewel fableth, but that Leo entreated him with many of the
bishopps falling on their knees. Again they entreat not Valentinian to
appointe a Council, but to exhort and persuade the Emperor Theodosius
thereunto. Thus Master Jewel follows his natural humor ever to report
things untruly, and to make worse of the matter, then his Author will suffer
him. Touching the matter it self, we shall anon speak at large. Let us first
consider the remnant of M. Iewelles gheasses against the authorite of the
Pope, in approving summoning and authorizing Councelles most clearly witnessed
by the ecclesiastical Story.

Leo epis. 11
appointed it to be holden at Ephesus.

Leo. epi. 51 43. et 46 Non iudidicio sed la trocinio. Liberatus ^^p. 12.
So did the same Emperor Theodosius maintain the heretic Dioscorus in that
conspiracy (not Council) at Ephesus (as Leo calls it) and vpholded (as
Liberatus writes) the condemnation of Flauianus: Theodo^etus and other
Catholic bishops not suffering (as the Pope required) an other Council to be
called for the dissolution thereof. Thus M. Jewel is driven again to take
part with heretics, and such as uphold them.

Leo epist. 13.50.44.58. The 478 Untruth For there was no such decay of the
popes universal power.
After that he made the same request to the Emperor Martianus. And the
Emperor likewise contrary to the Bisshoppes humble request commanded the
Council to be kept at Chalcedon. And whereas Leo had besought both these
Emperors that it might please them to take a longer day for the Council, for
that the time of the Summon seemed very short, and the ways were laid with
emyes, and therefore daungerouse for the Bishops to trauaill, yet would
never of them alter one day, but charged each man to appear as they were
summoned. And Leo the B. of Rome withal his universal power, was feign to
yield.

Leo epist. 47.
I had wished in deed most dearly beloved that all the Priests of God did
agree in one profession off the Catholic faith, and that none would so be
corrupted either by favor and by fear of the secular power, that he should
thereby swerve from the truth: But because many things are often done of the
which we after repent, and the Mercy of God passes the offenses of men, who
forbeareth to revenge that we may have leisure to amend, the religious Advise
of our most gracious Emperor is to be embraced, moving your holy brotherhood
to meat and assemble your selves together for the overthrowing of Satan's
sl^ightes, and reforming of unite in the Church, Beatissimi Petri Apostoli
sedis iure atque honor^ se^uat^.
the honor and right off the Sea of S. Peter the most blessed Apostle
pres^rued, inuiting also us by his letters to assiste in person at this
reverent Council, which yet neither the Necessite of this time, neither any
custom could permit. Howbeit in our brethern Paschasius and Lucentius
Bishops, Bon^facius and Basilius Priests, your brotherhood has me
Pr^sident in your Synod: Neither may you think me absent, which in my legat^s
am Present, and in the setting forth of the Catholic faith, (...) i^ v^st^a
^^^te^nitis ex istinet p^aesidere.
have not this long time ben absent. Thus far Leo. Whose whole words as
they lie in his Epistle I have alleged, to the intent you may see M. Jewel
that notwihstanding Martianus had appointed the Council to be kept at
Chalcedon, yet it was done Apostolicae sedis iure atque honor seruato,
without any prejudice to the right and honor of the Apostolic See. Which
right the ecclesiastical history confesses to be, Li 4. Ca. 9. Hist^r
triparti^ae.
that without it no Council could be helden or celebrated, and that long
before this Leo in the time of Julius. And therefore Leo gives his express
consent to the Emperors calling and hastening unto the Council (which he
would gladly for a time have differed) writing unto him in these words. I
required in deed of your most glorious clemency, Leo ad Mar^i^^^^ Augustiepi^t.
43.
that the Synod which you thought necessary to be assembled, as we also
required, for restoryng of unite in the East Church, might be for a time
differed, that the minds of men being more settled, those bishops which for
fear off enemies are stayed at home, might also meet. But because you do
zelously prefer gods cause, before the affairs off men, and are wisely and
godly persuaded that it shall further the wealth of your empire to have the
priests off God in unite, and the gospel preached without dissension, Ego
etiam vestris dispositionibus non renitor. I also do not witstande your order
herein, wis^ing that the Catholic faith, which can possibly be but one, may
be strenghthened in the hearts of all men. Thus far Pope Leo to the Emperor
Martianus, wherein we see he was not forced of the Emperor against his will,
but b^ good considerations was moved to consent and agree to that, which the
Emperor of zeloe and piety thought best to be done. But because M. Jewel
imagines here a general shipwrake of the Popes universal power, for so he
calls the authority off Christ's chief vicaire over all Christen men, I
will give to the Reader a note or two out of the epistles of Leo that may
sufficiently declare the supreme Authorite of the Pope over that general
Council of Chalcedon. First that his legates were president thereat, it is
evident by the words of Leo before alleged out of his letters to the whole
Council, Leo. epist. 47.
and also by the tenor of his legates subscription to the Council, as we have
before alleged. Secondarely because in that Council, many bishops of the East,
which had yielded before to Dioscorus the heretic, were partly to be
reconciled, partl^e punished, the ordering hereoff was all in the hands of the
Popes legates, as Leo in his letters both to the Emperor Martinus and to
Anatholius bishop of Constantinople does express. His words to the Emperor
are these. To the intent that they which will amend, may neither be overmuch
delaied, neither over easily and without discretion remitted: Leo epist. 44. ad
Martianu^. Augustum
it is enjoined to the legates of the Sea Apostolic, taking also with them the advice of the bishop off Constantinople, to see that neither the contagious
parties be admitted, nor the whole and sound repelled. In his letters to
Anatholius bishop of Constantinople appointing him his legate with Lucentius and
Basilius whom he sent at that time to the council, he writes thus. Leo epist.
46. ad Anatholium.
As touching those which have offended more grievously in this matter (he
means in the schismatic conuenticle of Ephesus) and therefore chal^ng^d to
them selves a superior place in that unhappy Synod, oppressing by their
ambitious pride the humilite of their simple b^ethern: if perhaps they do
rep^nt and do confess their own wickedness, if their satisfaction do some
according, let it be res^rued to some riper Councell^s of the (...) Apostolic,
to thentent that all things b^ing ^^i^d and examined, iu^g^ment may be geu^n
what ought to b^ d^t^rmined upon their confessions. And a little after. If it
b^n d^^u^l in some c^s^ to have a fa^d^r deliberation, let me besped^ly
in^o^^^d th^^^of, that the con^i^ion and cas^ b^ing ^xamin^d, we may d^^^rmine,
what is to be d^ne. T^us fa^re Leo. In all which words we s^e M. I^we^l a
supreme Authorite of the Pope and his legates over the whole Counsel, in
pardoning and punishing such bishops as had before offended, notwitstanding the
place and time of the Counsel was after the Emperors mind and pleasure.
Thirdly whereas Martianus being Emperor of the East, required the Council to
be helden in the East parts, not in Italy, that all that was done by the
authorite and consent off the Pope, not by any such rigorous force and absolut
commandment of the Emperor as M. Jewel untruly reports, it shall appear
by these letters of the Emperor him self unto Leo. Martianus at the beginning
of his Empire writes to Pope leo in this sort. Being called by the providence
of allmighty God to the empire, Tom. 1. Conc. in proleg. Chalcedon. Syn.
etc. We for the reverent and Catholic religion of the Christen faith, by the
help and maintenance whereof, we do trust the power of our Empire to be
stre^ghthened, have thought good in the beginning hereof, to speak by our
letters to your holiness, which occupies the principalite in the bishoprike
charge of gods faith, Tuam sanctitatem principatu^ in episcopatu diuinae
fidei possidentem. per celebra^dam synodum te authore.
provoking and requiring your holiness to remember the good estate off our
Empire in your prayers, and that also for the extirping of all wicked error,
we may fully purpose and determine, to restore unite and concord among all
Catholic bishops, By celebrating a Council, by your Authorite. Thus much the
Emperor Martianus to Leo the Pope for the calling and summoning of a Council.
Wherein you see, how far he is from any forceable mean, and how little he
uses therein his own Authorite, but refers the matter expressly to the
Pope, whom also he confesses to bear the principalite and chiefty in the
bishoply office, that is, among al bishops. Now touching the place where the
Council might be holden, in an other letter to the Pope, thus the Emperor
Martianus writes. Alia epsi: Martiani Ibidem.
It remains, that if it shall please your holiness to come in to these
parts, and to celebrat the Council: you will vachesafe so te do. Truly herein
your holiness shall satisfy our desire, and shall determine profitably for the
furderance of godly religion. But if this be burdenous for you to come hither,
let your holiness signify the same unto us by your letters, to the intent we
may direct our commandment to all the East, in to Thracia and to Illyricum
to summon all the most holy bishops into some determinat place, where it shall
please us, Sicut sanctitas tua secundum ecclesiasticas regulas dis^niuerit.
that they may so by their disposition set such things as concern the
furderance of Christen Religion and the Catholic faith, even as your
holiness shall determine according to Ecclesiastical Canons. In like manner
the Emperesse Pulcheria writes to Leo the Pope about the calling and
summoning off this Council off Chalcedon: Propterea tua reuerentia quocunque
modo prospexit, Epist. Palcherie ad Leone^ ibid.
significare dignetur. Therefore let your Reuerentnes voutchesafe to signify
unto us, after what manner so ever it shall think good, that we may summon the
bishopps to a Council, vt de episcopis qui ante hoc segregati sunt, sicut
fides and Christiana pietas exigit, te authore deceruant, to determine by your
Authorite of such bishops as have before this time been separated, even as the
faith and Christen piety requires. Thus much wrote the Emperors to Leo, and
thus wrote Leo to them. Here was no decaie or shipwreck of the Popes
universal power, but here was a most clear and evident demonstration of his
supreme Authorite in approving, and ordering a general Council, practiced by
his legates, confessed by the Emperors, and not dissembled by learned Leo him
self. More yet of the Popes authorite in this general Council of Chalcedon,
we shall have occasion hereafter to speak in the 118. Untruth. In Epist. ad
Episcopos Dardaniae. The 474 Untruth slanderous against Pope Gelasius.
Now let us see what M. Jewel will conclude of all the allegations out of
Liberatus and the epistles of Leo. He says.

Hereby we may soon conjecture, how true it is, either that Pope Gelasius
writes, That only the Apostolic See of Rome decreed by her Authorite, that
the Council should be summoned, or else that M. Hardinge would have us
believe, That all Councelles were summoned by the Pope.

Hereby we may soon conjecture how truly and faithfully M. Jewel meaned when
he offered to yield and subscribe to any old father or Council of the first
600. years, which now so little estemeth the Authorite of Gelasius a learned
Father of less then 500. years after Christ, that he takes upon him to
comptrolle him and to prove him a liar. So that now the question is no more
between us whether the learned Fathers do write so, teach so, or witness so:
but whether their writings, their doctrine, their witnesses be true, or no.
And whom shall we believe, if we believe not such ancient writers, so many
hundred years before us, so long taken for learned Fathers, bishops of
Christ's Church in their life time? Shall we leave Gelasius, and believe
Jewel? This impudent arrogance must needs proceed of Lucifer the first
creature that sinned in pride. If this be admitted, what do we profess a
Christen faith any longer? What do we talk of Fathers and Councelles, if when
Fathers and Councelles are brought, we must yet prove farther that the Fathers
speak truly, and that the Councelles say well. This is not to be tried by the
Fathers: but it is to try and examine the Fathers them selves. And then they
are not our Fathers, but our scholars. This is the right way to paganism and
infydelite, and to the utter abolishment off all Christianite. To such issue
these new altercations have brought matters. If we be Christen men, let us
abhor these enormites: If we be no Christen men, what talk we of Christ and
the gospel? To this digression the impudency off M. Jewel has forced me.
Touching the saying of Gelasius, which M. Jewel malapertly comptrolleth, first
Gelasius talks not of summoning but of holding and making the Council. His
words are. Authoritate, In epist. ad ^pisc. Dar^^. T^m. 1. Co^.
vt Synodus Ghalcedonensis fieret, sola decernit. Only the Sea Apostolic by
her Authority decreed, that the Council of Chalcedon should be holden. And
this to be true, it appears evidently by the letters of the Emperor
Martianus and the Emperesse Pulcheria to Leo the Pope, and by the letters of
Leo to the Council it self, as we have before declared. Again this Gelasius
wrote those words little more then fifty years after the Council of Chalcedon
was finished. It is credible he knew as well what was done there, as M. Jewel
does. Thirdly what does all this conclude against the allegations of D.
Hardinge? What makes it against the express and most manifest testimony of
the Ecclesiastical Storye witnessing expressly, that without the Authorite of
the bishopp of Rome no Councels could be held, and that by the virtue of the
Ecclesiastical Canon. What is all this to the Councelles of the Arrians,
disproued and disanulled for lack of the bishop of Romes Authorite? Forsothe
M. Jewel concludes that Hereby it may appear that all Counsels were
summoned by the Pope. D. Hardinge said not so much. But that all Councelles
must be approved by the Pope, even as the ecclesiastical history witnesses.
And that certain namely those of the Arrians were not accounted for lawful
Councelles, because they were not summoned nor approved by the Pope. Against
this Master Jewel has nothing concluded, unless he will reason thus.

The Pope Leo approved and summoned the Council of Chalcedon, and granted to
the Emperors pleasure touching the place.

Ergo, the Pope has no Authorite to summon or approve Concell^s.

Or thus.

Gelasius said truly that only by the Authorite of the Pop^ the council of
Chalcedon was held.

Ergo the Pope has not Authority to approve the Councelles.

These are weak reasons, God wotteth. And yet so he must reason, if of the
premises he will conclude to the purpose. And if it be not to the purpose what
makes it here?

M. Jewel goes forth and multiplieth Untruths. He says.

The 480 Untruth extreme facing.
Neither was the Bishop of Rome, nor his legate in his absence ever more the
President or Chief of the Council.



The 481. manifest Untruth.
For it is known that in the Counell of Nice Eustathius the Patriarch of
Antioche was the President, and the Bishop off Romes legates Vitus and
Vincentius sat in the fourth Room beneathe.

Tom. 1. pagin. 257.


The.482 Untruth For not he alone. Actor. 1.
In the Council of Constantinople Menna was the chief.

This Menna was not the president of the Council alone. Sabinus, Epiphanius,
Asterius, Leo, Rusticus bishops, Theophanes and Pelagius Deacons, sent from
the Apostolic See of Rome, considebant illi coadiutores, did sit in the like
and aequall Authorite with him, as the Acts of the Council do expressly
declare.

Did. 26. Sexta sy^odus. The.483 Untruth For this osius was the popes legate..
In the Council of Sardica, Osius and Corduba in Spain.

This Osius of Corduba, with Vincentius of Capua, Ianuarius of Beneuentum, and
Calepodius of Naples bishops, were the legates of the Sea Apostolic, and
were all presidents in that Council.



In the Council of Carthage, Aurelius the B. there.

to Innocentius to be confirmed as appears in S. Augustine, and Celestinus
witnesses that they were confirmed by the Sea Apostolic. As for the Council
of Aquileia we have it not perfectly set forth, as by the end of it is easy
to be seem. August epist. 90. Caelest. pp. in epist gal. cap. 3. Tom. 1. Council.

The 404 Untruth for only by way of authorite.




In the Council of Chalcedon Leo the bishop off Romes Legate had chief room,
but by way of entreaty only, and by the Emperors special grant, and not of
dew right, or universal Authorite.

Behold the lying impudency of M. Jewel. before he said. Neither was the
Bishop of Rome, nor his legate in his absence, ^uermore the president or Chief
of the Council. Now he confesses that in the Council of Chalcedon Leo the
bishop of Romes legate had the chief Room. Wherein he proves him self in
the former to have made a manifest lie. But now he spiceth the matter with an
other Notorious and lewd lie only avouched, but no way proved, that the Popes
Legate had there the Chief Rome by way of entreaty only etc. It should have
behooved M. Jewel to have proved this. verily he has been so often taken in
lying, that for any credit to be given him in such matters, he may now stand
for banckeroute. Certainly Leo notwithstanding Martianus summoned the Council
of Chalcedon, yet he says that was done Apostolicae Sedis iure atque honor
seruato, Leo epist. 47.
the Right and the honor off the Apostolic See reserved. And in the same
Council it is openly avouched without any Co^tradiction, notwithstanding M.
Iewelles Nay here, Council. Chalcedon Actio. 11.
that Missi Apostolici semper in Synodis prius loqui and confirmare soliti
sunt, the legates of the Sea Apostolic were wont in Councels allwaies to
speak first, and to confirm first. This lo was the right of the Sea
Apostolic, this was not by way of Entreaty. And therefore the Emperor him
self Martianus writing to Pope Leo about the assembling of this council
affirms eius sanctitatem principatum in episcopatu diuinae fidei possidere
that his holiness occupies the Tom. 1. Con. in prolego^. Chalced, Conc.
Chiefty or principal room in the bishoply charge of Gods faith, and inuiteth
him therefore ad celebrandam Synodu^ eo Authore, that a counsel may be
celebrated by his Authorite. In like manner writes Pulcheria the Emperesse unto
Leo the Pope of Rome about the same time as it has before been declared.
Here is an Authorite confessed not only of Leo the Pope, and the Counsel, but
of the Emperor him self in gouuerning and directing the Council. Here is no
entreaty or special grant made or required, M. Jewel would feign it were so,
but with al his shifts he shall never be all to prove it so.

But, says M. Harding, the bishop of Rome allowed all Councels. This is not
denied.

If it be not denied, why have you so long striued against it?

So did others, not only patriarchs or bishops but also Civil princes.

Gentle Reader. Eye M. Jewel well. Unless thou take good head, he will steal
from thee. He says not only the bishopp of Rome allowed all Counc^lles, but
also (says M. I^well) So did others. Then he must prove that other allowed
all Councels, and that with such and like authorite, as the Pope did. Now the
Authorite of the Pope was such, that without it (as the ecclesiastical story
reports) No councelles might be held. Then M. Jewel must prove that not
only Patriarchs and other bishops, but also Civil Princes, had such authorite
in approving Councelles, that without their Authorite they mignt not be held.
Such authorite M. Jewel must prove. Else, his so did others, will not follow.
Now let us see how he proves it.

In the Council of Calcedon it is written thus. Theodosius the Emperor of
godly memory has confirmed all things by a general law^, that were
determined in the universal Council. So likewise the Emperor Martianus. by
the holy edicte of our Maiest^ we confirm that Reverend Council. So Eusebius
witnesses that the Emperperour Constantius confirmed the determinations of the
Council of Nice. So the bishops in the Council of Constantinople wrote to
the Emperor Theodosius. we desire by your favor by your highness letters to
ratify and confirm the decree of the Council.

You might have added here M. Jewel, so in the late general Council of
Trent, the Orators of the Emperor and every Catholic prince there present,
confirmed the decrees of the Council. And yet neither the other examples nor
this late example is any thing like to the confirming of the bishop of Rome,
The bishop of Romes confirmation is so necessary that without it, (as the
Canons do command) no Council can be kept. No bishop nor prince has such a
confirmation. As for example, Theodosius which you alleged first, confirmed
the Council of Ephesus. And yet that Council was after and ever sense
accounted for no lawful Council because the legates of Pope Leo were not
admitted, but by violence of the heretic dioscorus injured. Vide act. 1.
Council. Chal.
Therefore as all your other examples do prove a godly zele in these good
Catholic Emperors, and do show how necessary it is that the secular power
do aid the spiritual, yet no Emperor or lay prince ever confirmed any
Council, as the Judge and president hereof. To be short. The bishop of Rome
has in all Councelles a negative voice, as without whose, none can be
approved: for so does the Canon, mentioned in the Ecclesiastical history,
expressly witness. Such a negative voice, such an absolute and supreme
Authorite in approving Councelles no Prince nor Patriarche has, but only the
bishop of Rome successor to Peter chief of the Apostles.

For why? The Emperor or lay Prince, as he has no absolute authorite to
judge in matter of ^he faith, so has he none to approve Councelles, when
matters of the faith only are handled. Therefore Gregory Nazianzen being a
bishop, calls the Emperor, Ouem sui gregis, a sheep of his flock. In orat.
ad subditos. Epist. ^2. ad (...). lib 4. cap. 11. para. 4
So S. Ambrose says. What is more honorable for the Emperor, then to be
called the son of the Church, for a good Emperor is within the Church, not
above the Church. So John Calvin in his Institions directly against M. Jewel,
and according to the mind of S. Ambrose says. The Magistrate if he be godly,
will not exempt him self from the common subjection of the Children of God.
Wherefore it is not the least part to submit himself to the Church judging
by the word of God. And therefore Constantin the great in the first Counsel of
Nice, as Sozomenus records, entered in to the Concell house after all the
bissops, lib. ^. cap. 5. hist. tripar.
had his seat and place benethe the^ all, neither would sit Down before the
bishops had commanded him. And in that Council, he protested plainly that it
was not his part to judge over the bishops. Whose example the virtuous
Emperor Martianus expressly following in the Council of Chalcedon, in his
oration made to the whole Synod speaks thus. Nos ad confirmandam fidem, non
ad ostendendam virtutem exemplo Co^stantini Imperatoris adesse Synodo
cogitauimus. Chalcedon Conc. Act. 1.
We after the example of Constantine have thought good to be present at this
Council, not to show our power therein, but to confirm the faith. Ibidem.
And a little after he says, Our endeavor must be to apply the people to the
one and right Church, being first persuaded the true and holy doctrine. And
therefore let your Re^uerentnesse expound and declare the true and Catholic
faith according to the doctrine of the Fathers, in all unite and co^corde. Thus
this virtuous Martianus following the steps of Constantinus, though he
confirmed the faith of the Concell, yet he judged not in the Council, he
committed the trial and judgment of doctrine to the bishops, he made his
people to obey it. Thus did Emperors and Civil princes behave them selves in
Councelles, such as were Catholics, and defenders of the Catholic faith.
This helps not hinders, this strengthens not overthrows the spiritual
Jurisdiction. Vide inter epist. Ciril li tom. 4. epist. 17.
And thus much of the Civil princes, and namely of Martianus and Constantinus
alleged by M. Jewel. As for Theodosius the second, whom he alleges also,
in the first Council of Ephesus holden under him, he behaved him self as other
Catholic Emperors did before him, submitting all matters to the determination
of the Council, as in Cyrillus above alleged it appears. But afterward as
he took upon him more then becomed his estate: so he maintained the blasphemous
heresy of Eutyches, Vide Chalced. Council. Act. 1.
so he defended the schismatic synod of Dioscorus the heretic, so he
consented to the death of the blessed bishop of Constantinople Flauianus
called therefore a Martyr in the Chalcedo^ Counsel, so most injuriously in
that conuenticle of Ephesus, he would not suffer Flauianus, Eusebius, and other
Catholic bishops which had deposed the heretic Eutyches, to sit in Judgment,
but to stand as parties accused, to answer to the wicked heretic Eutyches.
Act. 11. Leo epist. 24. and 26 and 26. Leo. epist. 44.
But as that co^ue^ticle of Ephesus which that Emperor so much maintained, was
and is to this day condemned for heretical, as Martianus sucessour to this
Theodosius the second brought to Constantinople the relikes of the Martyr
Flauianus, as the heresy of Eutyches by that Emperor defended was by the
general Council of Chalcedon, and by the consent of Christendom hitherto,
condemned and detested: so the doings of that Emperor are not prejudicial to
the Catholic faith, either in not admitting the Popes legates at the
conuenticle of Ephesus, either in not suffering a Council to be called for
redress of the Eutychian heresy at the Popes most earnest suit and request.
Finally as M. Jewel finds most help for his cause, in heretics and
maintayners off heretics, in Arrians, Donatistes and Eutychians: so the cause
which the Catholics defend, is evidently furdered by the behauyour and
doings of Catholic bishops, Athanasius, Chrisostom, Theodoretus and other,
and by Catholic Princes Constantinus and Martianus.

The Conclusions of the Council of Nice were sent abroad to the other
bishops that were away.

So were the Conclusions of the Councelles of Trent sent to all Catholic
Churches in Europe. This is but mere deluding and mocking of the Reader.

Lib. 2.
And Victorius says. That many thousands of bishops allowed that same
Council and agreed unto it.







Ergo, the bishop of Rome was ever the first of all other bishops. The first
proposition is evident by the distribution of provinces made in the Nicene
Council, and by the confession of M. Jewel out of the letter of Damasus to
the bishops of Illyricum, Can. 5.
who were as M. Jewel proves a part of the bishop of Romes province, being
in orb Romano. in the Roman Jurisdiction as M. Jewel turns it. page 283.
And so was all the west part of the world: France, Spain, Afrike, Britanny
and Italy, as well as Illyricum. The second proposition is here by M. Jewel in
express words confessed and avouched. Then the Conclusion follows directly.
Then if the Pope has ever been first of al bishops, he has ever had the
primacy over all bishops. If ever, then now at this day also. If over all
bishops, then over all the rest of the Church also. For as the Prince being
head of the Nobles is head over all the communaultye: so the bishop of Rome
being first of all Patriarchs, is first of all bishops, and first of all
Christen people underneath bishops. Being first, he has the Primacy, he is
Head and chief of all. Craft in placing of witnesses.
This is so true that M. Jewel not only auouchet it, but also proves it. For
this it follows in his text.

The 487. Vnthruthe For it was a full confirmation Leo. epist. 60.


And for that cause the Emperor Martianus required Leo the Bisshoppe of Rome
to writ unto the Council of Chalcedon, and to declare that he gave ^is
Consent to the Rule off Faith that there was determined.

Quibus, quae illic fidei sunt regula definita, firmarem.
For that cause, says M. Jewel, that is, because he was ever the first of
the four Patriarchs, the Bishop of Rome is required of the Emperor, to
give his consent says Master Jewel. to confirm, say the words of Leo his
Epistle to the Concell of Chalcedon. Lo the Pope is so truly the first of all
other, that in respect of that primacy, he is required to confirm the
determinations of all other. The other Patriarchs had before subscribed to the
decrees of the Council. Maximus of Antioche, Iuuenalis of Jerusalem, and
Anatolius of Constantinople. Yet the bishop of Rome must send his letters to
confirm their doings. Gods name be blissed. The force of Trut^e is such,
that even at the mouth of the enemy thereof it breaks out. This I trow,
helps M. Jewel but a little. Let us see how he proceeds.

The 488. Untruth. For not in like sort.
And in like sort the Emperor Theodosius required all Bisshoppes to subscribe
and to give their assente to the Council off Nice.

Nice, this Emperor and Dioscorus the chief doer in this matter, cried for a
confirmation of the Council of Nice, and commanded other matters not there
discussed, to be at the judgment of that conuenticle of Ephesus guided and
ruled all by the force and violence of Dioscorus the heretic. All which he
did to disanulle thereby the Synod of Flauianus held a little before in
Constantinople against the heresye off Eutyches. For this cause the Emperor
Theodosius so long after the Nicene Council caused the bishops a fresh to
subscribe to the same. This was not like to the Confirmation off the Chalcedon
Council required by the Emperor Martianus of Leo the bishop of Rome. For his
Confirmation was of such force and Authority that for want of that, the
Conuenticle of Ephesus under Dioscorus the heretic, was utterly disanulled and
condemned. Therefore in the Council off Chalcedon, Lucentius one of the Popes
legates charge expressly Dioscorus, Council. Chalcedon. Act. 1. non long a
principio.
quod Synodum ausus est facere fine Authoritate sedis Apostolicae, quod nunquam
rite factum est nec fieri licuit. That he presumed to hold a Council (at
Ephesus) without the Authorite of the Sea Apostolic, which at no time was
ever done, or laufull to do. Therefore also when the Acts off this Ephesine
conuenticle were read in the Council of Chalcedon, being mentioned in the
reading thereof that Iulianus Leo the Popes legate was present thereat, (for so
the heretic Dioscorus fained then for the better cloking of his wicked
attemptes in restoring the heretic Eutyches) the bishops of the East cried
out: Eiectus est, Nullus suscepit nomen Leonis. The popes legate was thrust out.
The name of Leo was not admitted. And a little after, when it was read out of
the Acts of the Ephesine conuenticle, that the letters of Pope Leo directed
thither were read in the Synod, the bishops of the East cried out again. Non
est nobis lecta epistola, si enim lecta fuisset per omnia, and contineretur per
omnia. The Popes letters were not readde unto us For if they had been readen
thouroughly, they had been thoroughly kept. And hereupon Dioscorus the
Patriarche of Aleandria, Iuuenalis the Patriarche of Jerusalem, and Thalassius
the Archbishop of Cesarea in Cappadocia, were particularly examined in the
Council of Chalcedon, why and upon what occasion they had not read, the Popes
letters sent unto them. And every one excused them selves thereof as well as
they could. Of such force and of such Authority was the bishop of Rome
above other bishops and Patriarchs in those days.

The thing that touches all, ought to be allowed by all.



The 489 Vnthruthe for this, Therefore, follows not as it appears in the
true interpretation of M. Jewels Regula Iuris.
And therefore Julius being bishop of Rome pronounced that all the Acts of the
Council of Antioche were void and of no force, for that he being one of the
four patriarchs was not called thither as well as others.

Lo now at lenght M. Jewel having hitherto shot at rouers and ranged at riot,
aymeth now at the Mark it self, and draws to the matter. This example of
ths Council of Antioche was alleged of D. Hardinge for the Popes authorite,
as being void and of no force, because neither the Pope was at it, neither
his legate. This story M. Jewel said before that D. Harding had untruly
alleged. And taking upon him to prove it, suddenly he turned away from the
matter proposed, and has talked at Randon as you have heard. have summoned
Councelles. Regula iuris, a rule off the law which he alleged. And this
having long sought where and how to pitche, having dased his Reader, with a
long variable tale from the purpose, suddenly he concludes: And therefore
Julius: etc. But what? Is therefore the story untruly alleged of D. Harding?
Is it therefore proved that the Pope had no authorite to Summon Councelles? Is
this M. Iewelles Reason? The Confirmation of the Patriarchs is specially
required to allow Councils, The Pope is the first off the foure-Patriarches,
Ergo the Pope has no authorite to summon Councelles? Or. Ergo D. Harding has
falsified the story off the Council off Antioche? For this is the Conclusion
which M. Jewel took upon him to prove. This is the untruth, which he noted.
And yet now, M. Jewel after long roning and wandering utterly forgetting what
he should do and where about he went, tells us that the story is true, and
al is well alleged: but an other fault there is. And that is this. In deed the
Council off Antioche was void and of no force for lack of the Popes
Authorite, M. Jewel confesses. But that was, not as he was Pope, but as he was
one of the Patriarchs. This is a pretty co^uayance in deed. But M. Jewel should
prove it to be so. Verily he has such a custom to lie, that his bare word
has but small credit. Then let us consider his proufes. He says.



it is proved of the bishopp of Rome? This is not true, and this M. Jewel is
never able to prove. Again this Council off Antioche was no general
Council, but a Council off the East Church only. Thirdely this difference
and praerogatiue off the bishopp off Rome in approving Councelles above other
patriaches appears most evidently in this very example off the Council off
Antioche. For not only Julius the bishopp off Rome, but Maximus the bishopp off
Jerusalem, another off the Patriarchs, was absent from that Council of
Antioche. And yet the ecclesiastical history making mention thereof, gives no
token of disanulling the Council by reason of his absence, as undoubtedly it
would, had his presence been of such necessite. But the same history making
mention of the bishop of Romes absence, gives out forthewith a reason, why the
Counsel should be void saying. Whereas yet the Ecclesiastical rule does
Command, that without the bishop of Romes Authorite no Counsels ought to be
held. Such an Ecclesiastical rule disallowing Councelles for want of the
Authorite of any other Patriache or metropolitan can not be showed. And
therefore the second Council at Ephesus was disanulled, because the Popes
legate was repelled, though all the patriarchs beside were present. Dioscorus
of Alexandria, Iuuenalis of Jerusalem, Flauianus of Constantinople, And thus
though all the Patriarchs were summoned, yet the absence of no one Patriarche,
but of the bishop of Rome only, did disanull any Council. This is the thing
that proves a superiorite in the bishop of Rome above all other bishops. This
M. Jewel should have disproued. But with all that he had said, he is not able.
Wherefore his Conclusion following must needs hang very loosely, where he
says.

The 490 Untruth for this is not the Canon.
And this seems to be the Canon that Julius alleged, that it was not lawful
to make rules and orders for the whole Church, without the Consent of the
bishop of Rome. being one of the fourte chief Patriarchs and having in his
province one great portion of the Church.

All this long talk is driven but to a gheasse. This seems to be the Canon,
says M. Jewel. But how little it seems, or can seem to be so, it has
already sufficiently been declared. And therefore M. Jewel perceauing very well
that all which hither to has been said, proves nothing, spetting in his
hands and taking better holdefast, goes to the matter yet ones again, and
labors it more. So depely did this ancient Canon mentioned by the
ecclesiastical history lie at his heart That no Councelles ought to be held
without the Authorite of the bishop of Rome. Therefore he comes in with a
rerewarde and renews the battaille, with these words.

Jewel. Leo. epist. 61. Leo. epist. 59. The 491. Untruth false translation.
And therefore Leo Bishop of Rome testifies his consent to the Council of
Chalcedon with these words. Your brotherhood knows that I have embraced with
my whole heart the determination of that holy counsel. And likewise unto the
Emperor Martianus he writes thus. Constitutionious Synodalibus libens adieci
sententiam meam unto these constitutions of the Council, I have gladly given
my assent.

Unto the constitutions of the Council, which have pleased me both for the
confirmation of the Catholic faith, and for the condemnation of the
heretics, I have added my verdit, And this verdit or sentence was not a bare
consent but a Confirmation of the Council. For so he writes expressly in his
letters sent at the same time and about the same matter to Pulcheria the
Emperesse, saying. Whereas the most godly Emperor has willed me to direct my
letters to the bishops present at the Council of Chalcedon, quibus qu^e illic
de fidei sunt regula definita firmarem, Leo. epist. 69.
by the which I should confirm such things as have been there defined
touching the Rule of faith, I have gladly fulfilled his request. And he adds
the reason immediately: Ne fallax cuiusquam simulatio sententiam meam haberi
vellet incertam. To the intent that no man by any deceitful dissembling may take
my sentence or verdit herein uncertain. Thus though the whole Council had
before most certainly confirmed the Catholic doctrine, against the heretic
Eutiches, yet the cofirmation of the bishop of Rome in express letters was
required, and that to the end no man might any more dissemble or wrangle, as
though the Sea Apostolic had not plainly uttered her mind therein. Yet says
M. Jewel.

The 492 Untruth for not ratified by him and others.
The end hereof was not to show his Sovereign powers above all others, but
that the decrees so ratified by him and others, might be had in more estimation

by him and others? No man's ratification or Confirmation was required but the
Popes. And that was expressly required, though his legates were present at the
Council, and has subscribed, Judged and determined in his name. Why add you
then and others? The place which you allege for this purpose speaks only of
the Bishopp of Rome and not of Others. For thus you follow the matter.

Le^ epist. 59.
Your highness thinks this evil will the rather be suppressed, if it be
declared throughout all Churches, the deci^es of the h^ly Council be well
liked of the Apostolic See.

of Christendom might understand that the determination of the Council had
been allowed, ratified and Confirmed, by the express letters of the Sea
Apostolic. Therefore Rome especially is called both of the Grecians and of
the Latins, Seeds Apostolica. Athanasius ad solit. vita^ agentes. Aug. co^tra.
2. ep. Pela. ca. 2. and 3. lib. 2.
The Apostolic See. As where especially the Apostolic prerogative has
succeeded. Therefore also the Africane bishops having discussed the heresy of
Pelagius and Caelestinus, sent their definition therein to the Sea Apostolic,
to be confirmed. So was the Nicene Council confirmed of Siluester, and the
Council of Constantinople of Damasus, the Council of Ephesus of Caelestinus, as
it is in the text off D. Harding noted. To the which Authorites M. Jewel never
comes nere by a great way, but rangeth about other matters not replying to D.
Harding (as the title of his book protests) but apposing of his own
objections, such as him likes. And therefore he falls again to opposinge
and says.

The 493 Untruth. For that will neu^r be proved
But that the whole ratification of Councell^ depended not only of the bishop of
Rome, but also of others no less the^ of him, it is easy to be proved.

Being a matter so easy, I trust you will prove it substantially. Let us see.

The 494 Untruth false translation. S^zom. lib. 6. cap. 23^
The bis^op in the Roman Coun^ell in the time of Damasus condemned the
Council of the Arians h^lden at Ariminum for that, neitheir the Bishop of
Rome, whose mind should have been known before all others, nor Vincentius,
nor any of the rest had agreed unto it.

Consent, for Confirmation or Authorite, and shifted in Others with the Bishop
of Rome, more then his allegation told him: so here the greatest and ^hiefe
part of the sentence he has quite altered, wherein the bishop of Romes
Authorite did most evidently appear. For these words, whose mind should
have been known before all others (whereby Master Jewel, would link the
consent of others with the popes mind, as though both were of like and
aequall authority) those words I say are falsified and wrested from the true
original both of the Greek and of the Latin. The greek both of Sozomenus
(whom M. Jewel alleges) and of Theodoretus is thus. Theodoret. lib. 2. cap.
22.
(...), The latin translation of that place reads thus. Cuius ante omnia
decebat eos expectare decretum. Whose decree they ought to have tarried for,
before all things. These be the words of the letters recorded both by
Sozomenus, and by Theodoretus.. These words declare that the Council of
A^iminum was condemned not so much because Vincentius, and the other were
absent, as because they had not looked for the Bishop of Romes decree, and
that before all things, before they had concluded any thing. This was the
cause why the Council of Ariminum was condemned. This lack of the Popes
decree to confirm their doings, though they were in that Council four
hundred bishops (as Nicephorus records) utterly disanulled that Council,
Niceph. lib. 9. Cap. 9.
made it void and of no force. And thus far is M. Jewel furdered by his own
allegation. Let us consider the remnant.

The.495 Untruth facing and impud^nt
are allowed for good, notwithstanding the Bishop of Rome would not allow
them.

Lib^o. 2. ad Boni^a^^u^. Cap. 4.
Yet Saint. Augustine says of Innocentius the Pope that De vtroque Concilio
and de Carthaginensi scilicet and Milenitano scripta susceperat, he received
letters from both these Councelles, to wit, both from the Council of
Carthage, and from the Council of Milenit in Aphrica. And Caelestinus the
first says. Epist 1 ad Episc. Gal. Cap. 3.
Aphricanorum Conciliorum Sententias suas fecerunt Apostolici Antistites cum
probarent. The Bishops of the Sea Apostolic by approving the determinations
of the Aphricane Councelles, made them their own. And among the Epistle^ of
Saint Augustine, the epistles of both those Councelles to the Pope, for
Confirmation of those Councelles, and the Answers of the Pope Innocentius, to
both those Councelles, Int^r epist. A^gust. Epist. 90.91.92.93 95.96.
are yet extant and to be read of all that are learned to no small evidence of
the Popes authority over the hishoppes of Afrike at that time, what so ever
Master Jewel has gathered and surmised to the contrary. Yea the very Canon
that Master Jewel and his fellows do make so much of, of not appealing out
of Aphrike to Rome, It is the xvij. Canon.
is in this very Council of Millenitum. Whereby we may understand, that
Appeals were not restrained without the Consent of the Bishop off Rome, and
also that (this notwithstanding) they did not at that time utterly abandonne
the bishop of Romes Authorite (as Master Jewel imagines) but in all other
things, that only excepted, acknoledged and confessed the same. For so they
referred the Acts of their Council to Pope Innocentius. August. epist. 92.
Epist. 95.
So they wrote again to the same Pope, moving him to cite Pelagius the
heretic out of the East to Rome. So Saint Augustine confesses that
Innocentius the Pope had by his Apostolical authority confirmed their
decrees. Epist. 106
Epist. 105.
So after that Council and that decree made, Rome was called by Saint Augustine
Caput Orbis, the head of the World. So to Bonifacius the Pope after that
decree and Council of Millenitum, Saint Augustine writing, Contra Epist.
Pelagij lib. 1. cap. 1
confesses him in Epis^opatus fastigio celfiore fastigio specula pastoralis
praeeminere. To have a praeeminence in the bishoply office, as sitting in a
higher room of the pastoral watch tower. Cap. 3. and 4.

Sanctus Papa Zosimus


Last of all so both by Innocentius and by his successor Holy Pope Zosimus, as
S. Augustine calls him, Caelestinus and Pelagius were condemned at the request
and suite of the Africane bishops. And thus far is M. Jewel helped by the
Aphricane Councels.

Leo epist. 13. The 496. facing Untruth as shall appear.
The Council of Chalcedon decreed that the bishop of Constantinople should be
in Dignite next unto the bishopp of Rome, and should Consecrat the
Metropolitanes of Asia, Pontus, and Thracia. This decree Leo the Bishop of Rome
very much misliked and would never assent unto it, yet that notwitstanding it
is in force and continues still.

If it continue still (as you say M. Jewel) then of likelihood the Turk who
bears now all the Rule at Constantinople, and has done these many years,
keeps that primacy over Asia, Pontus and Thrasia, which Leo would not grant.
Thus you care not how absurdely you speak, so you may exaggerat the matter,
to deface the Popes primacye. But how will you prove either that Leo never
assented unto itt, Council. C^al. Act. 16.
as we grant he did not at the beginning, nor his legate would for him, as
it appears at large in the Chalcedon Council, or that it continued so
afterward notwitstanding the Popes contradiction. You would prove it out off
Liberatus: whom immediately you allege, saying.

Liberatus thereof writes thus. Cum Anatholius Consenti^nte Concilio primatum
obtinuisset, legati vero Romani piscopi co^tradicerent, Liberatus cap. 13. The
497 Untruth not^ble, by n^pping q^ite aw^ye the la^t word of Liberatus
Q^^^a^m^do.
a Iudicibus and episcopis omnibus illa contradictio suscepta non est, Et licet
seeds Apostolica nunc vs^ue contradicat, quod a Synodo firmatum est,
Imperatoris patrocini^ permanet. When Anatholius by the Consent off the
Council had obtained the Primacy, and the bishop of Romes legates stood
against it, their gaynesaying of the Judges and bishops there was not received.
And albeit the Apostolic See of Rome even hitherto stand against it, yet the
decree of the Council by the maintenance off the Emperor stands still in
force.

This is yet the homlyest shifte of all. O.M. Jewel. will you ever be like
your self? Will you never deal truly? Is the Popes Authorite so well
estableshed by the consent off all writers of the first 600. years, that you
ca^ allege nothing against it, but either you must alter the words of the
Author with false translation, or add more in your english then you find in
the Author, or last of all (as you do now) cut clean away some word of
the Author? For in this sentence of Liberatus why leave you out the yery last
word of all both in your latin and in your english? Where is the word
Quoda^modo, after a certain sort? Why did you clean cut away that word? It
imported somewhat of like, and te^pered the whole matter so far, that M. Jewel
thought good utterly to leave it out. For Liberatus says that the same
preferreme^t of the bishop of Co^sta^tinople before the other Patriarchs, as
to be second in Authorite after the bishop of Rome, though the sea Apostolic
did vntell that day resist it, did yet continue still to his time, Imperatoris
patrocinio quodammodo, by the maintenance of the Emperor after a sort. Cap.
13.
As much to say. Not by just right and competent authorite, in quiet and
lawful possession, but as a matter boren out by the Emperor it contimued so
after a sort. And no maruail, if the Emperors shortly after the Council of
Chalcedon remaining only in the East, and the Empire of the West decaying,
through the invasions of the Goths, Hunnes and Wandalles, even from the time
off this Pope Leo vntell the Empire off Justinian under whom this Liberatus
lived, no maruaill I say if all that time the superiorite of Constantinople,
where the Emperor of the East for the most part continued, was by the
Emperor maintained and boren out after a sort, contrary to the pleasure of
the Sea Apostolic. Which herein defended only the Council of Nice (as the
Popes legates in Chalcedon openly protested) where the next prerogative to the
Pope of Rome was granted to the patriarche of Alexandria, and challenged
nothing to the prerogative of his own See, which notwithstanding the second
place given to Constantinople, remained allwaies the Chief and head See. For
it was pronounced in the Council of Chalcedon, when the prerogative of
Constantinople, was granted: Omnem quidem primatum, and honorem precipuum,
scundum Canones, antiquae Romae deo Amantissimo Archiepiscopo conseruari. That
all primacy and the Chief honor was reserved to the well-beloved of God the
Archbishop of Old Rome, according to the Canons. This therefore was a matter
boren out by the Emperor, not allowed by ecclesiastical authorite. This was
not only contrary to the pleasure of the Sea Apostolic, but also to the
decrees of the Nicene Council, which the Sea Apostolic herein defended not
only then by Leo, but afterward by Gelasius, and other bishops of Rome.
Again to this prerogative of the bishop of Constantinople, Conc. tom. 1. In
tomo de vinculo Anathema it is.
not only the legates of the bishop of Rome resisted, but also more then four
hundred bishops then present. For whereas there were at that Council (as it
appears in the Acts thereof) six hundred and thirty bishops, which
subscribed to the other decrees of the Council, yet to this decree of the
prerogative of Constantinople, there subscribed but two hundred and twelve,
scant the third part of the Council. Vide Act. Con. Chal. 3. and 16.
Therefore neither it is put at this present among the decrees of the Council,
neither was it allowed long after for any Ecclesiastical decree, but only (as
Liberatus says) bore^ out and maintained by the Emperor after a sort. And
therefore in the sixth general Council held many years after in
Constantinople, petition was made, Did. 22. Renoua^tes
that the Sea of Constantinople might be the second in privileges after Rome,
and before the Sea of Alexandria. This petition made in that general Council
more then two hundred years after the Council of Chalcedon had not neded,
Co^c. Chal. An. 450. Con 6. An. 681.
if in all that time that privilege of Constantinople had been in quiet and
lauful possession. But because it was but maintained after a sort by the
Emperors, as Liberatus says, who continuing all that time in Constantinople,
would magnify their own City, because also it was not by the just
Authorite of the bishop of Rome granted, therefore it was then again
required, and requested to be in that Counsel enacted an confirmed. Hereunto
might be added the sentence and verdit of learned Leo against Anatholius for so
usurping that prerogative to the injury of the bishops of Alexandria and of
Antioche, the schisma^ical presumption of Acacius, and Anthemius, both
Entychian^ shortly after that time, Leo ep 53.54. and 55.

Liberatus ca. 17. and 21.

Lib. 7. cap. 194. Jewel.


and last of all the Antichristian presumption of John of Constantinople in S.
Gregory's time, coveting to be the universal bishop of all the Church. But
these few may suffice to declare how little this allegat on of Liberatus
helps M. Jewel. Especially if it had plaesed him to have given thee leave
(gentle Reader) to peruse his whole words, and had not so pared quite of the
last word of the place. Quodammodo, after a sort, which in deed being added
did utterly mar all M. Iewelles matter: and therefore was by him feately in
deed and rhetorically dissembled, but guilefully and wickedly depraved. By such
evil dealing an evil cause must be maintained, what say you farther M. Jewel.

The 498 Untruth. For S. Hierom. sa^eing was of no matters of faith. Ad
Euagrium.
Which thing seems agreeable to that S Hierom writes. The Authorite of the
world is greater then the Authorite of one City. Meaning thereby the City of
^ome.

This saying of S. Hierom agrees very little with a decree maintained by the
Emperor against the Sea Apostolyke. S. Hierom in that place talks not of
Authorite in doctrine and in matters of faith, common to all the Church, but of
certain particular customs proper to any particular Church. Wherein the
custom of one City no not of Rome it self can prescribe against the general
custom of the world. And therefore S. Gregory informing S. Augustine our
Apostle touching certain his demaundes, and namely of the variable customs of
diverse Churches under one faith, does not prescribe unto him precisely the
custom of the City of Rome to be followed in all things, but It pleases
(says he) that if you have found any thing (be it either in the Church off
Rome, Beda lib. 1. cap. 27.
off France, or of any other) which may more please God, that ye choose the
same. And plant it in the English Church Yet in matters concerning faith
both the same Gregory acknowledged, and practiced a Supremacy of the Church of
Rome over al other Churches, as has before been declared, and S. Hiero^ him
self, writting to Damasus a bishop of Rome for his sentence in a matter of
doctrine, says expressly unto him. Qui tecum non colligit, spargit. He that
gathered not with thee, he scatters. And again. Extra hanc domum quicunque
agnum comederit, Greg. li. 4 epist. 2. In epist. ad Damas. Tom. 2^
prophanus est: Whosoever eats the lamb without this house (he means the
Church of Rome) he is an alienat. And thus S. Hierom agrees well with
Liberatus, not for M. Jewel, but directly against M. Jewel. Such profes M.
Jewel has picked out to weaken the Authorite of the Sea Apostolic the
Church of Rome. Now he Concludes.

The 499 Untruth. co^teining a number of untruths.
It may appear by that I have thus shortly touched, that the Bishop of Rome had
Authorite neither to Summon Councelles, or to be president and chief in
Councelles, nor to ratify and confirm the decre^s of Councelles, more then
any of the four Patriarchs. And last of all that Councelles may stand in
force although the Pope mislike them and allow them not.



It may appear also by that I have said, that the Canon reported in the
ecclesiastical History, is truly and faithefully reported of Socrates, truly
and faithfully alleged of D. Harding, untruly and shamefully impugned of M.
Jewel. The Canon I say which commands that no Council be held without
the Authorite of the bishop of Rome.

It may appear again how many notorious, impudent and outrageous Untruths M.
Jewel has committed in this paragraphe of the Confirmation of Councelles, as
being not able to allege one true Authorite against it.

The 500^ Untruth. For it will well follow as it shall now appear.
I think it will be hard hereof to geather M. Hardings Conclusion. That the
bishopp of Rome was Head of the Universal Church.

I doubt not but it will be easy to gather his Conclusion. The Pope was
president in all general Counsels, confirmed and ratified all general
Councelles, and by his Authorite has disproued Councelles. But in general
Councelles the Universal Church is represented, as in a parliament the whole
Realm, Ergo the Bishop of Rome was at that time the Head of the Universal
Church. And thus M. Jewel must subscribe. Except he will allwaies quarrel and
wrangle about terms, the thing being clear and evident.

Athanasius of Alexandria, and Paulus of Constantinople deprived and thrust out
of their bishoprikes by the Violence of the Arrians, assisted with the Emperor
Constantius, appealed to Rome to Julius the Pope and bishop there, and by his
authorite were restored to their rooms again. So Leo assoiled Flauianus the
Bishop of Constantinople excommunicated by Dioscorus.

The.501. Untruth slanderous.
The 113. Untruth. For the Emperor restored Athanasius and not the Pope.

Jewel. page 6.
so M. Jewel in this place, fulowing and wandering over the banks with Copia
Verborum, by the Violence and force of his talk, carrying a great deal off
error and Untruth alonge before him, at the lenght comes in with a But. And
says.

The.502. untruth. contrary to him self.
But Master Hardinge will say. The words be plain that Julius restored
Athanasius. It is true, and not denied.

The Emperor restored Athanasius and not the Pope. If it be not denied, why do
you deny it your self? Can it be true, and yet not true? Do you deny it,
and yet is it not denied? Then with you, true and not true, denying and not
denying, yea and nay is all one.

The.503. Untruth For this is not the only meaning.
But the meaning of these words is, that Julius pronounced him clear in that he
was accused off, and therefore worthy to be restored.

Lo ones again how M. Jewel strives and winceth against the Truth. He
said even now. That it was true that Julius the Pope restored Athanasius.
Now he says that he pronounced him clear, and therefore worthy to be
restored. The like impudent shifte these men do use in the express words off
holy Scripture: For where Christ says to his Ministers here in earth.
Whatsoever you forgive in earth. it shall be forgeuen in heaven. These men
say, that Gods Minister the Priest does not forgive sins, but declares
them to be forgeuen, and pronounces the party penitent to be clear, and
worthy to be forgeuen. By which meaning Christ should have said.
Whatsoever you forgive in earth, it is already forgeuen in heaven. And not.
It shall be forgeauen in heaven. But now. The Sentence of Peter goes before
the Sentence of heaven says S. Ambrose. And that which the Priest assoileth
in earth, Contr. Nouatia. li. 1.
shall be assoyled in heaven. If the Priest did but declare him to be assoiled,
then should he be before already assoiled. In like manner M. Jewel here in
this place. Whereas the Ecclesiastical Historye says expressly that Julius
the Pope restored Athanasius: M. Jewel says, he pronounced him worthy to be
restored. But how will M. Jewel prove that Julius the Pope pronounced
Athanasius worthy to b^ restored. How will he prove that to be the meaning of
the Ecclesiastical history? He says.

The 504. Untruth For D. Hardinge well know^th the contrary.
For it is certain, and M. Harding well knows that Athanasius upon Pope
Julius letters was not restored.

Be bold and blushe not Master Jewel. You that are so impudent against the
express words of the Ecclesiastical history, you may be bold upon D.
Hardinge, and upon his knowleadge. But it is certain and M. Jewel him self
well knows that Athanasius upon Pope Julius letters was restored. The words
of the Ecclesiastical History are these. The Bishop of Rome (Julius) hearing
the Accusations and complaints of Athanasius and Paulus, Hist. ^ripa. li. 4.
ca. 15
and finding the^ all to agree to the Nicene Council, received them into
Communion, as having charge of them all, through the dignite and prerogative of
his own See, and restored to every one their Churches. Curam omnium gerens
propter propiae Sedis dignitatem.
And a little after. Athanasius and Paulus sending the Popes letters to the
Bishops of the East, recovered each one again their Bishoprikes. Lo the
ecclesiastical history says, that the Pope restored to Athanasius and Paulus
their Churches, and that, as having charge of them all through the dignite and
prerogative of his own See. And again the history says. That Athanasius and
Paulus recovered their bishoprikes by sending to their adversaries the bishops
of the East, the Popes letters. Thus it is certain, and thus M. Jewel him
self knows that Athanasius was restored upon Pope Julius letters. In like
manner Theododoretus being deprived in the Ephesine Council, repentinge and
appealing afterward, Conci. Chal^edo^. Act. 1.
was by Leo the Pope of Rome restored, and in the Conc^ll of Chalcedon was
admitted by virtue of that restitution to sit among the other bishops. For the
Judges there said. Let the Reverend B. Theodoret enter and be a part of the
Synod, because Leo the most holy B. of Rome, has restored unto him his
bishoprike, and the Emperor has decreed that he shall be present. And so he
was placed among the other bishops, and allowed for a Catholic bishop, by the
acclamatio^ of the East bishops and consent off the Council, notwitstandinge
the cries and acclamations of the Aegyption bishopps, cleaving to Dioscorus the
Eutichian their Patriarche to the contrary. Thus was Theodoretus, thus was
Athanasius and Paulus two Patriarchs of the East, the one of Constantinople,
the other of Alexandria restored by the letters of the Pope to their
bishoprics, not only pronounced worthy to be restored. Yet M. Jewel will
prove it by a like. He says.

The 405 Untruth in falsifiing the text of Cassiodorus. Lib. 4. cap. 34.
The like is also written of others. Cassiodorus says. Maximus also restored
unto Athanasius, both his Communion, and also his dignity. That is to sa^e,
pronounced him worthy to be restored. For Maximus was not the bishop of Rome.

Histo. trip. lib. 4. cap. 34.
First you have printed these words, That is to say etc. in a distinct letter,
as if they were the words off Cassiodorus. Now they are your gloss, beside the
text of Cassiodorus. And so you have ones deceived your Reader. Again
Cassiodorus does not use the word Restituit restore, but praebebat did give.
Such an impossible thing it is for M. Jewel to keep truly the words of his
Author. Again this restoring of dignite and Communion of Maximus to
Athanasius, was not like to the Restoring of Pope Julius. The Pope by his
letters and by the prerogative of his own See (saiethe the History) Restored
Athanasius. Athanasius being after expelled again and by the Council of
Sardica restored: before he came to his own bishoprike of Alexandria, passed
by Jerusalem, where this Maximus was bishop, who also before had consented to
his deposition. This Maximus giving his Consent to the determination of the
Council communicated with Athanasius and by that Communicating declared to all
the province under him, that Athanasius was restored. This therefore was no
like matter to the Restitution made by Pope Julius. Again a similitude, or
likeness proves not, but serves only to declare, to exemplify, to make more
clear and open a matter off it self obscure and dark. And thus the meaning
off M. Jewel contrary to the express words off the History remains
unproven. Thus also the Untruth is clearly Justified. Which is: That Pope
Julius Restored Athanasius and Paulus to their bishoprics.

Now to touch somewhat that which M. Jewel discourses to the contrary, to
prove that the Emperor restored Athanasius and not the Pope, Athanasius ^hrise
restore^. Hist. trip. li. 3. cap. 8. Cap. 12.
it shall appear he deceives and abuses the unlearned Reader shamefully in
the whole matter. For Athanasius as he was diverse times driven from his
bishopric, so was he by diverse means restored. First he was banished by
Constantin the great being falsely accused off the Arrians: and was by the
decree of the same Constantin in his death bed, restored to his bishopric
again.

Lib. 4. cap. 6.
Julius cited Athanasius. And he upon the Citation appeared. The Arrians in the
mean while placed an Arrian bishop in his room. Cap. 9.
And calling a Conuenticle at Antioche, deprived Athanasius and diverse other
Catholic Bishops: Cap. 12.
After which deprivation they sent to Pope Julius to have him Confirm their
doings. Julius the Pope examining the matter and finding Athanasius, Paulus,
and the other bishops innocent, restored them all to their bishoprics again
by his letters. Cap. 15.
Being thus restored, first Paulus of Constantinople was banished again by the
Arrian Emperor Constantius. Cap. 18. Cap. 19.
Soon after also, the Arrians peeking a new quarrel to Athanasius, and
accusinge him to Constantius the Arrian Emperor, about the Distribution of
certain corn in in Alexandria, Athanasius fearing the Emperors displeasure
flede of his own accord: And with Paulus the bishop of constantinople, came
to Constans the Catholic Emperor of the Weste, and brother to Constantius the
Arrian Emperor in the East. cap. 20.
By whose letters to his brother they were at that time restored, and brought
in favor again with the Emperor Constantius, by whose displeasure they had
been before banished. And thus Athanasius was restored three soundry times upon
three soundre occasyons.

First of the Emperor him felfe, which had upon miss information banished
him. Secondarely, being accused to the Pope and by pretense of a Synod deposed,
was of the Pope, by a superior order, restored. Thirdly fleing upon
displeasure of the prince, was by getting again his princes favor restored.

Thus, if it had liked M. Jewel to deal uprightly, if it had pleased him
rather to instruct his Reader then to deceive him, if he had loved the truth,
M. Jewels Craft in destroying a Truth by telling a Truth.
and not sought escapes against the truth, he would have opened the matter, as
it lies in the story, and not blase out one truth to conceal an other
truth. For now you see (gentle Readers) that as Athanasius being banished
twice by displeasure of the Emperors, was by the Emperors restored: so being
also deprived of bishops, he was by the chifest bishop of Christ's Church, the
Bishop of Rome, in like manner, restored. And thus both are true, in diverse
cases. One truth must not overthrow an other.

Now that it may more particularly appear what a deal of error and
Untruth M. Jewel carries a long before him by the violence and force of his
talk in this matter, let us consider his own words. After he had with many
idle words proved that the Emperor restored Athanasius (which you see, being
true, does nothing empaire the other truth that the Pope also restored him)
he alleges Theodoretus for to amplify the matter more, and says.

The 506 Untruth in false applieing of Theodoretus. Theodor. lib. 2. cap. 17.
And Theodoretus touching the same writes thus. Procerum Senatorumque coniuges
etc. The lords and Counselors wives besought their husbands to entreat the
Emperors Majesty that he would restore Athanasius to his s^o^ke: and said
further, unless they would so do, they would forsake them and go to him.

It is a world to see the Impudencye of M. Jewel. It seems, he never cared,
what learned men judged of his doings, but that he has labored only to heap
up Authorites, without discretion. This place of Theodoretus is not of
Athanasius, but of Liberius the bishop of Rome, whom the Arrian Emperor
Constantius had banished for mayntayning the Catholic religion. And those
Lords and Councellers wives were the Matrones of Rome, requesting their
husbands to say to the Emperor for the return of their bishop Liberius the
Pope of Rome, not of Athanasius the bishop of Alexandria. The learned do know
this well. And M. Jewel him self can not be ignorant thereof. The story may
be read both in Theodoretus (as M. Jewel has noted it) and in the
tripartite history of Cassidorus. Lib. 2. cap. 17. lib. 5. cap. 18.
Now M. Jewel, not only applies this to Athanasius, which yet neither can by
any means truly be done; but also puts in the text of Theodoretus, the very
name of Athanasius instead of (...), the pastor Liberius. Thus he alleges
he cares not what nor how, to make a show of lerning. If follows in him.

The.507 Untruth in putting Arrians for Eutychians
were restored again by the Emperor and not by the Pope.

Here is an other gross error of M. Jewel. They were no Arria^s but
Eutichians which deposed Flauianus, and of whom Leo writes. Trust not your
note books to much M. Jewel. Take some pains to look to the Originalles.
Touching the matter, how prove you they were restored by the Emperor and not
by the Pope? You say.

Leo epist. 39.
For Pope Leo him self writes thus unto the Emperesse Pulcheria. Your Majesty
have restored h^me again the C^tholike bishops which by wron^efull sentence
were thrust from their Churches.

M. Iewel^ Craft in destroyeing one truth by an other.
This proves in deed, that the Emperou^^ restored them. But this proves not
that the Pope restored them not. Will you never leave M. Jewel, to disprove
one truth by an other truth? Under Theodosius the second, the Eutychians,
bearing rule, had expelled many Catholic bishops. Martianus a good Catholic
Emperor succeding to this Theodosius, removed the heretics, and restored the
Catholics. For this he is praised of Leo the Pope. Does this dyminish the
Popes Authorite? No more truly M. Jewel then the late doings of Queen Marye
in restoring the Catholic emprisoined bishops to their rooms and
bishoprics, did make against the Supremacy of the Pope. But that Pope Leo
bare a stroke in this matter, more then the Emperor, it appears well in the
very same epistle of Leo which your self allege, M. Jewel. Thus Leo writes
in the same Epistle. Quosdam saene Episcopos, etc. We understand by the
relation of our legates, and of our brother and felowebishop Anatholius, of
whom you have vouchesafed to make a good report, that certain of those bishops
which have given their consent to the wiched deeds (of the Eytychians) do
require a Reconciliation, and do desire the communion of Catholics. Whose
desires, we mind so far to accomplish, that such as are amended, and by
their own subscriptions, do condemn their wicked attemp^^, be admitted in to
favor, the charge thereof being committed to our legates and to the foresaid
bishop Anatholius. Thus we see as the Emperor restored the Catholics, so the
Pope reconciled the schismatikes. And as the Emperor by his secular power
restored the bishops to their liuelyhood: so the Pope by his spiritual
jurisdiction restored the penitent offenders to the unite of the Church. These
are both confessed truths. The one destroys not the other.

To proceed, M. Jewel excepting against Pope N^colas because he was out of the
compass of his first ^00. years, he avouches certain general Untruths
without any reason or proof in the world, and says.

The 508 Untruth for the^^^re abated before the vj.C. years after.

Christ. Eutropius Lib. 13.


It is well known that as the Popes power increased, so the Empire abated.

This is a manifest Untruth joined with a slander. The Empire most decayed
under Honorius, as all Histories do testify. For under him, the West part of
the Empire was utterly cut of until the time of Charlemain. This was about the
year of our Lord 400. well nere two hundred years before the end of the first
600. years after Christ, at what time M. Jewel imagines the Popes power to
have begone. The Hunnes, the Wandales, the Alani, the Goths, the Longabardes
all before that time had invaded, spoiled, and possessed all the West part of
the Empire, Italy, France, Spain, and Afrike. The empire after remained only
in the East. The Empire therefore wa^ long abated, before the Popes power
increased, if at the lest (according to M. Iewelles mind) the Popes power
began only after the first 600. years. But will you see how substantially M.
Jewel proves that as the Popes power increased, ^o the Empire abated? He
says.

Plat^us in Ad^iano. 2.
Therefore was Platine forced to say. Now the Emperors have (...) their
Civil power, and there Popes have lost the holiness.



Platina a hundred years past complains of the weakness of (...) Empire, of
the want of holiness in the Pope.

Ergo a thousand years a go, as the Popes power increased, so (...) Empire
abated. By such arguments and reasons M. Jewel has been persuaded to
forsake the faith he was baptized and brought up in.

The 509. Untruth. For the Emperor never confirms the Pope.
Now the Pope confirms the Emperor.

This is an other Untruth boldly avouched, but no whit proved. M. Jewel is
never able to show that any Catholic Emperor ever confirmed the Pope in such
sort as without that confirmation, he might not be Pope. That the Pope at this
day confirms the Emperor, it has so continewed almost these 80^. years
ever sense the time of Charlemain the first Emperor of the West Church, after
the decay thereof, ^laudu^ dec^d. 2. lib. 1
under Honorius, who also was made and crowned Emperor by the Pope Leo the
third, as his successors ever sense have been.

The 51^. Untruth. Answered before.
^ow contrary wise the Pope calls the Emperor.

How true this is, it has before been declared No Catholic Emperor ever
^ummoned Council without the Authorize and consent of the B. of Rome. Nor was
ever any general Council allowable and of force without the same Authorite,
as before has been proved.

The. ^1^. Untruth. For be w^ite (...) to the Emperor.
Pope Iuliu^ entreated the Emperor in his behalf.

This is a flat Untruth. He restored him by his own let^ers not to the
Emperor, but to the Arrian bishops, who had ^niuriously deposed him in their
conuenticle at Antioche.







A pot full of plummes Jewel out of Athanasius in Epist. ad Liberi^m.
Lo, M. Jewel will prove the request of Athanasius to Pope Julius, by that
which he wrote to Liberius, which was Pope after Julius. Yet let us hear the
words of Athanasius to Liberius. The words are.

We beseech you, that through your good exhortations, both by your self, and
what your Age^tes, we may be helped.

What word is there here of entreating the Emperor, in the behalf of
Athanasius? Athanasius desires to be helped by the Pope, and by his agentes or
deputes. He speaks no one word of the Emperor. And to what purpose, I ask
your wisdom (M. Jewel) should Athanasius require Liberius to entreat the
Emperor, who was then an Arrian him self (Constantius by name) and who was
no less enemy to Liberius then to Athanasius, whom also the same Emperor
banished, as he did Athanasius? Liberius was banished him self, and the Noble
Matrones off Rome entreated the Emperor for Liberius: And was Liberius
required to entreat for Athanasius? What thinks M. Jewel to wine the game
by facing? A man might say. Non satis commode diuisa sunt temporibus tibi Daue
h^c. But, by such impudent Untruths an evil cause must be defended.

Sozom. lib. 4. cap. 8. Stapleton Regula in ri^.
Moreover, for that he was a Patriarch, he summoned a Particular Council, and
labored the Bishops.

What of that Master Jewel? You know by your law. Abundans Cau^ela in Iure
non nocet. And the common saying, a man can not be to sure of his right.

There was an Ecclesiastical Canon that no man being once depose^, should be
restored again unless he had first cl^ered him self ^^fore a Council.
O^ea^^l. in Epist. ad Iulium.


against you in that point. We have not so learned Christ, M. Jewel.

The Egyptian bishops in the Council of Chalcedon vpholders of the
Eutichia^ heresy. being required and commanded by the Council to subscribe to
the decretall Epistle off Pope Leo sent to the Concell, refused to do it, and
alleged for their defense, that in the Nicene Council it was decreed. that
the bishops of Egypt be subject only to the Patriarch of Alexandria. Council.
chal. Act. 4.
But the Catholic bishops answered plainly Mentiuntur. They lie. And again.
Ostendant quod dicunt. Let them show and prove their saying. So we answer to
your Arrians M. Jewel, M. Jewel. seeks to heretykes for help.
saying that a bishop being deposed can not be restored but by a Council, They
lie. And again. Let them show that decree. We know heretics have ever
claimed against the Authorite of the Sea Apostolic. So the Donatistes appealed
from Pope Melchiades to the Emperor. So these Arrians and Eutychians alleged
Canons against their obedience to the bishopp of Rome. If you list to be an
heretic M. Jewel, claim by them. we Catholics can not do so.



the Appeal of Chrisostom

The 512. Untruth for the Appeal was offered to the Popes Legates only.
And therefore Flauianus, being wrongefully put from his bishopric offered up
his bille of Appeal, not unto the bishop of Rome alone, but unto him other
bishops.

Lo here is an express Appeal confessed by M. Jewel of the Patriarche of
Constantinople to the Bishop of Rome. Yet he says it was not to the bishop of
Rome alone, but to him with other bishops. Let us see how he will prove it.

The.513. Untruth in nipping off words out of the midst of S. Leo his whole
sentence. Leo epist. 24.


Esa. 28.
The truth hereof may well appear by these words of Leo bishop of Rome unto
the Emperor Theodosius. Omnes par^^um nostrarum E^clesiae, omnes mansueti^ini
vestrae ^um. G^mutibus and lach^imes supplicant Sacerdotes vt quia eisdem
L^bellum appellationis. Fl^uianus Epis^opus dedit, generalem Sy^^dum i^beatis
intra Italiam celebrari. All the Churches of these our countres, and all the
priests with sighs and tears beseech your highne^^. that, for as much^ as
Flauianus has offered up his bille of Appeal unto them, it may please you to
command, a General Concell to be kept in Italy.

What shall I say to M. Jewel? I am forced to say he is one of them of whom
the Prophet speaks, Posuimai^ mendacium spem nostram, and mendacio protecti
sumus. We have put out hope in lyeing, and by lyeing we have been defended. For
had M. Jewel given us here the whole words of Leo, had he not in the very
midst nipped of one whole sentence, then the truth should have appeared, and
the contrary to his assertion evidently been proved. He has put the words in
Latin, He has englished them truly. He has in the Margin quoted the place
rightly. And would a man suppose any Untruth herein to be committed? Truly but
that I had herein to do with M. Jewel, Leo epist. 24.
whose nature I am now some what acquaynted withal, I should have trusted his
allegation without serching the original. The whole words of Leo are these.
Omnes partium nostrarum ecclesiae, omnes mansuetudini vestrae cum gemitibus and
lachrymis supplicant sacerdotes, vt quia The words which M. Jewel ^ipped
quite of.
Et nostri fideliter reclamarunt and eis^^m libellum appella^^nis Flauianu^
Episcopus dedit generalem: Synodum iub^^ris intra Italiam celebrari. All the
Churches of these our Countres, and all the priests with sighs and tears
beseech your highness, that forasmuch as The words which M. Jewel nipped
quite of.
Bo^he our men (he means his legates in the Ephesine conue^ticle) have
faithefully resisted (to the condemnation of Flauianus) and to them Flauianus
the bishop has bishop offered up his bille of Appeal, it may please you to
command a general Council to be kept in Italy. These are the whole words of
Leo in the same epistle. By these words it appears evidently, that the bille
of Appeal was offered up not to all the Church an priests in Italy, but to the
Popes legates present at the Ephesine Synod, in the which, and where, Flauianus
was deposed and did appeal, as the words, which M. Jewel for that purpose
nipped quite of, do give us to understand. As also in a letter of Vale^tinia^
the Emperor to Theodosius it appears. where it is written, that the Bishop of
Constantinople sent his libels of Appeal to Leo the Pope. In preamb. Con. Chal.
But be it now that the Pope with his learned Council do restore bishops,
and not alone. What can M. Jewel gather thereof? He says.

The.514. Untruth For the Pope was always Chief.
or to be deposed.

The Pope was allwaies chief in such Councelles. And not only pronounced the
party worthy, but did by his own Authorite restore bishops. Tanquam curam
omnium gerens propter propriae Sedis dignitatem, Hist. trip. lib. 4.
As having charge of them all through the prerogative of his own See, as the
Ecclesiastical history speaks.

But (says M. Jewel) that Sentence was not allwaies putt in execution.
Jewel.






M. Jewel not well in his vvit^es.
Th^s was not a Sentence given by the Pope. But a sentence given against the
Pope. And those which gave such a sentence, were Arians. No marvel therefore
if it prevailed not. What means M. Jewel thus to reason? The Arrians could
not depose the Pope, Ergo the Pope can not depose Arrians and such other
sc^usmatikes. Was he well in his wits, when he thus reasoned?







Cap. 19.
vt quicunque ab imperatore etc. That whosoever sued to the emperor, to have him
hear and determine public Judgments, that he be deprived therefore of his
dignite.



Hist. trip. lib. 4. cap. 34.
it is necessary that the secular sword do help the spiritual Jurisdiction,
Thus far has M. Jewel ranged and roued, laboring to bring somewhat
against the Authorite of the Bishop of Rome. But he has only multiplied his
Untruths, declared his own weakness, and fortified more the Truth touching
the Popes Supreme Authorite. For being so much impugned and so little empaired,
so of assaulted and nothing battered, it remains as a Rock invincible,
against the which hell gates shall never prevail.

Concerning the Reconciliation of the Prelates of the Church, both
bishops, and Patriarchs, to the bishopp off Rome (114) whereby his Primacy is
acknowledge and confess, I need not say much, the matter being so evident.

The 114. Untruth. For Reconciliation is no necessary token, neither of
Primacie, nor of subjection. The.151. Untruth joined with a slander. for
Reconciliation is acknowledging of Primacie, And D. Hard. speaks of one
sp^cial kind thereof which is to the pope.


Albeit it were true, that Reconciliation of it self were no necessary token
of Primacy, yet this Reconciliation, being off the Chiefest prelates and
Patriarchs in Christ's Church, to the Sea of Rome, this Reconciliation also
being joined with the other arguments of Primacy in the Apostolic See off
Rome, (as Appeals, Confirming of Bishops, Excommunications in all parts of
Christendom, Restitutions of bishops and Confirmations of Councelles) it is a
necessary and sufficient argument for the Primacy and Souueraintie of that See
above all others. For as many Circunstances may make a good and sufficient
evidence, where one Circunstance alone could prove nothing, so the argument
of Reconciliation being joined with the other, is sufficient for the
acknowleadging and confessing of a Primacy.

Again if Reconciliation be no argument of Primacy, M. Jewel should have done
well either to have showed that the bishop of Rome was reconciled to other
bishopps as well as other bishops were to him, or else to have given a reason
how it came to pass that the bishop of Rome was never in such sort
reconciled. Verily beside the examples alleged here by D. Harding of the
Africane bishops reconciled to Bonifacius the second, and of Alexander the
Patriarche of Antioche reconciled to Innocentius, both bishops of Rome: we
read also, that the Bishops of the East, who were no part off the bishop of
Romes peculiar province or Patriarkeship, having unjustly deposed Flauianus of
Constantinople, and wickedly consented to Dioscorus the Eutychian, were not
only reconciled by Leo the B. of Rome, but did also require that
Reconciliation, and in the reconciliation did abide the Order prescribed by the
Pope.

For beside the words of Leo above alleged, wherein he signified that those
Bishops Reconciliationem reposcebant, Leo epi. 39
did require a Reconciliation, in his next epistle following and bearing the
same date with the former, written to Anatholius the Patriarche off
Constantinople about the same matter he writes thus. Epist. 40 Cap. 1.
As touching our breh^rn, which we understand both by your letters, and by
the information of our legates, to be desirours of our Communion, repenting
them that they were not stable and steadfast against violence and terror, but
consented to the mischief of another, and for fear yielded both to the
condemnation off that Catholic and innocent bishop Flauianus, and to the
approving off the wicked heresy off Eutyches, we allow the order that our
deputes have already taken, that they be in the mean while contented with the
Communion of their own Churches. Suarum interim Ecclesiarum essent Co^munione
contenti. Pacis and co^munionis nostrae vnitate laetentur.
Howbeit let order be taken by our legates, and you together, that such as with
full satisfaction do condemn their wicked doings, and chose rather to accuse
them selves, then to defend them selves, may enjoy also our Communion, and
peace. So that yet before, they condemn and accurse all such things, as have
been allowed off them against the Catholic faith. And a little after lest he
might seem herein to be over gentle, as admitting so easily such notorious
offenders, he adds. Neither can our gentleness in any point be reprehended,
Ibidem.
when we receive again with satisfaction such as we were sorye to see before
deceived. Therefore the favor of our Communion is neither to be denied,
neither yet rashely to be granted. For as it is a deed of mercy to comfort
the afflicted, so it is a point off Justice to punish the Offenders.

In an other Epistle, written within two months after to the Empress Pulcheria
also, when he had now sent his legates to Constantinople about the redress
of these matters, he writes thus. Leo Epist. 55.
I have now sent (as I declared in my other letters I would do) the Bishop of
Luca, and Basilius Priest, who ioyintly with my Brother Anatholius, shall
execute the Order which I have taken according to the rules prescribed unto
them. For, as I am informed by the letters of the foresaied bishop Anatholius,
and by the suggestion of his clergy, there are many things favorably to be
amended, and many things rigorously to be punished: to the intent that in such
a trouble and disorder, neither the discipline be to sharp, neither the pardon
to easy: For the obstinates, and the repentaunts, are not in like sort to be
dealed withal. Thus farrre Pope Leo touching the Reconciliation of the
bishops of the East, who had in the Conuenticle at Ephesus both wickedly
admitted the heresy of Eutyches, and wrongfully consented to the deposing of
Flauianus.

We see by the first words alleged that they were reconciled not only to the
Communion of their own Churches, but also to the Communion of the Sea
Apostolic, and that they desired such a Reconciliation. If this had been but a
Common Reconciliation as between friends and equalles, which have been at
variaunce, it had been enough for them that they were restored by the Popes
legates to the Comunion of their own Churches. It had not neded to have had
beside a Reconciliation and a restoring to the Communion of the Church off
Rome.

Again we seee in the words in the second place alleged, that a kind of
discretion was used in granting the Reco^ciliation which imports a
Soueraintie in the graunter, and a kind of subjection in the party reconciled.

The Popes Superiorite proved by Reconciliation, desired off him, or given out
by him.
In the third and last allegation we see some admitted upon satisfaction, some
repelled for obstinacy: And all by the legates of the Sea Apostolic. This
Reconciliation admitting some and repelling other by Authority, is a clear and
manifest token of a Primacy and Soueraintye in the Sea Apostolic over the
bishops of the East. For albeit in the way of Charity one aequall may be
reconciled to an other, yet in the way of Justice one aequall has no power to
punish the other, that will not be reconciled. This Reconciliation therefore to
the Pope off bishops not properly subject to his Diocese or province, wherein
as some are reconciled, so other are repelled, is a necessary token of Primacy
in the Pope over more bishops then of his own province, which Primacy in no
other B. or Patriarche can be showed. Against such a Reconliation he speaks
not one word. Only he reasons that every Reconciliation imports not a
Primacy. Which thing is not avouched by D. Harding. But only that by such a
Reconciliation as was made unto the B. of Rome, of them as were not of his own
province or Diocese, a Primacy of the Pope was acknowledged and confessed. But
of this we shall have more occasion to speak in the next Untruth. Let us
consider what M. Jewel has said therein.

Among them that, to satisfye the malicious mind off Eudoxia the Empress,
practiced their wicked conspiracy against Chrysostom, through which he was
deposed, and carried away into bannishement, Alexander Bishop of Antioche and
primat of the Orient, was one. (115.) Who at length stricken with repentance,
for that he had been both a consenter, and a promoter of that wicked Act,
submitted him self humbly to Innocentius the Pope, and by all means sought to
be assoiled and reconciled. And therefore sent his legates to Rome to exhibit
to Innocentius a solemn Instrument of his Repentance and lowly submission,
and to accept what should be enjoined. By which his humbleness Innocentius
moved, granted to his petitions, received him into the lap of the Catholic
Church again, and thus was he reconciled.





The 516. Untruth Slanderous. For the sending of legates and perfour^yng of
the condi^ions of the Reconciliation imports ^epentau^ce, penance,
Submission. Innoc^tius epist. 16. Tom. 1. Profitenti Condi^iones pacis.
impletas.
For in all that is written thereof by Innocentius, there is no manner mention,
neither of Solemn Instrument of repentance, nor of accepting of Penance, nor
of Subjection or humble submission.

Innocentius writing to one Maximianus a bishopp, who had moved Innocentius
about the Reconciliation of Atticus the bishop of Constantinople (who also had
been a consenter to the deposing of Chrysostom) and declaring to that bishop,
why he had not reconciled Atticus of Constantinople in like manner as he had
reconciled Alexander the bishop of Antioche, by the way, touches somewhat off
the Reconciliation made by the same Alexander, in these words. Communio
suspensa restituitur demonstranti causas etc. A man suspended from the
Communion, is restored when he shows the causes why he was suspended, to be
taken away, and professes the Conditions off reconciliation to be fulfilled.
Which, Atticus neither has signified, neither proved to be fulfilled by any
messenger either to you or to us. As our brother and follow bishop off Antioche
Alexander, by a just embasye has prosequuted and proved. Whereat also you
being present do know, that I have particularly examined all our writings
touching the cause of the holy bishop Chrisostom, wherein they have evidently
showed that at Antioche all things have been performed as they ought to be.
Whose reconciliation we embracing, truly we have made a way for all that will
ask it, to obtain the like: if at the lest they will at any time prove,
that they have done and performed for their part, such things as have been
in others examined and performed, communio nemque vt isti, legatio ne
solemniter destinata, sibi roga uerint redbiberi.
and also if they desire to be reconciled, by sending solemnly their legates
as these of Antioche have done. Thus far Innocentius.

In whose words we see, that this Alexander bishop of Antioche sent his
legates solemnly to Rome, that by those legates he desired to be reconciled,
that he had performed the conditions of Reconciliation, and that thereby he
was reconciled. Now this solemn sending of legates desiring to be Reconciled,
what was it but a Solemn Instrument off Repentance? For such was the manner
of Reconciliation in those days. So vrsatius and Valens did offer up to Julius
the Pope, Libellum penitentiae. An Instrument of repentance, when they were
reconciled from their Arrian heresy to the Catholoke unite. The perfourming of
the Conditions of Reconciliation, was the accepting of that which was enjoined.
The word Penance, as it is not in Innoce^tius, so neither is it in the words
of D. Harding. And who doubts but all this was done with an humble
submission, seeing that no repentance can be without humble submission, nor no
reconciliation without repentance? Cassiod. li. 4. cap. 12.
seeing also that Conditiones pacis complere, to perform the Conditions off
Reconciliation, requires expressly an humble submission, for lack of which
Atticus was not at that time yet reconciled, but continued suspended, and
through the which afterward, as it appears in an other epistle off
Innocentius, Epist. 17.
he was also reconciled. Touching this Reconciliation of Alexander of Antioche
to Innocentius, it shall the better appear, if the diligent Reader remember in
this place, the solemn Excommunication of Theophilus and other bishops his
adherents, in deposinge Chrysostom (off the which this Alexander was one) made
by this Pope innoce^tius. Of the which I have at larg spoken before about the
matter of Appeals. For by reason of the Exco^municatio^, this Alexander
Patriarche of Antioch, was necessarely reconciled. Therefore Innoce^tius having
received his submissio^, answers him in these words. Qua^ grata mihi, qua^
pia, Innoce^^i ^ epist. 15.
qua^ necessaria legatio a tua sanctitate frater Charissime ad nos directa
fuerit, gestoru^ ipsorum replicatione cognosces. How acceptable, how godly, how
necessary (derely beloved brother) your sending of your legates to us has
been, you shall know by the tenor of our dealing with you. As for the word
Subjection, which M. Jewel says is not in Innoce^tius, no more it is in the
text of D. Harding. The Spiritual Jurisdiction M. Jewel. requires no
Subjection, as Civil Princes do of their subjects. But as S. Gregory says:
Lib. 7. ep. 64.
vbi Culpa non exigit, omnes ratione humilitatis ^quales sumus. Where no fault
is committed, by the way of humilite, we be all equal. Therefore Innocentius,
after this Alexander was reconciled, he calls him, Fratrem Charissimum,
derely beloved brother, Epist. 15.
and as you allege for a mighty argument against the Popes primacy,
Condiscipulum sedis Apostlice, Epist. 17. Epist. 15. The.517. Untruth in false
tra^slating Ephesians. 2. Epist. 16. Necessaria legatio Solemnite^ de de^^ina^a
Co^dit^ones pacis ^^mple^^s d^gna lega^^one (...) ut^s est and probauit.
Scholefelowe of the Sea Apostolic. And sending his letters at that time
calls them primitias pacis nostre: the first fruits (not of friendship as you
untruly in this place translated it) but of the reconciliation made by us. And
so Crist is called in holy scripture Pax nostra Our reco^ciliation to God. So
this Alexander, Conditiones pacis completas esse, digna legatione prosequutus
est and probauit, by his worthy legates he went thouroughe with it and proved
it to the Pope that he had performed the conditions of Reconciliation. Had all
been but a matter of friendship and equalite, neither had he been before, by the
Pope excommunicated, neither had that solemn sending of legates to Rome been
necessary, neither neded any such Conditions to be performed, nor the
perfourmance thereof so expressly to be prosecuted and proved. Thus therefore
was the Patriarche of Antioche reconciled neither as a Subject unto his Prince,
nor as one equal friend to an other, but as a party before excommunicated to
his Spiritual head, that joining with his head Christ's vicaire, he might be a
part of Christ's mystical body.

Touching the examples alleged by Jewel, the writing of the Africanes to Pope
Innocentius about a Reconciliation between the Church of Alexandria and the
Church of Rome, Council Aphric. cap. 68.
was about this very matter of Crysostoms deposing, and makes very well to
prove a necessite of the same Reconciliation. But says M. Jewel.



Council. Aphric. cap. 68.
which was justly excommunicated, but ad sanctum Papam Innocentium, to the holy
Pope Innocentius, who had excommunicated them, that they might be Reconciled.
This expresses clearly, how necessary it was for the Church of Alexandria to
be reconciled to the Sea Apostolic. And thus far M. Iewelles own
alleagation has helped our matter.

Petrus Moggus was reconciled unto Asatius, Cap. 18.
not as unto his superior, but as unto his brother.

This Petrus Moggus was an heretic, Liberatus cap. 17. and 18.

Felix in Epist. ad Acacium.


excommunicated of the Sea Apostolic, and of Acacius also (whom M. Jewel
calls Asatius) but after was reconciled unto him. Wherevpo^ they were both
of Felix the bishop of Rome excommunicated. The conspyring of heretics can be
no president against the Reconciliations of Catholics. Who lists to see the
whole tragedy of this Petrus Moggus (which accursed the Chalcedon Council)
and of this Acacius consenting unto him by an edicte of Pacification made by
Zenon the Emperor, against the Sea Apostolic, and the end thereof, (...).
edictum. Cap. 16.17 and. 18.
let him peruse Liberatus set forth in the second tome of the Councelles.
The primacy of the bishop of Rome over the other patriarchs appears therein
most evidently: As by Appeals, by Reconciliations, by Exco^munications, and
such like Practice.

In this sense writes Hormisda bishop of Rome unto Epiphanius the bishop of
Constantinople. Jewel. The 518. Untruth For he wrote so not as absolutely his
equal, but as to whom the other was then reconciled.

Con. Constable. Act. 2. Vide libel. Joan. ad Ho^nisdam Tom. 2.


Seeing we have one frendsship in Communion and in faith, let us therefore take
like study and like care.

Yea. But what follows M. Jewel? It follows immediately. To thentent that as
we do now both equally rejoice in our Lord, that the Church of Constantinople
is united to the Apostolic See, so also we may (as you do charitably move me)
provide for the Reconciliation of other Churches also. For under John the
predecessor of this Epiphanius, the Church of Constantinople was reconciled
from the schism that Acacius before had made, to the Sea Apostolic. Being
thus reconciled, they wrote as fellows and equalles. For unless bishopps had
offended either against the Canons or against the Catholic faith, the Bishop
of Rome, used no Superiorite over them. Thus M. Jewel by titles and phrases
would disprove that, which the clear and open practice of the Church
evidently proves.

That which M. Jewel alleges out of Socrates for an example of
Reconciliation, Cassio. lib. ^. cap. 23. and 25. The 519. Untruth in all^aging
one thing for an other.
was (519) no Reconciliation at all. They were, or, at lest, pretended to be
Catholics which went to Pope Liberius. They went for a redress and ease of
their great aduersites and miseries which they sustained by the Arrians. They
sued also at that time to the Empe^our of the West, Valentinianus the first.
All this was not for a Reconciliation, but for the establyshing of the
Catholic faith against the Arrians, and to have some redress of the disorders
in their Churches.

The 520 Untruth For Arsenius was Reconciled to Athanasius as to his
Superior. Atha^as. Apolog. 2.
An other like example of Reconcili^tion we have made by one Arsenius the
bishop of H^psilitae to Athanasius the B. of Alexandria. This Submission or
Reconciliation was made unto Athanasius, yet was not Athanasius the bishop of
Rome.

This Reconciliation that Arsenius the bishopp of Hipsilitae made to
Athanasius, was not as to his equal, but as to his own primate and
Metropolitan. For so in the very sentence alleged by M. Jewel, it follows.
Neque citra tuam Metropolitani Episcopi sententiam vllum de episcopis aut alio
dogmate co^mu^i and ecclesiastico decretum aedituros. We promise also, that
without your Authorite, being the Metropolitan bishop, we will make no decree
either concerning bishops, or any other point of common and ecclesiastical
doctrine. This Submission therefore or Reconciliation made to Athanasius,
though it were not made to the bishopp of Rome, yet it was made to the
Metropolitan and superior, not to a fellow or equal. And thus the manner of
Reconciliation of Churches was done not between friends and fellows as M.
Jewel fansieth, but with humble submission, and knowleadge of a Supremacy
over the party reconciled. Finally thus Reconciliations being made to the
Bishop of Rome of Patriarchs and Metropolitanes them selves as of Alexander
the Patriarche of Antioche and of Atticus the Patriarche of Constantinople
both to Innocentius the B. of Rome, also of the bishops of the East to Leo
the B. of Rome, as before has been declared, is a sufficient token of primacy
and Supremacy in the Church of Rome over all other Churches, Patriarchs and
Metropolitanes.

Thus having declared the Supreme Authorite and primacy of the Pope, by the
Common practice of the Church, I need not to show further how in all
questions, doubts and controversies touching Faith and Religion, the Sea of
Rome has allwaies been consulted.

The 521. Untruth Slanderous. Stapleton
The 116. Untruth. For many great questions were never removed to Rome.

What were those great questions that were never removed to Rome? M. Jewel
names in his text not one question, great or small. And shall it be true
because M. Jewel says it only? He has been taken in Untruths to often, to
require now such credit. It had been an easy matter among many to name one.
Now no instance or exception being made, the universal remains true. For
to prove an universal, it is impossible. But if it like M. Jewel to stand by
this Untruth, he may take his pen and turn to the 91. and the 93. epistles
in S. Augustins works, and score it there also upon Innocentius the first: who
in his epistle, answering to the Fathers of the Council of Carthage (who had
required him, vt statutis eorum mediocritatis, Augustine. Epist. 90.
etiam Apostolicae sedis adhibeatur Authoritas, that to their decrees and
Canons the Authorite of the Apostolic See might be added, says no less then
D. Harding in his text said. For these are his words. Innoce^tius epist 91.
inter epist. Aug^stin.
Patrum instituta sacerdotali custodientes officio non censetis esse calcanda,
quod illi non humana sed diuina decreu^re sententia, vt quicquid de disiunctis
remotisque pr^uincijs ageretur, non prius ducerent finiendum, nisi ad huius
Sedis notitiam peruenire^, vbi tota huius Authoritate iusta quae fuerit
pronunciatio firmaretur. You observing the decrees of the Fathers, according to
the duty of priesthood, do show that they are not to be trod under foot,
whereas they, not by the sentence of man but of God him self, have thought
good that what soever should be in debate concerning such provinces as are
far distant, it should not be determined, before the matter were brought to
the knowleadge of this See, where, by the whole Authorire of the same, the
right and just Sentence might be confirmed. In these words Innocentius
affirms, that whatsoever was in debate or controversy in far distant
provinces, should be referred to the Sea of Rome, and there should take his
final sentence. Also that the Fathers had so decreed. And last of all that the
same decree of the Fathers proceeded not of the Sentence of man but of God him
self.

Again the same Innocentius answering to the Fathers of the Milleuitane
Council in Afrike also, requiring in like manner a Confi^mation of their
doings in that Council, has these words. Innoce^tius epist. 95. inter
^pi^t Augustine
Quid etiam Acti^ne firmastis, nisi scientes quod per omnes prou^ncias de
Apostoli^o sent petentibus, responsa semper eman^nt? Praesertim quoties fidei
ratio ventilatur, arbitror omnes fratres and co^pis^opos n^stros non nisi ad
Petrum, id est, sui n^minis and honoris Authorem ref^rre debere, velut nunc
retulit vestra dilectio, quod per totum mundum possit omnibus eccl^sijs in
commun^ prod^sse. An^ what have you declared in this your doing, but that you
know that thourough out all provinces, answers and Solutions do continually
flow to all that seek for it, at the Apostolical fountain? Especially, as
often as any matter of the faith is called in doubt, I think all our
brethern and fellow bishopps ought to refer it to none, but to Peter the
Author of their name and honor, you have now referred, that which might be
behoful to all Churches in common through out the whole world. Here
Innocentius, avouches no less to the Fathers of the Aphricane Councels, then
D. Harding did to his Reader: If the impudency therefore of M. Jewel will serve
him to abide by this Untruth, let him score it up also (as I said) upon
Innocentius.

Now if M. Jewel or any other man for him, will take this saying of
Innocentius being a Pope him self, to be an untrue saying and spoken only of
Ambition to exalte his own See and Authorite, it might suffice to call only to
remembrance that, this is the same Innocentius, to whom that excellently
learned and most holy Father Chrysostom Patriarche of Constantinople, Appealed,
Palladius in vita ^oa^. Chrysostemi, and Chrysostom. epist. 1. ad Innocentium.
Nicephorus lib. 13. cap. 34. Innoce^tius epist. 16. Tom. 1. Conc. I^em epist.
17. Council. Aphric. Can. 68. Aug. epi. 90. and 91
being wrongfully deprived of his Bisshoprike by the Synod of more then thirty
bisshoppes: who thereupon, excommunicated Theophilus the Patriarche of
Alexandria, which had done that injury: To whom, Alexander that holy and wise
Patriarche of Antioche was Reconciled from the bond of excommunication which
he incurred by the wrongeful deposition of Chrysostom: To whom also, Atticus
the second successor after Chrysostom in the Patriarkeship of Constantinople,
was in like manner Reconciled: To whom, the Bishops of Afrike thought good to
write about the Reconciliation of the Church of Alexandria to the Sea of Rome.
Last of all, to whom, the learned Fathers of the Cou^celles of Carthage and of
Milleuitum, among whom S. Augustine was one, referred the Acts of their
Councels to be Confirmed, this I say might suffice to any indifferent Reader,
to remember, and so to consider, that the Authorite of this Innocentius so
evidently practiced over the Chief patriarchs of the East, and so expressly
confessed of the Aph^icane Fathers, proceeded of no vain ambition, but of right
and Order, such as was dew to the Apostolic See of Rome.

But yet if all this suffice not to Justify this saying of Innocentius, which
M. Jewel has noted for an Untruth, let S. Augustine be an Vmper between us,
and let him pronounce, how he liked those letters of Innocentius the Pope,
wherein he uttered such words, so prejudicial, for the Authorite of the Sea
of Rome. S. Augustine writing to Paulinus of the Pelagian heresy, which in
those two Councelles off Carthage and of Milleuitum was condemned, Augustinus
Epist. 106.
speaks of the letters of those two Councelles sent to the Sea Apostolic
thus. Missae sunt de hac re ex duobus Co^cilijs, Carthagine^si and Milleuitan^,
relationes ad Apostolica^ Sede^. Relatio^s of this matter were sent, from the
two Councelles of Carthage and of Milleuitum, to the Sea Apostolic. Those are
the letters unto the which Innocentius made answer, and in the which Answer
the words above alleged of Innocentius, are written. Of those answers S.
Augustine a little after says thus. Ad omnia nobis ille rescripsit, eodem modo,
quo faserat atque oportebat, Apostolicae Sedis Antistitem. To all those
matters, he (Innocentius) wrote back unto us, even as it was right, and as it
behooved the Bishop of the Apostolic See.

This lo is the Judgment of S. Augustine, touching the Answer that Innoce^tius
made to the two Councelles of Carthage and Milleuitum. In which answers seeing
the words above alleged, are comprised, that all doubts ought to be referred
to the Sea of Peter, and all Solutions be sought from that Apostolic
fountain, we have the clear judgment of S. Augustine, that Innocentius in so
saying, spoke no otherwise then it was right, and then it becomed the Bishop of
the Apostolic See. Other bishops so to have spoken, it had been in deed neither
right nor convenient. This therefore being so clearly affirmed of Innocentius a
Pope of such Authorite well nere twelve hundred years paste, in two sundry
epistles, and by the Judgment of learned S. Augustine approved and commended, M.
Jewel comes now to late to comptroll it, and to sco^e it up for an Untruth.
For confer the words of Innocentius and of D. Harding together, Gentle
Reader, and thou shall see, they are all one both in effect and in very
terms. But that the one wrote in Latin, the other in English. Such be the
Untruths, that the plain and upright dealing of M. Jewel has scored upon D.
Harding. The sayings and decrees of the Ancient Fathers. Yea such a decree,
quod non humana sed diuina decreuere sententia, as the Fathers have decred, not
by the sentence of man but of God, says Innocentius.

If M. Jewel had read thus much in S. Augustins epistles, then was he
ouerperte and proud to note the doctrine of such Authorite for Untruth. He
specially who offreth to yield and Subscribe to any One sentence of any One
doctor. If he had not before read so much, but took this saying of D. Harding
to be (as he thought) a papysticall saying, and void of all good Authorite,
then let him learn by this, that he knows not all things, and as he was
grossly ouersene in this, so let him not be ashamed to confess his ignorance
in the rest. Our Lord of his mercy send him humilite. By true humilite he
will soon forsake his heresy.

Now somewhat to touch, that which M. Jewel prosecuteth here in his text,
the examples of Marcellinus, Dulcitius, Bonifacius, Euodius and others, which
sent their questions to S. Augustine and desired his Counsel, were questions
Moved, not Removed: that is: they were for instruction and Counsel, not for
final decision and determination. Such Removing of questions to be decided, is
here spoken off, not all kind of doubts and questions. Neither is this
universal so precisely avouched, as that you should require of us to declare
it in every particular, but being true for the most part or the most principal
matters, it declares a Primacy in the Sea of Rome. But, says M. Jewel.

S. Ambrose says that many that had been with the B. ^f Rome, would afterward
for their better satisfaction send to him.



And to be short, how all the world, has ever fetched light from thence.

The 522. untruth Slanderous, and agreing with the Arrians. Hist. tripar.
lib. 4. cap. 16.
The 117. Untruth. For Rome her self had her light from Greece.

So said the Arrians in deed in their rescript to Julius the Pope. But no
Catholic writer I wene ever said so. Of this matter we have before talked at
large in the 32. and 37. Untruths. For this is now the third time that it
has been noted for an Untruth. So much the Truth thereof misliketh him, or
else so desirous he was to heap up a number of Untruths. A toye, to my
knowleadge, never used of any grave or learned writer before.

Leo that worthy Bishop of Rome, was called the universal bishop and
universal Patriarche of six hundred and thirty Fathers assembled together
from al parts of the world in General Council at Chalcedon. Which is both
expressed in that Council, and also clearly affirmed by S. Gregorye in three
sundry epistles, to Mauritius the Emperor, to Eulogius Patriarch of
Alexandria, and to Anastasius Patriarche of Antioche.

The 523. Untruth Slanderous, and peuish.
The 118. Untruth. There is no mention made hereof in any Canon in that
Council.

What then M. Jewel? Can it not be expressed in that Council, but if it be in
some Canon expressed? What a childish reason is this? The Acts of the Council
of Chalcedon do contain a hundred and five leaves in print. The Canons of that
Council being set forth with a double edition contain but three leaves
thereof. And is there not room enough (M. Jewel) in all that Council to
find our matter in, except it be in some of the Canons? You mock and delude
your unlearned Reader M. Jewel, making him to believe that a Council consists
only of the Canons made therein. And how many things have you alleged M.
Jewel in this Fourth Article out of the Council of Chalcedon, and yet out of
no one Canon thereof? Were it honest and true dealing, to score up Untruths in
all these Allegations upon Master Jewel, because no mention is made in any
Canon in that Council? You are but a pelting wrangler, thus to cavil and
trifle. You seek not the edifying of your Reader. You seek only to snarle at
him, who has disclosed your immoderat pride and confuted your vain malapert
Challenge. But let us consider your learned Reply in this behalf. For this
point touched you to the quick. To be confuted in the very terms, of your
own challenge, that is death to you. Let us therefore considre how you
acquitte your self.

The 524. Untruth For D. Harding says not that Title was then given
Now for a brief answer, M. Harding has found 630. bisshops that (524) gave
this title to Leo the bishop of Rome in the Council of Chalcodon, and called
him the universal bishop, which thing (as he says) is recorded in S.
Gregory in three soundry places.

M. Jewel for a brief Reply, does first untruly report the words of D.
Harding, to thentent he may after daily thereat at pleasure. Gentle Reader,
look back to the words of D. Hardinge last above recited. Thou shall find,
he says not as M. Jewel reports him. He says not that the 630. bishops
in the Council of Chalcedon gave to Leo the name of Universal Bishop. He
speaks of no such gift. But he says, those Fathers called Leo by that
name. This seems perhaps to be a small difference. Verily if we had not to
do herein with a pelting wrangler, the difference were small in deed. But you
shall see what a stir he keeps about it.

The 525. Untruth. For it was holden in the year The 453. Pantaleo^ in sua
Chronogr. ex Sigeber to and alijs. Stapleton
Here good Christian Reader, by the way, this one thing I trust, thou will
consider of thy self. If the name of Universal Bishop was given to the
bishop of Rome in the Council of Chalcedon which was holden in the year of
our Lord.488. then by M. Hardinges own grant; and by the witness of this
Council, the Bishop of Rome before that time, had not the name of universal
Bishop. Otherwise, how could either they give, that they had not to bestow,
or he receive that he had already? In deed such bestowing of gifts had been
very childish.

Lo. Do you not see wha^ a high point of lerning M. Jewel has picked out
of the word Give? Think you it was no vauntage for him to alter the text of
D. Harding? No I warrant you. M. Jewel though he make many Untruths, yet he
will make few without some vantage. As touching the matter, what if the
Council did not give that name, and what if D. Harding did not grant so
much? Then has M. Jewel lost a good Argument. And more then that. For you
shall see.

Thus of the whole number of six hundred years, M. Harding freely, even at the
sight, has yielded us back (.526.) four hundred, four score and eight years
toward the Reckening.

You make your Reckening without your Oste M. Jewel. There is no such grant
made yet unto you. Therefore you may wipe your bille and go to rouste.

This weighty consideration you have made by the way, The 526. Untruth For
you come short of your reakoning thirty years and more.
as you say. What Reply make you to the matter it self?

Before we pass farther, let us see what credit the Pope him self gives to
this Council of 630. Fathers holden at Chalcedon.

Leo epist. 47. Greg. lib. 1. epist. 24. and li. 7. epist. 5. Gelas. in Tom. de
Anath. vin. Tom. 1. Con.
that by the Authorite of the Sea Apostolic it was holden. Pope Simplicius
excommunicated Petrus of Alexandria: Pope felix, Acacius of Constantinople: and
Pope Gelasius, Anastasius the Emperor for reproving the Counsel of Chalcedon.
Pope Gregory commanded the four general Councelles to be observed and
reverenced like as the four Evangelists. And thinks now M. Jewel to
bring us Popes that do disallowe it? Yea even of these very Popes alleged,
Leo and Gelasius? Truly though nothing be to hard to one that must defend
Untruth, yet this I trow will be very hard for M. Jewel, so much as
coulourably to prove. Howbeit let us behold how impudently he faceth and
avouches out the matter. He says.

The Apostolic See of Rome in part allowed it not. For that things were
there borne out by inordinat presumption. Inter Acta Con. Tarrac. The 527.
Untruth. Gelasius falsely alleged touching the quotation.


For these words of Gelasius you have noted in the Margin the Acts of the
Council of Tarraconense. Now that Council was holde^ before Gelasius was
Pope under Felix the third. And in the whole Acts of that Council there is
no word or half word of the Chalcedon Council. All this therefore is but a
pregnant Untruth. The words of Gelasius that you do mean are among the
decrees of Gelasius. Your Notary deceived you, that told you it was in Conc.
Tarracon. In tom^ de Anathem^ it is vinculo
Such care you have what you write, and what you teach the people that reads
your books. Had you seen M. Jewel the whole place of Gelasius, you would
have been ashamed to have alleged them as you have done, and to have taken
part again with the Eutychian herelikes. For this was the case. In the
Council of Chalcedon the Eutychian heretics were condemned. Council. Chal.
Act. 16.
At the end of that Council also not by the consent of the whole bishops, nor
of the third part of the bishops (as it has been before declared) and
against the express contradiction of the Popes legates, the bishopp of
Constantinople by certain of the Council, was made in dignity next to the
bishop of Rome, and preferred before the Patriarchs of Alexandria, and of
Antioche, contrary to the express decrees of the Nicene Council, which the
Pope by his legates defended. Can 6. Con. Nic.
This privilege of the bishop of Constantinople, the Council in their letters
to Pope Leo desired most humbly the Pope to confirm, Council. Chal Act. 3.
as it may be seen in the letters of the Council, regestred among the Acts
off the Council of Chalcedon. Yet Leo the Pope in his rescript to the
Councelles letters, confirming all other matters touching the Catholic faith,
would in no wise confirm or allow the privilege of Constantinople: This
privilege notwitstanding being (as Liberatus writes) by the Emperors favor
bore^ out after a sort, the Church of Constantinople fell shortly after to
the Eutychian heresye, under Acacius their bishop: who therefore with Petrus
Moggus Bishop of Alexandria were of Pope Felix predecessor to this Gelasius
excommunicated. The vpholders of this Acacius, Leo epist. 59. Liberatus. Cap.
18.
found fault with Gelasius the successor off Felix, for the excommunicating
of Acacius, and alleged that Acacius being an Eutychian ought not to be
condemned for that opinion by virtue of the Council of Calcedon, seeing that the
same Counsel was not in all points allowed of the Sea Apostolic it self.
This objection of those vpholders of Acacius the Eutychian, M. Jewel has
picked out of Gelasius, to prove (as you see) that this Pope allowed not that
General Council off Chalcedon. But Gelasius him self as he was an eloquent
and learned Pope, so he answered these vpholders of Acacius the Eutychian at
that time, lernedly and eloquently. And the same answer may serve M. Jewel
taking also their part. The beginning of the place is some what abrupte and
imperfect. Yet the words do euidentlye give to understand that all things
touching the Catholic faith done and concluded in that Council, a tota
ecclesia indubitanter admitti, were admitted of the whole Church without all
doubt or controuersye. But other things which in that Council per
incompetentem praesumptionem prolata sunt vel potius ventilata, The.528.
Untruth. Gelasius falsely translated
by inordinat presumption were propounded or rather tossed: not, as M. Jewel
translateth it, boren out, which the Sea Apostolic denied, being presently by
the Legates thereof gainesaied, those things the Sea Apostolic allowed not.
And the reason in Gelasius follows. Quia qu^e priuilegijs vniuersalis
Ecclesiae contraria probantur, nulla ratione sustine^. Because such things as
are contrary to the privileges of the universal Church, the Sea Apostolic by
no means allows. For by the decrees of the general Council of Nice it was
decreed that the Bishop off Alexandria and of Antioche should be the next
Patriarchs in dignyte after the bishop of Rome. Co^c. Nicen. Can. 6.
The bishop of Constantinople at that time was no patriarch at all. This was
the thing that the Sea Apostolic allowed not. And therefore Learned Leo in his
letters to the whole Council of Chalcedon, Leo. Epist. 61. Epist. 53.54, 55.
and 62.
to Anatholius then bishop of Constantinople, to Martianus the Emperor, to
Pulcheria the Emperesse, and last of all to Maximus the Patriarche of Antioche
utterly disproueth and disalloweth that unlawful prerogative of the bishop of
Constantinople, only because it was expressly against the Canons of the
Council of Nice. And in his letters to Maximus of Antioche, thus he says.
Quicquid praeter speciale^ causas synodali^m Conciliorum ad examen episcopale
defertur, Epist. 62.
potest aliquam di^udicandi hahere rationem, si nihil de eo est a sanctis
patribus apud Nicaeam definitum. Nam quod ab illorum regulis constitutioneque
discordat, Apostolicae Sedis nunquam obtinebit consensum. Whatsoever in
Councelles is called to the judgment of bishops, beside the special causes of
the Councelles, it may after a sort be determined, if the matter be not
already defined of the holy Fathers at Nice. For whatsoever varyeth from their
rules and constitutions, the Apostolic See will never consent unto it. And the
reason hereof is most strong and necessary, which Leo also in that epistle
alleges, saying. Vniuersae pacis tra^quillitas non aliter poterit custodiri,
nisi sua Canonibus reuerentia inte^nerata seruetur. The quietness of universal
unite can not otherwise possiby be mayntayned, except the Canons be reverently
and inuiolably observed. Thus Gelasius and Leo both, allowed and confirmed the
General Council of Chalcedon, in all matters touching faith and doctrine, for
the which that Council was especially called, albeit, the prerogative of the
bishop of Constantinople injurious to the bishops of Alexandria and of
Antioche, and contrary to the Canons of the Nicene Council, was worthily and
rightfully gainesaied, resisted, and denied. Yet says M. Jewel.

Pope Leo accuses the whole Council of Ambition and wilful rashness.

The.529. Untruth Leo never accused the whole Council so.
M. Jewel should have done well, to have given a note in the margin where Leo
so said, his works being so great and diverse. How be it the matter being
utterly false and untrue, no maruail if he left the place without quotation.
Pope Leo accuses not the whole Council, of Ambition, but only certain of the
Council, as Anatholius the bisshopp of Constantinople and certain other.
Therefore writing of this matter so granted and presumed by certain of the
Council, he calls it, quorundam consensum, the consent of certain, Leo
Epist. 55. Leo. Epist. 62.
and again quoru^dam episcoporum consensum the Agreement of certain bishops,
and in an other epistle, quorundam surreptionem, the guile and fraud of
certain. And as we have before declared, to this privilege of the bishopp of
Constantinople, Council. Chalcedon. Act. 16.
there subscribed only.212. bishops, as the Acts declare, whereas the whole
Counsel consisted of.630. bishops. So in the Ephesine Council, Inuenalis
bishop of Jerusalem attempted to get by consent of certain bishops the
Jurisdiction over Palestine, Leo ep. 62
from the patriarche of Antioche, as Cyrillus the bishop of Alexandria in his
letters to Pope Leo complained, but it was by the Sea Apostolic resisted and
overthrown. As that attempt of Iuuenalis does not disprove that learned
Council of Ephesus the first, no more does this attempt of Anatholius, any
thing empaire the Authorite of the Council of Chalcedon.

32. quaest. 2. Tria legit. The.530. Untruth Slanderous, and joined with a
folly. Exca. 27. Con. Chal. 26. quaest. 2. Nullus.
And S. Hierom in the case of Matrimony, Inter raptorem and raptam is received
against all those.630. bishops, and against the determination of the whole
Council.

I wot not verily, whether this false dealing of M. Jewel proceed of wilful
malice, or of mere ignorance. The question moved of Gratian is this. An raptori
rapta nubere possit patre assensum praebente. Whether a maid taken away by
violence may be married to the party that uses such violence, by the consent
of the Father. First he proves by the Council off Chalcedon and diverse other
authorites that two such parties ought not to be coupled together in
matrimonye. But then he says. Raptor and rapta nomina sunt vitiorum non
personarum. Vitia autem cum per poenitentiam purgata fuerint, nomina eorum
abolentur. A vser of vilence, and a party so used, are the names of the faults
not of the persons. But faults being purged by penance, do lose their names.
For so the aduouterer that repents, is no more an aduonterer. Upon this
distinction he alleges Authorites, that such parties after satisfaction may
marie, and among the rest, S. Hierom. Who speaking of three kinds of lawful
marriages, Ibide^. Tria legitima
puts for the second, this. Virgo in ciuitate etc. Amayde in some cite
taken of a man and coupled to him by violence, if the Father of the maid will,
the man shall give her a dowry as much as the Father shall think good, and
shall give the price of her virginite. By this satisfaction of the dowry to be
made by the man that has done the violence in recompense of that injury
(which dowry otherwise the Father should have given with the daughter) the
fault is taken away by S. Hieroms judgment, and so they may marye. Not as
Raptor and rapta, contrary to the Council of Chalcedon, but as man and wife,
the other trespass of violence used, being by satisfaction of a dowry paid,
abolished. And this ^s S. Hierom defended and the Council of Chalcedon both.
Understand your laws better M. Jewel, before you allege them. Abuse not
your Reader which desires to learn, and looks not to be mocked at your
hands, M. Jewel, with the quotations in your margin out of Popes decrees,
making nothing for your purpose. Use no more false marginall notes, like a Call
for birds: tolling therewith your Readers consent to falsehood and Untruth.
The more you deceive, the greater is your damnation.

In such regard they have the Councelles, when they list.

Like as a Shrewe having well bett her husband cries out to her neighbors, as
if her husband had bett her, so here M. Jewel having spett all his poison
against the holy Council of Chalcedon, having missereported Gelasius, The 531.
Untruth Slanderous.
flatly belied Leo, and ignorantly alleged the decrees, now he cries out
against the Catholics, and says that they have no regard of Councels but
when they list. This therefore to be but a mere Slanderous Untruth, it
appears by that which has before been said. Let us proceed.

It is against reason that one man should in part allow the will of the dead
(so far forth as it makes for him) and in part overthrow it (where it
seems to make against him).

Council. C^alced. Act. 16.
Ex his quae gesta sunt vel ab vnoquoque deposita perpendimus omne^ quidem
Primatum and honorem praecipuum secundum Canones, antiquae Romae deo
amantissimo Archiepiscopo confirmari. By these Acts and depositions of each
one we understand, that all the Primacy and chief honor is reserved,
according to the Canons, to the well-beloved of God, the Archbishop of Old
Rome. After which words follows the privilege of Constantinople over Asia,
Pontus, and Thracia. In all these words therefore Master Jewel has declared
his good will that he bears to the general Counsels of Christendom. But
gods name be blessed, though he has spett his poison, the Truth remains
sound. Remember the saying of the wise man M. Jewel. Quid stulti proprium?
Non posse and velle nocere. Remember that of late years in the very time of
your schism, the four first general Councelles, of the which this Council
off Chalcedon is one, were allowed by open Parliament. Verily in the very first
beginning of the Christen faith among us englismen, our Country being in a
manner all and throughout converted to the faith, our godly auncetours thought
it necessary by a full Synod and Council of our own country to establishe the
Authorite of the v. general Councelles off Christ's Church holden before
their days, Beda lib. 4 cap. 17.
of the which this Council of Chalcedon is the fourth. And Seuerus a
schismatic bishop of Antioche had his tongue cut out by the commandment
of the Catholic Emperor Justinius for the blasphemies that he uttered against
this holy Council of Chalcedon. Nicephor. lib. 17. c. 2
Such examples you follow, and such you forsake in defending your most
impudent Challenge. Let us hear you proceed.

The 532. Untruth. For D. Hardinge will not put any doubt of that Cou^celles
credit. The lewdenesse of M. Jewel
But M. Harding will say. Of what credit so ever this Council ought to be, it
gave Leo the name of universal bishop.

No. No. M. Jewel. D. Harding will put no such doubts of the credit of the
Council of Chalcedon. He neither has said neither will say any such
thing. And yet you have printed those words in a distinct letter, as if not
only D. Harding would so say, but also had already so said. So impudent and
false you are not only in misalleaging the words of the doctors, which the
unlearned Reader sees not, but even in falsifying the words of D. Harding,
whose whole text lies open in your book to be readen. But you think
perhaps to be of such credit, with your Reader, that he will trust your
allegation, without looking to the text being so nighe and easy to epsy. And
verily so did I trust you M. Jewel in the beginning also. But now I have
perceived that you alter sometimes the words of D. Harding in your own text,
though they are truly set forth in his text, which makes me not allwaies to
trust you. But alas, when come you to the matter M. Jewel?

M. Jewel toieth and dalyeth.
What if there were no such title either offered or given in the Council?

Lib. 4. epist. 32. and 36.
Truly then you shall prove S. Gregory a liar. Who said expressly, it was
Offered. As for the giving, that word is not avouched by D. Harding as it has
before been showed. But let us hear your proofs.

The 533. Untruth. For S. Gregory says, it was corrupted many a year ago.
Certainly the whole Council of Chalcedon is extant abroad, both written and
printed and may soon be seen.

If the whole Council be extant, and yet no such thing can be found in the
Council, then S. Gregory made a lie in deed, which avouched the Council did
so. But I reckon it a matter of more credit, that S. Gregorye said, then that
M. Jewel avouches. Let M. Jewel prove that the whole Council is extant and
that nothing thereof lacks, and so prove S. Gregory a liar. Lib. 5. epist.
14.
Else it will be thought M. Jewel has made a (...), and not S. Gregory:
Certainly S. Gregory him self says. Sancta Chalcedonensis Synodus in vno
loco ab ecclesia Co^stantinopolitana falsata est. The holy Council of
Chalcedon was in one place corrupted by the Church of Constantinople.





The 534. Untruth. For not he, but Athanasius so said. Page 234. Lib. 5.
epist. 14.
Perhaps he will say. This Canon was burnte by some heretics: as he (534)
said before of the Council of Nice.

Not he M. Jewel, but Athanasius him self (as you have before confessed)
says the Canons of the Nicene Council were burnte by the Arrians. And of
this Council of Chalcedon S. Gregorye says, as you heard before. It has
been falsified in one place thereof by the Church of Constantinople.





The 535. Untruth. The Pope claims not his Title by any such words.
Or else the words whereby the Pope (535) claims his title should so
negligently be lost, and that in Rome it self, in the Popes own Library, and
yet the words that the Pope reproves and condemns should stand whole.

This is a slanderous Untruth. The Pope claims not his Title by the words
of Universal bishop. Master Jewel in all this Article with all his study
and conference with his friends can name no one Pope that ever so called him
self, or required to be so called. And yet he puts this Title neither
desired nor used of any Pope, as the ground and foundation off the Popes
Supremacye. Will you know M. Jewel, whereupon the Popes primacy is grounded?
S. Gregory has told you in the beginning of this Article. VVhereupon the
Popes Primacy is grounded. Matthew. 16. Joan. 21. Luc. 22.
It is grounded upon the words of our Savior in the Ghospel to S. Peter,
whose successor the Pope is. It has been established by the General
Counsels namely of Nice and Sardica. It has been confessed by the continual
practice of the Church, by Appeals to that See, by Reconciliations, by
Confirmatio^s of Councels, by Confirmyng of Bishops and so forth, not only of
these 900. Years and upward by your own confession M. Jewel, but even of
the first 600. Years also, as it has been in this Article against your most
lying Reply, clearly and evidently proved. It has been confessed of the
learned Fathers, and Confirmed by the decrees of Emperors. Upon such good
grounds is the supremacy of the Sea Apostolic builded. These grounds you
shall never remove M. Jewel, nor any of your sect, without most manifest,
most impudent, and most outrageous Untruths. Such as you have in this Article
abundantly committed.

The.536. Untruth. For he has the Council of Nice and of Sardica, beside,
to hold by in this matter.
And yet the same can not be found.

This is an other pregnant untruth. For both the Council of Nice and of
Sardica, both within less then 400. Years after Christ have confessed a
primacy in the Bishop of Rome by the which D. Harding holds, and the very
name of Universal bishop M. Jewel anon will find him self in the Counsel
of Chalcedon. Yet we must give him leave in the mean while to Brag and Crow
at pleasure.





bis^oppes in the Council of Chalcedon, named the bishopp of Rome the
universal bishop. ^his is an Untruth to beguile the Reader.



The.53^. Untruth. For S. Gregorye says, the bisshops in that Counsel so
called the B. of Rome, as it shall anon appear.

Greg. li. 4. Epist. 32. and. 36.

The.538. Untruth. For he says not so only as it shall straight appear.


For Gregory says not, the bishops in that Council Saluted, Entitled,
Proclaimed, or (537) Called the bisshopp of Rome by that name.

As for Saluting, Intitling, Pro^layming, they are no part neither of your
Challenge, neither of D. Hardinges Answer. But that the Pope was Called the
Universal bishop, you deny, and D. Harding out of S. Gregory will prove. To
that what do you Reply?

Only (538.) he says. The name of universal bishop was offered by the
Council of Chalcedon to the bishop of Rome.

Will you grant so much M. Jewel? Then where is become your what if, which
you made before, when you said: what if there were no such title either
given or off^ed in the Council? You confess your self now, it was offered
in that Council, and so you prove your self that you uttered before a
manifest untruth. But now to the matter. You have confessed the words of S.
Gregory. What say you now unto them? Thus you say.

The.539. Untruth. For S. Gregory says it. The.540. Untruth, Slanderous.
He said they offered to call him so, but that they called him so in deed (539)
he says not. Therefore M. Harding herein (540) ouerreacheth and missetelleth
his Authors tale.

S. Gregorye writes of this matter in mo places then one. Therefore though in
the words by ^ou noted he says not expressly, The bishops of Rome were
called Universal bisshops by the Council of Chalcedon, yet in an other place
he says so. In a letter to John of Constantinople he writes so expressly
and plainly, in these words. Nunquid non, sicut vestra sanctitas nouit, per
venerandum Chalcedonense Concilium huius Apostolicae Sedis Antistites, cui deo
disponente deseruio, Grego. lib. 4. epist. 38
Vniversals oblato honor vocati sunt? Were not (as your holiness knows) the
bisshops of this Apostolic See, (which by the Providence off God I serve) by
the Reverent Council off Chalcedon Calle^ Universal Bishops, that honor
being Offered them? Behold M. Jewel, and remember your promise at Paul's
Cross. You said there. If it can be showed out of any Old General Council
that the bishop of Rome was within the first 600 Years Called an Universal
Bishop, you will yield and Subscribe. S. Gregory (whom your self before
calls, ( a witn^^ su^fi^ent) whom Venerable Bede calls Our Apostle, Li. 2.
ca. 1. Hist. ge^tis Angloru^.
because he sent us our first preachers of Christen faith, whom the Church
has esteemed as one of the Four doctors off the same, this holy and Learned
Father tells you, that By the Reverent Council of Chalcedon his
predecessors (bishops of Rome) were Called Universal Bishops. Will you
now come to the book and Subscribe? Will you yield according to Promise? What
you will do, it is easy to Judge. But that you may so do, for your own sake
I wish. In the mean the Reader sees, both that you have (not ouerreached or
missetolde) but flatly belyed your Author S. Gregory, and also how D. Harding
has neither ouerreached nor missetolde his Author, but has avouched that,
which his Author expressly wrote.

But let us take S. Gregory's words, even as your self M. Jewel, has
alleged them. Thus they stand. The name off Universal bishop was offered by
the Council of Chalcedon to the bishop of Rome. His words are not. The
Council offered to call him so. Therefore M. Jewel has ouerreached and
missetolde his Authors tale.

Now when the Council offered that name to the bishop of Rome, I would gladly
learn of M. Jewel, how and by what means they offered it. Either they offered it
by mouth, or by writing. If by writing, then they entitled him so, and
called him so in writing. If they offered that name unto Leo by mouth, then
they spoke it out to his legates (for he him self was not present at the
Council) they spoke it I say and uttered it by mouth. I trust M. Jewel will
not say. The whole Council stood up, and gaped upon the legates, and proffered
to speak, but the legates before they spoke or uttered any word at all,
desired them to hold their peace, and not to utter their minds. Unless they
did this, or some like thing, it can not be true that M. Jewel says, They
offered to call him so, but it must be true that D. Harding says, they called
him so in deed, and that either by mouth or by writing. For how a name or
title can be offered, without it be spoken or written I know not.

that neither Leo, nor any other of his predecessors bishops of Rome, would
ever re^eiue that Arrogant and ungodly name, or suffer him self to be so
called, notwithstanding it were offered by the Council. The bisshops of Rome
never used that name, notwithstanding it were offered to them. Therefore they
ought to loose it by non usure.

The bishops of Rome never used it in deed. Therefore (say you) they ought to
loose it by non usure. On Gods name. We do not desende that Name M. Jewel. The
Pope requires it not, but has ever shunned it and refused it. Only because of
your rash Challenge, it has been showed, that the Pope has been so called
off others. Which also your self confesses, saying.

All this nothwithstanding, true it is, that M. Harding says, Leo in that
Council of Chalcedon was thus called. The places be known and may not be
denied.

Lo gentle Reader: M. Jewel now, nothwithstandinge the Vnt^uthe noted in his
margin, notwithstanding his what ifs, M. Jewel confesses for Truth, which he
noted before in D. Hard. For Untruth.
notwithstanding his great questioning of Canons lost and six lines burnte,
notwithstanding I say all this great storming and striving that he made
before, now he confesses the Truth, and says All this notwithstanding true
it is, that M. Harding says, etc. Yea he will show us the very places off
the Council of Chalcedon, beside the witness of Saint Gregory, in the which
the Pope is called Universal bishopp and not only called, but saluted: For
thus he says.

M. Jewel con^esseth that, which in ^is Challenge, he valu^ted, no man could
prove.
The one sent by one Athanasius a priest, the other by one Ischyrion a deacon.
The third by one Theodorus likewise a deacon.

Lo you have heard M. Iewelles Confession. That the Pope is saluted Universal
bishop in three sundry Epistles in the Acts of the Chalcedon Council. But
what think we now? Will M. Jewel trow we, yield and Subscribe? He
confesses him self, the Pope was Called and saluted Universal bishop in
three sundry letters registered in the Council of Chalcedon, which Council
was holden as M. Jewel also confesses in the year of our Lord 488. This was
more then one whole hundred of years within his 600. What then? Will M. Jewel
Subscribe and yield? No No. He never meaned no such matter. You shall see what
shift he has to escape his promise. He says.



together in the Council of Chalcedon. Was that the tenor of your Challenge
at Paul's Cross? Is that Condition annexed to the words of your Challenge?
Nay you speak very largely and freely, The Tenor of M. Iewelles Challenge.
If it can be showed out of any old Catholic doctor, or Father, or out of
any old general Council, or out of the holy Scriptures of God, or any one
example of the primitive Church, whereby it may clearly and plainly be
proved, that the Bishop of Rome was with in the first six hundred years called
an Universal Bishopp, or Head of the universal Church, you will yield and
subscribe. Now Sir, here you have not only a General Council by the witness
of S. Gregorye, but also an Example of a Priest and two Deacons of the
Primitive Church, that Called, Saluted and Entitled Leo the Pope of Rome, an
Universal bishop. That it is clearly and plainly proved, you confess your
self, Jewel. Page 298.
saying. The places be known, it ca^ not be denied. Will you now except and
draw back because they were no bishops which so saluted and Entitled the Pope?

Do not all men here see, that you mocked your whole Audience when you made
your Challenge, and that you never intended to perform, which so stoutely
you promised twice in the Pulpit? Or was it (M. Jewel) the Act then passed in
Parliament, which made you so bold? Thinking that thereby all men's mouths
should be mouseled, and you might Crow alone?

For why M. Jewel? The Priest and Deaco^s of that time, are they no Christen
me^? Or is their testimony the worse because they were of the clergy? Then
behold an other testimony read and Regestred also in that holy Council of one
neither priest nor deacon, and yet a Christen man, who in his supplication
offered up to the Pope and to the Council of Chalcedon, uses the very same
Title and style as the other two deacons and Athanasius the priest did. Council.
Chalced. Act. 3.
The title of the supplication is this. Sanctissimo and beatissimo Universally
Archiepiscopo and Patriarchae magnae vrbis Romae Leoni, and sanctissimo
Concilio secundum voluntatem Dei and Diuina mandata in Chalcedone^si Ciuitate
co^gregato, a Sophronio Christiano. That is. To the most holy and most
blessed Universal archebishopp and Patriarche of the great City of Rome Leo,
and to the most holy Council assembled together in the City of Chalcedon
according to the will and commandments of God, by Sophronius a Christian man.
Will this Example please you M. Jewel? This is an Example of the primitive
Church. This was neither poor deacon, nor strange priest, as you term them
scornefully, more like a Hicke scorner, then like a Bishop, but this was a
Christen lay man and as it appears a man of worship. For in his Supplication
to the Pope and to the Council, wherein he accused Dioscorus the tyrannical
Patriarch of Alexandria, he added, that many other could say as much as he
said against the same Dioscorus, but that sieve pro paupertate, sieve pro timore
eius tyrannidis non sunt ausi, partly for poverty, partly for fear of his
tyranny they durst not. Whereby it appears, this Sophronius was neither poor,
neither of such a state as he neded to fear the Patriarch.

Now because M. Jewel urges this matter and would make it of no force,
because no bishop did so call the Pope in the Council, I would wish M.
Jewel, if he can, to satisfy and solute these questions.

That the Bishop of the Chalcedo^ Council Called Leo, Universal Bishop.
yea and that his predecessors were by that holy Council so Called, whether
he meaned not that the bishops off the same Counsel did offer that name and
Call them so, or no. If not the bishops, then either the Emperor and his
Council, or the notaries and inferior clergy of those bishops did offer
that name and Call his predecessors by that name. And then it was not the
Council at all that did it. For a Council consists of bishops, not of the
lay magistrate, or of the inferior clergy. And therefore it was cried in this
very Council of Chalcedon. Action. 1
Synodus episcoporum est, non clericorum. A Council is of bishops not of
clerks. If then of the bishops of that Council that name was offered, and
ofter it they could not without expressing the name, either by mouth or by
writing, if by those bishopps, they being the Body of the Council, the
Bishops of Rome were so Called, then it is clear that the bishops of that
Council either by mouth Called the Pope Universal bishopp, or by writing
Entitled him so. And thus by the witness of S. Gregory it is clear, the
bishopps of the Council of Chalcedon no less in number then six hundred and
thirty, either called by mouth, or entitled by writing the Bishopp off Rome
an Universal Bishopp. And so M. Jewel must Subscribe.

Paschasinus one of the Popes legates there, of Petrus bishopp of Corinthe,
Council. Chal. Act. 3.
Marinianus bishopp of Synnada, of Pergamius bishop of Antioche in Pisidia, of
Patricius bishopp of Tyana, and by the consent of all the rest, regestred
among the Acts and monuments of the Council, were they not also, I ask you
M. Jewel, allowed and approved of the bishops? Should they otherwise not
only have been readen in the Council, but also be regestred in the Acts
thereof? The supplications then being thus regestred and allowed, was not
think you the Title and style thereof also allowed? If it had been then
acompted a blasphemous, strange, or injurious title, that the Pope should be
entitled Universal Bishop, would that holy and learned Council, not only
have given the hearing thereof, but also commanded the same to be regestred
and reserved with the other Acts of the Council? Would they not rather have
blamed those deacons, that priest, and that other lay man for using that
Term, and for intitling the bishop of Rome with the name of Universal
bishop, if they had in deed disallowed it, or been of that mind as M. Jewel is
of? Therefore seeing it was not of the bishops reproved, but by their express
Commandment Regestred among the Acts of the Council and thereby Allowed,
it follows the bishops allowed that Title, and so the Example is of good
Authorite, and can not be avoided. Verily of no less authorite then if the
bishops them selves had so saluted or entitled the Pope. It follows also by
force of this Clear Example of the primitive Church, M. Jewel according to the
tenor of his Challenge must yield and Subscribe.

Dioscorus their Patriarche) made their supplication not only to the whole
Council, but to Leo the Pope by name, who yet was not otherwise present there,
then by his legates? Why do these of Alexandria in Egypt, put up their
supplication to the Pope by name, having the whole Council present, and call
him the Universal Bishop, omitting the other Patriarchs of Antioche and of
Constantinople, but that they acknoweledged him as Head and Chief of the
Council, and as the Primat and Superior to al other bishops and Patriarchs?

Universal bishop and that in the presence of a whole Council, unless that
name and Title of right appertayned to the bishopp of Rome? Or what vantage
could it be unto them to make a lie, and to utter such a Title in honor of
the Pope, which did dishonor and debace all the rest of the bisshops (in that
sense as M. Jewel takes Universal bishop) and should therefore in so doing
have provoked all the Cou^tell to indignation and displeasure for so iniuring
them eue^ to their faces? Must we for M. Iewelles pleasure, imagine such a
peuish absurdite or blind bettle ignorance in those four plaintifs of
Alexandria?

Universal Bishop? Shall we not rather think that in such a solenne
Instrument of their humble suite and petition to the Pope and to the Council,
they would with all diligence and truth, exactly observe the right, dew, and
approved Title of the Bishop of Rome and of the whole Council? When are Titles
of Magistrates exactely and truly penned, but in the suites and complaints
made to Magistrates? And what can more evidently prove the dew title of a
Magistrate, then the approved tenor of supplications made unto the Magistrate?
Or are such Titles in all private suites exactely kept, and in the most
honorable assembly of a whole General Council not kept? Nay it is most
evident by this Example of the Primitive Church, the Pope was either by the
Consent of that Council then first, or else before usually and of right called
Universal bisshoppe, of others, though the Popes them selves to avoid the
inconvenience of a wrong sense that might be gathered thereof, have never so
entitled them selves. And therefore M. Jewel to this Example of the primitive
Church must Subscribe.

The Bishop of Rome was called the vniuers^ll bishop, and head of the Church
above a thousand years sithence, he might with more truth and much better
have noted his book thus. S. Gregory's words misalleaged, the Council
falsified, this only Canon lost, all the rest whole and safe, A strange
priest, and two porre deacons, in their private suites for their goods, and
legacies, named Leo the universal bishop. But of the six hundred and thirty
bishops, that had voices in the Council, not one ever named him so. Thus much
M. Hardinge might truly have noted in the margin.

Plutarchus in Pericle.
the other strong and valiant of body, that making a Combat and wrasteling the
one with the other in the sight of all the people, Pericles being ever cast by
Thucy dides, he had yet such a sleighte that suddenly recovering him self, he
would by his eloquence persuade the people, that he had given his fellow the
fall, though all they saw with their eyes that he had taken the foil and the
fall both. It seems M. Jewel has conceived some like vain hope of Dame
Eloquence and Impudencye her cosen, that being expressly forced upon his
fond and rash Challenge to yield and Subscribe by clear and express evidence,
he may shifte yet the whole matter away, from him self, and to give his
adversary the foil. For this purpose he has ouerreached the words of S.
Gregory, and has forced the whole Council of Chalcedon to stand gaping upon
the Popes legates, and not be so hardy as to speak out their minds, when they
offered Leo the name of Universal bishop, lest if they had spoken out, M. Jewel
had been confounded. Therefore he makes S. Gregorye to say, The Coun^ell
offered to call the Pope so, but calls him not so in deed. Again he tells
the Reader of Canons lost, and six lines burnte, and only this poor name of
Universal bishop not able to be found in the whole Council. Thirdly
confessing of fine force the Truth which before he denied, and showing how in
the very Counsel the Pope was so Called, Saluted, and Entitled, then he
thinks to debace the matter, for that they were two poor deacons, not Rich
Bishops and a strange priest, not an Englishman borne (for else I maruail why
M. Jewel should call any priest of all Christendom a strange priest) and
again that none of the 630. bishops called the Pope by that name. Whereas yet
neither his Challenge was made of those.630. bishops, or of any bishops at
all, more then priests or deacons, and also the supplications of those parties
and the style thereof was both allowed of the bishops, and by their
Commandment Regestred among the Acts and monuments of the Council. Last of
all that all this was done in their private suites for their goods, as though
suitors and suppliants might be suff^ed to use a false flatte^ing style more
then the Judges would allow, and as though that should help their cause, and
not rather greatly hinder it, having a whole Council of so many learned and
holy bishops assembled from all parts of the world to be their Judges. Which
(as it may well be gathered) neither for their holiness would dissemble and
wink at such a false flattering Title, neither for their lerning could be
ignorant what Title of right appertained to the Pope. Which if it had been
otherwise then meet and right, the plaintifs in that case had been more likely
to have sped the worse, then to have fared the better therefore. Unless M.
Jewel will also say, that all the whole Council was either lead by flattery,
or blinded with ignorance, and that he only walks upright, and sees all.
Therefore the marginall note of D. Harding is true, that above a thousand
years past, The Pope was Called, Entitled and Saluted, the Universal Bishop:
Wherefore M. Jewel must Subscribe: There is no remedy.

Sundry holy Martyrs bishops of Rome used to call them selves bishops of the
universal Church: which in effect is the same as the Fathers of Chalcedon
understood.

The 541. Untruth. Slanderous.
as shall appear.

The name of Universal bishop, and of, bishop of the Universal Church, as the
Fathers of the Council of Chalcedon understood universal bishopp, are in
effect all one. How show you the contrary?

Lib. 4. ep. 32. and 36 The 542. Untruth in altering D. Hard. meaning. For he
said not,, they were all one thing absolutely, or in Saint Gregory's sense,
but as the Fathers off Chalcedo^ understood them.
none of my predecessors would ever consent to this name? Or how can he find
such fault with the name of universal bishop, and bear so easily with the
name of Bishop of the universal Church, which he knew, his predecessors
had used, if he took them both for one thing without difference? To be
short, if these names, as M. Harding assures him self, be both one thing,
how is the one godly, the other ungodly, the one Arrogant, the other not
Arrogant, the one blasphemous, the the other not blasphemous?

All these words make one argument. But all these words do not answer D.
Harding. S. Gregory blames the name of Universal bishop: But he blames not
the name of Bishop of the Universal Church. Therefore to S. Gregory, and in
S. Gregory's meaning they are not all one. I grant. But as the Fathers of the
Council of Chalcedon understood them, they are all one. S. Gregorye
understood the name of universal bishop, as excluding all other bishopps. Lib.
4. epist. 34. Of this matter Read more in the beginning off this Article. fol.
7.
Therefore he says of John of Constantinople which usurped that name:
Despectis omnibus solus conatur appellari episcopus. Dispysing all other
bishops, he would only be called a bishop. In this sense it was a proud,
arrogant, ungodly, blasphemous, and the very name of Antichrist. But in this
sense the Council of Chalcedon offered not that name to Leo. For who can ever
think that such a number of learned and holy Bishops would either be so
wicked, as to commit such a sacrilege, or so foolish, as to deprive them
selves, and to make them selves no bishops at all, only to extolle and make
one only man a Universal and only bishop of all the world. They had
therefore undoubtedly an other sense and meaning in those words then that
proud patriarche John of Constantinople usurped, or then holy S. Gregorye and
Pelagius his predecessor, so earnestly blamed, reproved, and condemned. They
called the B. of Rome Universal bishopp, as they called him the bishop of the
Universal Church. By the which title in that Council he is oftentimes
called, A^t. 13. and 8.
namely in the subscriptions of his legates. That is, either a Catholic
bishop, and a bishop of the Catholic Church, (as M. Jewel thinks the
word Universal to signify) or a supreme and chief bishopp over the whole
Church, as the Council off Chalcedon took and confes^^d Leo the bishop of
Rome, to be. Which may easily be proved, not only by the whole Acts of the
Council in the condemnation of Dioscorus and of Eutyches, but by the words
also of their letters sent and directed to Leo the Pope for a confirmation of
their whole doings in the Council. Council. Chal. Act. 3.
The words of the Councelles whole letters to Pope Leo are these. Si vbi sunt
duo aut tr^^ congregati in nomine eius, ibi se in medio eorum fore perhibuit
Christus, The Bishop off Rome Called Head off the Council by the General
letters off the Council it self.
quantam circa sacerdotes peculiaritatem potuit demonstrare, qui and patria and
liberis, suae confessionis notitiam praetulerunt? Quibus tu quidem sicut
membris Caput praeras, in his qui tuum tenebant ordinem, beneuol^ntiam
praeferens. If when two or three be gathered in the name of Christ, he
promised to be in the midst of them, what a special care has Christ at this
time had of his priests, which have left their country and their children to
set forth the confession of him? Over the which multitude thou have been
president as the Head over other parts of the body, declaring to them thy
great good will in thy Legates. In these words the whole Council of six
hundred and thirty bishops assembled in Chalcedon, do call and confess Leo the
Pope Head to them all. In this sense therefore as he was their Head, it is to
be thought they offered the name of Universal bishopp, that is, as the Head
bishopp over the Universal Church of Christ, not in the other proud and
arrogant sense which long after this Council John of Constantinople usurped,
and Pelagius and Gregory virtuous and holy Popes reproved and condemned. This
sense also as the Council of Chalcedon understood, seems hereby to be all
one in effect, with the title of bishopp of the Universal Church: not the
sense in which S. Gregory took those words. And thus M. Jewel has proved
that by the meaning of S. Gregory they are diverse, which no man denied, but
he has not proved that by the meaning of the Council of Chalcedon they were
diverse, which D. Harding denied. So he has (as in all his Reply over in a
manner,) Replied, but not to the matter.

Now that M. Jewel for a surplussage has found that diverse other
Patriarchs were called Universal bishops, what has he done thereby but
declared his former ignorance and the fond rashenes of his vain challenge?
For if other Patriarchs be so called, and yet of all other Patriarchs the
bishop of Rome by M. Iewelles own confession has ever been the first, Page
286. The vanite of M. Iewelles Challe^ge.
how could he doubt but that the bishop of Rome also was so called? If he
knew so before, what a vanity was it to make such a challenge of that title
which other had as well as the bishop of Rome? And which no bishop of Rome
ever used or desired? If he knew it not before, but has learned it sense by
farther search and diligence, then as he was deceived in the one, so let him not
be ashamed to acknowleadge his ignorance in the other. As it has been found
I say that John, Epiphanius, and Therasius of Constantinople were called
Universal bishops, by his own confession, so let him confess and
acknowleadge that the bishopp of Rome, Leo by name, was entitled and saluted an
Universal bishopp in four sundry letters of no Romans, nor of the Romain
province, but of the Patriarkeship and province of Alexandria, in the presence
of the whole Council of Chalcedon, in their humble suite and plea, where it is
most likely, they would utter nothing but truth, specially in a matter
which could nothing further them, but rather directly hinder the^ and make
all those bishops their heavy Lords, if at lest they entitled the Pope
Universal bishop in that sense as M. Jewel imagines, they did. Let him, I
say, confess this, acknowledge his former ignorance, and Subscribe.

The same title (of bishop of the universal Church) was used likewise after
the Nicene Council by Felix, by Leo, and diverse others before the six hundred
years after Christ were expired.

The 543. Untruth. Slanderous.
The 120. Untruth. For immediately before M. Hardinge confesses that Leo never
wrote him self by that name.

In very deed neither Leo him self nor any his successor, ever called or
wrote him self by that name, as S. Gregory says, meaning the name of
Universal bishop as the course of his text decla^eth evidently. But in these
later words he speaks not of the name of Universal bishop but of the name
of the bishop of the universal Church. We need not spend words and paper to
declare this. The text of D. Hardinge may be seen both in M. Iewelles
Reply, and in the other two editions of that book. Who so ever reads the
text, shall see to the eye, that M. Jewel herein was either blindely ouerfene,
or maliciousely affected.

Who so ever trauaileth in the reading of the Ancient Fathers, finds that
name (he means Head of the Church) almost every where attributed to Peter
the first bishop of Rome, and consequently to the successor of Peter, that
name (I say) either in terms aequiualent or expressly.

The.54^. Untruth. Slaun^erous.
The 121. Untruth. For Peter only is so called, yet was not Peter then Bishop
of Rome.

The.545. Vnruthe. For Peter was B. of Rome, when he was Head of the Church.
What? Will. M. Jewel defend now, that Peter was not bishop of Rome, and
renew the old doting opinion of his Father Luther, holding, that Peter was
never at Rome? M. Jewel says: Peter was not then bishop of Rome. What
means he trow we by this? Does he mean Then, that is when those fathers
wrote and called him so, he was not Bishopp of Rome? Who is so very a dolte as
to say that? If he mean, by Then, the time that he lived here in earth, by
how many Authorites might he be confounded? S. Hierom says plainelye: In
Catalogo vir. illust. To^. 1.
Petrus Romae vigintiquinque annis Cathedram sacerdotalem tenuit. Peter
occupied the priestly Chair at Rome xxv. years, lib. 3. cap. 3.
Ireneus, ep. 165.
Optatus, and Lib. 2.
Augustine reakoning up the Bishops of Rome, vntell their time, do reaken Peter
for the first bishopp of Rome. Lib. 3.3. De excid. Haer.
Egesippus Lib. 2. cap. 14 and 15. and 15.
Eusebius and Epiphanius do testify that S. Peter suffered at Rome. And will M.
Jewel forsake and gainesaie all these learned Fathers of Christ's Church, the
lowest of them well nere twelve hundred years old? Josephus a right approved
historiographer says, Illud veritatis certe signum esse, si de eisdem rebus
eadem omnes conscriba^t. Hier. 27. Lib. 1. ont^a ^pp^onem.
That is an undoubted token of truth, when all even of one matter do pronounce
after one sort. Let therefore M. Jewel bring any one writer before the age
of that fond friar Martin Luther, that ever wrote the contrary. It is maruail
that M. Jewel auouching this matter so stoutely, and building his Untruth
thereuppon, would yet in all his text, bring no proof, no reason, no argument
at al to confirm it. I wisse he could have told us much out of the story of
his brethern of Meydeburge, Centur. 2.
had he thought their lies worth the telling. Therefore he thought better to
auouche it by his own Sovereign Authorite stoutely, then to prove his most
Impudent Untruth fondely. Now because M. Jewel avouches that only Peter was
called Head of the Church, and yet his assertion nothing weakened there by,
let us shortly See a reason or two that may be Framed thereof.

S. Peter by M. Iewelles confession, was called Head of the, Church of the
Fathers.

S. Peter was Bishopp off Rome within the first.600. years. Ergo the Bisshopp
off Rome was Called Head of the Church within the first.600. years. Now
because M. Jewel says that only S. Peter was so called, let us prove the
like of Damasus an other bishop of Rome.400. years after Christ, by the
argument that D. Harding made, and the which M. Jewel in his Reply reproves,
because it was not solennelye made in mode and figure, Ambros. in 1. Timoth.
Cap. 3.
as though for lack of that, it could not be made otherwise. The words
first of S. Ambrose are these. Where as the whole world is Gods, yet the
Church is called his House the Ruler whereof at these days is Damasus. Of
these words I frame this argument, in good mode and figure.

Damasus Head of the Universal Church.
Whosoever rules the house of God which S. Paul speaks of to Timothe, rules
the Universal Church. But Damasus the Pope by the verdit of S. Ambrose ruled
the house of God mentioned in S. Paul. Ergo Damasus the Pope by the Verdit of
S. Ambrose ruled the Universal Church.

The Minor or second proposition is evident by the words of S. Ambrose
alleged. The Mayor or first proposition is evident by S. Paul's very words,
which are these. These things I write unto thee (o Timothee) hoping to come
shortly unto thee. But if I slack to come, 1. Timo. 3.
(I have thus written) to thentent thou may know how to behave thy self in
the house of God, which is the Church of the living God, the Pillar and
ground of truth. Lo this house of God which S. Paul here speaks of, is
that Church which is the Pillar and Ground of truth. Such is no particular
Church, but only the Universal Church. For Particular Churches may and have
erred many, but the Universal Church can not possibly err, and has never
erred. She is the Pillar, She is the Ground of Truth. Against her Hell gates
shall not prevail. Thus the former Propositions being both evident and true,
the one out of S. Paul, the other out of Holy and Learned Saint Ambrose
commenting upon S. Paul, the Conclusion must needs follow, which is, that
Damasus the Pope Ruled the Universal Church, not only his own dyocese, or
patriarkeshipp of Rome. Now if the Ruler be not the Head, I would M. Jewel
should instruct us what the Head of a company or common welthe signifies,
other, then the Ruler of that company or common welthe. Thus M. Jewel has in
terms equivalent the Head of the Universal Church. And a bisshopp of Rome so
called far within his first 600. years. If therefore M. Jewel made his
Challenge at Paul's Cross for the honor of God, for boulting out of the
Truth, and for the matter it self which is in controversy, he must according
to his promise yield and Subscribe to this Old holy Father S. Ambrose. If he
did but dally and to ye about certain terms and phrases, then the world may
know and See, what trifling Sermons prelates and Preachers of this new clergy
not only do make and pronounce, before their honorable and worshipful
audience, but also do print and set forth to be Readen and preserved of their
posterite.

Council. Chal. Act. 3.
Leo in the letters of the whole General Council of Chalcedor was called their
Head as has before been alleged. But a general Council represents the
Universal Church and is the Chief Body of the same. Ergo by a good
Consequent Leo was Called off no less then of a whole Council the Head of the
Universal Church. Ergo not only S. Peter, but Damasus and Leo two other Popes
have been so Called. Ergo M. Jewel must Subscribe.

(...).
Theodoretus in an Epistle to Leo, calls the same in consideration of the
bishop of that See his primacie, Orbi terrarum praesidentem, praesident or
bearing rule over the whole world.

The.546. Untruth Slanderous.
The 122. Untruth. Standing in untrue translation.

I turn to your rext, and find you to prove this Untruth in these words.

The.547 Untruth. For the Translation is good and True.
Yet Reply will be made, that Theodoretus calls the Church of Rome (...).
Which words M. Harding (547) untruly translateth, President, or bearing rule
over the world. For he knows, that the greek word (...), signifies,
Sitting in the first place, and forces not of necessite any rule or
government over others.

Ignatius in Epist. ad Romans (...).
You prove your self but a vain trifler and a mere grammarian M. Jewel, when
you Reply after this sort. We know, both (...) in greek and Praesideo in
Latin, does sometime signify, to sit in the first place. But do not you
know also that it signifies to Bear rule, and to govern? Is not our
english word President, taken out of the Latin Praesidere a word of
Authorite and government more then of sitting in the first place? Will you
measure and limit the Office of the Lord President in Wales, with the
prerogative of only sitting before other, and having the first place? But that
Theodoret calling the Church of Rome (...)., Orbi terr^rum praesidentem the
Church that is president and bears rule over the world, means a far
greater prerogative, then of sitting in the first place, and that therefore
this translation is true and you but a fond wrangler to find fault
therewith, the whole place of Theodoret him self shall testify and bear
witness.

Theodoret that learned father and bishopp of Cyrus begins his Epistle unto
Pope Leo in this sort. Si Paulus praeco veritatis etc. If Paul the Preacher
of Truth, Est epist^. praefixa co^mentar. in Pualum.
the trumpet of the Holy Ghost, ran up to the great Apostle Peter, to bring
from him a determination touching the question which those of Antioche moved
about the observations of the law of Moses, much more we which are abiecte
and off small regard, do run to your Apostolic See, that we may receive
from you some wholesome medicine to cure the wounds and sores of the Churches.
Vobis enim per omnia primos esse conuenit.
For to you it belongs to bear the chiefty in all things. For your See is
decked with many praerogatiues, whereby you are Superior to other. For other
cities are commended for greatness, for beauty, and for multitude of
inhabitants. And many are noble for certain spiritual gifts peculiar to them:
But God the geuer of all good things has given to your City a plentiful
and abundant copy of al goodness. For that City is the greatest and noblest
of al Cities, and it is she Et quae praeest orbi terrarum.
that gou^rneth the whole world, and is full of inhabitants. Furthermore this
City got that Empire which now governs the world, and of her own name
has called her subjects. But chiefly and principally the Faith commends
her, Romans 1.
and the worthy witness S. Paul, who cries out and says. Your faith is
preached through out the whole world. Thus far Theodoret in commendation of
the City of Rome, and not so much of the City it self, as of the Church
and See of that City. For these words to have been spoken of the Church not
of the City M. Iewe^l him self confesses, changing the words. Quae praeest
orbi terrarum, into Ecclesiam orbis terrarum primariam. The most Notable and
chief Church of the world. For the chief City of the world at that time
Rome was not, but rather Constantinople, which also was therefore called Noua
Roma, New Rome. Again it s^all the better appear by the suite and request of
Theodoretus in this epistle to Pope Leo, whether he called the Church of Rome,
the president of the world, for preeminence of place only, or no. Theodoret in
that epistle to Pope Leo being wrongefully deprived and deposed from his
bishopricque by Dioscorus the Patriarche of Alexandria in the Conuenticle of
Ephesus, of which we have often mentioned before, declaring first the
injurious judgment of Dioscorus, the long continuance in his bishopric,
having served therein xxvj. years, the largeness of his charge, having in his
province (for he was a Metropolitan Archbishop) Octingintas paraecias.
eight hundred Churches, his great pains and trauail in preserving all that
people from heresy, namely from the heresy of Marcion, from the which (as he
writes) he had delivered above a thousand souls, converting them to the
Catholic faith, declaring I say all these things to the Pope particularly,
he comes to his suite and says, Et post tot sudores and labores etc. And
behold after all this sweat and trauail, I am condemned, being not so much
at accused. But Apostolicae vestrae Sedis expecto sententism.
I look for the Sentence of your Apostolic See. And I beseech and require
your holiness, to aid me in this case Iustum vestrume et rectum Appellanti
iudicium.
Appealing to your right and just judgment, and to command me to come
before you, and to show that my doctrine and belefe follows your Apostolic
steps. And a little after, having reakoned up what works he had written,
partly against heretics, partly upon holy Scripture, of the which to this
day a great part is extant, he repeteth his suite, and says. But I beseech
you cast not of my humble request, nor despise not my hoar head, which after
such paynefull travails is thus injured. Before all things I beseech you, I
may know from you, whether I ought to stand to this wrongefull judgment, or
no. For I look for your sentence, Si iudicatis mestare iusseritis staebo.
and if you shall command me to abide the judgment, I will abide it, and
never trouble man here about any more, but abide the just judgment of my God
and Savior. Christ Jesus. God is my witness I have no regard of my honor
and promotion, but of the great offense that may rise hereof in the minds of
many simple folk and specially of such whom we have before converted from
heresy: Who having an eye to the Sea of Alexandria and other bishops which
have condemned us, will perhaps judge, that we are not able to discern the
true and right doctrine. Thus Far Theodoret in his supplication and Appeal
to Leo the Bishopp of Rome, he himself being a bishop of Cyrus in the East,
Council. Chal. Act. 1.
and subject properly to the province and Patriarkeship of Antioche not of
Rome. By this his Appeal, and by the Restitution also to his bishopric
which ensued hereupon by Leo the Pope, as I have before declared out of the
Chalcedon Council, and by the whole words of Theodoret it is evident, that
calling the Church of Rome, Orbi terrarum praesidentem, or quae priest orbi
terrarum, the President and gouuerner of the world, he meaned not a preferment
only of sitting in place before other bishops, but a Superior Authorite and
Primacy over other bishops, and such, as to whom from a Patriarche and
Council of Bishops, he might yet Appeal. Yet says M. Jewel.

The 548. Untruth. For that Translation agrees not with the Greek of
Theodoret

The 549. Untruth. For by Justinian no such preeminence of sitting is in any
Constitution alleged granted, as it has before well appeared.


He might (548.) better have turned it: Ecclesiam orbis primariam. The most
notable or ch^^s^ Church of the wo^lde. And so would his translation have
well agreed with the Constitutions of the Emperor Justinian, wherein the
preeminence of sitting in the first place in all Councelles and assemblies, is
by special Privilege granted to the bishop of Rome.

To the Constitutions of Justinian touching the bishopp of Romes prerogative I
have answered before, in the 99. Untruth. Art. 4. Fol. 51.
And declared there the great untruth of M. Iewel^ falsifying and corrupting
the Constitutions of Justinian. And now touching the translation of this place
I leave it to every indifferent Reader, perusinge the whole words of
Theodorets epistle, considering the cause and end of his writing, to judge
whether the translation of Doctor Hardinge be, (as Master Jewel has noted
it) Untrue, or that which he brings, Of sitting before other bishops in all
assemblies utterly False, being builded upon a former Untruth of Justinians
Constitutions, and contrary to the whole Meaning, Intent, and Purpose of the
Author him self, Theodoret in that epistle to Leo.

What other is it to call the Church of Rome the Principal Church, respect
had to the bishop there and not otherwise (wherein a figure of speech is used)
as Ireneus and Cyprian do, and President, or (123) set in authority over
the whole world, as Leo does, then to call the Bishop of Rome Head of the
Universal Church?

The 550. Untruth. Slanderous.
The 123. Untruth. Leo has not one such word.

This Untruth is soon Justified, and Master Jewel thereby expressly
convicted, and forced to Subscribe according to Promise. Epi. 84. ad Anastasium
Thessalonicensen.
For Leo calls expressly the Sea of Peter, Head of the Universal Church. His
words are. Ad vna^ Petri sedem Vniuersalis Ecclesiae cura confluit, vt nihil
vsquam a suo Capite dissideat. The charge of the Universal Church has
recourse to the only Seat of Peter, to thentent that nothing may at any time
Vary from their Head. Let now M. Jewel or any man else pick out any other
sense of these words, then that the Seat of Peter is Head of the Universal
Church. The cause why the Universal Church has recourse to the only Seat
of Peter, is because nothing might vary from the Head. And is not then the Sea
of Peter the Head thereof? If this place be not plain enoughe, take an other.
Leo writing to Theodoret after the Chalcedon Council ended and finished, has
these words. Quae nostro prius ministerio definierat, vniuersae fraternitatis
irretractabili firmauit assensur, vt vere a se prodisse ostenderet, quod prius
a Primae omnium Sede firmatum, Epist. 63.
totius Christiani orbis iudicium recepisset, vt in hoc quoque Capiti membra
co^cordent. That which God had first decreed by us, the irrefragable consent of
the Universal brotherhood, has confirmed, to show that it proceeded in deed
from him, as the which being first confirmed of the most Principal See, had
received also the determination of all Christendom, to thentent that herein
also the Parts might agree with the Head. In these words again Leo calls
his See (the Sea of Rome) the Head of all Christendom, and of the universal
brotherhood assembled in the General Council of Chalcedon. And least that
this testimonye of the Pope him self may seem to be off less Credit, call to
mind in this place (gentle Reader) the words of this whole General of
Council of Chalcedon calling this Leo in their letters unto him, their Head,
which I have before alleged unto thee in the 119. Untruth. fo. 185. B.
Yet because M. Jewel so stoutely avouches of this Universal authorite over
all Christendom in the Sea of Rome, that Leo has not one such word, Behold
yet a third place out of this Leo auouching most evidently the same. Speaking
to the City of Rome, in a Sermon which he made upon S. Peter's and Paul's day,
he has these words. Leo Sermon. 1. in Not. Petri and Pauli.
Isti sunt qui te ad hanc gloria^ prouexeru^t, vt sis gens sancta, populus
electus, Ciuitas sacerdotalis and R^gia, per sacram Beati Petri sedem Caput
orbis effecta, latius praesideres religione diuina quam dominatione terrena.
Quamuis enim multis aucta victorijs ius imperij tui terra marique protuleris,
minus tamen est, quod tibi bellicus labor subdidit, quam quod pax Christiana
subiecit. These are they (he means Peter and Paul which have promoted thee
(o Rome) to this glory, that thou should be a holy nation, a chosen people,
a priestly and princely City, and being made the Head of the world by the
holy Seat of blessed Peter, should bear a far larger government by
Godly Religion, then by worldly Empire. For although thou have enlarged thy
Empire by sea and by Land, with manifold victories, yet it is less that
warlye power to the has achieved, then that Christen peace to thee has
subdued. Thus far learned Leo, whom M. Jewel avouches to affirm not one
such word, as may prove the Church of Rome set in Authorite over the whole
world. You have Heard Leo say in this place that Rome through the Seat of
Peter has been made the Head of the world, and bears a larger gouuernement
by Religion, then ever she did by Empire. And therefore Prosper loinge before
the time of Leo affirms Romam per Apostolici sacerdotij principatu^ ampliorem
factam esse arce Religionis quam solio potestatis. De vocatione gentiu^ li. 2.
cap. 16
That Rome by the Primacy of Apostolic priesthood was of a larger Authorite in
the preeminence of Religion, then in the Throne of Empire. Thus Leo and Prosper
with Ireneus, S. Cyprian, and S. Chrysostom, whom D. Harding alleged do
uniformly call the Sea of Rome, the Principal Church, of more Principal
power, the Head of all Christendom, the Mast^^ of the world: But Leo most
expresselye above other, the Head of the Universal Church, as you have heard
and seen (...) his own words at large.

M. I^^^ll to answer all these places, brings the like to have been (...)
Paul who suffered at Rome with S. Peter: Whose Authorite had no other
successor but the Bishop there. Who was a Chosen Vessel, beside all the other
Apostles, Ser^^. 1. In Not. Pe. and Pau.
whom Leo calls consor^em gloriae Petri the fellow in honor to S. Peter, and
whose Privileges therefore and prerogatives do fortify much the Authorite of
the Sea of Rome, but debaceth it not in any point.

And in an other place S. Augustine says. Lib. quaest. vet. and notestam. q.
75.
Saluator qua^do pro se and Petro exolui iubet, pro omnibus exoluisse videtur.
Quia Sicut in Saluatore erant omnes causa magisterij, ita post Saluatorem in
Petro omnes continentur. Ipsum enim constituit Caput omnium. Our Savior
(says S. Augustine) when as he commands payement (for the Emperor) to be
made for him self, and for Peter, he seems to have paid for all. Because,
as all were in our Savior for cause of teaching, so after our Savior all are
contained in Peter: for he ordained him Head of all.

The 551. Untruth. For there is no wilful falsifying: and in the Se^ce no
falsyfying at al of S. Aug.
The 124. Untruth, standing in the willful falsyfying of S. Augustine. S.
Augustine says Caput eorum, not: Caput omnium.

This is the most apparent Untruth of all (except on^) that has hitherto been
brought. And yet M. Jewel calling this a wilful falsyfying of S. Augustine
Deals not only uncharitably, but also has auoutched an other most manifest
Untruth him self. For what wilful falsyfying can here appear, where no
advantage his had by the exchange? Considre the whole sentence gentle
Reader, and thou shallt See that S. Augustine affirms Peter to be Head of
all. He says in the same sentence. As al were in Christ. so al are in Peter.
And for proof thereof he saiethe. For Christ made Peter their Head. Whose head
M. Jewel, by S. Augustins meaning, but the Head of all? For of all he
speaks, not of some. And to prove that all were contained in Peter, he
calls Peter the Head of them (how but of?) all. Thus the matter being true,
the words by error altered, can make no wilful Untruth, if they make any
Untruth at all. For I take an Error or Escape to differ from an Untruth.

With all, I have proved, that which M. Jewel denies that the Bishop of
Rome within six hundred years after Christ, has been called the Universal
Bishopp of no small nu^^re of men of great credit, and very oftentimes Head of
the Universal Church, both in terms equivalent, and also expressly.

The 553. Slanderous.
The ^^5. Untruth. For (Peter only excepted) either of these Titles rests yet
vnp^oued.





Victor, the Church of Rome is called Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. The Head of
all Churches. If there be any difference between all Churches, and the
Universal Church, or if the Church of Rome, be Head in any other respect,
then in respect of the Bishop there^f^er M. Jewel with all his co^ning show
it. If there be (...) none in the world can be devised) then again (...) is
brought of the primitive Church (for the (...) is of things don above the year
(...) shortly after the Death of S. Augustine) in (...) is called Head of the
Universal Church, and so this other Title has been proved in a Bishop of
Rome beside S. Peter. Ergo M. Jewel must Subscribe.

Fourthely Damasus (as has been proved) was called of S. Ambrose Ruler of the
House of God, which S. Paul speaks of, which is as much as Head of the
Universal Church, ergo ones again M. Jewel either must protest to the world
he sought not for truth but trifled upon Terms, when he made his Challenge,
or else according to promise he must Subscribe.

Fiftely Leo the Bishop of Rome was Called of the whole Chalcedon Council,
Head of the Universal Church, Council. Chal. A ^ 3. Ide^ quoq^^ Leo. epist.
63. ad Theodo^^^
when they confessed him their Head, they then bearing the persons of the whole
Universal Church. They said in their letters unto him of them selves. Quibus
tu, quasi Caput membris praecras. Over whom thou haste been the Chief or
president as the Head is Chief over other parts of the Body. And in the same
Council he is Called diverse times Pope and Bishop of the Universal Church.
Act. 4.6. and 8. Cod^ de Sum. Tri^. et (...). Cath. Tit. 1 No^ Reddentos.
Therefore to the Chalcedon Council, calling the Pope their Head, you must
Subscribe M. Jewel.

Sixtely Justinian calls John the second, the Bishopp off Rome in his time,
Caput omnium Sanctarum Ecclesiarum, the Head of all Holy Churches. Here is an
other bishopp of Rome beside Saint Peter so called: Therefore you must
Subscribe.

Seventhly learned Leo confesses, Leo vbi supra.
Vniuersalis Ecclesiae curam ad Petri sedem confluere, vt nihil vsqua^ a Capite
suo dissid^at. That the Charge of the Universal Church has recourse to the Sea of Peter, that nothing may at any time vary from their Head.

S. Gregory in like manner calls the (...) off Rome, Caput omni^^ Ecclesiarum.
(...)
The (...) of all Churches.

Farther as it is alleged in the second editio^ of D. Hardinges Answer to M.
Iewelles Challenge, In libel. de Ingra^is.
Prosper calls the Sea of Peter, Pastoralis honoris Caput, The Head off
Pastoral Dignities, as much to say, of all Pastors and Shepeheardes in
Christ's Church.

Athanasius also in his epistle to Marcus the Pope (which Epistle M. Jewel
has in vain impugned) calls the Sea of Rome, Athanas. in epist. ad Mari^um.
Matter and Caput omnium Ecclesiarum. The Mother and Head of all Churches. If
Head of all Churches and Head off the Universal Church be diverse, then, it
is because the one word, is mere english, the other is a Latin made English.
Other difference in good sense I trow, will not be found. To these therefore
so Clear and so Many, all within the Compass of your 600. years, if you
think your Challenge good and wise, Yield and Subscribe.

These later allegations of D. Hardinges second edition, M. Jewel in his
Reply has utterly dissembled. To the place of Victor thus he Replieth.

The 553. Untruth. For Victor writes a Story of things passed long within
the first^.600. years
Touching Victor, that wrote the Story of the Vandales, he is neither
Scripture, nor Council, nor doctor, nor writes the Order, or Practice of the
Primitive Church.

This later sentence is a Manifest and Iewde Untruth, auoutched for a shifte
to avoid an Inconvenience. An Inconvenience I say of Subscribing. For if the
Story of Victor were of matters passed in the Primitive Church, then the
Example alleged out of him, Calling the Church of Rome, Head of all Churches,
should be an Example of the primitive Church, and then M. Jewel should be
forced to Subscribe. To avoid this Inconvenience, M. Jewel thought good
flatly to deny his Story, as not writing the Practice of the Primitive
Church. But you may not so Abuse us M. Jewel. You requiring in your
Challenge Any one example of the primitive Church, do after expound and limit
the Time of the primitive Church by the term of.600. years after Christ,
admitting all Examples within that time. Now Victor writes a Story
contayninge the practice of that Time. He writes the persecution of the
Vandales, Arrian heretics in Afrike, which befell immediately after the Death
of S. Augustine, as in his life written by Possidonius it is easy to See. Read
the Story of Victor joined to the Tripartite. Tu^. 1. oper. August.
For he yet living and lyinge in his death bed the Wandales beseiged his
City Hippo. But S. Augustine dyed not long after the year of our Lord 400.
Therefore Victor wrote a Story of matters passed more then a hundred years
within M. Iewelles 600. which he limiteth for the Primitive Church. Therefore
this Example is of that Time. M. Jewel vnrrulye denies it, because he will
not truly and honestly Subscribe unto it.





The 554. Untruth. In missereperting the words of Victor.
Only he says (.^54.) Rome is the Chief or Head Church of all othe^s, which
thing of our part is not denied.

M. Jewel to extenuat the sayieng of that godly Archbishop of Carthage
Eugenius, reported by Victor the Ecclesiastical writer, has altered and
falsified the words. For Eugenius that Catholic Prelat conue^ted before
Obadus a Captain of Humerichus the Arrian king of the Vandales, called the
Church of Rome, meaning thereby the Bishop of Rome, Caput omnium Eccl^siarum.
The Head of all Churches, He says not: The Head Churthe of all others. But,
The Head off al other Churches. Between these two sayings is great
difference. As for example. The Church of Caunterbury is the Head Church of
all others, respect had to England. For no Church in England has so Ample
and Large a Jurisdiction as that has. Yet is not the Church of Caunterbury
the Head of all Churches in England. For beside diverse Peculiars exempted from
the Jurisdiction of Caunterbury, even within the Province of that
Archebishoprike, the Archbishop of York and all of his Province are not
subject to any Jurisdiction of the Church of Caunterbury. Thus Master Jewel
for a Just Reply to Sufficient Authorites, weakoneth the Authors Credit,
Alters his words, Missereporteth the time of his Writings, and so by
Multyplying Untruths thinks to overthrow the Truth, to abuse his Reader
desirous to learn, and to deceive Gods People glad to be instructed. God
grant you M. Jewel the love of Truth, and grace to reform these your
Vn^^uthes.

The Conclusion.
HITHERTO I have (good Christen Reader) For the love of the Truth, and for the
Zele of Gods honor, and of his Church, Justified the Untruths which M.
Jewel in the former half of his Reply, the four first Articles has Charged
D. Harding with all, to the number of one hundred and xxv. which is the half
of the whole number through out the Reply, two excepted, and have Returned
them every one (One only excepted) upon Master Jewel for Untruths on his
part, and that Slanderous. Now how thouroughly I have answered M. Jewel in
this fourth Article, it shall appear by the Conclusion which him self makes,
at ^he end thereof. Thus he Concludes.

Page 3^4. The 555. Untruth. For D. Hardinge knows no such matter.
Now brefely to lay abroad the whole Contents of this Article. First, M.
Hardinge has wittingly alleged such testimonies under the Names of
Anacletus, Athanasius, and other holy Fathers as he (.555.) him self knows
undoubtedly to be forged, and with manifest Absurdities, and Contradictions, do
betraye them selves, and have no manner color or s^ewe of truth.

Ari. 4. fol. 26. and seq.
To the absurdities and Contradictions, with which M. Jewel charge the
epistle of Athanasius unto Marcus, we have Answered and proved them none. The
Authorite off Anacletus is defended by D. Hardinge in the Confutation of M.
Iewelles first Article. M. Iewelles other Fathers have no names.

The.556. Untruth. For D. Hardinge spoke not one word of any Canon of the
Chalcedon Council. fol. 29.
And yet he knows that neither there are, nor never were any such Canons to
be found.

The Canons of the Nicene Council alleged by D. Hardinge, were alleged by
Julius and Zosimus above a thousand years ago, and their Authorite is defended
against all M. Iewelles proufes, and reasons, wherein he labors to prove the
Pope a Forger. His whole Reply in that behalf is awnswered. As for Canons of
the Chalcedon Council, D. Harding alleged none. M. Jewel flatly belyeth him.

The 557. Untruth. Slanderous.

The 558. Untruth. For that Sentence followed, and was not in the midst.


He has dismembered (.557.) and mangled S. Gregory's words part contrary to his
own knowleadge,. he has cut them of (.558.) in the midst, the better to
beguile his Reader.

It has been at large declared that D. Harding has in no part mangled S.
Gregory, but alleged his full Sentence, that which followed, and was omitted,
not appertayning any thing to his purpose that then he had in hand. And the
Sentence, which is presumed by M. Jewel to have been guilefully cut of by D.
Harding, followed immediately his Allegation, was not in the midst thereof, as
M. Jewel both there and here most Impudently and Untruly avouches.

Ievvel. The.559. A burden of Vn^ruthe s^l^ Slanderous.
He has violently and perforce drawn, and rackte the Old godly Fathers,
Ireneus, Cyprian, Ambrose, Cyrillus, Augustine, Theodoretu^, Hierons, and
others, contrary to their own sense and meaning.



The.560. Untruth Slanderous.
Touching Appeals to Rome, the gouuernement of the East part of the world,
Exco^munications, Approbations of Orders, allowance of Councelles, Restitutio^s
and Reconciliations, he has openly (560) missereported the whole Universal
Order and Practice of the Church.

is maruaill that M. Jewel keeping so good an Audyt of D. Hardinges untruths,
in such Open missereporting could not score up one.

The.561. Untruth. For both these Titles have been found.
he has as yet found neither of these two glorious Titles, that he has so
narrowlye sought for: notwithstanding great pains taken, and great promises,
and Vau^tes made touching the same.

D. Harding has found them both, the one in the Chalcedon Council both
four times in four several supplications expressed, and also conffessed by
S. Gregorye, the other in Victor a writer of things passed within the 5^0.
years In the second Edition.
in Justinian, in Prosper, in Athanasius, and in the Chalcedo^ Council also.
But M. Jewel must deny all this, because he will in no wise Subscribe. For
thus now he Concludes and ends this Article.

The.561. Untruth. As before.
nor in any one of all the ancient Catholic Fathers, that the Bishop of Rome
within the space of the first 600. years after Christ, was ever entitled either
the Universal Bishop, or the Head of the Universal Church.

suo iudicio condemnatus. Condemned in his own Judgment. M. Jewel knows
him self certainly and undoubtedly that in the Chalcedon Council Leo the
Bishop of Rome was Called Universal Bishop in four sundry Supplicatio^s. For
he said before him self. True it is that M. Harding said. Leo in that
Council of Chalcedon was thus called. Jewel. page 298.
The places be known and may not be denied. Yet now he denies him self,
that any such thing has been showed, or that ever he was so Called. Is not
then this Man in his own Judgment condemned? Again he knows certainly and
undoubtedly that Eugenius the Archbishop of Carthage in Afrike Called the
Church of Rome, Head of all Churches, which is but in diverse English, Head
of the Universal Church, as Victor in his History reports. The authorite
and saying it self he could not possibly deny. Lib. 2. de pers. Vand.
Therefore in his Reply thereunto, he altered the words of the Author, and
labored to extenuat the Credit of the Historiographer, as has before been
declared. Yet being not able to Reply to the matter, but with a Couple of
Untruths cauilling only, now he denies flat, any such thing has been
showed. And what Man can be or ever was in his own judgment condemned, if you
M. Jewel be not that Man? Yet now these Matters, being by this Return of
your Untruths, more enlarged, and forced upon you, in such sort that every
indifferent Reader may see to the eye and behold the clear evidence thereof,
though now, you Subscribe and Rescribe as before, yet I trust hereafter, you
will either Subscribe and yield, or Rescribe and Clear your self better. What
ever of both you do, your Untruths remain Notorious and Evident and
Inexcusable. God give you Grace to Acknowleadge them, and other Grace to Beware
of them.

I aus Deo qui dedit velle, and dedit perficere.

Quando quidem Volumen istud perlectum, ac approbatum est a viris Sacroe
Theologioe and Anglici Idiomatis peritissimis, quibus merito credendum esse
iudico, puto tuto and vtiliter euulgari posse.

Ita iudico, Cunerus Petri, Pastor S. Petri Louanij. 17. Aprilis. Anno. 1566.

