The trial of the supremacy wherein (...) (...) fourth ye unity of christ's
church milita^t given to S. Peter and his successoures by Christ: And that
there ought to be one head Bishop in earth Christ's Vicar general over all his
church militant: with answers to the blasphemous objections made against the
same in the late miserable years now paste.

Aug. li. 3. de trinitate. ca. 3. Vtile est plures libros a pluribus fieri,
diuerso stilo, no^ diuersa fide etia^ de q^stionibus eisde^: vt ad plurimos res
ipse perueniar, ad alios sic, ad alios autem sic.

To the most holy, and godly Prince, Reginald Pole, Cardinal and Legate,
honor, virtue and grace, from our Lord Jesus Christ.
Although christ's church from the begi^ning was never clear from heresies
(most reverend father in God, Oportet haereses (...).
and most honorable lord) but has been at all times still vexed therewyth,
for the probation and exercise of the elect: yet was it never so miserably
tossed and turmoiled spesially with in this Realm of England (as I suppose)
with sects and scismes, as it has been of late years. Where as it has not
only be^ counted laweful for ye wicked to excogitate, to teach, to profess,
to maintain and defend errors, and Herysies without restraynt: but also he
that most vylelye could defyle his mother the church, and like the hedder or
snake which gnaweth fourth y^ mothers bowels, pluck out the holy sacraments
(the very entrails or bowels of his mother Christ's spouse) was best regarded,
was taken and accepted as most honest, most excellent, most worthy man, and
best learned. Such were thought most me^e to examyne causes, and bear rule in
the commen wealth, for that they smallye did pass either upon that golden
saying of Sayncte Augustine, he can not have God for his father* Aug^ de sy^^
^o lo ad ca^ thech. li. 4. ca. 10.
which has not the church for his mother, Cyprianus de simpl. praelat.
or else that without the unity of the Chatholyke and universal church,
there is no salvation.

In other times we read here of one Heresye and there of another: but in this
wicked season: Oh good Lord what Heresye (though long ago condemned by
Christ's church) have not they stured up again* And under the cloak or color
of Christian liberty defended the same, seeking still innovation, alteration,
and utter destructyon of all Godliness, still cryinge the Primatyfe Church,
the Primatife Church: as though a child should still continue a child in
the state of infancye, and never increase further, not markynge that the truth
was first sought, then found, after believed, observed, and followed, and is
still of the faithful sort from time to time to be kept without retournyng
back. But they turned back from all goodness, from all virtue, honestye and
grace: being far unmeet therefore for the kingdom of God, as Christ says
in the gospel, Lu. 9. 8
Nemo mittens. etc. But oh, what unspeakable hurtes and extreme miseries in
these miserable years has this Realm sustained hereby both bodylye and
ghostly* Infirmos capiunt firmos fatigan^, ac me diocres va^ll lantes
di^^^tunt. Greg. naz.
The simple sort have been still seduced, the mean sort lafte as wayuerynge
in doubt, the beast, the strongest and the most sure, have been greatly
weryed, not much unlike to the time of Julian the appostata. Li. 1. tripert. c^
17. and 19. li 2. ca. 25. li. 4. ca. 1^. 44 and li 10. ca. 44. li. 6. ^ccl,
^^^tor cap. 16.
The manyefolde damnable heresies have caused most miserable scisme among the
rude people, being haled from the truth and tossed from post to pyller on
every side, even like as it was in the Arians time when the Heritykes used
most commenlye both to say and do many things well to obtain thereby credit
among the simple, and weak, that so much more freely they might sow their
Herisies, and pluck down the Churches (which was ever their chief endeavor)
and deface all godly men, li. 3. tript ca. 2. li. 4. tript. ca. 44. 3. li. 7
ca. 40. li. 5. ca. 25.
either with violence, with punishementes with slatterynge of promotions, or
with deceyte. Has not this self same practice of the Arians in all points
been put in execution in these our wicked days? li. 5. tript. ca. 43.
Then one wicked still praised another as well in naughtye books as in publyke
Heretical sermons, and all to deface therwyth the godly catholics: Was not
the same here in England now practiced? Yea, even as Simon Magus was of the
wicked called Virtus dei, li. 2. eccl. hist ca. 1. et. 13.
the power of God, so have in our days as unmeet and unworthy lauds often
been made. Then was there never so folyshe nor gross an Heresy, but it had
folowers: Was not the like in this our blind time? li. 12. trip. ca* 9.
and as then, still they falselye accused the godly sort of treason, so to
dispatche them out of the way: even so, was now the like practyse in cryinge
against the breakers of the kings procedynges. As the godly still went then
to wrack: even so they did now without mercy or pytie, being most
cruellye handeled, and all without just cause or deserte. Then, ca. 39. li.
9. tript.
they made many damnable and most wicked laws to defend their noughtye
Heresies wythall: have they not done likewise hear with us?

Then the wicked Magistrates favored and exaulted li. 8. tript. ca* 3.
li. 3. ^c. ca. 3*
the wicked ministers, and greatly plaged the godly: was not the same exacted
hear in England? Then to serve God truly was cownted great offense, and was
greuouslye punished: was not the same done here even now on late? What
punyshement had they which would but only be present in the church at
Mass time? Yea, I my self saw deadlye checkes given to an honest catholyke
man for knelyng down on the steps in Paul's, for knockyng upon his breast, and
lyftynge up his hands. At what time the said honest Catholyke man was glad
for fear of their tyranny to say he would never do so more. O good Lord
what things did men then both say, and do for fear of punyshemente? Again
like as in the Arians time Scismatikes and Heritykes did not only contemn
(yea, li^ 5. tripart. cap. 30
condemn) the most godly and general counsa^ls, but also made private
councelles of their own, ten in nu^bre, wherein they never agreed among them
selves, no nor never fullye allowed that in one counsel which they had made
in an other: even so now in all points our wicked proceders in this palpable
darkness have imitate and followed the former steps of their forfathers the
lymmes of the devil. li. 1. tripert. ca. 20.
As then through Heresye the holy mysteries of Christ were had in contempt:
even so were they now. (...). 1. trip. ca. ^
As then, the heretics desire was still to cause the higher powers to favor
their Heresies: even so was it now. li. 4. eccl. ca. ^1. li. 5. ca. 16. li. 1.
trip. ca. ^5.
As then, the heretics still cried, this is the catholyke faith (meaning their
own heresies) this is the catholic doctrine, this is the catholyke church:
for this is the faith, the doctrine and the Church, of the Patriarchs,
prophets and Apostles: so did the heretics cry still in our days, having
once the vpperhande (as they had still in deed) through favor of the
Magistrates. And surely this was the most soore, and the most dampnable
persuasion to deceive and blind the simple innocents wythall. The Devil
never persuades but under the couloure of truth: yea, and he often has both
learned and virtuous livers to the outward apperaunce to take his part, being
his Angels transfygured in to the Angels of light. li 4. eccl. ca. 15. li. 4.
trip. ca. 23. li. 1. trip. ca. 15. li. 3. trip. ca. 6,
So that as* then they did ever slaunderouslye blaspheme and reuyle the true
christians, and would their own decrees and laws to be called the truth,
their errors the verity, and them selves to be counted godly and that their
church was the catholyke church, and they y^ Catholics and earnest defendours
of the truth: even so was it fullye and whollye within this Realm of
England, in all the miserable years now paste. As then, the Arians called
their sect, li. 8. tript. ca. 13. li. 5. eccl. ca. 16.
when they suffered for their heresies, holy martirs: even so now at this time
theritikes call their champions which stand obstinate to the fire, holy
martirs: not markinge (if I may speak a word or two by digressio^) that the
kind of death makes not the Martyr, but the cause, not markinge that even
among the Hethe^ many have willyngly suffered death, and yet no christen man
so folysshe as to call them Martyrs of God: not markynge again, that I one of
Kent (which said christ took no flesh of y^ virgin deniyng thereby his manhood)
had favorers which both thought and said when she was burnt, that she was
the Martyr of God: but then surely the devil shall be called a confessor, which
confessed that Christ was the son of God: Whose confession was then as true
and as truly made, as either I^^s of Kent, or else as any of theirs which as
obstinate heretykes break the unity of the church divide Christ's coo^e, and
yet cry the Lords word, the lor^des word, wrestinge our lords holy word
to their comdemnation. Howbeit we may well perceayue, that it is no more wonder
to se an obstinate heretyke stand stiff to the fire, then it is to se a man
kill, ha^ge or drown him self. The same devil which causes the one ca^
soon cause the other. But of this matter I will speak another time. Now
therefore (to return from whens I have a little while digressed) we may easily
conjecture that thonlye cause of al these mischiefs and miseryes that we of
late have suffered, has been the breach of thunity of Christ's church. Cause
of our miseries.
When we ones fled forth of Peter's ship, then we fell straight way headlong
into al licentious liberty: then we forsaked utterly al general counsels, all
ordinances from the beginni^g kept in christ's church, al judgments upon
scripture save our own: then of singularytye we did select and chose a new
faith, every day chaunginge and alteringe (and no maruayle) after that our
noble Prince through counsel of some wicked men about him took that in hand,
which never true catholic king did usurp before him: that is to sai, to sit
in Peter's chere. Since what time, oh good lord, what misery have we fallen
into, as well bodylye as gostlye? But now thanks be to Jesus Christ which
through his mercy has brought us again unto our mother ye catholyke
church, even into Peter's ship: and Jesus long preserve her among us, by
whose means we were brought again into it. li. 1. trip ca. 6*
Now we se that God suffers (as he did in tharians time) heresies often to
floryshe for a season, but yet ever i^ time of mercy he remembers us again,
and will not heresy still to prevail, but yt we may have good comfort and say
with Atha^. li. 10. eccl. ca. 34.
Nolite turbari fre^s nubecula est et ci to pertra^sit. Let not your hearts
fail you brethren, be not dismayed (says he) this heresy is but lik a little
cluod, it will sone vade away. Now we se also that it was not without great
cause that S. August. said, In epi. fun.
that amongst other things the succession of the bishops of Rome from Peter's
time did keep him in the true faith, li. 3. ca. 3.
as Ireneus had granted long before. Now we se yt, yt faith is to be received
believed and holden which has been kept of al me^, at al times and in all
places, of christendom since ye begi^ni^g and yt we must leave only to ye
generalitye to the antiquity and to the consent of the fathers al still agrei^g
i^ one For experience shows (and no (...) only ye scripture, stories, and
doctors) yt as heretics be ever full of diuissio^ and scisme, eue^ often among
the^ selves (as appears by Luther, Ecola^padius, Carolostadius, and Swi^g^^us.
etc.) being lively figured i^ ye co^fusio^ at Babilo^: so are the catholics
ever most surely knit i^ this unity, whereunto tholy ghost still does move and
sundry ways persuade men's consciences. Furthermore we se clearly what
wickedness and misery it is still to wa^der i^ palpable darkness from error to
error, being ones out of ye unity, for which christ prayed, Ioa. 18. li. 4.
trip. ca. 24.
saying: O father grant yt as y^ and I be one so may these which believe i^ me,
be one joined and knit together i^ one faith i^ one confession in one love in
one grace and pietye. Now we se the cause why we fell from this unity, and
upon what ground. We se the cause was nothing else but to maintain wyckednes
and sin. Cause of errors.
We se what was the progress, and what still followed of it: that is to say,
more sin and more: error upon error, and heresye upon heresy. We se also
that the end was almost utter destruction of all together both bodily and
gostly: extreme poverty, extreme misery: even as people quite forsaken of
god. Finally therefore we se, yt there is no way so easy for the devil to
bring in all kinds of heresies, errors, divisions, scismes contentions,
strifes, and mischiefs, as is to deny the unity of Christ's church, and to
forsake the head thereof, the Popes holiness. All heresies spri^g hereout says
Ciprian. Epist. ^. (...).
And for this cause I have now (right honorable lord, and most holy father)
taken this work in hand, and have dedicate the same unto your fatherhode, a
chief and head pyller of Christ's church, to the entente it might do more
good, and the sooner be embraced of al catholic people within this realm. And
herein according to my small talent, I have not only declared by sundry
probations (some apparent, and some demonstratyue) the most high authority
above al other both spiritual and temporal, given to Saint Peter, and to his
successoures for ever, but also have answered to all the come^ objections
which I have either heard or read deceitfully invented against the said
authority. Beseching your grace well to accept this my small labor, and
construe all to the best for Jesus sake: Whom I beseech long to preserve your
noble and virtuous estate in continual honor joy and prosperytye to the
great comfort and profit of all true faithful people within this realm: and
after this life to grant you eternal glory in heaven with god almighty and his
holy angels.

Amen.
Here do follow sundry probatio^s whereof some do set forth only S. Peter's
preeminence above the other apostles, some declare the most high authority and
power given by Christ to him and his successors to be above all other both
spiritual and temporal, and some do manifestlye show, that no temporal
magistrate king nor Emperor can be head of the church.

The first Probation.
CHrist said to Peter, Lu. 22.
behold Satan desired to sifte you, as it were wheat, but I praide for the,
that thy faith fail not: and when thou art converted, strengthen thy
brethren. Christ as soon as he had told them who should be greatest, he said
(turning to Peter) behold Satan desired. etc. If Peter here by this text had
not the burden laid upon him being made chief of al, then the question (who
was greatest) is yet still vnsolued: which thing were a great absurdity to
grant. Theophilact therefore says here upon (lu. xxii.) the sense hereof is
plain (says he) because Christ took Peter for Prince of the Apostels, he
said, after thou have wept and done penance for thy denial, confirm thou
other, not only the Appostels, but all the faithful which shall be to the words
end. Beside this, the chau^gynge of the plurel number in to the synguler is
not without high mystery, even to declare Peter's preeminence hereby. The
pexell was upon all, and yet the Christ prayed for Peter that after his
assenscion (his prayer was not for that time when Peter denied him thrice)
(...) faith might be sure and fyrme: as it is still and shall be to the worlds
end. (...).
prayer which Christ made was but for one alone to signify that he as head
should have the chief cure and charge committed unto him. And therefore he bad
him strengthen and confirm his brethren. Again it was not without high
mystery that Christ thus prayed for him alone, seeing that in all places of
christendom which then in the primative church had received the faith, the
same is now decayed both among the Corinthians, the Galathia^s, the Ephesians,
the Philippians, the Collossians, the Thessalonians and other: only among
the Romans where Peter was appointed to be, and for whom only here Christ
prayed, the faith still does continue and shall do for ever.

The second probation.
After that Christ* had ended al, hanginge upon the Cross, and after his
resurrection, he most earnestly committed to Peter as to the chief, the cure
and charge of al his flock, speaki^g to him only in ye singular no^bre, and
only biddynge him feed the^, govern and rule them: for yt does signify the
distinction of the two Greek words (...) and (...) whereby appears Peter's
preeminence and principality. Kings in ye scripture be named pastors for yt
purpose. David (.ii. reg. v.) had said to him by god, y^ shall feed my people
and be price over the^. And ye like ye read. eze. 34. esa. 44. 56. hie. 2. 22.
And psa. 2. And even so here is by these co^missio^, now given to Peter yt he
ought both to feed and govern or rule al christ's flock as chief shepherde
over the^. But hereof read more i^ ye answer to ye.46. objection

The third probation.
WHen it was demanded of the disciples whether their master would pay the
tribute (which was but one single piece of silver named dram, Inuentes
staterem illum sumens da cis pro me (...).
in value a paise grote, and it was paid only for the head of the house)
Christ then bad Peter pay two of those pieces of silver, one for me (says
he) another for thy self. Whereby we may easelye perceive that Christ would
him to be ye head of a house, even his vicar after him: and that it was not in
vain that he had a name given unto him even derived fourth of Christ's own
name, that is to say, to be called Peter, as Christ is called Petra, both
signifiynge one thing (but of this ye shall here more anon) and this
preeminence given to Peter, the other dysciples (yet then being some what
carnal) did partly perceive and understand: which thing caused them even at
that time to contend about the superioritye. But Christ then moving them to
humility set a child among them showing how they ought to humble them
selves, and that he should be highest in the kyngedome of heaven which would
be most lowlye in spirit. And this forsaid text (of payinge the tribute)
Sayncte Augu. Aug. li. 4. ve^ and nou^ ^est. q. 75.
declarynge, says thus, when Christ bad ^aie.ii. pieces of money one for him
and another for Peter, he was thought to bydde pay for all (as easily he
might if he would have bid Peter pay xiii. pieces of money as two) for like as
all were counted to be in Christ as head, because of mastership rule and
authority even so after Christ all be contained in Peter, whom Christ
ordained to be their head and ruler over all his flock. And note here well
that the tribute was but paid only for the head of the house: Christ
therefore saying pay two, one for me, and another for thy self, did signify
that Peter should be lafte head after him over al his family and his house.

The.iiii. probation.
In all things order is ever to be kept. No society or company can continue
without order: But there is no order where there is no head. In every
private house (that is well governed) there is one head: in every city or
good town one head ruler or gouerner, and underneath that head every other
officer keeps his place and order. As first the Maiour as head, the^
shiriffes, Aldermen, Deputies, Bayliffes, Constables, with other. In every
kyngedome one king the head, then Dukes, Earls, Barons, Knights. etc.

Shall not the^ a like and se^blable order be kept in the church of Christ, and
in Christ's house? As one head and chief Bishop Peter's successor by christ
appointed, then Patriarchs, Cardinals, Archbishops, Bishops, with many other
officers to keep all the whole mistical body in godly order? Yea and who does
impugn this comely and godly order, let us try what case he is in: Let us see
what that glorious martyr Ignatius S. John's disciple does say. in epist. ad
magnesia.
It is your duty (says he) to obey your high Bishop and in nothing to impugn
or contempne him: for he that so does, does not contempne man but God which
gives to him his authority. Remember, god said to Samuel, 1. reg. 8.
they have not despised the but me: Exodus 15
and also Moses said to the people, your murmuring is not against me, Nu. 16.
but against god. Dathan and Abiron murmuringe against Gods minister and
contempning his commandment, were counted to blaspheme god, and were therefore
swalowed up quick into the earth. And likewise Chore and his company for
resisting Aaron, were consumed with fire from heaven. ^. para. ^^.
Ozias a king for usurping the priests office was strike^ with lepresye: And
king Saul for the same was deprived his kinglye dignitye. 1. reg. 15.
Thus much says S. John's disciple holy Ignatius. What then are all our wicked
and obstinate contempners of the high and chief bishop worthy to have?
heb. 13.
Paul byddeth obey your spiritual gouerners, Luke. 1^.
and Christ says he that co^te^neth ye minister, even co^te^pneth him him
self: Yea he commands to obey them though they be evil, Mat. (...)
because they sit in Moises seat. 1. Pet. 2*
But our men will not obey them though they be never so virtuous, never so good
and holy, and sit never so low. But what says the spirit of God? Deuteronomy. 17.
He that is proud and will not obey the high pristes commandment (for it is
only one, that is to say, the chief priest, whom he speaks of there) let
him die. And be ye sure the death in hell is prepared for all such at the end.

The fifte probation.
Not only Ireneus S. Ciprian, and S. Augustine declaclare the preeminence of
saint Peter and his successors, how the establyshement of our hole faith does
depend thereupon, and all heresies do spring of the contrary: but also all
and every one of Peter his successors in that seat have confirmed and
established yt high Authority: which thing they would never have done being
so holy men (many of them eue^ martirs of Christ) without any spotte of
ambition, no nor could have been suffered to have done, if they had not had that
very preeminence by Christ him self. But now let us here some of their
testimonies.

Anacletus the Martyr, disciple, Annis post (...). 101.
and successor to S. Peter in his sea.
Let all hard causes which be of great importance be brought before the
apostolical sea of Rome as unto the head there to be determined and defyned.
Anacl. in episto. ad vniuerses in to^o o^be (...) sacerdotes.
For so Christ him self did ordeyne it, and so would have it. For only he
did appointe that the Apostolical sea of Rome should be the chief and head,
and even the very henge of all. For as by the henge the door is governed and
ruled, so by Christ's appointment all churches must be governed and ruled by
the authority of the Apostolical sea of Rome.

Euaristus his successor in in the sea of Rome, 110.
and also a holy martyr.
Your wysedomes desyryng of us to be instructed folowi^g the ecclesiastical
rule have referred al to the Apostolical sea as unto the head, Euar. in epi.
qua ^d^t consultatioibus ep^oru^ vniuersae regionis aff.
rather willing in doutful things to be taught what to keep, the^ rashlye by
usurpation to presume after your own phancies.

Alexander martyr and next successor to Euaristus in the sea of Rome. 119.

Relation is made (says he) unto this holy sea, alex. in epi. ad orthodox os
per diuersas prouinci as domino famulantibus
whereunto the decisinge of all great ecclesiastical controversies by christ
him self was given, he saying to Peter the prince of the Apostels, thou art
Peter. etc. That certain enemies of christ do presume to accuse the Priests of
God before the publyke and comen judges.

Sixtus martyr and next successor in the sea of rome. 129

Sixtus Bushop of the universal and apostolical church unto al bishops
sends gretinge etc. In epi. ad totius orbis epi.
If any of you be injured or wronged: it shall be lawful for him to appeal to
this holy sea apostolyke, and to have refuge here unto as unto the head. For
the holy aposteles willed and bade that all Bishops should be defended and
helped in their right, by the authority of this holy sea.

Thelespherus and Igenius holy martires in the same sea apostolic and next
successoures unto Sixtus the one after the other. 139.

These.ii. holy martires i^ their epistels have even the same (...) effect
that their predecessor Sixtus did publishe.

Pius the next successou^. 147

This most holy father about the observing the feast of Ester thus does write
unto al places of christendom. We by our apostolic authority do institute
and decree that ye keep the feast of Ester as we receued of our elders and
have appointed unto you. Remember yt you the members by no means must disse^t
from us being your head: seeing Christ commanded this our Apostolical sea
to be the head of all seas etc.

Victor a holy Martyr, 19^
and after successor in the same.
This holy martyr and Bisshoppe of Rome concerning the breakers of the ordour
taken for the said feast of Easter sends a sharp excomunication against all
the transgressors. li. 9. tri. ca. 38.


The same Victor in a certain epistel unto Theophilus and to all other in
Alexandria.
The Ecclesiastical decree received eue^ from Peter's tune co^cerni^g
appellatio^s to be made unto ye appostolical sea of rome ought to be observed:
so that we will that you defyne nothing therein without our authority: seeing
that Christ said only to Peter (whose place we now keep) what so ever thou
losest in earth. etc.

Mark here now I beseech you. All these holy men's testimonies and judgments
concerning this our matter of the primacy. These me^ sought not their own (as
Paul has to the Philippians) but that which was Jesus Christ's. These men
received it by succession, as ye have heard, one ever of another going before
even received it as it were by hand. And ever since these holy fathers thus
did believe and thus did teach, all christendo^ has and still does believe and
teach the same doctrine: As I could prove and try from this holy martyr
Victors time eue^ till this day: But no man (I think) will deny that: for
all ye difficulty (as heretics take the matter) is to prove it in the
beginning. But that (I trust in God) is here now sufficiently proved. And yet
beside all these testimonies S. Clement says that S. Peter himself with his
own mouth gave hi^ that high authority above al other. (...). ad Iac. d^
excessu petri.
Simon Peter (says he) before his death took me by the hand, saying these
words to all the people then present. This man I leave to be Bishop of this
city of Rome, I give to him the power that christ gave to me to lose and bind
that whatsoever he decreth in earth, the same shall be decreed and approved in
the heavens. Nicen council also in the.xviii. Council of Nicen.
Canon commaundith all appellations to be made to the sea of Rome. Therefore
here now I would wish yt the Swi^glians, Ecolampadians, Lutherans, withal ye
whole rabble which count all equal would try their doctrine with this and se
how they stand together in figure. They say the Popes Authority was but a
thing inverted of late days, and that only by man: but this proffe here
tries yt it was founded even from the beginning, and that by christ. Se now
who here in is to be believed, ye truth or falsed, right or wrong, God or the
devil.

The sixth probation.
All which profess christ truly are members of Christ's ecclesiastical body
under him as head, whether they be priests or lay men, Emperors kings, or
bishops (this no man denies I am sure) but they ca^ not be counted to be
under christ as their chief head, which wilfully do break the order that he
took when he was here in earth, which order was that Peter should be lafte as
head under him over all his flock (as I have and shall prove it sufficiently
in this small book by gods mercyful assistance) whether they be of ye laity or
of the clergy. If thou will be one of christ's sheep whether thou be king or
e^peror y^ must be under his shepeherde. It were a mo^struous ^yghte to se the
sheep rule the shepherd. Now if ye say thautoritie of Emperors, kings and
princes in christe^do^ ought not to be of less might and power the^ is the
power and authority among the heathen Emprours and kings which be free from
any such subjection. Hereunto my answer is, that Seruire deo regnare est:
Seruitus enim dei summa libertas to serve God and to keep his ordinances is
not to be counted service, but greatest fredo^: it is no subjection, but most
liberty. And yet furthermore here I speak not of a king, as a king to be
under the head of Christ's church, but a king as a christen man, a king as a
member of Christ, a King as a sheep of Christ's fold, so must he be under
and obedient to Christ's shepeherd. For Christ made the law general in geuynge
to Peter full authority to lose and bynd without any restraynt or any
respect or consideration had to king or Emperor: so that none of Christ's
flock be exempte from this high shepeherde, but of necessity compelled to
obey, onles they will needs wilfully break out of the fold, and fle from
Christ. Herein this place I might bring in to serve my purpose that noble
Emperor Theodosius, Theo. li. 9. trip. ca. 30.
which with all humble obedyence submitted himself (like a lamb to the
shepherde) unto that holy father Ambrose his Bushoppe being content to suffer
what punishment it pleased tholy Byship to put unto him for his offense. And
ought not all men in like manner to obey their spiritual shepeherdes
(specially the head shepeherde of al) except they will be exempted from
Christ's flock, yea, though they be earls, dukes, or princes? Have we not a
notable story not long ago of Henry the fourth emperor, Hen. 4. emp.
which with all submission, suffringe and that willingly al penance put unto
him by the Popes holiness Grego. the.vii. for his former contempt was received
again as a membre of Christ's Church being before for obstynacye iustelye
cut of? would god that at these and many such like examples, laft in stories
for our instruction kings and princes now a days would take occasion to
acknowledge them selves to be lively members of Christ's ecclesiastical body,
and with all humble submissio^ to judge themselves much inferiors as they be in
deed, unto the chief and spiritual head Christ's vicare their principal guide
and shepherde.

The.vii. probacion.
It is evident that all the Eua^gelistes (which as it were with one month do i^
al places give preemine^ce to Peter puttinge him ever in the first place) were
at that time assured that Peter was head and Prince of all the apostles. He
was not first called as it is written in John the first chapter: no nor the
Evangelists do observe to recite them after their calling, but sometimes one
in this place and contrarywyse the same in an other place, but Peter is ever in
the first place. Andrew is put second in Mathewe.iiii. in Mark and in the
Acts: James is fifte in Mathie, second in Mark, and third in Luke: John is
the sixth in Matheu second in thactes in Mark the third, and in Luke the.iiii.
And likewise is the chau^ginge in all other, because they were all equal: Yea.
Luke himself in his gospel does vary from that he writes in thactes: for
there he puts Andrew ye second, but here he cou^teth him the iiii. but Peter
in all places because christ appointed him to be chief and head is of al named
still the first, yea and that not only nu^bring the Apostels, but also in all
places where Peter with any other is recited: as in healinge the woman that
had the issue of blood. Luke. xii. And in the second and also.v. of thactes
Peter is ever the first.

The.vii. probation.
The scriptures truly understood give ever Peter ye preeminence, so does the
whole consent of all the holy fathers, and so does and ever has done the
universal and catholic church of Jesus Christ, which is the foundation and
pyller of all truth. Who can then stry^e against this, and yet think him
self to be a lively member in Christ's church?

The.ix. probation.
Ruling and obeinge (being coniugata) can never be one with out the other.
Therefore Christ bidding Peter rule and govern al his flock (as it is i^ the
second probation) even by the self same word commanded all the flock to obey
him. So that whether he be high or low, if he will be of Christ's flock, he
must needs obey^ the shepherd.

The.x. probation.
Both Nicen council and most part of all the general councels ever since
have established and confirmed (as a verity received from christ's time) that
appellations should be made to ye sea of Rome: Iulii primi epi. ad antio.
yea and that no councils should be kept without the consent of the bishop of
Rome: and also that like as Peter was the chief and head of all the Apostels,
so should ye church of Rome in his name consecrate by christ's appointmente be
head and chief over all other churches, whereunto even as unto the mother all
other churches in all matters of contrauersie should seek: all causes there to
be determined and ended. Haec Julius primus.

The.xi. probation.
Christ has but one spowse ( Vna est columba mea, cant. 6.
vna est amica mea.) As it is in the ca^ticles: his coote was without seame:
Io^. 19.
it can not be cut: his kingdom can not be divided, for then it would sone
come to dissolucion, Luce. 11.
which can not be, saying the gates of hell shall not prevail against it: Math.
16.
There is but one shepeherd there is but one shepe^ote wherein the holy ghost
set an order, Ioa. 10.
which order the devil shall never break, though he shake at it never so
sore. He went about to break this order first eue^ in him self when he
counted to be equal with the highest, as it is in Esai. the.xiiii. And after
when he caused our first parents to disobey gods commandment. Yea, and
ever since from time to time, this has ever been his chief endeavor. Thus he
caused ye Corinthia^s often to strive against this order, 1. corin. 1.
first, in the Sacrament of baptim preferri^g the baptim of one minister to an
others ( ego pauliego appollo. etc) then in the sacrament of matrimony
despisinge that because Pau^e had preferred virginity thereunto. 1. corin. 7
After this in the Sacrament of y^ Alter irreverently receuinge it, ^. corin.
11.
and puttinge no diversity (says Paul) between the body of christ and
other meat. More over where God appointed sundry gifts to sundry me^: to some
more, to some less, y^ deuel is ever redi to stir and move one to envy, and
an other to contemn: and all to break thorder set by the holy ghost. Yea and
among all these breches of order, y^ devil is i^ none so busy as he is to
persuade ye people against y^ unity of christ's church, and against ye head of
his mistical body, sayi^g ye church is unknown, here one and there one, but
none knows where, and all this is to break the order because they would be
under no head, but al at lose liberti so many heads so many wits ever
sturri^g to diversity in opinions, and moui^g the^ to sedicio^ ever causing ye
princes and magistrates to leave to their part. How be it al ye deuels endeavor
herei^ is i^ vain. For christ promissed (as ye have herd) that ye gates of hell
should never prevail against this: Peter's shipe never drown, though sometimes
it be sore tossed. Christ to Peter alone as to the head shepeherd gave charge
over al his sheep, biddinge him alone feed and govern them: appoynti^g him not
over Rome alone (says Chrysostom) but over the whole world (which profess
Christ) when at his assenscion, Lu. 19.
he goinge into the far country (mentioned in ye gospel) gave him that large
commission. So that who so ever obeieth not hereunto he is cut of and
perteyneth no more to Christ's church then a roten bow cut of the tree and
cast a side parteyneth to the liuelye tree. And this both the Greek church and
the Latin plainly do teach. Clement, Anacletus, Ireneus, Tertulian, Origin,
Cipria^, Basil, Ciril, Chrisostom, Athanasius, Ambrose, Hillari, and Austine,
with all the rest ever since. Whom shall we believe then herein? Al these with
the consent of the who^e church? or else shall we give credit to Swinglius
Ecolam podius, and Luther, whereof not one can agree with the other?

The.xii. probacion.
The cause why Christ changed Simons name and called him Peter was for yt ye
he should be head after him. And here first note yt read of no changing of
names in scripture but for some great benefit, priuelege or high dignity: as
appears in Abraham Jacob and other. And as for Peter's name it was not given
with out most high mystery, and as a sign of great priuelege. For Peter is
derived of Christ's own name a petra of the stone which was Christ. 1. corin.
10.
So yt he had his name most like unto Christ's name even derived and taken
forth of it, not only thereby to signifye unto us that Peter should have
Christ's chief authority and office committed unto him, but also because
christ did build his church here upon, Math. 16.
when he said to Peter, upon this stone I will build my church. What is yt? S.
Hierom, Hilari, and theophe. upon Mat. the.xvi. Tertul. also in. li. de presc.
her. And S. Aug. con. 26. de san. do plai^ly declare and say y^ christ gave to
Peter an exceeding great reward for his confession, in that he ded build his
church upon him, he being named the stone of ye church to be builded. Whereby
appears y^ Peter was ye stone where upon the church was builded. This is the
ce^sure herein of these ancient fathers and holy saints. But of these matter
ye have more in the answer to ye.vii. objection.

The.xiii. probation.
There was still one chief head in ye old law, which christ (as he says) came
not to break. Math. 5.
Therefore one must needs continue still i^ ye new. If ye say christ is now ye
head whereof ye other was the figure: truth is christ was and is the head
ever: as Paul says ( Christus heri et hodie. etc) in thold as well as in the
new: (...). 13.
and yet as he had his vicare under him then, so must he have now: as Aaron
was then, 1. corin. 10.
so was Peter now. All chaunsed to them in figure.

Aaron diversely was a figure of Peter. Aaron offended in the calfe, Peter in
denying his master: Aarons high office was confirmed with the death of Chore
and his company, so was Peter's with the death of Ananye, Number.
and Sapphire: Aarons with buddynge of the rod, Act. 5.
Peter's with raising Tabitha^ with healing the lame man, Act. 3.
and with curing diseases eue^ with his shadow. Act. 5
etc.

The.xiiii. probation.
In the sinagoge, Deuteronomy. 17.
there was one head bishop and diverse degrees under him: in the church
triumphant Christ the head with diverse degrees and ordres of angels: shall
then the church militaunt be without a head? In all natural things there is
ever one head. In every politic and comen wealth one head: one king in a
realm (as is in the faurthe probation) one mayor in a city one shiriffe in a
shire, one head in every house, and shall there not be one head in the church
(upon whom and upon whose authority all other must depend) to desise all
contrauerses? shall Christ's church be a monster either without a head or else
having many heads? and every one to do as he will? shall we grant this
confusion? Shall not the^ every one wrast scripture after his own brai^e? but
what shall we say further? has not the succession in the sea of Rome continued
from the beginning? li. 3. ca. 3. and. 4
does not Ireneus declare this? does not S. Aug. say y^ the succession of
Bishopes in the sea of Rome til this day keeps me (says he) in the bosom
and unity of Christ's church? In epi. fund.


The.xv. probation.
If Christ had lafte Thappostels without a head (yea or if si^ce we could have
been without one) then must needs have chaunsed that which is spoken the last
chapter of the book of Judges, yt in those days there was no ruler in Israel
but every one did that which he thought good him self. And this were an open
way to al herisies, as s. Cipria^ witnesses. Neque enim aliunde here ses
oborte sunt aut nata sunt seismata, quam inde quod sacerdoti dei non
obtemperatur: nec vnus in eccl. ad te^pus sacerdos and ad te^pus iudex vi cem
christi cogita^: cui si secundum magisteria diuina obte^peraret fraternitas
vniuersa, nem^ aduersum sa^cerdotum collegium quicquam moueret, nemo. post
d^uinum iudicium post populi suffragium, post coepisc^ porum consensum iudicem
se non iam episcopi sed de^ faceret: nemo sibi placens ac tumens seorsum foris
no^uam heresim conderet etc. haec. Cip. li. 1. epist. 3.
And therefore it is no meruell that y^ devil is ever most busiest to bring
christian people from ye unity from having one head: and to make christ's body
a mo^struous body with many heads. For then through variaunce, scisme and
contention he ever sows heresies at his pleasure. So that there is no more
open way to let in all heresies then to take away Peter's primacye and
authorytye from the church. wherefore let thautoriti of the church never go
about to extincte other heresies till this great wound be healed, and we
clearly restored to the unity again. Where the bone within is perished to
heal the flesh without, nothing helps.

The.xvi. probation.
Aaron was a figure of Peter like as Moses was of Christ. Anacletus he^ habet.
And as Aaron was under Moses so Peter was under Christ al being priests (
Moises et Aaron in sacerdotibus eius.) And as Moises with God and Aaron with ye
people handled all matters, god saying to Moses, Exodus 4.
Aaron shall be thy mouth to the people and thou his to me, even so Christ was
Peter's mouth to god when he said I have prayed for the. etc.

And Peter was Christ's mouth to the people, when Christ said to him
confirm thou and strengthen thy brethren. And here observe this (says S. Aug.
upon ye said text lu. 20.) yt Christ neither prayed for James nor John, but
only for Peter, in whom all the other were contained he being ye head of the
family. And therefore in paying the tribute money (whereof is spoken in the.iii.
probation) which was but one piece named dram in value a payse grote paid
only for the head of every house: Christ caused Peter to give.ii. pieces in
sign and token (says he) that Christ then was ye head of the house, and
that Peter was after to be i^ his stead to supply his rowm. wherefore as al then
were contained in Christ, so after ye asce^sion al were contained in Peter whom
Christ appointed to be head over the^ al. Aug. ^i. 4. no ui and. ^et. (...). q.
75.
And like as Moses, when he ascended committed all the cure to Aaron, so did
Christ when he ascended commit all the cure to Peter saying thrice, feed, feed,
feed.

The.xvii. probation.
Many priueleges which S. Peter had above other given hi^ by Christ plainly
declare hes primacy: one is, he gave Peter power to lose and bind i^ ye heue^s
and to other but i^ one heaven: which thing plainelye decareth says Origin (a
man of no small authority) upon yt same place Peter's preeminence above all the
rest. An other priuelege is that tha^gel after christ's resurrection onlinamed
peter, saying go tell to the disciples, and to Peter which was not (as some
say) only to comfort him, lest he should have dispaired, saying Christ's
first appering to him, was sufficient comfort for him, but it was (as ancient
writers do testifye) to show his primacy* like as that was to se how all the.iiii. evangelists so exactly do set forth his.iii. denials. An other
priuelege is that Peter though he came to the Sepulcher after S. John yet he
went first into it: he went first to Christ's place, which after him should
be first and chief i^ ye church. It was also a great ^uelege yt last of al
christ said only to Peter, follow me: by which words (says Chrisosto^) he
showed again both his great love and charge that Peter's cure should be greater
then all the rest. Here now then I will demand certain questions, if Peter
should not have been ye chief of all, and that even by Christ's will, why then
did Christ only give to him a name derived forth of hes own name? Why was
he^ named first in all places? Why was the church promissed to be builded upon
him? Why gave Christ only to him the keys of the heavens? Why joined he
only Peter with him in paying the tribute? Why prayed he only for Peter,
committinge the charge of his brethren to him? Why did he first appear to
Peter alone? Why did he bid Peter follow him in kind of death? And why was
only Peter crucified as christ was? Why had he al these priueleges? Even
bicavse he was head of all. And this is the censure and judgment of all the
whole church of Christ and of all the holy Saynctes, Martirs, and
Confessoors, even since christ's time hitherto.

The.xviii. probation.
Peter alone ever as head spoke for all, as it is both in the ghospel and in
Thactes both before christ's ascension, and after: his sayings and doings
also sufficiently set forth his primacy, and declare evidently yt he had the
keys only, yt he had y^ blyssing only, and that al was there spoken by christ
to him (as by priuelege) only: and this caused hi^ ever still to take upon hi^
as he did, and that in sundry places of thactes: as i^ the chosinge of Mathias
to supplye Judas rowme, Act 1.
i^ excusi^g thappostles from dro^ke^nes, (...). 1.
in making the sermon at receiuinge tholy ghost, when he couerted 3000. at once
to christ. And here mark yt Peter's name alone (as it is in the probation next
before) is expressed. Act. 1.
Why should he so have been separated from the other, but for preeminence and
superiority? Again, he alone healed the lame man John being then present
(saying that which I have I ge^^ the, vsinge the singular number) at what time
he alone made ye.iii. sermon al being then present: where also ye se that the
first miracle after Christ's ascension was wrought by Peter, and all the
sermons yet still made by Peter: He also answered the rulers for healing ye
lame man* Act. 4.
he alone used thauctority in punishi^g Anany and Sapphire and likewise i^
subduing simo^ Magus. Act. 5.
etc. act. 8.
beside these all the other apostels are put without names in their doi^ges: by
thandes of thappostels (says luke) many miracles were wrought. act. 5.
etc. but Peter's name is still expressed: peter's shadow (says he) cured many,
where as thappostels with laying on hands healed them. And here mark also i^ yt
point ye diversity. Yea and Peter's ^emine^ce plainly appeared both in ye
vision, acts ye.x. where he only had then showed unto hi^ ye receiui^g and
vniti^g of ye heathe^s, and also i^ ye.xv. of yt acts i^ pacifii^g ye strife
about ye Legals, where Peter as first and chief (yea and yt in ye presence of
James being Bishop there) answered to the matter and gave hes sentence first,
unto who^ Paul and Barnabas with other did consent: and then S. James which
there by Peter (as Chrisosto^ witnesses) was appointed bishop last of all
recited the decree as it was mete for hi^ to do being bishop there. ^o. 97. in
Ioa.
But of these ye have more declared in ye answer to ye.xii. and.xiii
objections. And therefore now to our purpose: do not these things (I pray you)
sufficientlye prove Peter's superiority and ^eminence? yea did not Peter in all
these (if I might not rather say ye holy ghost speaking in Peter) show him
self to be chief of thappostels, and to have ^emine^ce above the^ al? Surely
if it had not been his office appointed to him by God, he would not still have been so bold, yea so malapert, and arroga^t, as at every time to take ye
preemine^ce upon him: and namelye as to speak first i^ an other ma^s see, the
bishop being present.

The.xix. probacion.
The working of sundry miracles which be set forth i^ thactes plainly declare
Peter's superiority and primacy. Did not 3000. people (as ye heard) turn to
Christ from infidelity heari^ge but one sermon of his? yea and these was a
greater miracle (according to christ's promise) the^ ever Christ hi^ self
wrought, Joan. 14.
either in raising Lazarus or other. Ioa. 11.
Christ raised but one the^ bodily, Peter here raised. 3000. ghostly. act. 2.
and. 3.
Again, did not tholy ghost descend upon al yt heard Peter's sermon? acts. 9.
Did not he heal ye lame man and Eneas being sick of ye palsye? act. 5.
Did not he raise Tabitan? Did not hes shadow heal many? What like do ye read
of the other apostels? May we not the^ well conclude yt Peter had ye superiority
and preemine^ce of al other, eue^ given to hi^ by Christ? Did not he here i^
these examples put hes authority sufficiently in execution? seeing tholy ghost
did confirm and establishe ye same with so many wonders and miracles?

The.xx. probation.
It does greatly prove Peter's authority that Christ after his ascencion did
only show to him (as to the head and chief of all) the vision of ceasing the
legals: act. 10.
and that in the storye folowinge, act. 12.
prayer was made of thole congregation for Peter, where as we read not ye like
done for any other.

The.xxi. probacion.
S. Dionise (S. Paul's dissciple) names Peter supremu^, ca. 3. de diui.
nominibus.
the highest: and also he names him culmen the top above all other.

The.xxii. probation.
S. Clement disciple and successor to S. Peter says yt christ gave not equal
power and like authority to all the Apostels indifferently: In epi. 4. ad
eccle. hiero.
But he appointed one (yt is to say Peter) above al other. li. 3. ca. 3.
And after S. Clement Ireneus affirms the sea of Rome to be the head see of
all other. etc.

The.xxiii. probation.
Tertulian asks whether any thing was hyd from Peter the stone where upon
Christ did build his church? li. de pres. her. in me. li.
Christ gave to him (says he) to be the stone or rock of his church and he
gave to him y^ keys of the ki^gdome of heavens, and he gave to him power i^
heavens: which all seeing he gave to Peter alone, who will deny him to be
chieffe of all the other? he alone was ordained to be the stone: to him alone ye
keys were given: he alone received the power in the heavens.

The.xxiiii. probation.
Origin says let none say John was greatter then Peter which both is called
and is the top of al other. In inicio euang. Ioa. viz hom. 2. in diuer. ^o. 5.
in. exo.
Again, he says, Christ said to the great foundacio^ of the church, to the
most sure stone, where upon he did found his church, O thou of little faith
why did thou doubt?

The.xxv. probation.
S. Ciprian that holy Martyr says that the unity of the church does depend
of the unity of Peter's authority and he says also that upon Peter whom Christ
did chose first (not in calling but in dignity) he builded his church, Tract.
3. de simp. prael. epi. ad quinti and epist. 3. ad cornelum li. 4. epi. 8. li.
4. epist. 9.
and he answered for all often times. Again he says yt the sea of Rome is ye
root and mother of al churches, and al heresies, and schisms do spring only
of that, that men will not obey the head bishop. And moreover he says yt
christ's church was to be builded upon Peter. What can be said more plainly
then this for the confirmacio^ of Peter's authorytye and his successors?

The.xxvi. probacion.
S. Hillari does highly set forth S. Peter's authority and his dignity calling
him ye foundation of Christ's church. cano. 16. in math.
And so likewise does Ciril, In math. 16. and ca. 12. l^. ^. in Ioa.
calling him the prince and head of thappostels. And also in an other place
saying. In petro ta^que in petra lapideque firmissimo sua^ esset edificaturus
ecclesiam. In peter as in the rock and most sure stone Christ would build
his church. Rursus apostoli (inquit) post ascensionem Petrum loco domini
habuerunt et in signum huius subiectionis prius seorsum ei datae vel promise
sunt claues. etc.

The.xxvii. probation.
Chrysostom in sundry places does greatly extolle Peter's authorytye. de
laud. pau.
In one place he says Peter was ye head of thapostels. ho. 55. in math.
In an other place he says, Peter a pore fessher and a simple man, Christ made
the shepherd, the mouth of Thappostels, master of the world, and head of his
church: whom for this cause Paul went to Jerusalem for to se. etc. Would he
then have his church to have a head, and since to be without? God forbid.

The.xxviii. probation.
The holy father Athanasius writing to Liberius affirms that the cure of the
universal church was committed to him as it was to al his predecessors and
successors also in ye see of Rome. And in many mo Epistels which the said
Athanasus sent unto Mark, unto Felix, and other, he proves very largelye the
like primacye of Peter and al his successors.

The.xxix. probation.
Eusebius affirms Peter to be greatest, li. 2. eccl. hist cap. 14.
to be chefest, and principal of all Thappostels. And Sozomneus also an old
godly Historiographer (even about the time of Iulia^ thappostata) writes yt
the Bishop of Rome had cure and charge over al Byshopes both of the East and
of the weste church because of the excelle^ce and dignitye (says he) of his
see. li. 4. trip. ca. 15.
annis (...). 364.
Wherefore socrates an other ancient and holy Historiographer affirms that
the holy Canons even in the beginning did forbid that any thing should be
concluded in any council without the Byshope of Romes authority. li. 4. trip.
ca. 19


The.xxx. probation. li. 2. con. eu^o.

Holy Basil says that Peter because he did excel other in faith, therefore the
church was builded upon him. theop. explica. illiud lu.
And Theophilus also writes that Peter to whom thee cure of all the church
was committed, asks Christ, whether he told that parable (Lu.) to them
alone, or to al?

The.xxxi. probation.
Saint Ambrose says that Peter was the stone wherevpo^ Christ did bild his
church. con. 47. de (...) de p^tri.
Christ (says he) called him the stone because he first laid the foundation
of faith among the heathens, and because like an immouable rock co^teineth
or vpholdeth thole burden of Christ's building. In ca. 1. ad gal.
Again he says it was mete that Paul should desire to see Peter, because he
was first among the Apostels to whom christ had given charge over hes
churches.

The.xxxii. probation.
Saint Hierom calls the Bishop of Rome the highest priest. To. 3. in pref.
in. 4. euang. ad dan.
And in an other place he says like as Plato was chief and Prince of al
philosophers so was Peter of al ye Apostels, upon whom Christ's church was
builded with a stable and sure foundacio^, To. 2. li. 1 contra. Pela.
which neither with violence of water nor other tempest can be overthrown.
Also he writing unto Damasum shows that like as al peryshed which were
forth of Noes ship, To. 2. in epi. ad damasu^.
so do al now which be fourth of Peter's ship the catholic church. Tom* 2.
li. 1. con. Io^.
Moreover he affermeth that although after a manner upon all ye apostels the
church was builded, so yt they be called the foundacions of it, yet upon Peter
as chief after him* christ chose him one as Prince and head over ye rest, y^
thereby al occasion of schsime might be clearly taken away.

Again he says in an other place, De (...) stribus.
peter was chief and prince of Thapostels: and also he says yt Peter
reproved. S. Marks Gospel, and committed it by his authority to the church
to be red: as S. Clement (says he) witnesses in the sixth book written to S.
James Thapostel.

The.xxxiii. probation.
Saint Aug. in many places does highly set up Peter's authority above all
others. Li. 2. conf. donat. ca. 1.
In Peter Thapostell (says he) the primacie over the rest of ye Apostels did
ha^ge and that in high excellent grace. Again (says he) who is ignoraunte y^
Peter's pri^cipality of Apostle shipe is greatelye to be preferred to the office
of all other? tract. 124. in euan. (...).
Peter for the primacye of his apostleshipp in that he had the keys given to
him did represent, the whole church, Peter which after should be ruler of the
church was suffered to fall that he might learn the rather thereby his own
weakness to forgive sinners afterward, con. 124. de tempore.
and to bear with the flock. con. 26 and. 27 de. san.
Christ called Peter the stone where upon he builded his church. tract. 15. in
Ioa.
Peter received of him ye keys of power like as Paul did the keys of science.
More over, who knows not (says he) that Saint Peter was the chief of all the appostels? Li. q. noui and vet test. q. 75


Seeing now that thus many holy martires and confessors of christ's church
received this doctrine one of an other (as by hand) even from the beginning
and first foundacio^ of the church: and saying again that not only y^ Latin
church but ye greek church also (as appears both by these fornamed writers,
and likewise by many holy counceles) ever received Peter and every one of his
successors as chief, head, and ruler over al: can he then be counted a
christin man, that will not only deny but that will doubt of this received
truth even from Christ?

Now to the objections.

Here now follow sundry objections invented against thautoritie of Peter and
his successors: in citinge and answering to them I keep no ordour, because
thinuentours of them did break all faytheful and comelye order that ought to
be kept in the ecclesiastical hierarchy and mystical body of Jesus Christ.
That objection which first came in place, is first answered unto. And here
(gentel reader) by these objections ye shall plainly perceive, that like as
coper gildid often seems to be gold, but if it be rubbed and hardly tried, it
will utter him self to be copper, and then less to be set by, eue^ so the
falsitye gilded and colored with wittye and rethorical perswacio^s appears often
to the simple to be the veritye and truth, but opened and tried by the
scriptures and verities thereof shall appear but copper counterfete. And I
trust in Jesus Christ that the crafty deceit in this matter of ye primacy
(which in these years past has killed a thousa^de souls) is here in fully
detected and disclosed: So that no man shall have cause hereafter to set by
the^, onles he will forsake gold and chose copper.

The first objection.
The saing of Christ Math. xvi. blessed art thou Simo^. etc. and the rest that
follows in the text, is not (say they) to be appropriate peculierly to Peter,
but to all the Apostels, whom Christ generallye did ask the question: and for
whom Peter generallye gave answer. Again, christ did not build his church
upon Peter, but upon Peter's faith, and upon Peter's confession, yea upon Christ
him self. For none can put any other fundation (says Paul) but that which
is set already whichis Jesus christ.

The answer.
It must needs be appropriate peculierly only to Peter? Cephas ac petrus
eiusdem plane significationis cum petra (inquit cras. in* 1. Io) and ideo idem
est dictu pro^sus rues petrus, perinde ac si dixisset christus ei, tu es Petra.
At hic iam observes velim, quod cephas significat non quemvis lapidem, sed
ingentem aliquam petram sc^pulum aut rupem, cui arx aut gra^de aliquod
edificium possit superstrui. Nam sc^pulosus ille collis vnde jerusalem ab
obsidentibus romany possit conspici, cephas (inquit Josephus) dicebatur. Et
rursus hoc quous obserua, quod christus in primo congressu (nempe Ioa. primo)
pollicitus est dum^axat se nomen cephe simoni impositurum, at tunc statim non
imposuit, sed maiori merito seruauit in futurum, vt simon randem caelitus
illuminatus a patre, eius diuini tatem confiteretur, and tunc audiret tu es
cephas, petrus aut petra. etc.
for the which knew no man's mind but his own told but only his own faith.
They all had not then one faith in christ as appears ^i Judas, which believed
not, as it is in John ye vi. It rwas not reveled to them al as yet: but suppose
it had be^, yet that Peter was not preuie of. Every ma^s heart was only known
to god. Wherefore Peter answered but for him self only. And therefore it is
to be thought (says Hilarious) that at that time ye other Apostels were not as
yet so firmly established in that sure sentence and belefe now confessed by
Peter: yea he made answer straight way without respect to his fellows eue^ as
tholy ghost moved him: and so likewise ye answer was made to him again alone
calling him by his fathers name, saying to him in the singular number tibi to
the and not vobis to you: he blessed not the^ al, but he gave ye blessi^g to
him alone by name. As before, John the first, he said to him (and not to
Andrewe or other) thou shall be called a stone, so now here he says to
veryfye his promise before made, thou art a stone (not as before you shall be
calde a stone) upon whyth I will build my church. That which I have by nature
(that is to say to be the foundacio^) that do I now perticipate with ye. This
was the true understanding of this foresaid text Mathewe the.xvi. in the
primative church, as now shall apeare most plainlye by these testimonies
folowinge.

Anacletus disciple and successor to S. Peter.
Anacletus the servant of Jesus Christ, by gods calling set in the sea
apostolic and appointed there unto by S. Peter prince of the Apostelles
se^deth greting to all Bishops, and to the residue of Christ's flock. etc. The
holy and appostlyke church of Rome received the primacy and power above all
churches and upon al faithful people (he does exempte neither King nor
Emperor) even of our Lord our savior and not of the Apostels, he sainge to
Peter, thou art a stone, and upon this stone I will build my church. etc. And
I will give to thee the keys of heavens. etc. and sone after he says among
ye holy Apostels there was diuersitye of power for although al were apostels,
yet by god him self Peter was made head, yea and this Thappostels the^ selves
would have, that Peter should be the head, and should have the rule and
principalitye of Thappostelshype.

Anacletus also in another epistel to the catholyke church.
In all difficulties and questions of great importance let the censure be
referred unto ye see apostolyke: For yt Christ him self willed, when he said
to peter thou art a stone, and upon this stone I will build my church etc.
Hereby appears not only Anacletus own judgment in this matter, but also
what was then the commen taking of it by the commen censure of the universal
church. Which thing also appears by Saint Clemens testimony and others,
even then at the same time in the primative church.

S. Clement in the first epistel to S. James.
By Christ's own mouth (says he) Peter was ye chief of thapostels unto whom
god ye father had reveled his son Jesus Christ's, and unto whom Christ gave
thee blessing Math. the.xvi. This was the judgment then: yea and if you look
further ye shall see, how thie took this truth (as it were) by hand, one of
another.

Tertulian which was shortly after.
Was any thing hid from Peter (as it is in the.xxiii. probation) which was
called the stone, whereupon Christ's church was builded, to whom the keys of
heavens were given, and which had power to lose and bind in heavens and in
earth? Now ye here the commen faith hereof at that time in the universal
church.

Here also what Orige^ says: yea hear the censure and judgment of the
universal church herein, in Origens time, and that in the Greek church.
Peter (says he) upon whom christ builded his church wrote but only.ii.
epistels. In mat. de. ^^noni test.
Also he says when christ committed the charge of fedinge his sheep to Peter,
In epist. ad ^ho. cap. 6.
and that upon him even as upon the earth he would build his church, he
moved him to no other virtue but only to love and charity. Ho. 5. in exo.
Again he says mark what christ says to the great foundation of his church,
and to the most sure and steadfast stone, where upon he builded his church. etc.

Behold now here upon, S. Ciprian and the judgment in his time of all the
catholic church in this weighty matter.
Our Lord (says he) gave first unto Peter power to forgive sin upon who^ he
builded his church, In epist. ad Iubai.
and whereat the unity thereof had his beginning. And a litel after he says the
church of christ which is but only one, christ did only build upon one:
and the like he says in the epistel ad Quintinum, and also in the Epistle ad
Cornelium.

Harken also holy S. Basil.
Peter says he because he did (...). con. c^.
excede and pass al other in the excellency of faith therefore he took the
buildynge of christ's church even in him self. Petrus (inquit) quoniam fide
prestabat ecclesie in se edificatione^ suscepit.

S. Hillari upon the same words.
Peter for his confession obtained a worthy reward, In 16. mar exp^icans tues
pe. etc.
for that he did see the son of god in man. etc. and a little after. O happy
foundation of ye church laid in giving of a new name. A stone chosen meet for
that building which should brust the gates of hell and death. O blessed Porter
of heaven to whose arbitremente the keys of the eternal kyngedome are given.
Ii. 6. de tri.
etc. Moreover he says, Peter by reuelacion of the father saying ye son of
god, which thing far passed ma^s infirmity to know, deserved a very high
place above other, through the confession of his blessed faith.

S. Ambrose exposition also upon the forsayde text, and what was then thereof
the uniform consent of all other.
Christ called Peter a stone, Con. de nata li pe. con. 47 de fide pe. li. 2. de
vocat. genti^ ca. 9.
saying thou art Peter. etc. Peter for stedfastnes (in an other sermon says
he) was by christ called a stone the foundation of the church. etc. Moreover he
says who doubts but Peter the most steadfast stone, which was partaker both
of the virtue and name of the principal stone christ, ever fervently desired
to have constancy to dye for Christ?

S. Hierome likewise in declaring the former text.
I say to the says Christ (but hes saying was his doing) thou art a stone,
Math. 16.
and upon this stone I will build my church. Even as Christ gave light to the
Apostels to be called the light of the world, and gave them also other names
forth of his own name, so did he give to Simon the name of a stone, that
according to the propriety thereof, he said unto him, I will build my church
upon thee.

S. Augustines testimonye also thereupon.
The churches do justly worship the birth day of that see, In con. de ca^edia
pe.
which Peter received for ye salvation of the churches, Christ saying to him
thou art Peter, etc. he called him the foundation of his church. etc. Again he
says, Con. 16. and 114. de (...).
ye have heard christ call Peter a stone, where upon he would buyld his church.

Chrysostom in the Greek church: here his testimony.
By christ's words saying thou art Peter, Hom. 55. in math.
and I will buyld my church upon thee. etc. clerelye appears how great Peter's
power was above other. Also he calls Peter ye prince of the apostels, Ho. de
diuite and pauper^
upon who^ christ builded his church, the very immovable stone, which for
the fishers hook received the keys of heavens.

Cyril, in expoundinge the same text, agrees herewith.
Christ in changing of Peter's name did signifye that in him as in the surest
stone, li. 2. in Io^*
he would buyld his church. All these most holy and reverend fathers with one
consent moved by tholy ghost did as it were from thappostels time here unto
their own times plainly declare from time to time what was the judgment even
of the universal church of Christ in all places of christendom both East
and West as well among the Greeks as the Latins concerning the former text
thou art Peter. etc

And as for the time since these godly men were, thousands with one consent
have agreed herewith, and none ever denied that exposicion but fleshely
heretics, whose propurtye was and is ever to deny all godly laws whereby
their wickedness might be improued. And therefore ye shall sone know whether
a man be an heretic or not by this one proof: If he believe accordnige as he
has been taught by the church of Christ from the beginning, and receive the
truth by succession of the Bishops in the sea of Rome (according to the
faith and doctrine of Ireneus and after him of Sayncte Augustine) then is he a
good christian man, else not, though he cry a thousand times, scripture,
scripture scripture, wrastynge and applyinge it still amiss after his own and
others wicked pha^cyes. For what? Shall we condemn all these holy fathers? our
mother the church and al? was Christ's promise naught? Was tholy ghost never
here til Luther came?

Here now the council of Alexandrine (wherein ye Arians were condemned) here I
say all ye bishops of Egypt, Thebeans, and Libians, among whom holy Athanasius
was, they writing to Felix then bishop of Rome. Here I say how they ded expound
the former text.
All those holy fathers did there plainly declare that it was decreed in
Nice^ counsel yt me^ should appeal in certain cases to the sea apostolic, ye
see of Rome, to whom Christ's gave by special prerogative above all other
power to lose and bind, and that it was the guide and henge in whom all must
be sustained, vpholden and mayntayned, he saying, thou art Peter, and upon thy
foundacio^ the pillars of the church, that is to say, the bishops (whose
office is to sustain the church) are builded and confirmed unto thee, the
prince, the teacher, and the head of all christian religion the keys were
given and power in heaven and earth. etc.

Oh how great then is this authorytye where unto with one consent whole
christendom thus does agree? Yea and that not all being still gathered
together in one place, but being often separated far a su^der not one knowing
of an others mind, and yet al agreing ever in one, and all after one fashion
expounding the forsaid text thou art Peter. etc. Every one hereby geuinge to
Peter and his successors, the high preeminence and authority above al
christendom. So that by the consent of al these (both fathers and counsels) it
well appears that Peter answered only for him self, like as did the
scribe mark the.ix. where as christ demanded a question indifferentlye of
all. Sometimes when he demanded of all, al gave answer: as when he asked whom
do men say the son of man is?

Sometimes when he asked all, Math. 16.
none answered, but every one held his peace: as when he asked, whereof they
reasoned in the way? And some times one alone answered, Mar. ^.
as did Peter in the former text, and the scribe mark the.ix. And here now I
judge, this objection is sufficiently answered unto, to satisfye herewith al
reasonable people: and as for the other sort, God I beseech him open their
eyes to se the truth, or else take them away quicklye for fear of infectinge
the flock of Christ and specially the simple Lambs of his fold.

The.ii. objection.
Saynete Augustine in sundry places (as. 50. tract. in euan. Ioa) seems to
say that christ builded the church upon Peter's faith, or upon his
confession, yea or upon christ him self. etc.

Thanswere.
This is fully answered unto in the last responsion: but yet somewhat to say
further: S. Aug often uses in treatinge of matters to dispute and reason sundry
ways: so to try forth the truth. But ye must mark that it is not alone to
teach a sure and true doctrine, and to dispute to reason or search forth a
verity or doctrine. S. Aug. in his sermons wherein he taught the truethe to the
people ever showed plainly that Christ builded his church upon Peter
according to the faith of the church not mathamaticallye upon Peter's faith but
upon faithful Peter. So that a catholic faith is necessarilye required to
every membre of Christ's church. And thus it is to be taken that authors often
do ascribe it to Peter's faith.

For else both Nathaniel and they also, which in the tempest that Christ
swaged with his word, made like confession with Peter and before him, ought
to have had ye same blessing that Peter had.

The third objection.
The gates of hell shall not prevail against the foundations of the church:
but many bishops of Rome have been heretics, yea and many other have been
sinful in their living and very wicked, against whom the gates of hell have
prevailed. Wherefore ye church is not founded upon them.

Thanswer.
If they be wicked they shall not escape the hand of God ( Potentes potenter
tormenta patienter) but wicked or not wicked al we are bound to obey. Sapi. 6.
The Scribes and Pharasies (says Christ) sat upon Moses seat, Math. 23.
obei and observe all that they bid. The sin of ye ruler is no derogacion to
the power and authority god has put him in, yea and none is pure without al
sin, neither one nor other, head nor foot, no nor ye church it self here
(which is the congregation of faitheful people) is al wholly pure without spot
or wrincle: but ye church triumpha^t in heaven (ephe. the.v.) shall be al pure
holy and immaculate without spot or wrinckle. Peter him self the head and
foundation of ye church after the keys received was called satan, yea and
after denied his Master thrice. Wherefore against ye catholyke church builded
upon Peter the gates of hell shall never prevail: that is to say, the faith
shall never fail neither in the catholyke church nor in the head of it,
neither in Peter nor in his successors: but there the faith shall ever abide
sound and perfect. The gates of hell have prevailed (I grant) against the
persons of the Popes, but not against the power etc. The gates of hell shall not
prevail against it: that is to say, neither infidelitye nor heresye.

For like as ye perfection or integretye of faith is the port or gate
through which we enter or go in to the way that leads to yt kingdom of
heavens, so is infidelity or heresy the gate through which the enteres go
streighte to hell fire. Now as for that they say the faith of Peter in many of
his successors has failed, as in Marcellinus, Liberius, Felix the second,
Anastasius the second, Johannes the.xxii. Benedictus the.xi. and Honorius with
other, which (say they) did err and their faith did fail.

And therefore the prayer of Christ is not so to be taken, that he did mean
the person of Peter and his successors when he prayde that Peter's faith
should not fail, but he did mean that it should not decay or fail (say
they) in his whole congregation or church: but that one or other (though he
were not openly known) should ever keep the true faith Here unto I answer
that Albertus Pighius defe^deth all these Bishops of Rome with diverse other
from al errors and heresies in the fourth book and viii. Chapter of his
Hierarchy: so that their faith (says he) did never decay, no nor the faith
of any that ever was or shall be in the place set in Peter's cheer. Nevertheless
it is no inconuenyence to grant yt some of the Popes for a time have erred,
Erra^tes romans pontifices se dis authoritas cito correxit, vel eos penitus
reiecerit etc. haec platina.
but quickelye by the authority of the sea and the holy ghost the matter has
been reformed again, so that the faith has not been counted there to fail,
no more then you righteous man fallinge vii. times in the day is counted to lose
ye name of a righteous man. Furthermore, like as the universal church in
discussinge matters of our faith can not err (and yet all men as men may
err) because of Christ's assistaunce continually governing the same, eue^ so
Christ's vicar ye pope as a private person and as infirm man may err both in
lyuinge and beleuinge (and then neither head nor member of Christ's church
being cut of) but as pope and head he can not decide nor determine any thing
amiss. Marcellinus did amiss in sacrifising to Idols, yea Saint Peter
offended Galathas the second, but neither of them erred in discussinge matters
of faith and that through Christ's assistaunce and his holy spirit. And so
theuangelistes as men might and did offend and err but as writers of
scripture they could not so do.

But here now to speak more of that they sclaunderouslye obiecte, saying,
that many Popes have been naught and sinful in lyuinge. What is that to the
purpose? the authority remains yet still perfect. How many of the Kings
even of Judah were most wicked? was their authority any thing diminished
thereby? No truly. Ofre for the sin of the people God suffers the wicked
the tira^de or hypocryte to rule: Job. 34.
beside mani other plages which he daily powers upon them for sin: and
even the same he often sends in to his church, and yet thauthorytye is ever
to be obeyed. As they which sat in Moses chere, even so now they which sit
in Peter's seat. So though yt they be euel and naught, thauthoritye yet still
continues. And here now forthermore, though for a time they know not who is
right Pope through ye doutes that may be in elections, or that for the time
there be a Schism and then two or three named Popes sedicyouslye, whereof in
deed none is right Pope, as it appears in the counsel of Constanciense, and
also in the time of Henry the ii. Emperor, where Benedicte the ninth,
Siluester the third, and Gregory the sixte, did al contend at one time, and
yet none of the three being the right Pope, nor any other then elect (for
Clemente the second was after lawfully chosen and they iii. deposed) yet still
ever remained ye see whole, and thautority firm and sure: Christ's cote was
never cut nor divided. Again, we see that through ambicio^ of Emperors
Kings Princes and other inferior magistrates, which often cause their blood
and kindred to be chosen and set in highest dignities in the church being most
unmeet there to, great sclaunder and sore decay comes to the true religion
of Christ. We see moreover yt wicked lyuers often fall into errors and
heresies, and then live more lice^tiouslye after thexample of Paulus
samosatenus whereof Eusebius li. 7. ec. ca. 26
speaks. We see also that God often for the sin of his people sends (as I
even now said) wicked rulers both spiritual and temporal, and so greuouslye
plageth them by that means: as ye both read in Job and in Esaye. Job. 34.
But what makes this against the Popes authority? Esa. 43.
Forsothe nothing at al. Howbeit here by we may be put in remembrance still
to cry unto GOD to send holy Fathers of the cleregye to be set in dignities
to rule over us. Which thing I suppose would be much better then often it is,
if temporal Magistrates would let elections of the Cleregye alone, and that
all might be done by calling of tholye Ghost, without simonye, without
avarice, without ambicion, and without desire of pomp in the world. But I will
not medel with this matter: it far passes my reach. I will only say with
the holy man Chrysostom, O yea men of the laity, rejoice not, laugh not, if
ye se wicked and unmeet ministers of the Clergy crepte in to the Church, but
weep and wayle, and think that it is for your sin: think that if they be
brass (says he) then be ye Irne: if they be Irne, ye be earth. For ye be
ever worse then they. If the salt of the earth be unsavory, where with all
shall any thing be well seasoned? If the light be gone, if the candel be out,
how shall ye se then in darkness? Lord be mercyful unto us. The spiritual
ministers of god from the highest to the lowest should be chosen and taken of
the purest, of ye most godly, and of the best learned. But alas of late
years here in this Realm of England, the most unmeet, the most vile and
naughtest were made both Prestes and Bishops.

Oh what great plage was yt to the simple souls, and innocent people? (I
remember the like choosing.iiii. regum.xvii.iii. regum.xiii. et. li. i. eccle.
cap. v et.xii.) but thanks be to Jesus Christ such be taken away, they be
well weded fourth of the church, and both godly and learned placed in their
romes. But now to return to my process intended.

The.iiii. objection.
Christ called Peter checkinglye satan: straight after that blessing and high
preeminence given to him. Wherefore it should appear that Christ's words in
that blessinge were only to be referred to ye church and not to Peter's person.

The answer.
Peter's falling took not away his power given to him before: Christ's chekinge
him does not frustrate his blessing, nor take away the strenght of Christ's
words pronounced in blessing him: which blessing was given for the time to
come and not for the time present. For all the time til thappostels had received
tholy ghost they were but infirm and fearful they were imperfect before the
passion says Origin and Hilari. ho. 3. in. mat.
Wherefore if ye ask how could he, which had opened to him the high misterye
of Christ whereby he confessed him to be the son of God, now be ignorant of
his death and passion? Chriso. ho. 15. in. math.
the answer is, that Peter had the high misterye of Christ opened unto him
that he was ye son of GOD: but as for the misterye of the passion it was hid
from him. Therefore it was no marvel that he was ignoraunte of it. Again
Origin says that the rebuke or check then given to Peter calling him satan
(which is but aduersarye) was but gentel: like a rebuke of the father given to
the child. For Christ (says he) turned to him when he rebuked him: But
blessed is he to whom Christ does turn. He turned to Peter, and that most
mercifullye, after that Peter had denied him thrice. Yea and moreover Christ
bad him here come after hi^: which is ever to be taken in the good part. Like
as contrariwise, it is euel and wicked, to go after your own lust or
concupiscence ( Post concupiscentias tuas neeas) according to Helias saying,
Eccle. 18.
do ye yet halte in two parts? 3. Reg. 18.
if God be he, go after him, and if Baal be he, go after Baal. Finallye, some
do hold, that Christ rebuked not Peter hear, but the euel spirit which
caused him so to say to Christ.

The.v. objection.
Some things be spoken (says Saint Aug.) which are thought properlye to
perteine to Peter, In psa. 108.
and yet they have not their chief understanding except they be referred unto
ye church, whose person Peter was well known to bear in figure, for ye
preemine^ce which he had over the other Apostels. As that is, I give to thee the
keys of the kingdom of heavens, with such other.

The answer.
Be it so, yt that is true, yt Peter bare a figure of the church, and that
Christ's words to him I will give thee the keys etc. have a more high
understanding being referred to the church then if they be referred to Peter's
person, because of the unity, the primacie, and prerogative of the church,
which was begone and institute in Peter, the giving of the keys, and the high
power to lose and bind, was not to be referred to the only person of Peter
and there to end, but to continue in the church still by succession yet all
this is but referred to the church by the means of Peter and through Peter,
and so shall continue by succession whiles christendom endures. For when
christ said to hi^ alone thou art Peter. etc. he made of him the beginning of
ye church saying I will build my church upon the or upon this stone. etc

The.vi. objection.
Christ is the foundation and head of the church, how should then Peter be the
foundation or head thereof?

Thanswere.
Christ is the chief foundation which by his own virtue power and strength
vpholdeth all the building, he is also the chief head from whence the
spiritual and liuelye influence does descend and flow into all the members:
but therefore ye can not conclude that the church has two foundacions or.ii.
heads, and so to be as monstrous: seeing ye Peter received but only of Christ
to be the head and the foundation after him. Ioa. 8.
As christ the light: Math. 5.
and the appostels the light. Ioa. 10.
Christ the shepeherd, Ephe. 4.
and thappostels the shepeherdes.

The.vii. objection.
There is much a do about changing Simons name in to peter, as though that
made any thing for it: seeing James and John had their names changed, and
were called Bonarges the sons of thonder.

Thanswere.
John and James had not their names changed, but had a comen name added unto
them: which never is spoken of, but only when it was given in Mark the third
chapter: and yet this their comen name was not added without a great
prerogative for yt only John and James were admitted with Peter to be at the
tra^sfiguracion, Mat. 17.
and at the raising of the ruler of the Sinagoges daughter, Mar. 3.
and also at his prayer in the garden before his death. Howbeit Peter had his
name changed, Ioa. 18.
and had a name given which was derived out of christ's own name (which is
petra, a stone) so that christ did communicate his own name to Peter,
signifyinge that he should keep his own place after him, and be the stone the
foundation of his church. But of this chaunginge of Peter's name is more
largelye spoken in the.xii. probation.

The.viii. objection.
All the apostels received immediately of Christ like and equal dignity power and
authority even over thuniuersal church of christ, he saying to al and to
every one indifferently, as my father send me I send you, receive al ^holy
ghost, go into al places of the world and preach, baptize, heal diseases, and
forgive sins.

Thanswere.
Not only thappostels but also.72. disciples received all these of Christ, in
so much that ye people of Samaria through Phillp the deacons preaching received
the ghospel and were baptized: then was rather the time to congregate and
gether together with all speed the flock of Christ, then to make any mention
of rulinge or gouerninge them. Notwithstanding before all these commissions,
Peter was made head over all: Math. the.xvi. as is declared in the answers to
the first and tenth obiectio^s and in sundry places mo of this book. In
epist. ad ephe.
Wherefore Saynct Ambrose says that at the beginning all taught and baptized
at all times and in all places (not only in churches) as occasion served: but
as soon as the people were somewhat gathered together in the faith, and
churches builded, then were ordres set and rulers appointed by tholy ghost,
some in this place and some in that, even as christ promised. So that this now
iustlye weyed, what makes this objection against Peter's authority which was
given to him before by Christ? Surely no more then now it should be against
the legates prerogative if Peter's successor the Pope would for vrge^t causes
constitute certain inferior Bishops to be legates equal with him, geuinge
them all and to every one of them his own full authority some into Germany,
some into Denmark. etc. Yea and beside this, who does not se yt though legates
have the Popes full authority given them, yet in the foundation of the
authority all is not equal: no more then Christ geuinge to all the
appostelles and to the.27. disciples also, his own whole and full authority
that he had of his father, was in the root and foundation to be counted all
equal power and authority with that which he him self had of his heavenly
father. Again what Idiote will judge the.27. Disciples to be equal with
thappostels though in that legacy and imbassage concerning preaching and
baptisinge they were appointed by Christ as all equal? And even now here the
same is to be said to that in this imbassage or legacye Christ for the time
send all forth with that equal commyssyon to gether the people, not then
speaking of any gonerninge of them: in which gouerninge (when it should
ones be put in execution) Peter was ordained eue^ by Christ to be the head,
Mathue the.xvi. So that all this their commission and aucthoritye was but taken
forth of Peter's.

The ninthe objection.
Anacletus and also Ciprian do say that all the apostles had equal power and
dignitye given to them by Christ: In simp. ^le.
but because all should preach one thing: therefore the beginning thereof
first began by one, which was Peter. Yea and he says further, Anacle. ait
caeteri apostoli cum beato petro pari corsortio p^diti and honorem et
potestatem acceperunt. Cip. ait, quod hoc caeteri apostoli erant quod petrus
fuit, pari consortio prediti and honoris and potestatis.
in the church there is one office of all bushoppes, whereof every one has a
part allotted whollye unto him. Respon^. Id est in simil. honoris and
potestatis. Rursus: duplex est potestas, vna, ordinis sieve consecrationis,
altera, regiminis sieve administrationis. Anacle. and cipri. fatentur omnes esse
pares si loquaris de potestate ordinis vel consecrationis, sed non esse pares
in regimine, in administratione, ac jurisdiction.


The answer.
This is somewhat answered unto in the last responsion. Nevertheless to speak a
little further therein, con. 27. de sanctis.
S. Aug. says that S. Peter and S. Paul were equal: but he does not leave it
so raw, but declares how, saying, they were equal in merit, but in power
and authorytye Peter did far excel, like as Paul did in science. Howbeit
in power to forgive sins, in power to preach, in power to minister the
Sacraments, in excommunicatinge etc. all were like, and all their power was
like not only among thappostels, but also if ye join the.72. disciples with
them (as is declared in the last responsion) so that herein does not consist
Peter's authority above others but it does consist in the jurisdiction above
all other. So that though in some things all the apostels had equal power
and dignity given unto thyem by Christ, yet because they should all preach
one thing, Christ would one (that is to say Peter) to be the begynner, the
chief and head of al: Super vnum edificat ecclesi. quamuis omnibus apostolis
parem dederat potestate^ (in sacramento videlicet and potestate ordinis sacer
dotalis) vt vnitatem manifestaret. vnitatis itaque ciusdem originem ab vno
incipientem authoritate sua disposuit: and exordium ab vnitate proficiscitur vt
ecclesia vna esse monsiretur que est vna semper ordinata hominum multitudo in
diuinum cultum.
because the unity of the church should depend upon the unity of Peter's
authority. As concerning thoffice of apostelship or edifyinge in faith, so
they were equal, but in government and power Peter head of all the rest.

And where you say there is one office of all bishops whereof. etc. S. Ciprians
words be these. Ecclesia vna est. etc. episcopatus vnus est cuius a singulis
in solidu^ pars tenetur, id est. The church is one, the bishopriche is one,
whereof part is holden of every one as in the whole. This is the english of
it (and not as ye for your purpose have translated it) whereby appears
nothing else but that al depends upon the unity. etc. If this were not here
S. Ciprians meaning, why then in other places did S. Ciprian say (as we have
it in the.74 probacion and iu aunswering to the first objection) that upon
Peter Christ builded his church as upon the first in dignity? And that the sea
of Rome is the root and mother of all churches? And again yt al he resies and
schisms do spring only of that men will not obey the head bishop? I set
Ciprian to answer to Ciprian. Think not yt the holy Martyr will be contrary to
him self.

The.x. objection.
The keys were equallye given to al (though he promised them but to Peter
alone) when Christ brethed upon them and said receive the holy ghost, math.
16.
whose sins ye forgive they be forgiven. Ioa. 20.
etc.

The answer.
The keys were given to the church, but in the person of Peter because of the
unity. And here first note that there is no mention made of the keys but
only Mathue the.xvi. where as only to Peter Christ promised them: but his
promise and his saying is his doing. So that although to forgive sins, which
was given to all the apostels and.72. disciples also (as is declared in the
last answer but one) do perteyne to the keys as a part thereof: yet is there
in the keys a much more large power contained. For therein is comprehended
the fullness of all ecclesiastical power and dignitye: which even then in the
xvi. of Mathue Christ gave only to Peter (saying tibi to thee) and through
him to all his successors. He promissed them only to him but his
promissinge or his saying (as I said) was his doing ( Eius dixisse est
fecisse) and that it is so, by gods help I shall now try by sufficient
testimonye. But first note that when christ had spoken of the church and that
the gates of hell should not prevail against it, he no further continued his
promise to the church but turned then his speech to Peter, saying I will give
to thee the keys: so that the church receives them through Peter, to whom
in his own person then they were given as to the head and foundation of the
church under Christ.

But now let us hear testimonies hereof.

Tertulian libro de pressed. haer.
Was there any thing hid from peter (as ye have it twice before) which was
called the stone of the foundation of the church? Which had the keys of
heavens given him and power to lose and bind both in heavens and in earthes?
Tertulian here speaks of that Christ said to Peter after he had given him
the blessing Mathue the.xvi. that which I do now thou know not, and yet he
grants there that Peter had received the keys before: which can be no time
else but even when the promise of geuinge them was made, as will appear by
conferring the textes, the places, and the times together.

S. Ambrose also in the xx. of Luke.
Peter which came later, first entered into the sepulcher, as he which had
received the keys of the kingdom to open unto other. Mark here Sayncte
Ambrose says likewise that the keys were given to Peter before the passion
which must needs be even at the promise Math.16. or else never, as shall
appear by reding the process of the gospel.

S. Ambrose also in libro de Isaac. etc.
Christ said to Peter thou can not follow me now. Ioa. 13.
etc. but he had before given to him the keys of the kingdom of heavens. etc.
Lo, all this was before the passion. Therefore we must needs grant that he
gave the keys when he promyssed them, saying none can show any other time of
giving them.

S. Aug. con. 124. de tempore.
In declaringe the geuinge of the keys Matthew the.xvi. he says, Christ gave
the keys then to Peter: and therefore he says tibi dedi claues regni celorum I
have given to thee the keys of the kingdom of heavens, the like S. Aug. has
tract. 50. in Ioa. et. li. 2. contra gau dentii epistolam.

S. Hilari in. psa. lii.
S. Hilari says that christ took not away the keys from Peter when he denied
him, here we see S. Hilari judges that the keys were given before the
passion: but that must be when he promyssed them: Matthew the.xvi. etc.

S. Hilari in psalm.cxxxi.
Christ said to Peter come after me satan (or aduersarye) to whom he had
given the keys before. But that must needs be when he promyssed them, seeing
this follows even straight after in the same chapter the.xvi. of Matthew.

Chrysostom in explicando propitius esto tibi. etc. Math.xvi.

He says. O Peter what is this? thou which had a heuenlye reuelacion, and
the keys given to thee of the heavens, art thou so sone fallen so sore?

By all these ancient writers it appears yt the keys were given when they
were promessed: and that Christ gave them presentlye in saing I will give thee
the keys. And this has caused that ever since, ye keys iustlye have been put
unto all Peter's successors, and to none other. As for the power to minister
the sacrament of penance and to forgive sin, was given after the
resurreccion both to the Apostels and to the.27. Disciples (as a part of the
keys) and yet as under Peter he being the head. But who I pray you is so
foonde to say that the.27. Disciples received the keys equallye with Peter?

The.xi. objection.
Christ said to al indifferentlye what so ever ye shall bind upon earth, math.
18.
shall be bound in heaven, and what so ever ye lose upon earth, shall be losed
in heaven.

The answer.
That power given Math.xviii. was (as appears by the process) but to
excommunicate the wicked, and to lose the^ from it again if they were truly
penitent: 1. Cor. 5.
which power Paul caused the Corinthians to execute upon ye fornicatour. 2.
cor. 2.
And here note well, that it was not without great cause, that Christ used here
the plurel number, saying what so ever you bind etc. For one did never this at
that time (only Peter the head except) but it was given to the church and
rulers of the congregation being for that cause gathered together: as ye
read.i. cor.v. It is in no place of the gospel, whereby any one may
excommunicate, only Peter (for him and his successors) except, which being
head had it given to him alone with the keys: and therefore he alone put it in
execution upon Anani, Act. 5. and. 8.
upon Sapphire, and upon Simo^ Magus. etc. How be it if a man should grant,
that ye power of losing and bindinge (Mat. xviii) was spoken to the apostels as
before (Mat. xvi) to Peter, yet must we needs confess (as appears in the
answers to ye.iii. last obiectio^s) that to Peter as to yE head the power was
given, and to other but as under him, still kepinge and observing a due order,
which order is broken, if Peter, the other Apostels, and the.72. disciples (or
the successors of every of these) had like power given in all things.

The.xii. objection.
The.viii. of thactes Peter and John were sent by the other apostels to Samaria,
but ye senders seem to be greater then they which be sent. etc.

The anwere.
When by Philip the dracon the people of Samaria were converted to ye faith, by
ye co^se^t of all ye apostles (the holy ghost being ye chief author) Peter as
whose authority was greatest was chosen as being thought most mete to go to
confirm them with tholye spyrite, the matter and case then requirynge the
chief power. What did this against Peter's authority? or to the derogation of
his high power and preeminece? It seems rather to set fourth his excellent
priuelege: because none was thought (yea eue^ to the holy ghost which was the
chief sender) so mete as Peter he being the head of al to go to destroy the
great member of the devil Simon Magus: a thing of passinge difficulty which
required Peter's presence. This was an argument of tharians, the father sent the
son, ergo the son was less then the father. How be it Herod sent ye.iii.
Kings to Christ, yet he was not greater then they. May not ye King and the
Counsel of a Realm find a cause that shall seem expedient yt the King in his
own person shall go? Will they not then say, it has pleased yt King and the
Council, ye the King him self shall go, and take one chief Duke with him, as
Peter had John with him? May it not then be said, the cause was so great they
have eue^ send fourth the King? have not even the very consuls of Rome (as
histories declare) often so been sent? was not therefore the consuls authority
the higheste, but to be counted equal with other? yea have we not a like
example in scripture, Ios. 2^.
how the head of al Phinees was sent and.x. Princes with him in to the land of
Galaad? eue^ so Peter the head as most mete and as most honorable was put
thereunto being so sent to Samaria: yea and note this that Peter ever used
humble submission but where authority was required. But further yet herein to
speak what derogation were it now to the Popes authority, if the whole
college of Cardinals did conclude that it were expedient for his fatherhode
now to come in to England? Moreover, note well (concerning this objection) that
in thactes Lukes chief purpose was to describe ye pere grinatio^ of him self
and of Paul so y^ not one word is there of Peter's tarieng nor of his
stallacio^ at Antioche, nor of ye deuidi^g thapostels into sundry cu^tres, nor
who^ they converted nor what martirdo^e they suffered.

The.xiii. objection.
In ye xv. of thactes in ye question had about the legals James had ye chief
preemine^ce for the counsel was concluded by hi^. etc.

The answer.
S. Peter made S. James Bushop of Jerusalem, In episto. ad episco. per Itaiian.
as Anacletus Peter's disciple and successor says: ho. 87. in io^
and after him Chrysostom confirms ye same, with these words, Peter ye
Master of ye whole world made Saint James Bushope of Jerusalem. Do ye think
then, that Saint James would take upon him to be above his head? but now I pray
you iustlye powder and wey the place Acts the.xv. and ye shall find that both
Peter did first as head say his mind (yea though it were in. S. James see) and
also that which Peter then said took place shortly after and yet does, S. James
even then confirminge Peter's saying with the prophets testimony. What makes
it then against Peter's authority that S. James approving all that Peter had
spoken added somthi^g to Peter's words? which addicion yet shortly after was
quite taken away and never since observed, that is to say, to abstene from
blood. etc. yea and may not ye chief of a council first give his sentence (as
Peter did here) and yet after him an inferior may say something more, which
shall be thought to the whole counsel better for ye time? does this any thing
against thautoritie of the chiefest? Peter's judgment was yt the heathen
people should be quite delivered from all the Iewishe burdens: and so shortly
after it was fullye concluded (though for a short time S. James counsel was
taken) as appears by yt Paul then sone afterwrote to the Corinthians: 1.
cor. 10.
bye all that comes into ye shambles, eat all things. Tit. 1.
etc. and to Tite, all meats be clean unto the pure, and to the Romans, Romans
14.
no meat is to be counted common or unclean, ye which eat not, misiudge not
them that eat. Again, to the Collosians let no man judge you in receiui^g
your meat. collo. 2.
etc Whereby well appears that S. Peter's sentence was chief, as spoken by the
chief. But herin yet more to speak, note well, yt Peter often among
thappostels used such modestye and humility (and in so doing did follow
Christ's commandment, which bad ye higher they were the lower and more humble
they ought to be) yt he did not ever put his high authority in execution:
Ciprian ad ^uintinum.
but as S. Ciprian says yt Peter whom Christ made head of al, and upon whom
he builded his church when Paul did contend with him about circumcision, did
not revenge or boste him self that he was the Prince or chief of al (as he
justly might have said) but still he humbled him self. But god forbid yt we
should ascribe this his humble and gentil submittinge to the derogation of his
high power and authority: but think yt ever when Christ's glory or the
profit of ye flock required it, then he used his full and high authority, as
appears in the punishi^g of Anany and Sapphire Simon Magus. etc. And yet
furthermore, in the primative church it was rather time (as is in the.viii.
responsion) to call people in to Christ's flock, then to set every man in his
own place, or to talk then of rules and orders or of Peter's authority: that
was to be done afterward, the people being first instructed in ye faith. The^
was rather ye time to seek for gethering, the^ for gouerni^g. And if we look
well, we shall find not only in the ghospel before Christ's asce^sion, but
also afterward in thactes, that Peter behaved him self as head and Prince,
ever when time required and occasion served. He spoke for all, he answred for all, he for all said to Christ behold we have forsaken al and followed thee,
Math. 19.
what reward therefore shall we have? again he said to Christ speak thou
this parable to us, Lu. 2.
or unto all? and when Christ asked whether they would go away also from
him, Ioa. 6.
Peter alone made answer, saying to whom shall we go? thou have the words of
life. None did thus but he, and that because he was head.

Howbe it as yet whiles Christ was present with them in his natural shape (for
in ye form of bread he is ever still present) it was not meet that his vicare
should greatly meddle.

But after thascension Peter first stood up as head and made the sermon at
the choosing of Mathias, Act. 1.
and said oportet we must chose one. etc. And after when they had received
tholy ghost and were illuded of the people, Act. 2.
he alone spoke and preached conuertinge them to the faith.3000. people at
once. Also when he and John came into the temple at y^.ix. hour of prayer,
Act. 3.
he alone said to the lame creple that which I have I give the, in the name of
Jesus arise. etc.

The lame man asked alms of both, and Peter bade look upon both, but he said
not in the name of both, we have neither gold nor silver, yt which we have
we give thee. etc. But as head he in ye singular number as having a singular
authority said (yea though John one of the chief of the appostels were
present) I have neither gold nor silver, yt which I have I give thee. etc.
And this declares him to be head. Likewise he alone for all as head, Act. 4.
made the oration to pacify the people, and he alone as prince did strike
Ananye and Sapphire. Act. 5.
Which of all the apostels in the presence of Peter did any thing that seemed
to be of authority above other? but only he ever in the presence of all (as
ye hear) used authority above al.

The.xiiii. objection.
Paul says that nether Peter nor other apostel gave or added any thing to
him. Gala. 2.
Whereby it appears that Paul gave no place to Peter.

The answer.
Paul most reverently gave place to Peter as to the head, and for that cause
from a far he came to Jerusalem to se Peter which was the chief of the
Apostels. And that Paul says that Peter adds nothing to him nor other
Appostels, he says it, least Gods glory should have been diminished, and
does mean that he had christ to be his author of his apostleship and sender
forth, and that he was not sent by any any apostle, but even by Christ him
self.

The.xv. objection.
Paul says he did resist Peter even openly in his face at Antioche.

The answer.
Clement Origens master says this Peter was not Peter the prince of
thappostels, Cle. 4. disp. li. and Euse. li. 2. eccl. ca. 14.
but one named Peter a disciple one of the.72. And of this Eusebius speaks
affirming the same. Howbeit if we grant yt it was even S. Peter the prince of
ye apostels no inconvenience will follow. For Paul was equal with Peter as
concerning the defense of faith ( quoad fidei de fensionem) but not concerning
the dignitye of prelacye. ( non quoad dignitatem prelationis). Again an other
answer, if the ruler ye superior or head do err, in any point of his
faith, or offend other and cause the^ thereby to err, either by his saying or
doing openly and slau^derously, then the inferior may charitably, either
secretelye (if that be sufficient) admonish: or else openly reprove, if such
occasion serve as did here. Nevertheless S. Hierome, Chrysostom, and
Theophilact affirm that S. Paul in rebukynge Sayncte Peter did but feane and
was not in earnest. So yt like as s. peter did feane before the Jews (for the
time, so to win them the sooner) in yt he did keep their legals being among
the Gentiles: even so. s. Paul when the Jews were gone seeing yt many of the
Gentiles were offended with Peter's doing, did feane an earnest checkinge
against Peter, so to win ye Gentilles (and even so now he writes to the
Galath.) so that on both parts there was a godly feaninge: the one by Peter
the sooner so to win the Jews, and the other by Paul so likewise to win
the Heathens. Yea and Paul used this often, as in circumciding Timothe, Act. 16.
and in shauing his head in Che^chreis as perfourming his vow, Act. 18.
and in like manner acts the.20. etc. And yet beside this remember that S.
Ciprian says (as ye heard even now) that Peter, whom christ made head of all
and upon whom Christ builded his church when Paul did contend with him
about circumcision, did not revenge or boast him self that he was the prince
or chief of all (as he justly might have said) but still he humbled him self.
etc.

The.xvi. objection. Gal. 2.

Paul says that authority was given over the Heathen unto him, glo. ga. 2.
haec habet, euan. creditum paulo ita principaliter vt petro, quod verum est de
predicatione ad quam spiritussanctus eum segregauit sed non in pote state
iurisdictionis.
like as unto Peter over the Jews.

The answer.
Christ him self said he was sent to the Jews and not to the Heathens, and
bade the Apostels go preach to the Jews and not to the Heathe^s: for that
first he was sent chiefelye to the Jews as to his people: yea and therefore S.
Peter durst not meddle with the Heathen till he had his vision acts the.x.
(which was showed to him as head and neither to Paul, John, nor other) and
therefore chiefelye and principallye Peter was sent to the Jews, as Paul was
among the Heathens, but yet Christ which said he had other sheep beside
them, Ioa. 10. and. 20
bade Peter feed all his sheep, making him chief over all. Also Paul preached
first among ye Jews (as it is in thactes we should have preched Act. 13.
to you. etc.) but because he did most good and profit among the Heathen,
and the Jews refused for ye most part his doctrine, therefore he gloried in
the Heathen, and not in the Jews, calling him self their apostle. But Peter
equally profited in both being head of all, but because he was first sent to
the Jews Paul calls him their apostle chiefly, not wtsta^ding after he won
ye people at ponthum, Galatiam, Capadocia^ Asiam, et Bithiniam. etc.

The.xvii. objection.
Peter knew no commission he had over the Heathen, as appears Acts the.x.
till he had the vision.

The answer.
It is sufficiently* answered unto in the last respo^sio^. Howebeit this I say
further, that he knew his high commission to be over all the flock of christ.
Howbeit as co^cerninge ye time when ye Ge^tils should be called, and received
into the shepecote, that Peter knew not before he had the vision to receive
them. But what is yt against ye preemine^ce? surely nothing at al.

The.xviii. objection.
Jerusalem should rather be thought to be the head see then Rome (if any
such should be) where Christ worked our salvation, and where by Christ and by
his apostles also, the gospel first was preached, as the prophet before had
said, Esai. 2.
ye law shall come forth of Sion and the word of our lord forth of Jerusalem.
Again Antioche should be preferred to Rome also, because Peter was first
there.vii years before he came to rome: Act. 11
yea and chiefelye for yt the name of christians there first began.

The answer.
First note that the bishop takes not his dignitye of the place, but the
place of ye bishop: not peter of Rome, but Rome of Peter. Peter was prince of
all before he was bishop in Rome. Now as for Jerusalem which was vtterli to
be destroyed* by gods reue^geme^t for christ's death and their impenite^t hearts
and not one stone to be left up on an other, god would not y^ head apostle to
be there settled: Where also fleshly ye jews still look for a carnal kingdom
(and that yet Messiah is there to come) in which error the sons of zebedy
ones were, mar. 20.
and also the disciples with whom christ talked goinge toward Emaus. mar. 16.
And for this it was ordained by the holy ghost in the primative church
among the apostles, that Jerusalem was not only none of the principal and
metropolitan sees, but was subject unto the sea of Caesaria, as appears in
Nicen counsel. Now as for Antioche rather Jerusalem should have been head,
because the word was first preached there, then Antioche, where through
Paul's diligence only the name of christians began. Howbeit the answer is yt
Peter the head bishop made, ye head see: so yt if he had continued there still
and there died head bishop then had Antioche been the head see for ever. But
that was not gods will. Nevertheless because Peter was ones there bishop,
and preached long among them, and converted them to the faith, and
after.vii. years ordained Euodium there (after whom followed Ignatius) even
then in the primative church by the apostels it was ordained for ye third
chief see: and Alexandria for the second, because Peter appointed his dearly
beloved disciple Mark there to be Bishop: and yet both it and Alexandria
subjects to Rome, because both they there received their prerogatives and
dignities even of Peter ye head bishop, which had his see by ye holy ghost
there appointed (says Chrisost.) Ille totius or bis magister (inquit
chrisost.) In totius orbis dn^a sedem accepit.
as was counted the chief city of al y^ world: And where as he with his death
confirmed the prerogative and dignity thereof, Hinc diuus Amb. Romae aposto.
sacerdotii residere principatum and per petru^ factum long ampliorem arce
religionis, quam un quam fueri^t solio imperi alis ac terrenae potestatis
appointinge also before his Martyrdom yt S. Clement should succeed him in that
high place to receive the keys (says S. Clement him self writing to S.
James,) which, Peter then, said he, had before received of christ. This
undoubtedly is the catholic faith. So that no scriptures wrasted ought to
move a christen man from this the faith of ye church received before al
scriptures were written. This is yt Paul says if any man preach any other
ghospel to you the^ yt which you have received, (...). 1.
cursed be he. Paul neither said nor did mean, if any man preche any thing
but yt which Mathue, Mark, Luke, or John, have written (as for some of the^
then had not written) but he did mean if any preach against thappostolicall
tradicions though they were never written, cursed be he. All the consent of the
apostels scholars, disciples, and successors, to this day, these have taught:
and shall we now bring al into question? Yea shall we condemn all, and invent
new of our own, as men have done in this realm of late years most
wretchedly? Sayncte Austen says that the succcession of Bishops in Peter's
see is one of the.4. causes yt kept him in the catholic faith, and Ireneus
agrees with the same, S. Cipria^ affirms that all heresies spring forth of
the denial and refusinge the sea of Rome to be head. Anacletus a holy Martyr
disciple to S. Peter and successor to him in that see, says, that ye see of
Rome had his preeminence and power above all, not given by the Appostels, but
even by Christ him self. This doctrine ever has been taught of all the
writers from the beginning with one consent, both of the Latins and the
Grecia^s. Sayncte Clemente, Anacletus, Ignatius, Policarpus, Dionisius, Papias,
with many other, which all were in thapostels time: and after them, Ireneus,
Tertulian, Origin, Ciprian, Athanasius, Eusebius, Ambr. Hiero^, Aug. Chriso.
with thousands since them, which have ever kept ye same line and succession,
receiuinge this doctrine, as it were, by hand, one of another. Whether shall we
follow al these holy and learned fathers being saints in heaven, or else give
ear to a rableme^t of rascal herytikes very limbs of the deuel?

The.xix. objection.
Christ before Pylate refused an earthlye kingdom, Ioa. 28.
saying, Ioa. 6.
his kingdom was not of this world: yea and when they would have made him a
king he fled away.

The answer.
This makes nothing against the authority of S. Peter, or his successors yt
Popes holiness. Christ came not to reign in a temporal kingdom. No true
christen man ever believed or taught the contrary. He came not to deprive
kings of their worldly dignities and honors. He came to establish a new
kingdom which is spiritual, Apoc. 5.
for the salvation of the soul: and here of Saint John speaks saing thou
have redeemed us with thy blood and made us a kingdom to our lord, and we
shall reign upon the earth. This kingdom Christ did ordeine, and made Peter
head here of and his successors for ever: so that every worldly King or
Prince if he will be in this kingedome must be subject to the head of the
same, or else shall he never come to the kingdom of heaven, which is thonly
cause of coming in to this spiritual kingdom here. As for infidels and
heathen Princes which will neither the one nor the other I speak not of. Christ
although he were Prince of ye kings of ye earth, as S. John says, and as man,
not only as God, King of Kings and Lord of Lords (his vesture wherein that
was written signified the humanitye that covered the godhed) yet when they
would have made him a King, he fled, and no meruel for he came not therefore.

His only coming was to redeem man with his blood, being obediente to his
father, even unto the vilest death: so that he came not to bear here in the
world an earthlye scepter: and for that he said to a certain young man
requiringe right at his hands against ye injuries of his brother: O thou man
who appointed me to be judge or deuider between you and your brother? as though
he had said, that is not ye cause of my coming (at the least way
principallye) to meddel with such civil matters, but it is to suffer death
for man's ransom. How be it, now to note a word or.ii. although Christ in
his own person, came not to take in hand any earthly kingdom, being
notwtsta^ding as man king of al kings, yet he would his disciples, that is to
say, all that truly profess him, be he of the laity or clergy King Bishop or
other (for all such be Christ's Disciples) iustlye and godly to use and
exercise all rules and offices here in the world: both kings Bishops, Dukes,
Lords, Ladies, both men and women rich or pore high or low.

The.xx. objection.
Christ to declare how he and his should be subjects, Math. 2^
bade give to Caesar that which was Cesars and to God that which was Gods.
etc.

The answer.
By these words of Christ there is no derogation against his chief minister
here in earth no nor any power given to the laytye here by to be over the
cleregye. For here the wicked Pharisees came craftily being determined whether
he had said yea or nay to have had a great vauntage against him either as a
traitor or else as a dissembler, and demanded not whether they were bound to
pay tribute, or whether he could justly receive it: but whether they might
give tribute to Caesar or no he being a strange prince: which thing they
thought to be against the fredo^ of their law. Now Christ which saw al
things perceuing their deceytfull hertes said neither it was lawefull, nor not
lawful, but only bad give to every one that which was his right to have. And
this is every christen man's duty to do. But yet further here in to speak, i^
case Christ then had given commandment to the Jews as his people to have
paid tribute to Caesar or to other fore^ Princes, his commandment had been no
more against the Clergy, then against any other of the laytye be he King or
Emperor, if he be a member of Christ's church and a sheep of his flock.

The.xxi. objection.
Christ bad go pay tribute which, should seem to make against his
preeminence to be over al. etc.

The answer.
A man might say it was no more against Peter, then against Christ him self
King and Lord of al, which here of humilitye thus submitted him self for all
our examples whether we be of the clergy or of the Laitye if we be his
Disciples. Christ's words there biddinge Peter take fourth of the fishes mouth
a piece of money etc. were full of high mysteries. How be it here for this matter
it is sufficient to note, that by Christ's words their in the process it
plainlye apperethe that both Christ and Peter were free from painge any
tribute money by any law, but yet to avoid sclaunder and offense for the time
christ did permit that it should be paid.

The.xxii. objection.
When the disciples contended to gether about superioritye, math. 20.
Christ said, among the heathen their kings have rule over them. Mar. 10.
etc. but among you he that will be gretest must be as servant. Lu. 22.


The answer.
By Christ's words it plainelye appears that he would have superioritye
among his Disciples, but yet it should be with all humilitye and godlynes,
and that the superioritye or primacie should be without all ambicion or vain
glory. Christ said not here, their shall be among you none greter then other: he
said not, among my Disciples which profess me, there shall be no ruler no
King or Prince. etc. but he plainlye describes what manner of men they should
be which among christen people ought to bear rule office and authority
whether thoffice and burden be ecclesiastical or polytical: they ought to rule
to ye profit and commoditye of their subjects and not to their own luchre
po^pe or vain glory. For this to rule is counted mere tira^nye which heathen
Princes often use. Among christen men it ought to be only to gods glory and
honor, remembering S. Ambrose, Li. 9. trip. ca 30.
saing to the Emperor Theodosius which was that his subjects were joined
unto him not only by kind and nature, but also by the commen service of one god
which is Master and lord over al, both over ye Prince and his subjects. And
here note that christ in ye former words, sai^g among ye heathe^s their Kings
have power. etc. but it shall not be so among you etc. speaks to al hes flock
as well to ye laity as to ye clergy, yt is to say, to all yt be subjects and
members of his yt none of them should rule, be he Prince or other, after ye
manner of the heathen, which (says Orige^ there upon) only to their own
commodity and vau^tage yea and yt violently often with spoyli^g and killi^g not
knowi^g god, Christus non prohibuit principatum simpliciter sed tiranni cum ac
violentum.
do exercise great tira^ny over their subjects. But thus it shall not be
(says Christ) among you, nor any that profess my name, which know that
there is one god above, Lord over king and subject here in earth, and ye both
Master and servant must give a count as servants together unto yt one lord
and god. Ye therefore when you rule se it be with all humilitye ever loking to
their commodity over whom ye do rule: to the honor and glory of god, and not
to your own pomp or vaineglorye, to your own pride or covetousness.

The.xxiii. objection.
S. Peter forbids any spiritual shepherd to bear any lordelye rule over ye
flock, 1. Pet. 5.
but wills to feed them with all dilygence. etc.

The answer.
That which is in the last respo^sion will serve to answer here unto this
objection. For neither Christ nor Peter forbids rule governance or
primacye, so that it be according to the right rule and order, with all
humility godliness and charity. Both Christ and Peter describe and appoint an
order as well to the civil ruler (being a Disciple of our savior) as to the
ecclesiastical: notwithstanding the ecclesiastical example in ruling, being
more perfect, more high in dignitye, and the eye of the body, requires a
straiter examination with all perfection and godliness, he to govern the sheep
and subdue the wolfes, Haec diuus Barnardus ad euge.
he being in the church of Christ the great priest, ye highest Bushop the
Prince of all ministers, the very air to the Apostels, Abel in primacye, Noe
in governance, in patriarcship Abraham, in order Melchisedech, in dignitye
Aaron, in authority Moises, in judgment Samuel, in power Peter, and in
anointing Christ, one shepherd oboue al, having power to lose and bind.
Wherefore (now to return) a christian ruler whether he be of the clergy or of
the laytye can not, nor ought to bear any lordlye rule after the manner of the
heathen Princes, which like tira^tes use their subjects only rigorouslye to
their own vauntage. But a christians rule and governance over his subjects
is nothing else but a charge and a solicitude or carefulnes over his brethren
in Christ, and a balishippe or stewardshippe over them that be servants
together with him under god the commen lord and Master of all.

The.xxiiii. objection.
No man serving almightye God ought to intermedel him self with seculer
business. etc. says the Apostell.

The answer.
Saying al christen men in baptim do promise and vow to fight under Christ,
the foresaid text does as well bind the laitye as the cleregye being christen
men: so that no christian man ought so to medel with seculer business that he
forgote his spiritual duty: which ought to be ye chiefest care of al
christen men. Moses, Iosue, David, with all godly rulers ever since have had
no impedimentes by their worldly business and earthlye substance, but rather
thereby great aid and help (vsinge them well as they did) to the furtherau^ce
of their spiritual cure and charge.

The.xxv. objection.
Let every soul be subject to y^ higher powers. Romans 13.
etc. paying tribute and toll to whom it is due. etc.

The answer.
Thappostel here as well commands to obey spiritual rulers (giving them
their duties) as seculer. He does not hereby bind ye shepherd to be under the
sheep, nor bind the shepeherde to pay any tribute to any membre of the
mystical body he being the head thereof. I might here now declare how not
only among the christen flock the priests ever were and ought to be fre from
al exactions tools, and tributes, but also among the Heathen people they were
ever free, as ye read in the genesis in the time of famine in Egypt: And
likewise in the oration of Sun machus co^sul of Rome, to Valentinian,
Theodosius, and Arthadius, emperors, which he made against the Christians. So
that Paul did bind no priests by yt text being among christian men to pay
any tribute or tool. Howbeit if priests or bishops of christendom, yea or
the head bishop the pope himself were in a Heathen realm he or they ought to
be subjects to the laws there, and pay tribute or tool: For christ's law
takes no right or duty from any party. And that is it which Paul in the
former text to the Romans does declare: and Peter also, bidding al to be
subject to kings and other etc. every one to his superior? or to whom he is
subject by law or order. And this both Peter and Paul command: for y^ there
were some which thought (but falsely) that christ's law was so free, that if
servants came ones there unto, they should be no more bound to their
masters: and yt al christians were clearly delivered from al Heathen
authority and duties doing. But against these, Paul bids all be subject
and obedient to authority and power and observe and keep all civil ordres
there where they as subjects do inhabit. And this to be referred as well to
the clergy as to the laytye.

The.xxvi. objection.
Be ye subject to kings and other. 1. Pet. 2.
etc.

The answer.
This is sufficiently answered unto in the last responsion.

The.xxvii. objection.
He that does not renounce and forsake all that he has can not be my disciple.
Lu. 14.
etc.

The answer.
This is not only to be observed of the clergy, but also of all christen
people, that is to say, that none ought to prefer any thing to christ or love
any thing above him: but in comparison thereof, cry, fie upon all. Thus our
savior him self does expound it, mat. 19.
saying, he that loves father or mother. etc. more then me, can not be my
disciple.

The.xxviii. objection.
Phocas the emperor more then.500. years after Christ ordained ye see of Rome
to be the head see. Yea and Saynct Gregory then bishop there refused to be
called the universal Bishop over all other Bishops. etc.

The answer.
Against the wicked which went about craftily and proudly contrary to
Christ's order to have set up other sees either above or else not to be
subject to Peter's see at Rome, Phocas the emperor and long before him
Constantine did make laws to establishe Peter's see given him by Christ:
which see by worldly power and schismatical counsels then did seem to have
been in danger notwithstanding Christ's promise, that hell gates should not
prevail against it, that is to lay, neither infidelitye, heresye, nor
schismaticy. And these establishinges of the sea of Rome by Emperors laws to
be chief and head, and al other sees, yea al christian me^ to be obedient
hereunto, was eue^ as Nabuchodonoser king of Babylon saying the wondrous
miracle of preserving the iii. men lyinge in the hot fournes did make a law
that there was no god but the god of Sidrac, Misac, and Abedenago, and that who
so blasphemed against him should dye. Here in Nabuchodonoser did nothing else
but establyshe that which he saw through miracle by god him self to be
required of all men: and so likewise these good emperors did nothing else here
in Peter's seat but up hold that which was given by christ him self from the
beginning. Now to yt of s. Greg* how he refused to be called the universal
bishop. etc. So it is that one named John the^ bishop of Constantinople did
greatly strive to have had his seat chief above Peter's contrary to Christ's
ordinance, and wrote him self the universal bishop: but S. Gregory then
bishop of Rome Peter's successor gretlye withstandinge that wicked man and
most godly defendinge Peter's authorytye among other things says, that
neither Peter nor any of his successors ever wrote him self the universal
bishop: qui vniuersalem se facit episcopum aliis (inquit* episcopatus honore^
detrahit, quen sibi arroga vniuersu^ hae Greg.
which had been to have taken away quite all honor (says he) from all
other bishops: for he having all nothing had been left behind* And therefore
Sayncte Gregory him self wrote, as all the holy bishops of Rome have done
ever since, Gregorye the servant of the servants of god. etc. And herein he
followed the example and biddinge of Christ, which was, that as he came to
serve and not to be served, so would he all his the higher they were so much
more humble and meek ever to be. Notwithstanding almost ever since Peter's
time till Sayncte Gregorye came, the head bishops in the sea of Rome wrote
them selves Bishops of the universal church of Christ (but not universal
Bishops) as appears by Sixtus the first Theophilus, Stephanus, with many
mo: So that it most euidentelye appears that they falselye do lie which say
that by Phocas or by Constantine the sea of Rome was made chyefe and head, and
not before so taken. But yet herin to speak a little further; some affirm that
Peter of humilitye and all ever after even Sayncte Gregorye and other refused
to be called the universal Bishop, but yet every one of them was the
universal Bishop. Yea and sayncte Gregorye him self affirms, that by this
text Pasce oues feed or govern myshepe, cure and charge over ye whole church
was given by christ to S. Peter being prince of all the apostels. Was he not
then the universal bishop, the chief and the head? Saint Gregorye of
humility to avoid ambition refused to be called the universal or general
bishop, nevertheless he was ye head and chief of all. And therefore he neither
would nor ought suffer the bishop of Antioche to be called the universal
bishop. Moreover we may think, yt that holy council of Calcedon would not
have willed sayncte Gregorye to be called the universal bishop, if the holy
ghost had not that willed, yea and that according to gods word.

The.xxix. objection.
Constantine the emperor did call the council at Nicen and was chief therein.

Thanswere.
Constantine that holy emperor being most fervent in Christ's true religion
to destroy the damnable heresy of Arrius at the appointment of the spiritual
fathers (not as by his own authority) ^oke the pain to gether the council
together, Constantinus ex sacerdoth sententia apud v^bem, nicae^ episcopale
concili^ conuocat. li. 10. ccc. hist ca. 1. and. li. 2 trip. ca. 5.
and then last of all placed him self in the council, and y^ yet with license
to be there among them first obtained of the and holy fathers. And even so the
councelles of Ephesime* Consta^tinopolitane and ^al^edo^ holy emperors were
^ou^tedto call being only therein but ministers and executors of ye bishops will,
counselors a^ders and defenders with the swearde.

The.xxx. objection.
Agatho bishop of Rome (in whose time was the.vi. general council) sent to the
emperor being at constantinople to have his election allowed before he would
be consecrate. And this according to the order then accustomed: so did
Vifalianus and S. Gregory also: as it is in the.63. did. in the chapter
beginning Agatho.

Thanswere.
The time was when neither the head bishop ye bishop of Rome, nor other
bishops were chosen without the consent not only of the Emperor and the
magistrates, but also not without the consent of the multitude of the comen
people.

And this the clargye (though it was their only office to chose) did then
suffer, yea, then greatly desired yt it so might be, partelye to the intent
that against the wicked and against tyranny they might the rather be defended
with the temporal sword, and partlye that the people might the rather give
ear to christ's doctrine and ly^e more virtuously having him their head and
shepeherde whom they loved and chose them selves. What meruel was it then that
themperours consent (ye chief of the comen people) was desired in that
election? what makes this against our holy father the popes authority?
Surely nothing at al. Howbeit in process of time many inconveniences rising
herby (as tira^ny sinister affection with diverse other corruptions) it was
lafte to the election of the clergy again: and that even by the consent of the
holy emperors: as ye may read in gracia^ did. 63. and in many other places
mo. Wherefore Hildebra^d (which after was pope named Greg. ye.vii.) answered
unto Otto Archb. of Colen coming from Hen. the.iiii. emperor, that neither
emperor nor any other but only the clargye had any power or Authority in
chosing the bishop of Rome: and that the permission or suffera^ce yt emperors
for certain causes had had therein was iustlye for more lawful and more
reasonable causes taken away.

The.xxxi. objection.
At Nice^ counsel ye bishop of Rome was not present. etc.

The answer.
What then? his authority was there (as it ever was and is in all councels
lawfully gethered) by his legates. Their names at that time were, Victor,
Vincentius, and Osius bishops of Corduba. Yea and there it was declared and
confirmed (not instiTute: for yt was done by Christ) that no general council
should be kept without the consent and authority of the bishop of Rome. So y^
although ye bring never so many councils wherein the bishop of Rome in his own
person was not present, yet his authority and power was never abse^t. And here
note further that in the.iiii. first and chief general councels, whereunto S.
Gregory said he gave credit even as to the.iiii. eua^gelistes, all the
doings were referred to be judged and confirmed by the authority of the
bishop of Rome.

At Nicen counsel (which was the first of ye. iiii.) they did send this epistle
following. Unto the most blessed Siluester bishop of the city of Rome, Osius
bishop of Corduba, Victor, and Vincentius priests of Rome with the rest of ye
bishops.318, send greting in our lord.

What so ever we have ordained in this counsel of Nicen, we desire that it may
be confirmed by the agreement of your mouth. And in the second council which
was the first at Constantinople, all that blessed company there gethered obeid
unto Damasus Byshope of Ro^e he giving sentence against the heretics
Macedoniu^, Sabellium, and Eunomiu^. Likewise at the third chief general
council which was holden at Ephesus Nestorius was condemned by Celestine then
Bushope of Rome being chief judge. And finallye at Chalcedon, the last of
the.iiii. all the council there gethered did write as in most submission, unto
the most holy Bushope of Rome Leo, Byshope of thuniuersal church etc.

The.xxxii. objection.
Ireneus bishop of Lions did resist Victor bishop of Rome eue^ sone after ye
apostels time concerning ye feast of Easter. And Anicetus bishop of Rome even
immediately after thappostels gave place to Policarpus S. John's disciple.

The answer.
Anicetus, then Pius and after them Victor, successors unto peter made decrees
concerning easter. And ye East church first did resist ye order because they
had kept an other custom (which was after the Jews fashion) taken of S.
John evangelist. Then Policarp. bishop of Smirma in ye greek church, yea and
being S. John's disclple also, came to Rome to Anicetus to ask council of the
matter. And here mark ye all that they did was to edifye and not to destroy:
and mark also that Policarpus acknowledged supirioritye when he came to holy
Anicetus Byshope of Rome about the determination of Easter: notwithstanding he
was S. John's disciple, a Bishop, yea and that in the greek church. Again,
after this when Victor that holy martyr about the same matter would have
excominicate (as head of all) the bushoppes of the greek church Ireneus
exhorted him to the contrary lest more trouble discord and disquietnes
thereby might have risen. What makes this objection now against the popes
authority? Ireneus god knows acknowledged al to be subject to that high
authority as ye may read in his work li. 3. ca. 3. et. 4.

The.xxxiii. objection.
Christ came in all pouertye not having (as he says) where to hide his head:
Lu. 9.
his Disciples likewise were called being pore fishers. etc.

The answer.
Christ thereby did no more burden the Clergy then he did ye laitye: yea then
he did kings or Princes being ones subjects to ye ghospel. It was mete that
he and his then should come without all worldly honor riches or seculer
authority both for our example, and also that infidels should have no
occasion to say that he had institute his religion, by violence, by tirannye,
by power, and earthlye goods: as no doubt they would have done, if he had
commen as he might if it had pleased him with all worldly power, he even as
man being king of al kings. Nevertheless in this pouerte it ought not to have
continued, Ecclesia in primis exigna erat: sed lapis excisu^ de monte ex creuit
vehementer in monte^ magnum, adhu^ impleturus vniuersam terram, qui oe^s
introducentur in or^le christi etc
no nor could so have done, saying Christ would have but one body mistical in all christendom, and one head thereof his successor to govern all the rest,
must it not then needs follow yt eue^ in temporal substance both he and al
other under him according to their calling ought to have where with all to
maintene and defend their places? would it not else sone come to pass that all the ministerye should come in contempt, or at the least way smallye be
regarded? yea and would not all thereby shortly come to confusion call to your
remembrance (I pray you) how y^ Christ did send his Disciples twice forth:
ones, long before his passion, and the other time after his resurrection. At the
first sending he bad them go al porely (knowing that al necessaries then should
be provided for them) to with draw all men thereby from Avarice: and that
nothing should be an hindraunce to the settinge fourth of his Ghospel. But at
the second time of sendynge them fourth which was after his resurrection and
ascension (he bidding them tarry till they had received tholy ghost) they were
charged to take all things necessary: yea and shortly after Saint Paul him
self did appoint (being even led with the same spirit of God) that no mo
pore ignoraunte fishers should be made Bishops or priests but that they
should be both doctors and men of good hospitalitye. At the beginnynge all
was raw simple and rude: yea and at that time when the Bushoppes were such as
had been but poor ignoraunte fyshers, then the very Princes and rulers came
and laid al their goods at their fete. If ye now will needs have ye one ye
must then needs have ye other. How be it like as at the beginning of the
world the chief King Adam our first parent was al naked and bare: which
thing can not prove that all Kings since should be as pore: even so in ye
primative church to show the pouertye of the Apostles, can not prove that now
all should continewe in like state: no more then it will follow that a child
newlye borne and wrapped in ignorance, in unbecillytye and want of al
perfection, lackinge knowledge, lackinge stre^ght, not hable to stand speak or
go. etc. should still continewe in the same miserable estate.

Mark well this similitude, saying Paul lickeneth ye mistical body unto ye
natural body of man. This both well prove that al ought not to be brought to
the weak and imperfect estate of the primative church, which yet heretics
for a confusion ever desired to have. But here note also, yt we must not
change that which was then in the primative church but well consider that more
perfeccion, has been still added thereunto. Sit profectus (inquit aug.) fidei ac
religionis no^ permutatio. Again though Christ as man came in all humilite for
our rede^tio^ and for our instruction, yet as man he was king and lord of al,
having so written in the hemme of his garment, king of kings and lord of
lords. And in yt he did nether chose rich princes to be hes discip. nor willed
his disci. after to pass of earthly riches, he declared plainly by fact yt
which he taught in word saying be not careful for erthly things. but first
seek ye kingdom of heaven and al these shall be cast unto you, he yt provides
for the birds of y^ air will also provide for every one according to their
vocation, he yt provided for princes their domynyons provided also for Peter
and his successors their dominions, and he yt provided princes to lay their
goods at Peter's feet, has ever since provided for Peter's see and will do
still to ye end. He bids al be pore in spirit, but as for to be pore in
goods no man is commanded, but rather co^trari sei^g he bade al me^ make
fre^des of ye wicked Ma^mon, and that it is more blessed to give (says he)
the^ to receive. Happy is he who^ god at the^d shall try to have been a good
bayliffe or a faithful stuard here i^ these trifeling things. For having much
no man shall be reproved, but for evil kepinge getting or spending, damnation
shall come. He is most mete to have worldly possessions riches and dignities
which both ca^ and will best bestow them, whether he be of the clergy or of
the laity: but all ye matter of the laytye against the clergy these.xx.
years and mo has ever still been to take away the double honor that Paul
speaks of and then it would sone follow that al godliness should shortly
after cease seeing honos alit arts, and as Martial says. Sint mecenates no^
desunt flacci marones, ver giliumque tibi vel tua rura dabu^t.

The.xxxiiii. objection.
Christ came not to bear rule but to be in all subjection, and he would his
Disciples to follow his stepes, both Peter and other. Think that Christ's
words were not contrary to his doing. etc.

The answer.
Christ came first most humbly for our erudicion, but afterward he boldlye
said, all power is given to me both in heaven and in earth. God the father then
did exalt him causing al in heaven hell and earth to bend and bow unto him:
and then he gave to his disciples power to work miracles to forgive sins.
etc. Then he appointed Peter to be porter of heaven gates: then he made him
chief shepherd over al his flock etc. Yea, and yet beside this Christ in the
time of al his subjection and basing him self would be taken and counted to be
Master over his flock: ye call me^ Master (says he) and so I am. etc. What
then (I pray you) makes it against Christ's Mastershipe or superiority that
he so to teach humility humbled him self? yea or what proves that lesson or
that example against Peter's primacie? Surely nothing at all.

The.xxxv. objection.
Beatus Rhenanus gethereth thus of Tertulian. Tertulan says he) counted the sea of Ro^e among the chief sees, but he did not say, it was the chieffest of
al. Therefore he believed not that it was the chiefest of al.

The answer.
Rhenanus was not counted in all points catholic and that iustlye. Therefore
it makethe small force for his collection. How be it if he were either happy
or blessed (according to his name) or else had my lerninge in tharte of dialecte
he would not collect or gether his argument in the negative per locum
abauthoritate. The philosopher did not say this ergo the philosopher thought
not this to be true? S. Paul did not say tholye ghost proceeded from the
father and the son, therefore Saint S. Paul thought not or believed not yt
tholy ghost did proceed from ye father and ye son? A wise reason and well
releshed.

The.xxxvi. objection.
Ephesians. the.ii. all the apostels are showed to have like dignitye, where Paul
says yt the ephesians be builded upon the foundacio^ of the apostels. etc.
And Sayncte John says the church has.xii. foundacions and in them the names
of the xii. apostels written. Apo. 21.
etc.

The answer.
Sayncte Hierome says that upon the appostelles the church was builded, which
indede was only builded upon christ as upon ye chief rock, and under christ
pri^cipally upon pet christ by his own power vpholdeth ye bylding and is ye
chief head as he is the chief light ye chief shepherd. etc. and under him he
appointed Peter next in dignitye, notwithstanding all the Apostels in a manner
of speaking be called the foundacio^s.

The.xxxvii. objection.
In the sixth council at Cartage it was decreid that no appeal ought to be to
Rome, but ought to be determined with in the country.

The answer.
We read in Socrates historye that there was a determination made for
constitucions prouincial at ye council of Co^sta^tinople. Li. 9. trip. ca. 13.
And the same be still allowed and approved. But there be none of the^ which be
to ye derogation of the sea of Rome.

For there it was decreed also, that next to Rome as chief Constantinople
should have his see. Now if ye greek church decreed (as ye say) at yt counsel
to have al causes without appellation to Rome, to be finished there wtin ye same
province, we must either say that it was to be understood in inferioure
causes, or else yt, that restraint notwtstanding, they still did acknowledge
their obedine^ce to ye see apostolic of Rome. For else how could this their
doing agree with ye appellations had, from yt beginning (as appears in ye v.
probatio^) to ye see of Rome? Therefore these council being catholic did decree
nothing against ye faith of the universal church observed from ye beginning
both in the Greek and latin church.

The.xxxviii. objection.
In the.vi. and.vii. article of the council Nice^ it was decreed y^ in thorient
the bishop of Antioche should be chief: in Egypt ye bishop of Alex: about Rome
the bishop of Rome: and in Jury the bishop of Jerusalem.

The answer.
Histories from time to time have fully declared yt the sea of Rome ever has
had ye preemine^ce since Peter's martyrdom over al christendom. Look in hist.
tripertita. li. 4. ca. 6. ix. xii. 14* 19. 23. 24. 29. et li. 5. ca. 29.
Therefore all the determinacion that was had in Nice^ counsel must needs stand
and agree therewt as no doubt it does, if it be truly applied. For if ye mark
well Osius bishop of Corduba in ye absence of the bishop of Rome. was the
chief in ye counsel, only because he was i^bassador there in ye place of ye
bishop of Rome. Also at yt time it was decreed yt ye.3. patriarchal sees should
keep their dignytyes without any derogacion to the sea of Rome which then was
declared to be ye head over al. And likewise in the great council of
Lateranense under the most holy father Innocentius the third were established
the old and ancient priueleges of the patriarchall sees of Constanti. Alexan.
Antioche and Hiern. So yt they and every of the^ first receiving ye paul at
Rome as of ye chief and head of all might afterward communicate the same to
all other accordinglye being under their jurisdiction: and also might carry
their crosses mall places of christendom Rome only except, and where the pope
or his legate should be present. The priuelege also of the sea of Rome to be
above all other patriarchall sees (as to whom all other owe obedience, eue^
from the beginning) ye have plainly declared in ye decrees distinct.80.

The.xxxix. objection.
The sea of Jerusalem in the council of Constantinople (as ye have li. 9.
tripert. cap. 14.) was declared to be the mother of al churches.

The answer.
As ye have in the same chapter, that counceil acknowledges Rome to be the
chief, and that Constantinople should be the chief see next to Rome, and yt
jerusalem there had a great priuelege granted: for that it was the mother of
all other churches (as it is there put in the margente) that is to say, the
mother and first in time, but not in dignity. As is further declared in ye
answer to the.xviii. objection.

The.xl. objection.
The.xii. appostels did chose the.vii. deaco^s, Act. 6.
and not Peter only. Wherefore it seems there by that Peter's authority is not
above the rest.

The answer.
As for chosing inferior ministers, it is done by eueri bishop in his dioces:
as it has been ever from the begi^ning to this day, Paul's example agreing
therewith: yea and at that time they used to have the consent of ye multitude,
because as Paul says they ought to have good testimonye of them which be
without.

The.xli. objection.
All the apostels did put their hands upon the.vii. deacons. Act. 6.


The answer.
That was done for yt through the prayer of them al together rhey might receive
more abou^dant grace.

Howbeit an other answer to these two objections may be this that Peter by
his priuelege might alone have chose^ Mat. and also ye.vii. deacons but he
would not for sundry causes: one, lest he thereby should have been thought to
have given and co^ferred grace of him self: an other, for humility: the
third, for to keep unity and peace: the forth, to follow christ's example and
doctrine which bade the higher you be so much humble your self the more:
the fifte and last, thereby to give honor and reverence to the holy councels.
Yea and here note that saying Peter was not ordained to put in execution the
primacye but after Christ's death and passion therefore because of humilitye
Peter was loathe at the beginning to take his authority upon him but in manner
as half against his will: so that by little and little his authority daily
increased more and more.

The.xlii. objection.
The pope was never ruler of all the world: nether in Inde Persidia, Egypt. etc.

The answer.
What then? no more is he received in Bohem, nor in part of Germany. Is he not
therefore the head of the whole church? yes truly. He is received of all that
be neither infidels heretics nor scismatiks: which be only conuenticles of the
devil, and not members of christ's church. But he shall be head of all, when
that saying of Paul shall be fulfilled, Romans 11.
that all the rest of the jews shall be saved, Ioa. 10.
and yt there shall be of al one shepecote and one shepeherde.

The.xliii. objection.
S. Hierome writing ab Eua grium does seem to make Bishops and priests al
equal. etc.

The answer.
Though that were most true (as it is most false) yt Bishops and pristes were al
equal: yet does not ye prove yt there is noheed of the church. Howbeit to answer
to S. Hiero. he in that epistel does extolle so highly the office of a priest,
thereby to suppress a certain deacons arrogancye which preferred him self to
priests. Writers often use for their purpose to do, as a man that would make a
crooked rod straight, does bend it as far the contrary way: And so did
Sayncte Hierome in that epistle, where as in other places he both declares the
office of a Byshope and ye office of a priest to be diverse (ye one to be a
name of age, Hiero. ad rusticum.
the other of dignity) and also highly sets fourth the preemynence and
authority of the high Bishope the head of al: as ye have in the 32. probatio^,
and also in ye answer to ye first and.44. objection.

The.xliiii. objection.
Some men have stoutly affirmed yea and set fourth in print that Peter was
never at Rome. Therefore though Peter were head Bushoppe, yet ro^e ought not to
be ye head see.

The answer.
Saint Hierom upon ye first chapter to the Romans declares that saint Peter
was at Rome Bushoppe and preacher there: but what should I speak of. S.
Hierome alone seeing Linus, Ignatius, Dionisius, Egesip. Ireneus, Tertulian,
Eusebius, Papias, and Atha. this plainli declare with many mo old writers?
Linus in epistola ad orientales: Ignatius in ye third epistle to Tharsenses et
epistola. 11. ad to. egesippus. li. 3. de exci. Hierom. ca. 2. Iren. li. 3.
cap. 1. and. 3. tertul. li. 4. co^. mer. and. li. de praes. Her. Euse. li. 2.
ec. hist. ca. 14. 15. 25. papias. Saint Iho^s scholar affirms ye same and so
does Atha. and Ambrose with other.

Tertulia^ li. de. praescrip. haer. says y^ S. Peter suffered martirdo^e at
Rome, eue^ ye same kind of death yt christ did. S. Ciprian names ye church of
Ro^e peter's see, and calls it the principal church whereoute the unity does
spring Li. i. epist. epis, iii. ante calcem. S. Amb. also bearethe testimonye
hereof, saying, we think it was not without a cause that tholy apostels Peter
and Paul did suffer martridome i^ one day in one place, and under one tira^d:
In one day yt they might come together unto christ at one time: one place yt
Rome should lack neither of the^, under one persecutor, y^ either might feel
like crudeliti. The day was appointed them for their merit: the place for their
glory: the persecutour for their virtue. What place did they suffer in? In the
city of Rhome: which was the chief and head city of all the nations: So
that there should rest the head of all holiness, where before was the head
of al supersticion, and there the princes of ye churches should remain where
before ye princes of ye Ge^tils did dwell. Haec amb. in co^. in natali petri et
pauli. co^. 67 Again S. Ambr. says Peter went forth in the night and saw
Christ mete him goinge into ye city to who^ Peter said lord whither go
you? christ answered, I go to Rome there to be crucified again: And the^ Peter
knew yt christ's au^swer did perteine to his crucifyinge or death. Haec ambr.
li. 5. epistolaru^ in or^one co^. auxentiu^. And this sam i^ effect with much
more has Egesippus (li. ^. excid hiera. cap. 2) an old writer eue^ sone after
ye apostels time* yea and he being a Grecia^ which would have been loath to have
testified any thing to the glory of Rome if the very truth had not compelled
him y^ to have done.s. Hierome likewise ( in catalogo illust. viro rum in
titulo pe^. intitulo pauli, in titulo philonis) says Peter prince of the
apostles after that he had been bishop in Antioch etc. came to Rome the second
year of Claudius the emperor and kept ye see there.xxv. years even unto the
last year of Nero, under whom he being crucified did suffer mertirdom. Orosius
thistoriographer affirms ye like li. 7. ca. 4. and. v. And so does Euse. li.
ii. ca. xiiii. and etia^ in li. croni. And holy Bid our cou^trema^ in his
cronacle testifies ye same of s. Peter. s. Hie, again says in the place
recited Philo fell into great acquai^ta^ce and love with Peter in the city of
Rome etc. Ireneus moreover (scholar to s. John's disc. Pol.) li. 3. ca. 1. and.
3. shows that peter was bishop i^ rome and so do chriso. and hes abbreuiator
the ophilat in co^mentariis epistolae poster. ad Timo. Yea, and here now final
lie to conclude s. Peter him self in his first epistle and.v. cha. speaking
under ye name of Babilo^. (for so he calls there rome because of superstition
and idolatry then used amongst ye infidels) shows yt he wrote yt his epistle
from rome: as al authors do declare, which do interpret that epistle of
Peter: and so do Tertu. li. con. Iudeos page 128. Saint Hierome in catalogo
viroru^ illustr, titulo Marci: papias disciple to S. John eua^g. and bishop of
Jerusalem: and Eusebius li. 2. ec. his. ca. 15. with many mo. I need not here
to bring in certain germayn writers which expou^ding the fornamed place of
Peter affirm him there to speak of Rhome under the name of Babylon (where not
without great blasphemy often they rail against all godliness) and yet they
be not ashamed to say and write: yea and put forth in printe thousand volumes
wherein they deny yt Peter ever was at Rhome.

The.xlv. objection.
Christ bade peter feed hes flock saying: Ioa. 21.
Pasce but this word pasce be tokeneth service and not preeminence. It is (I
say) a word of service and not preeminence.

The answer.
Christ in yt place used.ii. words: twice he says (...) which is pasce
feed, but after he adds (...) which is both rege et pasce rule or govern,
and feed. psa. 2.
And so in the Ps. god bids rule them with an irne rod: Act. 20.
and in ye Acts Paul wills them to take heed to them selves and ^o all the
flock among whom ye holy ghost had made them bishops to rule ((...)) the
church of god. 1. pe. 5.
Also in Peter's epistle, rule ye the church of Christ (though it be feed in
the damnable translacions) (...). Therefore now to conclude, saying every man
knows that to rule or govern is thoffice of superiors heads and rulers, we
may well and truly answer, that to Peter and to all his successors was
given not only commandment to feed but also to rule his flock. 1. Cor. 4.
And for this says Paul (which was but an inferior to Peter) will ye that I
shall come to you with the rod of correction? 2. Timo. 4.
Rebuke (says he to Timothe) and check in season and out of season. But of
this ye have more in ye.2. probation.

The.xlvi. objection.
Ezechias that good king as having high authority over all given unto him
eue^ by god, 2. par. 28.
said harken o ye Levites and priests, be ye hallowed, and make ye pure and
clean the house of our lord, put away al wickedness and all uncleanness from the
holy place. etc.

The answer.
There were in Judah by gods permission many wicked kings which did most
filthyly pollute gods house with Idolatrye, and but few good, which with all
their might did seek gods honor. Among which few king Ezechias was one of
the chyefe. But if ye mark the text well, ye shall not find that he did usurp
or take upon him the priests office: but with his temporal sword did
defend it in all godly order. etc.

The.xlvii. objection.
Mokst commonly at al times causes of heresies have been debated before
Emperors kings and princes, both in this Realm and also in other places of
christendom. As appears euidentlye by many chronicles.

The answer.
Good Kings and Princes have often made laws and ordained sharp statutes to
preserve the churches right therewith, as mainteners and defendours thereof: but
not as chief authors or heads of the church.

The.xlviii. objection.
Kings have granted many priueleges preeminences and immunities to the
clergi: where by appears plainlye the Kings authority to be above theirs. etc.

The answer.
Thereby appears plainlye that all such godly Princes were ever redye with
all their power to defend Christ and his church: and with all their indeuore
to set up his glory.

The.xlix. objection.
In tholde testamente the priests were in subjection to the high Princes. And
first to speak of Aaron: he ever took Moises for hes sovereign lord.

The answer.
Moses was a figure of Christ, as Aaron was a figure of Peter his vicare: yea
and both Moses and Aaron were priests, Psa. 98.
as ye prophit testifies ( Moses and Aaron in sacerdotibus eius) so that to
prove Aaron under Moises makes nothing against my purpose, no more then to
prove yt Peter was under christ, should make against it.

The.l. objection.
Achimelech the high priest used all subjection when he spoke to king Saul,
^. Reg. 22.
which caused him notwithstanding he was the high priest, to be kilde,
because he had asked council of god for David.

The answer.
Achimelech (as authors do testifye) did signify Christ, Liranus.
being betrayed and put to death by Does signifienge Judas. 1. Reg. 22.
His condemnation was most unjust, and Saul in that fact most wicked and
cruel. The people disobeyed the kings commandment therein (as it is in the
text.i. reg. xxii. and would not kill the high priest when he bade them,
knowing it to be contrary to gods will, as Rabbye Solomon testifies. But then
wicked Doech a stranger borne, did kyl him, and that contrary to gods will.
Now in that ye say the high priest used al subjection in speakinge to the
wicked king: that surely was no meruel: he spoke for his life, which he
perceued then to stand in great ieoperdi being in the tirantes hands.

The.li. objection.
Did not Solomon put Abiathar the high priest to death? 3. Reg. 2.
would he have done that, if he had not been in authority above him.

The answer.
He neither put him to death, nor caused him, vir mortis es id e^t, morte
dignus. Lira. 3, reg. 2.
to be put to death. But he put him forth of his great office and dignity: to
signifye ( inquit glos. iii. reg. ii.) that the Jews should not be utterly
destroyed though their pristehode was ended, but that toward the end of the
world they should come into Christ's flock, and so cause to be one shepecote
and one shepherde. That expulsinge of Abiathar the high priest was not done
without the spirit of prophecye, and that the scripture of God (i. Reg. ii)
spoken of Hely the priest might be fulfilled, where it was said to him that for
the wickedness of his sons Ofne and Phinees all his posteritye, should lose
thoffice of the high priestehode. And here note that Aaron the high priest
had.ii. sons Eleazar and Ithamar, and that to Eleazar and his posteritye that
high office by gods oppointme^t did perteine. How be it through offenses
committed, god turned it for a time unto Ithamar and after to Hely and last of
all to Abiathar of the same line: but now in the beginni^g of Salomo^s reign
God turned it from Abiathar (which came of Ithamar) to Sadoch which came of
Eleazar, to whom and to whose posteritye god appointed first the highpriestes
office. Mark well his secrettes be very priuey both in ponyshinge for sin,
and also in those things that were done in figure. Here by putti^g Abiathar
forth of the high Priests rowme and putting in Sadoch was signyfyed the
putting away the leuiticall priesthod, and the institutinge the new after the
order of Melchisedech. And this figure S. Paul does speak of Hebrews the.vii.

The.lii. objection.
King Alex. wrote to Ionathas the high priest saying, Mac. 10.
we have now this day ordained thee to be the high priest over thy people.
etc.

The answer.
Alex. was an heathen king the son of Antiochus, now like to be greatly
troubled with war against Demetrius, and therefore was glad to send for aid to
ye Jews: and so send to y^ high priest Ionathas which came of the line of
Aaron as did Judas Mathias and other: So that he now received not this high
office of the heathen king which had no power to give it him: although hereby
appears the good will that the heathen king bare toward him, and yt he would
defend him in his office to the vttermoste: and therefore in sign thereof he
send him diverse Princelye gifts, saing this day have we ordened the to be
high priest, that is to say, we by all our power and strength do promise to
ratifye, streghthen and defend the in thy high office. etc. yea and beside
this suppose yt king Alex. had had authority and power in deed to have chose^
Ionathas the high priest, he being ones iustlye chosen, what had that been
against his high priestehode? surely nothing at all. No more then it were
against the authority of our holy father the Pope if the college of
Cardinales after his election had send unto him being absent, sainge, this
day we have chosen your most holy father hode to be the highest paster over
al christendom. etc.

How be it I may give one answer to all the.v. last objections and say that
in tholde law they lived fleshlye and the seculer power was then ye higher it
was then called ye priestly kingdom because ye priesthod then did depend upon
ye kingdom: but now contrariwise it is called a kinglye priestehode in ( i.
Petri. ii.) the priestehoode being now ye chief and the spiritual power above
ye Carnal. And this is now required in ye time of grace.

The.liii. objection.
As tholde law was a figure of the new, so was ye old priesthode a figure of
the priest hode of the ghospel: but ye priesthode in the old was subject to
the power and dignity of Kings therefore it must be so now.

The answer.
The similitude is not like as appears in the last respo^sion.

The.liii. objection.
There is not one word in scripture ye makes any men^ion of the Byshope of
Rome. Whereby then would he have his authority?

The answer.
The place gives not authority to the Byshope but the Byshope to the place.
Ye have in scripture yt Peter by priuelege had ye keys given to him being
chief of al other (as it is fully declared) and that Rome was at his death
establisshed to be the sea for all his posteritye. Read the answer to ye.18.
objection.

The.lv. objection.
Peter was the chief only because of his confession, that is to say,
chiefest in virtue, in preachinge, and in ruling affections. etc.

The answer.
No doubt it is true yt Christ would his elect to excel in virtue, in
preachinge, and in rulinge affections etc. but yt Peter's preeminence did not
consist here in appears partlye by that. S. John being a virgin was more pure
then Peter, and every other of Thappostels as feruaunt as he, and as diligent
in preaching as he, and partly by that, if this were true, that Peter's
superiority did only consist here in, then our faith concerning the unity
could not by succession have so long continued as it has done still in the sea of Rome. Read the.lvii. responsion.

The.lvi. objection.
The Disciple is not greater then his Master, but Christ was in all
subjection: how then can it be that Peter was superior or chief of all other?

The answer.
Christ was superior and chief over al, and yet of humilitye (to teach the
Disciples yt the higher they were, the more low they ought ever to be in heart)
he declared still in his own person al subjection.

The.lvii. objection.
In scriptures there is no mencio^ made of Peter's supremaci.

The answer.
Not as heretics wraste the scriptures: but there is mention often and many
times in scripture of Peter's supremacye as christian people take ye scriptures.
As it is both in ye probacio^s and also in sundry responsions in this book.

The.lviii. objection.
In diverse consideracions a man may be head and chief, and yet i^ other
relatio^s or respects inferior and subject. ye chief tailor, ye chief
paynter, the chief physician or surge^ here in London within ye parishes where
eueri of them does dwell, are but taken as neyghbourlike, and may chance, as
much inferiors, without a^^i such preemine^ce which they have among their own
companies in their own halles: so Peter chief and first in placing, chief in
co^sta^cye and stedfastnes of mind, chief in ferue^tnes of deuocio^, chief
in preaching and godliness, but not chief or first in preemine^ce here in ye
world to be above princes. etc.

The answer.
Peter in yt respect or co^sideracio^ yt he is christ's vicar and chief head
underneath him here in earth, so is he head over all ye be of the same
occupatio^ yt he is of (because the similitude depends so^what upon crafts
or occupatio^s) that is to say, of christ's religion. He is chief over al y^
profess christ, whether he be tailor, paynter, phisicio^ or surgen, yea
whether he be king or emperor: not y^ Peter does challenge any seperiortye over
an emperor or king because he is emperor or king, or over a phisicio^ or
paynter because he is physician or paynter, but in respect and in consideracion
al they be christian me^, so are they al under Peter: like as ye head phisician,
the head tailor, the head paynter, and head surge^ (as it is i^ thobiectio^)
will ever require, and that by right all that be of the same craft science or
occupation, to be under the^, and that without any respect or co^sideracio^ to
riches or poverty, to wisdom or ignorance

The.lix. objection.
Oh how many scriptures have been wtin these.xxii. years brought and cited
against the popes authority? The answer.

Ever when ye hear any scripture alleged (says Orige^ upon Mathue) contrary
to yt which ye universal church observes believe the^ not. Give no credit to
the^, for they would but deceive you with false allegatio^s or false applicatio^s
of scriptures contrary to ye meaning of tholy ghost. Think yt scripture is no
scripture, if the true intent and meaning be not there: yea if therein ye follow
not ye authority of the church. For how shall we know (I pray you) that
Moses wrote al yt is in hes.v. books, seeing we never saw his hand writing?
Yea and though we had seen it, how could we know it to be his hand he being
dead so long ago? or if we knew all this, how were we sure yt all that he wrote
was true, and yt god spoke unto him? And ye same is likewise to be demanded of
all the prophets writings. If ye say christ bare testimony of Moses, of ye
law, and of yt prophets, then I ask further, how ye know by christ's
testimonye yt these which we read be Moses or the prophets writings although
we grant y^ by christ's testimony Moy. and ye proph. were true and faithful?
Yea yet further how know ye yt christ bare testimonye of Moses and ye
prophets who^ ye never heard preche nor teach? If ye say by ye eua^gelistes,
the^ I turn again and ask how ye know these to be ye ghospels of Mathue,
Mark or Luke, seeing ye never saw their hands writing? And if ye had seen
the^, yet ye knew the^, not: but suppose ye know them how do ye wot yt all is
true yt they wrote, seeing eueri man may be deceived, yea specially Mark and
Luke which wrote but of here say, and did never see christ? If ye say, they
wrote being taught by tholy ghost, then ye same doubt comes again, how ye
know tholy ghost taught the^, or how know ye yt these be their writings
without corruption or mixture? Ca^ ye by any menes save or defend thautority of
ye scripture, but only by thauthority of ye ecclesiastical traditions? surely
by none other. Ye know which be the canonical scriptures, and ye true sense
thereof, only by ye testimonye of ye church understand and received by
succession of the fathers from ye beginni^g til this our time. Dionise,
Clement, Policarpe, Ignatius, Tertulia^. Orige^, Ciprian, Athana. Basil.
Hilari, Chriso. Ambrose, Hierome and Austine with al holy me^ ever since had
never other rule to know ye truth of scripture by, but only yt come^
profession and co^se^t of all the fathers ever in their time by succession
linking together their testimonies for ye full knowledge of ye truth. This is
was and ever shall be ye very pillar and fou^dacio^ whereunto we must needs lein.
So yt we have received ye truth of ye ghospel by ye ecclesiastical tradicio^
rather the^ by writing: yea and ye certitude of our religion and sure faith
has not depe^ded from ye beginning upon ye authority of ye gospels written, but
rather co^trarywise ye authoriti of ye gospel written has depe^ded upon the
certitude of our religion. etc. Paul when he said if an angel from heaven
preche any other ghospel the^ these, cursed be he, did not mean of any ghospel
written, which the^ had no authority i^ ye church, though sone after ye gospels
written for certain causes, receued their authority of ye church And here is now
to be noted yt we read in Eusebius how that Serapion that learned and holy
bishop of Antioche said, Li. 6. cap, 10.
we receive Peter and other of thappostels even as christ, Serapio^ the viii.
Bish. of Antioche wtin xl. years after S. John Euang. he was borne.
but we refuse such things as be falsely written under their names, because we
have no such tradicio^ of the church. etc. This was ye rule then to know
things by, when they ever received al as it were by hand one of an other. The^
they perceived yt thauthority of ye ecclesiastical tradicyo^ exte^ded much
further then the authority of ye ghospel written: and yt in all doubtful cases it
must give se^te^ce and judgment which is truth and which is falsily. So yt
here now to conclude though heretics wrast never so mani textes of scripture
against the popes authority, it makes no force, nor proves any thing against
our purpose. And yet moreover hereby appears y^ though there were no
scripture at al to prove the popes authority by (as there be very mani) yet yt
made nothing contrary hereunto, seeing that by successession it has been still
received eue^ from Peter's time hitherto.

The.60. objection.
The pope will suffer princes to kiss his fete and so honor him, but thangel
would receive no such honor of.s. John: Apo. 19. et. 22*
as ye read in thappocalips twice.

The answer.
As for yt of thau^gel, s. John he ring before how yt ye angel had said unto
him (as in the person of Jesus christ speaking) Ego (...) alpha et omega. I am
ye first and the last, thought him to be god: and therefore would have given
unto hi^ gods honor, which thangel justly forsook. Also the aungel seeing Christ
incarnate. and ma^s nature so highlye exalted, could not abide to have man to
honor him, though it were but only with the honor due unto a creature: where
as before in thold testament tha^gels oftimes suffered men to honor them. What
makes this then for your purpose? for sothe nothing at al. But now to answer
to ye kissing ye speak of: Jesus Christ came not to break any order, nor to
pull ki^nges authorites and powers from them nor to make the^ subjects.
Nevertheless these we must think to be true yt a king comes not to christ, to
hes church, or to ye minister under christ, as a king, or because he is a king,
but as a christenma^, and because he is a christen man. And in yt respect of
hes coming and hu^bling him self (as a lively member of Christ's spiritual
kingdom) his diadem, hes Princelye crown, or worldly scepter is not thought
upon. Thus a king comes to ye altar to offer, kissing ye pristes phamel in
his hand, kneling down, or making low curtousy, kneling also to receive
absolucion at the priests hand being but hes chaplayne. This gere a King or
Prince would not willingly with al humility do (as experience shows they do
i^ deed) if there were not a further consideration in the matter. And even ye
like answer is to be made unto ye kissing of the shoe ye speak of. where as
al godliness and humility may be in both the parties y^ one in doing his duty
with all subjection even as to Jesus christ, the other in receiving as christ's
vicar yt due reverence being at ye same tune the more humble and meke in heart,
beholdynge on the one side his own frailty and unworthiness, and on the other side
thautority and high power of christ and his spowse.

The.61. objection.
S. Peter the.x. of thactes would no^ (...) Cornelius to honor (...) the pope
will all men to (...) him.

The ^^^^were.
Sumwhat is answered here unto in the last responsio^ but yet further to
speak, Cornelius there as to Peter him self with out further consideration
would have exhibet such great adoracion which Peter with al humility then
refused: yea and as some authors affirm it was godly honor which Cornelius
there as of symplyty not of iniquyty would have given unto Peter, which he
justly forsook, saying, I am a man as you art. etc. Moreover then in the
beginning things were not established, they were but raw and not come to
their perfection. Would ye therefore have them so to have continued style Should
the babe or child still continue in infancy? should it never learn to
understand, speak or go?

The.62. objection.
In times past the pope did suck out of this realm by avarice insaciable,
i^numerable, su^mes of money yearly to the great exhausting of the same.
Therefore away with him, let him have no more a do here.

The answer.
God which of his liberal goodness se^deth al yt we have, never causes pouertye
for payinge our duties* How pore the realm has been and yt daily more and
more since ye small duties justly paid to Rome (small I say and y^ most truly
if they be compared to ye intolerable exactions rauenously extorted since) were
lafte of, and how rich and wealthy it was before, every man may easily see,
and yt al was the very hand and plage of god. Let us pay to all yt we ough,
and yt with a fra^ke heart: we shall be never the porer for paying our duties.

God sends al and yt most liberally to al such as with godliness endeavor the^
selves to do their duties in all things. But as for ye wicked, ye oppressers,
and wtholders of duytes, he justly withdraws hes liberal hand from the^
se^di^g often great plages upon the^ and yt wonderfully far co^trari to al
their expectacio^s. I remember I heard i^ a sermon at Paul's about ye time
abbeis were suppressed a man of great and high authority say these words in
effect. (...).
Good people be not offended with putting down of abbeis, but consider ye
manyfold commodities ye shall receive thereby. In times past ye crown of England
was (if I might be so bold to speak (says he) but a beggarly crown: here
after it shall be a crown imperial. In times past, oh how many taxes,
fiftenes, lones, subsidies. etc. have ye paid? Hereafter you shall never pay
more. In tunes past, fish and whitmeat could not come abrod for being
supersticiosly devoured in abbeis and religious houses: but here after all this
gere shall be most plentiful. etc. Consider now these.iii. lies: consider the
success ever since: consider the oppression and not paying the small duties I
spoke of, and cry the hand of god upon us, the hand of God upon us, all these
miserable years before the Queen's coming, whose reign Jesus long prosper
over us.

The.63. objection
The pope has by him self and his adherentes since he and his authority was
put fourth of this Realm, gone about to stir up al christian nations against
us, to destroy us with the sword, and has cursed us etc. ca^ he then be gods
servant? should we regard any such? does not good abhor ye sowers of
discord? Prouer. 6.
be not the sterers to murder the children of the deuel? Roma. 16.
god is not god of dissencion but of peace, Ioa. 8.
says Paul. 1. Cor. 14.


The answer.
The Pope has still used for our cursinges to surre^der blessings, and for
our blaspheminges against him has still made supplicacions and most earnest
prayers to God for us, that we might have grace to return again into Christ's
flock: which now (thanks be to Jesus christ and Queen Mari) we have
obtained. How be it I believe yt we ought our selves (if we be catholyke)
rather to have desired utter destruction of our bodies being inuadyd with foren
enemies (enemies to our scisme and heresy but lovers to our souls) and to have
said lord help ye innocent, lord save our souls, lord revenge us and deliver
us from scisme by fire or sword. etc. rather (I say) the^ to have still
continued i^ scisme in errors, in here is. in obstina. and blindness daily
proceeding (for so they termed it) in darkness, and wadinge still further and
further toward ye devil death hell and da^natio^. Yea and may not ye prayer of
the holy saints (apoc. ye v^) reue^g (o lord) our blood so^thi^g serve to be
applied to this our purpose? And moreover, might not the Popes holiness iustlye
have given forth ye se^te^ce of exco^municatio^ or cursing against al obstinate
schismatikes and heretics in these realm he being Gods chief minister here
in earth? yea or might he not iustlye have ince^sed christian Princes against
us? god bids yt al they which will not here ye church (that is to say, not
obey the chief rulers thereof) shall be taken as ethnikes and publicans, and as
a canker or roten flesh shall be cut of (says Saint Ambrose) for fear of
corrupting more of the body: Mat. 18.
He that will not obey ye high priest, Ambro. ps. 118. con. 8
by the sentence of the judge shall dye for it, yt wickedness florishe not in ye
midst of the church, Deuteronomy. 17.
the wolf must be driven away or killed lest the flock should be devoured.
Immedicabile vulnus ense rescidendum.
Yea and it shall be the duty and office of christian Princes (says S. Austin
upon John) to use the sword against heretics, knowinge yt Saint Paul
wissheth that al such as with schism or heresy trouble the flock of Christ
should be cut of: Gal. 4.
not (says he) that we should wisshe any to perish, but be sorry as David
was for Absalon, if it might otherwise be remeded: how be it quietness will not
be gotten unto ye house of David but by the death of Absalon. Therefore eue^ as
god bids let the blasphemer be brought forth and put to death so ought al
christindome to say by all obstinate heretics: Yea and as it is in Hieremie,
cursed be he yt in this case witholdeth his sword from blood sheding, hier. 48.
seeing we have so many examples i^ scripture to declare how god helped Abraham
Moises Iosue and other ever to shede the blood of the infidels, and bad by
Samuel destroy Amalech: 1. Reg. 15.
shall not we then think ye like to be done to scismatikes and obstinate
heretics gods extreme enemies? And therefore where ye say ye sterers to
murder be the children of the devil (thereby to bring the Popes holiness and
other in to contempt as murderers or sekers of blood) who so does seek blood
as to revenge his owue cause is the child of ye devil, but who so seeks to
have gods enemies punished which be obstinate in infidelitye in heresy or in
schisms, he seeks not hes own glory but gods glory, he reue^geth not his
own quarrel but gods quarrel. To be remiss, to be full of lenity, to be ientil
and cold, in your own cause, i^ your own injury and wrong sufferi^g, is both
godly and virtuous: but to be tongue tied in gods cause, and so to suffer hes
glory to be diminished (as it has been greatly in these realm wtin these.xxii.
years) is both wicked and damnable. Also where ye say god abhors so wers of
discord etc. do ye think them to be sowers of discord, which being gods high
officers do seek means to punish abominable vices, scismes, and heresies? well
applied by my fay and like a clerk.

The 64. objection.
How can me^ in this realm take or receive again ye pope, seeing al their
oaths have been to the contrary? shall plainlye wilful periurye be committed?

The answer.
Unlawful oaths are not to be kept. And here note yt in oaths maki^g ye matter
ought rather to be weyed and regardyd then y^ manner or form. If ye swear
never so often yt thing that ye ought not to do, ye oath is to be broken. An
oath can not be the bond of wickedness. No man is bound to perform an unlawful
oath, seeing an oath ca^ not bind a man to sin.

The.65. objection.
The church of christ is unknown and al they which be of yt church be only
known to god. For none be of that church but only the godly which are pure
without spot: thou art all fair (says god to his church in the canticles) with
out spotte or wrincle says Paul (ephesians. v) ye which were ones darkness now are
light in our lord: what agreement is there between the light and darkness? (ii.
cor. vi.) with many textes mo for the same purpose. But if the body can not
be known, how shall y^ head be known? And if none be of the church but ye
good, who be then of the church and where be they? Every man knows that ye
smaler number is ever ye better: in which number neither the Pope nor the
infinite multitude i^ christendom which takes his part can be counted. For
their number is the greter and not the smaller.

The answer.
Among christenmen ever since ye name of christians (Act. the.xi.) first
began, the greater number, was always counted the catholic sort, and such as
ran astraye (being still the less number) were had ever for lost sheep, as
S. John says (i. Ioh. ii.) they went from us but they were not of us: for if
they had been of us they would have continued with us: of which sects have
been some at all times eue^ from the beginning Nicholas ye Deaco^ Himeneus
Alexander Cherinthus Marcion Nouatus with other, and now in our days.
Swinglius Ecolumpadius and Luther with diverse such Angels of darkness: but in
very deed among infidels the less nou^ber was ever the godly chrystya^s:
yea and among christen me^ the fewer sort are the elect according to
christ's testimonye, but yet be christen me^, and of the church which have
received the sacrament of baptim though their living be not according to their
profession. Nevertheless ye wicked do co^te^d to have ye church unknown a
Mathematical church to ye intent they would be free from al ce^sures
ecclesiastical to live as they would without any order: where as i^ deed christ's
church is manifestli known, or else he would not have bid his people tell ye
church ((...) ye rulers thereof) if they knew not to who^ they should tell: nor
Paul would have said. ( act. 20) yt bishops office had been to guide ye
co^gregacio^, nor would have called ye bishops ( ephesians. 4.) rulers of ye church, if
they had not known where nor who^ to have ruled. Therefore we must needs
confess yt al be of christ's church which be knit together i^ one religion
and have received one bapti^ with al other sacraments sacrame^tals and
ceremonies together used i^ ye church: whether they be si^ners or not
si^nnersal is one i^ these point, in ye state of grace or not, i^ virtue or in
vice. And to this do agree christ's parables of ye net full of fish, good and
bad: of ye corn and tares together in one feld, of y^ flock of sheep and
gotes, and of ye.x. virgins.v. wise and.v folishe without oil in their
lamps, that is to say, they had faith with ye wise, but no good works. Now as
for the textes brought i^ thobiectio^ taken forth of the canticles, and fourth
of Paul to the Ephesia^s and Corinthians are to be referred to the triu^phant
church, and do also now show yt only the good in gods knowledge, and to be
rewarded in glory are christ's spouse: not withstandinge here in the number
among christ's people al are counted ( oe^s. n. sunt de ecclesia numero sed
no^ merito) yt be knit together in one faith and one baptim etc. Whether the^
be good or bad. So yt the unity and agreement here in makes ye church to be
known. How be it if ye take or count all faithful people which are sinners to
be darkness, and ye righteous only to be the light, so (no doubt) y^ good and
bad do not al pertain to one company, but considering al faithful people (as
well sinners as just me^) in that they be knit together i^ one faith which is ye
light of al faithful souls, so they are al counted to be with in the cumpany of
thunitie of the church militant: Ex cE part (inquiunt scholastici) qua fideles
peccatores su^t tenebrae and iusti luz, non possunt pertinere ad vna^ and
eande^ societate^: sed ex ea part qua in vna integritate fidei (que lux
estanimarum fideliu^) conueniunt, optime possunt pertinere ad vnam and eandem
sanctam communitatem vnitatis ecclesiae. Vnitas ^taque facit ecclesiam cognitam.
with out which be al scismatikes al heretics and al yt be excommunicat. And
here by appears, yt only unity and agreement under one head i^ one faith in
one baptim and in one order of sacraments, sacrame^tales, ceremonies etc. in
one hope, one charity, in one spirit, and i^ one reward to be receued of one
head in heaven does make the church of christ to be known: but al we both
good or bad do depend of these unity under one head: in one faith, one baptim
one hope, one love, in one spirit, al loking for one reward under one head
christ in heaven: therefore all we (whether good or bad and not erri^g in ye
faith) are of these church which the^ co^seque^tly herby appears to be known.
Now for the proof of al these: for ye first, there is one christ (ephe. i) who^
God the father ordained to be head over al his church which is his bodi
mistical, Peter and his successors being immediate vicars thereof as is fulli
declared in this book. For the second, we al are knit in thunity one faith (i.
co. i) say al one thing and let there be no scisme among you: for ye are al
one (gal. iii) yt is to say, in ye faith of christ. For ye third we al agree in
thuniti of one bapti. ( Vnu^ baptismacte. ephesians. 4) and that co^cerni^g the
matter of bap. concerning ye manner and form of bap. and concerning also the
effect and profyt of bap. ti^. For these.iii. ye read John ye third Mathue ye
last and Mark ye.xvi. except ye be regenerate of water and tholy ghost ye
can not e^ter i^to ye kingdom of god. etc Go and teach al nations baptysing
them in the name of the father the son and the holy ghost. etc. He that
believes and is baptized shall be saved. etc. For the fourth ye are all called
(Ephesians the.iiii.) unto one hope of your vocation Hoc est in vna^ re^
sperata^ que est effectus vocationis vestre. For ye v, keep still one charity
(phi. ii) being al of one mind as the apostels were (Acts the.iiii.) and as
we are al being the church counted as one lofe (i. cor. x) or one body. For as
one lofe is made of many grains and one body of many members so is the
church compacte of many faithful people knit together in charity. For ye
sixte, i. cor. xii. the gifts of grace are many, but al comes of one holy
spirit. Be ye therefore careful (ephe. iiii) to keep the unity of this
spirit, seeing yt as one soul does quicke^ and norishe al members of the
natural body. So does one spirit quicke^, and norish all the faithful me^bres
of christ's bodi mistical. For the last, mat. 20. We look al for one penny to be
given of god which is our only one head (Iohels. i) rewarder of all, we being
then all brought into one shepecote of him our only one shepeherde and
pastor. By this answer ye may fullye perceive the palpable darkness
wherein these heretics blindlye do walk which obstinately hold that the
church is unknown, and that none be of it but such as be all pure without
spotte, and that the smaller number is ever the better concerning belief.

RHomanus pontifex est caput orbis vniuersi et hierarcha summus ac princeps
omnium, vbique and perpetuo, and hoc Authoritate diuina: necnon iudex summus a
quo appellare no^ licet, sed eius semper est (modo sitvere papa and catholicus)
causas fidei and ambiguitates omnes iudicio vltimato decidere ac determinare.
Verum toto tempore quo ignoratur quis sit verus pontifex sacrum concilium
authoritatem habet a deo ad sedandum schisma.

The conclusion.
WE may perceive now hereby (ientill reader) how weak and feeble all the
obiectio^s are, which be commonly made against the Popes authority. We may
perceive the long continuance of it, even from Peter's time hitherto, with
sufficient profes of the same. We may perceive also that thonly occasion of all
heresies and other mischiefs which have been here in England, and caused
miserable scismes amongst us in the late miserable years, was the forsakynge
of the head of the church and breaking the unity thereof.

We perceive moreover that ye only cause of leauinge and forsakyng him, was
sin aduoutrye pride and auaryce: but the cause being naught, how could the
effect be good? Yea how naught evil and wicked, the effect has been, and
what misery. we have both felt and suffered, still worse and worse as well
bodily as ghostlye every good man does plainly se. We perceive also (by
example now to speak) that like as if ye take a clue of yearne, and let the
top thread be fast knit, toss, tipe, and play at the ball with it, so long as
the top threde breaks not, all holds fast together: but break ones the
top threede, and then play with it, toss it up and down, and all will sone
come to naught: even so it has chaunsed here in England with christ's true
religion, after that we ones brake the top threde. Experience hereby has
taught us, that among christen me^ nothing is so sore to be feared as to be
divided from the unity of christ's church, as all they be which forsake the
head thereof.

In unity peace and concord all things do florysshe and prosper: but through
diuisyon and schism, what evil comes not? li. 9. trip. c^.


And that caused the holy emperor Theodosius so greatly to labor for
unity amongst Christ's flock. Which thing now earnestly pondered and
throughlye weped, let us with all dylygence, with all study and prayer
endeavor our selves to keep us in the unity of christ's church, and to keep
up the charet that it fall no more to the ground. Let us most humblye obey
unto Peter and his successors, as unto the head and chieffe stone (says
Saint Hierrome) whereupon Christ did build his church: whereunto who so
ever is not unity and knitte, is but a rotton and putryfyed bow, and
perteyneth nothing to this spiritual building of Christ: but shall utterly
perish.

Let us therefore flee here unto as to the chieffe refuge and holy ancoure in
all doubts: knowing that Christ prayed for Peter, that his faith should never
fail, but yt the truth should ever still continue in his see, so that his ship
should never drown.

The faith is quite exyled from those churches, which schismaticallye have
divided them selves from Peter's see: their ships be drowned, but Peter's
ship shall never drown. Let us therefore (for Jesus sake) now being in his
ship again, continue still therein, keeping all in one (as Paul wylleth us)
and say all one thing, sufferynge no Schism to be amongeste us.

but with all fear and reverence continuing here in, let eueri one meddle with
his own office, and do his own duty simply and warely, ever obeing (as paul
bids) our rulers, both spiritual and temporal namlye the head of all, Peter's
successor. And then shall we perceue how good and joyful a thing it is to
continue as brethren all in on. Which thing, Psa. 133.
if we do not, then surely shall we still feel gods heavy hand vpo^n us, gods
Ire, and great plage, as we have done by the space of.xx. years and more, and
as the Hebrews did dividing the unity of gods tabernacle, seperatinge them
selves from Jerusalem, 3. Reg. 12.
from the house of david (where was wont to be the seat and cheer of Moises)
and fleing into Samarye, ^. Reg. 13.
being then afterward sore plaged, and cast forth from gods face: he killinge
then the prophet whom he had sent to inproue them: because he did but only
eat meat among such as were divided from his house: shewinge thereby how
greatly he does detest and abhor al scismatikes, willing them al (as it is in
the ghospel) ever to be taken as heathens, ethenikes, or publicans. Mat. 18.
And note here, yt as Moses chere was then, so is thappostolical seat now:
Number. 16.
As god plaged then Dathan Chore and Abiron for scisme, so has he done now in
the new law, and will do still, except we amend. And as he cast Saul fourth of
his kingdom, and stroke Ozias the king with lepresie, for perverting his
ordor, whereby the unity of his house was kept: So has he of late days
justly plaged many among us: and will do to the end all such as will not
mekelye do penance and amend quite forsaki^g al scisme, with whom heresy is
ever joined: which.ii. (as Origin upon Ezechiel testifies) were thonlie ruin
and utter destruction of jerusalem as they be undoubtedly of al places
whersoeuer they do come vbi scismata (inquit) ibi hereses, ibi disse^siones,
and ruinae where be schisms there be heresies, there be dissensio^s, and
finally utter destruction: but where is union, there is peace and concord.
Here unto therefore Peter him self exhorts us, biddinge all be of one mind:
1. pet. 3.
and Saint Paul also, Roma. 15.
God grant you (says he) to be of one mind together after the example of
Jesus Christ, that ye all agreynge together may with one mouth praise him:
with one mouth says he, one consent of many in God is called with one mouth:
but because a consent together may be in evil, therefore he adds secu^du^
Jesus Christu^ consent together after the example and doctrine of Jesus Christ.
Phil. 2.
Like exhortacio^ Paul has to the Corin. and to ye Philip. I beseech you
brethren by the name of our lord Jesus christ yt ye al speak one thing, 1.
Cor. 1.
and that there be no disse^tio^ among you, 1. corin. 3.
but yt ye may be a whole bodi of one mind, and of one meani^g, with out strife
or sects among you. Io^. 17.
And for this christ prayed his father that his Disciples might be all one:
addinge further that when they were gathered together in one in his name he
would be among the^. Mat. 18.
And so in thactes they getheringe them selves together in one, Act. 2.
with one accord, in prayer, the place moved where they stood, and they all were
replenesshed with tholy ghost. And then there was one heart, one mind, Act. 4.
and one will of all that did believe. This unity tholye ghost had worked
amongst them coming down inlikenes of firye tongues, against ye cold poison
and envious intiseme^t of the devil. Gene. 11.
In babylon was ye confusion, and division of one tongue into many, in token
that the devil author of sedicio^ does ever divide a su^der, Lume^ graciae
^oe^s idem asserere facit s. Dion.
but tholye ghost as author of unity and concord at his coming made a union
of all tongues in to one. See therefore (says. Oratione. ^. in san. pent.
S. grego. nazian) the agreement and unity that comes by tholy ghost, and
the schism and division yt comes through the devil. At the buildinge in
babylon al their to^ges could not make one tongue to agree with an other, but
here one tongue made al to agree: Act. 2.
so that one man speakinge one language in one tongue was understand of all
nations. This union ever pleased God as it is in Exodus, Exo. 1^.
in Iudeth, Iudit. 7.
and in Esdras. ^. Esdr. 8.
All with one voice turned to god and prayed: yea and thus as one man the people
ever gethered them selves in God, and so overcame their enemies? Iud. 20.
as ye read in the books of the judges, of the kings, and of Esdras. Yea and
furthermore, 1. Reg. 11.
god him self, 1. esdr. 2.
to declare how hyghly this unity pleases him, and how acceptable it is unto
him began the creacion (says. S. Austine) only with one manne, (...). 21.
de ciu. dei cap. 22.
that we should ever therefore both think and say, let there be no strife
among us (as Abraham said to Loathe) for we be brethren. Oh how pleasant and
comfortable a thing is it for gods people to continue together in unity? Ho.
de inconprehensibili dei natu.
Holy Chrysostom after he has declared thunitie observed amongst ye angels,
with settinge forth their laudinge and praising of god, says thus, do ye see,
what reverence, what obseruaunce, what order the a^gels do keep, and what
negligence, what contempt, and disordre, is among us? The angels do laud and
honor god in unity and concord together, but wicked men do set all at
naught, do search and strive together, and that above their reach, ever
breaking the godly unity.

Al things (says he) save only man do observe the unity and ever keep
order.

The Aungelles keep their order in this unity, so do the son, the moon, and
the rest of the planettes keep their order: the stars, the elements, the
fowls of thayer, the fishes in the sea, the beasts on the earth ever still
keep their order, only manne will still be out of order.

And this is the cause (says he) why the unity is broken and not kept
among us.

And mark here (says he further) that like as in musycke when tharmony in
stringes, pipes, and tunes, do well agree together, then is there swet and
pleasant melody, and else it is grief and no pleasure to here: eue^ so it is with
us the members of Christ's mystical body.

If we read these natural examples which move to unity, and consider also
beside these, that every country has a sundry gift of god, which other
cou^tres do lack: as some have silks and veluettes, some spytes, some wynes,
some lead, woole, tin, Irne, wadde, mather. etc. and all this for a ciuel
unity, and honest natural order to be had and kept amongst the people, whom
god did creat to live in one as associate together ( homo est sociale animal)
knowing yt as thethnicke affirms, Concordia paruaeres crescunt, discordia
dilabuntur and magnae. Sal.
with concord peace and unity all things flourish and increase, but with
discord striffe and contention al comes sone to ruin and destruction. Oh
good Lord when we read or here these or such like natural persuasions
institute even by god, according to our first generation and birthe, mouinge
so greatly to unity what shall we then conjecture or say, to the supernatural
unity which ought to be observed and kept among us now being regenerate and
newly borne again in Christ? we being all of one religion, all through one
regeneracion grafte in Christ, every one as a member of the same body having
his peculier office to maintain this unity with all? we ought then all being
of one mind to be joined fast in one as members together, having every one his
office under one head appointed: seeing one baptime has regenerate us all unto
god, and that we have al one father in heaven, all brethren by profession of
Christ's true religion, all appointed to receive one reward of inmortalitye,
every one, one penye for our day laboringe in the vineyarde. And for this,
the members of these our corruptible bodies do succoure every one, one
another: and in case any thing do chance to one of them, whether it be good
or bad, every one of the other takes it as their own. What shall we say
then here in? If every member have need of other, if every member be member
to all other, and do minister in his office to al: if every membre do help
other, and never a member do grudge at others preeminence: if thande do
minister, the mouth do eat, the stomach receive the feet carye the woole.
etc. Why should not we then, being al members of Christ's body keep the same
co^formity to the mayntenaunce of this unity whereof now I speak? we se yt i^ a
material buyldyng one stone serves in one place, which can not serve in an
other, and will not we se that among the lyuelye stones of Christ's spiritual
house the same conformitye ought ever to be kept, and al for the defe^se of
this unity? knowing that there is but one hope, one faith, one baptim, on
lord, and one God, rewarder of all that keep the unity as they ought to do?
which thing if all Christen men still had earnestlye observed, then no doubt
the Turk and other infidels had not so prevailed against christendom as they
have done within these few. C. years. Scilurus 80. liberos hn^s quum esset
moriturus fasciculun^ iaculorum singulis porrex it, iussitque ru^pere: id cum
singuli recusassent, eo quod videretur impossible ipse singula iacula exemit,
atque ita facile co^fregit oi^a: filios admonens iis Verbis si concordes
eritis, validi inuictique manebitis: contra si dissidiis and sedicione
distrahemini, imbecilles eritis, and expugnatu faciles.
Remember Scilurus rods. Remember Antisthenes saying. Ciuium aut fratrum
concordia quouis muro firmius munimentu^. No wall or other defense can be so
sure as the union and agremente of people together in one. Let us then pray for
this most earnestly, that we may keep this unity: Which we can never do,
except we firmelye leyne to one head only, and immediate vicar here in earth
under Jesus christ. To whom with the father and tholy ghost be all laud
honor and glory for ever and ever. Amen.

Memorare nouissima et in eternum non peccabis.

eccle. vii. HORATIVS. Viue, vale. Si quid nouisti rectius istis,
Candidus imperti: si non vis, vte re mecum.
Made and composed by John Standishe doctor in divinity.

Imprinted at London in Fletestrete nere to. S. Dunstones church by Thomas
Marshe. Mense Iulii. 1556.

The fautes escaped in printyng.
Leaf. side. line. A. ij i. xxi. iectes, read, sects. A. iiii i xiiii uses,
read, used A. v ii. iii exacted, read, executed E. ii. i. xxi. to christ's read
into christ's F. iii. i v. reproved read approved. G. viii. ii. xi. patienter,
read patientur. I. i. i. xxii. be as monstrous. read be monstrous L. vii. ii
xix. is yt, read is it that. N. viii. ii xiii. bishops, read bishop O. vii. ii
xiii. my, read any. O. viii. i xviii. upon ye app. read, upon all thappo. P.
ii. i iiii. was the, read was then P. vi. ii vi. out a cause, read out cause

Beside these, some small fawtes be escaped: As cluod, assenscion, word,
faurth, decareth, desth. ded. whirhe. 27. excominicate. ab. etc. for, cloud,
ascension, world fourth, declares, death, did. which. 72. excommunicate. ad.
etc. with some textes in the margent lackyng and some not well placed: which
all every ientle reader may easily correct.


