A SERMON Preached at Paul's Cross on Barthelmew day, being the 24. of August.
1578. Wherein, besides many other profitable matters meet for all Christians to
follovv, is at large proved, that it is the part of all those that are
fathers, householders, and Scholemaisters, to instruct all those under their
government, in the word and knowledge of the Lord.

By JOHN STOCKVVOOD Scholemaister of Tunbridge.

Psalm. 119. verse. 104. By thy precepts I have gotten understanding,
therefore I hate all the vvayes of falsehood.

AT LONDON, Imprinted by Henry Bynneman for George Bishop.

To the Worshipful the Master, the Wardens, and Assistantes of the
worshipful Company of Skinners in London, JOHN STOCKVVOOD, Scholemaister of
their free Grammar Schole in Tunbridge, wishes prosperity in this life, and
everlasting felicity through Christ our Savior in the life to come.
Being my self (Right worshipful) earnestly requested of many that fear
GOD, and sundry of my friends, being labored by others of the godly to
persuade with me, for the publishing such doctrine, as it pleased God to give
me to utter at Paul's Cross not long sithence, I have at length yielded unto
their earnest suit, not being ignorante how many sharp censures will pass
upon this my doing, nor yet what diverse judgments shall be given of this my
travel. But howsoever me^ judge or think, as touching my self, 1. Cor. 4.3.
I say with Paul, I pass very little to be judged of them, or of man's
judgment, no, I judge not mine own self. There is a God that judges, who
knovveth my singleness in this behalf, and that the only mark I shoot at in
the putting it to print, is his glory, and the further profiting of his
Church, and greater edifying of his people: for if it pleased him in great
mercy to grant such success unto that which was then spoken by mouth
unto a fevv, that they were thereby instructed to amendmente of life, I doubt
not, but of like goodness he will grant, that the making hereof by
vvrighting common unto many, as it will longer and more surely remain
settled in their memories, so it vvil also work more frutefully, to their
putting it in daily ure and practice. And as all the virtues which are here
set down to be in Cornelius, are such, as ought of every good Christian to
be follovved: so the godly bringing up of all his family in the fear of the
Lord, being on our parts after his example faithfully performed, the Lord vvil
in like sort bless this needful travel in us, as he did in him. Wherefore I
am humbly in Christ's name, to request all your Worships, with the rest of
Cornelius his virtues, chiefly to be careful to practice this, of trayning up
your children and families in the word and knowledge of the Lord, and so
shall you have them godly, obedient, gentle, trusty, and faithful, like as
otherwise you vvil find them wicked, unruly, stubborn, pickers and stealers,
untrue and unfaithful. Now concerning my purpose, of offering this my simple
labor and travail, such as it is, unto your worships favorable
acceptance, there be many causes and reasons moving me thereunto, but
chiefly that this way I might leave unto the world a testimony of a
dutiful and thankful mind for your good vvilles toward me, in placing me
Scholemaister of your free Schole of Tu^bridge, honorably founded by that
worthy Knight Sir Andrew Iud, sometime Lord Mayor of your famous City of
London, and vvorshipfullye and liberally to your great costs and charges
mainteyned, against the bad attemptes of those that went about to have made
it their own private possession, which fact of him, the honorable founder,
and you the worthy mainteyners and defenders, I trust the L. will use as
good examples, to move others to do the like, for the training up of youth in
the fear of God, which duty I beseech him to grant me faithfully to perform
toward your Scholars, under my charge, to his glory, your joy and
comfort, and the benefit of his Church in time to come: and that finally
according to his good pleasure, he would long bless and prosper your
Worships, to the maintenance of all good learning and godliness. Fare you well.
From your free Schole at Tunbridge this.4. of Septem. 1578.

Your Worships most humble in the Lord to be commanded, John Stockwood.

An Admonition to the godly and gentle Reader.
THE earnest suit, and often calling upon of certain godly brethren (most
gentle and friendlye Reader) has at the length won at my hands, the
publishing of this Sermon in print, concerning the which, I am thus much
briefly to admonish thee, namely, that albeit there be more here set down, than
in deed was uttered at the Cross, yet was the whole meant there to have bin
spoken, had not time cut off so much of it as was handled at another place in
the afternoon. Having therefore the testimony of a good conscienc,e that herein
is nothing avouched, which may not well by the word be warranted, I have
thought good to set down the whole, and the rather, for that both the
second and third parts, as well as the first (which only was entreated at
the Cross) contain profitable admonition for these our times: at the which,
although the evil disposed may quarrel: and the wicked being galled, winche
and kick (for I have not learned to sow soft pillows under their elbows, to
lull them asleep in their sin) yet those, that are well given, and godly
minded, may (I doubt not) learn many lessons, which being put in practice,
will turn to their profit and amendment of living. As for those that are
offended (if there be any such) the cause is not in me, but in themselves,
which, if they can see (as I pray GOD heartily they may:) I hope they will be
careful, to reform such things in themselves, as they are here blamed for, and
their own consciences cries out unto them to be amiss: Nay there is no
estate or condition of men, no not of the very best and most godly, but that
Cornelius may be a glass unto them, in which they may see most clearly
represented, such virtues as ought to be in a true Christian, the want
whereof, as it is in a great many, yea, earneste professoures, to be found,
so I pray GOD, that after the diligent view of them in this glass how
comelye they are in a true Christian, and how well they do beseem a right
godly man, they may with speed be careful to express them in a godly life,
and holy conversation. Farewell, and make thine earnest and hearty prayers unto
GOD, to bless his Church with a rich store of faithful teachers, and a most
plentiful increase of godly, learned, and diligent Ministers, that may open
unto his people, the true meaning and understanding of his holy and heavenly
word, and that the people may live there unto accordingly, for his Christ's
sake.

Thy poor brother in Christ JOHN STOCKVVOOD.

A Sermon preached at Paul's Cross the.24. of August.1578.
ACTS. 10.









shall tell thee what thou ought to do.

^e shall speak ^rdes, whereby ^ou shall be sa^d, and al thine ^i^e.





THis Scripture (right honorable, worshipful, and dearly beloved in the
Lord) offers unto your consideration, generally these three points: first a
description of one Cornelius, a captain, caled from Paganism, or
Heathenishnes, to the true knowledge of Christ: secondly, the Angel his
appearaunce, and embassage unto him: and thirdely, his willing and speedy
obedience in performing that, which the Angel from the Lord charged him
withal.

Every one of these generalles have springing and growing out of the^, their
several and particular branches. to be noted: the first, God his wonderful
and merciful kindness, in calling the Heathen from error to the truth, and
his most fearful, but yet righteous judgment, in casting off for their
great unthankfulness, his own peculiar and chosen people of the Jews. The
second, Cornelius his trade, Cornelius.
and kind of of life. The third, his virtue and godliness. The fourth, his
christian training up of his familye and householde. The fyfth, his Alms
deeds and Prayers.



Cornelius his faith:

Secondlye, what profitte he reaped by godly instructing of his household:

Thirdly, the religionnesse of the soldier, which he sent with his servants
on this message.

I will use no fore-speech or entrance, garnished and set out with some
Rhetorical florishe, to win at your hands, heedfull harkening unto that,
which upon these places in the fear of God I am to deliver unto you, or to
purchase your favorable bearing with my plain and simple handling of this
Text, without curious and picked out words and terms. For the cause being,
not Ma^s, but Gods worthelye ^ba^engeth the greateste attention: and as for
painted, labored, and of purpose sought for eloquence, I leave it unto them,
that seek rather the praise of men, than the glory of God, knowing that the
word of the Lord simply and plainly handled, is able without the help of the
persuading speech of man's wisdom, to pierce even to the heart, and to divide
between the thoughts and the reins, which effect, I pray him for his
Christ's sake, to grant unto that, which in his name I am to speak.

The first branch of the first General, namelye, the calling of the
Gentiles, and of casting off the Jews.
THe calling of the Gentiles (of the which I am to speak somewhat, The calling
of the Gentiles.
for that our Cornelius was a Gentile; as hereafter shall more at large
appear) has evident and plain testimonies of holy Scripture in many and
sundry places: amongst the rest, these chieflye: Zach. 9.10.
He shall speak peace unto the Heathen, and his dominion shall be from sea
unto sea, and from the river unto the end of the land. Again: Mich.
1.2.3.4.5.
But in the last days it shall come to pass, that the mountain of the house
of the Lord shall be prepared in the top of the Mountains, and it shall be
exalted above the hills, and people shall flow unto it, yea many nations shall
come and say: Come, and let us go up to the mountain of the Lord, and to the
house of the God of Jacob, and he will teach us his ways, and we will walk
in his paths. For the law shall go forth of Sion, and the word of the Lord
from Jerusalem. And he shall judge among many people, and rebuke mighty nations
a far off, and they shall break their swords into mattockes, and their
spears into sithes: nation shall not lift up a sword against nation, neither
shall they learn to fight any more. But they shall sit every man under his
Vine, and under his Fig tree, and none shall make the^ afraid. For the mouth of
ye Lord of hosts has spoken it. For all people will walk every one in the
name of his God, and we will walk in the name of the Lord our God, for ever
and ever. Likewise, yea al Kings shall worship him, Psalm. 72.11.17.
and all nations shall serve him. And again, all nations shall bless him, and
be blessed in him: Moreover, Psalm. 2.8.
ask of me, and I shall give thee the heathen for thine inheritance, and the
ends of the earth for thy possession. Esal. 19.18.
Furthermore in that day shall five Cities in the land of Egypt speak the
language of Canaan, and shall swear by ye Lord of Hosts. etc. In like manner,
Esai. 42.11.12.
let the wilderness, and ye Cities thereof, lift up their voice, the towns
that Kedar does inhabit: Let the inahbitants of the rocks sing: Let them
showte from the top of the Mountains: Let them give glory unto the Lord,
and declare his praise in the Islands.

And to this effect in most comfortable sort, is almost the whole.49. The
calling of the Gentiles signified by diverse examples in the scripture
chapter of this Prophecy. Hereof also have we in the Scripture many
figures, and examples. For what else does the clensing of Naaman the Syrian
from his leprosy, by the Prophet Elizeus signify, Naaman.
but that a time should one day come, when as the heathen by faith in the
death and blood of Christ should be purged of the spiritual Leprosy of
their souls, which is sin? What means the sending of Jonas to the great
City of Niniuie, Jonas.
but that God is a God of the Assyrians, as well as of the Jews: a Savior of
the Gentiles, as well as of the Israelites? Job.
What do we learn by the incredible faith, and wonderful patience of Job,
who was a Heathen, but that God, even among the Heathen, has those that are of
his Church? What, that Christ himself concerning the flesh, Christ.
vouchsafed lineally to descend of those, of whom some of them were Heathen,
as Thamar a Cananite, Thamar. Ruth.
of whom were borne, Pharao, and Saram: as Ruth a Moabite, of whom was borne
Obed. Does it not to our great comfort, learn us that are Gentiles, that
Christ is borne a Redeemer, as well to us, as the Jews. In that immediatlye
after the birth of Christ, The wise me^
Wise men came from the vttermoste parts of the East to worship him: what are
we taught, but that the kingdom of Christ should stretche from the East unto
the Weaste, and from the one Sea to the other? Whereas Christ healed the
servant of the Centurion, The servant of ye Ce^turio^. The son of the
Courtier.
cured at Capernaum, the son of the Courtier (for the word (...) signifies
pertaining or belongyng to the king) help the daughter of the Canaanitishe
woman, possessed with a Devil, The woman of Canaan. The woman of Samari^^ The
calling of the Chamberlayne, an^ of Corneliu^
called the woman of Samaria, sent Philippe to the Chamberlain of Candace
Queen of Ethiopia, and Peter from Ioppa, to this our Cornelius, all which
were Heathen: does not all these sufficientlye prove the calling of the
Gentiles? But why in a matter doubtless, do I use proofs not necessary?

I come now to speak of the casting off of the Jews, Of ye casting off of
the I
which I will handle brieflye, and afterward lay before you, what we may
learn of the calling of the one, and refusing of the other.

In the twentieth Chapter of Matthew, Christ says to the Jews thus: Therefore
say I unto you, The Kingdom of God shall be taken from you, and shall be given
to a nation which shall bring forth the fruits thereof. Paul in the.13. of
the Acts, speaks to the obstinate Jews after this manner: It was necessary,
that the word of GOD should first have been spoken unto you: But seeing you
put it from you, and judge your selves worthy of everlasting life: Lo, we
turn to the Gentiles. And for confirmation of their so doing, they allege
the words of the Prophet I say: ^^. 49.6.
I have made thee a light of the Gentiles, that thou should be the salvation
unto the end of the world. And to ye Romans he says: Romans 10.29.20.21.
I will provoke you to envy by a nation that is not my nation, and by a foolish
nation I will anger you. And Isaias is bold and says: I was found of them
that sought me not, and have been made manifest to them that asked not after
me. And unto Israel he says: All the day long have I stretched out mine
hand unto a disobedient and gaine-saying people. To this purpose may you
read much in the.9. and.11. Chapiters of this Epistle. Moreover the Prophets
every where are full of threatenings unto the Jews, that they should be cast
out, and the Gentiles taken into their roomths.

Besides these plain Scriptures, it shall not be needful for me to allege,
^xamples of their reiection. For (alas) their miserable and lamentable
dispersi^n, and scattering abroad over the face ^f the earth at this day, and
great sla^erie and bondage that they live in, in ^he places where they are
scattered, are ^ufficient testimonies, that GOD his ^eauie judgments are come
upon them.

And these things will seem so much ^he more wonderful in our eyes, if we
^onsider with how near a band of love and fatherly kindness GOD tied
him^^lfe, as it were unto his people, and what (...) bar of partition, and
mighty wall of ^paration, he set between them and us. ^somuche, that as well
in Ceremonies, and Religion, as in other matters of life common traffic, they
were straight^ forbidden to have any manner of fe^^wshippe or familiarity with
the Gen^les, so that the very entrance of one ^ccirumcised into their Temple,
^as accounted a Profanation, ^d also a defyling of the same which the Lord
himself says by his Prophet Ezechiel: ^zech, ^4.6.7.9.
Thus says the Lord God, O house of Israel, ye have enough of all your
abominations, seeing that ye have brought into my Sanctuary strangers
uncircumcised in heart, and uncircumcised in flesh, to be in my Sanctuary,
to pollute mine house. And by and by after. Thus says the Lord God: No
stranger uncircumcised in heart, nor uncircumcised in flesh, shall enter into
my Sanctuary, of any stranger that is among the children of Israel. And by
his Prophet Jeremy, Ierem. 9.25.
the Lord threatens to punish every one, whose foreskinne is not circumcised
or cut off. But of the Jews he says by Moses: Deuteronomy. 7.6.
For thou art a holy people unto the Lord thy God, the Lord thy GOD has
chosen thee, to be a precious people to himself, above all the people that are
upon the earth.

Also of Jerusalem he speaks by the Prophet Isaias: Arise, arise, put on
thy strength, Isaias. 25.1.
O Sion, put on the garments of thy beauty, O Jerusalem, the holy City:
for henceforthe there shall no more come into thee the uncircumcised, and the
unclean. In respect of these great promises, and many more that are in the
Scriptures of GOD, his great good will, and special mercy toward them,
together with the remembrance of God his miraculous dealyng, for their delivery
out of the hands of all their ennimies, and the great glory and royalnesse
of their Temple of which they were wont so much to cry: Ierem. 7.4.
the Temple of the Lord: the Temple of the Lord: the Temple of the Lord: as
we read in Jeremy: they utterly contemned and despised the Gentiles,
thinking them to be wholly debarred from the couenaunte of the LORD, in so
much that they did as greatly abhor and deteste the name of a Heathen, as
we do now the name of a Jew or Turk, or should do the name of a Papiste,
so long as they continue in their wicked superstition: yea the Apostles
themselves a long season, could not be persuaded, that salvation belonged to
the Gentiles, so that you read afterward in this story of the Acts, ^ct.
11.2.3. etc.
how Peter was sharply reproved for preaching the word to this our
Cornelius, and others of the Gentiles.

The application of the doctrine of the calling of the Gentiles, and casting
off of the Jews.
Forasmuch then as the Jews to whom (as Paul speaks) appertains the
adoption, and the glory, and ye couenauntes, and the giving of the law, and
the service of GOD, and the promises, of whom are the fathers, and of whom
concerning the flesh, Christ came, are (as we see at this day) cast off, and
the Heathen wallowing in superstition, and Idolatrye, having no Faith, no GOD,
no Religion certain: every manne runnyng after the fancies of his own
brain, are taken in their stead, as has appeared by testimonye of the
word, and many examples of the same, and amongst the rest, this of our
Cornelius, whom we may not amiss term, of the first fruits of the Gentiles.

What have we to learn, (for now I come to the application of this, hitherto
spoken of the receiving of the Heathen, and of casting off the Jews) for our
comfort or admonition, out of this wonderful dealing of God, both toward
the one and the other?

By the off casting of the Jews, Ingratitud^ and disobedience to Go^ and his
wor^ God alwaie^ severely p^nisheth.
being the peculiar and chosen people of GOD, we do learn first, that
ingratitude and disobedience unto God, and his word, is a vice so odious in his
sight, that he will not let it escape unpunished in any nation whatsoever, but
will revenge it with horrible plagues. For if he spared not the natural
branches, truly he will not spare the unnatural: if he cut off those of the
true Olive tree, he will hew down also, those of the wild: if he have showed
such tokens of his Justice upon his own people offending, with what scourges
will he chasten the rebellion of strangers? The sins of the Iewe^
And as the sins of his people were marvelous great, so was their punishment
wonderful fearful.

They scorned the Prophets of ye Lord: they themselves are now a common scorn
and laughing stock unto others. They killed, and persecuted the servants of
God sent unto them for their health: they themselves to their great woe and
misery have bin slain, murdered, and killed. They refused Jesus Christ
himself their Savior, sold him for thirtye pence by the hand of Judas, and
chose rather a cutthroat murderer, than that they would have Christ set
at liberty: and they themselves have bin rejected by Christ, and thirty of
them at the siege of Jerusalem sold for a penny, and cruelly slain by
cut-throate and merciless murderers. They cry, his blood be upon us and our
children: and they had their desire at the full, when their City was taken.
For their old men were slain in their beds, their young men in the
streates, young infants murdered at their mothers breasts, little children
dispatched in their nurses lappes: and to be short, blood they asked, and
blood they had, in such abundaunce issuing from the great multitudes of
them that were slain, that the channels of their streets ran with streams
of whot^ ^reaking blood (a woeful and lamentable sight to behold) in as great
plenty, as you see them here usually wont to do, after a great shoure of
rain. They shut their ears at ye pitiful complaynt of the poor, themselves
sinning in excess of meat, as it is cast in their teth by ye Prophet, and
contrary to ye express commandment of the Lord, who straightly charged, that
there should be no beggar in Israel: they had their streets and high ways
swarming with beggars, and themselves afterward were so punished with famine,
that they were constreyned to eat (saving your manner) most loathsome and vile
things, as their own vomit and excrementes, and that which is most
unnatural and barbarous, they did eat their own children, and yet could not
be let alone with this merciless meat, but the unmerciful and hungerstaruen
Soldiers would break in, and by force take it from them. They banished, and
drove out of their Cities and territories, the Apostles of Christ suffering
them to have no place nor abode amongst them, and they themselves are now
driven and banished from those places, and are become a byworde and reproach in
those places where they in small number dwell, carrying a note of reproach on
their garments, that they may be known from other people: and that which is
most horrible, they refused the word of salvation, the food of their souls,
and therefore has GOD taken it from them, and bereaved them of the comfort,
that they might reap by the understanding of it. For albeit they have the
old Testamente, yet GOD has so fearfully punished their disobedience, that
they understand it not in the Hebrewe tongue wherein it is written, and which
was sometime their own mother tongue, they understand it not (I say) one
amongst an hundredth, their Rabbines excepted, but it is unto them, as the
Lattine service was unto us: yea their Rabbines themselves which understand
the signification of the words, are far from the knowledge of the meaning of
the same, and that (as I take it) of malice, especially in the matter of the
Messiah Christ Jesus our Savior, whom they utterly detest, and abhor,
lookyng yet still for another to come to deliver them: Besides that, they have
horribly corrupted the holy Scripture, by their false interpretations, and
Iewishe, and old wives fables. These horrible vices, deserved this fearful
reiection, and so much the rather, for that they contemned the admonitions,
and the forewarnings of the Prophets and Apostles, yea of Jesus Christ
himself, so that henceforthe in the Storye of the Acts, you shall hear very
little mention made of the Iewishe Church, but to their reproach, Let us lear^
the punishin^ of the Iewe^ to avoid t^^ like sins.
for all the glory thereof, is translated to us of the Gentiles, GOD make us
thanckefull for it. Let us, beloved, learn wisdom by their harms, let
their stubbernesse and disobedience teach obey, ^t us learn (...) the
pu^^shment of ^e Jews, (...) auo^de the ^e sins.
let their unthankfulness make us thankful, let their negligence make us
careful, least being partakers with them of their sins, we have part also
of their punishment. God warned them, he has and does daily warn us. He
spoke early and late unto them by his Prophets, he likewise daily and hourly
calls us by his Preachers. Their privileges and many blessings above other
nations could not privilege them from God his vengeance, for their great
contempt, but rather increased their punishmente for abusing them: so shall his
great mercies toward us Englishmen, ^he more ^enry we ^ue of God ^s
blessings, ^e greater ^ll be our ^nishment (...) abusing ^em.
above many other nations, make his judgments more heavy, if we show not our
selves thankful, and bring forth the fruits of repentance and amendment of
life. And to thee I say, O London, whose salvation in the Lord I heartily
tender, and on whom God has showed more tokens of his favor and love, than
on any other Town or City of this land, in blessing thee with plenty of
Preachers and teachers, see that thy living be answerable to thy knowledge, and
thy manners agreeable to thy teaching, otherwise I assure thee, it shall fall
out unto thee, as it did unto these Jews: God usually does greatliest bless
the greater citi^ with the Preaching his word, a^ greatiyest plague the^^for
the contempt of the same.
for as it has bin a thing at all times usual with God, upon the greatest
Cities to show greatest tokens of his love, and to enlighten them with greatest
knowledge of his word, that from them, other places of the land, as it were
little fountaynes from the great Springs, may draw good instructions, and
learn by their examples, to pursue after the like knowledge: even so he
begins first to punish those places, where he has showed most mercy, if
they abuse his mercy, and contemn his graces, yet in such order, that he
always gives them forewarning of the same by his servants, that if they amend
not, their punishment may be the iuster. So before the flood, he sent Noah:
before the burning of Sodom and Gomorrah, he sent Lot: before the destruction
of Canaan, Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob: before the overthrow of Pharao, Moses and
Aaron? before the captivity of the Jews many Prophets: before the euersion
of the Ninevites Jonas: before the seege of Jerusalem, and this casting off of
the Jews, (in which I stand the longer, because it conteyneth profitable
admonitions for our times,) Christ himself, and his Apostles.

We people of England have enjoyed the Preaching of the Gospel now these
twenty years, and God grant we may many more years enjoy it, we have had,
and at this present have many Godly, zealous, and learned Preachers, the Lord
for his Christ's sake, daily increase the number of them, which lay before us
out of the word, God his great blessings bestowed upon us, and our great
unthankfulness for them. And you here in London, out of this place, and
others, eeuery foot are admonished, and put in mind of your duties, but both
we of the Country, and you of the City, for the most part, contemn it. We
are like unto the children of Israel, we are weerie of the Heavenly Manna, the
word ^f life, the food of our souls, for the ^bteyning whereof, which we so
scorne^ully despise, many of our poor bree^hren in other Countries, hazzarde
both ^yfe and goods. What remains therefore, but that GOD, if we do not
^peedyly repent, show tokens of his wrath upon us, as he did upon the
Jews? And you here of London, have good experience of that, England ^eaty of
the word preached.
which a little before I spoke, namely, that as GOD commonly more
plentifullye blesses the greater Cities, so for their contempt, they have
more plentiful taste of his plagues before other places. For t^ll me, I pray
you, what contagious sickness, or dangerous disease is there, but for the
most part you have the first, and the greatest visitation with it? And do
you think that we of the Country escape scotfree? yet for all this, what is
our behauioure toward the word of eternal life? Will not a filthy play,
More resort to plays, tha^ to Sermons
with the blast of a Trumpette, sooner call thither a thousand, than an hours
tolling of a Bell, bring to the Sermon a hundred? nay even here in the City,
without it be at this place, and some other certain ordinary audience, where
shall you find a reasonable company? whereas, if you reforte to the Theater,
the Curtayne, and other places of Plays in the City, you shall on the Lords
day have these places, with many other that I can not reckon, so full, as
possible they can throng, besides a great number of other lettes, to pull from
the hearing of the word, of which I will speak hereafter. And do you think
that so long as these enormities are suffered, the plague, and such other like
infectious sicknesses, which in the.28. of Deuteronomie the Lord threateneth
to send as scourges, for the contempt of his word, shall cease and diminishe
amongst you? nay, they be means for them to rage more fiercely, and to cause
God to send new plagues among them, for as we are witty to commit new
sins, so the Lord daily prepares new punishments to correct us withal, in
so much, that he ^isiteth our new sins with such new and strange diseases,
as the names are unknown unto us, and never heard of of our forefathers, yea
our best Physicians know not which way to turn their hands to heal them. I
can not but commend the laudable policy, and diligente endeavor of the right
Honorable my Lord Mayor, and the worshipful Aldermen his brethren, for the
preventing of infection, by commaundyng men's houses to be kept sweet, and the
streates clean, with other such like ways. The plague will not be carried out
in a Dung-Courte.
But believe me (dear brethren) the plague can not be carried away in a dung
curte. What avails it to have sweet houses and stinking Souls? pleasant
smelling cha^bers, and grievous savoring minds? clean and fair streates, and
foul and filthy hearts and consciences? As I do not dislike these outward
clensings, so I beseech you, let every one of us labor for the inward purging
and scouring of our Souls: having ^he word, let us frame our lives accor^ing
to ye word, let our godly living be a ^estimonie of our profitable
understanding, let us as we be talkers, so likewise, be walkers: as we be
professors, practisers: as speakers, doers: as sayers, followers: and then
shall our godly living with our right understanding: our christian walking, with
our virtuous talking: our sober practicing with our honest professing: our
doing with our saying: our following with our speaking, strike up such a
pleasant harmony and joyful melodye in the ears of our GOD, as he will
bring upon us in great mercy all those blessings which in the forenamed 28.
of Deutronomie he promises to those that hear, and also do all that which
he commands: Behold ye despisers, and wonder and vanishe away: For I
work a work in your days, a work which ye shall not believe, if a man
would declare it you. The Lord (I say) for our co^tempte will take his word
from us a^ he did from the Israelits, and bestow it on such as will both make
more account of it, and also be more thankful for it, which by this that
has fallen out to the Jews, the LORD for his Christ's sake make us to be.

We have secondlye to learn out of this reiection of the Jews, God is tied to
no place nor person.
being (as you have heard) united unto GOD in such special sort, as he
never dealte so with any nation, that GOD is not tied to any place or person,
albeit they brag never so much of antiquity, succession, unity,
universality, or what other glorious or gorgious show soever they pretend,
but that when they scornefullye cast him off, he ^ustlye forsakes them. Let
us not therefor be deluded with vain titles, nor ^orne out with great
words. It is not ^erusalem, Alexandria, Constantinople, ^or Rome, that GOD is
bound unto. Let the proud Prelate of the sea^en hilled City, with his purple
Car^nalles, and horned Bishops, and the whole route of his shorn and greasy
rabble come forth, and show me if they can for their lives, the like causes
that these Jews had to glory off, and yet had they all them and many more, the
greater should be their punishmente in abusing them as they have done. Has
not the Pope with his adhere^ts as much boasted of his gaye titles, as ever
these Jews did, and as proudely disdayned the true professors as ever they
did the Gentiles? was it not a received opinion within these few years, that
out of the church of Rome there was no salvation, like as the Jews thought the
Gentiles to be altogether strangers from the promise? Are not these their
common out cries, the Church, the Church, the Church, our most holy father,
most reverend father, most godly father, most learned Doctors, most christian
Doctors, most light Doctors, most lighthened, I would say, most Seraphicall
Doctors: and against us, Lollardes, Heretics, Schismatickes, Hugonots,
Lutherans, Zuinglians, Caluinistes, Sacramentaries, and what not? have they not
as despightfully and cruellye handled us, as ever the Jews did the Prophets of
the Lord? yea have they not gone beyond them in forbiddyng us the readyng of
the books of our GOD, and for the same burned us and the word of our GOD
too? The Lord therefore in great justice has rejected them for all their
vain bostings, like as he did the Jews, and has broken the yoke of their
Tyranny from this and many other nations, his name be praised for it, and in
the end, with the breath of his mouth will utterly confound them.

As you have seen in these Jews a fearful example of God his wonderful
justice in casting them off for their offenses: In ye calling of ye Gentiles is
a notable token of God his great love.
so in receiving of the Gentiles you have to consider a notable proof and
experience of his surpassing love and unspeakable mercy. For what was there
in the Gentiles overwhelmed with error, blinded with ignorance, prone to all
kind of superstition and strange Idolatries, overtaken with all sorts of
filthynesse, and most horrible and outrageous wickedness, that might procure
him to favor them, or to show himself so bountious a father unto them. Of
his love therefore, of his love and most free favor was it, that he
vouchsaued to call them out of this great darkness, unto so marvelous light
and knowledge of his truth in his son Christ Jesus our most loving God and
merciful Savior.

There is not therefore any cause of boasting of our selves, or of any thing
in our selves, for that we are nothing else indeed but a huge mass and heavy
lump of sin. Let us therefore ascribe all the whole glory of our calling,
unto God, that mercifullye has called us from error unto truth, from
darkness to light, from wickedness to holiness, from condemnation to
salvation, from death to life, yea, from Hell to Heaven: for unto all these and
a great many more enormities, are we by nature enthralled. Let us therefore
enter the deeper into a true consyderation of our selves, and into a thorough
examination of our own souls and consciences, and then finding in our selves
what indeed we be of our selves, we shall learn to set less by our painted
sheathes, and to make better accoumptes of GOD his infinite and endless
mercy, who has thought good to place us in the room of his own peculiar
and chosen people.

Again we see in the consideration of the manner of GOD his calling us of the
Gentiles to the knowledge of his Christ, The manner of God his calling of the
Gentiles teaches that we are justified only by faith.
not requiring at our hands that we should be circumcised, or otherwise tied
to the observation of the ceremonies of Moses law, but only that we should
repent, and believe the Gospel, we see (I say) euidentlye hereby, that we are
not saved by the Law, nor yet by the works of the Law, but only by faith in
Christ, according as it is written: The just manne shall ^iue by faith. And
again: By the works of the law no flesh can be saved or justified: by how
much the more so often as I think on it (and truly I do many times think
on it) I do greatly maruayle, what madness has overtaken our Arch-Papistes
to besotte themselves and others with a vain and wicked persuasion of their
own righteousness, and an arrogante trusting to scale the high forte of
heaven, by the broken and rotten ladder of man his merytes, and the corrupt
works and inventions of their own idle fancies. For if Christ and his
Apostles never charged any with the observations of the Mosaicall Law, as a
thing necessary to salvation: and that (as appears in the wrytings of the
Apostles) it has always been accounted an infallible note of false Apostles
to plead works, and that of GOD his own Law, in the matter of justification,
let then this second note drawn from the manner of God his calling of the
Gentiles without inioyning them the observations of his own law, be
sufficient in a word to touch the shameless boldness of the Catolikes, that
dare shuffle in dross and trumperie of their own forging, to claim
righteousness withal, that I stand no longer to convince those, as injurious to
the death and bloudsheading of Christ Jesus, who teach that they have works
sufficient, not only to purchase Heaven for themselves, but also a surplus and
ouerflow to help others withal, that will pay sweetly for them, in as much
as their own conscience every night when they go to bed, may teach them,
if they truly examine it, that of themselves they are not able to think so
much as one good thought, and therefore must needs ascribe salvation to the
only and alone free mercy of God in Christ, laid hold on by the sure and
strong hand of a constant faith, works being no manner of cause thereof at all,
the which Friar Ferus, a man of their own, writing upon this tenth Chapter
of the Acts, in most plain words, does confess, saying: For so in that
first and most great calling of the Gentiles, they ought to have been made
equal with the Jews without all manner of help of the Law, that it might
be now manifestly known, that righteousness comes of the only grace and
election of God, and not of works: than the which, what can be spoken more
truly, and more agreeable to the truth. The Lord if it be his will, open their
eyes, that in this and all other points, they may bow and yield unto the
truth.

Thus much of the reiection of the Jews, and calling of the Gentiles, by
occasion of GOD his calling Cornelius, being a Gentile, to the knowledge of his
truth.

The second ^raunche of the first part.
In the second branch of this first general, comes to be considered,
Cornelius his profession and trade of life, which our present text says to
be a Captain of the Italian band at Cesarea, The practice of the Romans.
for it was an usual thing among the Romans, to place in the great towns or
Cities that they won, garrisons of armed men and soldiers, as well to
defend them against the invasions of the Parthians, whom besides many other
ennimyes, they were often and very daungerouslye encombred wythall, as also to
wythstande and keep under rebellion, and tumultuous vproares of the Jews, if
at any time they should attempt an insurrection: and further, that if need
should require, they might upon short warning, out of these garrisons
placed in every Town and City, gather a just and full army, being
assaulted, to defend themselves.

These bands consisted some of more and some of fewer Souldioures, some
footemenne, and some horsemenne.

The first or chief band contained commonly a thousand footemenne, over
which was a General, and every Centurye, or hundredth, had besides, his
several Captain, which of the number of Soldiers under his conducte, was
commonly called a Centurion, or Captain over an hundredth men. Such a one
was our Cornelius, who in that he is termed to be Ruler of the Italian band,
we may gather, that he was both an Italian himself, and also in good
estimation with the Emperor: For as the Romans g thered their garrisons out
of sundry Country men, of the which also they had their names, like as this
consisting of Italians is thereof called the Italian band, so likewise did they
make greatest accounts, and reposed most confidence in ye garrisons of their
own countrymen, out of which also for ye most part there were chosen Captains
such as best liked the Emperor. It is (I say) therefore very likelye, that
Cornelius being made Captain of the Italian band, was himself an Italian
well lyked of the Emperor. More than this, both he and his band were not
such as carried their houses on their backs, or were in this place to day,
and in an other to morrow, but had their fyxed and settled seat and abode
at Cesarea, Cesarea.
a City of Palestina, which was a Sea-town not far from the Mount Carmel, and
called sometimes Stratoes Castle or Tower, but afterward new builded by
Herod, and in the honor of Caesar the Noble, called after his name, Cesarea,
and at this time chiefliest inhabited of the Jews, for whose better keeping
under awe, Cornelius with his garrison was there placed, like as in other their
Cities in Syria and Palastina, for like considerations they had appointed to
them their several garrisons. I note this, because there were besides many
other Cities in other Countries, called by this name, as is to be seen in
Strabo and Stephanus, the which I omit, as not pertaynyng to my matter.

Now if you call to remembrance the manners and conditions of the soldiers
of that age, The manner of ye Roman soldiers.
and how far they were departed from the old discipline and usage observed
in wars, God his wonderful dealing in calling Cornelius shall the better
appear. It is well known to those that are conversant in histories, that the
Roman soldiers, when they went to war upon other nations, they had no
regard neither of right nor equity, or law, or honesty, or shame, or
conscience, but were wholly bente upon the spoil, as hungry as Wolves, as
greedye as Lions, as merciless as Tygres, as subtle as Foxes, as religious as
horses, as chaste as Goats, as harmless as common Robbers by the high way
sides. Out of this kind of men, it pleased GOD for to choose his Church, the
first fruits of the Gentiles, that look by how much their life was more
vnorderlye than any other kind of men, by so much his mercy might be judged
the greater, in that it pleased him to take them out of their vile filth and
stinking puddle of sin, in which they wallowed, and lay overwhelmed and
drowned, and by his holy Spirit so to renew them, that by the mighty and
effectual working of the same, the corruptions of the old manne being
mortifyed, they might deteste those offenses, unto the which before they
ran with greediness.

Cornelius his virtues therefore so rare in such licentiousness of life, and
looseness of manners, as at that time reigned every where, but principallye
amongst Souldioures, are both to be commended and praised, and highly also to
be wondered at: who in such greediness of spoil, was so well content with his
own: in such unmercifulness of others, was himself more merciful: in such
rudeness, so courteous: in such barbarousnesse, so gentle: in such
irreligiousnesse, so religious: in such wickedness, so godly: which virtues,
as he had them not of himself, so do they the clearer set forth the grace
of GOD in him, who stayed him, that he followed not the multitude to do evil,
neither was led with the most sort, to do, as most do.

The Doctrines which this second branch ministers unto us, are diverse, but
chieflye these: First, that with God there is no respect of persons, but that
out of al trades of life, and sorts of men, those that hate sin and delighte in
righteousness, are acceptable to him: so ye here for our comfort is set down,
that which the Scriptures plentifully other where do teach, before him, there
is neither bond nor free, neither rich nor poor, neither wise, nor foolish,
neither man, nor woman, neither Gretian, nor Barbarian, Jew, nor Gentile, but
whosoever he be that calls on the name of the Lord, shall be saved. In
great mercy he has received Noah the drunken, Abraham the Idolater, Lot the
incestuous, David an adulterer. Mathewe the Publicane, Peter the denier of his
Master. Paul the persecutor, and Cornelius the Captain, not to encourage us
boldelye to sin, but for to assure us (if of infirmity falling with these,
we do with the same by hearty repentance run unto him) he has in store for us
the like mercy which he had for the^. As for such as can peruersly allege the
falls of the godly as bucklers for their wickedness, their estate is
dangerous and almost desperate, but the LORD keep us from presumptuous and
malicious sins.

We see here again, in that Cornelius ^ Captain and Souldioure is called by
GOD to the understanding of his word and faith in Christ, and not bidden to
lay aside armoure, and cast away his weapon, and take him to a new ^rade and
profession of life, that the vocation of a souldioure is such, as if it be
well and honestlye used, displeases not GOD, and that it is also lawful for ^
Christian Magistrate (for such a one was Cornelius) to use the sword, either
^or the defense of the godly, or for the punishment of the wicked, the which
Paul at large teaches in the thirteenth of the Romans, and I mention in a
word to overthrow the fury of the Anabaptists, which contrary to the
scrip^ures do teach, that it is unlawful for ^he Magistrate to use the sword.

We learn further, that under vngod^y persecutors and wicked Tirants, God
notwithstanding has always had ^ome that have feared and served him: So in
the Court of Pharao was Joseph under Achab, Obadiah, under the King of Aram,
Naaman the Syrian: under Herod the Ruler at Capernaum: amongste the Scribes
and Pharisees, that made a law to excommunecate Christ, and all those that
did confess him, the chief ruler of the Sinagoge: under Tyberius, or else
Caligula, a most cruel persecuter, this Cornelius. And I nothing doubt, but
that at this day within the gates and palace of Rome, the Lord has yet some
one good Obadiah or other, that one day he will use, as singular instruments
for the behoof of his Church.

Yet is there behind one lesson more to be learned out of this second member,
very profitable, being applied, for these our days and times, that we now
live in, for out of this that is here said of Cornelius his being Captain of
the Italian band at Cesarea, you evidently see by that which has been
noted before of Cesarea, namelye, that it was a Town of the Jews, but
subjected to the Romans, with all the rest of the Country: you see (I say,)
that many times it comes to pass, that GOD delivers up a people that
was wont ^o be governed by godly laws and orders, and under godly Princes,
unto Tirants and persecutors, for their great ^ngratitude and
unthankfulness. For who were ever better governed, and with more equal and
reasonable government, than were the people of the Jews: ^et when they
disdained to be ordered, ^y the government of godly Princes, whom GOD
appointed over them, ^n the end, he bereaved them of that be^efite, and gave
them, who knew not ^ell to use the liberty that he had pla^ed them in, so
far over unto the subie^ion of others, that they were now not ^^ely under
the rule of Presidentes and ^eputies, but also had in all their Ci^es, bands,
and garrisons of forre^ souldi^rs, amongst the which, albeit some ^nes they
met with some one such as ^is our Cornelius, which was a thing ^oste
seldom, yet the miseries that vn^^^ those other, they suffered, were
won^^^full, and such as they can better re^e^ber, yt sometimes have lived
under ye gripings of the sharp talants of those eagree and greedy Hawks, I
mean the violence of foreign Souldioures, than I am able to express: and the
Lord, if it be his will, grant, that we Englishmen have never last, nor
experience of the like.

Let us therefore here-out learn t^ be thankful unto God for placing over
us in great mercy so godly and gracious (...) Queen, a lesson for England.
under whose most quiet and peaceable government (notwithstanding ye wi^ked
foretellings and lying Prophesies o^ false ^arted papists of her majesty's det^
at the end of this seven, and that seven besides their malicious practices, to
accomplish it, for the which some of the^ heads have bin worthily exalted,
as ^ trust the rest, if they may be know^ shall be as they well deserve to
be.) W^ have thus long enioied the clear shini^ light of the Gospel, and GOD
gran^ her to his good will and pleasure many yer^^ more to reign over us still
for the bett^^ and more plentiful furtheraunce of t^ preaching of his word,
let us (I say learn to be thankful, and not give oc^asion through our
great contempt and disobedience, and godless, and far ^nchristian living,
that God in his great ^rath and hot anger, take her majesty ^waye from us, and
with her also his ^orde, as in our remembrance for the ^^ke sins, he did
our virtuous King Edward, her Graces most dear and ^odly brother. We were
unworthy of ^im then, we are unworthy of her now: ^e contemned the word
preached under ^im then: we are weary of it preached under her Majesty now:
there was much ^^aching under him then, and small folo^ing: there is more
teaching under her ^owe, and a great deal less following. For our not
following then, he took from ^s our zealous Josias, and scourged us ^y a
Marie: his arm is not shortened, he ^an again for our not following now,
^ake away our virtuous and godly De^ora, and punish us with the like: Pray,
^ray, and most heartily beloved, pray, that ^e do it not, as our sins have
well de^erued, that he should do it. For if he do it, as this and far
greater plagues he has threatened to those that are contemners of his word,
by the miseries that heretofore you have suffered in the late days of
affliction, you may easily gather what shall be the state of the godly under
all wicked Athaliahs, and merciless Tyrants, such as GOD uses to send
upon those that have not learned to be thankful and obedient unto virtuous,
gentle, and godly Gouernoures. Wherefore, if in the former days of trouble,
with great and grievous sobbes and sighs, we have lamented our
unthankfulness toward the word, when we had it: Now the Lord to try us,
has once again sent it, let us remember to be thankful: if then in our
miseries, we could consider how great a plague it was to be punished with a
Tyraunte, let us now weigh^ how great a blessyng it is, to be governed by
so gentle and merciful a Queen if then we longed to be delivered from the
heavy yoke of foreign cruelty: let us now pour out our most harty^^
prayers, for the continuance of our joyful liberty, under the long and
prosperous reign of our Sovereign Lady: if when in times before, we had
the Gospel, we brought forth no fruits of the Gospel, let us, having
now again the Gospel, pray to our GOD, that our conversation and living
may be agreeable to the Gospel, least (as before I noted,) our heinous
offenses, worthilye provoke our GOD in great displeasure, to take from us
our gracious Gouernesse, under whose Christian regiment we have thus long
enjoyed it, and many years longer God grant we may have both her and it, and
in a holy and virtuous walking, express and follow it, least for our
ingratitude we taste of the like sause, that the Jews did for their
disobedience, which, as I have had very fit occasion, by their subjection
unto others to note, so I beseech you pray all hartilye to GOD, that we may
be warned and learned by it. For truly (beloved) unless we bring forth better
fruits of Christianity, than hitherto we have done it, can not be chosen, but
that God must needs punish us with this, or some other far greater
punishment, if any can be greater. You muse peradventure to see me so
fearful, and I much more wonder, to see England so careless. If you will
ask of me, why I think that GOD will visit us, I answer, for the multitude
of our sins and offenses, which daily are committed expressly against his
word, and for many of them being notorious and such as he himself has
commanded to be punished with death, Why God must needs ^unishe Eng^ande.
either they are often let pass unpunished, or else there is no punishment
for them at all, or if there be, it is so toyishe, I had almost said Popish,
that it rather cherishes, than kylleth the sin. And because you shall not
think my words to be as it were but a skar Crow, or that I have made much
ado about nothing, I will note unto you in a word some of them, and leave to
your judgment, whether that I have spoken, that which I have spoken,
without cause, or no, or also as not appertayning to my matter in hand of the
Jews at Cesarea and other places, being in subjection for their sins to
foreign power, that we may avoid the great sins which we daily run into,
for fear of the like or greater punishment, by how much our knowledge and
teaching is greater and clearer than theirs. Swearing.
Swearing and blaspheming the name of God, as it is a figure that clearly
touches the honor of God, so in his word is it expressly forbidden, and
also commanded to be punished with death, yet how outragiously and commonly
is it used amongst all degrees and states of people, from the Lord to the
beggar, and from the Courtier to the Carter, yea to the young child of three
years old: besides that I fear me a great number this Fayer and at other
times, do lay their souls to paune to the Dyuell by fearful oaths for their
gaynes, sometimes but of a penny in uttering their wares: and what punishmente
I pray you is there for it? It is written that the Plague shall never depart
from the house of the swearer, and think you then that it hangs not over the
land in which is such terrible swearing in the clear light of the Gospel,
and the offenders not touched with so much as a fillip? if there were no more
but this, it is not without cause that I put you in mind to leave it, least
the Lord do plague you. It is set down by the Prophet for one of the causes
of ye children of Isreal's being led into captivity, ^reach of ye ^abboth.
for that they kept not the Lords Sabbath: and what became of him that
gathered sticks on that day, I doubt not but you will remember: we
notwithstanding on the Lords day must have Fayers kept, must have Bear
baytyng, Bulbayting (as if it were a thing of necessity for the Bears of Paris
garden to be bayted on the Sunnedaye) must have baudie Enterludes, silver
games, dicing, carding, tabling, dancing, drinking, and what I pray you is
the penalty of the offenders herein, forsooth a flap with a Fox tail, as if
our Savior Christ had commen for his day to set us at liberty to do what we
list. And truly a lamentable thing it is to tell, but a great deal more
lamentable, that it is not punished. I dare boldelye stand to auouche it, that
there is no day in the week, wherein God is so much dishonored, as on that
day when he should be best served. And must we for these abuses think at
the Lords hand to escape uncorrected: Drunke^ne^
What should I speak of beastly drunkenness, which so far as I can learn,
has no punishmente at all? What of whordome, Whordom^
by the law of the most vprighte lawe-maker that ever was, being made a
Capital sin, and which the Evangelist Luke in the parable of the seed
terms a thorn, shall we think that a thorn will be killed with spreading a
white sheet over it, when it rather craves an axe? So to think to restrain
it, is as endless and fond a work as to go about to hew down a great
thorn with a bull-rushe: the Lord if it be his good pleasure, grant us a
sharper tool to cut both it and other stinckyng weeds down with all, for I
assure you, if these vices be thus still, either not at all punished, or else
so slightly punished, the Lord will more sharply punish us, either in such
sort as I have showed you he did these Jews, or in some other more grievous,
as he wants not infinite means unknown unto us, to punish the contempt of
his word, from whence these vices spring, the which I pray God the
chastisemente of these Jews may cause us to shun.

^he third ^nch of the ^t general ^nte.
For the third branch of my first part is set down, that Cornelius was a
Godly, or a religious and devout man, and one that feared God: where comes to
be handled Cornelius his Godliness and virtue. The word which is commonly
translated a devout and a religious man, and here attributed to Cornelius,
does properly signify one that does truly and in such sort as he ought to
do, worshippeth GOD, a right and a true worshipper of God, whereby we learn
that Cornelius had now forsaken and given over his old Heathenish religion,
in which his father, and fathers fathers in many generations had long
continued, worshipping those for Gods, whom it pleased men so to account.
For the case so stood concerning religion with the Romans then, as it did
with us in the late days of Popery, in which none might be taken for a
Saint, but such as the Pope his holiness had Canonized for a Saint. For
Tertullian in his book called an Apology or defense against the Gentiles.
Page. 186. and 587. as is printed at Paris by Paruus, does show, that it was a
decree amongst ye Romans, that none should be made a God by the Emperor,
unless he were first allowed of the Senate, in so much that when Tiberius
Caesar having heard of the miracles of Christ, would by prerogative of his
Emperourshippe have made him a God, the Senate would none of him, because they
had not allowed him. The world was then grown to a trim pass, that man
must forsooth be good unto God. For unless God pleases man, he shall be no
God, as Tertullian in ye same place speaks. By this appears how dangerous
it was for Cornelius a public magistrate to embrace Christ his religion, whom
the Romayne Senate so scornefully disdayned. And what crueltye they used
toward the Christians, the stories of ye age do sufficiently witness, which
show, that the christians were smered over with pitch and Rosen alive, and set
on fire with torches to light their cruel Persecuters home from their
banckquets in the night. But it was (no doubt) the mighty operation of God his
holy spirit, that had armed him against all encombraunces that might fall upon
him, who (no doubt) had prepared himself against displeasure, loss of his
office and captaineship, and also loss of life too, the least of which
might otherwise have discouraged him, who amongst ye Jews also could see
nothing that might heart him on, but rather pull him back, seeing amongst them
so manifold corruptions and passing ignorance of the law of God, a small and
slender knowledge whereof was rare to be found, even in the thousandth man of
them, in so much that some think, and that very godly, that it came to pass
by the special and singular providence of God, that Cornelius met with some
zealous and learned Jew, that instructed him in the true knowledge and
understanding of the law, by means whereof he so much profited in religion
and fear of the Lord.

1 We learn first out of this third branch, The Lessons of this third
branch.
in that Cornelius leaves his old heathenish religion and Idolatry, which his
forefathers followed, yt we must not be away from the truth neither with
multitude nor prescription of time. It is a common argume^nt now adays, what
are you better than your forefathers? did not they go to mass, worship Images,
run on Pilgrimage, fall down before the holy sacrament of the Alter, and to
be short, observe all order of holy Church? Why should you therefore be so
singular? are you wiser or better learned than they? Al these I say, and what
soever else may be alleged to like purpose, does the example of Cornelius
confute, who for the maintenance of his old Paganism, might very well have
recited ye examples of his forefathers, and the long and ancient continuance
of the heathenishe religion, by thousands of years more aunciente than it of
the Popes, in comparison of his being as it were but an infant of a days old.
Let us therefore after his example in matters of religion set aside the
practice of our forefathers: and let our old ancient customs veil their
bonnet to the word of the Lord. For so are we directly in his holy word
commanded: Thou shall not follow a multitude to do evil. Exodus 23.2.
And again: walk ye not in the ordinances of your fathers, neither observe
their manners, nor defile your selves with their Idols. I am the Lord your God:
Walk in my statutes, and keep my judgments, and do them, etc. Oh that our
Papists had eyes to see this, and hearts to believe it, with earnest minds
also to follow it, then would they not be so blinded with these vain
shadows of fathers, times and customs, but would measure ye truth of
religion by the square of the word, which the Lord if it be his pleasure,
grant them to do.

2 Secondly we learn out of this place and by this example of Cornelius, in
receiving of true religion, not to tarry until the chief rulers and
Magistrates embrace it, but so soon as God reuealeth it unto us, presently to
take the occasion offered, and to follow it, otherwise if Cornelius had waited
upon the Emperors receiving it, he might till this day have wallowed in his
old puddle of hethenishe superstition, like as in many cuntries at this time,
if the people should tarry the leisure of their Princes, they must still
remain in the filth of Popish Idolatry. Those Neutres therefore, that if
there come an hundredth chaunges, are still iumpe of the Princes religion, are
by this example manifestly confuted. Yet hereof does not follow, that if the
magistrate command false religion, that therefore, the subject may with
force ^esist, but rather offering his body to the pleasure of his Prince, for
the freedom ^f his conscience, say with the Apostle: Whether it be better to
obey God or man, judge you.

3 Thirdely, in that the holy Ghost says, that Cornelius was a religious or
devout manne, is most apparante that to be godly and religious apperteyneth
not only to the ministers, but also unto those whom they call secular
persons, by which also is beaten down their vain distinction, made between
them of the ministry, and the rest of the people, the one of them to be
termed the Spirituality, and the other, the Temporaltie: the one the Clergy,
and the other the Laytie: which difference as it came first from Rome, so I
would to GOD that there it were again. The only good it has done is this,
namely, it has made a great many, and that of those principallye which are
of greatest callings, to think, that it belongs only to those of the
ministry to be godly, to be zealous, to fear GOD, to be religious, as
for themselves they need take no care nor keep of any such matter, but
rather with greedynesse follow every one that which best^ likes his
corrupt affection. But thy^ example of Cornelius, said to be a devout and
religious man, sufficientlye confuteth all those which so think, and withal,
learneth every particular person, that he must be careful to serve GOD, to
fear him, to worship him, to pray unto him, and that religiously and deu^^tly,
and that it is not only the part of every private man so to do, but also
concerns as well the Magistrate, for Cornelius was a Magistrate, and therefore
hereby is also overthrown the most wicked assertion of the vnpure Atheiste
Machiauel, Machiauell.
who shameth not in most ungodly manner to teach, that princes need make no
accounte of godliness and true religion, but only to make an outward show
of it: for that (says he) is enough, albeit in mind they abhor it. And that
which is most horrible, he affirms further, that the religion of christians
casts them down into too much humility, abateth al courage and towardness,
and makes the^ fit to be wronged and spoiled, whereas ye religion of ye
Gentiles makes them ^o be of stout courage, and emboldneth them manly to
atchiue great matters: yet will he forsooth, that Princes pretend religion, the
better to keep their subjects within the compass of their duties, with the
fear and reverence thereof. This poison and a great deal more such filth
blusheth not this malaperte and pelting Town-cleark of Florence to spew out,
teaching Princes not to make accountes of religion or godliness: and yet must
this vile beast in many courts of other nations be the only Court book, nay
the Alcoram and God of Courtiers, whose devilish precepts they put in daily
ure, learning to be godless. The Lord grant he take no place among our
courtiers, and that they rather set before the^ ye examples of this our
Cornelius, of David, of Josias, of Ezechias, and such like, who were all
magistrates, and godly and religious magistrates, and in the scripture highly
commended for the same, whose factes and deeds unto godliness, I humbly
exhort our nobility and gentlemen rather to follow, than the decrees of this
deceyuer, and the furies of this Excetra and venomous serpent unto Atheism and
ungodliness. Excetra w^ a kind of ^nemous S^^pent. from whom wherone head w^
cut off, three sprang up in his stead as they do write of him


Fourthly, Cornelius being a public Magistrate, and openly professing
religion, not waying the danger that thereby might ensue unto him, as the
displeasure of the Emperor, the loss of his living, of his gooddes, and of
his life, teaches all men, and amongst the rest noble men, boldlye to
profess and also express religion and godliness, and not to stand aloof
for fear of displeasure, and loss of their honor, their rooms, and their
offices, as a great many nowadayes do, where there is in deed no fear,
having so Godly a Prince, unto whom nothing can be more joyful than to
hear that her nobilitye and commons are most religious and Godly. A great
many in this clear light of the Gospel, in which every man under his own
vine, and under his own fig tree (as the Prophet speaks) may boldly
sit and reason of the words and ways of his GOD, are notwythstandyng so
luke warm, or rather in deed key cold, that one can not tell what to make of
the^. They are very like the thing called Spo^gia, the which a man can hardely
tell whether it have any life at al, saving that when it is touched, it draws
it self more closelye together, and cleaves a great deal faster, to the
thing it hangs on: so they all these twenty years, in which the word has
been preached, are notwithstanding so close to themselves, that you can not by
any means know their religion, or what they profess: nay. if such as by
their calling it lies upon to try them, and therefore doubting of them will go
about to feel them, to see whether there be in them any life of the word and
any knowledge of God meet for a christian, then will they indeed play the
right Spongiaes, and clean more hardly to their rock of close profession,
shrinking in their selves, and will not stick to say unto you: my religion (Sir)
nay you must pardon me therein, I keep that secret from my dearest friend: none
shall know my conscience, but God and my self. But truly it were greatly to be
wished, yt the Queens Majesty would take order, that these Spongiaes, of what
degree soever they be, may be pulled up from this stone of secret and privy
profession, and the rather, for that it can not be chosen, but yt they which
deal so closely toward God in this peace of ye Gospel, must needs be as
hollow hearted toward her majesty, what soever they pretend to the contrary.
But these are the warye children, they will bear themselves warily and wisely
as they think, for fear of a change, but the Lord (I trust) in blessing her
majesty with long continuance of reygne over us, will disappoint them of their
purpose, as hitherto he has done, and cause that before they have their
change, they themselves shall first make a change of life with death, by one
means or other. In the mean season, the Lord grant her few of these
doubtful Spongiaes, and great store of Cornelia^s, such as do boldlye, but yet
truly religiouslye and deuoutely serve and fear the Lord. For in those does
consiste her su^este safety, and those, when so ever she shall have need,
she shall find her trustiest friends. For those that truly worship God,
and embrace his religion, will no doubt, most faithfully serve and obey her.
But were it so with us, as it is with many of our brethren in other Countries,
that we could not serve GOD truly without the danger of our lives, yet
Cornelius, who was in the like danger, tells us what to do, and so does
also Daniel, with Sydrach, Misach, and Abednago: of the which, he chose rather
to be cast into the Lions den, than he would make prayer to any other than
the true God: and they thought it better to be thrown into the hot burning
oven, than to worship ye golden image of Nabucha^nezer. For this saying of
Christ shall stand to the end of the world true: He that is ashamed to
acknowledge me before me^, I will be also ashamed to acknowledge him before my
father in the kingdom of heaven. But the case is nothing so with us as it was
with Cornelius. We may profess religion, in safety, he could not without
danger: we enjoy the word in peace, he with persecution: we with the liking
of our Prince have the liberty of our conscience, he could not serve God
without the displeasure of the Emperor: we need not to fear the loss of life
nor goods, he stood in great hazard of them both: and yet in this great
peace, prosperity, quiet, safety, and liberty, we stand upon such a nice and
tender point, of saving honor, estimation, credit, favor, love and liking,
that rare is that man that will venture to open his mouth for the furtheraunce
of the building of Gods Church, or speak for the preferring of good and godly
causes, whereas in our own causes, if it be for a license that may tend to our
own commodity, or that may enrich our own coffers, albeit to the great
hindraunce of many others, Lord, how will we labor, toil, travel, go, run,
ride, speak, sue, and sue again, till we have obtained it, which argues in
us great want of zeal, for the glory of God, which he for his Christ's sake
stir up, and kindle in us. We are far unlike the good Christian Captain
Terenti, ^erentius a ^b^e Capi^^yne.
who returning with a joyful victory over his Princes enemies, Valens the
Emperor badde ask what benefit he would at his hand, for his good service,
and he should have it, who having before his eyes, the furtherance of Gods
glory, rather tha^ the seeking of his own profit, requested, that the
Christians which had ventured their lives in Gods cause, might have a Church
erected to serve God in, aparte from the Arrian Heretics. The Emperor being
much moved at this request, in great anger tore his supplication in pieces,
and threw it on the ground, bidding him ask some other thing, that might be
for his preferment: but he with a heavy countenance gathering up ye pieces of
his supplication, answered: I have my reward, I will ask nothing else. This
was indeed a right Cornelius, a devout man, and one that feared God. O that al
Princes had store of such Terenties about them, that did make greter esteem of
Gods glory tha^ accounts of their own gain and commodity, so should true
religion more freshly florishe, than in many places it does, the most part
being busied about their own profit, whilst it being neglected, falls
miserably to decay and ruin, the Lord for his mercies sake amend it.

As you have hitherto heard of such virtues in Cornelius, The fourth branch
in ye first general
as did testify his inward sincerity toward God, namely, his
religiousnesse and fear of God, so hereafter I will make plain unto you such
outward exercises of his, as are sufficient testimonies of his inward
godliness, amongst the which is first his godly bringing up of all his
family, being the fourth circumstaunce of my first general point, and is
contained in these words: He feared God with all his household, which could
not be small, he being a Magistrate, and Captain of such countenance, as
you have heard, and therefore his diligence and pains (no doubt) was
exceedyng great, which he took, in instructing such a number in the fear
and knowledge of the Lord, wherein the holy Ghost witnessing, that they all
profyted, it appears evidently, that God did wonderfuly bless his godly
endeavor and faithful travail, by which it came to pass, that to his great
joy and comfort (no doubt) he had now a Church in his own house, as every
true worshipper of God, in his fear should labor to have.

Thus you see, that Cornelius thought if not enough to be godly himself,
unless he had his household godly to: he was not content himself alone to
serve God, but would have his family also to do the like: he judged it his
duty, as he himself was religious, so to make holy unto God all those which
were his: he would not his self alone walk in the ways of the Lord, and
suffer his servants belonging to his charge, to do what they list, to run
(as they say) at randone, to be at their own liberty, and to live as
strangers from God, but would make them partakers of that knowledge, which he
himself had learned, which as it was a matter of great pain, so was it also
of no mall danger, the religion of the Jews being then in a manner
universally hated and disdained, yea, and that which more is, of the proud
and scornful Romans cruellye persecuted.

But Cornelius was not ignorant, that it was far better to please God, than
men, and that the ignorance of his family, should be laid to his charge, if
through his negligence and slothfulness to instruct them, they ran into his
ignorance. Therefore not weighing the scorn nor persecution of me^, he walks
uprightly in the dischardge of his duty, and faithfully and painefullye
teaches his whole family, to serve and fear the LORD, and in the end,
reapeth the fruit of his labors, namelye, the profiting of his whole
household in the true fear of the Lord, Let this whole treatise of
childrens education, and household gouer^ment be well marked.
GOD bounteously blessing his godly care and Christian travel. We be taught
hereby, that it is not enough for every man to be devout and religious, and
to fear God himself, unless he also faithfully and diligently labor to
make all his household and family godly and religious to, which cannot be
done without much pain and travel, in diligent instructing them in the word
of the Lord, and in the principles of Christian religion, which duty as it
ought of all householders without any exception be performed, so is it almost
of all without exception neglected, to the high displeasure of almighty God,
who has straightly and expressly commanded it, and also to the great shame of
us, that have so fowlie foreslewed it. But because this may seem unto some, a
strange doctrine, and I peradventure be judged very precise that would lay
such a heavy burden upon men's necks, I will therefore directly prove unto you
out of the word of GOD, that it belongs generallye unto all persons, of what
degree and calling soever, to instruct their children and family in the word
of the LORD, insomuche, that not the greatest Emperor nor Monarche of the
world, can omit this duty, without high contempt unto GOD in neglecte of
that which he has so plainly and earnestly commanded, nay I say further,
that every householder whatsoever, is not only bound himself to be godly, and
to train up his household in godliness, but also to turn out of his house
and service all such as are ungodly and tell scorn to learn. And I will not
only say this, but directlye prove it by the Scripture, and I will do it, as
drawn thereunto by manifest occasion of my Text, which says, that
Cornelius with all his household feared God. For I have hitherto noted nothing,
neither hereafter mean to do, but that the godly may easily see, that the
circumstances of my Text led me evidently thereunto: the which I speak
because of scoffing quarellers, who, if the Preacher in great zeal speak any
thing to the rebuking of some notorious sin, although it be never so godly
spoken, yet if it be not bounded within the limits of his Text, they by and
by flowte at it, and say it was done for want of matter, albeit in deed it
make no matter, what such scoffers prate and babble.

Deuteronomy. 4.9.
In the fourth of Deuteronomie, it is written thus: But take heed to thy self,
and keep thy soul diligently, that thou forget not the things which thine
eyes have seen, and that they depart not out of thine heart, all the days
of thy life, but teach them thy sons, and thy sons sons. Deuteronomy. 6.7.
Likewise in the sixte chapter of the same book: And thou shall rehearse them
continually unto thy children, and shalt talk of them when thou tarriest in
thine house, and as thou walk by the way, and when thou lie down, and
when thou risest up. This is again repeated in the eleauenth chapter, and a
blessing added to those that perform it, in these words: That your days may
be multiplied, and the days of your children, in the land, which the Lord
swear unto your fathers to give them, as long as the Heavens are above the
Earth. Psalm. 78.6.7.
The like you have in the Psalm, where you find it thus written: That the
posterity might know it, and the children, which should be borne, should
stand up, and declare it to their children, that they might set their hope on
God, and not forget the works of God, but keep his commandments. Ephesians. 6.4.
To the Ephesians, parents are commanded to bring up their children in
instruction and information of the Lord. Deuteronomy. 17.19.
In Deuteronomie, the king himself is charged diligently to be exercised in
the reading of ye word of the Lord, as well for the instruction of himself,
as also the better government of his subjects in the fear of the Lord This
thing did the good King Josias observe, 2. King. 23.2.3.
reading his own self the law of the Lord unto his subjects, and caused
all to make a covenant, that they would walk according to that which they
understood the Lord to require at their hand. Joshua, the valiaunte and
virtuous Captain of the LORD, did daily read the word of the Lord, and
out of it very godly exhort all the people to fear and serve the Lord.

The Queen of Sheba greatly commends 1. King. ^^.
King Solomon for his godly order in his house and family. David, whom ye
scriptures report to have bin a King according to God his own heart, was not
only godly himself, but also careful to have all his subjects, and
principallye those of his own house, unfeignedly to fear the Lord, as
appears in the Psalm. 101. where he says: That he will destroy such as
privily slander their neighbor, that he will not suffer those that have
proud looks and high hearts: that those which are the faithful of the
land, shall dwell with him, and those that walk in the perfect way, shall
serve him: that no deceitful person shall dwell with him, nor any that tells
lies remain in his sight: that he will betymes cut off all the wicked of
the land, and to be short, concerning the government of his house, that he
will walk in the uprightness of his heart, in the midst of his house,
whereby, as the words following do declare, he means to use exquisite
diligence in trayning up his household in the service of the Lord. Helie the
Priest of the Lord, for letting his children run at liberty, is himself
charged to have committed those sins, which in his sons he let pass
unpunished: besides that, God fearfully punished both him and his sons, for
neglecting his duty in this behalf, for he himself fell and brake his neck,
his two sons were slain in battle both in one day, the Ark of the Lord
taken by the Philistines, and.3000. people slain, his sons wife upon the
news sodainelye brought to bed before her time, and dies in travail,
which heavy judgments may learn al men worthily to tremble at the
forslewing their duty, in instructing their families. Abraham is greatly
praised for his carfulness, in teaching his children and household to walk in
the ways of the Lord: For thus it is written of him: For I know him, Genesis
18.19.
that he will command his sons and his household after, that they keep the way of
the Lord, to do righteousness and judgment, that the Lord may bring upon
Abraham, that he has spoken unto him. All these both commandments and
examples (do I trust) sufficiently prove, that it is the part of al men, of
what calling soever, to use singular diligence and travail, to have their
family, and such as belong to their charge, to fear the Lord. As for that I
said they must also keep none such in their house as are stubborn, and
tell scorn to serve the Lord, the example of David out of the.101. psalm,
who will suffer no wicked person to dwell with him, nor serve him, and
therefore none that fears not the Lord, does sufficiently prove it. But thou
will say, David was a King, and I say unto thee, so art thou both a King
and Bishop to, over thy house and family: a King by government, to keep in
awe: and a Bishop by instruction to teach: and may so much the easier and
with less danger, teach and correct thine own family, as it is easier and
less dangerous to deal with a private family, tha^ with a whole realm, and
therefore the greater punishmnt shalt thou have, if herein thou omit thy duty.

If then the instructing of those under our government in the word of the
Lord be such, The nece^ty of instructing those under our^ charge in (...)
fear of the Lord.
as by the commandment of God is laid upon all: if Kings notwithstanding
their many cares and troubles, are not exempted from this duty: if Capitaines
in war, who of al other might seem to be privileged, are tied to this
charge: If Helie the Priest of the Lord were punished with ye neck break for
omitting it: if Abraham were greatly praised for the doing of it: What is he
that can challenge to himself freedom, from the performaunce of this, both
godly and necessary duty? Abraham.
God fayeth of Abraham, I know he will teach his children and household, to
walk in the ways of the Lord: But (alas) my beloved, what is the man, or
where is his dwelling, of whom we may say, I know he is painful in
instructing his children and household in the ways of the Lord. Surely such a
one is almost as rare upon earth, as a black Swan.

It is said of this our Cornelius, Cornelius.
that he feared God with his whole household, but how many housholdes may ^e and
amongst us, where the goodman himself makes no accounts of religion, (...)
marvel then, if the rest of his family be Godless? The Lord by Moses
commands his people, daily to ins^^^^^^ their children in the knowledge of
his word: but so far are the most part of us from doing thereof, that we
our selves read not in a year a Chapter of it.

And whereas every man is bound to catechize his own family, a great many
of our ministers are so ignorant, that they had need to learn. Catechismes
themselves, which, as in respect of their ignorance, it is very met they
should do, so for the same respect it were far better that they were utterly
removed, and able Pastors put in their roomths. ^uid.
David will walk with an vprighte heart in the midst of his house, and we
will walk in our houses we care not how loosely. ^
Josias at once hearing the law of the Lord, immediatlye prepares himself
to obey the same, and binds all his Subjects by couenaunte to do the like.
The Lord put it into the mind of our godly Princess, that as she is of
her self willing to hear the Law of the Lord, so likewise after the example
of good Josias, she may be careful to cause all her Subjects to make a
couenaunte, to walk after the commandments of the LORD: so (I trust) there
would be speedy remedy against this great neglecting of our duty, in the
virtuous education of our families in the fear of the Lord, the which on
our parts being so much forslewed, it is no marvel, if many times we
find small obedience, How God punishes the forslewing o^ this duty.
at the hands of our household. For so does God often leave manifest tokens
of his wrath, in punishing disobedience with disobedience.

How canste thou, whosoever thou art, look to have thy family faithful
unto thee, and thou thy self art faithless to GOD? do thou maruayle that
thy servants fear not thee, when as thou fear not the Lord, will thou
stiffely maintain thine authority over those under thy charge, and thy
self, yield no obedience unto the authority of the eternal? Think thou
much that thy wife and thy children show themselves not so obedient unto
thee, as peradventure they ought, and canste thou not see how thy self art
a Traytoure and Rebel unto God, without all keep or regard breaking his
statutes, and without any prick or remorse of conscience, neglecting and
contemning his commandementes? How shall those under thy charge perform their
duty unto thee, if thou perform no duty unto God? Nay how rather shall they
first learn to fear God, and then next truly serve thee without instruction
in the word of the Lord? Is it not expreslye set down in the Psalm, Psalm.
^8.^.
How God established a testimony in Jacob, and ordained a Law in Israel,
which he commanded our fathers, that they should teach their children. And
this law which he speaks of, is the commandment before recited out of
Deuteronomie, concerning parents often and diligent acquainting their children
with the word of the Lord. You see therefore beloved, Al householders ought t^
be well seen in the Scriptures.
that it greatly concerns al you, that are householders, to be very well
exercised and practiced in the holy Scriptures. For how can it be possible
that one should teach another the thing that he himself is ignoraunte in?
The father can not teach his son that which he himself knows not. The
master cannot instruct his servant in ye word which he never reads. The
husband (as Paul commands he should) can not teach his wife, himself being
rude and ignorant. The Prince can not declare unto his subjects the will of
the Lord, the which himself has not learned out of his word: all these
notwythstanding, being (as you have heard) charged from the Lord, with this
duty, it does hereof necessarily follow, that fathers, masters, husbands, yea
the prince himself ought diligently to exercise themselves in the reading of
the word of God, that they may every one severally teach it to them of
their charge, that they out of it may learn to fear the Lord. The Lord his
blessing the diligence of Cornelius in the virtuous education of his family,
with profyting generallye in his fear, ought to encourage us all to follow
his most godly example, hoping that GOD in his great mercy will grant unto
our Christian travail like success. For it can not be, that either the Prince
of subjects, or the father of his children, or the husband of his wife, or
the master of his servants, should hope for that subjection, that
obedience, that reverence, that faythfulnesse, which they of right ought to
have, and the other of duty are bound to perform, unless they labor to
teach them the fear of the Lord. It may be also that a man faythfullye
laboring to bring up his familye in the knowledge of GOD, shall have
notwithstanding ungodly and disobedient children, wife, or servants: for Adam
had Cain: Noah had Cham: Abraham had Ismael: Isaac had Esau: Jacob had of his
own sons that would ^^ue first slain, but afterward altered their
purpose, and told Joseph: Helie had ^ophm and Phinehas: Samuel his sons
^^ere unjust Judges over the people: ^ob his wife bydde her husband curse GOD
and dye: David his own son Ab^alon rebelled against him: and Iu^as for money
betrayed his Master Christ: yet for all this, must not we ^et pass this
duty of teaching our ^ouseholdes, but besides instructyng, ^se also
correctyng, Correction to be used as well as instruction.
where sins be committed, or else we shall be guyltie of those sins,
which we let pass in those under our gouernemente uncorrected, whether we be
private persons, ^or Magistrates. For the holy Scrip^ures lays upon Helie
the ungodliness of his sons which was committed with his knowledge, and the
children of Isreal's worshipping of the Golden Calves, is imputed to those
kings, which either commanded them, or suffered the^, ^or else did not destroy
them. Paul also to the Romans says, that not only they which commit these
sins are worthy of death, but those also which consent (...) to them, and I
fear me that as many of us before God shall be found to consent unto sins,
as do not punish them, if it lie in us, in those that under our charge commit
them. Wherefore as the Lord has laid upon us every one for ye most part two
persons: God has laid upon most men (...) persons.
the one of our general calling to be Christians: and the other of that
peculiar function that every one is appointed unto: so let us (beloved) for
the Lord his sake be careful to discharge them both with a good conscience:
let us not do the one and forslow the other: let us not think it sufficient to
have led the life of a godly christian, and to leave undone the perfourmaunce
of those duetyes which in respect of our several callings the Lord looks for
and requires at our hands for example: let not the father think himself
discharged that he himself has lived a Godly man, unless he also have lived
a godly father, that is, have brought up his children in the instruction and
information of the Lord. The householder must not think his duty
answered, if for his part he have walked in the ways of the Lord, unless ^e
consider that besides a Christian man ^e is also an householder, and a
christian householder ought to be, which also he shall be, if he labor
earnestly that his family may serve and fear the Lord. The magistrate must
not suppose himself to have done enough, if privately, concerning himself, he
have lived religiously and in the fear of God, unless he have spared no pain
nor diligence to bring his subjects to be godly and religious also. The like
(I say) of all callings whatsoever, and in this respect am most humbly and
reuerentlye, in the fear of God to request you, right honorable my Lord Mayor
of this worthy City of London, with the Worshipful Master Sherifes and
Aldermen, as the Lord (besides the general callings of Christians, the which
I trust, A request to the L. Mayor and his brethren.
and also hartlye pray that you Godly walk in,) has laid upon you ye
persons of public magistrates, that you will keep in your several wards a
careful and diligente watch to meet with all such abuses as highly offend
God, and are directly against her maiestyes laws, amongst the rest these:
filthy Whordome, and beastly Drunkenness, outrageous and unmeasurable Dicing
and Carding, and horrible profanation of the LORD his day, in flocking and
thronging to baudie Plays by thousands, whereas they ought to be occupied in
hearing the word of the Lord. For as for Whordome, it is common: Drunke^nesse
is no deynties in every Tavern: Dicing and Cardyng in most of your ordinary
tabling places: resorting to Plays in the time of Sermons a thing too
manifest. For the other, as I have them by report, so I wish them false: if
they be true, I desire to have them punished with severity, and then shall you
show your selves religious and zealous Cornelians, in living not only godly
your selves, but also in seeking to bring others belonging to your charge, to
be honest, virtuous, and godly likewise. Thus doing, the LORD will bless with
many blessings both you and your City, which for Christ his sake I beseech
him to do. The same suit I am to make unto all others in authority, and
wythall to tell them, that ye higher their calling is, the higher shall their
place be, and greater pains in Hell, if in this behalf they omit their
duty. For the mighty men shall suffer mighty torments, and he that
knows his Masters will and does it not, shall be beaten with many stripes.

But because I am thus far entered into this large and fruitful field of
childrens education; That it is the part of al Scholemaisters to teach their
scholars out of ye word of the Lord.
and household government, of fathers and householders generally neglected,
whilst where they should daily and continuallye teach their children and
families out of the word of the Lord to fear him, many of them daily and
nightly are occupied in Dicing, Carding and gaming, and yet must needs be
counted Protestants: give me leave I beseech you a little to direct my speech
unto those, whom in respect of their office it chiefly concerns, to bring up
youth, I mean schoolemaisters, for among all the diseases that these our days
and times are grieuouslye sick withal, there is none wherewith they are
either more generally or more daungerously infected, tha^ with this that the
most part of scholemasters, like as fathers and house-holders, think it no
part of their duty to meddle with instructing their scholars and pupilles in
the word of the Lord and principles of christian religion. Whereas without the
fear of the Lord, there is no wisdom, neither is it possible for youth to
go well forward in virtue and good manners, things as necessary as learning,
which, without these, is but a ring of gold in a swines snoute, if they be
not trained up in ye knowledge of ye word. For most true is that in deed
golden saying of the Psalmist: Wherewithal shall a young man redress his way?
in taking heed thereto according to thy word. Hearken, hearken all you that be
Scholemaisters, there is no other means to have your youth to profit in
virtue and godliness, but by taking heed to the word of the Lord. And what
parent is he that sets his son to school, but that he would have him as
well godly as learned? as well a virtuous child, as a toward scholar? as
well instructed unto salvation, as furthered in profane learning? For if there
be any that have other ends in putting their children to schole, these being
contemned, your schools were better to be without them, than combred with them.
From whence come the general complaints of the ungraciousness and
unhappiness of scholars, but from this, that you never teach them their
duties out of the book of the Lord. Some of you, think over much
gentleness to be the way, and others continual and tyrannical scourgyng and
whyppyng to be the way, whereas in deed you are both sorts far and wide out of
the way. For the one with too much leuitie encourages the^ to a lewd
licenciousnesse and looseness of manners: the others thinking by cruel and
butcherly beatyng to win reformation, engender in them such a mislike and
lothyng of learning, that they abhor with as deadly hatred the school house,
as we do those things which are most loathsome and noisome unto us. I like
well of gentleness, if it be such as by it manners be not corrupted and
spilled, and on the other side I allow of reasonable correction, so as it be
used as the last remedy, that is, when no other will serve. But the first,
the best and the chiefest way, is to begin with teaching your youth the fear
of the Lord: For that is, as Solomon says, the beginning of Wisdom. But you
fear peradventure that it should be to little profit to speak unto children
of religion: I hear you, and think of that you say, as a cloak to hyde your
fault, and cover for your slothfulness, rather than a true cause to stay
this duty. He that has said, suffer little children to come unto me and
forbid them not, for unto such belongs the kingdom of heaven, will no
doubt, bless your labors taken in hand in his fear. Begin therefore at
length and try: you shall I warrant you, to your comfort, see your youth
profit in virtue and godliness. I would have you, that setting aside all care
of religion in your scholars, to make it your only profession to read them
profane Authors, show me the example but of one person, whom, either Tullie
his Offices, or Aristotle his Ethickes, or Plato his Pre^eptes of manners, ever
yet made a god^y and a virtuous man. I am not against ^he teaching of propha^e
writers: I ^nowe they have their use. But I vtter^ye misslike your
preposterous, backewarde, and euerthwarte care in labou^ing, chiefly about
these, ommitting that which should be formoste, namelye in^truction out of
the word. Take heed that in respect ye worthily run not in^o the
reprehension that our savior Christ uses toward the Scribes and Pharisees
for touching Minte, and Annis, and Common, and leaving the weightye ^atters of
the law, as judgment, mer^e, and fidelity: that is, for taking much ^aines
about trifles, and dealing slender^^ and slightly in matters of great
im^^rtaunce. Let the name of God, and of his Christ be heard often in your
schools: let it be familiar unto your scholars by continual beating it into
their heads. What though it enter in but softly, the water by often dropping
pierces into the hard stone: by much heating the strong iron is made soft:
by often putting into the fire the toughest steel is made pliant. And yet in
this comparison the case is far otherwise, for we are but the planters and
waterers, God is he only that gives ye increase. Wherefore this duty of
instructing being especially commanded, being labored in with reverence of
his holy name and majesty, he will undoubtedly bless and further it. Now is
the time that you may do good, forslewe it not. Whilst your scholars be young
you may frame them as you will. The soft wax will receive any print, whereas
the hard will take none: young sciences, will be bowed, which way you will
have them, whereas the growe^ trees will rather break than bend Look what
licoure a vessel is seasone^ wythall, when it is new, it will kep^ a smacke
thereof when it is old. And, teach a child while he is young what ways he
shall walk, and he will not forgette it when he comes unto years. Popish
Scholemaisters.
This thing do the Papists of our time full well understand. And therefore
have their picked scholemaisters privately to nousel up their children in their
houses in the Popes religion, that they may taste and smell thereof when their
parents be dead and rotten. And great pity it is, that the Queens enemies
should be permitted such liberty. For by this means are many toward
gentlemen otherwise, utterly marred and spoiled. How (I pray) you falls it
out, ye you have at this day in this land, many young gentlemen not above 24.
years old at the most, that are more obstinate and stubborn Papists than
their fathers: they will ^ome at no Church, at no Sermons, when ^s their
parents will do both. And if at a^y time there be process out for them from
her majesty's high Commisioners, ^hey find one means or other to have
^ackling of it, and then forsooth they must in post over into France to
learn the language, whereas in deed their voyage is not so much to learn the
French tongue, as to withdraw themselves from punishment of law, and there at
liberty to hear (when they please) a Latin Mass. And for my part I wish
that all the Papists in England (without they repent) together with all the
rest of her Majesty's enemies, were in France or some other place of
bannishmente, without hope ever to return again, and so should our country
be in more quiet and safety. But of this that I have said it evidently
appears, that whereas in respect of their years, being not past.24. they were
at the beginning of the princes reign capable of no religion, and now be
stiff necked Papists, it can not be chosen, but they must have it by the
education of Popish scholemaisters, or Popish parents or both together. And
no marvel. For we have in many Gentlemen's houses, and also in the houses of
others in the country of higher calling, the sweepings of the Universities, I
mean, such rotten Papists, as by the broom of godly discipline, as
unprofitable duste, have bin sweeped out thence, are entertained in the
Country in private houses to teach their children. And there they be as safe,
as the Fox in his borow. For who dare be so bold as once to enquire wherein
they instruct their scholars? besides this, there are huddled together old
Popyshe persecuting Mass Priests, in some houses four, in some three, in
some two, in some one, and they (forsooth) under pretense of serving in
several offices, as some stewardes, some Caters, and so forth, peruerte whole
famylies. For can it possibly be otherwise, that themselves Papists, and under
Papists having the government of youth, as men chosen for the purpose,
should teach any other than Papistrie. I would to God we could learn by the
example of the Turk, to use one policy in a good cause which, he practices
in a bad. The manner of the Turk is, to take from such Christians as are under
his tyranny their children, so soon as they come to years of discreetion, and
to put them where they may be taught his Mahumetish religion, that afterward
they may the more faithfullye serve him. So (I say) do I wish, that the
children of our Papists, so soon as they be capable of lerning, might be
taken from them (they notwythstanding paying for their educatio^) and be
committed unto the government of godly teachers, that would learn them the
fear of the Lord: or if their education be permitted to be in the houses of
their parents, that order may be taken, that none have the teaching of them,
but such as be well known to be zealous in religion: for these Papists how
soever they outwardly pretend love, they do indeed kill: how soever they
would seem to cherish, they do in deed corrupt and spill. They resemble very
fitly the herb Colocynthis, which a man might judge by the outward
appearaunce of it in clasping with his strings of his root, other herbs that
grow next unto him, that he would sucker them: but indeed, as many as he
touches, they never prosper. So for all the world fares it with those which
come within the embracings of Popish Scholemaisters, though they make a fair
show of doing them good, yet do they indeed infecte them, that they will be
the worse for it as long as they live. Wherefore I earnestlye pray the
honorable and worshipful of her Majesty's high commission, A request to the
high commissioners, for the fiftin of Popish Schoolemasters.
to cause private Popish teachers, to be sought after and sifted as well to
stay the present mischief, as also to meet with before hand, the hurt that
may by suffering them grow hereafter. And to end this matter (in which,
albeit I have in long, I hope the necessity and profit of it, shall easily
with the godly procure my pardon) I likewise heartily desire all teachers of
youth, not to suffer themselves to be found less diligent in a good cause,
than the Papists in a badde: not to be less careful to instruct their
children in the fear of the Lord, than the Papists are to train up theirs
in Popery: not to be less mindeful to teach their scholars the true
religion, than the Papists to learn theirs the false. As for the rest of you
(beloved that are here present) if any of you with Corne^lius have labored all
his family to fear the Lord, you have like obedient children been careful
to perform that duty which GOD has laid upon you, and so in the Lords
name I exhort you to go forward: and those of you that hitherto for want of
knowledge, have omitted this duty of instructing your families with Cornelius
in the fear of the Lord, now that it has been euidentlye proved unto you,
to be your charge, no person of what calling soever to be excepted: add not I
beseech you to your knowledge contempt, but diligent and speedy practice,
and putting it in ure. For it is a fearful thing to fall into the hands of
the Lord. Take encouragement by the example of Cornelius, go about it in the
fear of GOD, and earnest calling on his name, so shall you have to your
great rejoicing, every man in his own house a godly Church, and with less
disquieting of your selves with chiding and fighting, you shall have those
under your several chardges, in singleness of conscience to perform such
duties toward you, as in the fear of God to you they do owe, the which for
his sons sake I beseech him to grant.

In the fifth branch of this first general, The fifth branch of the
first pa^
containing a description of Cornelius and his qualities, I have to speak of
his Alms deeds and Prayer, and first of his Alms, because that is first
mentioned in my Text. As before we have seen by Cornelius religiousnesse,
fear of God, and virtuous instructing his family, his faith toward God, so
now by his alms appears, that he bare a godly and pitiful affection
toward men in relieuing every manne as his necessity seemed most to
require. For where it is said, that he gave to all the people, this All is to
be restrained to, all the poor among the people: for it had been no alms
to have given to the rich, who had enough already.

John the Baptiste taught the souldioures, that asked of him their duty,
That they should strike nor accuse no man wrongfully, but be content with
their own wages. Cornelius has played ye good scholar, he has not only
perfectly learned that lesson, but has also taken forth an other, learning
besides being contented with his own stipend, out of the same, in love and of a
fellow feeling of the miseries of his poor brethren, to contribute unto their
necessities, for it cannot be chosen, but in whom soever there is true
Religion, and the fear of God, in the same also there must needs be love,
and a brotherly compassion, not only to pity, but also to help the wants of
those that stand in need, so far forth, as by the portion of good, the
which the Lord has blessed us withal, he has enabled us. And that out of
this love this ^elow feeling, this compassion, this pity, did issue in
Cornelius his charitable relieuing of the poor, ye very word it self, which
Luke does here use for alms, does planely show. For it properly signifies
Mercy, which is an inward affection and touching of the heart, rising of
the view of an other man's misery, and is here put figuratively, for all
outward duties of Charity, whereby we do good unto such as are in poverty
and necessity. Wherefore in as much as Cornelius is here said, to have
bestowed much alms amongst all the people, it is evident, that there was in
him a right Christian heart, and bowels of mercy, which did yerne, and as
it were melt at the calamities of his brethren, which did consider the band of
unity, which ought to be between members of all one head Christ Jesus: who
in this respect did feed, foster, and cherishe, provide and care for them, as
being of his own flesh, and had regard to help them, as the very members of
his own body. There is therefore no question, but that Cornelius liberality
and bounteousnesse, springing out of this fountain of brotherly compassion,
was no fained counterfaite, nor forged, but true, right, and perfect
beneficence, alms and liberality.

^t is not y^ogh to have ^e bare and ^aked name (...) Faith, but his faith
^uste also be ^uitefull in ^ood works.
We learn first out of this great alms of Cornelius, that it is not
sufficient to have the name of Faith, to be religious, to fear God, unless
also this faith do fructify and bring forth good fruits, according to that
which James writes: What avails it, my brethren, though a man (says he)
has faith, when he has no works? can the faith save him? And again: But
will thou understand, O thou vain man, that the faith which is without
works is dead? And mark withal, I beseech you, the manner of his speech
(for it makes being rightly understood, very much against the Popish
Iusticiaries of our time, which teach out of him that manne is justified by
his works, which words in deed he uses) he does, not say, What if a man
have faith, but what if a man say he have faith, by which appears, that he
speaks of hipocrites and vain boasters of faith. For the true and lively
faith can be no more without works, than the fire without heat, than water
without moisture, the Sun without brightness, the good tree without his good
fruit. The place o^ James expounded brieflye.
And where he says that Abraham with Rahab, were justified by their works,
he means that their outward works before men, were testimonies of their
inward faith before God: and not that their works were the causes of their
salvation, for so should he be against all the Scriptures, which teach, that
Faith only does justify, and so likewise we should make the holy Ghost
contrary to himself, which were very wicked, so much as to think, much
more to speak. We therefore teach out of this example of Cornelius, good
deeds and such other like virtuous actions of godly men, together with the
authority of the holy Scripture, that it is the part of a Christian, to do
good works, yea, that whosoever he be that does no good works, he is indeed
no more a true Christian, than a dead carcass, a living man. The Papists to
us wrong, (...) gyuyng me, that we are enemies unto good works.
Wherefore the Papists do us great injury, in filling the ears of the
simple and ignorant people, that our doctrine is a doctrine of liberty, that
we teach men to live looselie and lewdely, that we are enemies unto good
works, whereas in very deed, we do the flat contrary. We will men to
beware, that they use not the liberty of the Gospel for a cloak of
maliciousness: we teach them to serve the Lord in fear, in holiness, and
righteousness all the days of their life: We will men to let their light so
shine before men, that they seeing their good works, may glorify our
heavenly father, which is in heaven. The difference between the ^a^istes and
us, in the doctrine of good works.
But herein lies the difference between them and us: we teach, that Works
come after Faith, they, yt they go before Faith: we, that they follow him that
is already justified: they, that they go before him that is to be justified:
we, that they are the fruits of faith, they, that they be the tree out of
which Faith buddeth: we, that faith is the cause of works, they, that works
are the cause of Faith. And with as much truth may they teach, that light
is cause of the Sun: that heat, is the cause of fire: that moisture is the
cause of water. To be short, we teach, that the word of the Lord only is
the measure by which our works are to be moten: they, that the will of man,
and good intent. But howsoever they teach, or whatsoever they say, thus
says the Scripture, and thus teaches the word of God: without Faith, it is
impossible to please God. Whereof I conclude, that as after the example of
Cornelius, a Christian must do good works, so must he have Faith before: or
else how glorious soever they seem in the sight of man, before the Lord
they stincke, and are abominable. And therefore is it also in this place very
well said of Cornelius, first, that he was a religious man, and one that
feared GOD: and secondly, that he gave much alms to all the people.

Thus you see, that in him went first faith, religion, and the fear of God,
and then, that these were not idle, his good works and deeds do declare. And
thus let Papists say what they list, we teach, that in Christians it
ought to be, and with their own eyes in a great many they may see it for to
be, and God grant, that in all those, that do profess his name and
religion, it may be: I mean, that all such as do in word confess Christ
Jesus to be the Lord, may in deed with Cornelius so godly walk, that by
their living before the world, they may be taken for Christians.

(...) rule to ^nowe whether that whi^he we give ^e alms or ^o.
Secondlye, we have here a rule given us, how to examine and try that which
we give to the poor, whether it he alms or no. For to have that which is
given, so to be, does not consiste in the greatness of that which is
bestowed, but in the mind and disposition of the giver: for who commonly are
so liberal, or rather in very deed prodigal and lauishe, as are hipocrites
that in giving, greedily hawk and hunt after the praise and commendation of
men, and therefore as Christ says, blow a Trumpet before their alms, but
they have their reward: neither shall the great sums that they distribute and
bestow, ever come into this reckning before ye Lord, that he will accept and
take it for alms, that is, for such a work as does please him, because it is
not done in such sort as he commands. That therefore which we give, shall
then go before the Lord for alms, if it be (as the holy ghost here speaks
of Cornelius his liberality) mercy, that is to say, if it proceed of love,
and of a brotherlye pitying the misery of him which is in need, as reckening
him to be one of our own flesh, and so in regard of this near band and
conjunction, which God has made between us, we do (as it were) out of the
vowels of mercy and compassion liberally power out upon him, as one of our
own members for the relief of his necessity, according to the measure which
God has blessed us withal. For as Paul speaks: 1. Cor. 13.3.
Though I feed the poor with all my goods, and have not love, it profits me
nothing. And the Lord by his Prophet Isay, ^al. 58.7.
commands us, that we hide not our face from our own flesh. So you see,
that if our giving, issue out of any other heads than out of love, and a
fellow feeling of the wantes of our needy brethren, in that they be our
very own flesh, it is as nothing before GOD. that the ^^er giuings the
Pa^stes is no ^^lmes.
Whereof I conclude, that all the large giuings of the Papists, of which at
this day many make so great bragges, because they be not done in a reverent
regard of the commandment of the Lord, in Love, and of an inward being
touched with the calamities of the needy, but for to be well reported of
before men, whilst they are alive, and to be prayed for after they are dead,
and by the means of the^, to be delivered from the pains of Purgatory, and
so to win Heaven, are indeed no alms, but Pharisaicall tru^pets, to win a
brittle blast of glory, at ye hands of men. They have therefore (as Christ
says) their reward, that is to say, the thing they sought for, to wit, the
praise and commendation of me^, as for reward at Gods hands, they neither
have, nor ever shall have, unless in doing their alms they set before them
a reverent regard of the Lords commandment, and in love and mercy frame
themselves to help their needy brother. Wherefore (dear Christians) I
direct my speech unto you, An exhortation to the ric^ to be liberal to the
poor.
whom GOD in great mercy has blessed with plentiful increase of the riches
of this world, whereas he could have made you inferioure to the meanest.
Let Cornelius his example, who gave much alms to all the people, move you to
be liberal to help the poor: as he by giving franckly to ye people of ye
Jews, being none of his nation, did thereby testify his consent to their
religion, so by your giving unto the godly brethren, and to poor Scholars
that stand in need, give out testimony, that you all hope for one salvation
in Christ, for whose sake you show this mercy, in relieuing his and your
members. Give not as Hipocrites and Papists, for praise, or for to merit
thereby Heaven: But let that which you do, be done in love, and in mercy,
and so will it be a sweet smelling sacrifice in the sight of the almighty.
And truly it cannot be chosen, but if you put upon you love with the tender
bowels of pity and compassion, you will be rich in good works, and
plentiful in giving unto the poor: For where there is no giving, there is no
love, and little giving shows little pity, whereas great love, much mercy,
in such as GOD has enriched with ability brings forth great giving and
much alms. Deceive not therefore your selves with a vain persuasion of
Love, when ye will depart with nothing. For love always bursteth forth into
helying the thing that it loves, insomuche, that a man will not suffer his
very dog to lack, if he love him, much less his Christian and godly
brother: neither does it look what this man or that man bestows, or asks
what shall I give, or how much, when shall I give, or how often shall I give?
But by the pitiful view of the lamentable distress of such as are in
misery, easilye and readilye finds answer against all these worldly
motions.

Cornelius gave much alms to all the people: We that are far beyond him
in wealth and substance, think we have done very well, and enough, if we
have given a little unto a few: Cornelius gave plentifullye whilst he was
alive, and we give sparingly, for fear we shall lack ere we dye. And this is
a great fault amongst the wealthy of this world, Against deferring to d^
good.
that they defer their alms and other good deeds of charity, till after they
be dead, omitting the present opportunity to do good, the which GOD has not
only commended, but commanded and not only regards, but also in mercy
richly rewards. What fondness is there in those that would be counted wise,
to imagine that their executours after they be dead, will be more faithful in
disposing their liberality, than they themselves would be being alive? What
excuse soever we pretend for this deferring to do good, it springs only of
distruste in Gods providence: the Lord root it out of us, for in some it
works most horrible and wicked effects, insomuch, that they do not only not
give largely, after the example of this our Cornelius, but bestow nothing at
all: nay that which is worse, Covetousness (the root of al evil) springing
of this distruste in Gods fatherly provision for them, has br^d in them such
a burning desire of having still more, that like unto the dropsy man, the more
he drinks, ye more he thirsts: the more they have, the more they desire,
and therefore, least they should lack, they do not only not relieve their
poor brethren, but also take from them such living, as for their relief has
by others bin given unto the^, cruelly and barbarously devouring the goods of
the poor, and eating up, as it were, their own flesh. The Lord be
merciful unto us. This only, to end this point, I am to say, if Cornelius
having but a sparkle of faith, but a little knowledge in the Christian
religion, amongst so many stumbling blocks, lettes and dangers, have set up
unto us so clear and bright a glass of godly alms and Christian charity,
truly we that rejoice so much of our knowledge in Christ, and persuade our
selves of a marvelous light of faith, ought worthyly to blushe and be ashamed
to come so far behind him in brotherly pitying, and louinglye releeuing the
poor estate of our own needy members, and to be so soon cold in ye
exercise of charity. The Lord work in us bowels of compassion, that with
Cornelius, every one according to the portion that God has bestowed upon us,
may indeed feel and be touched inwardlye, with the miseries of the needy,
and in consideration of the same, give much alms to all the people: for there
will a day come, when it shall be said unto us: Give accountes of thy
Stewardship, for thou shalt be no longer Steward

Now follows Cornelius his daily and often praying unto God. The continual
exercise of praying in Cornelius.
For it is here said, that he prayed God continually. As before where the holy
Ghost speaks of Cornelius his alms, he figuratively uses that word, being
but one part, for all the kinds of charity: so here he sets down his daily
use of praying for the whole worship of God, as a certain and vndisceauable
note of his unfeigned godliness. For where there is the true fear of God,
which has been already showed to have remained in Cornelius, there must needs
be also a fervent desire by earnest prayer to humble our selves before the
majesty of God, to be by his holy spirit directed in ye true knowledge of
him, and his Christ, yt thereby we may be taught to walk in such ways as are
acceptable before him. This desire may appear to have been in Cornelius, by
the words which hereafter the Angel uses unto him, where he wills him to
send for Peter, who should teach him, what he should do. For being in the
number of those which had received the true knowledge of GOD, he prays
that he may be admitted unto a further and a more clearer light of
understanding, concerning his hope of salvation in the redeemer Christ Jesus,
yet not fully reveled unto him. His prayer being reported not to be of course
or of custom, or seldom, but daily and often, is a sign unto us, that his
religion was not builded upon feyned and cou^terfaite trifles, or consisted in
outward rites and ceremonies, but that as god is a spirit (as John witnesses)
so Cornelius like a true worshipper, did pray unto him and worship him in
spirit and truth, and did not sleyghtly (after the manner of the common sort)
use coldly and faintely this exercise of praying in number and measure, but was
earnestly, and eue^ from the heart, bent often to call upon God, like as his
manifold benefits, and unspeakable mercies daily toward him, did
continuallye provoke and call him thereunto.

This example of Cornelius his daily praying unto God, The example of Cornelius
ought to move us to diligence in prayer.
commends unto us the continual and often use of prayer, in which he was not
so diligente and feruente as we for the most part are cold, negligente, too
too slack and slothful, whereas we have to move us thereunto both the example
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who not only himself prayed often, but
also commanded us to pray often, and has appointed us a form of prayer,
which we commonly call the Lords prayer, and has besides promised to hear
our prayer made in faith: we have not (I say) only his example, but the example
of all his Apostles, with diverse others the godly Patriarchs, fathers, and
Prophets of the old testament. There be also causes both in respect of our
selves and also of our brethren, that ought worthily to move us to call upon
God for his assistaunce against our many enemies, as the Devil, the world,
and the corrupt lusts and wicked affections of our own flesh: this being one
of the principal weapons of that spiritual armoure which Paul teaches a
christian soldier to be furnished withal, against the great and strong
assaults of those mighty enemies. For besides the girdle of verity, the
breaste-plate of righteousness, the shoes of the preparation of the Gospel of
peace, the shield of faith, the helmet of salvation, and the sword of the
spirit, he adds: And pray always with all manner prayer and supplication in
the spirit. Again, if we would consider what Abraham, what Isaac, what Jacob,
what Aaron, Moses, Joshua, David, Solomon, Josias, Ezechias, Elias, Daniel, ye
Publicane, the thief on the cross, the Apostles, the Church praying for
Peter in prison, with innumerable others, have obtained at the hands of GOD by
prayer, the mighty and wonderful effects that have followed of their prayer,
must needs provoke and stir us up, to the often and unfeigned exercise of
this most Godly duty, and cause us, with Cornelius daily to pray unto God.
But we, al these notwithstanding, either pray never, or else very seldom, and
even then for the most part, of custom, think the reading and mumbling up
other godly men's prayers, how far soever our hearts be from that which we
speak, to be a good prayer before God, and that for this duty performed
thus, of fashion rather than of hearty and earnest zeal, we have God even
bound unto us, so that all the day after we are dispensed withal to do what
we list, much like unto the Papists, who if they have once heard Mass,
they have even for the work done (as they term it,) deserved free remission
for all those offenses which all the day after they should commit. Well, all
that I can say in this great slackenesse, and disorder in prayer, is, to
wish you all humblye to pray unto GOD to root out of us this great
negligence, and to grant us with Cornelius, continuallye and daily, not with
the lips, but with the heart, earnestlye to call upon him, which if we
truly love him, we will assuredlye do, and by no means be let therefrom.
For as he that truly loves, delights in nothing more than in the often
talking and conference with him who^ he loves: Where there ^s true love ^here
is often praying.
even so where there is true and unfeigned love unto God, there is a burning
desire by often prayer to talk with GOD, so as no peril nor danger, no not
of ^osse of life, can stay or hinder it, as may ^ppeare by Daniel, whom the
fear of ye ^ions den could not at the comman^emente of the King Darius
keep from ^raying unto his GOD but the space ^f thirtye days, which unto
such as ^aue to GOD but a little love, will ^eeme but a little thing. But true
love ^yll rather adventure any peril, than ^or to be but for a very short
time ^ebarred from this liberty. Yea, and as ^he more woodde is laid on the
fire, the greater is the flame, so is likewise this continual talkyng with GOD
by ^rayer, a great increasyng of our love ^owardes him, as on the contrary,
^he seldomer we commune with him by ^rayer, the more does our love toward ^im
from time to time abate and slake, ^ntill in the end it be clean quenched.
Let us therefore (good brethren) often repair unto the Lord by daily and
vn^ained calling upon his name, by which our love may more and more ^ncrease
toward him, and we ^lso have good and perfect experience how rich the
Lord is (as Paul speaks) to all those that in faith truly call upon him,
whereof we can never have better trial, tha^ when by often praying unto him,
according as the necessities either of our selves or others do require, we
find by his liberal granting our manifold requests, that he is in deed
rich in mercy, that has in stoare to suffice all creatures of the whole
world that do pray in faith without wavering, as James teaches us to do.

To whom we o^ght to pray.
The second note that I draw out of the praying of Cornelius, is, to whom,
when we pray, we ought to make our prayer. For having here a large scope, and
very plentiful matter, if I would enter into this common place of prayer, into
the which my text violently seems, as it were to draw me, wherein I might
to your profit handle, what causes ought to move us to pray: what prayer is: to
whom we ought to make our prayer: when we ought to pray: where we ought to
pray: how he ought to be affected and disposed that must pray: of what force
ye prayer of a godly man is with God: how many sorts of prayers there are: and
after what manner we ought to pray, with such like: letting pass the rest,
as being at the full handled in the common places of learned and godly men, I
will only deal in this matter of prayer, with such circumstaunces as my text
shall plainly lead me unto, of the which having taught before, that
concerning time to pray, we must with Cornelius pray continually (not yt we
should do no manner of thing else but pray, as the Heretics being of holding
this opinion called Enchites or Prayars, do falsely teach: but so often, as our
necessities calling us there unto, conveniently we may) I will now briefly
show to whom we ought to pray, because it is here said that Cornelius prayed
God continually. That we ought to pray to none but only unto God.
If therefore in a word you will know who he is to whom we should pray,
it is GOD. And saying, (God) I shut out al others both men and Angels, and
also women from this high honor, which being the greatest that we can give
unto God, he will imparte with no other, according as it is written: ^eut.
6.13.
Thou shall worship the Lord thy God, and him only shall thou serve. Wherefore
calling upon ye name of ye lord being one of his chiefest services, it
belongs unto him alone, and cannot without horrible robbery be given to any
other. And good reason it is, yt he only should be prayed unto for help and
salvation, who alone is able to help, who alone knows how to help, who alone
is willing to help, unto who^ alone and unto no other our prayers can be made,
that they may be heard: who alone can not only by our suite conceive our grief*
but also according to his infinite wisdom and unsearchable understanding,
knows a great deal better what we lack, than we for our ignorance are able
to express. According hereunto speaks the Lord by his Prophet: I, eue^ I,
am the Lord, and beside me there is no savior. And again: I said not in
vain unto the seed of Jacob: Esaias. 43.11.
Seek you me: I the Lord do speak righteousness, and declare righteous
things. They have no knowledge, that set up the wood of their Idol; and pray
unto a god that can not save the^. There is no other God beside me, a just God,
and a savior: there is none beside me. Whereupon he infers: Look unto me,
and ye shall be saved: all the ends of the earth shall be saved: for I am God,
and there is no other What ca^ be said either more plainly to wtdraw us from
praying unto any other, since god witnesses yt no other can help, or more
comfortably to allure us to call only upon the Lord, for as much as himself has
promised yt seeking to him we shall be saved. If this promise can not serve, we
have also commandments, Psalm. 50.15.
as in ye Psalm. Call upon me in ye day of trouble: so will I deliver thee, and
thou shall glorify me. And come unto me (says Christ our savior) all ye that
are weary and laden, and I will ease you. Concerning Saints and Angels, we read
that when this our Cornelius fell down before Peter and gave him but only
outward reverence, Peter would none of it, Act. 14.15.
but bad him stand up, saying: for even I my self am a man. And Paul and
Barnabas refuse to be sacrificed unto at Lystra, willing the people only to
worship god. ^ca. 19.10.
The Angel, also in ye revelation, when John fell at his feet to worship him,
says, See thou do it not: I am thy fellow servant, and one of thy brethren,
which have the testimony of Jesus. Worship God. And the Angel in the book of
Judges says unto Manoah the father of Sampson: Though thou make me abide, I
will not eat of thy bread, and if thou will make a burnte offering, offer it
unto the Lord. In the history of the Evangelists you shall find, that
Christ most readilye and louynglye granted the requests of all those which
humblye in faith sought unto him, whereas to his mother requesting him at the
marriage to help them, when their wine failed, he answers, woman what have I
to do with thee, mine hour is not yet come. And to his Apostles saying of the
woman of Canaan: Lord dispatche her, for she cries after us, he says, he was
not sent but to the lost sheep of the house of Israel. And this no doubt to
embolden and encourage us to make our prayers unto God by Christ and not by
saints, yea the scripture plainly teaches, The dead^ Saints (...) us not.
that the dead Saints have no knowledge of us. For it is written in Isaiah.
Doubtless thou art our father: though Abraham be ignorant of us, and Israel
know us not, yet thou oh Lord, art our father, and our redeemer: thy name
is for ever If then, amongst wise men it be counted folly to pray unto one that
is absent which can not hear our prayer: nay if it be Idolatry to suppose
that the souls of dead men either are in all places at once, or being but in
one place are able to understand the minds of al men, in all places (for it
is the peculiar property of God to know the hearts, and therefore are they
Idolaters that give this to any other) if it be a great and notorious injury
unto Christ to think any Saint or Angel to be in power or love equal unto him,
much more superior: if god only (as it has bin by the scripture plainly
proved, be able, wylling, knowing how to help, hearing our prayers in faith
made for help, and better understanding how to help, than we are able to
express, if he have promised to help, if he have commanded to sue unto him
for help: and finally if ye Saints and Angels have refused outward worship,
and therefore would much more refuse invocation, being a high service of God,
and carrying also with it a part of belief (for how shall they call on him,
on whom they have not believed?) if the dead Saints are ignorance of us and
know us not let us then (beloved) with Cornelius pray continually, and only
unto God, ye knows us, who is not ignorant of us, and he no doubt for his
Christ's sake, in all things will hear us yt we shall ask in his name: so far as
they make for the furtherance of his glory, and benefit of us ye ask for them
at his hands. For if when through sin, wickedness and transgression, we were
enemies unto God, and strangers from righteousness, which is by Christ, it
pleased God in great mercy, to send his son to work ye atonement between
him and us. being now by Christ made friends with God, it can not be chosen,
but that he will grant us whatsoever we shall ask in his name according to his
word.

Thus have you seen in Cornelius a godly Gentile, a religious soldier, a
devout governor, a Christian captain, one that none of ye engines and trappes
of Satan could so entangle and bewrap, yt they could stay, or withhold him
from the exercises of godliness, albeit they were, to catch withal, baited on
the one side with ye vain pleasures and delites of this world, with promotio^,
with honor, with love, favor, and liking: on the other side, with persecution;
with mockes and scorns of ye wicked, with hatred, disdain, envy, displeasure
of other superiors and the Emperor, and as depe^ding thereon with fear of
loss of office, life, and living, with which notwithstanding he is not moved,
but goes on boldly in the course of Christian religion, in which he had
begun. Such a one in respect of godliness, religion, and the fear of ye Lord
ought every one of us, of what degree or calling soever, for to be. But (alas)
dear brethren, which way might a man take to go to find ye house of
Cornelius, wherein not only ye master of the house with his wife is godly, but
has by his Christian travail and paintaking in instructing but of the word,
all his householde fearing God. I beseech you take a little pains with me, to
search amongst al sorts and kinds of men, for Cornelius, and then will it
easily appear how rare a thing it is to find him. And first in the way of
good speed let us begin with men of his own profession, and of the same
trade of life with him, I mean Captains, and let us by conference of their
manners and qualities, with his, make a trial, how near of kin the
Captains of our time are with Cornelius, the Captain of that time. How far
the Captains of ^ur times for the most part are from the virtues of Cornelius.
Captain Cornelius, his first commendation is, for his godliness, religion
and fear of God: our Captains think these things to be nothing pertaining
unto them, but post them over to the ministers, pastoures, and preachers.
Captain Cornelius feared God withal his householde: our Captains themselves
and their soldiers make chiefest accountes of such as setting aside all
fear of God and man, have desperate minds to adventure any hazard, and such
forsooth have a Capitaines heart, and the courage of a souldior.

Captain Cornelius gave much alms to all the needy of the people: our
Capitaines live by the spoil and robbery of others, chiefly, if they once
get to sea. There God sees them not, all is fish that comes to net, and
that ship which they find laden with richest booty and most precious
merchandise, is always the ship of our enemy, and therefore we must needs
have the spoil of him, albeit he be never so godly, and many times our own
Countryman. Captain Cornelius was daily and continuallye occupied in prayer
unto God: our Captains like the parish the worse the Church stands in.
Captain Cornelius used weapon at the commandment, and in the obedience of his
lawful Magistrate, for to withstand the invasion of enemies, to keep under,
as well the Jews, as others, that were likely to rebel, and to maintain the
public peace: our Captains run from place to place, and from realm to
realm, hired for money, not caring to intermeddle themselves in wars nothing
appertaining unto them, and there will they serve where they may have most
wages, be it under the banner, ensign, or standard of the Pope, the Turk, or
the Devil to, if he were upon earth to entertain soldiers. And so odious
unto the^ is ye name of Peace, that they in manner abhor and curse it,
wishing and praying for war, war, that with the blood and spoil of others,
they may enrich themselves. The qualities which were in Cornelius, besides his
knowledge in feats of war, were godliness, religion, fear of God,
Christian trayning up of his family, alms deeds, and prayer, and such
should likewise be in the Captains of our time in all places. But how are men
commonly judged of in respect of meetenesse to be Captains, if he can set his
countenance sternly, look biggly, go proudly, walk stately, and swear
roundlye, nay terribly, in such fearful sort, that he would make the
Devil, if he were incarnate, to quake and tremble at the hearing of it, such
a one is a valiant and a lusty, and stout Captain. I condemn not in
Capitaynes countenance, personage, making, manhood, I reverence them well
used, as the good gifts of God: neither do I disallowe the calling of a
Captain which I confess to be needful and necessary, and wherein a man may serve GOD as this our Cornelius: I only reprove the disorders of
badde Captains, and wish and pray, that as there be (no doubt) some godly
and virtuous Capitaines, so that all may be Cornelians: for it shall be no
shame at all for them, to set him before them for their pattern, nay shame
and confusion will it be to them all, if having with Cornelius the same
profession of life, they have not also with him the like agreement in manners,
which God for Christ's sake grant unto them.

Now if we shall seek for Cornelius among ye common people, we shall likewise
prove it a hard thing there to find him, ^arde to find Cornelius a^ong ye
com^on people.
for they are so far from his virtue, religion and godliness, that they run
greedily every man after his own ways, leaving and omitting the ways of the
Lord. And as for instructing their families after the example of Cornelius to
fear God, they are so far from ability to perform this duty, that
themselves had first need to learn: for of God and his word they know in a
manner nothing, and think it to be the only office of the Minister, to look
to teaching, yea ye which worse is, they seldom reforte to the place of
preaching, where they might learn their duty, unless it be on the Lords
day, on which, if in the fore-noone they have heard the word of God, in the
afternoon they think, that without all controlment, they may run after all
kinds of vanity. ^ notable pra^tise of the di^ell to pull from hearing ^f the
word ^n the Lords ^aye.
Here also on the other side, it is wonderful to consider, the craft and
subtlety of our common adversary the Devil, who, like the cunning Cook yt
for his gain prepares sundry sweet and pleasant dishes to procure appetite,
when as the stomach, (as it were) gorged already, inuenteth many kind of
vain exercises for that day, to pull them from hearing of the word, least by it
they might be won from his kingdom, to the service of the Lord, and so be
brought into a hatred of such kind of lewdness. And like as heretofore in
this land he used persecution to keep us in Idolatry, so now when as the
Lord in mercy has sent us the Gospel with peace and quiet, he uses
pleasure and prosperity to draw men unto vanity. How this way he prevails
both in Country and City our present times aforde too plentiful examples, and
the time to come in an other world will yield unto ye frequenters of such
leudnes plentiful punishment. There be not many places where ye word is
preached besides the Lords day (I would to God there were) yet even that day
the better part of it is horribly profaned by diuellishe inventions, as with
Lords of Misserule, Morice dauncers, Maygames, insomuch that in some places,
they shame not in ye time of divine service, to come and dance about the
Church, and without to have men naked dancing in nets, which is most
filthy: for the heathen that never had further knowledge, than the light of
nature, have counted it shameful for a Player to come on the stage without a
slop, and therefore amongst Christians I hope such beastly brutishness shall
not be let escape unpunished, for which end I recite it, and can tell, if I
be called, where it was committed within these few weeks. What should I
speak of beastlye Plays, against which out of this place every man cries
out? have we not houses of purpose built with great charges for the
maintaina^ce of them, and that without the liberties, as who would say, there,
let them say what they will say, we will play. I know not how I might with the
godly learned especially more discommende the gorgeous Playing place erected in
the fields, than to term it, as they please to have it called, a Theater,
that is, even after the manner of the old heathnish Theater at Rome, a show
place of al beastly and filthy matters, to the which it can not be chose^ that
men should resort without learning thence much corruption. For if he that
beheld but the filthy picture of Jupiter in a shower of golden rain
descending unto Dianae, could thereby encourage himself unto filthiness:
shall we think that flocks of as wyld youths of both sexes, resorting to
Enterludes, where both by lively gesture, and voices, there are allurements
unto whordom, they can come away pure, and not inflamed with concupiscence? I
will not here enter this disputation, whether it be utterly unlawful to have
any plays, but will only join in this issue, Against Plays and
Enterludes on the Lords dafe.
whether in a Christian common wealth they be tolerable on the Lords day, when
ye people should be exercised in hearing of ye word, which thing as it has
been oftentimes reproved by learned and godly men out of this place, so for ye
discharge of mine own conscience, I am to speak some thing, which in few
words is this. If playing in the Theater or any other place in London, as
there are by six that I know, to many be any of the Lords ways (which I
suppose there is none so void of knowledge in the world will grant) then not
only it may, but ought to be used, but if it be any of the ways of man, it is
no work for ye Lords Sabbath, and therefore in no respect tolerable on that
day. For thus speaks the Lord by his Prophet Isaias: If thou turn away
thy foot from the Sabbath, from doing thy will on mine holy day, and call the
Sabbath a delighte to consecrate it, as glorious unto the Lord, and shalt
honor him, not doing thine own ways, nor seeking thine own will, nor speaking
a vain word, then shalt thou delight in the Lord, and I will cause thee to
mount upon the high places of the earth, and feed thee with the heritage of
Jacob thy father: For the mouth of the Lord has spoken it. As in these
words is set down a blessing to such, as leaving their own ways, and the
doing of their own wills on the Lords day, set their delighte to do the
will of God on his holy day (which I think is not to go to a wanton Play) and
do consecrate it as glorious unto the Lord, so the seeking that day to please
our own fantasies, and to run after that which our flesh greedily delights,
has following after it the contrary curse, that I speak not how little
policy it is to suffer so much money to be so ill spente, which might be
employed to better uses. For reckening with the least, the gain that is
reaped of eighte ordinary places in the City which I know, by playing but
once a week (whereas many times they play twice. and sometimes thrice) it
amounts to.2000. pounds by the year, the suffering of which waste must one
day be answered before God, by such as suffer it, and the unprofitable expense
by such as give it, together with the loss of time, which Paul wills us to
redeem, for that the days are evil: and who is he that is so evil, as to
affirm two hours spent, in hearing a bawdie play, which should be spent in
hearing a Sermon, to be the redeeming of time, which Paul means. I fear me
(beloved) I fear me, if we shall, notwithstanding the often crying out of the
preachers against such vanities, still with greediness run to such lewd
exercise, P. Sempronius Sophus.
that the Heathen shall stand up at the day of Judgment, to condemn us, of
the which, some saw so great inconvenience in Plays, that they have
deuorced their wives, for seeing them without their knowledge, the which, as
it was too rigorous, so is our want of punishment too careless and loose,
the LORD grant that we may in this case have at the length some remedy.
For, albeit Demetrius the silver Smith with the rest of that occupation, be
never so much offended, yet must Paul still cry out against DIANA of the
Ephesians, and albeit such as by this trade of playing get no small gains,
be grieved, yet for that they pull from such exercise as the LORD for his
day has commanded (albeit as they be used, they be tolerable on no^ day)
the Lords Pastoures must not be tongue tied in speaking against them. For if
ill communication corrupt good manners, ill gestures, and worse words (whereof
in them is store) must needs, if we believe the holy Ghost, which so
affirms, work the same effect. Wherefore you of the common people, and you
also of all other callings think not that ye will be found Cornelians, if ye
refuse hearing the word preached, to run to Plays, nay if ye will be in
deed Cornelians, as all Christians ought to be, you must have special care
to look that not only your selves, but also all those of your chardge, at
such times, as heretofore you have run unto Plays, hereafter you resort to
the Preaching of the word, which duty the Lord requires at your hand. But I
may say in this case of the common people, with the Prophet Jeremiah.
Surely, they are poor, they are foolish, Ierem 5.4.^
for they know not the way of the Lord, nor the judgment of their God: I will
get me in to the great men, and will speak unto them, for they have known the
way of the Lord, and the judgment of their God: but these have altogether
broken the yoke, and burste the bands. Even so fares it with the great men of
our times, whereas they should know the ways of the Lord, and not be
ignorant of the judgments of their GOD, by the order and usage in their
houses and families, it should appear that there reigns in them, great
ignorance of both. ^ot many ^eate men Cornelians.
For what? be they think you Cornelians? do they themselves fear God with
all their household, when as the whole day can not serve them for their
Cards, Dice, Boules, Gluttony and Drinking, but they must spend the better
part of the night thereinto? ^udges and ^awyers.
What should I speak of Judges and Lawyers, were they all Cornelians, such as
in deed themselves were religious, and did fear GOD, with all their
Clearkes, and retinue, they would bridle men's unruly affections, and not
suffer them to go to Law for trifles, nor their matter to hang so long in
suit, persuading them of the goodness of their cause, so long as they are in
hope of the goodness of their purse, and as their bag weakeneth, let their
suit fainte, until the bottom of the purse being turned upward, the matter
in law consume to nothing: yea, if they with Cornelius had instructed their
servants in the fear of ye Lord, Lawiers servants.
there would not so many amongst them be infected with the disease of
Gehazi, who after their Masters have taken, and taken again, unless also they
be roundly greased, they will cause them to stay four or five days in town
more than they needed, before they shall get their matters dispatched.
Ministers.
And I would to GOD in those of our own calling, whom for the teaching of
others so to be, it principally concerns to be Cornelians our selves, there
were not a great number of us idle shepheardes, and able to do nothing, and a
great sort dumb dogs, that will do nothing, and many that think when
they have once in the week preached to their flock, that they have
sufficientlye and thoroughly done their duetye, making no accoumptes with
Cornelius, of private instructyng our own families, though very great, in
the word of the LORD, wherein many of our servants are not half so well
acquainted how many Chapiters there are, as they perfectlye can tell how
many spots there be in a pair of Cards, and do twice in a day occupy
the Tables, or Boules, when as they scarce read a lease of the Bible twice in
a Month.

Romans 15.4.
Seeing then that whatsoever is written in the Scripture, is written for our
learning, that we through patience, and comfort of the word, might have
hope: this example also of Cornelius, must needs be written for our
instruction, that we should imitate and follow his godly virtues: and for
as much as in all estates every one should be Cornelius, whereas in no
calling there is scarce any, it follows, that in all estates and callings,
both high and low, both rich and poor, both great and small, young and
old, learned and unlearned, do examine throughlye their own consciences, and
look how far, after due examination and trial, they shall find themselves
in religion, in the fear of GOD, in instructing their families in the word of
the Lord, in alms deeds, and prayer, to come behind Cornelius, so much the
more earnestlye they pray to God to pardon their former negligence, and to
grant, that with speed hereafter they may put in practice al those
qualities, which by the example of Cornelius, they have learned ought to be
in every true Christian, which I humbly beseech God to vouchsafe us all for
to do unfeignedly.

The second part.
Now I am to handle the special parts of my second general, containing the
Embassage of ye Angel to Cornelius, which with ye rest that is behind of the
third point, I will knitte up in as much shortness as may be, for yt I have
stood very long upon the doctrines and application of the members of the
first part. You have therefore in this second point first, to consider
Gods calling of Cornelius by the appearaunce of an Angel unto him in a vision
at the ninth hour of the day, which was about three of the clock in the
after noone, according unto the reckening of the Jews, who account their
hours from Sun to Sun.

This circumstaunce of time, by which it appears, that the coming of the
Angel unto Cornelius, was not in a dream, or by dark in the night, (albeit
in such cases the LORD also imprinted in the hearts and minds of them, to
whom, by such means he showed himself, always some one certain note and
token, or other, by the which they might manifestly know, that it was his
dooyng) but in the fair and broad day light, is set down to declare,
that the Lord did neither mock Cornelius, nor blind his eyes by casting a
mist before the^ as Iugglers and other false merchauntes to deceive withal use
to do, but evidently and plainly dealte with him, in such sort, that he
might easilye perceive that his calling was not from earth, but from heaven,
not from man, but from God, whereby also to his great comfort, he might see
how mercifully God rewards his own gifts in him, that for his further
instruction he used toward him the information of an Angel.

We learn out of this point many lessons. Lessons out of the first branch of
ye second general.
First that God never leaves the^ destitute of a teacher, which earnestlye,
and in a reverent fear of his name, and a dutiful estimation of his majesty,
call upon, him being exercised in the diligent reading, hearing and conferring
of his word, and heartilye desiring daily to profit and go forewarde in the
understanding of the same, and to grow from time to time, unto a further
knowledge in the way and doctrine of salvation, so that sometimes by Angels,
sometimes by men, sometimes by his own son, he extraordinarily has taught
those that have longed to learn, rather than they should want teachers. The
godly ^omen.
Thus by Angels he further instructed the godly women in the resurrection of
his son Christ: by Christ himself he fully taught in the same matter the two
Disciples going unto Emaus, The two Disciples.
and talking together of the things which were done concerning Jesus. To the
Chamberlain unto the Queen of the Ethiopians reading the scriptures as he
road in his wagon, The Cham^erlayne.
he sent Philip, to teach him the knowledge of Christ. ^aule.
Paul he directs to Ananias, for instruction, concerning that Christ, whom
before in his members he so egrely persecuted. ^imeon.
Simeon that good and godly old father, longing or he dyed to see Christ, he
moves by his spirit at that instant to come into the temple, when he there
found Christ his desired, and with joy embracing him, cries out, Lord now
let thy servant depart in peace, ^pollos.
for mine eyes have seen thy salvation. He causes Apollos a religious and a
learned, and eloquent Jew, knowing no more but the Baptism of John, to meet
with Aquila and Priscilla, who expounded unto him the way of the Lord
perfectly. This our Cornelius a devout man, Cornelius.
and one that fears god, has first direction by an Angel, and after the
holy Apostle Peter, to teach him what to do. Let us therefore, good
Christians, be like godly minded and virtuously occupied with these godly me^,
and the Lord, though not miraculously as he did unto them, will never forsake
us, but appoint us one godly mean or other, by which we shall grow to knowledge
and understanding in his heavenly truth: whereas, if we shall be rather delighted
in reding of filthy books, Baudie books.
as ye Baudies de Gall, the Amaudis, I trow it be, the great Palace and the
little Palace of pleasure, with a number more of such filthy books, wherwyth
this Churchyard swarmeth in this clear light of the Gospel: if we shall be
occupied in vain, wicked, and ungodly talk, so far off shall we be with
Cornelius from having the Angel or Peter to direct us, that the Devil of hell
will associate himself unto us, and creep at the length so far into our
hearts, that he will root out of us al care of virtue and godliness, and make
us rejoice in our own shame, that we may be the more fit vessels of wrath and
damnation.

God has v^ed sundry means in ^imes past to ^eueale his will unto ^en.
2 Secondly we see that God from time to time in the ages past has used sundry
and diverse ways to speak unto our forefathers, as sometimes by Angels
appearing in the visible shapes of men, as, unto Abraham, Lot, Gedeon, Manoah,
Zachari, Marie, to this our Cornelius and others. Sometimes by Angels in other
likeness, sometimes by dreams, sometimes by the Priests Ephod, sometimes by
visions: all which means as they were extraordinary, so are they also now
ceased, and the glory of our times greater, in which he has vouchsafed to
speak unto us by his own son, as the writer of the Epistle to the Hebrews
does testifye, who being long since ascended into heaven, he has thought good
to have us his people to be instructed by the voice of men, to which purpose
he has appointed unto us for teachers, pastors, and Doctors, wherewith we
must content our selves, not looking for the ministry of Angels, or
reuelatio^s from heaven, whereof I shall have occasion to speak more hereafter.
Much might here be said of Angels and visions, but I love not: willingly to run
into common places. This therefore may suffice, briefly to note, yt as they are
both extraordinary ways, whereby it pleased God in times past to reveal himself
unto men, so herein has appeared god his marvelous and wonderful love toward
us, that when as he might have deemed us unmeet and unworthy of the service of
the vilest, the meanest, and the very basest creatures in all the world, yet
not contented to have ordained all other things for the use and benefit of
man, he has also appointed his Angels, sometimes to be instruments, by which
he would declare his will unto men, but always to watch over them, for their
defense and safegarde What a comfort therefore (beloved) is it unto us to know
that the Lord has appointed his Angels for our service, A singular comfort.
according as it is written in the first Chapter of the Hebrews: He makes
the spirits his messengers, and a flaming fire his ministers. Nay how greatly
are we bound to praise our God, before whom we are in so high account, and
over whom he is so careful and tender, that he has not appointed for every
one his several Angel (which some have presumed to teach without the
warraunt of the word) but has given charge and commandment, that upon every
particular child of his, many Angels should for their safeguard attend and
wait. Psalm. ^1.11.
For so are we taught in the Psalm: For he shall give his Angels charge over
thee, to keep thee in all thy ways. And to Elizeus servant were showed many
fiery chariotes in a readynesse for the defense of his master. Wherefore letting
pass this heathenishe forgerie of every man having two Angels, let us be
thankeful unto God for this inestimable and inspeakable goodness, who sets
in watch for the protection of his Church, the whole army and host of heavenly
soldiers, and as best pleases his endless Wisdom, uses the help one
while of many thousands, and another while of one only, for the safety and
defense of those which are his.

3 Thirdly, we have here to note, God many times applies himself to the
capacities of men.
that God of his fatherly goodness applies and frames himself many times to
our affections and dispositions, using in calling us to his knowledge such
means, ways and instruments, as he knows we will be most moved withal. So he
called the wise men by a star: the Jews by the authority of the
scriptures, and baptism of John, the Gentiles by variety of miracles. And
Christ when he would call his Apostles to the preaching of the gospel. he
brought them into a great marvel and wonder of him, by the taking of an
incredible number of fish at one draught, and so teaches them of the fishing
for men. Paul likewise at Athens, by finding an Alter whereon was written To
the unknown God, takes occasion of a thing familiar unto the gentiles, to
reason with them of the true worship of God. And in this place it pleases God
first to use in the calling of Cornelius the ministry of an Angel, and
afterward the service of man. Where out we learn, what discretion and
judgment there ought to be, in those that are teachers of others, to imitate
and follow this example of God, Christ, and his Apostles, in teaching and
winning of men unto him, many times to apply themselves unto the capacities,
wits, and understanding of their hearers and by things acquainted and known
unto them, to seek by little and little to draw them to the knowledge of
things dark and hidden from them.

The second ^raunch of ye ^econd ge^erall.
The second member of this second part contains the fear of Cornelius at
the sight of the Angel. For thus it is written in the text: But when he looked
on him, he was afraid, and said, what is it Lord. The Angel of the Lord
was sent by God unto Cornelius for his good, for his benefit, and for his
comfort. He came to assure him, that God in mercy had regard unto him, that
he had heard his prayers, and remembered his alms, and that he had appointed
Peter to be messenger unto him of the glad tidings of salvation. Cornelius all
this notwithstanding albeit, he were a man that feared God, and that there were
in him a great and vehement zeal in religion, yet he is abashed and apailed,
he trembles and fears at the sight of Gods messenger, which is a token of
the weakness of man his nature, which having a taste of the majesty of God,
quiuereth and quaketh at his presence, considering the highness and
excellency of the same, and his own lowness and unworthiness, weying what
love, and what reverence, it owes unto God, what perfectness and pureness he
requires at our hand in his law, and what imperfection and vnpurenesse there
remains in us, and how little ability to perform that which he commands,
and therefore worthyly it humbles it self with fear and reverence before his
majesty.

First we learn out of this place, Holy men have always feared at the
appearaunce of God his angels.
that it has always been peculiar unto the Saints of GOD, to tremble and
fear at the apperance of his Angels, although they have in deed been sent
for their great joy and comfort. So Moses feared at the sight of the Angel
in the flaming bushe: Gedeon when he saw the Angel coming to show him that
God had appointed him to be the deliverer of the Children of Israel out of the
hands of the Midianites, Judge. 6.22.
cries out, Alas my Lord God: for because I have seen an Angel of the Lord
face to face, Judge. 13.22.
I shall die. Manoah when the Angel brought him tidings of the birth of
Sampson, Dan. 10.
after his departure, says unto his wife, We shall surely die, because we have
seen God. Daniel was stryke^ into such a marvelous fear at the sight of the
Angel, that as he says himself, there remained no strength in him: For his
strength in him was turned into corruption, and he retained no power. Zachary
feared when the Angel declared unto him, the birth of John the Baptisse: so
did Marie at the vision of the Angel, certifying her, that she should bear
Christ. The shepherds were sore afraid when they saw the Angel bringing them
news that Christ was borne The three Disciples in mount Thabor, Mat. 17.6.
fell on their faces, and were sore afraid, at ye transfiguration of Christ.
Mark. 16.8.
The godly women that came to anoint Christ, trembled at the beholding of the
Angel which told them that he was risen, and they ran away from the
Sepulcher sore amazed. And in this place Cornelius looking on the Angel
coming unto his comfort, greatelye fears. If it be so then, The coming of
Christ to judgment, will be most terrible to ye reprobate.
that to the very Godly the sight of Gods Angels be fearful and terrible,
appearing for their profit, and for their better assurance of GOD his
especial favor and good will toward the^, how terrible then and fearful
shall the coming of the son of man be, to the wicked and reprobate, when at
the day of judgment he shall come in great glory, accompanied with many
Millions of Angels to render unto them their pardon, which they have deserved
in the lake, that burns with fire and Brimstone? Let therefore those
desperate and careless persons that set at naught and contemn Christ, as a
merciful and loving savior, fear and tremble at him as a sharp and
revenging judge, who, if in the time of his humility here upon earth he could
with one word of his mouth throw flat to the ground all his enemies that came
to take him, what shall be his power coming to judge with majesty, to throw
down thousands unto Hell, who, if his Angels countenance have been terrible
to his own Saints and chosen, when they were sent for their comfort, how much
more fearful shall his angry countenance and frowning looks be unto the
wicked, when he comes to condemn the^: in so much that those, which now
setting all fear aside, or at least seeming so to do, whereas many times they
tremble at the shaking of a leaf, they seem to be so fool hardy, as if they
would pull God from heaven out of his throne, they shall then be driven into
such an horror, fear, trembling, shaking and shiuering, every vein, limme and
ioynte of them, that to save themselves, they, if they could, would creep
into a mousehole: nay, shall for fear and confusion say unto the mountains,
fall upon us to hide us from the terrible wrath of the Lord?

2 Secondly, We ought t^ fear at the speaking of ye Lord unto v^ out of his
word.
we must learn with Cornelius to fear and submit our selves at the presence
of God and the feeling of his divine majesty. For even unto the godly is the
sight of god terrible, not that God would thereby drive us into a perpetual
abashment and dismaying, or have us overwhelmed, as it were, and swallowed up
of fear and horror, but that we should with all meekness, lowlynesse,
humility and reverence, cast our selves down before his majesty, being with all submission ready to do that which he shall think best to enjoin us. For
the Lord looks, that those to whom he opens and shows himself by his
word, should be moved with a reverent fear at the hearing of ye same,
according as he witnesses by his Prophet Isaias: Hear the word of the Lord,
all ye that tremble at his word. And again: To him will I look, even to him,
that is pore, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my words. But what is
ye cause (beloved) that at this day ye word of the Lord works not in us this
effect of reverence, trembling and fear? forsooth, because we fasten our eyes
upon the person that speaks, with the baseness of whom we are nothing
moved, whereas if we would, as indeed we ought, consider that it is GOD which
speaks unto us in the person of man, then would be driven into this sluggishe
nature of ours, such a fear and reverence of the word of God, as ought to be
in us, which I pray God grant unto us.

The answer of Cornelius to the Angel.
Thirdly, I cannot let pass the answer that Cornelius makes to the Angel
calling him, where he says, what is the Lord? Whereas ye drossie translation
which goes under ye name of Ierom, and the common translation, and is the
Pope his own dearling, has, who is it Lord? Like as in the first of Samuel,
and third chapter, it has very falsely and rediculously, that Heli his eyes
were dim and could not see the candle of the Lord, until it was put out. And
in the.15. of the first to ye Corinthes, clean contrary unto the truth of ye
Greek text, which says, we shall not all die, but we shall all be changed: it
says, we shall all dye, but shall not al be changed: besides a great many
more filthy corruptions which have often out of this place been showed to be in
it, that you might learn to forsake and leave it. Al which errors, most of
them showed them by us, The Papists a long time in stead of ye holy Ghost,
prayed unto the Devil.
and some of them told them by their own men, I do the less marvel that
they still retain, for as much as of gross and wilful ignorance in their Latin
portuses in stead of Glory be to the father and to the son, and to the holy
ghost, they sing daily, Glory be to the father, and to the son, and to the
Devil. Spiritui paradyto, ye wicked and infamous spirit, in stead of
spiritui paracleto, the spirit, which is ye comforter. For ye, that there is
so much difference between ye two words, every boy of the grammar schole can
tell. And I would feign learn of some Papist, that holds that the church of
Rome can not err, whether this were an error or no, in stead of the holy
Ghost to pray to the Devil. And because I were loath to sustain their ill will
for reporting this truth of them, let it for me, rest upon the back of him
where I have it, which is, Polidor Vergil, a man of their own, who in his fifth
book and thirteenth Chapter of the finders out of things, too too pitiously
(poor soul) lamenteth, and complayneth of their waywardness, that being
told of so horrible a fault, will not leave nor amend it. Wherefore leaving
him in his sorrow, and his Popish Priests in their froward error, I
return to my purpose, and note unto you, that all the copies, so many as I
ever have seen or heard of, have this reading, What is it Lord? so that the
other, Who is it Lord? being such as any that in the Greek tongue can set the
Nominative case and the verb together, might easily avoid, proceeds of
wilful ignonoraunce and careless negligence, and darkeneth also the meaning
of the place, for which cause only I note it. Whereas this reading, What is it
Lord? argues that Cornelius his mind was touched with a fear, as knowing,
that albeit it were only the Angel that spoke unto him, yet he had indeed
to do with God, whose only messenger the Angel was. Therefore, thus saying,
he shows forth a ready and willing mind, even before he knows, to do
whatsoever the Lord should command him: whereas we, after that the Lord
has commanded and commanded again, strain courtesy, and take leisure to
perform his will, communing with flesh and blood, whether it be good policy
or no, to do as the Lord bids, and whether it may not procure us peril and
trouble. But all you that fear the Lord say with Cornelius, What is it Lord?
and by thy merciful assistaunce, we will perform and do it.

There follows the third branch of this second general, namely, The
third branch of the second general.
the Angels speech unto Cornelius, saying: Thy prayers, and thine alms are
come up into remembrance before God. Now therefore send men to Ioppa, and call
for Simon, whose surname is Peter. He lodges with one Simon a Tanner, whose
house is by the Sea side, he shall tell thee what thou ought to do. These
words, as in the beginning I declared, contain both a comfort, and a
commandment unto Cornelius, which both, with their doctrines, shall be handled
in order: first the comfort, because it is first mentioned, after this
manner: Thy prayers and alms are come up into remembrance before God. Of these
words we may not gather, that GOD, who sees all things, and before whose
eyes are manifest those things which are done in greatest secret, does at
any time forget the doings of men, but the holy Ghost in this place, as in
many other, speaks of God as of a man, for our better understanding. And
for because if God defer at the first to grant our requests, our dull
nature conceiueth no better of him, tha^ of a man that is deaf, therefore,
that Cornelius might know, that his prayers were heard, and his alms deeds
accepted, the Angel assures him, that GOD has in remembrance both the one
and the other, that is, that God will reward them with the full light and
knowledge of his Gospel. And so in many other places, does the word Remember,
being spoken of the dealing of God toward man, carry with it a
signification of reward. So God remembered Noah, and the floude ceased: he
remembered Abraham, and delivered his kinsman Lot out of Sodom: he remembered
Rachell, and gave her children: he remembered his promise, and delivered the
children of Israel out of Egipte. So we read that the thief on the Cross
said unto Christ: Lord remember me when thou commeste into thy Kingdom, and
he answers: this day shalt thou be with me in Paradise. And in the Psalm
it is said, He remembered us in our humility, and then follows, he redeemed
us. And therefore you shall find, that David often prays to the LORD, to
remember him. In this place therefore Gods remembrance of the prayers and
alms deeds of Cornelius, teaches him, that he will reward them, not for their
worthiness, but of his mercy.

^he do^^es.
1 Many lessons issue out of this fruitful place, which deserve large
discourses: but I will run them over in a word, hoping that the
straightness of time, wherewith I am overtaken, shall obtain pardon for my
shortness. First therefore, once again, to stop the mouths of the quarrelling
Papists, we teach, ye this place is a mighty encouragement, and a sharp
spur, to prick forward this dull nature of ours, unto good works, in which
we are so cold and slothful: for here we plainelye see, that our godly
exercises, our Christian deeds and good works be not only such as do
please GOD, with which he is much delighted, and the which he greatly
likes and very well accepts, but that he does also beautify and garnishe
them with this noble reward, that being used to his honor and glory, and the
benefit of his Church, he does most plenteouslie and liberally increase
them with a large heap of other gifts, blessings, and graces. For unto him
that has, shall be more given, and the faithful servant that is trusty in
few things, and puts out his masters talent unto gain, shall be set
over many things, and be made Ruler over many Cities, like as in this place
Cornelius, because God heard his prayers, and accepts of his alms, he
directs him unto Peter, for full instruction of the Gospel, and knowledge of
Salvation.

2 Secondly, for as much as it is here said, that Cornelius his prayers and
alms deeds were accepted before God, it must needs follow, that Cornelius
had faith. For whatsoever is not of faith is sin. And without faith it is
impossible to please God. It were blasphemy to affirm, that GOD is delighted
with sin, but God is delighted with the prayer and alms of Cornelius: if
therefore they were not sin, then were they done in faith, and therefore
Cornelius had now already faith. God is said to be well pleased with them,
it follows therefore inuincibly, that they proceeded of Faith. Cornelius
therefore had faith, yea, and also faith in Christ, for without Christ, if
we behold the bare Majesty of God, we shall be so far off from receiving any
comfort, or feeling any taste of his goodness, that we shall have our eyes
dazeled with the brightenesse thereof, and our selves ouer-whelmed with the
glory of the same. And I pray you, can it be, that without Christ, Cornelius
could be enlightened with the spirit of Christ, I mean the Spirit of
regeneration, or new birth? manifest and evident tokens, whereof are his
religion and fear of God. For God chalengeth in Ezechiel this honor unto
himself, ^zech. 11.19. and ^^.26.
to frame the heart to his fear and godliness, to make it new, and to drive
out the stone hardness of it, to cause it to walk in his statuts, and to do
his judgments and keep them. The fame therefore of the Messiah being then so
rife amongst all the Jews, yea and among other nations also far off, it
cannot be but that Cornelius his faith had some ground on him, albeit not in
such fullness as it pleased God afterward to reveal unto him. Wherefore
let the Papists lay their hand upon their mouth, Against the Papists abusing
this place.
which abuse this place shamefully two ways, the one, to prove, that before
Faith, a man may do good works, which may serve as preparatiues unto
Faith: and secondlye, that our works do deserve at the hands of GOD,
increase of his good gifts and graces in us, according unto the several
merits of every one of us. For the fleshlye manne is so far off from
preparing himself of his own power, to win the grace of GOD, 1. Cor. 2.14.
that he does not perceive the things of GOD, neither can do. And as for
deserving, the Scripture playnelye teaches, that Faith it self, from whence
all other good works do spring, is the only gift of GOD, and therefore must
Works, the fruits of the same, be so likewise. Wherefore if we have nothing
but that we have received. Why do we boaste, as if it were our own, and not
received? Yet when they have prated for their merits, until their tongues ache,
and cried out for their deseruings, till their throats be hoarse again, they
bring nothing that may stir up a man to do well, but leave us always in
doubt whether our works please God or no: nay they flatly affirm that it is
high arrogancy, and great presumption, for a man to assure himself of
salvation, whereas we denying, that our works can deserve any thing, and yet
teaching, that there is a reward laid up for them of mercy, which faith
takes hold on in Christ, do by this means stir up and prick forward the
godly to good works, when as they know they shall not lose their labor, the
recompense whereof (albeit it please the Lord in many places of the Scripture,
to term by the name of a Reward, yet hereof cannot be concluded deserte, but
it is rather a special token of Gods great fatherlye love, that thus crowns
in us his own good gifts, who otherwise doing our vttermoste, are nothing
else in deed, and in our own selves and nature, but unprofitable servants.

3 Thirdly, we may gather of the nature of contraries, that as God rewards
the religion, fear of God, godly bringing up of his household, prayer, and
alms deeds of Cornelius, with more plentiful abundaunce of spiritual gifts
and knowledge of his Gospel (as he uses in his children daily, by a new and
very sensible increase, to multiplye his graces, as it were by degrees, until
he bring them to perfection) so the little store of heavenly virtues, that this
day is to be found amongst us, our slownesse in prayer, our slackenesse in
the deeds of Charity, our unwillingness to labor for the edifying one of
an other, our weariness in hearing the word of God, and our less profiting
after the preaching of the Gospel, are manifest tokens of Gods just revenge
of our great unthankfulness, so that if we shall still go on in hiding in
the ground our Masters talent, it shall in the end be taken from us, and
given unto those that have used their talentes to gain, and we for our
deseruings be cast out into utter darkness.

^harge vn^ Cornelius ^tructing ^n what to ^e.
In the second part of this speech of the Angel unto Cornelius, is set
down a charge and commandment for his instruction, what he ought to do,
in which, he is told the place whither to send, Ioppa: to whom there to
send, unto one Simon a Tanner: for whom to send, for one Simon, surnamed
Peter: to what end he should send for him, namely, that he might teach him
what to do, or as it is in some readings, speak words unto him, whereby he
should be saved, and his whole house. Wherein appears the great goodness
of GOD toward Cornelius, in easing him of all the burden and trouble of the
journey, and laying it upon Peter, whom he had appointed for his teacher.
And whereas reason and duty would, that the Scholar should go unto the
master, yet here such is the gentleness of GOD, that he will have the
Master take pains to come unto the Scholar, letting Cornelius tarry quietlye
at home, whilst Peter sustaineth and endures all the encombraunces and
troubles of the way in trauailin unto him.

1 You have first to note, The doctrines.
out of this favorable dealing of GOD with Cornelius, that such is his loving
nature toward mankind, and so careful is he for their salvation, that he
daily thrusts forth Ministers for the instruction of his people, when as
they themselves are in a manner unwilling to have them, nay, that he is many
times found of them which sought him not, and offers himself to them that
ask not after him: yea, when we have run from him, that he has come unto us:

So, when our first Parents Adam and Eve had hidden themselves for shame of
their transgression among the trees of the garden, GOD seeks and finds them
out, and assures them of comfort in the promised seed. So he calls Abraham
out of Vr of the Chaldeis, when he wallowed in Idolatry. Lot he draws (as it
were) violently, and against his will, out of the destruction of Sodom. David
sleeping almost a whole year in security, and being touched with no remorse
of his filthye adultery, and other heinous offenses, he awaketh, by his
Prophet Nathan. Paul he conuerteth in the midst of his heat, and rage of
persecution, going to Damascus. And Peter after thrice denial and forswearing
him, he friendly admonishes of his fault and fall, by a look. But in this
case of Cornelius, GOD in letting him tarrye at home, and causing Peter to come
unto him, had (no doubt) a further respect, than unto Cornelius his own ease,
and that was, that all his whole household, together with a great many of his
friends and acquaintance, might receive the knowledge of the Gospel, and the
glad tidings of salvation, as well as he. For as he is the GOD of all, so
would he as well have those that be servant, saved, as those that be
Masters, of whose instruction also, if we be careless, we have one day an
heavy accoumptes and reckenyng to make for it.

2 Secondlye, in that GOD instructs not Cornelius by himself, nor by the
Angel, which both he could have done, but appoints him over unto Peter,
as before he did Paul unto Ananias. And the Chamberlayne of the Queen of the
Ethiopians unto Philippe: We see here a plain and evident place for the
confirmation of the outward preaching of the word, and the ministry of the
Church, for in as much as, Faith comes by hearing, and hearing by the word
of GOD, and none can preach, unless he be sent: whosoever he be, that looking
for other revelations, means, and ways, despises and contemns the word
preached by the mouth and ministry of man, despises the means which GOD
has ordained for his salvation, and to work in him faith by, and shows him
self plainly to be none of Christ's disciples, nor to have care to be
lightened with the light of the heavenly wisdom, in as much as he refuses
the voice of man, which CHRIST uses as an instrument, unto the which, he
will have our faith tied: wherefore he will not take at the hands of any
man, the contempt of this order, that I speak not with what horrible
examamples GOD has punished the bold and wicked attemptes, and practices of
the Anabaptists, and Enthusiaste Heretics of our times, that casting aside
the preaching of the word, will have all done by Revelations. GOD grant, that
the wonderful errors and wickednesses, which they have fallen into, may be
admonitions unto us, to make much of Gods constitutions and ordinances.

3 Thirdly, as this place commends the dignity of the preching of the word,
so also, in yt ye Angel reports of Peter unto Cornelius, that he should teach
him what to do, it also instructs us what manner of person he ought to be,
which is to be admitted into this high and honorable function of ye ministry,
namely, such a one, as can tell Cornelius what to do for to attain unto
salvation, that is, such a one, as is able to teach them of his cure and
charge their duties unto the Lord: for Paul unto Titus, Tit. 1.9.
wills that he which is a Minister, be such a one as holdding fast ye
faithful word according unto doctrine, may be able to exhort with wholesome
doctrine, and to improve those ye speak against it. And unto Timothy, he will
not have one made a Minister, which is a yo^g Scholar, least he being puffed
up, fall into the condemnation of the Devil. What woeful days therefore
(beloved) are these days of ours, in which thousa^ds of our Ministers, are
not only not young scholars, but also no scholars at al: not only not able to
exhort with wholesome doctrine, but also not to read distinctly and plainly,
such as in whom there is no manner of worthiness, that ought to be in a
Minister, but such as their greedy Latrones, Patrones I would say, allow
of, in giving them living, I mean their worthy paying for it, and then a Quare
impedit, against the Bishop, that shall deny him institution. And hereof
comes it to pass, that our Churches are full of Ieroboams Priests, I mean
the very refuse of the people, such as in their conscience abhor the
ministry, and take it only, because they know no other way to live, being
many of them unmeet to have the charge of our shoes, much less to be
trusted with the cure of our souls. The Lord grant unto those, whom it
concerns to redress this foul abuse, bowels of pity and compassion, with
our Savior Christ to yearne at the great ignorance of the people in the
Country, for lack of able teachers: in somuche, that in some Parishes it were
no hard matter to find many, that otherwise than after the manner of Parats
mumbling up the words of their belief without all understanding, are not able
to tell whether there be any GOD or Christ, or no. And you (dear brethren) of
this City, whom God has blessed with stoare of good teachers, whose number I
pray to be increased daily: pray for us of the country, that the harueste with
us being marvelous great, and the laborers wonderful few, it would please
the Lord of the harvest to thrust out into his harvest painful laborers and
faithful Peter's in great numbers, that may be able to teach Cornelius what to
do. For lack of instructions in many places of their duties unto God, they
clean forget their duties unto man, yea and many times take weapon against
their lawful and Godly Prince, which if they were well instructed in the
word of the Lord* there is very good hope, they would fear to do.

4 Fourthlye, where it is said that Cornelius should hear of Peter at Ioppa
at the house of one Simon a Tanner, we do learn of what sorts of men God
commonly uses to gather his Church, namely of the meanest and lowest estate
of the people, for the most part. For not many wise, not many strong, not
many noble according to the flesh. And God has chosen the folish, the weak,
the despised, to confound the wise, the strong, and the esteemed. Simon the
Tanner must entertain Peter, and the poor Shunamite keep a chamber for
Elizeus: and the widow of Sareptha in the time of famine, give a little bread
unto Elias: Matthewe the publican must bid Christ, yea, many times the caves of
Obadiah must hide the Prophets of the Lord by fiftye and fiftye, when as the
great men of Ioppa, contemn Peter: when Ahaziah by his Captain over fifty
will set Elias before him, if he tell him he shall die: when Achab will seek
over all realms and countries for the life of Elias, when Herod under the
pretense of worship will have Christ diligently sought after, that he may
slaye him: when as Iesabell will kill the Prophets of the Lord, and save alive
the Priests of Baal. But God has had at all times, and in all places, and
has at this time, and in this land, many of the great men, that make
accountes of Peter, and the Lord multiplye them continuallye for his Christ's
sake, and grant that they may all have God his faithful and paineful
ministers and preachers in a reverent regard and good accounte. For it is to
little purpose to feed us with living, and suffer us of every one to be
contemned, which will one day be the ruin and decay of the Church. Besides
that, it is a great token in what person soever, and of what countenance
soever, that does not with Simon the Tanner make much of Peter, that there is
in him little fear of GOD. Nay it is playnelie set down for one of the
properties that must be in him that shall dwell in the LORDS Tabernacle and
rest on his holy hill, that he must not only esteem well of the Preachers,
but of all other the Godly whatsoever. In whose eyes (says the Psalmist) a
vile person is contemned, but he honors them that fear the Lord. Those
therefore that do the clean contrary, that is, secretly maintain wicked
Papists, and make accountes of bad and lewd persons, contemning the godly,
and preachers of the Lord, I had rather leave it to your own consideration,
than my self declare, in whose Tabernacle they shall dwell, and on whose hill
they shall rest.

The third part.
NOw aword or two of the third part, and so I will end. In this part
generally is showed the willingness and obedience of Cornelius, with speed
to perform that which the Angel charged him withal. For (says the text)
When the Angel was departed, he called two of his servants, and a soldier
that feared God, one of them that waited on him, and told them all things, and
sent them to Ioppa. Where first comes to be noted, a commendation of the
faith of Cornelius, that all delays, reasons, A commendation of the faith of
Cornelius.
and excuses, set a part, withal speed prepares himself to do that, which
the Angel had told him to be the will and pleasure of the Lord. He stands
not to debate what trouble his new religion might work him, whether that it
were likelye, that the house of a poor Tanner should receive so singular a
teacher as Peter was, or rather, whether Peter were not some obscure and bad
fellow, that lay lurking and hyding himself in such a base place, whereas if
he were of such excellency, he should seem to be taken forth amongst the
great men of those times and places. These and such like, would the wisdom
and policy of man have laid unto him, to have withholden him from yielding
obedience unto the commandment of God. But over all these faith easily got
the victory, and causes him with diligence for to submit himself, to the
fulfilling of the Lords pleasure. Let us therefore learn, in the Lords
matters, not to plead policy, but when the Lord commands with all speed to
show obedience. You know how Saul spedde being commanded without any mercy
showed, to root out the Amalekites with all theirs, from man, unto beast, who
setting his own wisdom, before the wisdom of the Lord, is called fool
for his labor, and certifyed, that his kingdom shall be taken from him, and
given to such a one as should be ready for to do the will of the Lord. The
children of Israel, when God had streightlye charged them to destroy all the
nations, into whose land he would bring them, and showed the inconvenience
that would come unto them by saving them: they for saving them, found them
thorns and pricks unto their flesh, in so much that many years they lived
in their slauerye and subjection, as the book of Judges does plentifully
witness. The Prophet that contrary to God his commandment did eat bread,
and drink water in the house of the old Prophet, as he road homewarde was
devoured of a Lion. And he that commanded by the word of God to stryke the
Prophet, refused it, a Lion also did slaye him. Al these preferred their own
wisdom, policy, and carnal reasons, before the wisdom, and express
precepts of the Lord, and the fruits that thereof they reaped, were their
own destruction. God grant that their examples may make us wise, that with
Cornelius, in all things that we shall learn of the word of the Lord to
concern us, we may speedily prepare our selves to perform it without
commoning about the doing of it, with flesh and blood. For before our GOD,
obedience is far better, and of greater accountes than sacrifice.

The second lesson of this third part is, What fruit Cornelius reaped by ye
virtuous bringing up of his householde.
the fruit that Cornelius reaped by his godly instructing of his family,
namelye thereby he has gained thus much, that he has now faithful and trusty
servant whom he may send on his errande in this grave and weyghtie matter,
concerning the salvation of him and his. All you that be masters, learn out of
this, to be careful to plant in your servant the fear of the Lord, and then
shall you find them faithful unto you, as Abraham had his servant, as we
read in the 24. of Genesis. And those, that forslewe this duty, it is no
marueyle, if because they will not yield unto God their duty, they find
their own servants faithless and trustelesse, liars, filchers, stealers,
stubborn, disobedient, blasphemers, swearers, and altogether given over to al
sin and ungodliness. Yea, magistrates also, must be careful to have their
subictes taught their duetyes unto God, or else they shall find them
negligente in their obedience unto them, yea tumultuous, seditious and
rebellious.

Religiousnes in soldiers.
The last note of this third point, and of this whole scripture, is, that with
two of his servants, Cornelius sent also a soldier that waited upon him, who
feared GOD. Where we learn, that no trade nor profession of life is to be
preuiledged from the service of GOD, since that soldiers, who the further they
are from it, the more hardy of the greater number they are accounted, have in
the scripture their commendatio^ for this duty. Nay, Deuteronomy. 23.9.
the Lord in Deuteronomie describing the qualities of soldiers, will have them
not only to be free from al wickedness, but also from al manner of outward
pollutions. And therefore I do many times marvel, how the practice of our times,
in se^ding forth into ye wars thieves and murderers, can be warranted by ye
word. For sure I am, that the Israelites could not prosper at the siege of Ai,
until Achan the thief was found out and executed. And the lord in Numbers,
says, that no recompense is to be taken for the life of the murderer, nay yt
the land can not be cleansed of blood, but with ye blood of him that shed it.
Let murderers therefore, if they be proper and ha^dsome felows, be properly and
handsomely hanged, and honest me^, be sent to war in their steads.

And al you that be noble men and gentlemen for Gods sake I pray you, A good
lesson for noble men and gentlemen.
learn this one point of Cornelius: let not any wait nor attend upon you, but
such as fear the Lord, and then shall you not need in the country, such a
train to follow you with long poles in their necks, nor in ye City to wait
upon you, with long blades by their sides, with flashing and cutting, and
ruffia^ly quarelling, and for never so little a word speaking, imitating ye
speech of ye Devil unto our savior Christ: If thou be a man of thy hands,
come mete me in Smithfield.

Here I brokenly make an end, without any repetition, having as I could, and
not as I would, run over every part of this text, using only for proves ye
warrant of ye Scripture, because the testimony of man may be refused, but it
never goes forth but unto salvation or condemnation. If I have bin somewhat
long, I pray forgive me this fault, and pardon me this injury: I have done it
only for your further edifying, and for my farewell, do in Christ Jesus
humbly pray you al thoroughly to consider of that which I have spoken, being all
together within the compass of ye world, that you put it in speedy practice
and execution, especially the diligent travail to instruct your children and
families in the word of the Lord. For the Devil that now will go about in
withholding you from this duty, to tell you that it is not yours, but the
ministers office, will at your lives end, to condemn you for forslewing your
duty, lay unto your charge, that God has commanded you to teach diligently
his word to your children and families: The Devil that now to excuse you, will
allege that it will hinder your servants work, will at your dying day, to
accuse you, plead that Martha in being busye about the affairs of the house,
was not so well occupied as Marie in hearing of Christ. The devil that now
says unto you, that for thus doing you shall be mocked and scorned, will at
your last breath and gaspes, for not doing it, rehearse unto you, it is better
to please God than men: and they that please me^ are not the servants of God.
Wherefore my brethren, concerning this, that either I or any other of Gods
ministers shall in his word speak unto you, out of this place, let not the
saying of the lord by the prophet Ezechiel be verified in you, where he writes
thus: Also thou son of man, the children of thy people that talk of thee by
the walls, and in the doors of houses, and speak one to another, every one to
his brother saying, come, I pray you, and hear what is the word that comes
from the Lord. For they come unto thee, as the people uses to come: and my
people sit before thee, and hear thy words, but they will not do them. For
with their mouths they make jests, and their heart goes after their
covetousness? And lo, thou art unto them as a jesting song of one that has a
pleasant voice, and can sing well. For they hear thy words but do them not.
And when this comes to pass, (for lo, it will come) then shall they know that
a prophet has been among them. The Lord therefore make us to be wise hearted,
that with Cornelius, we may be ready with all diligence to do what soever the
Lord out of his holy word shall command us for Christ his sake, to which
Christ with the father and the holy Ghost, be all praise, honor, glory, and
Dominion, both now and for ever. Amen.


