A PLAIN AND EASY LAYING open of the meaning and understanding of the Rules
of Construction in the English ACCIDENCE, appointed by authority to be taught
in all Schools of her Majesty's dominions, for the great use and benefit of
young beginners: by JOHN STOCKWOOD sometime Schoolmaster of Tunbridge.

Imprinted at London, by the Assigns of Francis Flower. 1590

THE BOOK TO THE young Punies and Petits of the Grammar School.
WHen painful Master has no time,
In plainest sort your rules to teach,
Or clubbish fellows shall refuse,
Their friendly help heerin to reach:
Because you come with empty hand,
And profer not thrice welcome fee,
(which thing some scholars much desire)
Then boldly make resort to me.
I will you help, make proof who list,
And set you down the easy way,
Your English rules to understand,
Their meaning open for to lay.
For each example to his rule,
I teach you aptly how to fit:
Thus may you laugh, where others cry,
when up they go for missing it.
Now, as for see I none do crave,
I ask no other recompense,
The pain is mine, the profit thine,
Using this book with diligence.
TO THE RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL (unto whom in the Lord for sundry considerations I
stand most singularly beholding) Master WILLIAM LEWIN, Doctor of both Laws,
Justice of peace, one of her Majesty's high Commission for causes
ecclesiastical, Judge of the court of Prerogatives, etc. JOHN STOCKWOOD
Minister and preacher of the word of God, wishes a plentiful increase of all
heavenly graces, for the good of God his Church, and benefit of the
Commonwealth.
SVCH (RIGHT WORSHIPFVLL) have been the many and manifold bounties and favors,
ever since my first being acquainted with you until this day, extended from
your W. in most courteous manner not only unto my self, but also vouchsaued
sundry other of my good friends at my request, that howsoever unto others I
have peradventure given such worthy testimony of the same, as wherewithal
they have been contented, and supposed me to be a thankful recounter of
benefits received, yet could I never heerwithall satisfy and content my self,
because the greatness of your deserts toward me and my friends has seemed
woorthily to be further published unto the knowledge of all posterity, unto
whom (as duty binds me) I do most willingly acknowledge, that the grateful
remembrance of the same, so long as life does last, and breath not fail, shall
never be extinguished, nor buried in the loathsome lake of odious oblivion, but
always be reserved fast locked up in the safe custody of a most dutiful and
thankful mind. And to this end having no other means of better value, to
testify my thankful duty, I have presumed under your worshipful and learned
patronage to send abroad this plain and easy laying open of the English rules
of Construction for the young Punies of the Grammar school, in so familiar and
evident a manner, as the meanest wits, and slenderest capacities may to their no
small benefit and profit (as I am persuaded) understand and bear away the
same. And heerin though I have chiefly framed my self unto the simplicity of
the little ones and yoonglings that are occupied in these kind of studies, yet
some thing here and there I have inserted, not unworthy altogether of the
observation and marking of those which are of further reading.

If it shall of any be laid unto me for a fault, that I spend time in these
small trifles, and Grammar matters, the which might better be employed about
things more serious and of greater moment and importance, my defense is, that
to have laid well the ground work, and as it were the foundation, whereupon
the whole frame and building in a manner of the Latin tongue must be settled, is
not in deed and in truth, to be deemed a light and toyish matter, but that
shall bring great ease unto the master, and also good furtherance unto the
young beginners, if with diligence and heedfulnes they look into the same.
Besides that I know not how it comes to pass, that as, Nauita de stellis, de
bobus narrat arator, and every one as he has been brought up, deliteth to be
talking of those things for the most part wherein he has been most exercised:
so I having spent many years about the instructing of youth in the principles
and rudiments of the latin tongue, can not choose but ever now and then be
harping on those matters, with the which in former times I have been so long
and well acquainted. If any benefit may grow thereby unto those little ones,
for whose sake, as well to save them from the rod, as also to encourage them by
this plain laying open of the meaning of their rules, with more willingness,
and cheerfulnes to go forward in their studies: I shall have obtained my
desire, submitting in all humility this my simple travel, such as it is, unto
your wise and learned censure, whom I most heartily pray and beseech after your
accustomed and wonted clemency in such sort to accept of the same, as by me
toward your W. it has been meant, namely an unfeigned token of most dutiful
and hearty good will, the which for many courtesies I owe unto your Worship,
whom I pray the Almighty long to preserve in peace and prosperity to your
good contentment, and benefit of your Country. Tunbridge this 16. November,
1590.

Your W. most bounden, and humble in the Lord to be commanded, JOHN STOCKWOOD.

TO THE FRIENDLY READER concerning the profit of this book.
Why this labor has been taken in the English rules.
NOT being altogether ignorant (right gentle Reader) of the slender capacity
of many young beginners in the Grammar schools, having my self by the space
of twenty years exercised the office of a poor Schoolmaster, during the
which time I have had the trial of many wits, and finding by experience, that
one and the selfsame thing being often repeated in teaching, and as it were by
small drops instilled into the tender ears of the little Punies and Petites:
yet by reason of the weakness of their wits in those young years, it has
quickly passed away without any great profit, I have wished many times, that
some good body would take pains for to lay open the rules of construction in
our English Accidence, in such a plain and ready manner, as that the little
ones, might as it were by themselves easily conceive of the meaning of the
same, by the apt applying of every example unto his several rule. For this
being well performed, a ready way is opened to the more easy passing through
the examining and parsing of such lectures, as their teachers afterward shall
think good to read unto them. Which labor, because none hitherto has entered
upon, I my self in the vacation time of the twel^^ ^aies (as they call it)
have taken upon me, and with God his help ^^nished the same. And I have the
rather made choice to deal with the English rules, because it is the first
thing that the Accidentiaries do enter into, after they have learned their
eight parts of speech, and as it were the foundation of all the rest of the
Grammar building, the which being well laid, they shall be the better able to
proceed to the understanding of Latin Authors. And for as much as there lies a
great weight in the manner of teaching the young beginners the understanding of
these rules, which is chiefly to be attained by letting them familiarly and
plainly see, how every example agrees with his rule, I hope that I have in
such sort performed this point, as that the child of meanest conceit, if he
diligently read and mark this book, may almost without any help of his
master, be able of himself, by the example, to show the meaning of every rule,
to every one that shall demand the meaning of the same. So that the long time,
the which the master was wont to spend before, about the beating into their
heads of the understanding of their rules, may now be spent about other matters
tending to their profit, and they themselves, when as their masters words
oftentimes were no sooner in at the one ear, but that they were as quickly out
again at the other to his great grief, and many times to their greater smart,
when they were well whipped for their dulnes, may by the help of this book
opened and laid before them, have such a master as will at all times most
gently and plainly teach them, if they will but vouchsafe to repair and resort
unto him.

Pains spared to the schoolmaster.
The Schoolmaster then shall by this book be eased of much pains, that he was
forced to use before to little purpose, because that the sound of his words
striking their ears for the time, was straight ways forgotten: Ease to the
scholar.
and the scholar that carrying away many a stripe for his dulnes and
forgetfulness was much discouraged, and not daring for fear to ask his master
again the thing which he told him twenty times before, may resort hither, and
without any blows hear again and again the same thing even so often as he
list, the which neither time nor tediousnes will suffer his master to repeat
unto him.

Every father regarding the profit of his child.
Yea every loving and careful father for the profit of his son, the which
has sometimes in his youth been a smatterer in Grammar, and now through
continuance of time, and other business almost clean forgotten the same, by
using this book, and questioning at spare times with his child, when he
comes from the Grammar school, may partly increase his forlorn knowledge,
and partly help forward by his riper wit, the tender understanding of his
little child, and perceive how he profits, so far forth as concerns the
conceiving of the meaning of every rule, by applying every example unto the
same, to which purpose I dare boldly pronounce, that nothing is omitted, that
any way concerns the fitting of every example to every rule throughout the
whole rules of construction, having framed my self to be as it were
dunstically plain, for the better understanding of the young ones, unto whom
nothing can be made too plain, in which respect the learneder sort will
vouchsafe me their pardon, knowing that these pains were purposedly taken for
the profit of the small ones: yet it may be that same things are here set
down, the which being well marked, may save my master scholars of the higher
forms now and then a scowring, and also make a way for them by themselves to do
the like to their great profit, in the applieng the examples of their latin
Syntaxis, unto the rules of the same, the which will be the easier for them by
the help of this book, wherein they may behold the like to be performed in
all the English rules, in which respect they will also be the willinger to have
the English Accidence bound with this, to aid them in the same.

This book will further the sale of the English Accidence.
And by this means my friends the Printers of the English Accidence shall
stand not a little beholding unto me, in as much as this Book will be so far
off from hindering the sale thereof, as that it will cause the same to sell much
faster, every one minding to buie this, being desirous also to have that, to
join with it, that they may the better confer the one with the other, and see
in the Accidence the rule naked by it self seeming to be hard, here made
plain by the example, to appear most clear and easy for the capacity of
the very meanest, besides that, for the marking of the order observed both in
the one and the other, it shall be very behoouefull to have them both bound
together.

The commendation of the Grammar allowed by authority.
Now if any curiously conceited, and given unto novelties, liking better of the
later, though darker devises of others, then being content to use the more
ancient and plainer Grammar of our own, will demand of me, wherefore I did not
rather bestow these pains upon the making familiar the Grammar precepts of
some stranger, then in opening the rules of our own Countriman: mine answer
shall be, that concerning my self (under the correction of others be it
spoken) I know none in this argument (all circumstances considered) to whom our
Grammar allowed by public authority, ought to yield one foot of ground, in
regard of plainnes and easines, if it be rightly understood, and taught
accordingly. And for the profitablenes of the same, if there were nothing else
to be alleged, but the great number of most excellent learned men, shining as
notable lights, both in the church, and also the commonwealth, yet might this
in the judgment of all wise men, seem for to plead for the same sufficiently.
So that I would wish our own auctorized Grammar so long to be publicly
propounded in schools unto youth, until these admirers of new things, can
avouch so much profit to have common by their new devises, as we know by
experience to have proceeded already of this our old Grammar, wherein so many
profitable instruments in the civil and church government have hitherto been
trained.

Wherefore as I judge our own Grammar to be, if not more profitable, yet in
every point as profitable as any others whatsoever, so have I been hereby
moved to labor in it before in any other, What is performed in this book.
and in this part of it especially, the which most concerns the young
beginners, for whose sake I have not only applied all the examples of all the
rules of construction in the English Accidence, to express the meaning of
every several rule, but have also Englished all the examples, which hitherto
have gone only in Latin, whereby the little ones may be much furthered.

And moreover for their greater profit, I have borrowed from the Latin Grammar
so many rules, as I have thought most convenient and necessary, and have set
them down here also in English in their several places, as may well appear
unto so many as binding the English accidence with this shall take pains to
compare the rules of the one with the other. As many as shall reap commodity
hereby (as I hope all those youths especially shall, the which with diligence
shall be occupied in the same) let them give unto God alone all the glory, and
in consideration of my pains afoord me their earnest and faithful prayers,
that whilst I live, I may always carry a mind continually to do good in
his church and commonwealth, to his praise, and benefit of my country. From
my study at Tunbridge the 14. of Ian. 1588.

Thy poor brother in Christ, unfeignedly tendering thy good, wherein he may:
JOHN STOCKWOOD.

RVLES OF CONSTRVCTION made plain for young beginners in the Grammar school.
Question.

WHat is next to be done, after that you have once perfectly learned the eight
parts of speech set down in your Accidence?

Answer. We do then commonly, and for the most part use to enter into the rules
of construction, that we may be able to learn some easy Author in the Latin
tongue, meetest for the capacity and understanding of young beginners.

Quest. To what end do these rules of construction principally, and especially
serve?

The use of the rules of construction.
An. To teach which of these eight parts of speech may most aptly and fitly in
making of Latin, or construing of Autors be joined together, and agree the one
with the other in some certain properties, or else be governed and as it were
ruled the one of the other.

Rules of concord and rules of governing.
Qu. It seems then by this your answer, that for teaching sake, all your
rules of construction may be in such sort divided, as that they may be referred
unto either concord and agreeing, or else unto ruling and government.

An. So it is indeed, and so far forth as is sufficient for the Punies and
Petites in the Grammar school to know, reserving the more curious divisions
for such as are of riper and further years.

Qu. Tell me therefore, how many things are chiefly to be marked in these your
English rules of construction?

Two things to be marked in construction.
An. There are two things especially to be regarded and considered.

Qu. What are they?

An. The concord and agreeing of words together: and the governing or ruling
one word of another.

Qu. What call you a Concord?

What a concord is.
An. A Concord is the agreeing and ioining together of two Latin words at the
least, in certain conditions and properties, the which of the Grammarians are
called accidents, as of the verb personal and his nominative case, in number
and person: of the substantive and the adjective, in case, gender, and number:
of the relative and antecedent, in gender, number and person.

Qu. How many concords are there?

Three concords properly.
An. There be three concords.

Qu. Which be they?

An. The first, between the nominative case and the verb: the second, between
the substantive and the adjective: the third, between the antecedent and the
relative. Unto these some do add two other, that is, two substantives, when
they be joined together in one case: and the agreeing together of the word that
asks a question, and the word that answers unto the same question, the
which they call the interrogatiue and his redditiue. But because these are not
so properly concords, we will follow our own Accidence, and content our selves
with the three first named.

Qu. Wherefore were these concords at the first invented?

The use of the concords.
An. They do serve (as we are taught in the very first words of our English
rules) to learn us how to join words duly and orderly together in
construction.

Qu. Is there then any order to be kept in the ioining of words together in
construction?

What order is to be kept in construing.
An. If there be a vocative case in the sentence, you must first begin your
construing with it, next must follow the nominative case with such other words
as are to be joined with it: after the nominative case comes the principal
verb with such words in the same sentence as he does govern, or do depend
upon him, wherewith by the help of your master, and often practice in
construing you shall easily be acquainted.

Qu. What is first to be done then in turning an English into Latin, or in
construing of your lesson?

The principal verb.
An. First of all the principal verb must be sought out, because without the
verb the sentence is imperfect.

Qu. How shall you find out the principal verb?

How he is to be found out.
An. Our book does teach us, that if there be but one verb in the sentence,
the same is the principal verb: but if there be more verbs than one in the
sentence, the first is the principal verb, except it be the infinitive mood,
or have before it a relative, as that, whom, which, and in Latin qui, quae,
quod: or a conjunction, as vt, that, cum, when, si, if, and such others: or
else some aduerbe of wishing, as vtinam, I would to God, o, si, o that, and
such like.

Qu. After that you have the principal verb, what must next be done?

The nominative case.
An. I must seek out his nominative case, unless it be a verb impersonall,
which will have no nominative case.

Qu. By what means may the nominative case be found out?

How he is to be found out.
An. By asking this question who, or what: for the word that answers to this
question, shall be the nominative case to the verb.

Qu. Show me this by some example.

An. When I say in English: God is good, if I would know which word in this
sentence is the nominative case, I shall find it by putting this question who,
or what before the verb is, after this manner, saying, who, or what is good,
and the answer is, God, the which heerby I know to be the nominative case: so
in this sentence, Good scholars use diligence, if I ask, who use diligence,
the answer is, Good scholars, which is the nominative case. And so forth in
the like.

Qu. How must the nominative case be placed in making or construing of Latin?

The ordinary place of the nominative case in construction.
An. He must be set next before the verb, except a question be asked.

Qu. What if a question be asked?

1 The first exception altering the place of the nominative case
An. Then the nominative case is to be set after the verb, or after the sign
of the verb.

Qu. Show me this by the examples set down in your Accidence?

An. Amas tu, love thou? In this question the word tu, thou, being the
nominative case, is set after the verb Amas. In the other example, venitne
rex, does the king come? the word rex, the king, being the nominative case, is
in the English set after this word does, which is in this place the sign of
the verb come.

Qu. How shall I know the sign of the verb, from the verb it self?

How the sign of the verb is to be known from the verb it self.
An. That is well asked of you, because it is not expressed in the Accidence,
and yet may be some trouble unto a young beginner.

Qu. Let me see then what you can answer unto this question.

An. There be diverse words in English, the which sometimes are signs of a
verb, and sometimes they are verbs themselves.

Qu. Which be they?

Words that sometimes are signs of the verb, and sometimes verbs themselves,
and when they be so, or not so.
An. These among the rest: Do, do, does, did, did, have, have, has,
had, had, shall, shall, will, wilt, may, can, might, would, should, ought,
ought, am, art, are, was, wast, bin, be, and such like, the which being set
before other verbs, are but signs of the verb, and sometimes are tokens of the
tense of the verb, and sometimes are tokens of the voice of the verb, as
namely whether he be active, passive, or neuter. And sometimes they are verbs
themselves, and that for the most part, being set alone.

Qu. Give me one or two examples of this, and so shall I know that you
understand what you say.

An. When I say in English, I do love, thou do love, he does love, etc.
these words do, do, does, are signs of the verb love, and tokens of the
present tense. But in these sayings, I do, thou do, he does, these words,
do, do, does, are verbes themselves, and the like is to be said of all the
rest for the most part.

Qu. Are there no more exceptions causing the nominative case to be set after
the verb?

An. Yes, there are two other.

Qu. Rehearse them.

The second exception altering the place of the nominative case
An. If the verb be of the imperative mood, the nominative case shall be set
after the verb, or after the sign of the verb, as Ama tu, love thou, where
the nominative case, tu, thou, is set after the verb ama, love. Amato ille,
let him love, in which example the nominative case ille in Latin, is set after
the verb amato, and in English after this word let, being the sign of the
imperative mood, before the verb love.

Qu. What is the third exception?

The third exception altering the place of the nominative case
An. Sometime when this sign it, or there, comes before the English of the
verb, the nominative case shall be set after the verb: as Est liber meus, It
is my book, where this word liber, book, is set after the verb est, is,
because this sign it is placed before the verb. Again, Venit ad me quidam,
There came one unto me, in which example, quidam, one, is set after the verb
venit, came, because this sign there comes before it.

Words placed one way in Latin, and another way in construing the same into
English.
Further it is to be noted, that oftentimes in Latin the nominative case for
elegancie sake is set after the verb, with a far better grace than it could be
set before the verb, the which notwithstanding in construing of the same into
English, is to be set before the verb.

Qu. You have said that the word the which in construing comes before the
verb, is the nominative case, and that his most usual place is to be set
before the verb: but what case shall that word be, the which in Latin making,
and in construing comes next after the verb?

The usual place of the accusative case.
An. If it be a casual word, that is, such a word as is declined with case,
and answers to this question whom, or what, made by the verb, it shall
commonly be the accusative case, unless the verb do require some other case to
be governed withal, as Deum cole, Worship God. Ask this question whom or
what, saying, Worship whom, you answer God, which hereby you know to be the
accusative case.

Qu. Yea but you said (me thought) Deum cole, where the word Deum, which you
say signifies God, and is also the accusative case, the which should follow
the verb, is placed notwithstanding (as you see) before the verb.

Note.
An. Albeit that in the words as they ly in Latin, Deum be set before the verb
cole, yet in construing it comes after the verb, as cole, worship thou,
Deum, God. And here you must mark that like as many times in Latin (as it was
said immediately before) the nominative case is set after the verb, and yet in
construing is to be placed before the verb: so contrariwise the accusative
case is often in Latin set before the verb, when as notwithstanding in
construing it must be placed after the verb.

Qu. Now recite the example of your book, where the word following the verb,
is not the accusative case, but is put in some other case, and show me withal
the reason of the same.

An. Si cupis placere magistro, vtere diligentia, nec sis tantus cessator, vt
calcaribus indigeas. If thou covet to please the master, use diligence, and be
not so slack (or so great a sluggard) that thou shall need spurs.

Please, Whom? The master. Use, What? diligence. Need, What? spurs,
In this example there be three several casual words, following three several
verbs, and answering to the question whom or what to be made by the verb (as
placere magistro, please the master, vtere diligentia, use diligence,
calcaribus indigeas, need spurs) and yet neither of them are the accusative
case, but magistro, the dative case, because placere will have a dative case,
diligentia the ablative case, because vtere will have an ablative case,
calcaribus also the ablative case, because the verb indigeas does govern an
ablative case, by such rules as follow hereafter. And the like is to be
answered for other casual words in this manner following after verbs, and yet
being not put in the accusative, but in some other cases.

The first Concord.
The first concord.
Qu. THese things in your Accidence are set down as necessary points
generally to be known before you come unto the concords, the which being after
this plain and easy manner run over, tell me now which is the first concord.

Between the nominative case and the verb. They agree.
An. The first concord is between the verb personal and his nominative case.

Qu. In how many things does a verb personal and his nominative case agree?

In number, and person.
An. They agree in these two things, that is, in number and person.

Qu. In this manner of speaking, what mean you by this word Agree.

What is meant by this word Agree in the rules of the three concords.
An. Where my rule says that A verb personal agrees with his nominative
case in number and person, the meaning is, that look what number and person
the nominative case is, of the same number and person must the verb be: as if
the nominative case be the singular number and first person, the verb must
likewise be the singular number and first person. If the nominative case be the
singular number, and second person, the verb must be the singular number and
second person. If the nominative case be the singular number and third person,
the verb must be the singular number and third person, and so forth of the
persons of the plural number.

Qu. Make this plain by some few examples.

Examples of agreement.
An. When I say in Latin, Ego amo, I love, the verb amo is the singular number
and first person, because the nominative case Ego is the singular number and
first person. Tu amas, thou love, the verb amas is the singular number and
second person, because the nominative case Tu is the singular number and second
person. Ille amat, he loves, the verb amat is the singular number and third
person, because the nominative case Ille is the singular number, and third
person.

Qu. May I not then say in Latin, Ego amas, or Tu amatis etc.

Examples of disagreement.
An. You may not: because in the first example, though amas the verb be the
singular number like as the nominative case Ego, is, yet is it not the first
person, but the second, and therefore is there no true agreement, for that the
verb must be the singular number and first person, like as the nominative case
Ego, is. And in the second example Tu amatis, albeit the verb amatis be the
second person, as his nominative case Tu, is, yet is not the verb the singular
number, as the nominative case Tu, is, and therefore there is no agreement.

Qu. Now rehearse the rule for your first concord.

The rule of the first concord.
An. A verb personal agrees with his nominative case in number and person,
as Praeceptor legit, vos vero negligitis, The master reads, and ye regard not.

Qu. How fit you this example to express the meaning of this rule?

The fitting of the example of the rule of the first concord, to show the
meaning of the same.
An. In this example there are two verbs, and two nominative cases. The verbs
are legit, reads, and negligitis, regard not.

The nominative case unto the verb legit, is praeceptor, master, and the
nominative case unto the verb negligitis, is vos.

In the first part of the sentence praeceptor legit, the verb legit, is the
singular number, and the third person, because his nominative case praeceptor,
is the singular number and third person, by this rule, A verb personal agrees
with his nominative case, etc.

In the latter part of this sentence, vos negligitis, the verb negligitis is
the plural number and second person, because his nominative case vos is the
plural number and second person, by this selfsame rule.

Objection.
Qu. But how can there be agreement between the verb and the nominative case,
when as the verb is many times put without any nominative case at all?

Answer.
An. The nominative case in verbes of the first and second person, and also
sometimes in verbs of the third person is not expressly set down always, but
yet is it notwithstanding always to be understood, and so the verb has
always a nominative case, either expressly, or else by understanding.

The woorthines of the three persons, one above another.
Qu. To what end is the rule following added, which says, Here is to be
noted, that the first person is more worthy than the second, and the second
more worthy than the third.

An. To make a way unto the exception immediately following, which teaches,
when two or mo nominative cases of the singular number are joined together with
a conjunction copulative, and are of diverse persons, with which of them the
verb shall agree, and after what manner.

Qu. In what respect then is the first person said to be more worthy than the
second, and the second more worthy than the third?

How one person is more worthy than another.
An. This woorthines of one person above another, is not of birth or blood, or
wealth, or in any such like consideration, but rather of privilege and
prerogative (as I may so term it) that the one has above the other, in
binding the verb to agree with him, rather than with the other, that is, in
causing the verb to be of the same person, the which in this respect is said
to be the more worthy.

Qu. Make this yet somewhat more plainer for the helping of young beginners.

The making plain of the former rule.
An. Where my note says, that the first person is more worthy than the
second, and the second more worthy than the third, the meaning is, that when
two nominative cases one of the first person, and the other of the second, or
one of the second person, and the other of the third, being coupled together by
a conjunction copulative coming between them, be set before a verb, that
then the verb referred to the nominative cases of the first sort, shall be of
the first person, and not of the second: and referred to the nominative cases
of the second sort, shall be put in the second person, and not in the third.

Qu. You have said well, and yet shall this more plainly appear in applying of
the examples of the next exception unto the opening of the meaning of the same.
But tell me first, whether the verb personal does always agree with his
nominative case in number and person.

The verb not alwais the same number with his nominative case The nominative
case not always a casual word.
An. There are certain exceptions from this rule, and the same of two sorts,
the one concerning the verb, and the other concerning the nominative case. For
the verb is not always of the same number that his nominative case is of: and
the nominative case unto the verb, is not always some one casual word, that
is, a word declined with case, but sometimes some other thing.

Qu. How many are the exceptions concerning the verb?

Three exceptions for the verb. 1 Exception.
An. They are three. Whereof the first is this: Many nominative cases singular
with a conjunction copulative coming between them, will have a verb plural,
the which verb plural, or of the plural number, shall agree with his
nominative case of the most worthy person: as Ego and tu sumus in tuto, I and
thou be in safeguard. Tu and pater periclitamini, Thou and thy father are in
ieopardy. Pater and praeceptor accersunt te, Thy father and thy master do send
for thee.

Qu. What do you learn by this exception?

Two things to be learned by this exception. The first.
An. First, that two or mo nominative cases of the singular number, joined
together by a conjunction copulative (as et, atque, nec neque, and cum put for
et) do notwithstanding require a verb of the plural number.

The second.
Secondly, that the same verb must in person agree with his nominative case of
the most worthy person, that is, must be of the same person, that his
nominative case of the most worthy person is, so that if among the nominative
cases one be of the first person, and the rest of any other person, yet must
the verb be only of the first person: or if among the nominative cases one be
of the second person, and the other of the third, then shall the verb be of
the second person.

Qu. But what if the nominative cases thus coupled together, be all of the
third person?

An. Then must the verb be likewise of the third person.

Qu. Now show the meaning of this exception by the examples of the same.

The showing how the first example of the exception before going agrees with
the rule.
An. The first example is, Ego and tu sumus in tuto. Here are two nominative
cases Ego and tu coupled together by this conjunction copulative et, coming
both of them before the verb sumus, and being both of them of the singular
number, yet do they cause the verb sumus to be the plural number, because
that many nominative cases singular being joined together with a conjunction
copulative, will have a verb of the plural number. And because the one of the
nominative cases namely Ego, is of the first person, therefore the verb sumus
does agree with him in person, rather than with the other nominative case tu,
being of the second person, for that the first person is more worthy than the
second, that is, causes the verb rather to be of the first person than of the
second, when the nominative cases of the first and second person are so coupled
together.

The applying of the second example unto the rule.
The second example is, Tu et pater periclitamini. In this example two
nominative cases Tu and pater both of the singular number, coupled together by
this conjunction copulative et, do come before the verb periclitamini, and
therefore they cause him to be of the plural number, because many nominative
cases singular coupled with a conjunction copulative, will have a verb of the
plural number. And because the first nominative case tu is the second person,
therefore the verb periclitamini rather agrees with him in person, than with
pater the nominative case of the third person, that is, is rather of the second
person than of the third, because the second person is more worthy than the
third, that is, in such kind of coupling together of the second and third
person, causes the verb to be of the second person, and not of the third.

The fitting of the third example unto the rule
The third example is, Pater et praeceptor accersunt te. Here are two
nominative cases singular, pater and praeceptor, coupled together like as the
other before mentioned, by a conjunction copulative et, and coming before the
verb accersunt, which therefore is the plural number, though both the
nominative cases be of the singular number, because many nominative cases of
the singular number being coupled together with a copulative conjunction will
have a verb of the plural number. And because these nominative cases pater
and praeceptor are both of the third person, therefore is the verb accersunt
also of the third person.

Qu. What is the second exception, where the verb seems to disagree with his
nominative case, that is, seems not to be of the same number with his
nominative case?

The second exception concerning the verb. This rule is to be understood of
such verbes as are called substantives for the most part, as Sum, forem, fio,
existo, etc.
An. When a verb comes between two nominative cases of diverse numbers (that
is, one being of the singular number, and the other of the plural, or one
being of the plural number, and the other of the singular) the verb may
indifferently accord with either of them, so that they be both of one person:
as Amantium irae, amoris redintegratio est, The falling out of lovers, is the
renewing of love. Quid enim nisi vota supersunt? For what remains saving only
prayers? Pectora percussit, pectus quoque robora fiunt, She stroke her breast,
and her breast turned into oak also.

Objection.
Qu. There is not one of these examples the which can fitly be applied unto
this second exception.

An. Why so I pray you?

Qu. Because the exception speaks of a verb coming between two nominative
cases, and in all the examples the verb comes not between, but after the
nominative cases.

Answer to the former objection
An. This makes no matter at all: for we must have regard how the verb is
placed in the English and construing of the sentence, and not how it is set in
the Latin. For albeit that in the frame of words as they ly in Latin, the verb
do come last in these and such like examples, yet as you may easily see by the
English, the verb in construing is put between the nominative cases according
unto the rule.

Qu. Go to then, declare by your examples the meaning of this exception.

The applying of the first example.
An. Hmantium irae, amoris redintegratio est. In this sentence the verb est,
in English, is, being in the construing to be placed between these two
nominative cases irae, the falling out, and redintegratio, the renewing, the
which are of diverse numbers, for irae is the plural number, and redintegratio
the singular: the verb est agrees with the nominative case redintegratio,
being of the singular number as redintegratio is. But you may make it agree in
the plural number with the nominative case irae, the which is likewise of the
plural number, saying, Amantium irae, sunt amoris redintegratio.

The applying of the second example.
In the second example, Quid enim nisi vota supersunt? The verb supersunt,
remains, in construing being to be put between these two nominative cases of
diverse numbers Quid, what, and vota, prayers, Quid the singular number, and
vota the plural number, the verb supersunt (I say) is the plural number, and
agrees with the nominative case vota of the same number: but it may also agree
with the nominative case Quid of the singular number, if you say thus, Quid
enim superest nisi vota?

The applying of the third example.
In the third sentence, Pectora percussit, pectus quoque robora fiunt. The verb
fiunt, turned, in the construing coming between these two nominative cases of
diverse numbers, pectus, breast, and robora, oak, pectus the singular number,
robora the plural number, the verb fiunt (I say) agrees with the nominative
case robora of the plural number. But it may be made to agree with pectus the
singular number, if you say thus, pectus quoque fit robora.

Qu. But in these and such like examples, when you make the verb to agree with
the other nominative case, is it to be counted as good Latin, as the former?

A profitable note.
An. It is congrue, or true Latin. But in this behalf you must mark how the
best writers use to speak, and follow them, which is always most safest for
you to do, and so shall you be sure to speak and write the best Latin. And for
your better help in these and such like examples belonging to this rule, As
Literae sunt vera studiorum voluptas. As Omnia pontus erat.
understand you thus much by the way, that when a verb is put between two
nominative cases of diverse numbers, the verb does most commonly agree with the
former nominative case: but when the verb is set before or after nominative
cases of diverse numbers, then does it most usually agree with the latter,
rather than with the former.

Qu. Now let us come unto the third exception, where the verb and his
nominative case are not both of one number.

The third exception concerning the verb.
An. Many times when the nominative case coming before the verb is the
singular number, and yet is such a word as does signify a multitude, or
company, or more than one person, in such cases the verb is often put in the
plural number, as Pars abiere, Part of them are gone away. Suo quisque tempore
adierunt, They went unto him every man in his time.

Qu. How frame you these examples unto this rule of exception?

The applying of the first example.
An. Pars abiere, Here the verb abiere is the plural number, because his
nominative case pars is a word signifying a multitude in the singular number.

The applying of the second example.
Suo quisque tempore adierunt, In this place also the verb adierunt is the
plural number, because his nominative case quisque in the singular number does
signify more than one.

Qu. Thus much of the exceptions concerning the verb, where he seems to
disagree from his nominative case. Now tell me how many exceptions there are
likewise concerning the nominative case.

Exceptions concerning the nominative case before the verb.
An. It was said before that the verb must have a nominative case coming
before him for the most part, if it be a verb personal: but because that he
has not always a word declined with case to serve this turn, but has this
supplied by some other means, therefore here also are certain exceptions to
be marked.

Qu. How many are there of these exceptions?

An. There be three, whereof the first two are set down in the Accidence in
these words.

Here note also, that sometime the infinitive mood of a verb, or else a whole
clause before going, or else some member of a sentence may be the nominative
case to the verb, as Diluculo surgere, saluberrimum est, To arise be time in
the morning, is the most wholesome thing in the world. Multum scire, vita
iucundissima, To know much is the most pleasant, or sweetest life of all.

The first exception.
Qu. Set down the meaning of this rule in fewer words, and supply the examples
from elsewhere, if any be wanting in any part of the same.

The infinitive mood put for the nominative case.
An. Sometime the infinitive mood before a verb, is put in stead of the
nominative case unto the same verb, as Mentiri non est meum, It is not my
guise or property to lie.

Qu. How serves this example unto this rule?

The example applied unto the rule.
An. Here the verb est, has no casual word to be his nominative case, but
in stead of it, the infinitive mood mentiri supplieth the room of the
nominative case unto the said verb est.

Qu. What is the second exception?

The second exception. A whole sentence put for the nominative case
An. Sometimes a whole clause, that is, a whole sentence going before the verb
is the nominative case to the verb, and sometime some piece of a sentence is
put for the nominative case unto the verb. Of a whole sentence put for the
nominative case before the verb, let this example serve being borrowed out of
the Latin rules of construction: Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter arts:
Emollit mores, nec sinit esse feros. Add unto the things before spoken, that
to have learned the liberal arts faithfully, or well and thoroughly, does make
the manners or behavior of men to be civil, and suffers them not to be rude
or barbarous.

The example applied to the rule.
In this example the whole sentence, Add quod ingenuas didicisse fideliter
arts, is put in stead of the nominative case unto the verb emollit.

Qu. What are the examples of the other part of this exception, where part of
the sentence supplieth the room of the nominative case before the verb?

Part of a sentence put for the nominative case The first example applied.
An. They be two, and expressed in these words in our Accidence. Diluculo
surgere saluberrimum est, where Diluculo surgere, part of this sentence, is
nominative case unto the verb est.

The other example is, Multum scire, vita iucundissima.

Qu. But how will this example frame to this rule, seeing there is no verb at
all in this sentence?

The second example applied.
An. The verb est is to be understood in this sentence: before which verb so
understood, this part of the sentence, Multum scire, is put for the nominative
case.

Qu. Is there nothing else to be noted concerning this rule?

A necessary note.
An. Yes truly. For if but one infinitive mood, or but part of a sentence be
put in stead of the nominative case unto the verb, then shall the verb be of
the singular number and third person. But if (as many times it comes so to
pass) more than one infinitive mood, or more than one sentence, or piece of a
sentence, especially joined together by a copulative conjunction, be put for
the nominative case, then shall the verb be of the plural number, and third
person.

Qu. Now set down the third exception concerning the nominative case before
the verb.

The third exception of the nominative case before the verb borrowed from the
Latin rules.
An. Sometime an aduerbe with his genitive case is in stead of the nominative
case unto the verb, and then, if the genitive case governed of the aduerbe be
the plural number, the verb shall likewise be the plural number, and third
person, as Partim virorum ceciderunt in bello, Part of the men were slain in
battle. Partim signorum sunt combusta, Part of the ensigns were burned.

The examples applied. The first example.
In the first of these examples the aduerbe partim with his genitive case
virorum of the plural number, is put for the nominative case before the verb
ceciderunt, and therefore is the verb ceciderunt the plural number and third
person by this rule.

The second example.
In the second example also, the aduerbe partim with his genitive case signorum
of the plural number, is put for the nominative case before the verb sunt,
and therefore is the said verb sunt the plural number and third person by
this rule.

An aduerb with his genitive case singular.
But if the genitive case governed of the aduerbe, and together with the
aduerbe supplying the room of the nominative case before the verb, be the
singular number, then shall the verb also be the singular number, and third
person, as Satis pecuniae est mihi, I have money enough. The example applied.
In this example the aduerbe satis with his genitive case pecuniae of the
singular number, is put for the nominative case before the verb est, and
therefore is the same verb the singular number and third person by this rule.

The second Concord.
The second concord.
Qu. WHat is the second concord, or rather between what things is the second
concord?

An. The second concord is between the substantive and the adjective.

Qu. How shall you find out the substantive unto the adjective?

How the substantive unto the adjective is to be found out.
An. By asking this question Who, or what, and the word that answers to the
question, shall be the substantive, as in these examples, It is my master, ask
this question who, or what, saying, My who, or what is it, and the answer is,
master, the which hereby I do know to be the substantive unto this adjective
my. Again, when I say thus in English, A sure friend, if I ask this question
who, or what, and say, a sure what? the answer is, friend, the which hereby I
know to be the substantive unto the adjective sure, and the like is to be done
for the finding out of other substantives in like cases.

Qu. In how many things does the adjective and the substantive agree?

Wherein the adjective and substantive agree.
An. The adjective and his substantive do agree in three things, namely, in
case, gender, and number.

Qu. What call you to agree in case, gender, and number?

What it is to agree in case, gender, and number.
An. To be of the same case, gender, and number that the substantive is of, as
if the substantive be the nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular
number, the adjective also must be the nominative case, the masculine gender,
and singular number.

If the substantive be the ablative case, the feminine gender, and singular
number, the adjective must likewise be the ablative case, the feminine gender,
and singular number, and so forth, as appears by the examples of this second
concord.

Qu. What is the rule in your Accidence concerning this concord between the
substantive and the adjective?

The rule for the agreeing of the substantive and adjective together.
An. The adjective, whether it be a noune, pronoune, or participle, agrees
with his substantive in case, gender, and number: as Amicus certus in re
incerta cernitur, A sure friend is tried in a doubtful matter. Homo armatus, A
man armed. Ager colendus, A field to be tilled. Hic vir, This man. Meus herus
est, It is my master.

Qu. What do you by the way, gather generally out of this rule?

Three sorts of adjectives.
An. That there are three kinds of adjectives, that is to say, a noune
adjective, a pronoune adjective, and a participle adjective.

Qu. Show by the examples of the rule by you rehearsed before, how the
adjective agrees with his substantive in case, gender, and number.

The applying of the examples of the rule for the agreement of the substantive
and the adjective. The first example.
An. Amicus certus in re incerta cernitur. In this example there be two
substantives, and two noune adjectives, namely, Amicus certus, and re incerta,
where the first noune adjective certus agrees with the first substantive
amicus in case, gender, and number, that is to say, the first adjective certus
is the nominative case, the masculine gender, and the singular number, because
his substantive amicus is the nominative case, the masculine gender, and
singular number, by this rule, The adjective whether it be a noune, etc. And
the second noune adjective incerta, agrees with the second substantive re, in
case, gender, and number, that is to say, the second adjective incerta, is the
ablative case, the feminine gender, and singular number, because his
substantive re, is the ablative case, the feminine gender, and singular number,
by the same rule.

The 2. example applied.
In the second example Homo armatus, the participle adjective armatus is the
nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular number, because his
substantive homo is the nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular
number, by this same rule.

The 3, example applied.
In the third example Ager colendus, the participle adjective colendus, is the
nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular number, because so is his
substantive ager, by the same rule.

The 4. example applied.
In the fourth example Hic vir, the pronoune adjective hic is the nominative
case, the masculine gender, and singular number, because his substantive vir is
so, by the same rule.

The 5. example applied.
In the fifth example, Meus herus est, the pronounce adjective meus is the
nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular number, because his
substantive herus is the nominative case, the masculine gender, and singular
number, by the same rule, The adjective whether it be a noune, pronoune, and so
forth, as it is in the words of this rule.

Some show of disagreement between the substantive and the adjective, and when?
Qu. Is this rule so general concerning the agreement of the substantive and
the adjective, that it has no exception?

An. Yes, there falls out sometimes some show of disagreement between the
substantive and the adjective both in gender and in number, especially when
many substantives singular, that is, of the singular number, are joined
together with a conjunction copulative.

Qu. What reason is there of this?

An. Because that then the adjective must first be of the plural number, though
the substantives be al of the singular number, and secondly the adjective does
not agree with all the substantives in gender, if they be of diverse genders,
but with some one of them, that is, the adjective is not of the same gender
that all the substantives are of, but of the same gender of the which some one
of the substantives is of, the which they call the substantive of the most
worthy gender, because (as it was said before in the woorthines of the three
persons one above the other) he has this prerogative, to cause the adjective
to agree with him in gender, that is, to be of the same gender that he himself
is of.

Qu. What are the rules in your Accidence touching these points?

An. They be in number two, whereof the first is of the woorthines of one
gender above another: and the second of the adjectives being of the plural
number, and agreeing with the substantive of the most worthy gender.

Qu. Set down the words of the first rule.

The rules for the woorthines of the genders.
An. Where note, that the masculine gender is more worthy than the feminine,
and the feminine more worthy than the neuter.

Qu. What is the meaning of this rule?

The meaning of the rule of the woorthines of the genders.
An. When an adjective has for his substantive more than one word, that is,
two or more substantive of diverse genders coupled together with a copulative
conjunction, if one of the substantives be the masculine gender, and the other
the feminine, or neuter gender, yet shall the adjective be the masculine
gender: or if one of the substantives be the feminine gender, and the other the
neuter gender, then shall the adjective be the feminine gender, and not of the
neuter gender. For where there is diversity of genders in the substantives unto
the adjective, there the adjective shall rather agree with the substantive of
the masculine gender, than with the substantive of the feminine gender, and
with the substantive of the feminine gender, than with the substantive of the
neuter gender, except it be in substantives betokening things without life, of
the which some thing shall be spoken hereafter in handling the next rule.

Qu. What is your second rule of the adjective his being of the plural number,
albeit the substantives be of the singular number, and of his agreeing with the
substantive of the most worthy gender.

The rule, of the adjective his seeming to disagree with his substantive in
number and gender.
An. Many substantives singular, having a conjunction copulative coming
between them, will have an adjective plural, which adjective shall agree with
the substantive of the most worthy gender: as Rex et regina beati, The king
and the queen are blessed.

Qu. How do you apply this example unto your rule?

The applying of the example unto the rule.
An. In this example there are two substantives Rex and regina coupled together
by this conjunction copulative et, wherefore they do cause the adjective beati,
to be the plural number, and because one of these substantives, namely Rex, is
the masculine gender, and the other regina, the feminine gender, therefore does
the adjective beati agree with the substantive Rex in gender, rather than with
the substantive regina, that is to say, is rather the masculine gender with
Rex, than the feminine gender with regina, because Rex the masculine gender is
more worthy than regina the feminine gender, that is, causes the adjective
rather to be put in the masculine, than in the feminine gender.

Qu. Does the adjective being referred unto substantives of diverse genders,
always rather agree with the masculine gender than with the feminine, and with
the feminine rather than with the neuter?

A subexception, or an vnder-exception from the exception before.
An. If the substantives betoken things without life, then is the neuter gender
the most worthy gender, that is, if there be any of them the neuter gender,
the adjective shall likewise be the neuter gender: nay if one of them be the
masculine gender and the other the feminine, and none of them the neuter, yet
shall the adjective be the neuter gender.

An example of the first branch of the former rule, and the same also applied
unto the rule.
Qu. Bring some examples for the making more plain of this that you have said.

An. Coelum et terra sunt a Deo condita: Heaven and earth were made by God. In
this sentence are two substantives coelum and terra, coelum the neuter gender,
and terra the feminine gender, and because that both of them do signify things
not having life, therefore does the participle adjective condita agree in
gender with the substantive coelum, and not with the substantive terra, with
the which, if they had signified things having life, it ought to have agreed,
that is, therefore in this example the adjective condita, is of the neuter
gender with the substantive coelum, and not the feminine gender with the
substantive terra, because that in things not having life, the neuter gender is
the most worthy, that is, does make the adjective to be of the neuter gender
rather then of any other gender.

Qu. Give an example, of the adjective being the neuter gender, when one of the
substantives is the feminine gender, and the other the masculine gender, and
none of them of the neuter gender.

An example of the second branch of this rule, and the same applied. More
examples Labor and voluptas sunt natura dissimillima. Ira and aegritudo
permixta sunt.
An. Requies et iocus in vita necessaria esse videntur, Rest and sport do seem
in life to be necessary. Here are two substantives Requies and iocus, Requies
the feminine gender, and iocus the masculine gender, betokening things without
life, and yet is the adjective necessaria the neuter gender, because that in
substantives betokening things without life, though none of them be the neuter
gender, yet shall the adjective notwithstanding be put in the neuter gender.

And in both the examples before going, the adjective condita in the first, and
likewise the adjective necessaria in the second is the plural number, though
the substantives be the singular number, because that many substantives of the
singular number being coupled together with a conjunction copulative, will
cause the adjective to be of the plural number.

Qu. But is there nothing else to be marked as touching this rule of the
adjective to be put in the neuter gender, when he is to be referred unto
substantives signifieng things without life?

Figurative speeches do cause the substantive and the adjective not to agree.
Objection.
An. The figures called Syllepsis and Zeugma, do often cause an alteration in
this rule. But because that these are with the hardest for young beginners, we
will leave them to be opened by their learned masters, at such time as for
their capacities, they shall think most convenient.

Qu. What if the substantives signifieng things without life be both of one
gender, that is, either both the masculine gender, or both the feminine gender?

Answer.
An. Then may the adjective agree with them in gender, that is, if the
substantives be the masculine gender, the adjective may be the masculine
gender: if the substantives be the feminine gender, the adjective may also be
the feminine gender.

Qu. Show this by example, for the young beginners sake.

Example of the masculine gender.
An. I may say in latin, Codex et culter meus sunt amissi, My book and my
knife are lost: where the participle adjective amissi, is the masculine gender,
because both the substantives codex and culter are the masculine gender.

Example of the feminine gender.
So I may say, Iustitia and temperantia sunt amplectendae, Justice and
temperance are to be embraced, where the participle adjective amplectendae is
the feminine gender, because both the substantives iustitia and temperantia,
are the feminine gender, but yet in these kind of speeches it is more usual to
have the adjective put in the neuter gender. A note worth the marking. As
Polypus and Chamaeleon glabra sunt. ex Solino, testante Despauterio.


And here is further to be understood, that sometimes when as both the
substantives do signify things having life, yet is the adjective found to be
put in the neuter gender, though the substantive be of the masculine or
feminine gender, but this is a thing that falls out very seldom, but yet not
to be passed over without marking.

Qu. What else have you to say concerning this concord of the substantive and
the adjective?

An. Some Grammarians give this rule, that when a participle adjective that
comes either of a verb substantive as factus of fio, or of a verb passive
having the signification of calling, or the like, as dictus, of dicor,
appellatus, of appellor, An other rule to be marked. Made, Factus. Called
Dictus Appellatus Nominatus Vocatus
Salutatus Saluted Habitus Accounted Visus Seen or seemed Existimatus Esteemed
These and such like are said to be participle adjectives signifiyng calling,
etc.
is put between two substantives of diverse genders, then shall that adjective
agree with the first substantive, that is, be of the same gender that the first
substantive is of, as, pecunia dicta est neruus belli, Money is called the
sinews, or strength of war, where the participle adjective dicta, called,
coming of dicor to be called, being put between two substantives of diverse
genders, namely pecunia the feminine gender, and neruus the masculine gender,
it does agree with pecunia the former substantive, and not with neruus the
latter substantive. But if the adjective participle coming of such verbes as
is aforesaid, or the like be put after two substantives of diverse genders,
then he may indifferently agree with either of the substantives, that is, be of
the same gender, that either of the substantives is of, Terentius; Nunquam
aeque ac modo paupertas mihi onus visum est, and miserum and grave. Here the
participle visum agrees with onus by this rule.
as Ludos Megalesia appellatos, Plays called Megalesia: Gens vniuersa Veneti
appellati, The whole people called Venetians. In these two examples there are
two participle adjectives of calling, whereof appellatos in the first example
being set after these two substantives of diverse genders ludos and Megalesia,
Ludos the masculine gender, and Megalesia the neuter gender, the adjective
participle appellatos is the masculine gender with the first substantive ludos.

In the second example the same participle adjective appellati, being set after
gens and Veneti, gens the feminine gender, and Veneti the masculine gender, it
does agree with the latter substantive Veneti being the masculine gender, as it
is, showing that in such like placing of the substantives, the adjective may
agree with whether of them you will, so that you may say, Ludos Megalesia
appellatos, or Ludos Megalesia appellata. Gens vniuersa Veneti appellati, or
Gens vniuersa Veneti appellata: Paupertas onus visum est, or Paupertas onus
visa est, and so of such like, if the nature of the word will bear the same.

Qu. Why say you if the nature of the word will bear the same?

An. Because you can not say in latin, Verbum caro facta est, but Verbum caro
factum est. nor Aqua vinum factum est, but aqua vinum facta est, for otherwise
you should speak against the nature and truth of the matter.

Qu. Have you now done with this second concord?

Figures do cause disagreement between the substantive and the adjective.
An. There is yet further to be considered, that many times the adjective and
the substantive are of diverse numbers and genders, and cases by reason of
certain figurative speeches, as by Synthesis, Antiptosis, Enallage and such
like, whereof when scholars are of further learning and understanding, their
masters must instruct them.

What gender and number the adjective must be, when he has no casual word for
his substantive.
Lastly the adjective (like as the verb before spoken of in the first concord)
has for his substantive sometimes, the infinitive mood, sometimes a whole
sentence, or piece of a sentence, and sometimes an aduerbe with his genitive
case, and then in the three former, he shall be the singular number and neuter
gender: but if the adjective have more then one infinitive mood, or more then
one sentence, or more then one piece of a sentence, coupled with a conjunction
copulative, for his substantive, then shall the adjective be the neuter gender
and plural number.

And when an adjective has for his substantive an aduerbe with his genitive
case, then the adjective must be the same gender and number, that his genitive
case coming after the aduerbe, is of.

The third Concord, between the antecedent and the relative.
The third Concord.
Qu. WHat is the third concord, or between what things is the third concord?

An. The third concord is between the antecedent and the relative.

Qu. In how many things does the antecedent and the relative agree?

An. In three things, that is to say, in gender, number and person.

Qu. By what rule?

The rule of the third Concord.
An. By this rule: the relative agrees with his antecedent in gender, number,
and person: as, Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur, That man is wise, that speaks
few things or words.

Qu. How shall you know the antecedent unto the relative.

How to find out the Antecedent.
An. The antecedent is a word that commonly goes before the relative, and
therefore has his name in latin of foregoing, and is known by asking this
question, who, or what, for the word next before the relative, and being
rehearsed again of the relative by asking this question who, or what, and
answers unto the same, is the antecedent.

An. Show this by the example of your rule before going.

Qu. The man is wise that speaks few things or words. In this example this
word that is the relative, and this word man going before him is the
antecedent, the which by asking this question who, or what with the relative
that, is rehearsed again by the relative, and answers to the question who,
or what, whereby I know it to be the Antecedent: as for example, The man is
wise that speaks, etc. Ask the question who, or what, by the Relative that,
saying, That who or what is wise, the answer is, that man, where the word man
answers to the question, who or what, and is rehearsed again of the relative
before whom in the sentence it went, and therefore it is the antecedent. And
thus you must do for the finding out of the antecedent in all other sentences.

Qu. Now let me hear you apply the Latin example unto the rule of the third
concord between the antecedent and the relative.

The example applied to the rule of the third Concord.
An. Vir sapit, qui pauca loquitur. Here the relative qui agrees in gender,
number, and person with his antecedent vir, that is to say, the relative qui is
the masculine gender, the singular number, and the third person, because his
antecedent vir, is the masculine gender, the singular number, and the third
person by this rule, The relative agrees with his antecedent in gender, number
and person.

Qu. How is the relative qui, quae, quod englished for the most part?

An. It is most commonly englished by this word which, and sometime by this
english that, which may be turned into this English which, as in my example
before alleged, The man is wise, that speaks few things or words. The
relative that may be englished also by the word which: for I may say as well,
The man is wise, which speaks few things or words.

Qu. Wherefore serves this note?

A difference in english between the Relative That, and the conjunction That.
An. To put a difference between the relative that, when it may be turned into
this English which, being in Latin called qui, quae, quod, and the conjunction
quod or vt, the which is also englished by this word that. But this is the
difference, that this word that, when it is a relative, may be turned into this
English which, but this word that, when it is a conjunction, cannot so be
turned.

Qu. What rule have you for this in your Accidence?

The rule for the difference between the Relative That, and the conjunction
That.
An. When this English that, may be turned into this english which, it is a
relative, otherwise it is a conjunction, which in Latin is called quod, or vt:
and in Latin making it may elegantly be put away by turning the nominative case
into the accusative case, and the verb into the infinitive mood: as Gaudeo
quod tu been vales: Gaudeo te been valere, I am glad that thou art in good
health. Iubeo vt tu abeas: Iubeo te abire, I bid that thou go hence.

Qu. Is this the only cause of making this rule, thereby to put a difference
between the relative that, and the conjunction that?

An other use of the rule aforegoing.
An. No, there is yet a further use of this rule, namely this, to teach that
when this English that, is not a relative, but a conjunction, called in Latin
quod or vt, coming between two verbs personals, that then in Latin this word
quod or vt may elegantly for the most part be put away, by turning the
nominative case before which it is set, into the accusative case, and the
latter of the two verbs into the infinitive mood.

Qu. Show me this by the two examples in your rule before.

The examples applied unto the rule.
An. Gaudeo quod tu been vales. Here is in Latin the conjunction quod, in
English that, put before two verbs personals, Gaudeo and vales, and because
that this English that, cannot be turned into this English which, for it is no
good English to say, I am glad which you are in good health, but, that you are
in good health, therefore I know this word that to be a conjunction and no
relative: this quod therefore may be better put away, turning the nominative
case tu coming after it, into the accusative case te, and the latter verb
vales into the infinitive mood valere, saying, Gaudeo te been valere.

The second example applied.
So in the second example, Iubeo vt tu abeas, the conjunction vt, in English
that (therefore a conjunction, and not a relative, because it cannot in this
sentence be turned into this English which, for it is no English to say, I am
glad which thou art in good health, but, that thou art in good health) this
conjunction vt (I say) coming between these two verbs personals Iubeo and
abeas, may elegantly be put away, by turning the nominative case tu, into the
accusative case te, and the latter verb of the subiunctiue mood abeas, into
the infinitive mood abire, saying, Iubeo te abire.

Qu. Why, is it not good Latin to say, Gaudeo quod tu been vales: or Iubeo vt
tu abeas?

An. It is congrue or true Latin, but not good and fine Latin, but rather
Portuis or Popish priests Latin for the most part, in all such kind of
speeches, and therefore young scholars were better not to know it, than to be
acquainted with it. So that this rule is much better for them borrowed from the
Latin Grammar: Verbes of the infinitive mood coming after verbs personals, in
stead of a nominative case, will have an accusative case before them.

Qu. Has the relative always for his antecedent a word declined with case?

A whole sentence put for the antecedent.
An. No: for sometimes the whole reason or sentence before going, is put for the
antecedent, and then shall the relative be the neuter gender, and the singular
number.

Qu. What is your rule for this?

The rule for the same.
An. Sometime the relative has for his antecedent the whole reason that goes
before him, and then he shall be put in the neuter gender, and singular number:
as In tempore veni, quod omnium rerum est primum, I came in season, which is
the chiefest thing of all.

Qu. Declare the meaning of this rule by the example?

The example applied to the rule.
An. In this sentence, these words In tempore veni, being the whole reason or
sentence before the relative quod, is put for the antecedent unto the said
relative, and therefore is quod the neuter gender, and singular number by this
rule.

More than one sentence put for the antecedent.
Qu. But what if there be two, or more sentences, or pieces of sentences put in
stead of the antecedent?

An. Then the relative shall be the neuter gender, and plural number by this
rule:

The rule for the same.
But if the relative be referred to two clauses, or parts of sentences, or more,
the relative shall be put in the plural number, and neuter gender: as, Tu
multum dormis, and saepe pota^ quae ambo sunt corpori inimica, Thou sleep
much, and drinkest often, which both things are naught for the body.

Qu. Apply the example to make plain the meaning of the rule.

An. In this example, these two clauses or parts of a sentence, Tu multum
dormis, and and saepe potas, are put for the antecedent unto the relative quae,
and therefore is the said relative put in the plural number, and the neuter
gender by this rule.

An aduerb with his genitive case put for the antecedent.
And further here is to be understood, that like as has been already noted in
the two concords before going, sometime the relative has for his antecedent an
aduerbe with his genitive case, and then shall the relative be the same gender
and number, that the genitive case governed of the aduerbe is of.

Qu. Let these exceptions suffice to have showed, that the relative sometime
has for his antecedent a word that is not declined with case. And now go to
the next exception, where the antecedent and the relative do seem to be of
contrary gender and number.

Another exception of disagreement in show between the antecedent and the
relative.
An. Many antecedents singular (that is, of the singular number) having a
conjunction copulative between them, will have a relative plural (that is, of
the plural number) which relative shall agree with the antecedent of the most
worthy gender: as, Imperium and dignitas, quae petijsti, The rule and dignity,
which thou have required.

Qu. Let me hear how you can make this example agree with the rule.

The example applied to the rule.
An. Here are many antecedents (for by many in this place is meant more than
one) of the singular number, namely Imperium and dignitas, having the
conjunction copulative et, coming between them, and therefore by this rule
they cause the relative quae to be the plural number, and because these two
antecedents are of diverse genders, that is, Imperium the neuter gender, and
dignitas the feminine gender, therefore does the relative quae agree with the
antecedent imperium, the most worthy gender, that is, the relative quae is the
neuter gender with the antecedent imperium, and not the feminine gender with
the antecedent dignitas.

Objection.
Qu. You said before in the second concord, that the feminine gender was more
worthy than the neuter, that is, does cause the adjective or relative to be
rather the feminine gender than the neuter, when two substantives or
antecedents one of the feminine gender, and the other of the neuter gender do
come before an adjective or relative?

Answer.
An. So it is indeed in substantives or antecedents being the names of things
that have life, but in things having no life the neuter gender is most worthy,
that is, causes the adjective or relative rather to be of the neuter gender.

Qu. Have you a rule for this in relatiues?

The rule for the gender of the relative referred unto antecede^ts signifieng
things without life.
An. This is the rule: In things not apt to have life, the neuter gender is
most worthy, yea and in such case, though the substantives or antecedents, be
of the masculine, or of the feminine gender, and none of them of the neuter,
yet may the adjective or relative be put in the neuter gender: as Arcus et
calami sunt bona, The bow and the arrows are good: Arcus et calami, quae
fregisti, The bow and the arrows which thou have broken.

Qu. Fit the examples to express the meaning of this rule.

The first example applied.
An. Arcus et calami sunt bona, this is an example of an adjective referred
unto substantives of contrary gender, for here these two substantives arcus
and calami, being both the masculine gender, are notwithstanding joined with
the adjective bona of the neuter gender, because that in substantives of things
without life, though none of them be the neuter gender, yet may the adjective
be the neuter gender, as here it is by this rule.

Note.
Yet note, that because both these substantives are of one gender, namely the
masculine, therefore may the adjective also be the masculine gender, so that
you may say, Arcus et calami sunt boni, as well as bona.

The second example applied.
The second example is more proper unto this place, for that it is of a relative
referred unto antecedents of things without life. In the latter example
therefore, Arcus et calami quae fregisti, the relative quae is the neuter
gender, though his antecedents arcus and calami be both of the masculine
gender, because that in antecedents betokening things without life (as bow and
arrows do) the relative shall be the neuter gender, as here it is, though the
antecedents be both of the masculine gender, as here they are by this rule.

Let this be well marked.
Note also that if the antecedents be both of one gender, as here they are, the
relative also may be of the same gender, so that you may say, Arcus et calami,
quos fregisti, as well as quae fregisti.

Qu. What other exceptions have you yet behind containing some show of
disagreement between the relative and the antecedent?

An. There are yet two, the one to be fet from the end of the treatise of the
case of the relative following, because it is fitter to be handled here, in as
much as it agrees with the matter in hand, and the other is to be supplied
from else where.

Qu. Rehearse the exception set down in the end of the treatise of the case
of the relative.

A rule for the gender of the relative between two substantives of diverse
genders.
An. When a relative comes between two substantives of diverse genders, it may
indifferently agree with either of them: as Auis, quae passer appellatur, or
Auis, qui passer appellatur, The bird which is called a sparrow.

Yea though the substantives be of diverse numbers, yet may the relative agree
with either of the^: as, Est ne ea Lutetia, qua^ nos Parisios dicimus? Is not
that called Lutetia, that we do call Paris? or else, Est ne ea Lutetia, quos
nos Parisios dicimus?

Qu. Show how these examples agree with this exception.

The first example applied.
An. Auis quae passer appellatur. Here the relative quae being put between
these two substantives auis the feminine gender, and passer the masculine
gender, agrees with auis the feminine gender. And where it is said auis qui
passer appellatur, there the relative qui agrees with passer the latter
substantive of the masculine gender by this rule.

The second example applied.
Est ne ea Lutetia quam nos Parisios dicimus. In this sentence the relative
quam being put between these two substantives Lutetia and Parisios, of diverse
genders and also numbers, Lutetia the feminine gender and singular number, and
Parisios the masculine gender and plural number, it does agree with the
substantive Lutetia of the feminine gender and singular number, according to
this rule. And in the other saying, Est ne ea Lutetia, quos nos Parisios
dicimus, the relative quos agrees with the latter substantive Parisios of the
masculine gender and plural number by the same rule. For in such like cases the
relative may as well agree with the one substantive as with the other.

Qu. What is your other exception?

The other exception, which apperteineth unto adjectives also.
An. Sometime the relative agrees not with the thing or antecedent that went
next before, This rule being somewhat dark must with examples be made plain
by the diligence of the master.
but with the person unto whom the thing belongs, as Laudabant fortunam meam,
qui filium haberem tali ingenio praeditum, They praised my fortune, which had a
son endued with such a disposition or nature. Here the relative qui agrees
not with fortunam, that went next before, for it is the feminine gender, and
qui the masculine gender, but qui is referred to the person whereof he speaks,
namely himself, of whom he speaks in the first person ego understood, which
being the masculine gender, the relative qui also is in this sentence put in
the masculine gender.

Figurative speeches.
Further it is here also to be noted, that figurative speeches do often cause
the relative and antecedent to be of diverse genders, numbers, and persons, the
which for the hardness sake, we will not cumber young wits withal, trusting to
the help of their painful teachers in this behalf.

The case of the relative.
Qu. TO what use or purpose serve these rules following, which have this title
set over the head of them, The case of the relative?

An. To show what case the relative shall be, as well when he comes before
the verb, as after the verb, or after any other part of speech, for although
the relative be always set before the verb in respect of his placing, yet in
order of construction he is often in such sort considered as following the
verb, or else some other part of speech, whereof he is governed.

Qu. What is your first rule?

The first rule for the case of the relative.
An. When there comes no nominative case between the relative and the verb,
the relative shall be the nominative case unto the verb: as Miser est, qui
nummos admiratur, Wretched is that person, which is in love with money.

The example applied.
In this example the relative qui, is the nominative case unto the verb
admiratur, because there is no other nominative case coming before him and the
verb.

Qu. Rehearse the second rule.

The second rule
An. But when there comes a nominative case between the relative and the
verb, the relative shall be such case as the verb will have after him: as
Foelix, quem faciunt aliena pericula cautum, Happy is he, whom other men's
harms do make to beware.

The example applied.
Here this word pericula though in the latin it be set after the verb, yet is
it in construing the nominative case, and to be set before the verb faciunt,
between whom and the relative quem in construing it does come, and therefore
is the relative quem the accusative case governed of the verb faciunt, by the
rule of verbs transitiues following here after among the rules for the cases
which verbs do govern.

The third rule.
As the relative may be the nominative case unto the verb, so it may be the
substantive unto the adjective, that is joined with him, or comes next after
him: as Diuitias amare noli, quod omnium est sordidissimum, Will not thou love
riches, which to do, is the most beggarly thing in the world.

The example applied.
Here the relative quod, being the nominative case before the verb est, is
also substantive unto the adjective sordidissimum by this rule. And mark, that
whatsoever may be the nominative case unto the verb, or antecedent unto the
relative, the same also may be the substantive unto the adjective.

The fourth rule
Nounes interrogatiues and indefinites follow the rule of the relative: as
Quis, who, vter, whether, qualis, what manner one, quantus, how great, quotus,
how many, etc. And these evermore come before the verb, like as the relative
does: as Hei mihi, qualis erat? talis erat, qualem nunquam vidi, Woe is me, what
manner of person was he? such a one he was, the like whereof I never saw.

The example applied.
In this example, the noune interrogatiue qualis, is nominative case unto the
verb est, because there is no other nominative case between him and the
verb, and so is talis also the noune redditiue, or indefinite, and qualem is
the accusative case in construction after the verb vidi, because that the
nominative case ego, understood comes before the verb: for these kind of
nounes do follow the rule of the relative, that is, if there come no nominative
case between them, and the verb, then are they the nominative case unto the
verb, like as the relative is, but if there come a nominative case between
them and the verb, then shall they be such case as the verb will have after
him, like as the relative must be.

Qu. Have you nothing else to say concerning these kind of nounes?

A rule for nounes interrogatiues and indefinites.
An. As the relative agrees in gender, number and person with his antecedent,
the which for the most part goes before the relative, so these nounes do
always agree with the word that follows after them: as, quot homines, tot
sententiae, So many men, so many minds, where in the first place quot agreeeth
with homines following after him, and in the second place tot is the same case,
gender, and number that his substantive sententiae, which follows after him,
is of.

An objection against this rule.
Qu. What say you then unto this sentence of the poet Horace: Mammaeque putres,
equina quales vbera, And rotten breasts, such as are the vdders of a mare: Where
you see this noune quales, to be the feminine gender, with the former
substantive mammae, and not the neuter gender, with the latter substantive
vbera?

Answer.
An. This saying of Horace is to be noted of young scholars, but not to be
followed: for he should rather have said, qualia, than quales, making it to
agree with vbera the substantive following, according to the rule.

Qu. What is the next rule of relatiues?

The fifth rule of relatiues.
An. Yet here is to be understood and noted, that the relative is not
always governed of the verb that he comes before, but sometime of the
infinitive mood that comes after the verb: as Quibus voluisti me gratias
agere, egi, What persons thou willedst me to thank, I have thanked.

The example applied.
In this sentence the relative quibus is not governed of the verb voluisti,
before whom he comes, but of the infinitive mood agere, coming after the
verb voluisti, and it is the dative case, by a rule of verbs governing a
dative case, which rule follows in his due place.

The sixth rule. The example applied: yet Quibus rather indeed agrees with
rebus, tha^ is governed of adductus. The 7. rule. The example applied.
Sometime of a participle: as Quibus rebus adductus fecisti? With what things
moved did thou it?

Here quibus the relative is the ablative case governed of the participle
adductus, by the rule of participles governing such case, as the verb they
come of.

Sometime of the gerund: as Quae nunc non est narrandi locus, Which things at
this present it is no time to tell.

In this place the relative quae is the accusative case plural, governed of
the gerund narrandi by the rule of gerunds, which will have such case as their
verbs, whereof they come, do require.

The 8. rule.
Sometime of a preposition set before him: as Quem in locum deducta res sit,
vides, Into what state the matter is now brought, thou see.

The example applied and corrected.
In this example the relative quem is governed of the preposition in, which in
construction is set before him, albeit in the order of words, as they ly in
Latin, this preposition in be put between quem and locum. But in truth qui in
this example is rather an indefinite than a relative, and agrees with locum in
case, gender, and number, by the rule of the adjective agreeing with his
substantive, so that locum and not quem is here governed of the preposition
in, albeit that it is not to be denied, but that sometimes the preposition in
may cause the relative quem to be put in the accusative case, like as other
prepositions may cause him to be put in other cases also.

The 9. rule.
Sometime of the substantive, that he does accord or agree with: as Senties qui
vir siem, Thou shall perceive what a fellow I am. Albeit in this manner of
speaking, qui is an indefinite, and not a relative.

The example applied.
Here the relative qui, agrees with the substantive vir being the nominative
case, the masculine gender, and singular number, as vir is by the rule last
before set down: for qui is in this place a noune indefinite, that is, noting
no any one certain thing, and not a relative.

The 10. rule.
Sometime of a noune partitiue, or distributive: as Quarum rerum vtram minus
velim, non facile possum existimare, Of the which two things, whether I would
with less will have, I cannot easily esteem.

The example applied, and corrected.
In this example the relative quarum is the genitive case plural governed of
the partitiue vtram by the rule of interrogatiues, partitiues, distributiues,
governing a genitive case, as shall be showed afterward: yet here also qui is
rather an indefinite, and agrees with the genitive case rerum in case, gender,
and number, which genitive case rerum is governed of the partitiue vtram by the
rule aforesaid, albeit the relative is notwithstanding sometime put in the
genitive case, by the same rule of interrogatiues and partitiues, and such
like, governing a genitive case.

The 11. rule.
Sometime it is put in the genitive case, by reason of a substantive coming
next after him: as Ego illum non noui, cuius causa hoc incipis, I knew him not,
for whose cause thou beginnest this matter.

The example applied.
Here the relative cuius is the genitive case governed of the substantive causa
coming after him, by the rule of substantives coming together betokening
diverse things, whereof the latter must be the genitive case. Where note that in
such cases the relative cuius supplieth the room of a substantive, and in
construction is taken to be the latter substantive, albeit that in Latin he be
always set foremost.

The 12. rule.
Sometime it is otherwise governed of a noune substantive: as, Omnia tibi
dabuntur, quibus opus habes, All things shall be given thee, which thou have
need of.

The example applied.
In this place the relative quibus is the ablative case plural, governed of the
substantive opus, which requires an ablative case by a rule to be set down in
his place.

The 13. rule.
Sometime it is put in the ablative case with this sign than, and is governed of
the comparatiue degree coming after him: as Vtere virtute, qua nihil est
melius, Use virtue, than the which nothing is better.

The example applied.
In this example the relative qua is the ablative case singular, having in the
construing in English this sign than before it, and is governed of the
comparatiue degree melius, which will have an ablative case, when it may be
expounded by this aduerbe quam, in English than, as shall be showed hereafter.

The 14. rule.
Sometime it is not governed at al, but is put in the ablative case absolute: as
Quantus erat Julius Caesar, quo imperatore, Romani primum Britanniam ingressi
sunt? How worthy a man was Julius Caesar, under whose conduct (or who being
emperor) the Romans first entered into Britain?

The example applied.
Here the relative quo has no word whereof it may be governed, but is put in
the ablative case, which in this kind of speaking, is called the ablative case
absolute, for a cause to be showed hereafter.

The 15. rule.
Also when it signifies an instrument wherewith a thing to be done, it is put
in the ablative case: as Ferrum habuit, quo se occideret, He had asword,
wherewith he would have killed himself.

The example applied.
In this example the relative quo is the ablative case singular, governed of the
verb occideret, because the said quo in this place signifies an instrument to
do some thing withal, and therefore must be put in the ablative case by a rule
hereafter following concerning this matter.

The 16. rule.
Sometime the relative is governed of an aduerbe: as Cui vtrum obuiam procedam,
nondum statui, Whom, whether I will go to meet with, I have not yet determined.

The example applied.
Here the relative cui, is the dative case singular governed of the aduerbe
obuiam, which with such other like will have a dative case, as hereafter shall
be declared more at large.

Admonition.
There are besides these, many other rules whereby a relative may be governed,
yea almost by all the rules of all other parts of speech, but these before are
the most principal by which the young beginners may be learned to judge of the
rest.

The construction of nounes substantives, or what cases they may govern.
Qu. YOu have said at the beginning, that all the parts of speech do either
agree together in some certain conditions and properties, or else are governed
and ruled one of another. Of Concord or agreement has been spoken at large,
wherefore now order requires that we entreat of government. Tell me therefore
what you call government?

What government is, in Grammar matters.
An. Government properly in Grammar matters, is the requiring of some certain
case to be put after an other word in order of construction: As for example,
to make this as plain as may be for the very simplest to conceive, when I say,
some nounes do govern a genitive case, I mean that some nounes require a
genitive case, that is, do cause the casual word that in construction does
follow next after them to be put in the genitive case. Some verbes do govern an
accusative case, in thus saying my meaning is, that some verbs require an
accusative case, that is, do cause the word that in construing does come next
after them, to be put in the accusative case.

Qu. You mean then that the word which requires such, or such a case after
him, is said to govern, and that the word put in this or that case after an
other word going before it, is said to be governed.

An. That is my meaning, so that when I say in latin: Amor dei, The love of
God, this first substantive amor, is said to govern, and the second
substantive dei being the genitive case after amor the former, is said to be
governed of amor.

Qu. This is plain enough for all the rest of like sort. Now seeing in this
whole treatise as well that which has gone before, as this also which comes
here after we deal with construction, show me briefly, what construction is,
and what it is constre? for the little petits are peradventure to seek in this.

Construction.
An. Construction, is the due and orderly ioining and knitting of the parts of
speech together, according unto the right order of grammar.

To constre.
And to constre, is to set the words in due or right frame, as they ought to go
before, or to follow the one the other, when you turn latin into english (for
taking this pains for young beginners, we will content our selves with latin
only) so that it be placed first, that ought in construing to have the first
place, and that second, the which is to be set in the second place, and so of
the rest, whereof some thing has been spoken at the beginning.

Qu. Now then following the order of your Accidence, we will first begin with
the construction of nounes substantives, declaring what cases they will govern
or have after them in construction. Tell me therefore how many cases a noune
substantive may govern?

An. A noune substantive may govern three cases, that is a genitive, a
genitive or an ablative, and an ablative case alone.

Qu. What is your rule for a substantive governing a genitive case?

The first rule of substantives.
An. When two substantives come together betokening diverse things the latter
shall be the genitive case: as, Facundia Ciceronis, The eloquence of Cicero.
Opus Vergilij, the work of Virgil. Amator studiorum, a lover of studies. Dogma
Platonis, the opinion of Plato.

Qu. Apply the examples of this rule to declare the meaning of the same.

The examples applied.
Facundia Ciceronis, here are two substantives betokening diverse things, and
therefore the latter substantive Ciceronis is the genitive case governed of the
former Facundia, by this rule.

The second example.
Opus Vergilij. In this example opus and Vergilij two substantives coming
together, and betokening diverse things, Vergilij the latter of them is the
genitive case governed of opus the former by this rule.

The third example.
Amator studiorum. Here are two substantives, amator, and studiorum coming
together, and betokening diverse things, wherefore studiorum the latter
substantive is put in the genitive case being governed of amator the former, by
this rule.

The fourth example.
Dogma Platonis. In this example these two substantives dogma and Platonis do
come together and do betoken diverse things, wherefore Platonis the latter of
them is put in the genitive case, being governed of dogma the former, by this
rule.

Qu. But what if the two substantives coming together do appertain both unto
one thing?

An. Then they shall be put both in one case by the rule following, which is
this,

An exception.
But if they belong both unto one thing, they shall be put both in one case: as
Pater meus vir, amat me puerum, My father being a man, loves me a child.

The example applied. Sometime the latter of these substantives is put also in
the genitive case.
In the first branch of this sentence, there are two substantives pater and vir
coming together, and because they do belong both unto one thing, therefore are
they put both in one case, that is, vir the latter substantive is the
nominative with pater the former substantive. And so likewise in the latter
part of this same sentence, there are other two substantives me and puerum,
coming together, and because they also do appertain both to one thing, they
are put both in one case, so that puerum the latter substantive is put in the
accusative case with me, the former, by this exception.

Qu. What have you further to note concerning this first rule?

An other profitable note.
An. Sometime the former of the two substantives coming together, and being
referred unto diverse things, and the which should cause the latter subsantiue
to be put in the genitive case, is not expressly set down, but understood: as
Vbi ad Dianae veneris, When you come unto the temple of Diana. Here is only the
latter substantive Dianae the genitive case expressly set down, and the former
substantive Templum, which causes it to be put in the genitive case is
understood, whereof in authors you shall find many more such like examples.

Objection.
Qu. But sometime you shall have an adjective in the neuter gender to govern a
substantive after him in the genitive case.

Answer. How an adjective put alone in the neuter gender, may have a genitive
case.
An. When this comes to pass, then is the same adjective said to be put
absolutely, that is, by himself alone having no substantive to agree with, and
being thus put, he loses the nature of an adjective, and is taken for a
substantive, causing the other substantive following to be put in the genitive
case, as if he himself were a substantive, by this rule:

The rule for an adjective put alone in the neuter gender.
An adjective in the neuter gender, put alone without a substantive, stands
for a substantive, and may have a genitive case after him, as if he were a
substantive: as Multum lucri, Much gains. Quantum negotij? How much business?
Id operis, That work.

Qu. How apply you these examples unto the rule?

The first example applied.
An. Multum lucri. In this example the adjective Multum of the neuter gender,
being set alone without a substantive to agree with, causes the substantive
lucri to be the genitive case, as if he himself were also a substantive.

The second example applied.
Quantum negotij? In this second example the adjective quantum being set alone
in the neuter gender without any substantive, wherewith he may agree, does
stand for a substantive, and causes the substantive negotij following after
him, to be put in the genitive case, as if quantum it self had been a
substantive.

The third example applied.
Id operis. In this third example the adjective id is set alone in the neuter
gender without a substantive to agree with, and therefore does he cause the
substantive operis coming after him, to be put in the genitive case, as if he
were a substantive.

Objection.
Qu. Wherefore do you say in all these examples, that the adjective is set
alone without a substantive to agree with, seeing that in every one of them,
every several adjective has his several substantive joined with him.

Answer.
An. Because that albeit every adjective has a several substantive following
him, yet does not any of the adjectives agree with any of the substantives, or
is put in the same case, gender, and number, that the substantive following him
is of, but does govern the said substantives, causing them to be put in the
genitive case by this rule.

Qu. There is yet one rule put in here among the rules of substantives,
concerning the English of this word Res, a thing, put with an adjective, and
causing the adjective to become a substantive, the which, I see not how it can
very fitly agree with this place.

An. This rule I grant, might more properly have been handled in the second
concord between the substantive and the adjective, in as much as an adjective
being so put as this rule requires, does oftentimes become a substantive, with
the which the adjective following in the same sentence does agree in case,
gender, and number. But yet seeing that this place treats of substantives,
and that in such consideration as in this rule is specified, and adjective may
become a substantive: for this cause as I take it, the Author of our Accidence
thought good to set down this rule among the other rules of substantives, the
which is as follows.

A rule for the english of this word Res put with an adjective.
When the English of this word Res, a thing, is put with an adjective, ye may
put away Res, and put the adjective in the neuter gender, like a substantive:
as Multa me impedierunt, Many things have let me.

And being so put, it may be the substantive to an adjective: as, Pauca his
similia, A few things like unto these. Nonnulla huiusmodi, Many things of like
sort.

The first example applied. If you resolve this sentence by the word Res, you
must say, Multae res me impedierunt. The second example applied. You may
resolve this sentence thus by the word, Res, Paucae res his similes.
In the first example the adjective multa, many things, having in English the
signification of this word res, a thing, joined with him, in Latin shuts
clean out this word res, and is put alone in the neuter gender, and plural
number, being the nominative case unto the verb impedierunt, as if he were a
substantive by this rule.

In the second example, Pauca his fimilia, the adjective pauca, few things,
having in English the signification of this word res, a thing, joined with him,
in Latin shuts out the said word, and is put alone in the neuter gender, and
plural number like a substantive, with the which the adjective similia does
agree in case, gender, and number, being the nominative case, the neuter
gender, and the plural number, like as pauca is, by this rule.

The third example applied.
In the third example, Nonnulla huiusmodi, the adjective nonnulla, many things,
having in English the signification of this word res joined with him, This
sentence by Res may be resolved thus, Nonnullae res huiusmodi.
does in Latin shut out the word res, and is put alone in the neuter gender,
and plural number, like a substantive, with the which the adjective huiusmodi
does agree in case, gender, and number, being the nominative case, the neuter
gender, and plural number, like as nonnulla is, by this rule.

Qu. Thus much concerning substantives governing a genitive case only, with
such other matters as appertained thereunto. What is now your next rule?

Substantives governing a genitive case, or an ablative.
An. Our next rule is of the second kind of construction of substantives, where
they do govern indifferently a genitive case, or an ablative.

Qu. By what rule?

The rule.
An. Words importing indument of any quality or property, to the praise or
dispraise of a thing, coming after a noune substantive, or a verb
substantive, By a verb substantive is meant the verb Sum, es, fui, etc.
may be put in the genitive case, or in the ablative: as Puer boni ingenij, or
Puer bono ingenio, A child of a good wit. Puer bona indole, or Puer bona
indolis, A child of a good towardnes.

Qu. Can you not express the meaning of this rule in fewer words?

An. It may be shortly set down thus: A noune substantive betokening praise or
dispraise of a thing (the which commonly is perceived by the adjective joined
with him) coming after a noune substantive, or a verb substantive, may be put
in the genitive, or ablative case.

Qu. Now apply your examples unto the rule.

The examples applied.
An. Puer boni ingenij. Here the substantive ingenij being a word of praise,
is put in the genitive case coming after the other noune substantive puer by
this rule. And in the other saying, Puer bono ingenio, the substantive of
praise ingenio, is put after the other substantive puer in the ablative case by
the same rule, because such kind of substantives in such manner of speaking, may
be put either in the genitive case, or else in the ablative.

Puer bona indole. Here indole a substantive of praise is put in the ablative
case after the other substantive puer by this rule. And in the other saying
puer bonae indolis, the substantive of praise indolis, is put after the other
substantive puer in the genitive case by the same rule, because that in such
like speaking the substantive of praise or dispraise may be put in the ablative
or genitive case.

Substantives usually having only an ablative case.
Qu. Let us now come unto the third kind of substantives governing only an
ablative case.

An. They are but two in number, namely, opus and vsus, and are in such kind
of construction undeclined, that is having in all their cases the same
termination.

Qu. What are the words of your rule?

The example applied. Opus and vsus.
An. Opus and vsus when they be latin for need, require an ablative case: Opus
sometime has also a genitive case, and sometime an accusative case, and vsus
also an accusative case, but this is very seldom.
as Opus est mihi tuo iudicio, I have need of thy judgment, Viginti minis vsus
est filio, My son has need of twenty pounds.

Opus est mihi tuo iudicio. In this example iudicio is the ablative case,
governed of opus by this rule.

Viginti minis vsus est filio. Here is the ablative case, governed of vsus by
this rule.

Sometime this word opus is taken for an adjective, and has the signification
of necesse, or necessarius, needful, or necessary, and then it may have a
nominative or an accusative case to be construed withal, and some other
construction also.

The construction of nounes adjectives or what case they will have after them.
And first of such adjectives, as require a genitive case.
Qu. Having passed through the rules set down in your Accidence for such case
as nounes substantives will have after them, let us now hear what is to be
said for the construction of adjectives. What cases may adjectives have after
them?

Cases of adjectives.
An. Some adjectives have only a genitive case; some a dative only: some
only an accusative case: and some only an ablative: and some may have one, or
more of these cases together.

Qu. We will then take this course, that we will first handle such adjectives,
as have but one case after them only, and afterward deal with them that have
more then one case. And first of adjectives governing a genitive case, for the
which what is your first rule?

Rules for adjectives, governing a genitive case only.
An. Adjectives that signify desire, knowledge, remembrance, ignorance, or
forgetting, and such like, require a genitive case: as, Cupidus auri, Covetous
of money. Peritus belli, Expert of warfare. Ignarus omnium, Ignorant of all
things. Fidens animi, Bold of heart. Dubious mentis, Doubtful of mind. Memor
praeteriti, Mindful of that is past. Reus furti, Accused of theft.

Qu. Show the meaning of this rule, by the several examples of the same.

The examples applied.

The first example.


This rule has seven examples, whereof the first is, Cupidus auri, in which
example the adjective cupidus signifieng desire, does cause the substantive
auri coming after him to be put in the genitive case by this rule.

The second example.
Peritus belli. Here the adjective peritus betokening knowledge, causes the
substantive belli coming after him, to be put in the genitive case by this
rule.

The third example.
Ignarus omnium. In this example, the adjective ignarus, signifieng ignorance,
causes omnium the word following him, to be the genitive case by this rule.

The fourth example.
Fidens animi. Here fidens an adjective signifieng boldness, causes the
substantive animi to be put in the genitive case by this rule.

The fifth example.
Dubious mentis. In this sentence the adjective dubious betokening doubtfulnes,
causes the substantive mentis to be the genitive case by this rule.

The sixth example.
Memor praeteriti. Here memor the adjective signifieng remembrance, causes
praeteriti the word following to be put in the genitive case by this rule.

The seventh example.
Reus furti. In this example the adjective reus betokening accusing, does
govern the substantive furti in the genitive case by this rule.

Qu. Are there no other adjectives of like signification unto these expressed
in the former rule, the which do govern also a genitive case?

A note for other adjectives governing a genitive case.
An. There are besides these a great number of adjectives derived of verbes,
the which do also govern a genitive case, whereof some end in us, some in ax,
some in idus, or ius, some in rus, and tus with many others, the which cannot
be comprehended under any certain rule, and therefore are to be marked by
diligent reading of good authors.

Qu. Rehearse the next rule for adjectives governing a genitive case.

Nounes partitiues.
An. Nounes partitiues, and certain interrogatiues, with certain nounes of
number, require a genitive case: as Aliquis, Some body. Vter, Whether. Neuter,
Nether. Nemo, No body. Nullus, None. Solus, Alone. Vnus, One. Medius, The
middlemost. Quisque, Every one. Quisquis, Whosoever. Quicunque, Whosoever.
Quidam, Some. quis for Aliquis, Some body: or, quis an interrogatiue, Who.
Vnus, one, duo, two, tres, three, primus, first, secundus, second, tertius,
third, etc. As, Aliquis nostrum, Some of us. Primus omnium, First of all.

Qu. Apply your examples unto this rule.

The examples applied.
An. Aliquis nostrum. Here the noune partitiue aliquis does make the pronoune
nostrum to be the genitive case by this rule.

Primus omnium. In this example primus a noune of number does cause omnium to
be put in the genitive case by this rule.

Qu. What do you call a noune partitiue?

Nounes partitiues.
An. Those are called nounes partitiues, the which do either signify many, as
quisque, every one, or else one among many, as alter, another.

Qu. And what are nounes interrogatiues?

Nounes interrogatiues
An. Such as do ask a question, as quis, who, and such like.

Qu. What else is there to be noted concerning this rule?

The adjective and the genitive case which by this rule he governs, are
sometime of diverse genders.
An. The adjectives, which by this rule do govern a genitive case, must be of
the same gender that the genitive case is, the which they do govern for the
most part, except the genitive case be either this word rerum, or else some
noune collectiue, that is, such a noune as in the singular number does signify
a multitude: for then may the adjective, and the genitive case which he
governs, be of contrary genders.

Qu. What have you more to say, as touching this rule?

A rule borrowed from the latin.
An. Sometimes the adjectives appertaining unto this rule, are construed with a
dative case, and sometimes with an accusative case with a preposition, and
sometime with an ablative case with a preposition.

Qu. What is the next rule?

The rule of asking and answering a question.
An. When a question is asked, the answer in Latin must be made by the same
case of a noune, pronoune, or participle, and by the same tense of a verb,
that the question is asked by: as Cuius est fundus? Vicini. Whose ground is it?
My neighbors. Quid agitur in ludo literario? Studetur. What do they in the
school? They study.

Objection.
Qu. To what purpose is this rule brought in here among adjectives governing a
genitive case, when as oftentimes in the examples of this rule there is neither
adjective, nor yet genitive case at all?

Answer.
An. Yet for as much as many times the question is asked by Cuius, the genitive
case of quis the interrogatiue, and for that the word that answers the same
question, is oftentimes the genitive case also, this rule is not unfitly placed
here among the other rules of adjectives governing a genitive case.

Qu. Let us see then how the examples agree with the rule.

The examples applied. The first.
An. Cuius est fundus? Vicini. In this example the question is asked by the
genitive case Cuius, and the answer is made by this word vicini, being put in
the genitive case by this rule, which will have the word asking the question,
and the word answering the question to be put both in one case.

The second.
Quid agitur in ludo literario? Studetur. Here the question being asked by
quid and the verb agitur of the present tense, the answer is made by studetur,
a verb likewise of the present tense, by the second branch of the same rule
requiring, if the question be asked by a verb, that the answer be made by
another verb of the same tense.

Qu. How many exceptions are there from this rule?

Three exceptions from the rule before going.
An. There are three exceptions. The first, when the question is asked by
Cuius, cuia, cuium, Whose? The second, when the question is asked by a word
that may govern diverse cases. The third, when the answer must be made by one
of these pronounes possessiues, Meus, mine, tuus, thine, suus, his, noster,
ours, vester, yours.

Qu. Rehearse these in order as they are set down in your Accidence.

An. Except a question be asked by Cuius, cuia, cuium: as Cuia est sententia?
Ciceronis. Whose sentence is it? Ciceroes.

Qu. This exception is somewhat dark for a young beginner: Make it therefore
more plain: for it seems to be an imperfect sentence.

The exceptions made plain, and their examples applied. The first exception.
An. If a question be asked by Cuius, cuia, cuium, the nominative case, then
the answer must be made not by the same case, but by the genitive, as Cuia est
sententia? Ciceronis, where the question is asked by the nominative case Cuia,
and answered by the genitive case Ciceronis, by this exception.

Qu. What is the second exception?

An. Or by a word that may govern diverse cases, as Quanti emisti librum? Paruo.
For how much bought you the book? For a little.

Qu. Make this exception also more plain.

The second exception and his example made plain.
An. When a question is asked by a word that may govern diverse cases, the word
that asks the question, and the word that answers the same, shall not be
both of one case, as in this example: Quanti emisti librum? Paruo: the question
is asked by the genitive case quanti, because the verb emisti does cause this
adjective with certain others being set without substantives, to be the
genitive case: and the answer is made by the word paruo in the ablative case,
because the same verb also will have an ablative case of this adjective, and
certain others, and so because it governs diverse cases, the word quanti
asking the question, and the word paruo answering the question, are in this
example put in diverse cases.

Qu. What is the third exception?

The third exception.
An. Or except I must answer by one of these possessiues, Meus, tuus, suus,
noster, vester: as Cuius est domus? Non vestra, sed nostra. Whose house is it?
Not yours, but ours.

Qu. Make this exception also as plain as may be.

The exception and his example made plain.
An. If the question must be answered by any of those pronounes possessiues,
Meus, tuus, suus, noster, vester: then the word asking the question, and the
word answering the question shall not be both of one case, as in the former
example the word Cuius is the genitive case asking the question, and the word
vestra a pronoune possessiue answering the question, is the nominative case by
this exception.

Qu. Come to the next rule of adjectives governing a genitive case.

Comparatiues and Superlatiues governing a genitive case, with whom for the
most part they must be of the same gender. The first example applied.
An. Nounes of the comparatiue and the superlatiue degree being put
partitiuely, that is to say, having after them this English, Of, or Among,
require a genitive case: as Aurium mollior est sinistra, Of the ears, the left
is the softer. Cicero oratorum eloquentissimus, Cicero the most eloquent of
orators.

In this first example, Aurium mollior est sinistra, the word aurium is the
genitive case, governed by the comparatiue degree mollior, the which hereby I
know to be put partitiuely, because aurium has before it in English this sign
Of, according unto this rule.

The second example applied.
In the second example, Cicero oratorum eloquentissimus, this word oratorum is
put in the genitive case governed of the superlatiue degree eloquentissimus,
being put partitiuely, the which I know by this sign of, going in English
before the word oratorum, when it is construed, by this rule.

Of Adjectives governing a dative case.
A dative case after adjectives.
Adjectives, that betoken profit, or disprofit, likeness, unlikeness, pleasure,
submitting, or belonging to any thing, require a dative case: as Labor est
vtilis corpori, Labor is profitable for the body. Aequalis Hectori, Equal to
Hector. Idoneus bello, Fit for war. Iucundus omnibus, Pleasant to all persons.
Parenti supplex, Suppliant to his father. Mihi proprium, Proper to me.

The examples applied. The first.
In this rule are six examples, whereof the first is, Labor est vtilis corpori,
in the which corpori is the dative case governed of the adjective vtilis
signifieng profit by this rule.

The second.
In the second example, Aequalis Hectori, this word Hectori is the dative case
governed of aequalis, an adjective signifieng likeness by this rule. Note.
Where note that many adjectives signifieng likeness do sometimes govern a
genitive case.

The third.
In the third example, Idoneus bello, the word bello is the dative case governed
of the adjective idoneus, signifieng profit by this rule. A note borrowed from
the latin.
Where note also that this adjective idoneus, fit, or profitable, with certain
others, as Natus, borne, commodus, profitable, incommodus, unprofitable, vtilis
profitable, inutilis, unprofitable, vehemens, darnest, aptus, fit, will some
time have an accusative case with the preposition ad, to.

The fourth.
In the fourth example Iucundus omnibus, the word omnibus is the dative case
governed of the adjective iucundus, betokening pleasure by this rule.

The fifth.
In the fifth example Parenti supplex, parenti is the dative case governed of
the adjective supplex betokening submitting, by this rule.

The sixth.
In the sixth example Mihi proprium, this word mihi is the dative case governed
of the adjective proprium, signifieng a belonging to a thing, by this rule. And
this adjective proprium does sometime also govern a genitive case.

Qu. What is your next rule for adjectives requiring a dative case?

An other rule for a dative case after adjectives.
An. Likewise nounes adjectives of the passive signification in bilis, and
participials in dus, require a dative case: as Flebilis, flendus omnibus, To be
lamented of all men. Formidabilis, formidandus hosti, To be feared of his
enemies.

The first example applied.
In the first of these examples, Flebilis, flendus omnibus, the adjective
flebilis of the passive or suffering signification, and the participial
adjective flendus ending in dus, do govern the word omnibus in the dative case
by this rule.

The second example applied.
In the second example Formidabilis, formidandus hosti, the adjective
formidabilis of the passive or suffering signification ending in bilis, and the
participial adjective formidandus ending in dus, do govern the word hosti in
the dative case by this rule.

What is meant by a participial.
Qu. What do you call a participial in dus?

An. A participial in this place is taken for an adjective like a participle,
but yet in deed no participle, because he does not signify time, as when he
is a participle, he always ought to do.

Adjectives construed with diverse cases. This rule is borrowed from the
latin-Grammar.
And further here is to be noted that many adjectives compounded with the
preposition con, do also govern a dative case, and that these adjectives,
communis, common, alienus, strange, immunis, free, are construed with diverse
cases, as sometimes a dative, sometimes a dative with an ablative, sometimes
with a genitive, sometimes with an ablative with a preposition only, saving
that the variety of this kind of construction is to be diligently observed in
these adjectives, ioining them in latin writing with such cases only, as the
best approved writers do use to match them withal.

Adjectives governing an accusative case for the most part.
An accusative case after adjectives.

And sometimes these substantives are put also in the genitive case. This rule
is borrowed from the latin. The first example applied. The second example
applied.


THe measure of length, breadth, or thicknes of any thing, is put after
adjectives in the accusative case, and sometime in the ablative case: as,
Turris alta centum pedes, A tower an hundredth foot high. Arborlata tres
digitos, A tree three fingers broad. Liber crassus tres pollices, vel tribus
pollicibus, A book three inches thick.

In the first example. Turris alta centum pedes, this word pedes betokening the
height of a thing, that is, of the tower spoken of in this sentence, is put
after the adjective alta in the accusative case by this rule.

Arbor lata tres digitos. In this sentence the word digitos betokening the
measure of breadth, is put after the adjective lata in the accusative case by
this rule.

The third example applied.
In the third example. Liber crassus tres pollices, vel tribus pollicibus, after
the adjective crassus, the word pollices is put in the accusative case, being a
word that here resembles thicknes, and it may be said also in the ablative
case pollicibus, because that these words of the measure of any thing, may be
put after adjectives in the accusative or ablative case indifferently.

Objection.
Qu. But how shall a young Punie know whether the word of measure do signify,
either the depth, height, length, thicknes, squarenes, roundnes, or any such
other quantity of a thing?

Answer.
An. That is to be gathered by the signification of the adjective going before
it in the same sentence, for if the adjective have the signification of
thicknes, then is the substantive, which he governs to be understood to be
spoken of thicknes in that place also: if the adjective signify breadth, the
word of measure, which he governs, carries the signification of breadth, in
that sentence also: if the adjective signify height, the substantive of
measure governed by him in the same sentence is to be supposed to be meant of
height also, as appears in all the examples before, and the like is to be
said of all such other like, as for example when I say, thirty foot high,
here the word foot is understood of height, ten foot broad, here it is
spoken of breadth, two foot deep, in this place it is to be referred unto
depth, and so forth in all other measures.

Qu. Set down this rule then in fewer words for the ease of the yoonger one.

The former rule set down more briefly.
An. The word of measure may be put after adjectives in the accusative case,
and sometime in the ablative or genitive.

Note also that many adjectives do govern an accusative or an ablative case by
the figure Synecdoche, of the which, as time serves, the good schoolmaster
will instruct his scholars according to their capacity.

Adjectives governing an ablative case.
An ablative case after adjectives.
NOunes of the comparatiue degree, having than or by after them, do cause the
word following to be the ablative case: as Frigidior glacie, More cold then ye.
Doctior multo, Better learned by a great deal. Vno pede altior, Higher by a
foot.

The first example applied.
This rule has three examples, in the first of the which Frigidior glacie, the
substantive glacie, when you do construe it, being englished with this sign
than before it, is the ablative case governed of the comparatiue degree
frigidior, by this rule.

The second example applied.
In the second example Doctior multo, the comparatiue degree doctior does cause
the word multo coming after him, and when it is englished, having this sign
by before it, to be put in the ablative case by this rule.

The third example applied.
In the third example, Vno pede altior, the word altior of the comparatiue
degree causes the substantive pede to be the ablative case, The second rule
for adjectives with an ablative case.
because it follows in construction the said word altior, and has before it
this sign by, by this rule.

The adjectives Dignus, Worthy, Indignus, Unworthy, Praeditus, Endued,
Captus, Taken, Contentus, Content, with such others, Add to these cinctus,
girded, fretus, trusting, ornatus, decked, and such others.

The examples applied.


will have an ablative case: as Dignus honor, Worthy of honor, captus oculis,
Taken in his eyes, or blind, virtute praeditus, Endued with virtue, paucis
contentus, Content with few things.

In these examples, honor after dignus, oculis after captus, virtute after
praeditus, paucis after contentus, are the ablative case by this rule.

Dignus indignus with a genitive case. Dignus, indignus, and contentus, with an
infinitive mood.

The first example applied.


Note also that dignus and indignus sometime do govern a genitive case.

And note further, that dignus, indignus, and contentus, may in stead of the
ablative case have an infinitive mood of a verb: as, Dignus laudari, Worthy
to be praised, contentus in pace viuere, Content to live in peace.

Dignus laudari, in this example the infinitive mood laudari, is put after the
adjective dignus, in stead of an ablative case, by this rule.

The second example applied.
Contentus in pace viuere, in this example the infinitive mood viuere is put
after the adjective contentus, in stead of an ablative case, by this rule.

Qu. Are there no other rules besides these, for adjectives governing an
ablative case?

Other rules for adjectives with an ablative case
An. There are yet three other rules in the Latin grammar, the which in English
are as follows.

The first rule. Sometimes these adjectives have a dative case.
Nounes that betoken diversity, will have an ablative case with a preposition:
as Diuersus ab isto, Diverse from this man, where the adjective diuersus
betokening diversity, causes isto to be put in the ablative case with the
preposition ab, by this rule.

The second rule.
Adjectives will have an ablative case signifieng the cause of a thing: as
Liuida armis brachia, Arms black and blew with weapons, where the adjective
liuida governs the word armis in the ablative case, signifieng the cause of
the same by this rule.

The third rule.
Adjectives will have an ablative case signifieng the form or manner of a thing:
as, Facies miris modis pallida, a face pale after a marvelous manner. In this
example the adjective pallida has modis an ablative case after him, signifieng
the manner of the palenes by this rule.

Adjectives governing an ablative case, or a genitive case.
Adjectives with an ablative or genitive case.
Adjectives signifieng fulness, emptines, plenty or wanting, require an ablative
case, and sometimes a genitive: as, copijs abundans, abounding in riches, crura
thymo plenae, bees having their thighs full of thyme: vacuus ira, irae, ab
ira, void of anger. Nulla epistola inanis re aliqua, No epistle without some
matter. Ditissimus agri, most rich in land. Stultorum plena sunt omnia, all
places are full of fools. Quis nisi mentis inops, oblatum respuat aurum? Who,
except he be void of wit, will refuse gold offered him? Integer vitae,
scelerisque purus, non eget Mauri iaculis, nec arcu, He that is innocent of
life, and clear of wickedness, needs neither the darts, nor bow of the Moore.
Expers omnium, void of all thiags. Corpus inane animae, a body without a soul.

Qu. Because the many examples of this rule mingled together, do cause the same
to be long and dark for the yoonger sort, divide the examples of the same into
their several heads by themselves.

The examples of this rule of two sorts.
An. The examples of this rule are of two forts, the one of adjectives with an
ablative case according to this rule, and the other of adjectives with a
genitive case by the same rule.

Qu. How many are the examples of adjectives of this rule with an ablative case?

The examples of the first branch applied.
An. They are in number four, whereof the first is, copijs abundans, in which
example the adjective abundans signifieng plenty, does govern the substantive
copijs in the ablative case by this rule.

crura thymo plenae, the adjective plenae betokening fulness, does govern the
substantive thymo in the ablative case by this rule.

Vacuus ira, irae, ab ira. In this example vacuus the adjective signifieng
emptines, does govern ira the substantive in the ablative case by this rule, so
like wise he may be construed with agenitiue case, saying vacuus irae, by the
same rule, and moreover he may have an ablative case with a preposition, as
vacuus ab ira.

Nulla epistola inanis re aliqua, the adjective inanis signifieng emptines,
does govern the substantive re in the ablative case, by this rule.

Qu. How many examples are there of adjectives by this rule governing a
genitive case?

The examples of the second branch of the former rule applied.
An. There be six, whereof the first is, Ditissimus agri, in which example the
adjective ditissimus betokening plenty, does govern the substantive agri in
the genitive case by this rule.

Stultorum plena sunt omnia, the adjective plena signifieng fulness, causes
stultorum to be the genitive case by this rule.

Quis nisi mentis inops, etc. the adjective inops betokening wanting, does
govern the substantive mentis in the genitive case by this rule.

Integer vitae, scelerisque purus, etc. the adjective integer betokening
wanting, does govern vitae in the genitive case, and the adjective purus
likewise signifieng wanting, does govern the substantive sceleris in the
genitive case by this rule.

Expers omnium, the adjective expers signifieng emptines, does govern omnium
in the genitive case by this rule.

Corpus inane animae, the adjective inane betokening wanting, governs the
substantive animae in the genitive case by this rule.

Construction of certain Pronounes, and how they are governed.
Mei, tui, sui, nostri, vestri.
THese genitive cases of the primitiues, Mei, tui, sui, nostri and vestri, be
used when the passion or suffering is signified: as Pars tui, Part of thee,
Amor mei, The love of me.

But when possession of a thing is signified, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and
vester be used: as Ars tua, thine art. Imago tua, thine image.

The examples applied.
Pars tui, in this example the genitive case tui of the primitive Tu,
signifieng suffering, is put after the substantive pars by this rule.

Amor mei, in this example, the genitive case mei of the primitive ego,
betokening suffering, is put after the substantive amor by this rule.

Ars tua, here because possession of a thing is signified, the possessiue
pronoune tua is joined with ars, and not tui the genitive of the primitive tu,
by this rule.

Imago tua, in this example likewise the possessiue pronoune tua, is used with
the substantive imago, and not the genitive tui, of the primitive tu, because
possession of a thing is signified, by this rule.

An admonition
For the better understanding of this rule the which in deed is too hard for
young beginners, let the learned master teach the^, when the genitive case is
taken actiuely, when passiuely, and when possessiuely, whereof let the
scholars of more learning read Despauterius in his rule of Mei, tui, sui,
nostri, and vestri.

Nostrum, vestrum.
These genitive cases, Nostrum, vestrum, be used after distributiues,
comparatiues, partitiues, and superlatiues: as Aliquis nostrum, Some of us.
Mayor vestrum, The greater of you. Maximus natu nostrum, The elders of us.

The examples applied.
Aliquis nostrum, the genitive case nostrum, is used after the distributive
aliquis by this rule.

Mayor vestrum, in this place the genitive case vestrum, is used after the
comparatiue mayor, by this rule.

Maximus natu nostrum, the genitive case nostrum, is used after the superlatiue
degree maximus, by this rule.

An other rule borrowed from the latin Grammar.
Also these possessiues Meus, tuus, suus, noster and vester, have after them
sometimes these genitive cases: Ipsius, solius, vnius, duorum, trium, omnium,
plurium, paucorum, cuiusque, and sometimes the genitive case of a participle.

Construction of verbes, or what cases verbes do govern: and first of verbes
governing a nominative case.
Verbes with a nominative case after them.
SVm, I am, Forem, I were, fio, I am made, existo, I am, and certain verbes
passiues, as dicor, I am said, or called, vocor, I am called, salutor, I am
saluted, appellor, I am named, habeor, I am counted, existimor, I am esteemed,
videor, I am seen, or accounted, with other like, will have such case after
them, as they have before them: as, Fama est malum, Fame is an evil thing.
Malus cultura fit bonus, An evil person by due ordering or governance is made
good. Croesus vocatur dives, Cresus is called rich. Horatius salutatur poeta,
Horace is saluted by the name of poet. Malo te diuitem esse quam haberi, I had
leifer thou were rich in deed, than so accounted.

The examples applied.
This rule has five examples: four of a nominative case after the verb, and
the fifth of an accusative case after the verb.

Fama est malum, the verb est having fama the nominative case before him
causes malum also to be the nominative case after him by this rule.

Malus cultura fit bonus, In this second example malus is the nominative case
before the verb fit, and therefore does the same verb cause bonus to be the
nominative case after him by this rule.

Croesus vocatur dives, In this third example Croesus is the nominative case
before the verb passive vocatur, and therefore is dives the nominative case
after him by this rule.

Horatius salutatur poeta. In this fourth example Horatius is the nominative
case before the verb passive salutatur, and therefore is poeta the nominative
case after the said verb by this rule.

Malo te diuitem esse quam haberi, te is the accusative case before the
infinitive mood esse, and therefore in construction diuitem is likewise the
accusative case after the same verb by this rule.

Another rule for a nominative case after the verb.
Also verbes that betoken bodily moving, going, resting, or doing, which be
properly called verbes of gesture, as, Eo, I go, incedo, I go, curro, I run,
sedeo, I sit, cubo, I lie, appareo, I appear, bibo, I drink, studeo, I
study, dormio, I sleep, somnio, I dream, and such other like, as they have
before them a nominative case of the dooer, or sufferer, so may they have a
nominative case after them, This rule in fewer words is thus: Verbs of gesture
have such case after them, as they have before them.
of a noune or a participle, declaring the manner of circumstance of the doing,
or suffering: as Incedo claudus, I go lame, Petrus dormit securus, Peter
sleeps void of care. Tu cubas supinus, Thou lie in bed with thy face
upward. Somnias vigilans, Thou dreamest waking. Studeto stans, Study thou
standing.

And likewise in the accusative case: as, Non decet quenquam meiere currentem
aut mandentem, It does not become any man to piss, running, or eating.

The examples applied to the meaning of this rule, as I have briefly set it
down before, for the ease of the little ones.
This rule has six examples, of the which the first five are of a nominative
case after such kind of verbes as are mentioned in this rule, which are called
verbes of gesture, and the sixth is of an accusative case after the said verbes.

Incedo claudus, as this verb of gesture incedo has ego understood for his
nominative case before him, so has he claudus the nominative case after him by
this rule.

Petrus domit securus, in this second example, as Petrus is nominative case
before dormio a verb of gesture, so is securus nominative case after him by
this rule.

Tu cubas supinus, in this third example tu is nominative case before the verb
of gesture cubas, and therefore is supinus nominative case after him by this
rule.

Somnias vigilans, in this fourth example as the pronoune tu understood is
nominative case before the verb of gesture somnias, so is vigilans the
nominative case after him by this rule.

studeto stans, like as the pronoune tu understood is the nominative case
before the verb of gesture studeto, so is stans the nominative case after him
by this rule.

Non decet quenquam meiere currentem, aut mandentem, in this sixth example this
word quenquam is the accusative case before the infinitive mood meiere, a
verb of gesture, and therefore currentem is the accusative case after the
said verb by this rule.

An admonition.
It had bin long and tedious in every one of these examples to have showed how
the nominative case before the verb signified doing or suffering, and how the
nominative after the verb declared the manner of circumstance of the doing or
suffering, and therefore the examples are applied unto the rule as it is
shorter set down in the margin before, nevertheless the master, if he think
the capacity of his scholar will beat it, may apply the examples in the
other manner: that is more large.

The third rule for the nominative case after the verb.
And generally, when the word that goes before the verb, and the word that
comes after the verb, belong both to one thing, that is to say, have respect
either to other, or depend either of other, they shall be put both in one case,
whether the verb be transitiue or intransitiue, or of what kind soever the
verb be: as, Loquor frequens, I speak often. Taceo multus, I hold my peace
much. Scribo epistolas rarissimus, I write letters very seldom. Ne assuescas
bibere vinum ieiunus, Accustom not thy self to drink wine next thine heart,
or not having eaten somewhat before.

The examples applied.
Loquor frequens, in which example, as ego understood is nominative case before
the verba loquor, so frequens is the nominative case after him, as having
respect unto ego the nominative case before the verb by this rule.

Taceo multus. In this second example also ego is nominative case before the
verb taceo, and multus nominative case after the verb taceo, because they
belong unto one thing by this rule.

Scribo epistolas rarissimus. In this example rarissimus is nominative case
after the verb scribo, because it has respect unto ego understood, which is
the nominative case before the same verb, by this rule.

Ne assuescas bibere vinum ieiunus. In this fourth example ieiunus is
nominative case after the verb assuescas, because it has respect unto tu the
nominative case understood before the said verb, by this rule.

Verbes governing a genitive case after them.
Verbes with a genitive case after them.
THis verb Sum, when it betokens or imports possession, owing, or
otherwise pertaining to a thing, as a token, property, duty, or guise, it
causes the noune, pronoune, or participle following to be put in the genitive
case: This rule shorter is thus. This verb Sum, with all his moodes and
persons, when they betoken possession, or perteining to a thing, require a
genitive case.
as, Haec vestis est patris, This garment is my fathers. Insipientis est
dicere, non putaram, It is the property of a fool to say, I had not thought.
Extremae est dementiae discere dediscenda, It is a point of the greatest folly
in the world to learn things that afterward must be learned otherwise. Orantis
est, nihil nisi coelestia cogitare, It is the duty of a man that is saying of
his prayers to have mind on nothing but heavenly things.

The examples applied.
Haec vestis est patris, this word patris is the genitive case governed of the
verb est betokening possession, or showing whose the garment is, by this rule.

Insipientis est dicere, non putaram, this word insipientis is the genitive
case, governed of the verb est betokening a property, by this rule.

Extremae est dementiae discere dediscenda, this word dementiae is the genitive
case governed of the verb est, signifieng the pertaining or belonging unto a
fool, or the point and token of a fool, by this rule.

Orantis est, nihil nisi coelestia cogitare, this participle orantis is the
genitive case governed of the verb est, signifieng a duty, by this rule.

Qu. Is this rule always true, so that it has none exception?

An. Not so. For if any of these pronounes, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and
vester be used after this verb Sum in such manner of speaking, when it
betokens or imports possession, or pertaining to a thing, they shall be put
in the nominative case, and not in the genitive, by this exception following:

An exception from the former rule.
Except that these pronounes, Meus, tuus, suus, noster, and vester shall in
such manner of speaking be used in the nominative case: as Hic codex est meus,
This book is mine. Haec domus est vestra, This house is yours. Non est mentiri
meum, It is not my guise, or property to lie. Nostrum est iniuriam non
infer, It is our parts not to do wrong. Tuum est omnia iuxta pati, It is thy
part or duty, to suffer all things in like.

The examples applied.
Hic codex est meus, in which example because this pronoune meus comes after
the verb est betokening possession, it is put in the nominative case by this
exception.

Haec domus est vestra, this pronoune vestra being put after the verb est
signifieng possession, is the nominative case by this exception.

Non est mentiri meum, the pronoune meum coming after the verb est betokening
a property, is put in the nominative case, and not in the genitive by this
exception.

Nostrum est iniuriam non infer, the pronoune nostrum is the nominative case
after the verb est betokening a part or duty, by this exception.

Tuum est omnia iuxta pati, the pronoun tuum coming after the verb est
betokening a duty, is put in the nominative case, and not in the genitive case
by this exception.

Qu. But can you show me any reason, why in these kinds of speaking, these
pronounes after the verb Sum should rather be used in the nominative case,
than in the genitive?

A reason why these pronounes set down in the former exception are rather put
in the nominative case, tha^ in the genitive after the verb Sum.

An other rule, for the genitive case after verbs.


An. These pronounes after the verb Sum, in these kinds of speaking, are
rather put in the nominative case than in the genitive, because that they have
substantives alwais as nominative cases unto the verb, either expressed or
understood, with the which they must agree in case, gender, and number, the
which substa^tiues, if they be expressed are many and diverse: if they be
understood, it is for the most part this word officiu^, in english duty.

Verbes that betoken to esteem or regard, require a genitive case betokening
the value: as, Parui ducitur probitas, Honesty is reckoned little worth.
Maximi penditur nobilitas, Noblenes of birth is very much regarded.

The examples applied.
Parui ducitur probitas, in the which this word parui betokening the value, is
the genitive case after the verb ducitur, signifieng esteeming by this rule.

Maximi penditur nobilitas, Maximi betokening the value is the genitive case
after penditur, a verb of regarding, by this rule.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Here is to be noted that this verb aestimo, to esteem or regard, may have an
ablative case also, as well as a genitive.

An other rule for verbes with a genitive case, and sometime an ablative.
Hic furti se alligat, vel furto, This man accuses himself of theft. Admonuit
me errati, vel errato, He admonished me, or gave me warning of my fault. De
pecunijs reperundis damnatus est, He is condemned of briberie.

The examples applied.
Hic furti se alligat vel furto, this word furti, the genitive case betokening
the crime, is governed of the verb of accusing alligat, by this rule, and you
may say it also in the ablative case furto, after the same verb, thus, Hic
furto se alligat, by this rule.

Admonuit me errati, vel errato, admonuit a verb of warning does govern the
word errati betokening the crime, in the genitive case, by this rule, and it
may also be said errato in the ablative case thus, admonuit me errato vel de
errato, by the same rule.

De pecunijs repetundis damnatus est, the word pecunijs betokening the crime is
put in the ablative case with the preposition de after damnatus est, a verb of
condemning by this rule.

An other rule for verbes with a genitive case.
Satago, to have as much as one can do, misereor, to have mercy, miseresco, to
have pity, require a genitive case: as, Rerum suarum satagit, He has as much
as he can do of his own matters. Miserere mei deus, Have mercy on me O God.

The examples applied.
Rerum suarum satagit, the word rerum is the genitive case after the verb
satagit by this rule.

Mei is the genitive case after the verb miserere, by this rule, but misercor
and miseresco have sometimes also a dative case, but this is very seldom.

An other rule for verbes with a genitive, and sometime an accusative case.
These verbes Reminiscor, to remember, obliuiscor, to forget, recordor, to
remember; and memini, to remember, will have a genitive or an accusative case:
as, Reminiscor historiae, I remember the history. Obliuiscor carminis, I
forget the verse. Recordor pueritiam, I call to remembrance my childhood.
Obliuiscor lectionem, I forget my lesson. Memini tui vel te, I remember thee.
Memini de te; I spoke of thee.

The examples applied.
Reminiscor historiae, in the which reminiscor does govern the word historiae,
in the genitive case by this rule, and you may say it by the accusative case
thus, Reminiscor historiam, by the same rule.

Obliuiscor carminis, the verb obliuiscor governs the genitive case
carminis, by this rule, and it may be said by the accusative case, Obliuiscor
carmen, by the same rule.

Recordor pueritiam, the verb recordor causes pueritiam to be put in the
accusative case by this rule, and it may be said by the genitive case recordor
pucritiae, by the same rule.

Obliuiscor lectionem, the word lectionem is the accusative case after the verb
obliuiscor by this rule, and it may be said by the genitive case Obliuiscor
lectionis, by the same rule.

A note for the verb Memini.
Memini tui vel te, the verb memini does govern the genitive case tui, and
the accusative case te by this rule. And in the other sentence, Memini de te,
the same verb memini does govern the word te in the ablative case with the
preposition de, but in another signification. For the verb memini with a
genitive or an accusative case does signify to Remember, and with an ablative
case with the preposition de, does signify to make mention, or to speak of a
thing.

Objection.
Qu. But wherefore is this sentence, Indigeo tui vel te, I have need of thee,
set here in this place?

Answer.
An. To show that the verb indigeo may have either a genitive case, as tui in
this example is, or that it may be construed with an ablative case, as te in
the same example is: but indeed this example does more properly belong unto the
rule of verbs betokening fulness, emptines, etc. following hereafter.

A rule for the verb potior.
This verb Potior to conquer, enjoy, or obtain, will have a genitive, or an
ablative case: as, Potior vrbis, I conquer the city, Potior voto, I obtain my
desire.

The examples applied.
Potior vrbis, the verb potior has a genitive case by this rule.

Potior voto, the verb potior governs an ablative case by the same rule.

Verbes governing a dative case.
Verbes with a dative case.
ALl manner of verbs put acquisitiuely, that is to say, with these tokens to or
for after them, will have a dative case: as, Non omnibus dormio, I sleep not
to all men. Huic habeo, non tibi, I have it for this man, and not for thee.

The examples applied.
Non omnibus dormio, the verb dormio being put acquisitiuely, does govern
omnibus in the dative case with this token to, before it in English, by this
rule.

Huic habeo, non tibi, the verb Habeo put acquisitiuely does govern the
dative case tibi, with this sign for, before it in English, by this rule.

This rule is very large, and has many heads or branches, and therefore unto
the same do belong these kind of verbes following signifieng

To 1 Profit or disprofit: as, commodo, to profit, incommodo, to disprofit,
noceo. to hurt. All these verbs most commonly have a dative case: and sometimes
they are confirmed with other cases also.
2 Give or restore: as, dono, to give, reddo, to restore, refero. to give
again. 3 Promise, or to pay: as, promitto, to promise, polliceor, to promise,
soluo. to pay. 4 Command, or show: as, impero, to command, indico, to show,
monstro. to show. 5 Trust: as, fido, to trust, confido, to trust, fidem habeo.
to trust. 6 Obey or to be against: as, obedio, to obey, adulor, to flatter,
repugno. to resist. 7 Threate^ or to be angry with: as, minor, to threaten,
indignor, to be angry, irascor to be angry 8 Compare: as, comparo, to compare,
compono, to compare, confero. to compare.


The verb sum, with a dative case.
Also this verb sum, with his compounds, except possum, as Absum, to be
absent, adsum, to be present, desum, to be wanting, insum, to be in, intersum,
to be present, praesum, to be chief, prosum, to profit, will have a dative
case.

Satisfacio, benefacio, malefacio with a dative case.
Also verbes compounded with these aduerbes satis, been, and male: as
satisfacio, to satisfy, benefacio, to do a good turn, malefacio, to do an ill
turn, will have a dative case.

A dative case after verbes compound with certain praepositions.
Finally, certain verbs compound with these prepositions, prae, ad, con, sub,
ante, post, ob, in, and inter, will have a dative case: as praeluceo, to
excel, or to bear light before one, adiac^o, to lie near, condono, to
pardon, suboleo, to smellou^, antesto, to stand before, or to excel,
posthabeo, to set less by, obijcio, to lay against one, insulto, to leap
upon, intersero, to put between, with many other such like, the which
sometimes are joined with other cases also.

This rule more shortly and more easily is thus: This verb est, set for habeo,
will have a dative case.

The examples applied.


This verb Sum, es, fui, may oftentimes be set for habeo, to have, and then the
word that seems in the english to be the nominative case, shall be put in the
dative case, and the word that seems to be the accusative case, shall be the
nominative: as, Est mihi matter, I have a mother, Non est mihi argentum, I have
no money.

Est mihi matter, which sentence being Englished, it appears that this verb
est is set for habeo, and therefore the word I, which in the English seems to
be the nominative case, is put into the dative in the Latin by this word mihi,
and mother, which in English seemed to be the accusative case, in Latin is the
nominative case by this word matter, by this rule.

Non est mihi argentum, by Englishing the same it appears that this verb est
is set for habeo, and therefore the word I, the which in the English seemed to
be the nominative case before the verb I have, in the Latin is after the verb
est turned into the dative case tibi, and the word money, which in English
seemed to be the accusative case after the verb have, in Latin is turned into
the nominative case argentum unto the verb est by this rule.

An exception from the former rule very dark and hard for a young scholar.
But if sum (that is the word which comes of sum) be the infinitive mood,
this nominative case shall be turned into the accusative case; as Scio tibi non
esse argentum, I know thou have no money.

This rule has one example, the which one hundredth scholars, which think
themselves some body, may at the first brunt be peradventure set up with, and
unless it be thus to be applied to expres the meaning of the exception, I for my
part confess that I know not what may be the meaning.

The example applied.
In this example therefore, Scio tibi non esse argentum, this word argentum is
the accusative case in construing before the infinitive mood esse, coming of
this verbs sum, in this sentence in English, set for habeo, the which
accusative case here, before the infinitive mood, if the sentence were to be
uttered by any other mood of the verb sum, should in the Latin be the
nominative case, as est tibi argentum, thou have money, vtinam esset illi
liber, I would he had a book, and so forth of the like speeches: where when
they are to be made by the infinitive mood, the word which before in the Latin
was the nominative case, must be turned before the infinitive mood of sum, into
the accusative case: as Laetor illi esse librum, I am glad he has a book, but
all this much a do, and tedious for the little Punies, may be remedied, by
teaching them briefly, that when est has in English the signification of
habeo, to have, it does require a dative case.

Sum with two dative cases.
Also when sum, has after him a nominative case, and a dative, the word that
is the nominative case, may be put also in the dative: so that sum may in such
manner of speaking be construed with a double dative case: as, Sum tibi
praesidio, I am to thee a safeguard. Haec res est mihi voluptati, This thing is
to me a pleasure.

The examples applied.
Sum tibi praesidio, the word praesidio which in the English I am to thee a
safeguard, seemed to be the nominative case after the verb sum, I am, the which
had after it this dative case thee, in Latin tibi, this word I say praesidio is
put in the dative case, and so has sum a double, or two dative cases by this
rule.

Haec res est mihi voluptati, this thing is to me a pleasure, this word
voluptati, which in English after the verb is, with his dative case to me,
seemed to be the nominative case after the same verb, is put into the dative,
and so the verb sum has a double dative case, by this rule. But this rule
more shortly and easily for young scholars is thus:

The former rule set down shorter.
This verb sum may oftentimes be construed with a double dative case.

Other verbes with a double dative case.
And not only sum, but also many other verbes, may in such manner speaking have
a dooble dative case, one of the person, and an other of the thing: as, Do tibi
vestem pignori, I give thee a garment for a pledge. Verto tibi vitio, I lay it
to thee for a fault. Hoc tu tibi laudi ducis, Thou accountest this for a praise
unto thee.

The examples applied.
Do tibi vestem pignori, the verb do has two dative cases tibi and pignori,
tibi of the person, and pignori of the thing by this rule.

Verto tibi vitio, the verb verto has a double dative case, tibi of the
person, and vitio of the thing, by this rule.

Hoc tu tibi laudi ducis, the verb ducis has two dative cases, tibi of the
person, and laudi of the thing, by this rule.

Verbes with an accusative case.
An accusative case after verbes.
VErbes transitiues are all such as have after them an accusative case of the
doer or sufferer, whether they be actiues, common, or deponent: as, Vsus
promtos facit, Use makes men ready or cunning. Foeminae ludificantur viros,
Women do mock men. Largitur pecuniam, He gives money.

The examples applied.
facit has promtos in the accusative case by this rule.

foeminae ludificantur viros, the verb transitiue ludificantur governs viros
in the accusative case by this rule.

Largitur pecuniam, the verb largitur does govern an accusative case, being a
verb transitiue by this rule.

What are verbes transitiues.
Qu. What call you a verb transitiue?

An. A verb transitiue deriuing his name of transeo, to pass over, is such a
verb as passes over his signification into some other thing, as when I say, I
love God, this verb love passes over his signification into this word God,
which is the thing loved.

Qu. Wherefore serves this note, whereby some verbs are termed by the name of
transitiues?

An. To make a difference between them and certain other verbs neuters, the
which are called intransitiues, or absolute, because they do not pass over
their signification into any other thing, but do finish it in themselves: as
Dormio, I sleep, aegroto, I am sick, which verbs and such like do determine
their action in themselves, and do not pass it over into any other thing, like
as verbs transitiues do.

Verbes neuters with an accusative case.
Also verbes neuters may have an accusative case of their own signification: as
Endymionis somnum dormis, Thou sleep the sleep of Endymion. Gaudeo gaudium,
I joy a joy. Viuo vitam, I live a life.

The examples applied.
Endymionis somnum dormis, the verb neuter dormio to sleep, has the
accusative case somnum sleep, of his own signification after him by this rule.

Gaudeo gaudium, the verb neuter gaudeo to joy, has after him the accusative
case gaudium joy, of his own signification by this rule.

Viuo vitam, the verb neuter viuo to live, has after him vitam life, an
accusative case of his own signification by this rule.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Where note that this accusative case after verbs neuters is turned sometime
into the ablative case.

An other note borrowed from the latin.
There are also certain verbs neuters, the which sometimes have an accusative
case, not of their own signification, but this is by a figure called Enallage
in the most of them: as Viuunt Bacchanalia, for Bacchanaliter.

Verbes with two accusative cases
Verbs of asking, teaching, and araying, will have two accusative cases, one of
the sufferer, and another of the thing: as Rogo te pecuniam, I ask thee money.
Doceo te literas, I teach thee letters. Quod te iamdudum hortor, Which thing
this good while I exhort thee unto. Exuo me gladium, I put off my sword from
me.

The examples applied.
Rogo te pecuniam, where this verb of asking rogo has two accusative cases,
namely te of the sufferer, and pecunia^ of the thing, by this rule.

Doceo te literas, the verb of teaching doceo has by this rule two accusative
cases, namely te of the sufferer, and literas of the thing.

Quod te iamdudum hortor. In this third example the verb of asking hortor has
two accusative cases by this rule, to wit, te of the sufferer, and quod of the
thing.

Exuo me gladium, this verb exuo, of araying, or rather indeed of vnaraying,
has two accusative cases, me of the sufferer, and gladium of the thing, by
this rule.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Here note that verbs of asking do sometime turn one of the accusative cases
into the ablative case with a preposition.

Borrowed from the latin.
Also verbs of araying, or vnaraying, do sometime turn one of the accusative
cases either into the dative, or else into the ablative, without a preposition.

Verbs governing an ablative case after them.
Verbes with an ablative case.
ALl verbs require an ablative case of the instrument, put with this sign with,
before it, or of the cause, or of the manner of doing: as Ferit eum gladio, He
strikes him with a sword. Taceo metu, I hold my peace for fear. Summa
eloquentia causam egit, He pleaded the cause with great eloquence.

The examples applied.
Ferit eum gladio, the verb ferit has after him this word gladio the ablative
case of the instrument, with this sign with before it in English, by this rule.

Taceo metu, in this second example the verb taceo has after him this word
metu, the ablative case of the cause, by this rule.

Summa eloquentia causam egit, the verb egit has after him the ablative case
eloquentia of the manner of doing, by this rule.

An other rule for an ablative case after verbs.
The word of price is put after verbs in the ablative case: as, Vendidi auro, I
sold it for gold. Emtus sum argento, I was bought for money.

The examples applied.
vendidi auro, the verb vendidi does govern auro in the ablative case, being a
word of price, or a word that signifies the price or value, wherefore the
thing was sold, by this rule.

Emtus sum argento, the verb emtus sum has after him the ablative case
argento, being the word of price, or signifieng the value wherefore the thing
was bought, by this rule.

Two exceptions from the rule before.

The first exception.


This former rule has two exceptions, which are as follows.

Except these genitive cases, when they be put alone without substantives (for
if they have substantives they shall be put in the ablative case) Tanti, so
much, quanti, how much, pluris, for more, minoris, for less, tantidem, for so
much, tantiuis, for so much, quantiuis, for how much soever, quantilibet, for
as much as you list, quanticunque, for how much soever: as quanti mercatus es
hu^c equum? for how much bought you this horse? certe pluris quam vellem,
truly for more than I would.

The examples applied.
Quanti mercatus es hunc equum? where quanti a word of price, because it is put
without a substantive, is put in the genitive case after the verb mercatus es,
by this exception.

Certe pluris quam vellem, the word of price pluris, being put alone without a
substantive, is put in the genitive case after the verb mercatus sum
understood, by this rule.

The second exception.
Saving that after verbs of price, we shall always use these aduerbes in steed
of their casuals: carius, more dear, vilius, better, cheap, melius, better,
peius, worse, not that these words and no other are to be used after verbes of
price, that is, verbes betokening, buyeng, selling, bargaining, and such like,
but that when occasion is offered of such kind of speaking, then these aduerbes
are to be used, and not their comparatiues being nounes adjectives, unless their
substantives be joined with them, and then they shall both be put in the
ablative case.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Note also that after this verb valeo, betokening the value, or worth of a
thing, the word of price may sometimes be put in the accusative case.

An other rule for an ablative case after verbs. Some of the verbes belonging
unto this rule have sometimes a genitive case also.
Verbes of plenty, or scarcenes, filling, emptieng, loding, or vnloding, will
have an ablative case; as affluis opibus, thou flowest in wealth: cares
virtute, thou art void of virtue: expleo te fabulis, I fill thee with tales:
spoliauit me bonis omnibus, he spoiled or robbed me of all my goods: oneras
stomachum cibo, thou lodest thy stomach with meat: leuabo te hoc onere, I
will ease thee of this burden.

The examples applied.
This rule has six examples,

affluis opibus, this verb of plenty affluis has the ablative case opibus,
by this rule.

Cares virtute, in this second example virtute is the ablative case after the
verb of wanting or scarcenes cares, by this rule.

expleo te fabulis, the verb of filling expleo, has after him the ablative
case fabulis by this rule.

Spoliauit me bonis omnibus, in this fourth example bonis is the ablative case
after the verb of emptieng spoliauit, by this rule.

oneras stomachum cibo, this word cibo is the ablative case after the verb of
loding oneras, by this rule.

Leuabo te hoc onere. In this sixth example this word onere is the ablative case
after the verb of vnloding leuabo, by this rule.

An other rule for an ablative case after verbs. Some of these verbs are
sometimes read with an accusative case.
Also these verbs following, with certain other like, will have an ablative
case: as Vtor, to use, fruor, to enjoy, fungor, to execute an office, potior,
to obtain, laetor, to rejoice, gaudeo, to be glad, dignor, to vouchsaue, or
think one worthy, muto, to change, munero, to reward, communico, to make
partaker of, afficio, to trouble, prosequor, to pursue, impertio, impertior, to
bestow, and such like. And here is to be marked, that these two verbes afficio
and prosequor are for the most part to be englished accordingly as the ablative
case which they govern, will give occasion: as, afficio te dolor, I make thee
sorry. Prosequor te odio, I hate thee, etc.

An other rule for an ablative case after verbs.
Verbs that betoken receiving, distance, or taking away, will have an ablative
case with these prepositions, a, ab, e, ex, or de: as, Accepit literas a Petro,
He received letters of Peter. Audiui ex nuncio, I heard it of the messenger.
Long distat a nobis, It is far distant, or far off from us. Eripui te e malis,
I delivered thee out of troubles.

The examples applied.
Accepit literas a Petro, this word accepit a verb of receiving, has an
ablative case with the preposition a, namely a Petro, by this rule.

Audiui ex nuncio, the verb of receiving audiui, has an ablative case with
the preposition ex, namely ex nuncio, by this rule.

Long distata nobis. In this third example, the verb of distance distat, has
an ablative case with the preposition a, namely a nobis, by this rule.

Eripui te e malis, the verb of taking away eripui, has an ablative case with
this preposition e, namely e malis, by this rule.

An exception from the former rule.

The examples applied.


And this ablative after verbs of taking away, may be turned into the dative:
as, Subtraxit mihi cingulum, He took from me my girdle. Eripuit illi vitam, He
took from him his life.

Subtraxit mihi cingulum, the word subtraxit, being a verb of taking away,
has after him the dative case mihi by this exception.

Eripuit illi vitam. In this second example, eripuit being a verb of taking
away, has after him the dative case illi, by this exception.

An other rule for verbes with an ablative case.
Verbs of comparing or exceeding, may have an ablative case of the word that
signifies the measure of exceeding: as, Praefero hunc multis gradibus, I
prefer this man by many degrees. Paulo interuallo illum superat, He is beyond
the other but a little space.

The examples applied.
Praefero hunc multis gradibus, in which example praefero a verb of comparing
or rather of exceeding, has after him the word gradibus an ablative case
betokening the measure of exceeding, by this rule.

Paulo interuallo illum superat. In this second example, superat a verb of
exceeding, has after him the word interuallo in the ablative case, betokening
the measure of exceeding, by this rule.

The ablative case absolute.
A noune or a pronoune substantive joined with a participle, expressed or
understood, and having no other word whereof it may be governed, it shall be put
in the ablative case absolute, that is, the ablative case set alone without any
word to govern him: as, Rege veniente, hosts fugerunt, The king coming, the
enemies fled. Me duce vinces, I being captain, thou shall overcome.

The examples applied.
Rege veniente, hosts fugerunt, the noune substantive rege joined with the
participle veniente here expressed, and having no other word to govern it, is
put in the ablative case absolute by this rule.

Me duce vinces, the pronoune substantive me joined with the participle
existente understood, and having no other word whereof it may be governed, is
put in the ablative case absolute, by this rule.

A note for the yoonger sort.
Where note, that if there be no participle expressly set down with the
ablative case absolute, then for the most part you are to understand this
participle existens, the which causes always the substantive following to be
the ablative case, by the rule of participles governing such case as the verb
that they come of. And because that Existo will have such case after him as he
had before him, therefore the participle existens understood with the ablative
case absolute before him, does cause the substantive following, if there be
any, to be put also in the ablative case, as appears in this example, Me
duce, where the participle existente understood with the ablative case absolute
me, causes the substantive duce following, to be the ablative case also, by
the rule next before in this note alleged: and the like is to be said of all
other such speeches.

How to resolve this ablative case absolute.
And this ablative case absolute may be resolved, or turned into other Latin by
any of these words, dum, whilst, cum, when, quando, when, si, if, quanquam,
although, postquam, after that, and then the ablative case must be turned into
the nominative case, and the participle into the verb, as in these examples,
Rege veniente, the king coming, id est, that is to say, dum veniret rex,
whilst, or when the king came. Me duce, I being captain,.i. This.i. thus set
in latin with two pricks, stands for id est, that is to say.
si ego dux fuero, or rather extitero, turning the participle existente
understood, into the verb extitero.

Synecdoche. aegrotat animo. Rubet capillos. discrucior animi.
Some verbs may have an ablative case by the figure Synecdoche, and sometime a
genitive, and sometime an accusative, after such manner as Poets use to speak.

Diverse cases after one verb. Borrowed from the latin.
One and the same verb, in diverse respects, or by diverse rules, may have diverse
cases, as a double dative case, an accusative case, an ablative case absolute,
the ablative case of the instrument, and such like, whereof in the Latin
grammar there is this example: Dedit mihi vestem pignori, te praesente, propria
manu, He gave me a garment to pledge, you being present, with his own hand.

The Construction of verbs passiues, or what case they will govern.
An ablative after passiues, and sometime a dative. The participles of verbes
passiues, have more often a dative, the^ an ablative.
A Verb passive will have after him an ablative case with a preposition, or
sometime a dative of the doer: as, Virgilius legitur a me, Virgil is read of me.
Tibi fama petatur, Let fame be sought after by thee.

The examples applied.
In this rule are two examples, whereof in the first, Virgilius legitur a me,
the verb passive legitur does govern the ablative case of the doer me, with
the preposition a, by this rule.

Tibi fama petatur, the verb passive petatur does govern the word tibi the
dative case of the doer, by this rule.

How these passiues and such like, may be turned by the actiues.
And this ablative or dative shall be turned into the nominative case, and the
nominative into the accusative, if the sentence be turned by the active voice:
as, Ego lego Virgilium, I read Virgill, where me the ablative case in the
sentence of the rule before, is here turned into the nominative ego, and the
passive legitur, into the active lego, and the nominative case Virgilius into
the accusative case Virgilium.

Verbes passiues may have other cases by the rules of their actiues.
Petas tu famam, Seek thou fame, where tibi the dative case in the former rule
is turned into the nominative tu, the passive petatur into the active petas,
and the nominative fama, into the accusative famam, by this rule.

These five verbs called neuter passiues, will have such construction as
passiues by the first rule had: vapulo, to be beaten, vaeneo, to be sold,
liceo, to be set at a price, fio, to be made, exulo, to be banished.

The construction of gerunds, or how they are used, and what cases they govern.
The case of gerundes.
GErundes will have such cases, as the verbes that they come of: as, Ocium
scribendi literas, Leisure to write letters. Ad consulendum tibi, To counsel
thee.

The examples applied.
This rule has two examples, Ocium scribendi literas, where the gerund
scribendi does govern literas in the accusative case, because that the verb
scribo whereof it comes, will have an accusative case by the rule of verbes
transitiues, etc.

Ad consulendum tibi, in this example the gerund ^^^sulendum has the dative
case tibi, because consulo the verb whereof he comes will have a dative case
in this signification, by the rule of verbes of giving or restoring, etc.

The gerund in Di to be used after certain substantives.
When the English of the infinitive mood comes after any of these nounes
substantives, This rule borrowed from the latin is shorter thus. The gerund in
di is put after certain substantives, and certain adjectives.
studium, desire, causa, cause, tempus, time, gratia, cause, ocium, leisure,
occasio, occasion, libido, lust, spes, hope, opportunitas, fit occasion,
voluntas, will, modus, manner, ratio, reason, gestus, gesture, satietas, fulness,
potestas, power, licentia, leave, consuetudo, custom, consilium, counsel,
vis, force, norma, a rule, amor, love, cupido, desire, locus, place, and others
like, if the verb should be of the active voice, it shall be made by the
gerund in di, as when I say Ocium scribendi, leisure to write, here in the
English to write, the English of the infinitive mood to write, comes after
the substantive leisure, in Latin ocium, and therefore it is put in the gerund
in di, by this rule, and so of the rest.

The gerund in di, after adjectives.

Sometime the genitive case plural, is put after the gerund in di.

The examples applied.

Sometime the infinitive mood is put after Substantives and adjectives, in
stead of the gerund in di.

Borrowed from the latin.

The gerund in do.

The example applied.


And the same gerund in di, is used also after certain adjectives: as, Cupidus
visendi, desirous to go see, Certus eundi, determined to go. Peritus iaculandi.
skillful in darting, Gnarus bellandi, cunning in warring.

In all these four examples, after these adjectives, cupidus, Certus, Peritus,
Gnarus, these words Visendi, Eundi, Iaculandi, Bellandi, are put in the gerund
in di, by this rule.

The gerund in do.
WHen you have the English of the participle of the present tense, with this
sign of or with, coming after a noune adjective, it shall in Latin making be
put in the gerund in do, as, Defessus sum ambulando, I am weary of walking,
here in this sentence is the english of the participle of the present tense
walking, with this sign of before it, coming after the adjective weary, and
therefore is the said english of the participle of the present tense with of
before it, as namely, of walking, in Latin turned into the gerund in do,
faieng, defessus sum ambulando, I am weary of walking, by this rule.

An other rule for the gerund in do.
Also the english of the participle of the present tense, coming without a
substantive, with this sign in or by, before him, shall in Latin making be put
in the gerund in do: as, Caesar dando, subleuando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus
est, Caesar by giving, by helping, by forgiving, got praise and renoume. In
apparando totum hunc consumunt diem, They spend this whole day in making ready.

The examples applied.
Caesar dando, subleuando, ignoscendo, gloriam adeptus est, in the which
example being Englished, there is in three places the English of the participle
of the present tense put alone without a substantive with this sign by, before
it, as namely, by giving, by helping, by forgiving, and therefore in the Latin
it is turned into the gerund in do, saying, dando, subleuando, ignoscendo, by
this rule.

In apparando totum hunc consumunt diem, here in this sentence being
Englished, as appears before in the rule, there is the English of the
participle of the present tense set alone without a substantive, with this
sign in before it, namely thus, in preparing or making ready, and therefore in
Latin it is made by the gerund in do, apparando, by this rule.

The gerund in do used either without a preposition, or else with certain
preposition.
And the same gerund in do, is used either without a preposition, or else after
one of these prepositions, A, ab, de, ex, cum, in: as, Deterrenta bibendo, they
fear them from drinking. Ab amando, from loving. Cogitat de edendo, he
thinks upon eating. Ratio been scribendicum loquendo coniuncta est, the way
to write well is joined with speaking.

The examples applied.
deterrent a bibendo, the gerund in do, bibendo, is used after the preposition
a, by this rule.

Ab amando, in this second example the gerund in do, amando, is used with the
preposition ab, by this rule.

cogitat de edendo, the gerund edendo is used with the preposition de by this
rule.

Ratio been scribendi cum loquendo coniuncta est, the gerund loquendo is used
with the preposition cum by this rule. And of the gerund in do used without a
preposition, you had an example before in this sentence, Caesar dando, etc.

The gerund in dum.
The gerund in Dum.
THe English of the infinitive mood coming after a reason, and showing the
cause of the reason, may be put in the gerund in dum: as, The example applied.
Dies mihi vt satis sit ad agendu^, vereor, I fear that a whole day will not be
enough for me to do my business, in the English of this sentence or reason there
comes the English of the infinitive mood, namely, to do my business, and
shows the cause of the reason, and therefore it is in Latin put in the gerund
in dum, agendum, by this rule. But this example more properly belongs unto
the next rule, yea and the rule it self is more hard then that young beginners
can easily understand the meaning of the same.

An other rule for the gerund in dum.
The gerund in dum is used after one of these prepositions, Ad, ob, propter,
inter, ante: as, Ad capiendum hosts, to take the enemies. Ob, vel propter
redimendum captiuos, for to redeem the prisoners. Inter coenandum, whilst
they are at supper. Ante damnandum, before they are condemned.

The examples applied.
This rule has four examples, dum, capiendum is used after the preposition ad,
by this rule.

redimendum is used after the prepositions ob vel propter, by this rule.

coenandum, is used after the preposition inter, by this rule.

damnandum, is used after the preposition ante, by the same rule.

An other rule for the gerund in dum.
And when ye have this English must, or ought in a reason, where it seems to
be made by the verb oportet, it may be put in the gerund in dum, with this
verb est set impersonally: and then the word which in the English seems to
be the nominative case, shall be put in the dative: as, abeundum est mihi, I
must go hence.

The example applied.
In this reason or sentence in English we have this word must before the word
go, whereby it may seem that it is in latin to be made by the verb oportet,
and therefore it is put in the gerund in dum, abeundum, with this verb est set
impersonally, and the word I which in the English, when I say, I must go hence,
seems to be the nominative case, is in Latin turned into the dative case
mihi, by this rule, saying abeundum est mihi.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Here is to be noted, that sometimes these gerunds are turned into adjectives
called gerundiues, because they come of the gerunds, and when they be thus
turned, you shall know them by this, that they govern no case, but agree with
their substa^tiues in case, gender and number, like as other adjectives do.

Supines, and of their construction, and how they are used.
The case of supines.
SVpines do govern such case, as the verbes that they come of: as, Auditum
poetas, to hear poets. In which example the first supine auditum does govern
poetas in the accusative case by this rule, because the verb audio, of which
he comes will have an accusative case by the rule of verb transitiues, etc.

The signification of the first supine.
The first supine has his active signification, saving that in some few verbes
it signifies passiuely: And it is put after verbes and participles that
betoken moving to a place: as Ego cubitum, I go to rest. Spectatum admissi,
risum teneatis amici? my friends, being let in to behold such a sight, can you
forbear laughing? Sometime the infinitive mood is put after verbes in stead
of the first supine.


The examples applied.
This rule has two examples, Eo cubitum, the supine cubitum is put after eo a
verb of moving or betokening moving by this rule.

Spectatum admissi, etc. spectatum is put after the participle admissi, by this
rule.

A note borrowed from the latin.
Where note that sometime the first supine is put absolutely or alone after the
verb est, and does not follow any other verb betokening any moving at all:
as many Grammarians do note, as Cessatum est satis. But under their correction,
I would say that in such manner of speaking it were rather a verb impersonall,
then a supine.

The latter supine.
The latter supine has his passive signification, and is put after nounes
adjectives: as dignus, worthy, indignus, unworthy, turpis, filthy, foedus,
foul, procliuis, ready, facilis, easy, odiosus, hateful, mirabilis,
wonderful, optimus, best, and such like: as facile factu, easy to be done.
Turpe dictu, dishonest to be spoken.

The examples applied.
Facile factu, the latter supine factu signifieng passiuely, is put after the
adjective facile, by this rule.

Turpe dictu, the latter supine dictu, signifieng passiuelie is put after ye
adjective turpe, by this rule.

The latter supine turned into the infinitive mood passive.
And this latter supine after nounes adjectives may be turned into the
infinitive mood passive, as, Facile fieri, Easy to be done, Turpe dici,
dishonest to be spoken.

The Time, or in what case words betokening time, shall be put after verbes.
Part of time.
NOunes that betoken part of time, be commonly put in the ablative case: as,
Nocte vigilas, Thou watchest in the night. Luce dormis, Thou sleep in the
day.

The examples applied.
Nocte vigilas, where this word nocte signifieng part of time, or taken for
part of the night, is in construction put in the ablative case after the verb
vigilas, by this rule. Sometimes, but very seldom, the word betokening part of
time is put in the accusative case.


Luce dormis, the word luce signifieng part of time, or taken for part of the
day, is in construction put in the ablative case after the verb dormis, by
this rule.

Continual term of time.
But nounes that betoken continual term of time, without intermission or
ceasing, be commonly used in the accusative case and sometime in the ablative
case.
: as, Sexaginta annos natus est, He is threescore years old. Hyemem totam
stertis, Thou sleep the whole winter.

The examples applied.
Sexaginta annos natus est, in the which this word annos betokening continual
term of time, is in construction set after the verb natus est in the
accusative case, by this rule.

Hyemem totam stertis, this word hyemem betokening continual term of time, or
being taken for the whole winter, is in construction put in the accusative case
after the verb stertis, by this rule.

Space of place, or in what case a word that signifies space of place, shall
be put after verbes.
Space of place. Sometime the space of place is put in the genitive case, but
then this word spacium, or iter, or some such like is understood.
NOunes that betoken space between place and place, be commonly put in the
accusative case, and sometimes also in the ablative: as, Pedem hinc ne
discesseris, Go thou not a foot from this place.

In this one example, the word pedem betokening space of place, is in
construction put after the verb discesseris in the accusative case, by this
rule.

A place, or the case wherein such names of places as are either nounes common,
or nounes proper, shallbe put after verbes.
The construction of common names of places, or proper names of countries.

Sometimes, but very seldom these nounes are put without a praeposition.


NOunes appellatiues, or names of great places, be put with a preposition, if
they follow a verb that signifies in a place, to a place, from a place, or by
a place: as Viuo in Anglia, I live in England. Veni per Galliam in Italiam, I
came through France into Italy. Proficiscor ex vrbe, I go forth of the city.

Here are three examples of this rule. The two first are of proper names of
countries, and the third is of a common name of a place.

The examples applied.
Vino in Anglia, this word Anglia being the proper name of a great place or
country, is put with the preposition in, in the ablative case signifieng in a
place, after the verb viuo, by this rule.

Veni per Galliam in Italiam, the word Galliam signifieng a great place or
country, is put with the preposition per in the accusative case after the
verb veni signifieng going by a place, by this rule, and so is Italiam with
the preposition in put into the accusative case, being the name of a country,
and following the same verb signifieng to a place, by the same rule.

Proficiscor ex vrbe, the word vrbe being a noune appellatiue, or common name
of a place, is put in the ablative case with a preposition ex after the verb
proficiscor, signifieng the going from a place, by this rule.

A note for the better understanding of this rule.
Here note, that by nouns appellatiues in this rule is meant nounes common,
signifieng the names of places, as a city, a country, a town, an island, the
market, the church, the school, and such like. And by names of great places
are understood the proper names of Countries and Islands, as France, Italy,
Spain, Scotland, England, and such like: for the proper names of smaller
places, as cities, towns, and villages belong to the rules following.

The proper names of cities or towns in the genitive case. The examples
applied.
In a place or at a place, if the place be a proper name, and of the first or
second declension, and singular number, it shall be put in the genitive case:
as, Vixit Londini, he lived at London. Studuit Oxoniae, he studied at Oxford.
Sometimes the names of Islands are found also in the genitive case, but not
usually.


Vixit Londini, the word Londini being the proper name of a city, signifieng
in or at a place, and being also of the second declension, and singular number,
it is put in the genitive case, by this rule.

Studuit Oxoniae, the word Oxoniae signifieng in a place or at a place, being
the name of a city, and of the first declension, and singular number, is put
in the genitive case, by this rule.

Humi, domi, militiae, belli.
And these nounes, Humi, on the ground, domi, at home, militiae, at warfare,
belli, at war, be likewise used, that is, after verbes signifieng in a place or
at a place, they are put for the most part in the genitive case, like as the
proper names of places in the rule before going: as, Procumbit humi bos, The
ox lies on the ground. Militiae enutritus est, He was brought up in warfare.
Domi, bellique ociosi viuitis, Ye live idly both at home and in war.

The examples applied.
In these three examples, humi in the first, Militiae in the second, domi and
belli in the third, are put in the genitive case, like as if they were proper
nounes belonging to the former rule, by this rule.

Proper names of places, in the dative, or ablative case.
But if the place be of the third declension, or of the plural number, it shall
be put in the dative, or in the ablative case: as Militauit Carthagini, or
Carthagine, He served in the wars at Carthage. Athenis natus est, He was borne
at Athens.

The examples applied.
Militauit Carthagini, vel Carthagine, the word Carthagini being the proper
name of a city, and signifieng at or in a place, because it is the third
declension, is put in the dative case by this rule, or you may say it by the
ablative case Carthagine, thus, Militauit Carthagine, by the same rule.

Athenis natus est, the word Athenis being the proper name of a city, and
betokening in or at a place, because it is the plural number is put in the
dative or ablative case, by this rule.

Ruri or rure.
Likewise we use this word ruri or rure, betokening in or at a place, in the
dative or ablative case, as in this example: Ruri or rure educatus est, He was
brought up in the country.

Proper names in the accusative case.
To a place, if the place be a proper name, it shall be put in the accusative
case, without a preposition: as, Eo Romam, I go to Rome.

The example applied.
In this example this word Romam being the proper name of a city, and
signifieng to a place, is put in the accusative case without a preposition, by
this rule. But sometimes it is also put in the accusative case with a
preposition, but very seldom, and then rather to be marked than followed.

Domus and rus
So also are these words domus and rus signifieng to a place put in the
accusative case: as Confero me domum, I go home. Recipio me rus, I go into the
country.

The examples applied.
Confero me domum, the word domum betokening to a place is put in the
accusative case by this rule.

Recipio me rus, the word rus signifieng to a place, is put in the accusative
case also by the same rule.

Proper names of places in the ablative case.
From a place, or by a place, if the place be a proper name, it shall be put in
the ablative case without a preposition, and sometime in the accusative case
with a preposition betokening by or through a place: as, Profectus est Londino
(vel per Londinum) Cantabr^^am, He went from London, or by London to Cambridge.
In this example Londino, the proper name of a city, and signifieng from a
place, is put in the ablative case without a preposition, by this rule, and it
may also with the preposition per, be put in the accusative case, Per Londinu^.
signifieng by or through a place, by the same rule, and the like is to be said
of all such other examples.

Domus and rus
Domus and rus be likewise used in the ablative case signifieng from a place:
as, Abijt domo, He went from home. Rure reuersus est, He returned from the
country. The examples applied.
In which two examples domo in the first, and rure in the second both
signifieng from a place, are put in the ablative case by this rule.

Verbes impersonals and what case they govern.
It, or there, signs of verbes impersonals for the most part.
A Verb impersonall has no nominative case before him, and this word it or
there, is commonly his sign: as, Decet, it becomes. Oportet aliquem esse,
there must be some body.

The examples applied.
Decet, I know the said verb to be an impersonall, by this sign it before him
in English, when I say, it becomes, by this rule.

Oportet aliquem esse, I know this word oportet, to be a verb impersonall,
because in English he has this sign there before him, when I say there must,
by this rule.

What is to be done when neither of these signs it, or there, are before a
verb impersonall.
But if the verb impersonall have neither of these signs, it or there, before
him, then the word that seems to be in the English the nominative case, shall
in Latin be such case as the verb impersonall will have after him: as Me
oportet, I must, tibi licet, thou may.

The examples applied.
This rule has two examples, Me oportet, I must, is the first, where because
this impersonall must, oportet, has none of these signs it or there before
him in English, therefore this word I that seems to be the nominative case,
is in Latin turned into the accusative case me, by this rule, because oportet
will have an accusative case after him.

Tibi licet, thou may, the impersonal may, has neither it nor there,
before it, and therefore the word thou, which in the English seems to be the
nominative case, is in the Latin put into the dative, by this rule, because
licet will have a dative case after him.

Interest, refert, and est.
These impersonals, interest, it behooves, refert, it belongs, or
appertains, and est set for interest, require a genitive case of all casual
words, that is, words declined with case, except Mea, tua, sua, nostra, vestra,
and cuia, the ablative cases of the pronounes possessiues: as, Interest omnium
recte agere, It behooves all men to do rightly. Tua refert teipsum nosse, It
appertains unto thee, or it is thy part to know thy self.

The examples applied.
Interest omnium recte agere, the impersonall interest has the genitive case
omnium, by this rule.

Tua refert teipsum nosse. The impersonall refert has tua the ablative case of
the pronoune possessiue tuus, by this rule.

Impersonals with a dative.
Certain impersonals require a dative case: as, Libet, it lists, licet, it is
lawful, patet, it is manifest, liquet, it is evident, constat, it is certain,
placet, it pleases, expedit, it is expedient, prodest, it profits, sufficit,
it is sufficient, vacat, it has leisure, accidit, it chances, conuenit, it is
meet, contingit, it happens, and such other like.

Impersonals with an accusative case. Impersonals with an accusative case, and
a genitive.
Some will have an accusative case only: as, Delectat, it deliteth, decet, it
becomes, juuat, it deliteth or helps, oportet, it behooves.

Some besides the accusative case, will have also a genitive: as, Nostri nosmet
poenitet, We are weary of our own estate. Me ciuitatis taedet, I am weary of
the city. Pudet me negligentiae, I am ashamed of my negligence. Miseret me
tui, I take pity on thee. Me illorum miserescit, I have pity on them.

The examples applied.
Nostri nosmet poenitet, the impersonall poenitet beside the accusative case
nos, has the genitive case nostri, by this rule.

Me ciuitatis taeder, the impersonall taedet besides the accusative case me,
has also the genitive case ciuitatis, by this rule.

Pudet me negligentiae, the impersonall pudet besides the accusative case me,
has the genitive case negligentiae, by the same rule.

Miseret me tui, the impersonall miseret besides the accusative case me, has
the genitive case tui, by this rule.

Me illorum miserescit. In this fifth example the impersonall miserescit,
besides the accusative case me, has also the genitive case illorum, by this
rule.

Impersonals passiues, coming of verbes neuters.
Verbes impersonals of the passive voice being formed of neuters, do govern
such case, as the verbs neuters which they come of: as, Parcatur sumtui, Let
cost be spared, where the passive impersonal parcatur, coming of the verb
neuter parco, to spare, has the dative case sumtui, because the neuter parco
will have a dative case, as when we say, Parcamus pecuniae, Let us spare money.

Verbes personali passiues
A verb impersonall of the passive voice has like case as other verbs passive
have: as, Benefit multis a principe, Many are pleasured by the prince.

The example applied.
In this example, the verb impersonall benefit having the passive
signification, has an ablative case after him of the dooer, with a preposition
a principe, like as other verbs personals passiues have, by the first rule of
verbs personals passiues, in their place set down before.

The case understood.
Yet many times this case is not expressed, but understood: as, Maxima vi
certatur, (subaudi understand) ab illis, They fight with most great force,
where the ablative case with the preposition, ab illis, is understood, by this
rule. And the like is to be said of all other such speeches.

A deed signified to be done of many by a verb neuter.
When a deed is signified to be done of many, the verb being a verb neuter,
we may well change the verb neuter into the impersonall in tur: as, The
example applied.
In ignem posita est, fletur, She was put into the fire, they wept. In this
example when I say they weep, there is a deed signified to be done by many,
and because that the verb weep is a verb neuter, in Latin flent, it may be
turned into the impersonall in tur fletur, by this rule.

A Participle, and his case.
Participles have the cases of their verbes.
PArticiples govern such case as the verbs that they come of: as, Fruiturus
amicis, one that will use his friends. Consulens tibi, one giving counsel unto
thee. Diligendus ab omnibus, one to be beloved of all men.

The examples applied.
fruiturus has the ablative case amicis, because the verb fruor of which he
comes, will have an ablative case.

Consulens has the dative case tibi, because his verb consulo will have a
dative case.

diligendus has an ablative case with a preposition, namely ab omnibus,
because his verb diligor by the rule of passiues, will have an ablative case
with a preposition.

Participles 4. ways turned into nounes.
Here note that participles may four manner ways be changed into nounes, and
so, oftentimes govern not the case of their verbs.

Appetens vini, greedy of wine, where appetens is a noune and not a
participle, because it has a genitive case, when as his verb appeto will have
an accusative case.

Indoctus, unlearned, Innocens, innocent, or giltles, both which words are
nounes and not participles, because their verbs doceor and noceo, cannot be
compounded with the preposition in, as they are.

as, Amans, loving, amantior, more loving, amantissimus, most loving.

Homo laudatus, a man laudable, where laudatus, because it signifies no time
present, past, or to come, is a noune and not a participle. Puer amandus, a
child worthy to be loved, where amandus is a noune, because it has no
express difference of time. And all these are properly called nounes
participials.

Participles turned into nounes require a genitive case.
Participles when they be changed into nounes, require a genitive case: as,
Fugitans litium, avoiding strife. Indoctus pilae, not skillful to play at the
baull. Cupientissimus tui, most desirous of thee. Lactis abundans, having store
of milk, all which four words are known hereby to be nounes and not
participles, because they govern a genitive case, by this rule. Fugitans, 1.
Indoctus, 2. Cupientissimus, 3. Abundans, 4. Exosus, perosus, pertaesus, have
always the active signification, namely when they govern an accusative case.
But exosus and perosus signifiyng passiuely require a dative case.


These participiall voices, Perosus, hating deadly, exosus, detesting or
lothing, pertaesus, weary or lothing, have always the active signification,
and govern an accusative case: as, Exosus saeuitiam, hating cruelty. Vitam
pertaesus, weary of life.

Here are two examples in this rule. In the first, Exosus saeuitiam, this
participiall voice exosus has the active signification, and does govern the
word saeuitiam in the accusative case, by this rule.

In the second example, Vitam pertaesus, this participiall voice pertaesus
signifieng actiuely, does govern the word vitam in the accusative case, by
this rule. Borrowed of the latin.


Natus, prognatus, satus, ortus, cretus, creatus, editus.
Here note, that these participles, Natus, borne, prognatus, coming of some
stock or lineage, cretus, borne, ortus, borne, editus, sproong or begotten,
satus, borne, creatus, created, will have an ablative case. Borrowed of the
latin.


The Aduerbe, or what case Aduerbes do govern.
Aduerbas with a genitive case.
ADuerbs of quantity, time, and place, require a genitive case: as, Multum
lucri, much gain. Tunc temporis, at that time. Vbique gentium, in all places.

The examples applied.
This rule has three examples. Multum lucri, the aduerbe multum being an
aduerbe betokening quantity, has the genitive case lucri after him by this
rule, but multum indeed is rather a noune than an aduerbe, as has been seen
before, yet are there many other aduerbes of quantity which do govern a
genitive case. These aduerbes En and Ecce will have a nominative case, and
sometime an accusative. Borrowed of the latin.


Tunc temporis. In this second example the aduerbe of time tunc does govern
the genitive case temporis by this rule.

Vbique gentium, the aduerb of place vbique does govern gentium in the
genitive case by this rule.

Aduerbes with a dative case.
Certain aduerbs will have a dative case, like as the nounes that they come of:
as, Venit obuiam illi, He came to meet him. Canit similiter huic, He sings
like unto him.

The examples applied.
Venit obuiam illi, where the aduerbe obuiam does govern the dative case illi,
by this rule, because the noune adjective obuius whereof the aduerbe obuiam
comes does govern a dative case.

Canit similiter huic. In this second example the aduerbe similiter, does
govern the dative case huic, by this rule, because the noune adjective
similis, whereof similiter comes, will have a dative case.

Tempori, luci, vesperi, used like aduerbes.
These dative cases Tempori, In time, Luci, In the day time, Vesperi, At night,
are used aduerbially, that is, like as if they were aduerbs: as, Tempori
surgendum, We must arise in time. Vesperi cubandum, We must lie down at night.
Luci laborandum, We must work in the day time.

Aduerbes with an accusative case.
Certain aduerbes will have an accusative case, like as the prepositions which
they come of: as, Propius vrbem, Near to the city. Proxime castra, Next to
the tents.

The examples applied.
propius vrbem, the aduerbe propius does govern the accusative case vrbem by
this rule, because the preposition prope, whereof propius comes, will have an
accusative case.

proxime castra, the aduerb proxime does govern the accusative case castra by
this rule, because the preposition prope whereof the aduerbe proxime comes will
have an accusative case.

How prepositions are turned into aduerbes.
Where note, that prepositions, when they be set without a case, or else do
form the degrees of comparison, be changed into aduerbes.

The aduerb plus, more, may have a genitive, an accusative, or an ablative
case. A note borrowed from the latin.


Aduerbes of the comparatiue and superlatiue degree.
Aduerbes of the comparatiue and superlatiue degree, will have such case as the
nounes adjectives which they come of, of the same degree will have. Borrowed
from the latin.


Of the construction of conjunctions.
Conjunctions copulative, and disjunctive.
Conjunctions copulatiues, and disiunctiues, with these four, Quam, then.
Nisi, except, or unless. Praeterquam, besides. An, whether, do couple like
cases: as, Xenophon and Plato fuere aequales, Xenophon and Plato were equal.

In this example because Xenophon is the nominative case before the conjunction
copulative and, therefore does the said conjunction cause Plato likewise to be
the nominative case by this rule.

Exception. Where the word after the conjunction, by some other rule is not
suffered to be the same case with the word before the conjunction.

And sometimes the conjunctions aforesaid are put between diverse cases: as,
Studui Romae et Athenis, I studied at Rome, and at Athens. Est liber meus et
fratris, It is my book and my brothers. Emi fundum centum nummis et pluris, I
bought the ground for a hundredth pieces of money, and more.

The examples applied.
This rule has three examples. Studui Romae et Athenis, the conjunction et is
put between diverse cases, namely, Romae the genitive, and Athenis the dative by
this rule.

Est liber meus et fratris, the conjunction et is put between liber the
nominative case, and fratris the genitive case, by this rule.

Emi fundum centum nummis et pluris, the conjunction et is put between nummis
the ablative case, and pluris the genitive case by this exception.

Like moodes coupled together.
Conjunctions copulatiues and disiunctiues most commonly couple like moodes and
tenses together: as, Petrus et Ioannes precabantur et docebant, Peter and John
did preach and pray.

Sometimes diverse moodes are coupled together. The example applied.
In this example the conjunction copulative et does join these two verbs
precabantur and docebant, in the indicative mood and preterimperfect tense, by
this rule.

Diverse tenses joined together.
And sometime diverse tenses are coupled together: as, Et habeturet referetur
tibi a me gratia, I do both thank you, and will also requite you.

The example applied.
In this example the conjunction et does join habetur, the present tense, and
referetur the future tense together by this rule.

The preposition and his case.
SOmetime this preposition In, is not expressed but understood, and the casual
word nevertheless is put in the ablative case: as, Habeo te loco parentis, I
have, or account thee in steed of my father.

In this example the preposition in, is not expressed before the word loco, but
understood, and yet loco be put in the ablative case by this rule.

Not only In. but any other preposition of the ablative case being understood,
may cause the word whereunto it is understood, to be the ablative case.

A verb compound with a preposition. Sometime besides the verb compound, the
preposition also wherewith he is compounded, is added before his case.
A verb compound with a preposition, sometime requires the case of the
preposition that he is compounded withal: The examples applied.
as, Exeo domo, I go from home. Praetereo te insalutatum, I pass by thee
unsaluted. Adeo templum, I go to church.

exeo domo, the verb exeo compounded with the preposition ex, does govern
domo, in the ablative case by this rule, because the preposition ex, wherewith
he is compounded, will have an ablative case.

The preposition In, being englished by any of these words, To, toward, or
against will have an accusative case: and without these, an ablative case for
the most part.
praetereo te insalutatum, the verb praetereo does govern te in the
accusative case, being compounded with the preposition praeter, the which out
of composition will have an accusative case, by this rule.

adeo templum, the verb adeo being compounded with the preposition ad, does
govern templum, in the accusative case, by this rule, because the preposition
ad out of composition will have an accusative case.

An interiection, and his case.
This interiection has also an accusative, and a vocative case. The example
applied.

The ^^^ection V^^ or Veb, has also a dative case, and sometime is put alone
without any case.

The interiections Eheu and Ah, have also an accusative case.

Proh has also a nominative case sometime. The interiection Hem, has a
nominative, a dative, an accusative, and a vocative case.


Certain interiections require a nominative case: as, O festus dies hominis, O
joyful day of man.

In this example the interiection o does govern dies in the nominative case by
this rule.

Certain interiections require a dative case: as, Hei mihi, we is one, where
mihi is the dative case governed of the interiection hei, by this rule.

Certain interiections have an accusative case: as, Heu stirpem inuisam, Alas
the hated stock, where the interiection heu does govern the accusative case
stirpem, by this rule. And this heu has sometimes also a nominative case.

Certain interiections have a vocative case: as, Probsancte Jupiter, O holy
Jupiter, where Jupiter is the vocative case governed of pro, or proh, by this
rule.

And this proh will have also an accusative case: as, proh deum atque hominum
fidem, O the faith of gods and men, where proh governs fidem in the accusative
case by this rule.

The rest of the interiections for the most part do govern no case at all.

Qu. Having thus gone through all the English rules of construction, tell me
now in a word, how the little Punies of the Grammar school, in examining and
parsing their lessons may find out the rules to show them the case of every
part of speech in the same?

How to find the rules for the case of a word.
An. They must first learn perfectly what part of speech every word of their
lesson is, and then consider of what word he is governed, and also what part of
speech the same is, and so shall he easily turn to the rule, that shows the
case of his word.

As for example, if the word governing (which for the most part is the word
that in construing goes next before the word governed) be a substantive,
turning to the rules of substantives, you shall there find what case he
governs: if he be an adjective, look among the adjectives: if a verb, look
among the rules for verbes, and so of all other parts of speech accordingly.

General rules of construction.
Qu. Now to make an end of this Treatise, set down some few general rules
to be marked of young beginners, in construction, as you find them else where.

An. Look what case the singular number will have, she same also has the
plural: as, Memor praeteriti, Memoros praeteriti.



Look what case the positive degree has, the same has the comparatiue, and
the superlatiue.





To God alone be laud and praise,
Who must direct in all our ways.
FINIS.

