AN EPITAPH UPON the death of the Right worthy and VVorsh: Gent. S: Edward
Stanhope Knight deceased: and whilst that he lived, Doctor of the Civil Law,
and one of the Masters of his Majesty's high Court of Chauncery: Vicar
general of England: Chauncellor of London: and one of the Masters of the sine
office, etc. Who continued Chauncellor of London, in the time of five Bishops,
and three of Canterbury, for the space of thirty years or thereabouts: Who
deceased the 16. day of March. An. Dom. 1607.
THe time and destiny wear set at strife,
Honor and Virtue was their mutual claim,
Fate at the death, the season at the life,
Of worthy Stanhope, equally did aim,
Death did the ambage of the cause decide,
Whose censure both are willing to abide.
Strong was the plea of (...) desteny,
Quoth she, I plead the cause (...) Fate,
Where does he live that is (...) to die,
From the Throan de (...) beggars state.
And to corrupt this vmpire (...) did say,
Thou shall have share to give his life away.
The time abusde heart sick for Reformation,
Pleaded her wrongs, oh plea too truly just:
Craving to have the Cato of our Nation,
Not rest the manage of his worthy trust.
Death bribde by fate, gave sentence he (...)
And so expirde the life of equity.
Whom Time with tears, thus direfully bemones,
Oh son of Justice dropped from heaven bye:
The shape of honor shrouded with thy bones,
Concealed from the world in Earth must lie.
And the poor wronged wretch that craves redress,
Must careless languish in his deep distress.
Reverend and grave ^ich mine of perfect merit,
As in descent so in his virtues great,
Religious in his life, his Clemency,
A pattern absolute of high Estate,
Stanhope in death will teach to all that live,
What tight to wrong, what pain to sin to give
Where now shall learning boast of her perfection,
Where Justice vouch her self sincerely right
How shall the poor man get a safe protection?
Against powerful wrong or fell oppressions spite,
Stanhope is dead, wherein our hope did stand,
Why should our hopes be built upon the sand.
Who shall the perfect linguisht be esteemed?
Or who the states man, who the Lawier called?
Who the Apollo of our (...) deemed?
Since he is dead, in whom here was enstalled.
A Linguists tongue, states policy, and wit,
That might the Apollo of a world befit*
Such was his life, and such his industry,
As not his titles him, but them he graced:
Encouraging the good to piety,
When they beheld the ill by him defaced.
Over his toumbe, I Will carue this Paragraphe,
His Virtues shall out-liue his Epitaphe,
Est labor in minimis sit voluisse satis: Pie fato Coelebs funxit: 16 die
Martii. a verbi Incarnati. Anno 1607.
At London printed by William Barley.


