THE Abridgement of the English Chronicle, First collected by M. John Stow, and
after him augmented with very many memorable Antiquities, and continued with
matters foreign and domestical, unto the beginning of the year, 1618.

By E.H. Gentleman. There is a brief Table at the end of the Book.

Imprinted at London for the Company of Stationers, 1618.

Dextera Domini me exalt abit.

To the Right Honorable Sir George Bolles Knight, Lord Mayor of the City of
London, and to the Right worshipful the Aldermen his brethren: And to Sir
Anthony Benn Knight, Recorder of the same City. Edmond Howes, Gentleman,
wishes all health and felicity.
RIght Honorable and grave Senators, the blessed and peaceful entrance into
this land, and joyful possession of our Liege Lord, of his immediate right of
the Imperial crown of England, and the utter banishment of all doubt in the
Regal succession, with the universal hearts applause of all his Highness
English subjects, who with one consent acknowledged their love and duty unto
his lawful right in Sovereignty, all which in the speedy effecting and
establishing of peace in this kingdom was much more then either our neighbor
Nations held possible to be so easily performed, A appeared by their great
admiration upon the certain knowledge thereof, or was rightly understood of
the multitude that wholly enioyes the benefit, as too plainly appears by
their wilful ingratitude and forgetfulness, seeing their long continued fear so
quickly suppressed, and beyond all expectation converted into as great freedom
and tranquillity, as either their hearts could wish, or is enjoyed by any other
nation. All these, and many other high blessings of Almighty God still
succeeded one another, and no man would once hold up his finger to make present
acknowledgement or public understanding unto posterities, of the boundless
and wondrous works of God in these our days, as also of the manifold
remarkable accidents which have happened of late years.

These motives, I say, with the earnest persuasions of diverse grave and
honorable personages, who never ceased to accite me unto this present Act of
Chronology, have directly caused me to perform this general business, in
which my tedious labors I have been intollerably abused and scandalized by
Thraso, Momus, Zoylus, and other backebiters, and detractors: concerning whom,
since it is the least of offenses to offend offenders, I will neither vex my
self, nor trouble your patience in seeking to please the envious and
insatiate. But forasmuch as I highly prize the good content of the honest,
wise, and virtuous, thus was the course and manner of my proceeding herein.

After I had well observed, that no man would lend a helping hand unto the late
aged painful chronicler: neither in many months after his death, that any
would expose or show themselves to prosecute so good a work: and albeit that
in this interim, and before, there were many named to have already entered into
this Labyrinth, yet not one appeared: whereupon I remembered the saying of the
Philosopher: That the naming of many friends, is a maine impediment unto
friendship. And as in that, so in this; then for my own clear satisfaction,
and full assurance, that I would neither prejudice nor prevent any others
better proceeding, I entered into particular conference with every man whose
names had been diuulged. Some of them of honorable rank and reverent
quality: all of them learned, and of good sufficiency, some whereof answered
me, they thought that the giving out of their names in this sort, was rather
done by their secret enemies, of purpose to draw them into capital
displeasure, and to bring their names and lives into a general question, then
for any other intent of good: other said, who does this work, must flatter,
which I cannot, neither will I wilfully leave a scandal unto my posterity.
Another said, I cannot see how in any civil action a man should spend his
travel, time and money worse, then in that which acquires no regard, nor
reward, except backebiting and detraction. And one amongst the rest after he
had sworn an oath, said: I thank God that I am not yet mad, to wast my
time, spend two hundred pound a year, trouble my self, and all my friends,
only to gain assurance of endless reproach, loss of liberty, and bring all
my days in question: and like as these spoke, so did many others. And in
conclusion, I saw it utterly refused of all. And by this time it was generally
observed, that this work was wholly neglected. Then many of my friends began
again to animate me, and very seriously required me to make supplement: whose
kind persuasions prevailed so far, that I promised them to do my endeavor,
only for one years space, wherein my good will exceeded my best experience,
as I found afterward, for that it is not a year or two wherein a man may
obtain the particularities of truth, neither accomplish any thing to the
effect in this solid and variable imploiment. Then forthwith I repaired to the
most honorable superiors, unto whom I humbly signified my zealous love,
duty, and diligence in this general service of my Prince and Country. Of whom
I received very gracious encouragement, and honorable instructions. And after
that, upon conference with diverse grave Elders, lovers of virtue, and favorers
of the Cities honor, by whose direction, with all meekness I manifested my
willingness unto the Lord Mayor, and Court of Aldermen, being then resolved,
neither to break my former promise, nor to neglect so great and general a
good for any deprauing speeches, or maleuolent aspects, with all integrity;
since which time I have spent in this business sixteen years without any great
cause of encouragement. May it therefore please your wisdoms rightly to
understand that in all my proceedings I have neither presumed too far of my
self, nor done ought that might discourage, or prevent any other. And thus
much for the cause and manner of my proceeding.

Now right honorable, and most worthy Elders, whose state and government is
renowned through the world: what is he that has any understanding, and knows
not London to be the most flourishing and peaceful City of Europe? of
greatest antiquity, happiest in countinuance, most increased, chief in
prosperity, and most stored with plenty? and here I might allege many
ancient presidents of pleasures, profits, time, and state, whereof never any
subordinate Magistrates could equal yours. But seeing few words to the wise
suffice, I will only speak a word or two by the way. The promised blessing
unto the ancient Israelites to possess a land that flowed with milk and honey,
is with seven fold measure heaped on your heads, your city filled more
abundantly with all sorts of silks, fine linen, oils, wines, and spices,
perfection of Arts, and all costly ornaments, and curious workmanship, then
any other Province: so as London well deserves to bear the name of the
choicest storehouse in the world, and to keep rank with any royal City in
Europe: her Citizens rich and bounteous, witness their franke-giuing of more
then twice seven fifteens in one year, and their long continued charges and
expense, as well upon all occasions by sea and land for defense of their Prince
and Country, as in ayding and relieuing their distressed neighbor Nations, and
in performing many other worthy matters for their own honor, the delight of
strangers, and the relief of the poor, as otherwise: so as without offense it
may truly be said, that the liberality of the Londoners, is but half known
to their common friends. Peace and plenty in the highest degree possesses now
your gates and palaces: all nations repair with willingness to be partakers
of your happiness: many other glorious Cities have many ways wanted these
incessant blessings: witness the famous City Rome, which has been often
spoiled and sacked: the City Mosco, which not long since was twice spoiled with
fire, the first by her enemies, the last was a private politic practice of
her own Emperor. The like misfortune has befallen unto the great City
Constantinople. Stately Antwerpe has felt the smart of diverse changes within
man's memory. Populous Paris of late years was glad to beat down her own
Suburbs, and cut her skirts shorter, least other should sit upon them:
Cracouia, Lishbon, and many other royal Cities were glad and feign to seek
and sue for that which is freely given unto her. These last have I cited to be
as a looking-glass to London; since it is as impossible for any to know their
proper face and feature without an object, as it is for any people to be
truly sensible of their own felicirie, that have not seen nor tasted others
misery.

And thus (right Honorable and grave Fathers) although it was my meaning to
have used breuity, yet being enforced to the contrary, I crave your pardon,
least I have offended by prolixitie. And because I will for ever be exempt, and
free from all danger of all precurrant vipers, lurking Adders, and venomous
tongues, I here conclude, with tender of my love, and the continuance of a
double prentiship, not only of these my free offered labors in this
Abridgement, but also my larger Book, the which I likewise reco^mend unto your
kind acceptance, having as well formerly as at this present proclaimed a
cessation from any further supplement or continuance of the general English
Chronicle, to the end they might and shall for ever be truly understood, that
I have no coherence with the envious who never did good themselves nor speak
well of others, being ever desirous to do my best to avoid all impediments
that may any way impeach others better proceedings, wishing you all increase of
your hearts desire, and everlasting happiness.

TO THE HONEST AND friendly Reader.
FOr thy sake with the rest of my loving Countrymen, and for the modest delight
of other Nations, of what quality soever, through the earnest persuasion of
many my good friends, favorers of knowledge, I was the rather induced to
perform this business, and to arm my self with my best patience against the
daily injuries and discurtesies which in these affairs I have endured both in
Court and Country, without the least part of pride or presumption on my
behalf. A time may come, to their disgrace, wherein I may retort their
undeserved malice. But as concerning the ignorant, proud and envious, it will
be hard for me to escape their braine-sicke imputation. For my own part I
acknowledge others excellency, and my own insufficiency. What I have done, was
in a kind of voluntary necessity; as is evident: for that every man (so far
as I could perceive) though they thought it a very good work, yet they held it
no wisdom to run headlong into judgment, and for the pleasure of others to
waste their time, spend their money, displease superiors, and endure the cruel
censure of the multitude, only upon hope of Master Stowes reward. All which,
notwithstanding, for the general good of all men, and without intent of
offense to any, seeing so many memorable accidents like to be buried in
oblivion, I have undertaken sixteen years supplement, and enlarged it with
very many memorable antiquities.

And according to my promise I have published my larger work three years
past. The manifold abuses which have been offered me by the shape of man, and
the small respect by those of good spirit, and solid substance, have so checked
my forwardness, that I stand amazed, having already been condemned, and
i^dged before I was tried, or heard to speak. What I have written, is free
from leazing: Be thou therefore of what Religion or condition soever, expect
nothing here^^ contained, to be written for any purpose of flattery, time
service, or offense: truth I sought, and truth is here set down. Peace and
good thoughts possess thee. Farewell.

Thy very loving friend, Edmond Howes.

A DESCRIPTION OF ENGLAND SCOTLAND, WALES, and Cornwall.
Britain, is an Island in the Ocean Sea, situate right over against France,
one part of which Isle Englishmen do inhabit, another part Scots, the third
part Welshmen, and the fourth part Cornishmen. All they either in language,
conditions, or laws, do differ among themselves. England is the greatest
part, which is divided into 40. Counties, which we call shires: whereof ten
(that is to say) Kent, Sussex, Surrey, South-hampton, Barkeshire, Wilshire,
Dorsetshire, Somersetshire, Devonshire, and Cornwall, do contain the first
part of that Island, which part bounding toward the South, stands between
the thames and the Sea.

From thence to the River of Trent, which passes through the midst of England
be 16. shires, whereof the first six (standing Eastward) are Essex,
Middlesex, Hartfordshire, Suffolk, Northfolke, and Cambridgeshire. The other
ten, which stand more in the middle of the country, are these: Bedford,
Huntington, Buckingham, Oxford, Northampton, Rutland, Leicester, Notingham,
Warwick, and Lincoln. After these there be 6, which border Westward upon
Wales, as Gloucester, Hereford, Worcester, Shropshire, Stafford, and Chester.
About the middle of the Region, Darbishire, Yorkshire, Lancashire, and
Cumberland. On the left hand toward the West, is Westmerland: against the same
is the Bishopric of Durham, and Northumberland, which boundeth upon the
North, in the Marches of Scotland. These shires be divided into xxii.
Bishoprics, Canterbury, Rochester, London, Chichester, Winchester, Salisbury,
Excester, Bath and Wells, Worcester, Gloucester, Hereford, Couentry and
Lichfield, Lincoln, Ely, Norwich, Oxford, Peterborow, Bristow. And this is the
province of the Archbishop of Canterbury, which is the Primate of England, with
Wales. York, Durham, Chester, and Carlisle, is the other province of the
Archbishop of York, which is another Primate of England. The Ocean sea does
bound England: the first part of Britain East and South Wales, and Cornwall
West. The river of Tweede divides England and Scotland North. The length of
the Island begins at Portsmouth in the South part, and ends at Tweed in
the North, Scotland another part of Britain.
containing 320. Miles.

Scotland, after the overthrow of the Picts, began at the river Tweed, and so
meeting at the river Tine. Therefore ye length of Scotland, from Tweed to the
furthest coast, is esteemed to be 480. miles: But as Scotland is longer than
England, so is it narrower. The said river of Tweed separateth the marches from
Northumberland, the farthest country of England: the chief town whereof is
Barwicke, now in possession of the English. The western limite of Scotland,
whilome was Cumberland, which the river of Selue divides from Annandall.
Between these two Regions, the Cheuiot hills appear. Next to the marches,
Pictland bordereth, bounding upon the East. The most famous towns, be Dunber,
Haddington, Leigh, Northbarwicke, and Edenbrough the Kings seat. The same
City, the river called the Frith, does water and pass by: the same river
again divides from Loughdean, a country adjoining called the Fife, in which
country are many towns, as Donfermile, Cupre: but the notable town of S.
Andrew, specially famous for the University, and Sea of the Archbishop. On
the other side toward the Irish side Northward, is Nidisdalia, so called of the
river that passes thereby, where be the towns of Douglasse, and Doufrie. Upon
the South adioyneth Galloway, where is the town called Coswel, and the ancient
Temple of S. Ninian. By that stands the country of Haricta once renowned
with the town Haricton, whereof perchance it took the name. About Haricta,
toward the west, is Elgonia bordering upon the Ocean, whereon is the Lake
Lomunde, which is very broad and large, containing many Islands, situate at the
foot of the mountain Grantshayn, eight miles from the Castle of Doubriton. A
good space on this side Grampius rises ye river Taus, the greatest of all
Scotland, taking his name of Atholl and Calidonia, a lake from whence it
springs, which falling by many places, but chiefly by S. John's town, and
lastly by Dunde, and there breaks into the German sea. Against Taus is
Anguise, and is divided from Fife. To the same upon the North, adioyneth
Atheles. On the other side Argile shows it self, being full of Lakes, whose
uttermost bounds stretch so far as Ireland, about which the promontary of
foteland, called Lands-head stands.

Between Argatele and Olgouia westward, lies the country of Sterling. Here
the Forest of Calidonia began on the left side, there likewise is the Castle
of Calidone situate by Taus, called Doucheldin. From a little hill of the
Forest, rises Cluid.

Of that river the Dale was called Glotenale: which country that river runs
by, and in the same is the City of Glasco, a goodly University. Again,
toward the East is joined the country of Anguis and Merne, upon the sea coast,
wherein Fordunne by situation is very strong. Of the same side of Scotland is
the country of Mar, garnished with a city called Aberdon, standing between
the two rivers of Dona and Dea. Then follows Morry, which the two notable
rivers do compass about, called Nea and Spea. At the mouth of the last river,
stands the town of Elgis: But in the middle part stands the broad country
of Rossia. The breadth of the Island is scarce xxx. miles over, which defended
with three promontories like Towers, repelleth the great waves and surges of
the sea: and environed with two gulfes, which those promentories do enclose,
the entries be quiet and calm, and the water peaceable. The strait of the land
is at this day called Cathanes, coasting upon the sea Deucalidon.

About Scotland in the Irish seas are xl. Islands: many of these in length at
least are 30. miles, but in breadth not above 12. Amongst them is Iona,
beautified with the tombs of the Scottish Kings. Beyond Scotland toward the
North be the Isles of Orcades, the which are 30. in number the principal of
which Islands is Panonia.

Beyond the Orcades stands Thule, in the frozen sea now called Island.

The other part Northern, and full of Mountains, a very rude and homely kind
of people does inhabit, which are called the Redshankes, or wild Scots, and
thus much of Scotland.

Wales lies on the left hand: Wales the third part of Britain.
which like a promontary or foreland on every side is compassed with the maine
sea: except it be on the Southeast part with the River of Seuerne, which
divides Wales from England. Therefore Wales is extended from the town of
Chepstow, where it begins by a straight line, a little above Shrewsbury,
even to Westchester Northward. Into that part so many of the Britains as
remained alive after the slaughter and loss of their country, at the length
did repair, where partly through refuge of the mountains, and partly of the
woods and marshes, they remained in safety: which part they enjoy to this day.
4 Bishops in Wales.
There be many towns and strong Castles, and four Bishoprics. The first is
S. David's, another Landaffe, the third Bangor, and the fourth S. Asaph, which
be under the Archbishop of Canterbury. The Welshmen have a language from the
Englishmen, which as they say, does partly sound of the Trojan antiquity, and
partly of the Greek. And thus much of Wales.

Cornwall.
Cornwall begins on that side which stands toward Spain westward: toward
the East, it is of length fourscore and ten miles, reaching a little beyond S.
Germans, situate on the right hand upon the sea coast, where the greatest
breadth of that country is but twenty miles. It bordereth upon England, West,
South and North: The maine sea is round about it: it is a very barren soil,
but there is great plenty of Lead and Tin: their tongue is far dissonant from
English, but it is much like to the Welsh tongue: because they have many words
common to both tongues. Cornwall is in the Diocese of Exester, which was once
worthy to be counted the fourth part of the Island, for the contrariety of
the language.

Thus much of the particular description of Britain. The form of the Island
is Triquetra, having three corners, or three sides: two whereof, that is to
say, the corner toward the East, and the other toward the West (both extending
Northwards) are the longest. The third, which is the South side, is far
shorter then the other: for the Island is greater of length then of breadth.
The right corner of which Island Eastward, is in Kent at Dover and Sandwich.
From whence, to the third angle, which is in the North of Scotland, is seven
hundred miles. Again, the length from this corner of Dover in Kent to the
uttermost part of Cornwall, being S. Michaels mount, is supposed to be three
hundred miles. From this left angle, being the West part of Cornwall, which
has a prospect toward Spain, to the North angle in the further part of
Scotland, the length is eight hundred miles.

THE RACE OF THE Kings of Britain: and in the Margent are placed the years
before Christ's birth, when every King began their reign, till Cunobilinus, in
whose time Christ was borne, and then the years from his birth are placed.
BRute the son of Siluius (following, 1108.
as heretofore, the common received opinion) after a long and weary journey
with his Trojans, arrived in this Island, at a place now called Totnes in
Devonshire, the year of the world, 2155. the year before Christ's nativity,
1108. wherein he first began to reign, and named it after his own name
Britan: he builded the City of new Troy, now called London: he divided the
whole Island among his three sons. Unto Locrine his eldest son, he gave
the middle part, called Loegria: to Camber, Cambria, to Albanact, Albania: he
deceased when he had reigned 24. years.

1084
LOcrine reigned 20. years. he chased the Hunnes which inuad^^ this realm,
and pursued them so sharply, that many of them with their King, were drowned
in a river named Humber. Locrine had to wife Guendoline, How Humber took that
name.
daughter to Corineus, Duke of Cornwall, by whom he had a son named Madan:
he also kept Estrild, by whom he had a daughter named Sabrine: but Guendoline
gathering a great power, fought with King Locrine, and stewe him. She drowned
Estrild with her daughter Sabrine, Seuerne.
in a River called Seuerne.

1604 Guendoline a Queen. The King devoured by woules.
GVendoline discreetly ruled 15. years, and left the same to her son Madan.

MAdan was devoured by wild woules, when he had reigned 11. years.

1009 A traitor to his brother devoured of wild beasts.
MEmpricius slew his brother Manlius, taking the wives and daughters of his
subjects: but was destroyed of wolves, when he had reigned 20. years.

EBranke founded Alclud in Scotland: he made the Castle of Edenbrough, 919
and Bambrought: he builded Rayrbranke, 929
now called York, he reigned 40. 917
years.

Chester.
Brutus, surnamed Greeneshield, reigned twelve years.

LEil builded Carlill, now called Cestria: 892
he reigned 25. years.

RVdhudribras builded Canterbury, Winchester, and Shaftsbury. He reigned:
twentynine years.

BLadud, who had long studied at Athens, 863 Bath. The King attempted to fly.
brought Philosophers to keep schools in Britain: he builded Bath, and
presumed to fly: but brake his neck when he had reigned 20. years.

LEile, builded Caer Lair, now called Leicester. He had three daughters,
Gonorell, Ragan, and Cordelle: which Cordelle succeeded him in the Kingdom,
when he had reigned forty years.

COrdelle was sore vexed by her two Nephews, 844 Cordila Queen.
Morgan of Albanie, and Conedagus of Camber, who cast her into prison: where
she flew her self, when she had reigned 5. years.

MOrgan warred on his Nephewe Conedagus, 800
but Conedagus slew Morgan, and then was King of all Britain: He reigned three
and thirty years.

RIuallo, in whose time it rained blood three days: 766 Blood rained.
And then a great mortality caused almost desolation. He reigned 46. years.

GVrgustus, a common drunkard, whereof followed other vices, reigned 37.
years. 721


SIcilius the brother of Gurgustus reigned forty nine years. 664


IAgo, Cousin to Gurgustus, 636
reigned five and twenty years.

612
Kimmacus reigned 53. years.

^59
Gorbodug reigned 43. years.

396 The brother slew the brother.
FErrex with his brother Porrex, ruled Britain^ five years, they fell at
civil discord for the sovereign dominion, in which Ferrex was slain, and
Porrex afterward was killed.

441 Mulmutius laws.
MVlmutius Dunwallo constituted good laws, which long after were called
Mulmutius laws, he gave privileges unto Temples, and ploughes, and began to
make the four notable ways in Britain, he reigned 40. years.

BElinus and Brennus divided this Isle of Britain. Unto Belme was appointed,
England, Wales and Cornwall. Unto the other, the part beyond Humber. This
Brennus raised war against B^line: but in conclusion, Brennus went amongst
the Gauls, where for his excellent qualities, he was their sovereign
Captain, with whom he passed into Italy, sacked Rome. Belinus reigned xxvi.
years.

Gurgustus subdued Denmark, and in his return met with a fleet coming from
the parts of Spain, which were seeking for habitations, 375 Ireland inhabited.
to whom he granted the Isle of Ireland to inhabit. He reigned xix. years.

356 Mercia^ law the third.
GVinthelinus had to wife a notable woman named Mercia: She divised certain
laws, named Mercians laws. He reigned xxvi. years.

33^ The Picts inhabited the marches
CEcilius reigned seven years: a people called Picts, arrived here in
Britain, and possessed those parts, which now be the Marches of both Realms,
England and Scotland.

KImarus reigned 3. years, 323
and was slain as he was hunting.

Elanius was King of Britain 9. years. 321


MOrindus, 311 The King devoured.
in whose time out of the Irish seas came a wonderful monster, which destroyed
much people, whereof the King hearing, would needs fight with it, by which he
was devoured, when he had reigned 8. years.

GOrbomannus reigned 11. years. 393 Grantham builded.
He builded Grantham.

ARchigallo extorted from men their goods, 192 The King deprived.
to enrich his treasure: for which cause he was deprived when he had reigned 5.
years.

Elidurus reigned 5. years. 296


ARchigallo restored, ruled the people quietly ten years.

ELidurus, after the death of his brother, 272
reigned not passing two years, but that his younger brother Vigenius took
and cast him into prison.

VIgenius reigned seven years, and Pereduries, 370 The town of Pickering
built.
reigned after 2. years, He builded the town of Pickering.

Elidurus the third time reigned four years. 261


Gorbonian reigned ten years. 258


Morgan guided the Realm 14. years. 248


EMerianus, when he had tyrannously reigned 7. years, was deposed. 234
227


Iuall governed peaceably 20. years. 207


Rimo governed this Realm 16. years. 191


Gernuntius reigned 20. years. 171


CAtillus reigned ten years: A good example.
he hung up all oppressors of the poor.

161
Coilus quietly reigned 20. years.

141
Porrex, a virtuous Prince, reigned 5. years.

116
CHierennus, through his darkness, reigned but one year.

135
Fulgen his son reigned but two years.

133
Eldred reigned but one year.

132
Androgius likewise reigned one year.

131
Varianus reigned three years.

136
Eliud, a great Astronomer, reigned 5. years.

124
Dedantius reigned five years.

120
Detonus reigned in the land two years.

118
Gurginus reigned three years.

115
Merianus was King two years.

111
Blandumus governed two years.

180
Capenus reigned three years.

106
Quinus ruled this land two years.

104
Silius reigned two years.

94
Bledgabredus reigned ten years.

91
Archemalus was King two years.

88
Eldelus reigned four years.

86
Rodianus was King two years.

83
Redargius reigned three years.

81
Samulius reigned two years.

78
Penisellus was King three years.

76
Pyrhus ruled this land two years.

74
Caporus was King two years.

70
Diuellus governed four years.

66
Helius reigned not full one year.

Lud repaired London
LVd repaired the city of new Troy, and builded on the west part thereof,
Ludgate, leaving after him two sons, Androgius, and Theomancius: who being not
of age to govern, their Uncle Cassibelan obtained the crown. London took the
name of Lud, and was called Ludstowne. Thus far Ieffery Munmouth.

CAssibelanus ruled 19. years. In the 8. year of his reign Julius Caesar
sailed into Britain, 51 Caesar his first voyage into England.
whereat the first, being wearied with an hard and sharp battle, and after
with sudden tempest, and his navy almost destroyed, he returned again into
France: the next spring (which was the year before Christ 51. The second
voyage of Caesar.
) he passed the seas again with a great army. But whiles he went toward his
armies ^nland, his ships lying at anchor, with force of tempest were
destroyed, so that 40. were lost. Upon land also his horsemen at the first
encounter were vanquished. At the second conflict, he put the Britains to
flight. From thence he went unto the river of thames, on the further side
whereof, Cassibelanus with a great multitude of people, was keeping the banks:
but not being able to resist the force of the Romans, England tributary to the
Romans.
London submitted it self to Caesar, delivering unto him hostages: which
example also the other cities followed: whereby Cassibelanus was constrained
to agree that Britain should become tributary to the Romans. Then Caesar like
a conqueror with a great number of prisoners, sailed into France, and so to
Rome.

Theomantius reigned quietly 23. years. 37


CVnobilinus. the son of Theomantius, reigned 35. years. In the 14. year of
his reign, 14
Christ our Savior was horn.

From this place following, the years from Christ his birth, are placed in the
Margent.
An Christ. 1
JESUS Christ very God and man, was borne in the 42. year of the reign of
Augustus: he began to preach the 15. year of Tiberius, and suffered his
passion in the 18. year of the same Tiberius.

21
GViderius, for that he thought the Romans had their tribute wrongfully, he
denied to pay the same: he reigned 23. years.

Aruiragus rained 28. years.

44
Claudius the Emperor sailed into Britain: he subdued unto the Empire, the
Isles of Orcades, and those that lie in the Ocean Sea beyond Britain.

First Christians in England.
The year after Christ's birth 63. came into Britain Joseph of Arimathie, and
11. other Christians, who builded them a Chapel in the Isle of Anaion, and
after he was there buried; which place being since increased and newly builded,
was named Glassenbury.

73
Marius was ordained King: the Picts, accompanied with the Scots, invaded
Britain, unto whom Marius gave inhabitance in the further part of Scotland: He
reigned 53. years.

COilus, brought up among the Romans, 124 Colchester built.
paid the tribute truly, he builded the town of Colchester, and reigned 55.
years.

At this time 133. Galen.
the famous Physician Galen flourished in Rome under Helius Adrianus the
Emperor.

LVcius sent his Ambassadors to Eleutherius Bishop of Rome, England received
the Faith.
desiring him to send some devout and learned men, by whose instruction both he
and his people might be taught the Faith and Religion of Christ: whereof
Eleutherius being very glad, sent with them Faganus, and Deruuianus, by whose
diligence Lucius and his people were baptized and instructed in the faith of
Christ. Lucius reigned 12. years.

SEuerus Emperor in Britain, caused a trench to be cast from sea to sea, the
length of 22. miles. 194
He deceased at York.

ANtonius Bassianus died in the vi. 212
year of his reign.

CArausius took upon him in Britain, and 7. 290 Carausius usurps in
Britain.
years after Carausius was slain by Alectus. Saint Alban, suffered martyrdom
under Dioclesian and Maximilian, in the year of our Lord 23.

ALectus then kept Britain by the space of three years, and was subdued by
Asclopiodatus. 292 The first imperial Crown of gold.


At this time the Emperor of Rome ordained for himself and his successors,
and imperial Crown or diadem of gold, adorned with precious stones. Read my
larger book.

299
ASelepiodatus slew Gallus, the Roman Captain in the city of London, Coil
took on him the Kingdom of Britain.

305
Constantius began to reign, possessed Africa, Italy, France, Britain.

306
COnstantine the great, son of Codstantius, and Helen was created Emperor in
Britain: he established the Gospel in his Empire, and after him all Emperors
were Christians: He left behind him three sons, to wit, Constantinus,
Constans. and Constantius.

337
COnstantinus attempted war against his brother and was slain.

340
COnstans then ruled Britain, which he had administered with great justice: but
was slain.

353
COnstantius then had the regiment of Britain himself alone, enjoyed the
Roman^ Empire.

S. George.
About this time lived the famous Preacher S. George in Antioch.

372 Julian the Apostata.
IVlianus (called the Apostata) began his reign over the Empire, an earnest
adversary to Christian Religion. After him succeeded in the Empire, Iouinion.
Iouinian.


365
VAlentinian was Emperor: he by his Deputy here in Britain, made sharp war
upon the Picts and Scots.

Hillary Term.
This year 369. dyed S. Hillary, Bishope Poytiers, of whom Hillary Term
takes the name: or as some think, of Pope Hillary, who was Pope in the year
464.

GRatian was then created Emperor: 375 Maximus.
Maximus here in Britain usurped the title of the Empire, whereupon
assembling all the men of war, and youth of the Realm, he passed into
France, expelled the Frenchmen out of Armorica, and placed therein Britains,
under Conon, Little Britan in France.
of whom ever since it has been called Britain the less.

VRsula, with the eleven thousand Virgins, sent into little Britain to be
married, were slain.

At this time 386. The original of the Patriarchy of Constantinople.
in a general Council at Constantinople, among other things it was ordained,
that the Bishops of Constantinople should for ever be called Patriarchs. Read
my larger book.

HOnorius the son of Theodosius, 395
suceeded after his father in the Empire: but Gratian, a Britain, taking upon
him to govern Britain: was immediately slain, and Constantine was elected
Governor.

THe last of September 425. 408 The death of S. Hierosme.
died the most reverend Father S. Hierosme, in his hermitage in Bethelem at 91.
years of age.

THeodosius succeeded in the Empire, and made Valentinian his cousin, fellow
therein, At this time Britain, with the foresaid wars, was so impouerished
of able men, that it could not withstand the invasions of the Pictes and Scots:
whereupon they required aid of Aetius, the Captain of the Roman Army, he
sent them certain men of war out of France, who manfully chased away the
Picts and Scots, and raising a wall between the Province and the enemy,
returned. After their departure, the Picts and Scots invaded the Britains
again, forraged their country, and destroyed the inhabitants: whereupon there
was sent new aid out of France, and a wall was made of stones. But shortly
after the Scots and Picts made greater Roades into Britain, then ever
heretofore. For the Romans being troubled with wars in France and Italy,
neglected the defense of Britain. This happened about the 16. year of
Theodosius the younger, the year of Christ, 443.

S. Patrique sent to convert Ireland.
About this time, being the 14. year of Honorius the Emperor, there was a
general Council held at Ephesus, by Celestinus the first, who by consent of
the Emperor, sent S. Patrique the son of Goths, sister to S. Martin of
Towers, to convert the Irish Nation. And in the year 413. which was the 2. The
Goths spole Rome.
year of this Honorius, the Goths destroyed Rome: but Alarcus their King,
being a Christian, showed mercy to such as fled into the Churches of St. Peter
and St. Paul.

Ricus Geyse, alias Genseric, King of Alaynes and Vandals, after he had
subdued Carthage, came from Spain into Libia, at the request of Boniface,
governor of Africa, to aid him against Sygisuldus, King of Barbary, who not
only made havoc of the Country of Africa, with fire and sword in all
extremity with his devilish people, but also greatly infected the world with
the Arrian heresy. And in the year 431. he with like malice to disturb the
Christian Church, besieged the City, The death of S. Augustine.
wherein was the most holy and reverend Father, Saint Augustine, who died
within three months after the siege, at 76. years of age, having been 40.
years Bishop: of whom it is written: that God showed him a special grace,
that he lived not to see the desolation of that City, whereof he was then
Bishop, viz. Hyppo.

The end of the Romans government in Britain, which had continued 483. years.
AFter this, the Britains continuing a while in doubtful war with the Picts
and Scots, elected Vortiger.

VOrtiger being king, 447
such a plenty of corn and fruit happened, as the like had not ben seen in
many years; which plenty caused idleness, gluttony and letchery. Pestilence.
There followed such a great pestilence, that the living scantly sufficed to
bury the dead. Also the Scots and Picts in most cruel wise spoiled the land:
where through Vortiger was forced to send for aid of foreign lands. And in
three large ships, Saxons sent for.
there came out of Germany, three sorts of people, Englishmen, Saxons, and
Getes: Hengist and Horsus, Saxons entered this land.
two brethren being their Captains, unto whom was given the Isle of Thanet to
inhabit. By their manhood in many battles, Vortiger vanquished and drove
back the Pictes and other enemies: whereby Hengist came in such favor,
Vortiger divorced.
that Vortig^ married his daughter Rowan, a maid of wonderful beauty* for
whose sake the King was divorced from his lawful wife: after which time the
Saxons daily increased, and the Christian faith decayed.

The Britains considering the daily repair of the Saxons, showed to their
King the ie^pardy that might thereof ensue, but all was in vain: wherefore they
deprived him when he had reigned 7. Vortiger deprived.
years: and ordained to their King, his eldest son Vortimer.

454 The King poisoned.
VOrtimer pursued the Saxons, and vanquished them. Until at length he was
poisoned by his Step mother, after he had reigned six years.

460 Barone slain at Aubresbury
VOrtiger obtained again the Kingdom, and shortly after, Hengistus entered the
land, with a number of Saxons: but when he heard of the great assembly that
the Britains made against him, he treated for peace: shortly after the Saxons
traitorously slew on the plain of Sarisbury, CCCClx. First kingdom of the
Saxons.
Barons and Earls, and took the King prisoner, constrained him to grant unto
them Kent, Sussex, Suffolk, and Norfolk. Then Hengist began his dominion over
Kent: and sending fore more Saxons, made war upon the Britains.

Aurelius Ambrose and Viher, made war upon Vortiger, Vortiger burned.
and burned him in his Castle, when he had secondly reigned 6. years.

AVrolius Ambrose, second son to Constantine, 466
hasted him with an army toward York against Occa son of Hengist, where he
discomfited, and took prisoner the said Occa. He caused the great stones to
be set upon the plain of Sarisbury, Stonehing.
in remembrance of the Britains that were slain there.

A Saxon subdued the countries of Southery, Somerset, Devonshire, and Cornwall,
The second kingdom of the Saxons.
which after was called the Kingdom of South Saxons.

The kingdom of the east Saxons began under Duke Vffa, The third kingdom of
the Saxons.
which contained Norfolk and S^ffolke. Aurelius, died of poison, when he had
reigned 32. years.

Other Pendragon was crowned King. 498
He was enamored upon Igreene the Dukes wife of Cornwall, and on her he begat
Arthur. He reigned eighteen years, and was buried at Stonehing.

ARthur, the son of Other Pendragon, 516
was crowned King of Britain. He fought twelve battles against the Saxons,
Round Table.
he constituted the order of the round Table, to which order he only received
such of the nobility, as were most renowned for virtue and chiualry.

While Arthur was ocupied in his wars beyond the seas, Mordred, to whom he
had committed the government of Britain, confederating himself with Cerdicus,
King of the West Saxons, traitorously usurped the Kingdom: of which treason,
when relation came to Arthur, he speedily returned, Mordred slain.
pursuing him into Cornwall, gave him battle, where Mordred was slain, and
Arthur being deadly wounded, was conveyed to Glassenbury, where he died, and is
buried, after he had reigned 16. years.

542
COnstantine, kinsman to Arthur, was ordained King.

AVrelius a Britain, raising mortal war against Constantine, slew him when
he had reigned 3. years. He was buried at Stonehing.

This year 544. there was an universal earthquake.

545
AVrelius Gonaxus, King of Britain, imprisoned his uncle, which was right
heir to the crown. He reigned 33. years.

The 5. and 6. kingdoms of the Saxons.
The kingdom of Northumberland began under a Saxon, named Ida. This province
was first divided into two kingdoms: the one was called Deyra, the which
contained the land from Humber to Tine: the other Brenicia, which included the
country from Tine to the Scottish sea.

VOrtiporus the son of Conanus, was ordained King of Britain, a victorious
King, and cruel tyrant, 578
who put from him his wife, and kept her daughter for his concubine: in diverse
battles he discomfited the Saxons: He reigned 4. years.

MAlgo Conanus governed the Britains, slew his first wife, and took his
brothers daughter. The first war between the Saxons in this realm.


EThelbert, King of the Saxons in Kent, gave battle to Ceanlinus, King of the
west Saxons: in which fight were slain two Dukes of Ethelberts, and himself
with his people chased.

CAreticus ruled the Britains, 58^
his subjects moved the Saxons (with Gurmundus King of Ireland) to make war
upon Careticus, in such wise, that he was feign to take the town of Cicester,
where they assaulted him so sore, that he with his men fled from thence into
Wales. Gurmundchester builded.
When he had reigned 3. years, Gurmund builded Gurmondchester.

EThelridus governed Northumberland, 588
who made such continual war upon the Britains, that it is thought he slew
more of them then all the other Saxons. By this cruelty the faith of Christ was
almost utterly extinguished in Britain, many were chased out of the Island, The
Saxons had the whole possession of this realm.
the rest remained in Wales, and the Saxons obtained the whole dominion of the
Island: saving a part of Scotland, and was subject to the Picts and Scots.

This year 616. being the fourth year of Hyraclius the Emperor of the
Romans, in the month of August, in France and other places, A strange and
terrible pestilence.
there happened a great earthquake, and presently followed a great pestilence,
with such hideous scabs and botches, as they could not discern nor know one
man from another. This pestlience was very fierce and infectious.

596. S. Gregory sent Augustine, Melitus Iustus, Auste^ came into England, S.
Austens at Canterbury, S. Paul's Church in London.
and John, to preach the Christian faith to the Angles, which were first
received of Ethelbert, King of England, whom they converted to the faith, with
diverse of his people. This Ethelbert began to build Saint Augustines in
Canterbury, Paul's Church in London, S. Andrews in Rochester, S. Peter's at
Westminster builded The life and death of the false Prophet Mahomet.
and S. Adrewes in Rochester. Sibertus, King of the east Saxons, builded
Westminster.

MAhomet, of the stock of Ismael, an Orphan, of poor parentage, of an
excellent wit, and great strength, borne in Arabia, in his youth taken and sold
to a rich Merchant, who employed him in his affairs: his master died, then he
married Cadiga his Mistress, of 50. years of age, by whom he had much
wealth, which he in few years increased mightily, as well in Treasure,
Camels, Munition, as other commodities: he gave great entertainment in his
house, and was liberal unto the poor, he was very skillful in Magic, and
learned many deceits of the Egyptians, for the which he was held in admiration
of the ignorant Sarazens, and distracted Arabians. And albeit he was of small
reading, by reason of his education and otherwise, yet he hearkened unto such
as were learned, especially, if they were any way malcontented, either with any
established religion, state or government. Amongst which number, he inclined
earnestly unto the censured Heretic Sergius, a Monk of Constantinople, which
should have been punished for maintaining the Nestorian heresy: he
attributed great Divinity to himself: And having the falling sickness, he
denied it, saying, he was only in a trance, being ravished with the vision of
the Angel Gabriel, who delivered him secret instructions, and new
commandments from God: he taught a Dove to pecke food out of his ears,
which he made the people believe was the holy ghost, that came to inspire him:
by means whereof, and other his illusions, which his confederates used in his
behalf, strongly possessed the multitude with a most holy and reverent opinion
of him, as also that he was the great Prophet of the Ismaelites, or as they
call themselves, As descended of Sara wife to Abraham.
the Sarazens: and then by the help of Sergius and the rest, in contempt of
the old and new Testament, he made his Antichristian Alcaron, wherein he
forbade the use of holy Scriptures, commanding them to continue circumcision,
and utterly to abolish baptism, for to them belonged the divide promise: in
contempt of Jew and Christian: he commanded every Friday for ever, to be
held his holy Sabbath: he commanded them not to eat swines flesh, nor drink
wine by day: he allowed every man to have many wives, and constituted a
voluptuous Paradise, like to the Manichees: he absolutely denied the Trinity,
and the doctrine of our Savior Christ, and his Apostles, except only such
places of text, as he wrested to serve his sathanicall purpose, saying Christ
was a holy Prophet, and his forerunner, and had foretold much of him, and of
his coming: he said the holy Ghost was a Creature, like to the Nicholaytans,
with many other abominations and blasphemies, not fit to be spoken by a
Christian: all which he began publickely to preach in the year of Christ 620.
in the twelfth year of the reign of Hyraclius the Emperor: and by degrees it
was so followed and believed, that he grew mighty in favor with all sorts of
people, chiefly the Sarazens: then he entered into arms, and with a great
host wasted Asyria, The Scenits did Mahomet great service.
took Damasco, overthrew the Persians, he inueigled the warlike Scenits, who
revolted from Hyraclius for want of pay, and having subdued many Nations,
caused himself to be crowned King of Persia: then he proclaimed himself a
great Prophet, and by force established his blasphemous Alcaron, consisting of
the dregs of all Religions then in use: which devilish and Antichristian
Doctrine, through the remissness and negligence of the Emperors, and civil
dissension of the rest of the Christian Princes, has over spread all Asia,
Africa, and the best part of Europe, and is in many places of India. He dyed
in the year 632. being poisoned by his alyes, upon hope to succeed him in his
government: some write he dyed at thirty years of age, and others write at
forty years, and they put him in an Iron chest, and placed it upon lofty
Tressels in the City of Mecha in Persia, whereunto the Turks go in
pilgrimage from all places. Read Egnatius 2. Book, Blondas 9. Book, Charles
Fountagne 2. Book of Medals, and Polydor, Virgil, 7. Book.

606
This year 606. Clocks and Dials were commanded to be set up in Churches.

613
CAdmine Duke of North Wales, was made Sovereign of the Britains, who gave
strong battle to Ethelfride, King of Northumberland, and forced him to
entreat for peace: he reigned 42. years.

The Kingdom of Mercia began under the Saxon Penda: The 7 kingdoms of the
Saxons. Lincoln Minister. S. Peter's at York.
which Lordship contained Huntingtonshire, Herefordshire, and Glocestershire.
At that time reigned in diverse parts of the land, 7. Kings. Paulinus builded
the great Church at Lincoln. He began the Cathedral Church at York, named
S. Peter's.

CAdwallaine the son of Cadwane, 635
began his reign over the Briaines, He warred strongly upon the Saxons, and
made Penda King of Mercia tributary to him: he reigned 48. years, and was
buried at London.

Sigibert King of the East Angles, sent for Felix out of Burgondy to preach the
faith: Dunwich. The province of Canterbury divided into parishes.

Ely. O^waldfire The bishops sea of Winchester. Glazing brought first into
England. The Abbeyes of Abingdon. Chertsey. and Barking builded.


he made this Felix Bishop of Dunwich, and by his counsel, he erected diverse
schools.

Honorius, Archbishop of Canterbury, divided his province into Parishes.

Atheldrith the Queen, began the Monastery at Ely.

Medulfe builded the Abbey of Malmesbury.

Penda, King of Mercia, warred upon Oswald, King of Northumberland, and slew
him in battle.

Kenewalcus King of the west Saxons, builded the Bishops sea of Winchester.

Benet the Monk, and master of the reverend Beda, brought first the craft of
Painting, Glasing, and Masons work into this land.

Cissa began to build the Abbey of Abingdon, and Erkenwald Bishop of London,
builded the Abbeyes of Chertsey, and of Barking.

Ostrike, Duke of Gloucester, founded the Monastery of Gloucester.

Peda, The son of Penda, and Selruphus of Mereia, were the first founders of
Peterborow.

685
CAdwalladar was ordained King of Britain, (says- Ieffery) and ruled only
three years. He was the last King of Britain. And this land after his time
called Anglia, This Island called universally England.
and the inhabitants there of Angles; or Anglish Saxons, who used to call all
men Welshmen that be strangers unto them. This happened after the entering of
the Saxons, under their leaders Hengist and Horsus, in the time of Vortiger,
236. years.

Justinian the Emperor.
Justinian the second, which some said was Justinian the fourth, son to
Constantine the fourth, was the last of the race of Hyraclius, and began his
reign in the year 686. he cut the noses of his younger brothers, to the end
they should not aspire to the Empire. This wicked Emperor caused a headstrong
Council to be made against the sixth general Council held by his father: he
made wars upon the Arabians, and Bulgarians, contrary to the appointment of
his father, and prospered accordingly, for he was put to the worst: Amurath
King of Sarazens, made peace with him, and restored back Africa. This
Justinian, for his cruelty, and wilful behavior, was generally hated of all
his subjects, and in the tenth year of his reign was chased out of his
government, by Leonicus, who possessed the Imperial Crown three years: with
the special help of Callymycus, and then the men of war chose Hysmarus,
Alias Tyberius the third, who cut his nose likewise; and repressed the
Arabians: he banished the most noble Phillippicus, because an Eagle was seen
to light upon him as be slept, then he sailed from Africa, to
Constantinople, and took Leonicus, and cut his nose, as he had done to
Justinian, and seered it: in the seventh year of his reign, Justinian by
help of the Bulgarians, recoured his Empire, and presently practiced all manner
of revenge upon those he hated: he banished Tiberius, pulled out the eyes of
Callymycus, and in his daily exercise of cruelty, as often as he blew his nose,
he caused some of the favorers of Leonicus to be put to death: six years
after his reestablishment, he sought to ruinate Chersena, he was banquished in
war by Phyllippicus, whom he banished with his son Tiberius, and lost his
life and Empire: after him succeeded Phyllippicus, surnamed Bardanes. Read
Egnatius 2. Book.

I will not speak chiefly of the West Saxons, because (in the process of
time) they subdued other Kings, and brought this land again to one Monarchy.
687
KEnwalcus, surnamed Jew, reigning among the west Saxons maintained such war
against the Kentish Saxons, that he constrained them to seek means of peace.

Wels and Glassenbury. Kingdom forsaken.
This man builded the College of Wels, and the Abbey of Glassenbury, he also
paid the Peter. pence first to Rome. When he had governed the west Saxons by
the space of 7. years: he gave up his royal power, and went to Rome. Anno
101. Ethelredus King of Mercia, obtained a Bishops sea to be in the City of
Worcester, Anno 711. Edilwach King of the south Saxons, gave to the Bishop
Wilfride, Selsee.
the Isle of Selsee, wherein the said Wilfride builded a Monastery, and became
the first Bishop of the Province.

Germany converted.
And in the year 715. the Germans were generally converted to the Christian
faith.

726
EThelard was King of the West Saxons, in whose time the reverend Beda was
famous. Beda
Beda for his learning and good life was renowned in all the world: he compiled
78. books. Ethelrald reigned 14. years. He died at 70. years of age. Beda
died the last of May, 732. of age 72.

CVthred was King of the west Saxons: 740
he reigned 16. years.

Slgibert being cruel toward his subjects, 757 Cruelty.
was deprived of his kingly authority, and wandering in a wood, was slain of a
swineheard: he reigned not one year.

About this time the Sarazens ouer-ran and spoiled all France.

KEnulphus appeased certain murmurs that were among the people, 757 The King
slain.
for the deposing of his predecessor Sigibert. He founded the Cathedral
Church of Wels, in Anno 766.

As he haunted a woman, Wels.
which he kept at Merton, he was slain by a kinsman of Sigibert. Kenulphus
slain.
When he had reigned 29. years, he was buried at Winchester.

About this time Charlemaine had forced the Saxons to become Christians. Saxons
become Christians.


BRithricus, of the blood of Cerdicus, was made King of the west Saxons, and
ruled 17. years. It rained blood.
In his time it rained blood, which falling on men's clothes, appeared like
crosses.

This year 793. The original of Flanders. soleme music in Churches in France.
the west country of Flanders began to be an Earldom. And 16. years before
that Charlemaine of France sent choice scholars to Rome, to learn to sing
according to skill and Art. The first Church that received and preferred
skillful melody was Mets in Lorrayne. Till this time the Frenchmen had but
small skill in Music: but there were no Organs known in France, until the
year 826.

Offa, King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of S. Albones: S. Albones. Offa-dike.
he chased the Britains into Wales, and the utter bounds of Mercia, which is
now called Offa-dike.

The Danes first entered this land. The King poisoned.
The Danes arrived in the Isle called Portland, but by the puissance of
Bithricus, and other Kings of the Saxons: they were compelled to avoid the
land. Bithricus was poisoned by his wife Ethelbura: for which deed the Nobles
ordained that from thenceforth the Kings wives should not be called Queens,
nor suffered to sit with them in places of estate.

Winchcombe.
Kenulph King of Mercia, builded the Abbey of Winchcombe.

802
EGbricus the Saxon, obtained the government of the west Saxons, he tamed the
Welshmen, and vanquished Bertulphus, King of middle England: he reigned 37.
years, and was buried at Winchester.

The Bishopric of Hambro and Breame founded.
This year 812. being the 11. year of the Imperial reign of Charlemaigne,
he founded an Arch-bishopricke in Hambro, and ordained that the Archbishop
and his successor should be Metropolitan of Sclauonia, Denmark, and other
great Provinces of the North, Upon envy thereat, the Danes and others being
mighty in arms after the death of Charlemaigne, assaulted Hambro, and
destroyed it cruelly. Then within a while after was ye Bishopric of Breme
founded. The Archbishop of Ha^bro sought to convert the Danes.

A Delnulphus, the son of Egbricus, 839
began his reign over the most part of England: there came a great Army of the
Pagan Danes, with 550. ships into the mouth of the Thames, and so to London,
and spoled it. London spoiled.
Adelnulphus came against the foresaid Danes, and had of them an honorable
victory.

Adelnulphus sent his son Alfreed to Rome: at which time Leo the fourth
consecrated him King.

Adelnulphus did make the tenth part of his kingdom free from all tribute and
service to the King: he reigned 18. years, and was buried at Stonehing.

ADhelbalde reigned two years and a half: 857
he presumed to his fathers marriage bed, and was buried at Shireburne.

AThelbrict, brother to Adhelbald, took under his dominian, Kent, Southery, 860
and Southsex. Winchester spoiled.
In his time the Pagans spoiled the City of Winchester: he reigned 5. years,
and lies at Shireburne.

ETheldred brother to Atheldrict, 866
was slain by the Danes, when he had reigned 5. years and was buried at
Winborne.

About this time a furious heathen people came from Sweathland, Denmark, and
Norway, and most despitefully possessed that part of France, which ever since
has been called Normandy, The original of Normandy.
of whom it took the name: William the Conqueror is descended of them.

Hinguar and Hubba overcame the Province of the Northumbers. Edmond martyred.
Hinguar sailed into the east part of England, took Edmond, the King of that
Province, being constant in the faith of Christ, who first beaten with bats,
then scourged with whips, yet still called on the name of Jesus Christ, his
adversaries shot his body full of shafts, and stroke off his head.

Chastity before beauty preferred.
Ebb, Abbess of Coldingham, cut off her nose and upper lip, and persuaded all
her sisters to do the like, that they being odible to the Danes, might the
better keep their virgnitie: in despite whereof the Danes burned the Abbey and
Nuns.

872
ALfreede the fourth son of Aethelwolph, received the government of the whole
Realm, and fought many sharp battles against the Pagans. He restored, and
honorably repaired the City of London (after it had been amongst other
Cities destroyed with fire, and the people killed up.) he made it habitable
again. The twenty ninth year and fifth month of his reign, departed this
life, and is buried at Winchester in the Monastery of his foundation. He
founded a Monastery of Monks at Ethelingsey, and another for Nuns at
Shaftsbury: he ordained the hundreds, and tenths: he ordained common Schools
of diverse Sciences in Oxford, and turned the Saxons laws into English,
University in Oxford.
with diverse other books. He divided the twenty four hours of the day and
night into three parts: he spent eight hours in writing, reading, and praying,
eight in provision for his body, and eight in hearing and dispatching the
matters of his subjects.

This year 930. the King of Norway was baptized, and became a devout
Christian, 900 The Danes and Norweies converted.
and his son Otto was Emperor, his eldest daughter married Lewis, the fourth
of that name, King of France. And about the year 962. the people of Denmark
were converted to the Christian faith by Popynus the Popes Chaplain: and
shortly after that, the said Otto made fierce wars upon Denmark, and took
their King Aleadus prisoner, and caused him and all his children to be
baptized.

EDward, surnamed Senior, the son of Alfreed, was anointed King: he
builded. Hertford, another town at Wittham in Essex: he builded a new Town
against the old Town of Nottingham on the south side of the River of Trent,
and made a bridge over the said River between two towns. Thilwall built.
Manchester repaired.
He subdued the King of Scotland and Wales: he also builded Thilwall, and
repaired Manchester: he was buried at Winchester when he had reigned four
and twenty years.

ADelstane, after Edward his father was crowned at Kingstone: he brought this
land into one Monarchy, for he expelled the Danes, and quieted the Welshmen.
He caused them to pay to him yearly for a tribute, twenty pound of gold, 300.
pound of silver. 2500. head of neat, with hounds and hawks to a certain
number. He conquered Scotland: He reigned 15. years, and lies at
Malmesbury. Guy of Warweike
Guy Earl of Warwick side the Danish Giant in Hide meade, nigh unto
Winchester.

940
EDmund, brother to Adelstane, took on him the governance of this realm, who
was slain when he had reigned 5 years, and was buried at Glastenbury.

About this time the Empire of Greece was translated from Constantinople into
Germany, The Translation of the Empire of Greece. The King of Denmark
converted.
in the time of Otto the Emperor. And at this time began the Princes Electors.
And the City Magdeburge in Germany was also founded, read my larger book.

ELdred succeeded Edmund his brother: he took on him but a protector, but
afterward he was crowned at Kingstone: he quieted and kept in due obeisance
the Northumbers and Scots, and exiled the Danes. He reigned 9. years, and was
buried at Winchester.

946
EDwine succeeded his uncle Eldred, he was crowned at Kingstone. In the self
same day of his coronation, he ravished his own kinswoman, 959 The King
deprived.
the wife of a noble man: and afterward slew her husband. Which act, and for
banishing Dunstan, who rebuked him, he became odible to his subjects, and was
deprived when he had reigned 4. years.

EDgar, brother to Edwine, was crowned at Bathe: He was excellent in justice,
and sharp in correction of vices, King crowned at Bath
that never before his days was used less Fellonie by Robbers, or Extortion
by false Officers. He chastised the great negligence, and vicious living of
the Clergy: he prepared a great Navy of ships, which he disposed in three
parts of this Realm, and had Soldiers always ready pressed, and ready against
the incursions of foreign enemies. King Edgar having restored, and new founded
eight and forty Monasteries, which before had been destroyed, Worcester
and confirmed the Monastery of Worcester, which Osnalde then Bishop of
Worcester, by the Kings consent had enlarged, and made the Cathedral Church of
that shire.

Alwinus Alderman, Earl of Eastangle, Ramsey founded.
founded the Abbey of Ramsey.

King Edgar reigned 16. years, and was buried at Glastenbury.

EDward the son of Edgar, 975 The King murdered.
was crowned at Kingstone, by the counsel of his Stepmother Elfreed: he was
traitorously murdered when he had reigned 3. years. Buried at Shaftsbury.

At this time died S. Dunstan.

Etheldred the son of Edgar was crowned at Kingstone: but because he came to
the kingdom by killing his brother, he could never get the good will of his
people. A great part of the city of London was burnt.

At this time (says Sigibert the Historian) flourished Guydo Aretine: he was
the first that taught the Gamuth for prick-song.

King Etheldred erected the Bishopric of Exeter: he caused all the Danes in
England to be slain. In revenge whereof, Swaxe King of Denmark invaded
England with fire and sword. Etheldred died when he had reigned eight and
thirty years, and was buried in Paul's Church in London.

1016 Edmond Ironside.
EDmund the son of Etheldred, succeeded in the kingdom, who was surnamed
Ieronside: and whiles between him and Canutus, striving for the Empire, many
bloody battles were fought, the Kings themselves attempted to fight hand to
hand for the title of the kingdom, in which combat, after long and doubtful
fight, they both being weari^d, England divided, Edricus a traitor. Treason
rewarded.
fell to a covenant to divide the same. Edmund not long after was slain by the
treason of one Ederick of Staton. Edrick making vaunt thereof to Canutus,
Canutus answered, saying: and thou shall die, as well thou art worthy: and
straight ways the traitor was tormented to death, and cast into a ditch.

About this time ended the race of Charlemaigne, and then began the line of
Hugh Caper in France.

1018 The Danes possessed all England. Marriage made upon condition. Canutus
King of 4. Kingdoms.
Canutus the Dane challenging all England to himself, slew his brother Edmond;
he procured to have given him in marriage Emma the Widow of King Etheldred, who
at that time was with Edward, and allured her sons to exile with Duke Richard
in Normandy. She did bear Canutus a son of his own name: by his affinity
and alliance, the Danes became of the more strength and power. His subdued the
Scots, whereby he was King of England, Scotland, Denmark, and Norway. He
founded the Monastery of Saint Edmondes-Burie: S Edmonde bury builded.
when he had reigned twenty years, he deceased, and was buried at Winchester.

HArold Harefoot, 1038
using the force of the Danes that dwelt in England, invaded the Realm, while
his brother Hardicanutus governed in Denmark.

And not being unmindful by whose aid he came to the kingdom, Harald a
tyrant. Emma and her children banished.
rewarded the Danes with great dignity, in this Realm: he constrained his
mother in law Emma to fly and provide for her self: he tormented to death
Alured the son of Emma, which she had by King Etheldred, who then was come
out of Normandy to visit his mother, He reigned 3. years, died at Oxford, and
was buried at Westminster.

HArdicanutus son of Canutus and Emma, 1041
as soon as he had gotten his fathers kingdom, fetched his mother out of
exile. And in revenge of displeasure that was done to her, and of the murder of
his brother Alured, he commanded the carkas of Harold to be dug out of the
earth, and to be thrown into the river of Thames, where, S. Clements Church
without Templebarre.
by a fisher it was taken up, and brought to the Danes, who buried it in a
Churchyard which they had at London. In the midst of his cups he departed this
life, the 3. year of his riagne, and was buried at Winchester.

EDward the son of Etheldred, was crowned at Westchester: he released the
tribute of 4000. pounds, called Dane-gelt, Dane-gele.
which the English people from the beginning of the reign of the Danes, was
compelled to pay their King every year: Edgitha was barren.
he took to wife Edgitha, the daughter of Earl Goodwine: he sent for home
into England his Nephew Edward, the son of King Edmond his brother, who
brought with him Agatha his wife, Edgar, Margaret, and Christian his children,
borne in Pannonia, where he lived but a while. Thus Edward being disappointed,
both of his Nephew and his heir, pronounced Edgar the Outlawes son, to be
heir to the Kingdom: but because this Edgar was within age, by his testament
he made Herold the son of Goodwine Regent, until the young Edgar should be
of age to receive the kingdom: notwithstanding, he immediately after the death
of Edward, pronounced himself King, which thing shortly after brought
destruction both to himself and all England. This Edward reigned 23. years 6.
months and odd days: Lubecke founded.
he was buried at Westminster, which he had newly builded.

1066 This year of our Lord begins here at Christmas William Conqueror
cousin to K. Edward by the mothers side.
This year 1055. Henry the 4. Emperor of that name, and 90. in number began his
reign, and in the 43. year of his reign, the city of Lubeck was founded by a
Pagan. Read my larger book.

HErold gave to young Edgar the Earldom of Oxford: but Harold the King of
Norway assaulted England both by sea and land. Whose attempt whiles Herold of
England prepared to withstand, William Duke of Normandy, came into England with
a well appointed Army, alleging, that by right it was due to him by the gift
of King Edward his kinsman, and also by oath established betwixt Harald and
him. He landed at Pemsey, the 28. of September. Harald slain.
Harald notwithstanding he was bare of men by reason of the battle that he
had fought against the men of Norway; yet hearing of Williams coming, went
straight ways against him. Both armies being brought into array, the battle
was fought, wherein great slaughter of Englishmen was made. And the Normanes
got the victory on the 14. of October. King Harold was shot through the brains
with an arrow, when he had reigned 9. Months, and was buried at Waltham in
Essex, where he had founded a fair College.

THus ends the reign of the Saxons, who had now continued sometimes in
wars with the Britains, then with the Danes, and now with the Normanes the
space of six hundred years.

VERSES.
A thousand six and sixty year,
it was, as we do read:
When that a Comet did appear,
and Englishmen lay dead.
Of Normandy, Duke William then,
to England-ward did sail:
Who conquered Harald with his men,
and brought this land to bale.
WILLIAM CONQVEROVR.
Anno reg. 1
WIlliam, Duke of Normandy, surnamed Conqueror, bastard sonn^ of Robert the 6.
Duke of the Du^chy, and cousin german to King Edward, after the battle at
H^stings, came to London, when with great joy he was received, both of the
Clergy and people, and crowned on Christmas day, which day by the
Historiographers of that time, was accounted the first of the year following,
and so named 1067. 1067
But after the account of England now observed, the year begins not until
the 25. of March.

This year, through the great suite and labor of William the Bishop of
London, King VVlliam granted the Charter and liberties to the same William
Bishop, Wherefore the Mayor and Citizens of London repair to Paul's.
and Godfry of Portgrine, and all the Burges of the same City of London (...)
as large form as they enjoyed the same in the time of Saint Edward, before the
Conquest: (...) reward whereof, the Citizens have fixed (...) his grave, being
in the midst of the great Isle of Saint Paul's Church in London, this Epitaph
following.

TO William, a man famous in wisdom and holiness of life, who first with Saint
Edward the King and Confessor, being familiar, of late preferred to be Bishop
of London, and not long after, for his prudency and sincere fidelity, admitted
to be of Council with the most victorious Prince William, King of England, of
that name the first, who obtained of the same, great and large privileges to
this famous City: the Senate and Citizens of London, to him having well
deserved, have made this.

KIng William besieged Exeter, Exeter besieged.
which the Citizens and other English men held against him.

King William gave to Robert Cummin, An, reg, 2. 1068 Earl of Northumberland
slain.
the Earldom of Northumberland, against whom the men of the country did
arise, and slew him with nine hundred of his men, and King William came
afterward upon them, and slew them every one.

AG^lricus Bishop of Durham, An, reg, 3. 1069
being accused of treason, was imprisoned at Westminster. The Englishmen that
were fled out of England, having Edgar to be their captain, returned out of
Scotland, and suddenly set upon the Garrisons that King William had set at
York, put them to ^^ight, slew them, possessed the City, and pronounced
Edgar to be King; but not long after, King William came with a great army and
recovered the City, constraining Edgar to return again into Scotland.

Such a dearth was in England, Ann, reg. 4.
that men did eat horses, cats, dogs, and man's flesh.

1070 Monasteries rifled. Ann, reg. 5.
King William bereued all the Monasteries and Abbeyes of England of their gold
and silver, sp^ring neither Chalice nor Shrine.

1071 Ann. reg. 6. Castle of Ledes and of Oxford.
The castle of Ledes in Kent was builded by Creueceur, and the Castle of Oxford
by Robert O^^ley, two noble men that came into England with William the
Conqueror.

1072 York subject to Canterbury. Ann. reg. 7.
In a Counsel holden at Windsore, (...) Province of the Church of Canterbury
(...) the Church of York, was examined, and approved.

1073 Ann. reg. 8.
King William with a great power inuad^ Scotland, and forced Malcolme to do him
homa^ and fealty.

1074 Married Priest removed.
Gregory the seaueth Pope, excommunicated all committers of Simony, and removed
married Priests from executing of diui^ Service, whereof arose great troubles
in E^^^land.

1075
King William caused a Castle to be builded a Durham, and Earl Waltheothus of
Northu^^berland to be beheaded at Winchester: he says into Britain, and
besieged the Castle of Dole^, but prevailed not.

Bishop murdered. An. reg. 10
Walter Bishop of Durham, bought of King William the Earldom of
Northumberland, wherein he used such cruelty, that the inhabitants slew him.

1076 An. reg. 11
The earth was hard frozen from the kalende^ of November, to the midst of
April.

1077
Upon Palm Sunday about noone, appeare^ a blashi^g Star near unto the Sun.
An, reg, 12.


Malcolme King of Scots, waffed Northumberland, flew many and took a great
prey. 1068 An, reg, 13
This year King William builded the Tower of London.

Thurstone Abbot of Glassenbury, 1079 Murder.
in his Church caused three Monks to be slain, and eighteen men to be
wounded, that their blood ran from the Altar ^awne the steps.

This year was a great wind on Chrstmas day, a great earthquake and roaring
out of the earth the 6. of April. An, reg, 15 1081


Henry Earl Ferrers founded a Church within his Castle of Tutsbury. An, reg,
16 Tutsbury.


Alwine Child, a Citizen of London, 1082 Bermondsey.
founded the Monastery of Saint Saviors at Bermondsey in Surrey.

King William caused enquiry to be made, An, reg, 17 1083 Acres of land
numbered, An, reg, 18
how many Acres of land were sufficient for one plough by the year: how many
beasts to tilling of one hide, how many Cities, Castles, Farms, Granges,
Towns, Rivers, Marshes, and Woods, what rent they were by year, and how many
Knights or Soldiers were in every shire: all which was put in writing, and
remained at Westminster.

King William took homage and oath of allegiance of all England, 1084 A
greatter
and took of every hide of land six shillings, and sailed into Normandy.

When the Normanes had accomplished their pleasure upon the Englishmen, An,
reg, 19 1085
so that there was no Noble man of that Nation left to bear any rule over
them: it was brought to pass, the for the space of more then thirty miles,
good pro^fitable corn ground was turned into a chase (...) wild beasts. New
forest Bishop at Lincoln.
Remingus Bishop of Dorcheste^ removed his sea to Lincoln, where he builded
new Church.

An, reg. 10. 1086 water flood Battle Abbey, and Selby Abbey. S. Martine be
grand.
There was a great water flood, so that hills we^^ made soft and consumed, and
with their fall ouer^whelmed many villages.

King William builded Battle Abbey in S^sex, another at Selby in Yorkshire,
the th^^ at Caen in Normandy, in which he was buri^ed. He gave great
privileges to Saint Marth^^le graund in London. Paul's Church in London burnt.

An, reg. 21. 1086 bo^^s found
In a province of Wales called Rose, (...) found the Sepulcher of Gawen, upon
the Se^^shore, who was sisters son of Arthur the great King of Britain,
being in length fourteen so King William being at Roan in Normand^ went with a
great Army into France, spoyli^ all things as he passed. Last of all he burned
(...) City of Meaur, with our Lady Church, a^ two Anchorits that was enclosed
there. The Ki^^ cheared his men to feed the fire, and came hi^ self so near,
that with the heat of his harne^ he got a disease. Also the Kings horse
leaping o^uer a ditch, did burst the inner parts of the King with the pain
whereof he was sore afflict^^ and returned to Roan, where shortly after (...)
ended his life, King William died,
the ninth day of September, (...) the year of our Lord 1087. When he had
raig^ned twenty years, eight months, and sixteen days. He was buried at
Caen in Normandy, and had issue by Matild his wife, daughter to Baldwin Earl
of Flanders, Robert Curthose, unto whom he gave Normandy, Richard that died
young, William Rufus to whom he gave England, King Will^^am had 4: sons, and
5. daughters.
and Henry, to whom he gave his wives inheritance and treasure: Daughters,
Cicely Abbess of Caen, Constance wife to Stephen Earl of Bloys, Margaret
promised to Harold King of England, and Elienor betrothed to Alfonso King of
Galicia.

WILLIAM Rufus.
WIlliam Rufus, An, reg. 1.
the third son of William Conqueror, began his reign the ninth day of
September, in the year of our Lord 1087. He was variable, inconstant,
covetous, and cruel: he burdened his people with unreasonable taxes, and what
he thus got, he prodigally spent in great banqueting, and sumptuous apparel.

Otho Bishop of Bayon, and Earl of Kent, with his brother Robert, Earl of
Mortaine and Hereford, and almost all the Nobles of England, The nobles rebel.
raised war against King William, and would have had Robert his eldest
brother to be King: but William by fair words pacifying some of the
principal conspirators, besieged the residue in the Ca^stell of Rochester, And
lastly overcame them.

An, reg, 2. 1089 Hospital of S. John and Harbaldowne. An, reg, 3.
Lanfranke Archbishop of Canterbury decea^sed, he renewed the great Church of
Canterbury, he repaired the walls of that City, bui^^ded two Hospitals, the
one of Saint John, the other at Harbaldowne. He restored the Church of
Rochester.

1090 K. William made war against his brother.
King William Making war against his bro^ther Robert Duke of Normandy, at
length agre^^ment was made between them, that if one (...) them died without
issue, the other should succe^^ in the inheritance.

Scots did homage.
Malcolme King of Scots, did homage to King William.

A great tempest fell on Saint Lukes day, specially in Winchcombe, where a
great part of the Steeple was overthrown. And in London, the wind ouerturned
606. 606. houses ouerturned An, reg, 4.
houses, and the roofe^ Bow Church in Cheap, wherewith some persons were slain.

1091 Newcastle. Sarisbury.
King William builded the new Castle upon Tine. Osmond Bishop of Sarisbury,
founded the Cathedral Church of Sarisbury.

In England fell a wonderful abundance (...) rain, An, reg, 5. 1092 great
frost.
and after insued so great frost, that Horses and Carts passed commonly over
great Rivers, which when it thawed, the Ice brake down many great bridges.

King of Scots slain Bishoprike at Bath.
Malcolme the King of Scots coming into England, was suddenly slain with his
son and heir, by Robert Mowbrey, Earl of Northumberland. John Bishop of
Wells, by nointing the Kings hands, transposed the Bishops sea to Bath.

King William builded again the city of Carlisle, which was destroyed by the
Danes 200. An, reg. 6. 1093 Carlisle repaired and the castle builded. Famine.
years before: he also builded a castle there, and out of the South parts of
England, sent men to inhabit there. This year was a great famine, and so
great a mortality that the quick were scant able to bury the dead.

The Welshmen spoiled the city of Gloucester, Welshmen won Anglesey. Ann, reg.
7:
with a part of Shrewesbury, and won the Isle of Anglesey.

The Bishopric of Thetford was translated to Norwich.

King William with a great power entered Wales, 1094 Bishoprick^ at Norwich K.
Willam invaded Wales.
not being able to follow the Welchmen amongst the hills, he builded two
Castles in the borders, and returned.

Great preparation was made by the Christians to go against the infidels at
Jerusalem, An, reg, 8.1095 Going to Jerusalem. 1096
Peter the Hermit being their first leader, and after Godfrey of Bullen.

Robert Duke of Normandy, An, reg. 9. Normandy pawned. An, reg. 10. 1097
took his journey toward Jerusalem, and laid Normandy to gage to his brother
King William for 6666. pound of silver.

All the land that sometime belonged to Earl Goodwin, by breaking in of the
sea, Goodwin sands. An, reg. 11. 1099
was covered with sands, and there is yet called Goodwin sands.

King William in Normandy gave himself to wars, so that with exactions and
tributes, he did not only shave, but flea the people of England.

Jerusalem won.
The Christians took the City of Jerusalem, placing there a King and a
Patriarch.

The Conquest of Jerusalem by Godfrey of Bollen.
THe fifteenth of July, 1098. after thirty six days siege, the City of
Jerusalem was yielded unto Godfrey of Bollen, Duke of Lorane, chief leader of
the Christian Army against the Sarazens, to recover the Holy land: he was
accompanied with three Kings, and diverse other Christian Princes: namely,
Robert Duke of Normandy, eldest son unto William the Conqueror: he had an
hundred thousand Soldiers, all of them marked with the sign of the Cross.

This renowned and victorious Prince, before he entered into Arms, morgaged
his Dukedom unto the Bishop of Liege, for great sums of money, wherewith he
furnished himself in this expedition: he was chosen King of Jerusalem, but
would not be crowned with a Crown of gold, because our Savior Christ was
crowned with a crown of thorns. This Christian Conquest was performed about
five hundredth years after the Persians had got possession of Jerusalem and the
Holy land: Peter the Hermit, who had seen and felt the Turkish outrages,
took great pains in going to all Christian Princes, to contract them unto
this service. Pope Urban the second, in the Council of Cleremount, was also
very forward in this business. King Godfrey dyed of a fever, having reigned
one year, and was buried near unto the holy Sepulcher: after him succeeded
his brother Baldwine, and reigned eighteen years: he made great wars upon
the enemies of our faith. After the death of King Godfrey. Jerusalem continued
fourscore and eight years under Christian obedience, and then became subject
unto Turkish tyranny.

After King William was come out of Normandy, he kept his Court at Westminster,
in the new Hall, and hearing men say it was too big, Words of William Rufus.
he answered, This Hall is not big enough by one half.

King William being a hunting, word was brought him that his people were
besieged in Maine: he forthwith took shipping, though he were vehemently
pet^waded to the contrary, for that there was at that time a great tempest, to
whom he answered, he never heard that any King was drowned. At this time he
got more honor then ever he did in all his life: for he chased his enemies,
and returned with victory.

In the Summer, An, reg, 1^. 1100 K. William slain.
blood sprang out of the earth at ^inchamsteed in Barkeshire.

King William on the morrow after Lammas day-hunting in the new forest, Sir
Walter Tirel shooting at a Dear unawares hit the King in the breast, that he
fell down dead, and never spoke word: his men, and especially that Knight, gat
them away: but some came back again, and laid his body upon a Colyars cart,
which one silly l^^ne beast did draw to the City of Winchester, where he was
buried. He reigned twelve years, 11. months lacking eight days. He gave
unto the Monks called de Caritate in Southwarke, the great new Church of Saint
Savior of Barmondes eye, and also Barmondes eye it self. He also founded a
good Hospital in the city of York, called Saint Leonards, for the
sustentation of the poor.

Henry Bewclarke.
An, reg, 1.
HEnry brother to William Rufus, and the first of that name, for his learning
called Bewclarke, borne at Salby began his reign the 5. of August, the year
of our Lord 1100. He restored the state of the Clergy, Measures reformed.
Vlna, now called a yard.
assuaged the grievous paiments, reduced again S. Edwards laws, reformed the
old untrue measures, and made a measure by the length of his arm, which was
called Vlna.

S. John's by Smithfield. Clarkenwell.
Jordan Brise: Baron, founded the house of St, John of Jerusalem, near unto
London in Smithfield. The same Jordan gave 14. acres of ground lying in the
field next adjoining to Clarkenwell, to build thereon a house for Nuns.

1101. An reg, 2.
Robert, Duke of Normandy, the Kings eldest brother, which was now returned
from Jerusalem, made war for the crown of England: but by meditation, peace
was made, on condition that Henry should pay 3000. marks yearly to Duke
Robert, and if the one died without issue, Winchester and Gloucester burnt.
the longer liver should inherit: Winchester and Gloucester was burnt.

The Cathedral Church of Norwich was founded by Robert Bishop of Norwich. 1102
Norwich. An, reg, 3. Hospital of S. Bartholomew.
The priory and Hospital of Saint Bartholomew in Smithfield was founded by a
Minstrell named Reior.

Robert Duke of Normandy coming into England, 1103 An, reg, 4. Younger brother
beguileth the elder.
through the subtilty of King Henry his younger brother released to him the
tribute of 3000. marks of silver.

Great malice was kindled between the two brethren, Robert and Henry, 1104 An,
reg, 5.
whereupon deadly war in sued. There appeared about the Sun, four circles,
and a blazing star.

Endo, sewer to King Henry, 1105 An, reg, 6. S. John's in Colchester
founded the Monastery of S. John in Colchester.

Robert, Duke of Normandy, came to his brother, and friendly desired him to
bear brotherly love toward him: 1106 Elder brother seeks favor of the
younger.
But King Henry feeling his conscience accusing him for obtaining the kingdom
by defrauding of his eldest brother, and fearing men more then God, first he
reconciled the Nobles of the Realm with fair promises, and then pursued his
brother into Normandy, where between them were many sore battles fought, but
at the last, the valiant man Robert was taken. The first Canons entered into the
Church of our Lady in Southwarke, called Saint Mary Ouery, Saint Mary Oueries.
founded by William Pountlarge Knight, and William Dancis, Normans.

1107 Ann. reg. 8.
King Henry returning into England, brought with him his brother Robert, and
William of Morion, and put them in perpetual prison, from whence shortly after
Duke Robert deceiving his keepers, sought to escape, but he was taken, and by
his brothers commandment, he had his eyes put out, and then kept straighter
till his dying day.

The Priory of the Trinity in London builded.
The Church of the holy Trinity without Algate in London, was founded by
Mathild the Queen.

A great part of Flaunders was drowned by breaking in of the sea, 1108 Flemings
sent into Wales. Ann. reg. 9.
which caused many Flemings to come into England, at length by the kings
appointment, they took upon them the possession of Rosse, a province in Wales.

1109 An reg. 10 Tax. Ely a Bishoprike.
Henry Emperor of Rome, required to have Maude the Kings daughter in marriage,
which was granted, and the King took three shillings of every hide of land
through England. This King translated the Abbey of Ely into a Bishopric.

1110 An. reg. 11 Castles as Bristow and Cardife. S. James at Bristow.
King Henry made Robert his bastard son, the first Earl of Gloucester, who
after builded the Castles of Bristow and Cardife, with the Priory of S. James
in Bristow.

King Henry went into Normandy to make war against the Earl of Angion, 1111
An. reg. 12.
and spoiled the whole country.

This year was a great mortality of men, 1112 An, reg, 13
and murren of beasts.

The city of Worcester was burnt. 1113 An, reg, 14.
The tenth of October the river of Medway, by no small number of miles, 1114 An,
reg, 15 Medway and Thames dried up.
did so fail of water that in the midst of the channel the smallest vessels
and boats could not pass. The self same day the Thames did suffer the like
lack of water, for between the Tower of London and the bridge, not only with
horse, but also a great number of men and children, did wade over on foot.
1115 Chichester burnt.

A blazing star.




Chichester was burnt, many storms, and a blazing star.

In March was exceeding lightning, and in December thunder and hail, 1116
and the Moon at both times seemed to be turned into blood. 1117


Maude the Queen of England dyed, An, reg, 18 1118 Matildes hospital. An,
reg, 19 Knights of the temple.
and was buried at Westminster, she builded an Hospital near unto London,
without Holborn, which now is the parrish Church of Saint Giles in the field.

The order of the Templars Knights began. Many sore battles were fought in
France and Normandy, between Henry King of England, 1119 An, reg, 20.
and Lodowicke the French King. 1112 An, reg, 21 The Kings children drowned.


King Henry having tamed the Frenchmen, and pacified Normandy, returned into
England, in which voyage William Duke of Normandy, and Richard his son, and
Mary his daughter, An, reg, 22. 1121
Richard Earl of Chester, and his wife, 1122
with many noble men, and to the number of 160. persons were drowned.

Lybussa Queen of Bohemia.
Lybussa daughter of Cracus the second King of Bohemia: for a certain space
reigned as Queen over them: and albeit she ministered justice indifferently,
yet there grew a great disdain and malecontentment amongst all sorts of
people, that men should be governed and directed by women: and thereupon was
spread a general voice, that forthwith they would have a King. And to appease
the peoples discontent, or as some think, for her own pleasure, she married
a Peasant, called Primislaus, who governed the Bohemians, and was the first
that builded walls and rampires about the City of Prague, in the year 995.
After the death of the said Lybussa, there presently start up one of her
handmaids, called Valasque, a lusty Lady, of wondrous Amazonian boldness,
Valasque with her army of Ladies.
who very cunningly caused an assembly of all the chief Ladies, and others of
note, unto whom she made an eloquent Oration, and amongst other things, she
spoke as follows: My most noble and worthy Ladies, we have lost our Queen
and Mistress, whose high spirit could never admit, that either we or our
Sex, should in any sort be subject unto men: if therefore for the ever freeing
of our selves and our heirs, you now please to lend me your strong hand, I
here promise and assure you, that we will have the supremacy and gouerntment.

This speech prevailed so far, that instantly the women took oath, and
joined their hearts and hands to effect their wills against men, and in that
fury flew all the men they met: then they entered into Arms, and for seven
years space, maintained wars very stoutly, and like valiant Amazones: all
which notwithstanding in the end they were suppressed by Prym^slaus, partly by
force, partly by policy, gifts and fair words. Read Naucler.

King Henry married Adelisia, An. reg, 23. Gloucester burnt.
the Duke of Louans daughter.

The City of Gloucester was burnt.

Henry Earl of Warwick, An, reg, 24 Warwick with the College.
and Margaret his wife, founded the College of Saint Mary in the town of
warwick.

Waleran Earl of Mellent was taken in Normandy by King Henry, 1124
and he with many others were imprisoned at Roan. An, reg, 25 Coiners punished.


The King caused all the Coiners of England to have their privy members cut
off, 1126 An, reg, 26 The Empres returned into England.
and also their right hand, because they had corrupted the Coin.

Henry the Emperor being dead, Maude the Empress returned into England.

Richard Bishop of London, 1127 An, reg, 28. S. Oseth. An. reg, 29.
founded the Monastery of S. Oseth in Essex.

At this time men had such a pride in their hair, that they contended with
women in length of hair. 1128 Men ware hair like women.


King Henry held a Council at London, wherein it was granted him correction of
the Clergy: so the King took infinite sums of money of Priests, 1129 An,
reg, 30.
and suffered them to do what they would.

1130 An, reg, 31.
King Henry gave his daughter the Empresit, unto Geffrey Plantagenet Earl of
Angiou.

1131 An, reg, 32 Rochester burnt.
The City of Rochester was sore defaced with fire.

The King made a Bishopric at Carlisle.

1132 An, reg, 33 Carlisle a Bishoprike. London burnt.
Maude the Empress did bear unto Ieffery Plantagenet Earl of Angiou, a
son, and named him Henry.

A great fire beginning at Gilbert Beckets house in west Cheap, consumed a
great part of London from thence to Algate.

Henry Bloys Bishop of Winchester, builded the Hospital of S. 1133 An, reg,
34. Worcester burnt.
Cross near unto Winchester.

Worcester was sore defaced with fire.

Maude the Empress brought forth a son named Ieffery. 1134 An, reg. 35.
Short thigh died.
Robert Cortoise or Short-thigh King Henry's brother died in the Castle of
Cardife, and was buried at Gloucester.

King Henry remaining in Normandy, deceased the first day of December, 1135 An,
reg, 36. Death of K Henry.
Anno 1135. when he had reigned 35. years, 4. months: his bowels, brains and
dies were buried at Roan, the rest of his body being powdered with salt, and
wrapped in Bulls hides, was buried at Reading, an Abbey of his own foundation.
He founded a Priory at Dunstable, and builded the Castle of Windsort, with a
College there.

KING STEPHEN.
STephen Earl of Beloine, son of the Earl of Blois, and Adala, An, reg, 1.
William Conquerours daughter, Nephew to King Henry the first, claimed the
kingdom the second day of December, Anno 1135. and was consecrated at
Westminster on the 26. of December. This was a noble man and hardy, of passing
comely of favor and personage: he excelled in martial policy, gentleness, and
liberality toward all men: although he had continual war, yet he did never
burden his commons with exactions.

Fire which began at London Stone, Fire at London.
consumed eastward to Algate, and westward to S. Paul's Church.

King Stephen besieged the castle of Exceter a long time, 1136 Exceter besieged.
which Balwine de Rivers held against him: but at length when they within the
Castle, wanted necessary things to live by, An, reg, 2.
they compounded.

King Stephen passed the sea, 1137
to subdue Normandy, where he took many cities and strong Castles.

Rochester was burnt with all the city. Rochester S. Peter's in York.


The Archbishops sea in York, S. Martins without the walls, and the Hospital
with 39. Churches were burnt. Saint Peter's Church at Bath, The city of Bath
burnt An, reg, 3.
and all the city was burnt.

1138 An, reg, 4. Battle of the sta^dard
The Nobles sent for Maude the Empress, promising her the possession of the
Realm, according to their oath made to her. David King of Scots, purposing to
recover the Crown of England for the Empress, invaded Northumberland, when by
Thurstane Archbishop of York, the Scots had an overthrow, and were slain
above ten tho^^sand.

1139 The Empress returned into England. An, reg, 5.
Robert Earl of Gloucester returned into England with his sister the Empress,
and a great A^my, which arrived at Portsmouth.

Robert Earl of Gloucester, with a great power, invaded the town of
Nottingham, and spoiled it the Townsmen were taken, 1140 Nottingham spoiled.
slain, or burnt in the Churches whereunto they fled.

This year 1140. died Johannes de temporibus, he was Page to Charlemaigne.

An, reg, 6. 1141 Lincoln be sieged. K. Stephen taken. An, reg, 7. The Empres
obtained the Crown. Earl of Gloucester taken. K. Stephen restored.
King Stephen besieged Lincoln against Rainulph Earl of Chester, but Rainulph
Ear of G^^^cester, came with a great power and rescued the same, chased the
Kings Army, and took him prisoner, he was had to Gloucester, and after to
Bristow. The Empress rejoicing at this he^ good hap, departed from Gloucester,
and came to Cicester, from thence to Winchester, where the Crown of the Realm
was delivered into her hands.

Earl Robert being pursued, was taken a Sobbrige with Earl Warren, and many
other: at length through meditation, peace was concluded, that the King should
be delivered to his kingdom, and the Earl to his liberty.

Gaufride de Mandeuil, Earl of Essex, Abbeys of Walden and Stratford.
founded the Abbey of Walden, and Sir William de Mountfitchet, founded the
Abbey of Stratford Langthorne.

King Stephen hearing the Empress to lie at Oxford, 1142
with a great power came and besieged her a two months space. Earl Robert,
with Henry Son to the Empress, landed at Warham, where he besieged the
Castle, Warham Castle besieged.
which was defended by Hubert de Lucie, who at length yielded the same.

In the mean time the Empress seeing that she was void of help, The Empres
flies.
clothing her self and her company all in white, upon a night went over the
Thames a foot, which was then hard frozen: she went to Wallingford, and the
Castle of Oxford was yielded to the King. An, reg, 8. 1143


William of Ypre founded Boxley Abbey in Kent. An, reg, 9. Boxley.


King Stephen took Ieffery Maundeuile, Earl of Essex at Saint Albones, 1144
An, reg, 10
which Ieffery could not be at liberty, till he had delivered the Tower of
London, with the Earls of Waldon and Plecy. When the Earl was thus spoiled of
his holds, he took the Church of Ramsey, and fortified it. 1145 Wallingford
besieged. An, reg, 11


King Stephen besieged Wallingford, but could not prevail. The Earl of
Chester was reconciled to the King, and was at the siege with him, 1146 An,
reg, 12.
but shortly after when he came to the Court, the King being at Northampton,
he was taken and kept prisoner till he had rendered the Castle of Lincoln, and
other fortresses.

1147 An, reg, 13. The Empress went into Normandy.
Earl Robert deceased, and was buried at Bristow.

The Empress being wearied with the discord of the English nation, went over
into Normandy.

1148 An, reg. 14. S. Katerins.
Queen Matild builded the hospital of S. Katherine by the Tower of London for
poor brethren and sisters.

Henry the Empress son, went to David King of Scots, of whom he was joyfully
received, and made Knight.

1150 An, reg, 16.
England was full of trouble and war, set forth to fire and rapine, through
the discord betwixt Stephen, 1151
and certain Earls that took part with Henry.

Ieffery Plantagenet Earl of Angiou, and Duke of Normandy deceased, and left
his son Hen^^ his heir.

About this time died Gratianus: he compos^^ the great Decretals.

Henry Duke of Normandy married Elion^^ whom Lewis King of France had divorced
from him, An, reg, 17 1152
and had by her a son named William.

Queen Maude deceased, and was buried^ Feuersham.

The King commanded the Nobles to meet a^ Winchester, where the Duke being
receiue^ with great joy the King in sight of all men adopted him his son, An,
reg, 18. Norwich increased. 1153
and confirmed to him the principality of England.

The Duke received him in place of a father, granting to him all the days of
his life to enjoy the name and seat of the King.

Duke Henry came with the King to Oxford, An, reg, 19. K. Stephen adopted K.
Henry.
where the Earls and Barons, by the Kings commandment swear fealty to Duke
Henry, saving the Kings honor so long as he lived.

King Stephen died the 25. of October, 1154 K Stephen died.
when he had reigned eighteen years, ten months, and odd days. He founded
the Abbeies of Cogshall in Essex, of Furnes in Lancastershire, and Feuersham in
Kent, where his body was buried.

Henry the second.
HEnry the son of Ieffery Plantagenet, and Maude the Empress, An, reg, 1.
began his reign over this Realm of England, the 17. day of December, and was
crowned the the same day, in the year of our Lord 1154. he was somewhat red of
face, short of body, and therewith fat, well learned, noble in chiualry, wise
in counsel, steadfast of promise, and a wedlock breaker.

William of Ipres, 1155
and all the Flemings that had flocked into England, fearing the indignation of
the new king, departed the land, and the castles that had been builded to pill
the rich, and spoil the poor, were by the Kings Commandment thrown down.

Queen Elianor did bear a son, called Henry after his father.

Line of the Saxons repaired.
King Henry went into Normandy, where with long siege he took diverse Castles.

King Henry with an Army went against the Welshmen, An, reg, 2. 1156
where he felled their woods, fortified the Castle of Rutland, and reedified
the Castle (...) Basingwirke. An, reg, 3. 1157


An, reg, 4: K. Henry reedified Castles. 1158
Queen Elianor brought forth a son named Ieffery. A new coin was made in
England.

King Henry took escuage of the Englishmen, the sum whereof grew to 124.
thousand pounds of silver.

An, reg, 5. 1159
Henry the Kings son, not seven years old, married Margar^t the French
Kings daughter, not two years old. An, reg, 6. 1160


An, reg, 7.
Thomas the Kings Chancellor, was elect^ Archbishop of Canterbury.

1161 An, reg, 8. Publicanes whipped. An, reg, 9. 1162
There came into England thirty Germans as well men as women, who called
themselu^^ Publicanes, they denied Matrimony, Baptism and the Lords Supper.
Being apprehended, the King caused they should be marked with an ho^^ Iron in
the forehead, and whipped them, an^ that no man should succor them. Thus being
whipped, and thrust out in the winter, they di^ for cold. An, reg, 10. 1163


London bridge was new made of timber, (...) Peter, a Priest of Colchurch.
London bridge made of timber.
Malcolme the Scottish King, and Kefus Prince of Southwales, did homage to King
Henry, and his son Henry.

A Council was holden at Claringdon in presence of the King and the
Archbishops, Bishops, 1164 An. reg. 11
Lords, Barons, etc. wherein was by their oaths confirmed many ordinances.
Thomas, Archbishop of Canterbury, being sworn to the same, shortly after sore
repented, and fled the Realm.

A great earthquake in Ely, Norfolk, 1165 An. reg. 12. Earthquake
and Suffolk, so that it overthrew them that stood upon their feet, and
caused the bells to ring.

Queen Elianor brought forth a son named John.

The war was received betwixt the King of England, 1166 An. reg, 13.
and the French King for the City of Toulouse.

Conan Earl of little Britain died, 1167 An, reg. 14.
and left his heir, a daughter named Constance, 1168 An, reg, 15
which he had by the King of Scots sister: which Constance King Henry married
to his son Geffery.

Robert de Boscue, Earl of Leicester, founded the Monasteries of Gerendon of
Monks, Gerendon. Leicester, and Eaton. An, reg, 16. Henry the Kings son
crowned. 1169
of Leiceister of Canons regular, and Eaton of Nuns, was founded by Amicia
his wife.

King Henry caused his son Henry to be crowned, as he thought to the
quietness of himself and his realm: but it proved otherwise.

Thomas Becket, Archbishop of Canterbury, the eighteenth day of December was
slain by William Tracie, Reignold Fitzs Vrse, Hugh Moruil, and Richard Briton
Knights: Nicholas Bree^espeare an Englishman, K. Henry Lord of Ireland. An reg,
18. 1172
who was chosen Pope by the name of Adrian the 4. He granted the Regiment of
Ireland to the King of England, whereupon King Henry took ship at Pembroke,
and sailed thither.

An reg, 19. 1173
King Henry the son, with his wife the French Kings daughter, were both together
crowned at Winchester.

King Henry the elder was assoiled of the death of Thomas the Archbishop, upon
his oath made that he was not privy to it.

King Henry married the eldest daughter of He^bert Earl Morton unto his son
John.

An, reg, 20. 1174 Leicester burnt. King of Scots taken. Canterbury burnt.
King Henry the elder returning into England, in short time subdued his rebels.
The city of Leicester by his commandment was burnt, the walls and castle
rased, and the inhabitants dispersed into other cities. The King of Scots was
taken by King Henry, led into Normandy, where he compounded for his ransom.
Christ's Church in Canterbury was burned.

An, reg, 21. 1175
King Henry the son, with his brethren, and others, were reconciled to King
Henry the Father.

An, reg, 22 1176
The Kings of England both father and son went together to visit the tomb of
Thomas late Archbishop of Canterbury. An, reg, 23. 1177
The stone bridge over the Thames at London was began to be founded. A
Cardinal and the Archbishop of Canterbury, gave 1000. Marks toward the same
foundation. There chanced some discord betwixt the Kings of England and France,
about the marriage of Richard Earl of Poitow, An, reg, 24 1178
with the French Kings daughter.

Richard Lucie, the Kings Iusticiar, Lesnes. An, reg, 25 1179
laid the foundation of the conuentuall Church in a place which is called
Lesnes, in the Territory of Rochester.

The City of York was burned.

The Church of St. Andrew in Rochester, An, reg. 26.
was consumed with fire.

The Usurers of England grievously punished. 1180 An, reg, 27. Usurers punished.


Geffery the Kings bastard son, resigned the Bishopric of Lincoln, and was
made the Kings Chancellor. 1181 An, reg, 28.


Robert Harding, a Burges of Bristow, to whom king Henry gave the Barony of
Barkeley, 1182
builded the Monastery of Saint Augustines in Bristow.

They of Aquitane hated their Duke Richard for his cruelty, and were minded to
drive him out of his Earldom of Poitow, and Dukedom of Aquitane, An, reg,
29. 1183 An, reg, 30 K. Henry the younger deceased.
and transpose those estates to his brother King Henry the younger: but all men
looking for victory to the young King, he fell miserably sick, and died, and
was buried at Roan.

King Henry sent many men of war into Wales: 1184
for the Welshmen emboldened by the Kings absence, had slain Many Englishmen.

The Abbey of Glastenbury burnt. Glastenbury burnt. An, reg, 31.


Heraclius Patriarch of Jerusalem came to king Henry, Heraclius the patriark
desiring him of aid against the Turk: but the King because of the cruelty of
his sons, was counseled not to leave his dominion in hazard, and to go
far off. This Patriarch dedicated the new Temple, then builded in the west
part of London.

This year 1186. The city of Paris was paued, whose streets until this
time, lay as rudely as London streets, which were not all paued in four
hundred years after: Paris paued London paued. Lubecke destroyed. The cities
take warning. Tile or slate generally used in the Cities.
and the north Churchyard of Paul's, otherwise called the Close, and diverse
other streets in London were not paued until the reign of Queen Elizabeth.

In the year 1246. the City of Luberke was quite consumed with fire, whose
misfortune made Paris, London, and other Cities to cover their houses with
tile or slate, especially if they stood close together, and not to use any
thatch, which until then was usual.

The Empres deceased.
Maude the Empress, mother to King Henry the second deceased, she founded the
Abbey of Bordesley.

An, reg, 32 1180 Geffery earl of Britain dies.
Geffery Earl of Britain the Kings son died, and was buried at Paris, he left
issue two daughters, which he had by Constance (daughter of Conan Earl of
Britain) who also at this time of his death was great with child, and after
brought a son named Arthur.

A great earthquake threw down many buildings: among the which the Cathedral
Church at Lincoln was rent in pieces, Chichester burn.
Chichester City was burnt.

Near unto Orford in Suffolk, An, reg, 33. 1151 A fish like a man.
certain Fishers took in their nets a fish having the shape of a man: which
fish was kept by Barthelmew de Glanuile, Custos of the Castle of Orford, in
the same Castle by the space of six months, and more for a wonder: he spoke
not a word: all manner of meats he gladly did eat, but most greedily raw fish.
At length he stole away to the sea.

The town of Beuerly with the Church of St. An, reg, 34. 1189 Beuerly burnt.
John there was burnt.

Phillip the French King required that his sister which had been kept in England
22. An, reg, 35. 1190
years might be restored unto Earl Richard as his wife, and Earl Richard
desired the same: but King Henry denied this request, and so they got them to
armor. The French King and Earl Richard pursued the King of England so hard,
Death of Henry the second.
that he was forced to yield all the requests, as well of the French King, as
of his son Richard. This was done at Gisors, and so departing came to Zafe,
where he fell sick, and departed this life, the sixth day of July, in the
year of our Lord 1189. when he had reigned 24. years, 7. months, lacking
11. days, and was buried at Fonteuerald, in the Monastery of Nuns by him
founded.

Richard Coeurdelyon.
RIchard the first, for his valiantness, surnamed Coeurdelion, second son to
Henry the second, began his reign and was crowned the third of September 1186.
He was big of stature, with a merry countenance: he commanded that no Jews
nor women should be at his Coronation, for fear of enchantments. For breaking
of which commandment many were slain. Elianor the old, who at the
commandment of her husband, had been long kept close prisoner, was now set at
liberty.

King Richard gave over the castles of Berwick and Rokesburgh to the Scottish
King, for the sum of ten thousand pound: he also sold to the Bishop of Durham
his own Province for a great piece of money, and created him Earl of the
same. He also feigned to have lost his signet, and then caused to be
proclaimed, that whosoever would safely enjoy those things which before time
they had enrolled, should come to the new seal. He gave his brother John the
Provinces of Nottingham, Devonshire and Cornwall.

Outlaws in England.
In this time were many Robbers and Outlawes, among whom Robert Hood and little
John remained in the woods, despoiling and robbing the goods of the rich.

The said Robert entertained an hundred tall men and good Archers with such
spoils as he got: upon who^ four hundred men were they never so strong, durst
not give the onset. Poor men's goods he spared, abundantly relieuing them
with that which he got from Abbeys, and houses of rich Earls.

This year the Citizens of London obtained to be governed by two Bayliffes or
Shriues, and a Mayor.

Henry Cornhill, Shriue. Richard Reynery. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin, Fitz
Leostane Mayor.
King Richard betook the guiding of this land to William Longshanke, Bishop of
Ely, 1190
Chancellor of England, and transported over into Normandy.

The two Kings of England and of France met at Towers, Voyage to Jerusalem.
and from thence set forward on their journey toward Jerusalem.

The Jews of Norwich, Saint Edmonsbury, Lincoln, Stamford, and Linne, were
robbed. And at York to the number of five hundred, beside women and children,
entered a tower of the castle, which the people assailing, the Jews cut the
throats of their wives and children, and cast them over the walls on the
Christians heads, the residue they locked up, and burnt both the house and
themselves.

William Bishop of Ely, Ditch about the Tower of London.
builded the outer wall about the Tower of London, and caused a deep ditch to
be made.

John Herlion, Shriue. Roger Duke. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leostane
Mayor.
King Richard subdued the Isle of Cipres, and then joined his power with
Phillip ye French king in Asia, conquered Acon, where there grew between the
two Kings, a grievous displeasure: for which cause Phillip shortly departed
thence, and coming into France, invaded Normandy.

John, brother to king Richard, took on him the kingdom of England.

King Richard restored to the Christians, the city of Ioppa.

The bones of king Arthur were found at Glastenbury.

William Hauerall. Shirues. John Bucknot. Shirues. 1191
Henry Fitz, Alwine fitz Leostane. Mayor.
Ann. reg. 3. John the Kings brother rebelled. 1192
William, Bishop of Ely, withstood the kings brother, who said, he wist not if
his brother were alive or not. To whom the Bishop answered: If King Richard be
yet living, it were unjust to take from him the crown. If he be dead, Arthur
the elder brothers son must enjoy the same.

Nicholas Duke. Shriue. Peter Newlay. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwine fitz Leostane.
Mayor.
An, reg. 4. K. Richard was taken prisoner. 1193 An, reg, 5
King Richard having knowledge that Phillip of France invaded Normandy, and that
John his brother had made himself King over England, made peace with the
Saladine for three years, and with a small company returning homeward, he was
taken by Leopold, Duke of Austria, who kept him in straight prison, a year and
five months.

Roger Duke. Shriue. Richard Fitz Alwine. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwine fitz
Leostane Mayor.
The Kings friends entreating for his deliverance, his ransom was set at
100000. l. Kings ransom.
whereupon commandment was directed from the Kings Justices, that all Bishops,
Prelates, Earls, Barons, Abbots, and Priors, should bring in the 4. part of
their revenues, toward the Kings ransom, and besides this, the Clergy
brought in their golden and silver Chalices, and fleeced their Shriues, all
which was coined in money.

John the kings brother, when he heard of the imprisonment of his brother, made
great war within the realm, and took by strength the castles of Windsor,
Nottingham, and others.

The king was delivered, and landed at Sandwich: 1194 K. R. the second time
crowned. An, reg, 6.
on the 12. of March he was again solemnly crowned. After this he called into
his hands all such things as he had either given or sold by patents, or
otherwise: by which means he got a great sum of money, and sailed into
Normandy, where shortly after, peace was taken between the two kings. Also by
means of Elionar the old Queen, Earl John was reconciled to his brother.

William fitz Isable, Shriue. William fitz Arnold. Shriue. Henry fitz Alwine.
Mayor.
K. Richard sent messengers to the Pope, 1195 An, reg, 6.
complaining upon the Duke of Austrich, for misusing of him and his, as they
came by distress of weather through his country, whereupon the Pope
excommunicated the Duke, and inioined him to release the covenants that be
constrained the King to make.

Robert Beasaunt Shriue. Iokt Ieiouse. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Fitz Leostane
Mayor.
William with the heard.
William with the beard moved the common people to seek their liberty, and
not to be subject to the rich and mighty: by which means he drew to him many
great companies. The King being warned of this tumult, commanded him to cease
from those attempts, but the people still followed him. He was taken in Bow
Church in Cheap, but not without shedding of blood: for he was forced by fire
and smoke to forsake the Church. He with nine of his adherents had sentence
of death, and were hanged.

A false accuser of his elder brother in the end was hanged. God amend or
shortly send such an end to such false brethren. 1197 An, reg. 9.
This counterfeit friend to the poor, slew one man with his own hands, polluted
Bow Church with his Concubine, and amongst other his detestable facts, one was,
he falsely accused his elder brother of treason: which elder brother had in
his youth brought him up in learning, and done many things for his preferment.

Gerard de Antiloch Shriue. Robert Durant. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
King Richard, and the Earl of Flaunders confederated together.

Roger Blunt. Shriue. Nicholas Duket. Shriue. An, reg. 10. 1198
Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
King Richard ^ooke of every hide of land through England 5. s. The French King
was intercepted by the army of King Richard, so that with much a do he escaped
into Cipres.

Constantine Fitz Arnold Shriue. Robert de Beaw. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin
Mayor.
King Richard turned his arms against the Barons of Poictow that rebelled
against him, 1199
he set their Cities and Towns on fire, spoiled their country, and slew many
of his adversaries cruelly: at the last came to the Dukedom of Aquitane: and
besieged the Castle of Chalne, where one Bertraine de Gordon, smote him with a
venowmed dart, K. Richard wounded to death.
which stripe the king little regarded, but inuading the Castle, wan it, and put
the soldiers in prison: of this wound aforesaid he died the 6. day of
April, in the year of our Lord 1199. when he had reigned 9. years 7.
months, and was buried at Founteuerard: his heart was buried at Roan, and his
bowels at the aforesaid Chalne.

King John.
John brother to Richard, An, reg, 1.
began his reign the 26. day of May, in the year of our Lord 1199. Of person
he was indifferent, but of melancholy complexion. Phillip king of France in a
quarrel of Arthur the son of Ieffery, John's eldest brother, Duke of
Britain, made war upon King John in Normandy, and took from him diverse
Castles and Towns.

Shriuewick of London put to farm 1200
K. John granted the Shrifewick of London and Middlesex to the Citizens thereof
for 300. pound yearly to be paid, as of ancient time.

Arnold Fitz Arnold, Shriue. Richard Fitz Barthelmew. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin
Mayor.
An, reg, 2 Tax.
King John required of every Plow land 3. s. The king being divorced from his
wife Isabel, the Earl of Glocesters daughter, he passed over the sea, paid
forty thousand marks to the French King, and returned into England with Isabel
his wife, daughter to the Earl of Angolesme.

Roger Dormer, Shriue. James Bartilmew. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
K. of Scots did homage 1201 An, reg, 3
K. John went to Lincoln, where he met with William king of Scots, Rotlond Lord
of Gallowy, and many other noble men, which did to him homage.

Walter Fitz Alis, Shriue. Simon de Aldermanbury. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin
Mayor.
1202 An, reg, 4.
Arthur Earl of Britain being made Knight by the French King, whose younger
daughter he had fianced* besieged the Castle of Mirable, in which Queen
Elianor was enclosed, but King John came with a power, and delivered his mother
from danger: Arthur earl of Britain ^^ken.
he took there his Nephew Arthur, William de Brawsa, Hugh Brune, and many
others.

Hail as big as hens eggs, etc.

Normand Brundel, Shriue. John de Ely. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
Arthur Earl of Britain, 1203 An, reg, 5. Earl of Britain murdered.
from Falaise was brought to Roan, and put in the Tower under the custody of
Robert de Veypont, where shortly after he was dispatched of his life

The King of France took Lisie, Dandely, with the castle and vale de Ruell, in
which were Robert Fitz Water, Sayer de Quincie, and many others: he took the
strong Castle upon Seyne, builded by King Richard.

Water Brown, Shriue. William Chamberlain. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
Normandy, Angiou, Britain, Maine, 1204 An, reg, 6.
Poitow, and Touraine, were within a short time delivered to King Phillip.

King John married Jane his bastard daughter to Lewelin Prince of Wales, and
gave with her the castle and Lordship of Elinsmore, in the Marches of South
Wales.

Thomas Hauarell, Shriue. Hamond Brond. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
The 14. Great frost. Dearth of corn. An. reg. 7
of January began a frost which continued till the 22. day of March: so that
the ground could not be tilled, whereof it came to pass, that in Summer
following, a quarter of wheat was sold for a Mark, which in the days of Henry
the second, was sold for twelve pence.

John Walgraue Shriue. Richard Winchester. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
Great thunders and lightnings were seen, so that many men and women were
destroyed, 1206 An, reg, 8.
be^sides cattle and houses overthrown and burne^ corn in the fields was
beaten down with hai^^ stones as big as goose eggs.

John Holland, Shriue. Edmond Fitz Garrard Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
1207
King John took the 13. part of all mouable goods, both of Lay and Religious
throughout England.

An, reg, ^.
The Monks of Canterbury elected Stephen Langton to be their Archbishop. The
Pope sent letters to King John, humbly exhorting him to receive the said
Stephen, being thereunto canonically elected, the rather because he was an
Englishman borne, and a Doctor of Divinity, etc. but king John being greatly
offended with the prom^ting of the said Stephen, sent men in armor to expel
the Monks of Canterbury, and condemned them of treason.

The original of the Kings of Tartary.
At this time began the kingdom of Tartars, in Tartaria.

Queen Isabel was delivered of her first son named Henry.

Roger Winchester, Shriue. Edmond Hardwell. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
1208 England interdicted.
W. B. of London. and E B. of Ely, and M. B. of Winchester, by the Popes
commandment, executed the interdiction upon the whole realm, and they ceased
through all England to ministering of Ecclesiastical Sacraments, saving of them
that were in peril of death, An, reg, 10
and Baptism to children. The King set all the Bishoprics and Abbeys in the
Realm into the custody of Laymen, and commanded all Ecclesiastical revenues
to be confiscated.

This year was granted to the citizens of London, by the kings letters
patents, Mayor of London yearly chosen.
that they should yearly choose to them a Mayor.

Peter Duke, Shriue. Thomas Neale. Shriue. Hen Fitz Alwin Mayor.
The Exchequer was removed to Northampton by the Kings commandment: Exchequer
at Northhampton.
he also gathered a great Army, and went toward Scotland, as far as the
castle at Northampton, where the King of Scots came to them, and treated peace,
for which he gave 11000. Marks of silver, and delivered his two daughters for
a pledge. After this he took homage of all freeholders, Homage of freeholders
An, reg. 11.
and swore all men to his allegiance.

The Arches and Stone bridge over the Thames at London, was this year finished
by Serle Mercer, and William Alman, London bridge builded of stone
then Procurators, or Masters of the Bridgeworkes.

Peter le Losne, Shriue. William Blund. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
The King commanded all the Jews both men and women to be imprisoned because
he would have their money. Jews ransom.


The king brought Ireland under his subjection: he caused the laws of England
to be execu^^^ there, An, reg, 12 A mint in Ireland. Tax.
and money to be coined, he raised a gr^^ tax upon all the Religious in
England, whom (...) caused to pay such a ransom, that the sum ca^^ to 100000.
pound, besides 40000. pounds of the white Monks.

William de Brawse was chased out of England, and his wife and children
murdered at Win^^^*

Adam Wetley, Shriue. Stephen la Grace. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
1211 Army into Wales.
The King went into Wales with a great for^^ subdued all the Princes and Nobles,
took 28. plages for their subjection, and returned. There (...) him messengers
from the Pope, Legate from Rome.
which came (...) make an unity betwixt the King and the Bishope Canterbury,
with the Monks which were bani^shed: but the Ambassadors returned without
(...) end concluded.

A great tax.
After this the king took of every knight whi^^ was not with him in Wales, two
marks of ^uer of every shield.

John Fitz Peter, Shriue. John Garland. Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin. Mayor.
Welsh invaded England.
The Welshmen took diverse Castles of the King of England, cut off the heads of
all the soldiers, burned many Towns, and with a great prey returned.

1211 Pledges hanged.
The King caused the 28. pledges that the Welshmen delivered him to be hanged.

An Hermit in Yorkshire named Peter, prophesie^ openly to King John, and said,
Peter of Pomfret. An, reg. 14.
that upon Ascension day next coming, he should be no King, but the Crown
should be transposed to another. This Peter was apprehended and put in prison.

The 10. of July at night the city of London upon the South side of the river
of Thames, London bridge perished with fire.
with the Church of our Lady of the Canons in Southwarke being a fire, and an
exceeding great multitude of the people passing the bridge, suddenly the North
part by blowing of the South wind, was also set on fire, and the people which
were even now passing the bridge, perceiving the same, would have returned, but
were stopped with fire, and it came to pass, that as they protracted time, the
South end was fired, so that people thronging themselves betwixt the two fires,
there came to aid them many Ships and vessels, into the which the multitude
so undiscreetly pressed, that the Ships being drowned, it was said, that
there were destroyed about three thousand persons.

Randolph Eland, Shriue. Constantine Iosue, Shriue. Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor.
Pandulph the Legate admonished the King to restore Stephen Langton to his Sea
of Canterbury, and the Monks unto their Abbey: 1213
The King calling to mind the manifold dangers he was in, made promise by
oath to be obedient to the Court of Rome.

Pandulph with the nobles of the realm, came together at Dover upon Ascension
even, K. John resigned the Crown. Peter of Pomfret. An, reg, 15. Stephen
Langton returned. The King absolved.
where the king did resign his Crown with the realm of England and Ireland
into the Popes hands.

When the Ascension day was past, Peter the Hermit bound to a horse tail, was
drawn through the streets of Warham, and there both he and his son were
hanged. Stephen Langton Archbishop of Canterbury, and the other that were
banished arrived at Dover, and went to Winchester to the King, and absolved
him. Richard Pri^^^ of Bermonsey, builded an house (against the wall of the
said house of Bermonsey) called the Almor^ of Hospital of Conuerts of S. S.
Thomas hospital. Mayor of London. 24. years.
Thomas.

Henry Fitz Alwin Mayor of London deceased, who had continued Mayor of London
four and twenty years.

Martin Fitz Alis, Shriue. Peter Bate. Shriue. Roger Fitz Alwine Mayor.
A ditch about London.
The ditch without the walls of London, 200. foot broad was begun.

1214 An, reg, 16.
Pope Innocent sent Nicholas Bishop of Tus^^^lane to release the interdiction
which had continued 6. years, 3. months, and 14. days.

Solomon Basing, Shriue. Saint Edmondsbury burnt. An reg, 17.
Hugh Basing. Shriue. Searle Mercer Mayor.
S. Edmondsbury was consumed with fire.

1215 The King meets the Barons.
The King met with the Barons in a meadow betwixt Stanes and Windsor, and there
granted the liberties of England without any difficulty, the Charter whereof
is dated, given by our hand in Rimming mead betwixt Stanes and Windsore, the
16. day of June, the 17. year of our reign, unto which all the whole realm
was sworn.

The King sent unto the realms next adjoining, to procure him Soldiers,
promising them large possessions. By means of Pandulph, the Pope disanulled
the aforesaid charter and liberties granted, and also excommunicated the
Barons. The Barons excommunicated.
By the other messengers were procured a great number of men of war, which
landing at Dover, the King forthwith besieged Rochester, and took it.

John Trauers, Shriue. Andrew Newland, Shriue. William Hardel Mayor.
The Pope excommunicated the Barons by their peculiar names: but they
notwithstanding sent to Phillip King of France, requiring him to send his son
Lewis into this realm promising to make him King, which the French King
refused to do, till the Barons had sent him 24. pledges.

Gwall^ a Legate was sent from the Pope into France, to forbid the going of
Lewis into England: 1216 The Barons sent for Lodowick.
b^t his persuasions nothing prevailed: he charged them upon pain of
excommunication. This notwithstanding, Lewis with a great army arrived in the
Isle of Thanet: An reg. 18. Lewis arrived in England.
King John being then at Dover, fled toward Gilford. Lewis subdued all the
Castles in Kent, Dover only excepted: then came he to London, where he was
honorably received of the Nobles and Citizens: The King marched through
Norfolk and Suffolk, till he came to Linne, and appointing Sauarice de
Manlion to be Captain there, began to fortify the town, but here filling
his belly too much, he got a surfeit and therewith fell into a laske, and when
the messengers of them that were besieged in Dover were come, and had declared
their case, the disease, with grief conceived thereat, increased.

The Kings treasure drowned.
Moreover great sorrow oppressed him, for that in his journey he had lost the
ornaments of his chapel with other treasure and carriages at the passage of
Welstreame, where many of his household servants were drowned in ye water and
quicksands: he died in the castle of Newarke on the 19. King John died.
of October 1216. where the Captain of the castle causing his body to be
bowelled, the same was conveyed to Worcester, and there honorably buried, when
he had reigned 17. years, and 5. months, lacking 8. days. Issue of K. John.
Farendon. Hales, Godstow, and Knarisbrough.
He had issue two sons, Henry and Richard, and three daughters: Isabel,
Elianor, and Jane. He founded the Abbey of Bowley in a new forest of
Southampton. He builded the Monasteries of Farendon and Hales Owen, he
reedified the castle of Godstow, and Wroxal, and increased the chapel of
Knarisbrough.

Henry of Winchester.
An, reg, 1.
HEnry the eldest son of John, of the age of 9. years, began his reign the
19. of October, in the year 1216. he was crowned at Gloucester, in the
presence of Wallow the Legate. He remained in the custody of William Marshall,
Earl of Pembrooke.

Bennet Seinturer, Shriue. William Bluntiuers. Shriue. James Alderman Mayor.
When Lewis heard this, 1217 An, reg, 2
he wist not what to do, whereupon compelled by necessity, he sued for
peace, and returned into France.

Thomas Boxerell, Shriue. Raph Eiland Shriue. Serle Mercer Mayor.
Ranulph Earl of Chester, Saer de Quincie. 1218 An, reg, 3
Earl of Winchester, with others, took their journey toward Jerusalem.

John de Viel, Shriue. John le Spicer. Shriue. Serle Mercer. Mayor.
W. Marshall died, Earl Marshall died. An, reg, 4.
and was buried at London in the new Temple, after whose death the King was
governed by Peter Bishop of Winchester.

Richard Wimbleton, Shriue. John Viel. Shriue. Serle Mercer Mayor.
King Henry was crowned at Westminster, 1220 K. Henry crowned at Westminster.
Castles of Chartley. Beston, Delacresse. An, reg, 5.
by Stephen Langton, Archbishop of Canterbury. The new work of our Lady
Chapel at Westminster, was begun by King Henry.

Ranulph Earl of Chester, builded the Castles of Chartley, Bestone, and the
Abbey of Delacresse.

Richard Renger, Shriue. John Viel. Shriue. Serle Mercer Mayor.
1221 Welshmen subdued. An, reg, 6.
K. Henry subdued the Welshmen which rebelled. The Nobles granted to the king
two marks of every hide of land. William Earl of Arundell died, buried at
Wimondham, a Priory of his foundation.

Richard Renger, Shriue. Thomas Lambert, Shriue. Serle Mercer Mayor.
1222 Counterfeit Mary and Christ.
A young man was brought before the Archbishop of Canterbury, who willed
himself to be crucified, and to be called Jesus. And the old woman that had
bewitched the young man to such madness, and procured herself to be called
Mary the mother of Christ. They were both closed up between two walls of
stone, where they ended their lives in misery. The citizens of London falling
out with the Bailise of Westminster, and the men of the suburbs at a game of
wrestling, Feet and hands cut off. An, reg, 7. 1223
made a great tumult against the Abbot of Westminster: for the which their
Captain Constantine with other were hanged: the other that were culpable had
their feet and hands cut off.

Richard Renger, Shriue. Thomas Lambert, Shriue. Serle Mercer Mayor.
King of Jerusalem. An, reg, 8. 1224
John de Brennes, King of Jerusalem and chief master of the Hospital there,
came into England and required aid to win Jerusalem, but returned with small
comfort.

John Trauers, shriue. Andrew Bokerel, shriue. Richard Renger Mayor.
Gray friars.
The Friars minours first arrived at Dover 9. in number 5. of them remained at
Canterbury, and did there build the first covent of friars minours, that ever
was in England: the other 4. came to London, and hired an house in Cornehill,
of John Trenars: they were by the Citizens removed to a place in St. Nicholas
shambles, which John Iwyn Citizen and Mercer of London, appropriated unto the
Communaltie of the City, to the use of the said Friars. The whole Church was
builded at that time by diverse Citizens.

The King granted to the Commonaltie of the City of London to have a common
seal.

John Trauers, shriues. An, reg, 9.
Andrew Bokerel, shriue. Richard Renger Mayor.
The 15. 1225 A fifteen. Great charter confirmed.
part of all men's goods moveable within the realm, as well of the Clergy, as
of the Laity, was granted to the King, and the King granted to the Barons and
people, the liberty, which they long time had sued for.

Roger Duke, shriues. An, reg, 10.
Martin Fitz William, shriue. Richard Renger Mayor.
The King granted to the Citizens of London, Free warre^ An, reg. 11. Free tole.
free warren, that is to say, free liberty to hunt a certain circuit about
the city. And also that the Citizens of London should pass tol-free throughout
all England, and that all wears in Thames should be destroyed for ever.

Roger Duke, shriue. Martin Fitz William, shriue. Richard Renger Mayor.
The king made all the Charters of the liberties and forests to be frustrate,
1227 Cancelled. An, reg, 12
alleging that they were granted whiles he was under ward of other: so it
followed, that who so would enjoy the liberties before granted, must renew their
Charters of the Kings new seal.

Stephen Boxerell, Shriue. 1228 An. reg, 13.
Henry Cocham. Shriue. Roger Duke Mayor.
The king corrected the measures and weights. Great thunder and lightning burnt
many houses and slew both men add beasts.

William Winchester, Shriue. Robert Fitz John Shriue. Roger Duke Mayor.
1229 An. reg. 14.
Robert Bingham Bishop of Sarisbury by the kings help, prosecuted the building
of the new Church at Sarisbury, which his predecessor Richard did translate.
Stephen Bokerell, Shirues. Henry Cocham. Shirues. Roger Duke Mayor.


1230 Darkness in Paul's Church.
Upon the day of Saint Paul. when Roger Niger Bishop of London was at Mass in
the Cathedral Church of St. Paul, suddenly the weather waxed dark, and an
horrible thunder-clay lighted on the Church, the same was shaken, as though it
would have fallen, and out of a dark cloud came such lightning, that all the
Church seemed to be on fire: all men thought they should have died: thousands
of men and women ran out of the Church, An, reg, 15
and being astonished, fell upon the ground void of all understanding: none of
all the multitude tarried in the Church, save the Bishop and one Deacon, which
stood still at the high Altar.

Richard Walter Shrieues. John Woborne Shrieues. Roger Duke Mayor.
Richard the kings brother married Isabel Countess of Gloucester, 1231 An, reg,
16.
late wife to Gilbert Earl of Gloucester, late wife to William Marshall Earl
of Pembrooke, and the marriage being scantly finished, the said William dyed,
and was buried in the new Temple in London.

Michael of S. Helen Shriue. Walter de Russel, Shriue. Andrew Bokerel,
Pepperer, Mayor
The morrow after S. 1232 An. reg. 17
Martins day began thunders very horrible, which lasted 15. days.

Henry Edmonton, Shriue. Gerard Bar, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell, Pepperer, Mayor.
1233 Likeness of five Suns.

The 7. of April there appeared as it were four Suns beside the natural Sun,
of a red color, and a great circle of Crystal color.

The king builded a fair Church, Houses of Conuerts.
and many houses adjoining thereunto in the city of London, not far from the
new Temple. In which house all the Jews and Infidels that did convert to the
faith of Christ, might have under an honest rule of life sufficient living,
whereby it came to pass, that in short time there was gathered a great number
of Conuerts, Hospital at Oxford. An, reg, 18
which were baptized and instructed in the laws of Christ. He also builded the
hospital of S. John without the East gate of Oxford, for sick and strangers
to be received in.

Simon Fitz Mary, Shriue. Roger Blunt, Shriue. Andrew Bokerel Pepperer Mayor.
1234 Salisbury burnt.
Richard Marshall, and Leolyne Prince of Northwales, with a great force invaded
the kings land, and destroyed the same with fire and sword, from the coasts of
Wales to Salisbury, which tow^ also they set on fire.

This year was a great dearth and pestilence, so that many poor folks died
for want of victuals.

An, reg, 19.
Ralph Ashy, Shriue. John Norman, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Mayor.
1235
The Jews at Norwich stole a boy, and circumcised him, meaning to have
crucified him at Easter: for which fact they were convicted.

S. Mary Spittle. An, reg, 20
Walter Brune a Citizen of London, and Rosia his wife, founded the Hospital of
our Lady without Bishops-gate of London.

Gerard Bate, Shriue. Robert Hardell, Shriue. Andrew Bakerell Pepperer Mayor.
1236 High waters. Statutes of Marton. An reg, 21.
K. Henry took to wife Elianor, daughter to Raymond, Earl of Province. The
Thames ouerflowed the banks, so that in the great Palace of Westminster men did
row with wherries in the midst of the Hall. A Parliament at Marton wherein was
made the statutes of Marton.

Henry Cocham, Shriue. Jordan of Couentry, Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer
Mayor.
Octobon a Cardinal came into England as a Legate from the Pope. 1237
This year passed stormy and troublesome weather, and very unhealthful.

John Toloson, Shriues. 1238
Geruas the Cordwaiuer. Shriue. Andrew Bokerell Pepperer Mayor.
Octobon being lodged in the Abbey of Osney, Legate put to his shift^
the scollers of Oxford slew his master Cook, and the Legate for fear got him
into the steeple of the church, where he held him till the kings Officers
coming from Abingdon, conveyed him to Wallingford, where he accursed the
misdoers. Otho de Kilkeuney, a standard bearer to the scholars, was taken with
12. other, and cast into prison, Scholars did penance
and long after went from S. Paul's Church in London to the Legates house, bare
footed and bare headed, where they asked him forgiveness. King in danger. An,
reg, 23 1239
A Scholar of Oxford enterprised to have slain the King in his chamber at
Woodstocke, was taken and pulled in pieces with horses John Coders, Shriue.
John de Wilchale, Shriue. Richard Renger Mayor.
The K. Tower of London. An, reg, 24 1240
gave the Earldom of Lecester to Simon Mountford. The Tower of London was
fortified, which the citizens feared lest it were done to their detriment.
Roger Bongry, shriue. Ralph Ashy, shriue. William Ioyner Mayor.
The stone gate and bulwark which the king caused to be builded by the tower
of London was shaken with an earthquake, and fell down: Bulwark by the Tower.
but the king commanded the same to be builded again. Many strange fishes
came a shore, Monstrous fishes.
whereof 40. were Seabuls, and one of a huge bigness passed through the bridge of
London unhurt, til he came as far as kings house at Mortlacke, where he was
killed.

Aldermen An, reg, 125
Aldermen of London, which had the rule of the wards of the City, were every
year changed.

John Gisers, Shriue. Michael Tony. Shriue. Gerard Bat, Mayor.
The Jews were constrained to pay 2000. marks at two terms in the year,
1241 Bulwark by the Tower. An, reg, 26.
or else to be kept in perpetual prison. The walls and bulwarks that were
newly builded about the tower of London, were again thrown down as it were
with an earthquake.

John Viel, Shriue. Thomas Duresme. Shriue. Reginald Bongey. Mayor.
An. reg. 27. 1242
K. Henry with a great army sailed into Normandy, purposing to recover Poiters,
Guien, and other countries, but after many bickerings, to the loss of
Englishmen, he treated peace.

John Fitz John Shriue. Ralph Asswaie. Shriue. Reginald Bongey Mayor.
1263 Great floods.
The Thames ouerflowed the banks about Lambeth, and drowned houses and fields
the spa^ of 6. miles, and in the great hall at Westminster, men took their
horses backs.

Hugh Blunt Shriue. Adam Basing, Shriue. Ralph Ashwie, Pepperer Mayor.
Griffin the eldest son of Leoline prince of Northwales, 1244 Miserable death
of Griffin.
which was kept prisoner in the Tower of London, made of ye hangings, sheets,
towels, etc. a long line, and put himself down from the top of the tower: but
being a very big man, the rope brake, and he fell on his neck. Robert Grofted.
An, reg, 29.
Robert Grosted Bishop of Lincoln, with other Prelates, complained to the king
of the waste made of the Church goods, by alian Bishops and Clearkes.

Ralph Foster, Shriue. Nicholas Bat, Shriue. Michiael Tony. Mayor.
The King enlarged the Church of S. Peter's in Westminster, pulling down the
old walls, 1245 An, reg, 30 1246
and steeple, and caused them to be made more comely.

Robert of Cornehill, Shriue. Adam of Bentley, Shriue. John Gisers, Pepperer
Mayor.
The Church of S. Mildred in Canterbury, Canterbury burnt. An, reg, 31
and a great part of the City was burnt.

Simon Fitz Marie, shriue. Laurence Froike, shriue. John Gisers, Pepperer,
Mayor.
King Henry let to f^rme the Queene-hiue in London to John Gisors then Mayor,
1247 Queen hiue.
and his successors, and co^minalty of London for ever, for the sum of 50.
pounds the year.

A great plague was in England.

John Viell, shriues. Pestilence. An, reg, 32. 1248
Nicholas Bat, shriue. Peter Fitz Alwin Mayor.
By reason of the embasing of the coin, a great penury followed.

The town of Newcastle upon Tine, was burned, bridge and all.

Earthquake An, reg. 33
By a strange earthquake the tops of houses were thrown down, walls did
cleave, the head of chimneyes and towers were shaken.

Nicholas Fitz Iosey, shriue. Geffery Winchester shriue. Michael Toney Mayor.
1249 A Mart at Westminster. An, reg, 34.
The King made a Mart at Westminster to la^^ 15. days, which the citizens were
feign to redeem with 1000. pounds.

Richard Hardell, Shriue. John Tolason, Shriue. Roger Fitz Roger Mayor.
In October the sea flowing twice without ebb, made so horrible a noise, that
it was heard a great way into England, 1250 Tempests.
beside this in a dark night, the sea seemed to be on a light fire, and the
wa^s to fight one with another, so that the Mariners were not able to save
their ships. And at Winche^^sea, Winchelsea drowned.
besides cottages for salt, and fishermens houses, bridges and mils, above 300.
houses in that town, with certain Churches, through the violent rising of the
sea were drowned.

An, reg, 35.
Humfrey Beas, shriue. William Fitz Richard, shriue. John Norman Mayor.
1251 Mayor of London sworn. An, reg. 36.
K. Henry granted, that where before the citizens of London did present their
Mayor before the king, wheresoever he were, and so to be admitted, now should
come only before ye Barons of ye Exchequer.

Lawrence Froicke, shriue. Nicholas Bat, shriue. Adam Basing Mayor.
A great drought from Easter to Michaelmas. 1252 Shepherds assembled. An, reg,
37.


The shepherds of France and England took their journey toward the holy land,
to the number of 30000. but their number vanished in short time.

William Durham, shriue. Thomas Wimborn, shriue. John Toloson Draper Mayor.
The liberties of London were seized by ye means of Richard Earl of Cornwall,
1253 Liberties of London seized. An, reg, 38.
who charged the Mayor that he looked not to the Bakers for their ^ses of
bread: so that the city was forced to please the Earl with 600. Marks, and
were restored.

John Northampton, shriue. Richard Pickard, shriue. Richard Hardell Draper,
Mayor.
Edward the kings son, wedded Elianor the kings daughter of Spain, his father
gave him ye Earldom of Chester, 1254 An, reg, 39.
and the governance of Gwien and Ireland. Ralph Ashy, shriue. Robert of Limon.
shriue. Richard Hardell Druper Mayor.


142. Jews were brought to Westminster, which were accused of crucifying a
child at Lincoln, 18. of them were hanged, 1255 An, reg, 40. Jews hanged.
the rest remained long prisoners.

Stephen Do, shriue. Henry Walmond. shriue. Richard Hardell Draper Mayor. 1256
An, reg, 41

The Mayor and diverse Aldermen of London, and the Sherifes were deprived of
their offices, and the governance of the City committed to other.

1257
Michael, Bokerell Shriue. John the Minor, Shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Mayor.
King of Almaine.
Hugh Bigot, chief Justice of England, and Rog^ Turkleby, kept their Courts in
the Guild hall (...) London, and punished the bakers upon the Tu^^berell, and
did many other things contrary to the laws of the City.

Walls of London repaired. An, reg, 42. 1258
The King caused the walls of the City (...) London to be repaired.

Richard Owell shriue. William Skwie shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Mayor.
The Lords held a Parliament at Oxford, when were chosen 12. Peers, which had
authoritie^ correct the breakers of these ordinances: the King his brethren the
Noble men and Barons, taking their oath to see the same observed. Mad
Parliament. Twelve Peers. A Jew drowned. An. reg. 43.
A Jew (...) Tukesbury fell into a privy upon the Saturd^^* and would not for
reverence of his Sabboath (...) plucked out: wherefore Richard of Clare Earl
(...) Gloucester kept him there till Monday, at whi^^ time he was dead.

Robert Cornehill Shriue. John Adrian. Shriue. Richard Hardel Draper Mayor.
1259 Oath to the King. An, reg, 44.
The king commanded the Mayor that he should ca^ to be sworn every stripling of
12. years of a^^ or upward, to be true to ye king and his heirs, and th^^ the
gates of ye city should be kept with harnessed (...)

John Adrian, Shriue. Robert Cornhill, Shriue. John Gisors Pepperer Mayor.
The Barons and nobles of the realm held a Parliament at London, in the new
Temple, Parliament An, reg, 45
and the King held himself in the Tower of London.

Adam Browning, Shriue. Henry Couentry, Shriue. William Fitz Richard Mayor.
K. Henry published at Paul's cross, 1261 K Henry absolved. An, reg, 46
the Popes absolution for him and all his that were sworn to maintain ye
articles made in the parliament at Oxford.

John Northampton, Shriue. Richard Pickard, Shriue. William Fitz Richard Mayor.
The Barons armed men against the King, Barons in armor. 1262
and all this year houered about London, without any notable of act rebellion.

This year 1263. An reg. 47 1263 Sarazens attempt to conquer Christendom.
all Christian nations on the other side the sea, sustained great dangers and
outrages by the miscreant Sarazens: so as the Christians was constrained to use
their best means to suppress them. And in Paris there was a great Council
held of Prelates and Barons, to devise means for their countries safety. In the
10. year of the reign of Richard the Emperor there was a blazing star seen
3. months. A blazing star. Earl of Cornwall chosen Emperor.
At this time there was a Schism amongst the Princes Electors in Germany, and
they elected Richard Earl of Cornwall, brother to K. Henry of England: he was
chosen in the year 1257. or as some say, in the year 1255. and with him was
likewise chosen A^phonso, King of Castile: Thomas Aquinas.
he reigned 18. years: in his time flourished the great Clarke S. Thomas
Aquinas.

John Tailor, shriue. Richard Walbroke, shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas, Mayor.
There was slain of Jews in London to the number of 700. 1263 Jews slain for
usury. An reg, 48.
the rest were spoiled, and their Synagogues defaced, because one Jew would
have forced a Christian man to have paid more then 2. d. for the usury of 20.
s. the week.

Robert Monpilet, Shriue. Osbert Suffolk, Shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas Mayor.
1264 Battle at Jews. The King taken. An, reg, 49.
A battle at Lewis between K. Henry and the Barons, in which battle the King
with his son Edward and Richard Earl of Cornwall, with many other Lords, were
taken by Simon of Mountford, Earl of Leicester and the Barons.

Gregory Rokesley, shriue. Thomas of Lafford, shriue. Thomas Fits Thomas Mayor.
1265 Battle at Eu^sham.
Edward being now at liberty, allied him with the Earl of Gloucester and
gathering to him a great power, warred so freshly upon Simon of Leicester, that
at the end, he with many other of the nobles, were slain in the battle at
Euisham.

A parliament was holden at Winchester, when all the statutes made at Oxford,
Parliament at winchester. An, reg, 50
were disanulled. London was in great danger to have bin destroyed by the K.
for displeasure he had conceived, but the Citizens wholly submitted both lives
and goods in^^ the kings hands. The King gave unto his son Edward, the Mayor
and 4. Aldermen: many other were committed to several prisons.

Edward Blund, Shriue. Peter Anger, Shriue. Thomas Fitz Thomas Fitz Richard
Mayor.
The king gave to diverse of his household servants about the number of 60.
houses and households within the City: so that the owners were compelled to
redeem their houses and goods, 1266 Battle of Chesterfild. An, reg, 51.
or else to avoid them. The 11. of May was the battle of Chesterfield against
them that were disherited, where many were slain.

John hind, shriue. John Walrauen, shriue. William Richard Mayor.
Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, 1267 An, reg, 52.
allying himself with the exiled Gentlemen, rose against the K. and the 8. of
April with an army entered the city of London, and therein builded bulwarks,
and cast trenches in diverse places: the King gathered an army, came toward
London, pitched his tents at Stafford, and tarried there the space of one month.

The sixth of June the Earl of Gloucester in peaceable manner rendered the City
unto the King.

John Adrian, shriue. Lucas Ba^ecourt, shriue. Alin Souch Mayor.
Variance fell between the fellowship of Goldsmiths and Taylers of London,
1268 An, reg, 53
causing great rufflings in the City, and many men to be slain. For which
riot, twelve of the chief Captains were hanges.

Walter Haruie, Shriue. William Duresme, Shriue. Sir Stephen de Edward Mayor.
Great frost 1269 An. reg. 54.
The river of Thames was so hard frozen from S. Adrewes tide to Candlemas, that
men and beasts passed on foot from Lambeth to Westminster, the merchandise was
carried from Sandwich and other havens to London by land.

Thomas Basing Shriue. Robert Cornehill, Shriue. Hugh Fitz Otonis Mayor.
1270 An, reg, 55.
The Nobles of England assembled at London to entreat of diverse matters,
whereof there arose discord betwixt John Warren Earl of Surrey, and Alin de la
Souch Lord Justice of Ireland, before the Justice of the Bench, where the said
Alin Souch was wounded to death.

Walter Potter, Shriue. Tailor. Shriue. John Adrian Vintner Mayor.
1271 An, reg, 56.
The steeple of Bow in Cheap fell down, and slew many people, men and women.

Richard King of Almaine, and Earl of Cornwall, brother to K. Henry, deceased,
and was buried at Hailes.

Gregory Rokesly, Shriue. Henry Walis, Shriue. John Adrian Vintner Mayor.
1272 Riot at Norwich. An, reg, 57.
In June began a great riot in the City of Norwich, through the which the
monastery of the Trinity was burned, whereupon the King rod down, and making
inquiry for the chief doers thereof, caused 30. of them to be condemned,
drawn, hanged and burnt.

Richard Paris, shriue. John Bedell, shriue. Sir Walter Haruie Mayor.
K. Henry died in the 16. of November, in the year 1272. when he had reigned
56. years, and 28. days: he was buried at Westminster: he builded a great
part of the same Church: he left for his heir, his eldest son Edward, Edmond
Crowchbacke Earl of Leicester, and Lancaster, and two daughters, Beatrice and
Margaret.

King Edward, surnamed Longshankes.
EDward the first after the Conquest, An, reg, 1. 1273
son to Henry the third, surnamed Longshanke, began his reign the 16. of
November, in the year 1272. being then beyond the sea.

John Horn, shriue. Walter Potter, shriue. Sir Walter Haruie Knight Mayor.
This year fell a great variance at Oxford, An, reg, 2 1274
between the Northern and Irishmen, wherein many Irishmen were slain.

Nicholas Winchester, Shriue. Henry Couentry, Shriue. Henry Walls Mayor.
On St. Nicholas even were great earthquakes, An, reg, 3
lightnings and thunder with a huge dragon, and a blazing star which made
many men sore afraid.

Usury was forbidden to the Jews, and that they might be known, Usury
forbidden.
the King commanded them to wear a Tablet the breadth of a palm upon their
outmost garments. A Frenchman brought into Northumberland a Spanish Ewe, as big
as a Calfe of two years, 1275 First rot of sheep.
which Ewe being rotten, infected so the country, that it was spread over all
the Realm.

Lucas Batecourt, shriue. Henry Frowicke, shriue. Castle of Flint. An, reg, 4.
1276
Gregory Rokesley, master of the Kings Mints, and therefore a Goldsmith I
think. Mayor.
King Edward builded the Castle of Flint, strengthened the Castle of Rutland,
and other against the Welshmen. There was a general earthquake, by force
whereof the Church of Saint Michael of the mount without Glastenbury, Black
Friars in London.
fell to the ground.

The black Friars Church at London, was builded by Robert Kilworby, Archbishop
of Canterbury.

John Horn, Shriue. Ralph Blunt, Shriue. Gregory Rokesly Mayor.
An, reg, 5. 1277
The statute of Mortmaine was enacted, Michael Tony was hanged, drawn, and
quartered for treason.

Robert de Aria. shriue. Ralph le Feuere, shriue. Gregory Rokesley, Mayor.
King Edward gave unto David, brother to Leoline Prince of Wales, the Lordship
of Frodisham. An, reg. 6. 1278


John Adrian, Shriue. Walter Langley, Shriue. Gregory Rokesley, Mayor.
Michaelmas Term was kept at Shrewsbury. An, reg, 7. 1279 Jews executed.
Reformation was made for clipping of the Kings coin: for which offense 267.
Jews were put to execution.

Robert Basing shriue. William Mazaliuer, shriue. Gregory Rokesley Mayor.
Whereas before this time the penny was wont to have a double cross with a
creast, First halfepence and farthings round. 1280
in such sort yt the same might be easily broken in the midst, or in 4.
quarters, and so to be made into halfpenies or farthings, it was now ordained,
that pence, halfepence, and farthings should be made round. At this time twenty
pence weighed an ounce of Troy weight.

Thomas Box, Shriue. Ralph le Lamere, Shriue. Gregory Rokesley Mayor.
David brother to Leoline Prince of Wales, An, reg, 9. 1281
moved all Wales almost to rise against the King.

William Farrendo Goldsmith, Shriue. Nicholas Winchester, Shriue. Gregory
Rokesley Mayor.
There was such a frost that 5. Bridges broken down.
arches of London bridge, and all Rochester bridge was borne down and carried
away, with many bridges more.

William Mazaliue^, Shriue. Richard Chigwell, Shriue. Henry de Wales Mayor.
An, reg, 11 1282 Corn sold by weight. The tonne in Cornhill.
The Bakers of London were first drawn upon Herdels by Henry Walleis Mayor, and
corn was then first sold by weight.

This Henry Walleis caused to be erected the Tonne upon Cornhill to be a
prison for night walkers, and other suspicious persons.

The stocks market. 1283
He also caused to be builded an house called the Stocks, to be a market for
flesh and fish in the midst of the City.

The Jews sinagogues destroyed.
John Pecham Archbishop of Canterbury, sends commandment to the Bishop of
London to destroy all the Synagoues of the Jews, within his Diocese.

Ralph Blond, Shriue. Anktein de Beteuil, Shriue. Henry de Walleis, Mayor.
An, reg, 12 1284
Leoline Prince of Wales was slain, and his head was set upon the Tower of
London. Also David the brother of Leoline Prince of Wales, was taken and
beheaded.

Jordan Godcheape, Shriue. Martin Box, Shriue. An, reg, 13. 1283
Henry Walleis Mayor.
Edward the Kings first son, was borne at Carnaruan in Wales.

Phillip of France, surnamed the Fair, began his reign in the year 1285. he
builded the stately Palace for the Parliament in Paris* he took Guy the Earl
of Flanders, and carried him and his two sons prisoners to Paris. In his time
Pope Clement the 5. was consecrated at Lions. And the Cathedral Papal was
transferred from Rome unto Auignon in France, and there remained 70. Knights
Templars suppressed, and Knights of the Rhods ordained.
years during which transmigration, there were 3. Cardinals appointed to
govern Italy. In this Kings reign the Hospitelars of St. John took Rhodes,
and drove out the Turks, and were afterward called Knights of the Rhodes.
This Phillip bare great hatred unto the Kinghts Templars, which at this time
flourished throughout Christendom, whose name and order of Templars, began
presently after the conquest of the holy land by Godfrey of Bullen, as well for
their religious resolute defending the Temple, suppressing all manner of
thieues and robbers, that offended the Christians in Judea, as their continuing
warlike service upon the common enemies of Christ's religion, viz: the Turks
and Sarazens, who by their oath were bound not to turn their face from their
enemies. This honorable order by degrees became most famous, and was by this
time dignified and received in every Christian nation: which Knights for the
most part consisted of younger brothers of noble birth and haughty courage, and
were possessed of fair palaces, endowed with great privileges and reuenews for
their maintenance. These men presuming upon their proper merits, kindred,
ally^nce, and large possessions, became very proud and insolent, but whether
their great pride, or abundance of wealth, caused their sudden suppression, ^s
not directly set down in any history, therefore I submit my opinion unto the
saying of the holy Scripture, to wit, Pride goes before destruci^n. The Kings
displeasure toward them prevailed so far that he procured the Pope to
suppress them with confiscation of their lands and goods, and in their places
for the Christian service against the forenamed common enemies of our faith,
they ordained the order of the Knights of the Rhodes. This King reigned 28.
years, and was buried at S. Denis, read Gaguin 7. book, ^ Emilius 8. book.
In the year 1522. the Isle of Rhodes was yielded unto Sultan Solomon upon
Christmas day, after it had been besieged 6. months with great strength and
fury: and then that name and title of Knights of the Rhodes ceased: but for as
much as the maintenance of such a special order was as propicious to the
Christian service, as odious unto Turkish infidelity, the Emperor Charles the
5. in the year 1529. gave unto the late Knights of the Rhodes, the Isle of
Malta, since which time they have been called the knights of Malta, having upon
all occasions and extremity whatsoever, right worthily performed their oath,
maintained their order and reputation: for which cause the inue^^rate malice of
the Mahometists continued as great toward them, as to any former ordered
Christian seruitors: whereupon, as well in ha^^ to suppress them, as to
increase further oppression upon Christendom, the forenamed Solomon, t^^ 10. of
May 1565. sent Mustapha Basha with ^ mighty host against them who won certain
hol^^ and forts within the Island. And with all violen^^ they besieged their
chief city called Bourg by (...) and land, whom the forenamed Knights and
the^ friends as religious and valliantly resisted, as w^ insallying forth upon
the strongest part of their enemies camp, as maintaining their walls,
waterworkes, and rampires. Albeit of themselves it was not possible for them to
make long resistance against so strong and cruel enemies, having already
endured 4. months terrible siege, by which time the K. of Spain sent fresh
supplies unto them, and ^ing conioined, so stoutly repulsed Mustapha, that in
gladly raised his siege, and departed with loss of 25000. of his men, and of
Christians there were slain 5000. besides 240. Knights of the order.

Laurence Ducket Goldsmith, Ducket hanged up in Bow Church.
grievously wounded one Ralph Crepin in West Cheap: and then sled into Bow
Church: after that, certain evil disposed persons, friends to the said Ralph,
entered the Church in the night time, and slew the said Laurence lying in the
steeple, and then hanged him up, placing him as though he had hanged himself.
But shortly after, by relation of a boy, the truth of the matter was known: for
the which a woman and sixteen men were put in prison, and afterward more, who
all were drawn and hanged, save the woman who was burnt.

The great Conduit in Cheap was begun to be builded.

Stephen Cornehill, shriue. Robert Rokesley, shriue. Gregory Rokesley Mayor.
A Iustes was proclaimed at Boston in the fair time, whereof one part came in
ye habit of Monks, another in the suit of Canons, who had couenanted after the
Iusts to spoil the fair, An, reg. 14. 1286
for the atchiuing of their purposes* they fired the town in 3. places. Fair
at Boston spoiled. An, reg, 15 Yarmouth D^nwich and Ipswich perished. 1287
Walter Blunt, Shriue. John Wade, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Mayor.


On New years day at night, as well through vehemency of the wind, as
violence of the se^, many Churches were overthrown and destroyed, not only at
Yarmouth, Dunwich, and Ipswich, but also in diverse other places of England.

Thomas Crosh, Shriue. Walter Hautaine, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Mayor.
An, reg, 16. 1288
The Summer was so exceeding hot, that many men died through the extremity
thereof: and yet wheat was sold at London for 3. s. 4. d. the quarter, and
such cheapnes of beans and pease, as the like had not been heard of.

William Hereford, Shriue. Thomas Stanes, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos.
An reg. 17. 1289
Great hail fell in England, and after insued great rain, that the year
following wheat was raised from 5. d. the bushel to 16. d. and so increased
yearly, till it was lastly sold for 20. s. the quarter.

William Betaine, Shriue. John of Canterbury, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Mayor.
An, reg, 18 1290
Rice ap Meredith, was by the Earl of Cornwall taken, drawn, hanged and
quartered.

Falke of S. Edmond, Shriue. Solomon le Stotell, Shriue. Sir John Briton
Custes.
The transgressions of diverse Justices was tried out, and punished accordingly:
some lost their goods, An, reg, 19 1291
and then were banished: some as well of the Bench as of the Assizes were sent
to the Tower.

The King banished all ye Jews out of England, giving them to bear their
charges till they were out of the realm: Jews banished.
the number of Jews then expulsed, were 15. M. 9. persons.

Thomas Romain Shriue. William de Lier. Shriue. John de Breton. Custos.
The wool staple was ordained to be at Sandwich. Ralph Blunt, Shriues. An, reg,
20 1292
Hamond Box Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos.


King Edward adjudged John Ballioll to be true heir of Scotland. An, reg, 21:
John Ballioll did homage for Scotland.


Queen Elianor died at Herdby, a town near to Lincoln, she was brought to
Westminster, and there buried. 1293 Queen deceased.
The king made at every place where she stayed a costly cross, with the
Queens image upon it. Charing Cross, and the Cross in West Cheap of London,
were two of them.

The Minoresse, The Minoresse.
a Nunnery without Algate of London, was founded by Edmond Earl of Leicester,
brother to King Edward.

Henry Bole, Shriue. Elias Russel, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich Custos.
Three men had their right hands cut off in west Cheap for rescuing a prisoner
rested by an Officer in the City of London. An, reg, 22 1294


Robert Rokesly, Shriue. Martin Aunsbresby, Shriue. Ralph Sandwich, Mayor.
An, reg, 23 1295
The water of Thames ouerflowed the banks, and made a breach at Rotherheth
beside London the low ground about Bermondsey and Toth^, was ouerflowed.

Henry Box, Shriue. Richard Gloucester, Shriue. Sir Ralph Sandwich Mayor.
An, reg, 24 Castle of Beawmarish.
The King passing with an army against the Welshmen, builded the Castle of
Beawmarish in the Isle of Anglesey. The Welshmen were consumed by famine, their
woods were felled, and many castles fortified* Rice ap Meredith was brought to
London.

The Frenchmen arrived at Dover, and spoiled the town. 1296


John of Dunstable, Shriue. Adam de Halingbery, Shriue. Sir John Breton Mayor.
An reg, 25. 1297 K. Edward won Barwicke.
John Baliol King of Scots, contrary to his allegiance rebelled: King Edward
won the Castles (...) Barwicke and Dunbarre: he slew of Scots 25. thousand: he
conquered Edenborough, where he found the regal ensigns of Scotland.

Thomas Suffolk, Shriue. Adam Fulham, Shriue. Sir John Breton Mayor.
An, reg, 2^.
The King increased the tribute of the woolles tasking for every sack 40. s.
where before the time they paid but half a mark.

The Scots by instigation of W. Wale^s ^ebelled, 1298
and put the Englishmen to much trouble.

John de Stortford, shriue. W. de Stortford, shriue. Sir John Breton, Mayor.
Fire being kindled in the lesser hall of ye palace at Westminster, An, reg
27. 1299 The King^ p^llace burnt. S Martins in the Vintry.
the flame thereof being driven with wind, fired the building of the Monastery
next adjoining, which with the palace were both consumed.

S. Martins Church in the Vintry at London, was now builded by the Executors of
Matthew de Calumbaris. Richard Rotham, Shriue. Thomas S^ly, Shriue. Henry Waleis
Mayor.


This realm was troubled with false money, An, reg, 2^. Fall money. 1300
called Crockden and Pollard, coined in parts beyond the seas, and uttered for
sterling.

K. Edward took to wife Margaret sister to Philliple Beaw then King of France.

John de A^mentiers, Shriue. Henry de Fingrie, Shriue. Henry Waleis Mayor.
K, Edward made his voyage against the Scots, An, reg, 29. 1301
wherein he subdued a great part of the land, took the castle of Estreueliue
with other, and made the Lords swear to him fealty.

Lucas Hauering, shriue. Richard Camps, shriue. Elias Russell Mayor.
The K. An, reg, 30 1302
gave to Edward his son the Princedome of Wales, and joined there unto the
Dukedom of Cornwall, and the Earldom of Chester.

Robert Colleuer, shriue. Peter de Boscube, shriue. Elias Russel Mayor.
An, reg, 31 1303
The Scots rebelling, made William Waleis their leader, wherefore the king
having his army ready, passed over ye whole land, none offering him battle.

Hugh Port, Shriue. Simon Paris, Shriue. Sir John Blunt Mayor.
An, reg, 32. 1304
Richard Grauesend Bishop of London deceased, who is reported to have purchased
the Charters and liberties of the City of London, in the year of our Lord
1392. in the 16. of Richard the second. The untruth whereof I have thought good
thus much to note.

The Kings bench and exchequer returned.
The K. returning out of Scotland, commanded the courts of the Kings bench and
the Exchequer, which had now remained at York seven years, to be removed to
their old places at London.

W. de Combematin, Shriue. I. de Bereford, Shriue. Sir John Blunt. Mayor.
An, reg, 33 Draw the staff. 1305
K. Edw. ordained Justices of Tirelebasto^, against intruders into other men's
lands, truce breakers, extortioners, murderers, and such like offenders.

W. Waleis, which had oftentimes set Scotland in great trouble, was taken and
brought to London where he was hanged, headed, and quartered.

Roger Paris, Shriue. John Lincoln, Shriue. Sir John Blunt Mayor.
Robert Bruce caused himself to be crowned King of Scots, whereof when King
Edward heard, An, reg, 34 1306
he went with have into Scotland, where he chased the said Robert Bruce, and
took many of the Noble men prisoners, and brought Scotland into such
obedience, as he gave of the lands, thereof to his subjects of England, with
Markets, Faires, and Warrens. Among other, I have seen under the broad seal
of the said King Edward, a Manor called Retnes, in the County of Forfaire in
Scotland, and near the furthest part of the same nation, Northward, given to
John Ewer, and his heirs, John Ewer.
ancestors to the Lord Ewer that now is, for the service done in those parts,
with market every monday, Fair for 3. days every year at Michaelmas, and
free warren for the same, dated at Lauereost the xx. day of October, Anno Reg.
34.

William Coser, Shriue. Reginald Thunderle, Shriue. Sir John Blunt Mayor.
This year 1306. An, reg, 35. Sea-coale forbidden to be burned near London.
upon sundry complaints of many of the Clergy and Nobility resorting to the
city of London, touching the great anoiance and danger of contagion growing by
reason of the french of burning sea-coale, which diverse fire makers in
Southwarke, Wapping, and East Smithfield, now used to make their common fires
because of cheapnes hereof, and to forbear the burning of bauin and fire
coal, the King expressly commanded the Mayor and Shriues of London for with to
make proclamation that all those fire-makers should cease their burning of
sea-coale, and make their fires of such fuel of wood and coal as had been
formerly used. Read the Record.

The great new Church of the gray Friars in London was begun to be builded
by the Lady Margaret Queen, 1307
second wife to Edward the first. John of Briton, Earl of Richmond, builded
the body of the church, the residue was finished by the Lady Mary Countess of
Pembroke, Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, Margaret Countess of Gloucester,
Elianor Spencer, Elizabeth Bourgh, sisters to Gilbert de Clare.

King Edward sent messengers into England, and commanded that all that ought
him service, should be ready at Carlisle within 3. weeks after the feast of S.
John Baptist, But himself being vexed with a bloody flixe, the 7. of July
departed this life at Burgh upon the sands, in the year of our Lord 1307. when
he had reigned 34. years, seven months, and odd days: his body was buried
at Westminster, unto the which Church he had given lands to the value of an
hundred pound by year: 20. pound thereof yearly to be distributed to the
poor.

Edward of Carnaruan.
An, reg. 1.
EDward the second, son to the first Edward, borne at Carnaruan, began his
reign the 7. of July, in the year 1307. he was fair of body, but unsteadfast
of manners, not regarding to govern his commonweal by discretion and justice,
which caused great variance between him and the Lords.

Nicholas Pigot, Shriue. Nigellus Drurie, Shriue. Sir John Blunt Mayor.
The King married Isabel the French Kings daughter. 1308


The Lords envying Pierce of Gauestone, Pierce of Gaueston exiled. An, reg, 2.
Earl of Cornwall, a stranger borne, banished him the land.

William Basing, shriue. James Borener, shriue. Nicholas Faringdon Goldsmith,
Mayor.
The King sent for Pierce of Gaueston out of Ireland, 1309 An, reg, 3
and gave him the Earl of Glocesters sister in marriage, which caused him
again to rise in pride, scorning the Nobles of the realm. The Barons
therefore declared to the King, that except he would expel the said Pierce
from his company, they would rise against him, as against a perjured Prince:
whereupon once again he caused Pierce to abjure.

James of S. Edmond, shriue. Roger Palmer, shriue. Thomas Roman Mayor.
Pierce of Gauestone returned into England, 1310 An, reg, 4.
and came to ye kings presence, who forgetting al oaths and promises, received
him as a heavenly gift.

The Church of Middleton in Dorsetshire, was consumed with lightning, the
Monks being at mattens.

Simon de Corpe, shriue. Peter Blackney, shriue. Richard Reffam Mercer Mayor.
Templars. condemned
Templars in England, upon heresy and other filthy Articles, whereof they were
accused, were condemned to perpetual penance in several Monasteries.

1311 Pierce of Gauestone beheaded.
The Barons of England being confederated against Pierce of Gauestone, besieged
him at the castle of Scarborough, where they took him, and brought him to
Warwick castle, and caused his head to be stricken off.

Simon Mermood shriue. Richard Gilford, shriue. Sir John Gisors Pepperer Mayor.
1312
Queen Isabel was delivered of her first son named Edward, at Windsor.

The Rhods won by the Christians. An, reg, 6.
The Knights of the order of S. John Baptist, called S. John of Jerusalem, put
the Turks out of the Isle of Rhodes, and after that, wan upon the said Turks
daily for a long time.

John Lambyn, Shriue. Richard Gilford, Shriue. Sir John Gisors Pepperer Mayor.
1313 Battle at Streueling. An, reg, 7.
King Edward gathering a great power, marched toward Scotland to break the
siege of the Castle of Streuelin, where he and his power encountered with
Robert Bruce and the Scots: in the end whereof the English men were
discomfited, and so eagerly pursued by the Scots, that many of the Noble men
were slain.

This year 1313. according to the Chronicles of Germany, The French King
burns all his diseased.
Phillip king of France, surnamed the Fair, having his body full of venomous
scabs and manginesse, caused all such of his subjects, as well women as men,
both in France and Flaunders, as had either the leaprosie, or meazelrie, to be
burned. The cause of this his tyrannous rigor was because he had been
informed, that the said lazar or pockey people had wilfully poisoned all the
chief wels and standing waters. Some say, that this visitation was the divine
justice of God upon the King for suppressing the Knights Templars. All the
Jews in Germany burned.
And in the year 1403. all the Jews in Germany were burned, because they had
poisoned all the wels and standing waters. It appears by foreign Chronicles,
that the Jews had a general purpose to poison the Christians: for the Jews
in France did poison the waters likewise, and were severely punished.

Robert Gurdome, Shriue. Hugh Garton, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith
Mayor.
The King caused his writs to be published for victuals, 1314 Victuals prised.
An, reg, 8.
that no Ox stalled or corn fed be sold for more then 24. s. no grass fed
ox for more then 16. s. a fat stalled cow at 12. s. another cow at 10.
shillings. A fat mutton corn fed, or whose wool is well grown, at 20. pence,
another fat mutton shorn at 14. d. A fat hog of 2. years old, at 3. s. 4. d.
A fat goose at 2. d. half penny in the city at 3 d. A fat Capon at 2. d. in the
city at 2. d. half penny, A fat hen at one penny, in the city at one penny
half penny. Two chickins a penny, in the city on penny half penny. Four pigeons
for one penny, in the city three pigeons for one penny, 24. eggs a penny, in the
city 20. eggs a penny, etc.

Stephen Abingdon, Shriue. Hamond Chigwell, Shriue. Sir John Gisors pepp^rer,
Mayor.
1315 A Tanners son claimed to be King. An, reg, 9. Mortality of men, Dogs
flesh good meat. Children were eaten.
A Tanners son of Exceter named himself the son of Edward the first, for the
which he was hanged at Northampton.

The dea^th increased through the abundance of rain that fell in harvest: so
yt a quarter of wheat or salt was sold for xl. s. There followed this famine a
grievous mortality of people, so that the quick might uneath bury the dead.
The beasts and cattle also by the corruptnesse of the grass whereof they fed,
died: horseflesh was counted great delicates, the poor stole fat dogs to
eat: some in hid places, did eat the flesh of their own children. The
Thieves that were in prison, Thieves devoured one another.
did pluck in pieces those that were newly brought amongst them, and greedily
devoured them half alive.

Hamond Goodcheape, Shriue. William Bodele, Shriue. Stephen Abingdon Mayor.
There arrived in England two Cardinals, to make peace between England and
Scotland, and to reconcile unto the K. 1316 Two Cardinals robbed.
Thomas Earl of Lancaster. When they came near unto the town of Derlington,
certain robbers, Gilbert Middleton and Walter Selbie being their Captains,
suddenly set upon the family of the Cardinals, and robbed them of their
treasure: but the Cardinals came to Dirham, where they tarried a few days for
answer of the Scots, and so returned to York. Gilbert Middleton was taken,
An, reg, 10.
carried to London, and there drawn and hanged.

Sir Iosseline Denuile and his brother Robert, with 220. in the habit of
Friars, did many notable robberies, they spoiled the Bishop of Dirhams
palaces, leaving in them nothing but bare walls, Thieues like Friars.
for the which they were hanged at York.

William Causton, Shriue. Ralph Ballancers, Shriue. John Wengraue Mayor.
The new work of the Chapel, New work of Paul's.
on the South side of the Church of S. Paul in London being begun, there were
found in the foundation, more then 100. heads of Oxen and Kine, which then
confirmed greatly the opinion of those, who have reported, that of old time it
had been the Temple of Jupiter, and that there was the sacrifice of beasts.

Edward de Bruise, the king of Scots brother, 1317 Edward Bruce beheaded. An,
reg, 11.
who by the space of 3. years, had assaulted Ireland, and had crowned himself
King, was taken by English men, and beheaded at Dundalke.

John Brior shriue. William Furneis, shriue. John Wengraue Mayor.
The town of Barwicke was betrayed to the Scots, through the treason of Peter
Spalding. Barwicke betrayed. 1318 A murren of Kine.


A great murrain of kine happened, dogs and ravens eating of the kine were
poisoned, and did swell to death, so that no man durst eat any beef.

John Pounting, Shriue. John Dalling, Shriue. John Wengraue Mayor.
The king being at York, Suburbs of York burnt.
the Scots entered England, came to York, and burnt the suburbs of the city,
and took sir John of Britain, Earl of Richmond, prisoner, with many other.

Many herdsmen, and certain women of England, would go seek the holy land to
kill the enemies of Christ, 1319 Herdsmen and women went toward Jerusalem. An,
reg, 13.
as they said: but because they should not pass over the great sea, they slew
many Jews in the parts of Tolose, and Gascoine: wherefore many of them were
taken and put to death.

Simon Abingdon, shriue. John Preston. shriue. Hamond Chickwell pepperer Mayor.
Thomas Earl of Lancaster, with many Earls and Barons, came to Sherborn, and
from thence with baners displaied to S. 1320 The Barons in armor, An, reg, 14.
Spencer banished.
Albones, from thence they sent to the King being at London, requiring him to
banish the two Hugh Spencers. At length the King granted to their petition, so
that Hugh Spencer the elder was banished, but the younger Hugh could not be
taken.

Reginald at Conduit, Shriue. William Prodom, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon
Goldsmith Mayor.
Jews and leapers. Poisoned waters.
Certain leapers who had couenanted with the Jews to poison all the Christians
in Europe, laid poison in Jewels, springs and pits: for the which many were
burnt.

1321 Mortimer sent to the Tower.
Roger Mortimer, the Earls of Richmond and Arundell, submitting themselves to
the King, were sent to the Tower of London. After this, when the Kings Army,
and the Army of the Barons met near unto Burton upon Trent, Thomas Earl of
Lancaster beheaded. An, reg, 15
the Earl of Lancaster fled, and the King pursuing them to Burbrige, Thomas
Earl of Lancaster was taken and beheaded at Pomfret.

Richard Constantine, Shriue. Richard Harkeny, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell
pepperer Mayor.
Andrew Harkeley Earl of Carleil was charged with treason for making peace
with the Scots, 1322 An, reg, 16.
for which he was sent to York, hanged, headed, and quartered. John Grantham,
Shriue. Richard of Ely, Shriue. Hamond Chickewell pepperer Mayor. 1323 An. reg.
17.



Roger Mortimer Lord of Wigmore gave his keepers a sleepy drink, escaped
through all the watches of the Tower, and passed into France.

Adam of Sarisbury, Shriue. John of Oxford, Shriue. Nicholas Farendon Goldsmith
Mayor. 1324 An, reg, 18 The Queen sent into (...).

King Edward sent the Queen his wife unto her brother the French King to
establish the peace, who went over with a small company* by her mediation a
peace was fully finished, whereupon Edward the Kings son went over.

Bennet of Fulsham, Shriue. John Cawson, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell pepperer
Mayor.
Whiles the Queen with her son remained in France longer then the Kings
pleasure was, (...). reg, 19
and would not come again without Roger Mortimer and other Noble men that were
fled out of England: the King banished them both, and all o^^^r that took
their parts.

Gilbert Morden, shriue. John Cotton, shriue. 1326 An, reg. 20. Qu. Isabell
returned.
Richard Britain Goldsmith Mayor.
Isabell the Queen, with her son Edward, Edmond of Woodstooke the Kings
brother, Roger Mortimer, and many other Noble men that were fled out of
England, arrived at Orwell besides Harwich in Essex: immediately the Earl
Marshall, the Earl of Leicester, the Bishops of Lincoln, Hereford, Diuelin,
and Ely, being joined to the Queen, made a great army.

The Citizens of London beheaded such as they took to be the Queens enemies,
they took also Walter Stapleton Bishop of Exceter, and beheaded him and two of
his servants, Bishop of Excester beheaded.
because he gathered a great army to withstand the Queen.

Richard Rothing, shriue. Roger Chanticle, shriue. Richard Britain Goldsmith
Mayor.
This Richard Rothing Sheriff, builded (...) Parrish Church of Saint James at
Garlic (...) in London, S. James. The Queen besieged Bristow. Spencer the
elder executed. The King taken.
The Queen besieged Bristow, wh^^ was seen rendered, and the morrow after her
c^^ming, Hugh Spencer the elder was drawn (...) hanged. The King, Hugh Spencer
the younger and Robert Baldocke, determined to fly into (...) Isle of
Lombardy, but being in great danger (...) the sea, at last arrived in Wales,
where they (...) taken, the King was committed to Henry (...) of Lancaster his
kinsman.

Spencer the younger executed.
Hugh Spencer was condemned at Herefor^ where he was drawn, hanged, headed,
and quartered.

Simon Reading was drawn and hanged.

Robert Baldocke died in Newgate.

The Queen with her son Edward, K. Edward the second deposed.
Roger Mortimer and other, went to Wallingford Castle, and before the twelfth
day came to London, where they were joyfully received. On the morrow after they
held a Parliament, where by common decree, they deposed the King, and elected
Edward his eldest son. He was thus deposed, when he had reigned nineteen
years six months and odd days.

Edward the third.
EDward the third, about the age of fourteen years, An, reg, 1.
began his reign the twenty five of January, in the year of our Lord. 1326.
In feats of Arms, he was very expert. At the beginning of his reign he was
chiefly ordered by his Mother Isabell.

The inhabitants of the Town of Bury besieged the Abbey, burnt the gates, The
Abbey of Bury spoiled. 1327
wounded the Monks, bare out all the gold and silver, ornaments, books,
charters, the assay to their coin, stamps, and all other things, appertaining
to their mint, etc.

Liberties confirmed.
The King confirmed the liberties of the City of London.

The 22. of September at night King Edward the second was cruelly murdered in
the Castle o^ Barkeley, by the practice of the Queen his wife the Lord
Mortimer, and the Bishop of Herefor^ He was buried at Gloucester.

Henry Darcy, Shriue. John Hauten, Shriue. Hamond Chickwell Grocer Mayor.
An, reg. 2 1328
Peace was made betwixt the Englishmen and Scots, Peace with the Scots. 1329
so that David the son of Robert Brce married Ioane of the Tower King Edwards
sister*

By procurement of the old Queen, and Roge^ Mortimer, Edmond of Woodstocke,
Earl of Kent the Kings Uncle, was beheaded at Winchester.

Richard Laz^r. Shriue. Henry Gisors, Shriue. An, reg, 3 R. Mortimer executed.
An, reg, 4
John Stanland Mayor.
Roger Mortimer was taken by William M^^tacute, and sent to London, where he
was condem^ned and hanged.

1330 Black Prince borne.
The 15. day of June was borne Edward (...) black Prince.

Robert of Ely, Shriue. Thomas Whoorwood, Shriue. Sir John Pultney Draper
Mayor.
S. Laurence Poultney. An, reg, 5. 1331
This Sir John Pultney builded the College (...) London, called Saint Laurence
Pultney, and ^^tle Alhalowes a Parish Church in Tha^^ street, and also the
Carmelite Friars Church (...) Couentry.

John Motking, Shriue. Andrew Aubury, Shriue. Sir John Pultney Draper Mayor.
Henry Earl of Lancaster, and of Leicester, Hospital of Leicester. An, reg,
6. 1332
founded the new Hospital by the Castle of Leicester, wherein were an hundred
poor impotent persons.

The King of England with force came before Berwicke, where they that kept the
Castle and Town used many deceitful treaties.

Nicholas Pike, Shriue. John Husband, Shriue. John Preston Draper Mayor.
The Scots came with great multitudes, An, reg, 7. 1333 Battle at Holidowne
minding to dissolve the siege of Berwicke, whom the King courageously met, and
slew of them eight Earls, 1300. horsemen, and of the common soldiers, 35000.
near unto Halidon.

The townsemen of Berwicke yielded to the King of England, both the castle and
the town, King Edward won Berwicke.
who placing garrisons there, he sent Edward Baliol and other Nobles to keep
the Realm of Scotland.

John Haman, Shriue. William Hansard, Shriue. Sir John Pultney Draper Mayor.
Edward Baliol king of Scots did homage to king Edward at ^ew Castle upon Tyne,
An. reg. 8. 1334 K. of Scots did homage
and shortly after he received homage of the Duke of Britain or his Earldom
of Richmond.

John Kingstone, Shriue. Walter Turk, Shriue. Reginald at Conduit Vintner,
Mayor.
An, reg, 6. 1335
Part of the University of Oxford went t^ Stamford, because of a variance that
fell be wee^ the Northern and Southern Scholars.

Great waters.
The Sea banks brake in through all England* but specially in the Thames, so
that all the cas^ and beasts near thereunto were drowned.

Walter Morden, Shriue. Richard Vpton, Shriue. Richard Wotton Mayor.
King Edward made his eldest son Ed^^ Earl of Chester, An, reg, 10 1336 A
Duke and six Earls created.
and Duke of Cornwall.

It was enacted that no wool should be conuai^ out of the Realm.

John Clarke, shriue. William Curtis, shriue. Sir John Pultney Draper Mayor.
1337
The Town of Southampton was burnt (...) the French Kings Galleys.

Privilege to Cloath-makers.
It was enacted that whatsoever Clothwor^ of Flanders, or of other countries
would d^^ and inhabit in England, should come quietly (...) the most
convenient places should be asigned (...) them with great liberties and
privileges.

Admirable pestilence at Auignon in France. A warning to all cities and
nations. Sheepeheards and heards-men died in the fields, so as there was none
to say these sheep or kine are mine.
This year 1338. as says the French Chro^^^cle, there happened in Auignon so
strange and te^ble mortality, that brooks and rivers were red (...) blood. And
that from the graves and sepulch^^ of the dead there issued streams of blood.
(...) unheard of mortality, was foretold the Fren^ by father Robert a Iacobin
Friar, who hear^ bewailed the sins and wickedness of this C^^ty and other
places, for the which he often pr^thed unto them that God would surely visit
them unless they speedily repented: but they obeyed not his doctrine. This
sickness continued a long time, and dispersed into Germany, and other nations
many a year after.

Also it was enacted that none should wear any cloth made without the realm,
the K. the Queen, and their children only excepted.

The king caused to confiscate all the goods of the Lumbards, Goods of Monks
confiscate.
and also all the Monks of the order of Clume and Citiaux, through the whole
Realm.

Walter Beale, shriue. Nicholas Craine, shriue. Henry Darcy Mayor.
King Edward with Queen Phillip his wife, An, reg, 1^ 1338 Arms of England
and Farnce joined.
and a great army, passed the Seas into Flanders and so to Colleine, where he
made friendship with the Emperor, and was made his vicegerent. He quartered
the arms of England and France.

William of Pomfret, Shriue. Hugh Marberell, Shriue. Henry Darcy Mayor.
A sudden inundation of water at New Castle upon Tine, An, reg, 13 1339 New
Castle drowned.
bare down a piece of the Town ^all, where an hundred and twenty men and
wo^en were drowned.

The King appointed himself to be called King of England and of France.

William Thorney, Shriue. Roger Fresham, Shriue. Andrew Aubery Grocer Mayor.
The King gathered a Navy of two hundred, An, reg, 14.
and sailed toward Flanders, 1340 Battle on the sea.
where he fought with the enemies a most cruel battle by sea, in the which
the Frenchmen were overcome, and slain of them 30000. men. There was ta^en 200
ships and the rest fled.

By the assistance of the Duke of Brabant and the Earl of Hainalt, with them
of Gaunt and Cypres, he entered the North parts of France, and besieged the
City of Turney. In the mean season the Earl of Henalt. Sir Walter Manny and
Reignold Cobham, burnt 300. Towns great and small, taking preyes.

Adam Lucas, Shriue. Bartholomew Maris, Shriue. An, reg. 15. 1341
Andrew Aubury Grocer, Mayor.
Two Cardinals were sent from the Pope, who demanded a truce for three years
betwixt the two Kings, in which space the title that the King of England
pretended, might be discussed.

Richard of Barking, shriue. John of Rokesley, shriue. John of Oxford Vintener
Mayor.
An, reg, 16. 2342
King Edward sailed over into Britain, when he took diverse castles and other
strong holds that resisted him. After this he besieged Vannes, and though
Phillip de Valois came down with a great multitude of people, yet a truce was
taken and Vannes remained to the King of England.

An, reg, 17. 1343 Florences of gold.
John Loukin, Shriue. Richard Keslinbury, Shriue. Simon Frances Mercer, Mayor.
King Edward commanded florences of Gold to be made the penny of the value of
vi. s. viii. pence, the halpeny and farthing after the rate.

William Mountacute Earl of Salisbury conquered the Isle of Man from the
Scots, K. of Man
which Isle Edward the third gave the same Earl, and caused him to be crowned
King of Man.

John Steward, shriue. John Alisham, shriue. John Hamond Mayor.
King Edward held a solemn feast at his Castle at Windsor, Order of the
Garter. 1344 Chapel at windsor 24 poor Knights.
where he established the most honorable order of the Garter, to the number of
26. Knights, which were chosen of the most noble and valiant persons of this
Realm. He also augmented the Cappell, which his progenitors Kings of England
had before erected, with 8. Canons in the Castle of Windsor, adding a Deane and
15. Canons more, and 24. poor knights, with other Ministers. Geffery
Wickingham, shriue. Thomas Leg, shriue. John Hamond Mayor.


The Scots to the number of 30000. An, reg, 19 1345 Scots invaded Westmerland.
William Douglas being their leader, entered into Westmerland, and burnt Carlisle
and Penreth, with many other towns, wherefore the Bishop of Carlisle, with
Thomas Lucy, Robert Ogle, and a great number compassed them in the night
season, and with lights and noises so disquieted them, that they neither durst
go out for victuals, nor give their bodies to sleep, but at the last
Alexander Stragon stoutly prepared to go out for victuals, Scots overcome.
whom the Bishop and Robert Ogle met, and with a spear thrust him through the
body, so that the Scots were overcome and slain.

Edmond Hemenball, shriue. John of Gloucester, shriue. Richard Ledger Mayor.
An, reg, 16 1346 K. Edward sailed into France. K. Edward besieged Callice,
Scots invaded Northumberland.
King Edward took shipping, and arrived at Hogs in Normandy, from thence he
went to Caen, in which journey he burned the ships, in all the havens round
about, he spoiled Caen to the bare walls, and took many prisoners. He
besieged Calice. David le Bruce with all his power entered the borders of
Northumberla^d, came to Bear Park by Neuels cross nigh Durham, spoiling and
killing all that met them: then William Souch Archbishop of York, the Lords
Percy, M^nbray, Ralph Neuell, gave them a sharp battle wherein the Englishmen
had the victory, the Scots put to slight. The King of Scots taken.
In the chase were taken David le Bruce the Earls of Meney, of Stradermes, of
Fife, with others.

John Croyden, Shriue. William Clopton, Shriue. Geffery Witchingham, Mayor.
An, reg, 11. 1347 Calice won
When King Edward had long time besieged Calice, the French King came to break
the seege: but when he saw he could not fulfill his desire, he set fire in the
tents, and went his way: which when the men of Calice perceived, they yielded
the town and Castle.

The misfortune of one Emperor and four Kings with other things worthy memory.
This year 1347. Lewis the fourth Emperor of that name fell from his horse and
died thereof. And in the year 1390. John King of Spain, as he was hunting a
heart, fell from his horse and brake his neck. In the year 1395. in diverse
parts were seen one great star, and five little stars which seemed to
fight with the great star, and to pursue it by the space of an hour, and
after that there were diverse voices heard in the air like cries, and after
that a man was seen in the air like copper, holding a lance in his hand, and
he threw fire after the star, and suddenly all these sights vanished: In
some places there were heard loud voices and great sounds of men fighting, and
rattling of Armor, wherewith the people were much astonished. These prodigies
came before a great battle which was fought this year in Hungary, where the
Hungarians at this time had the victory, and slew of their enemies the Sarazens
almost an hundred thousand: but the next year following, the Turks and
Sarazens had a mighty victory upon Sigismond King of Hungary, and upon the rest
of the Christian army. Which discomfiture of the Christians, the French
Chronicles very honestly records to be long of the proud disordered Princes and
Gentry of France, who obstinately inclined more to their several losses and
riotous desires, then to their obedience in this special service of God. It
happned this year also, being the year 1396. that the King of Arragon riding
after a Heart, fell from his horse and brake his neck, and not long after this
King Richard came to untimely death. And in the 400. the Duke of Brunswicke was
murdered by a Knight. And this year in france there were hailestones as big
as goose eggs. Strange hail. The University of Iypsicke founded. K. Edward
chosen Emperor.
About this time was that University of Lypsicke founded.

K. Edward was by the Princes Electors chosen Emperor: but he refusing it,
attended the wars in France. Adam Broson, Shriue. Richard Bas, Shriue. Thomas
Leggy skinner Mayor.


Gualter Many founded the Charterhouse besides London near to Smithfield, and
was there buried. An, reg, 22. 1348 An, reg, 22 Charterhouse Churchyard. Great
pestilence.
The pestilence began in England about Lammas, so that very many that were
whole in the morning, died before noone. In one day there was 20.40.60. and
many times more dead bodies buried in one pit. About the feast of all Saints it
came to London, and increased so much, that from Candlemas until Easter, in
the Charterhouse Churchyard near unto Smithfield, more then 200. dead corpse
(besides the bodies that were buried in other Churchyards) where there every
day buried. Henry Pichard, Shriue. Simon Dolseby, Shriue. John Loukin
Fishmonger, Mayor.


An, reg. 23. 1349 A bloody procession.
More then 120. persons of Zealand and Holland, coming out of Flanders to
London, sometime in the Church of S. Paul, sometime in oth^^ places of the
City, twice in the day, in the sight of the people, from the loins to the
heels covered with linen cloth, every one in their hand a whip with three
cords, beat themselves on their bodies going in procession, 4. of them singing
in their own language, all the other answering them.

Adam of Bury, Shriue. Ralph of Linne, Shriue. Walter Turk Fishmonger, Mayor.
In Oxfordshire near to Chippingnorton, An, reg, 24 A serpent with two heads.
1350 Battle on the sea.
was found a Serpent having two heads and two faces like women, one face
attired of the new fashion of women's attire, the other face like the old array
and had wings like a bat. King Edward met the Spaniards upon the Sea by
Winchelsea and Romney, and slew them, and took 26. great ships.

John Notte, Shriue. William Worcester, Shriue. Richard Killingbury Mayor. An,
reg, 25. Groats and half groats

A new coin called a groate, and half groate, were coined, but these were of
less weight then the Easterlings, by reason whereof victuals and merchandise
became the dearer.

John Wroth, Shriue. Gilbert Stinesthorpe, Shriue. Andrew Aubery Grocer Mayor.
An, reg, 26. 1351

The Castle of Guines was yielded to the Englishmen dwelling in Callis.

John Peach, Shriue. John Stotley, Shriue. Adam Frances Mayor.
King Edward altered the Chapel, An. reg. 27. S. Stephens at Westminster.
1353 Dry so^mer.
which his progenitors before time had founded, of S. Stephens at Westminster,
into a College of xii. secular Canons, xii. vicars, and other ministers
accordingly. This summer was called the dry summer.

William Would, Shriue. John Little, Shriue. Adam Frances Mercer, Mayor. An,
reg, 28 1354

The staple of wool was removed from Flanders, and established sundry places
of England: Wool-staple. Westminster.
to wit, at Westminster, Canterbury, Chichester, Bristow, Lincoln, and Hull.

William Totingham, shriue. Richard Smelt, shriue. Thomas Leggy Skinner Mayor.
An, reg, 29. 1355 Dissension at Oxford.
A great dissension fell in Oxford between a scholar and a vintner for a quart
of wine, so that the scholar powered the wine upon the vintners head, and brake
his head with the pot, by reason whereof a great conflict was made between the
scholars and the Lay people of the Town.

Walter Frost, shriue. Thomas Brandon, shriue. Simon Frances Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 30. 1356
Edward Prince of Wales, nigh to the City of Poytiers, joined battle with K.
John of France, of whom the Prince by his martial policy won a noble victory.
French king taken,
In this conflict King John was taken, with his young son and many of his
Nobles.

Richard Notingham, shriue. Thomas Dolsel, shriue. Henry Pichard Vintner Mayor.
This Henry Pichard Vintner, Mayor of London in one day sumptuously feasted
Edward King of England, John king of France, the King of Cipres, then arrived
in England, David King of Scots, Edward Prince of Wales, with many other Noble
men, An, reg, 31 1357
etc.

The King taking his journey toward Scotland, besieged Barwicke, which was
shortly rendered unto him. Edward Prince of Wales returned into England with
John King of France, Iusts in Smithfield.
and Phillip his son. Roial Iusts were holden in Smithfield before the Kings of
England, France and Scotland. Stephen Candish, Shriue. Bartholomew Frostling,
Shriue. Sir John Stodie Vintner Mayor.


This Sir John Stody gave unto the Vintners of London, Alms houses.
all the quadrant wherein the Vintners hal now stands, with the tenements
round about, where he founded 13. houses for 13. poor people, which are there
kept of charity rent-free.

David le Bruce King of Scots was delivered from the long imprisonment he had
been in, K. of Scots released. An, reg, 32 1358
his ransom being set at 100000. marks to be paaid the next 10. years
following.

John Barnes, Shriue. John Buris, Shriue. John Loukin Stock fishmonger Mayor.
King Edward with a Navy of ships passed the sea to Calice, and so into
Burgundy. An, reg, 33 K. Edward invaded Burgundy. 1359
In the mean season the Normans with a small Navy arrived at Winchelsea, and
partly burnt the town, and slew such as did withstand them, wherefore the
Prelates of England assembled in armor: Frenchmen arrived at Winchelsea. An,
reg, 34 1360
but the french were gone. Simond of Benington, shriue. John Chichester,
shriue. Simon Dolfeby Grocer Mayor.


A final peace was concluded, Peace with France Frenchking released.
King Edward came into England, and straight to the Tower to see the French
King, where he appointed his ransom to be three millions of Florences, and so
delivered him out of all imprisonment.

John Penis, Shriue. Walter Berney, Shriue. John Wroth Fishmonger Mayor.
An, reg. 35. 1362
Men and beasts perished in England in diverse places with thunder and lightning.
Friends were seen, and spoke unto men as they traveled.

William Holbech, shriue. James Tame, shriue. John Peach Fishmonger Mayor.
Second mort^lity, An, reg, 36. Subsidy of wool.
A great death and pestilence in England in which died Henry Duke of Lancaster,
who was buried at Leicester.

King Edward commanded all Pleas to be made in English, and not in French.

1363 An, reg, 37.
This time was granted to the K. for 3. years 26. shillings 8. pence of every
sack of wool.

John of S. Albons, Shriue. James Andrew, Shriue. Stephen Candish Draper Mayor.
Great wind
A great wind in England ouerturned many steeples and towns.

The French King, the King of Cypres, and the king of Scotland came all into
England, to speak with King Edward, who received them with great honor, and
gave them great gifts.

^reat frost. An, reg, 38 1364
A frost in England lasted from the mids of September to the month of April.

Richard Croydon, Shriue. John Hiltofte, Shriue. John Notte Pepperer Mayor.
The French King dies.
The ix. day of April, died John King of France at the Sauoy beside
Westminster, his corpse was honorably conveyed to Saint Denis in France. John
de Mitford, Shriue. Simon de Mordon, Shriue. Adam of Bury Skinner, Mayor.
Ingram Lord of Cowsey, An, reg, 39 1365
married Lady Isabell the Kings daughter. John Buckleworth Shriue. Thomas
Ireland. Shriue. John Loukin Fishmonger, Mayor.


The King commanded that peter pence should no more be paid to Rome. An, reg,
40. Peter pence forbid. 1366


The 3. day of April was borne at Bordeaux, Richard son to Edward the black
Prince, who was after King of England.

John Ward, Shriue. Thomas Attalie, Shriue. John Loukin Fishmonger, Mayor.
This John Loukin stockfishmonger, four times Mayor of London, builded a
chapel called Magdalenes at Kingston upon Thames, An hospital at Kingston
to the which he joined an hospital, wherein was a master, two Priests, and
certain poor men: he builded the parish Church of S. Michael in crooked lane.

Edward Prince of Wales taking compassion upon Peter K. of Spain, An, reg, 41.
The bastard brother disheriteth the lawful. 1367
who was driven out of his Kingdom by Henry his bastard brother, entered
Spain with a great puissance, and in a battle at Nazers, put to flight the
foresaid bastard, he restored the foresaid Peter to his former dignity: but
not long after, Henry the bastard, whiles K. Peter sat at a table, suddenly
thrust him through with a spear. Robert Girdler, Shriue. Adam Wimondhom,
Shriue. Simon Mordin stock fishmonger, Mayor.


An, reg, 43. Third pestilence. Dearth of torn. 1396
The third pestilence was this year, a bushel of wheat at London sold for 2.
s. 6. d.

John Piel, Shriue. Hugh Holditch, Shriue. John Chichester Goldsmith Mayor.
A great part of Gascoine fell from the Prince because of ye exactions he laid
upon them: also sickness increasing upon him, he returned into England.

William Walworth, shriue. Robert Gayron, shriue. A chest with three locks,
and money to be lent. An, reg, 45. Great subsidy.
John Barnes Mercer Mayor.
This John Barnes gave a chest with 3. locks, and 1000. Marks to be lent to
young men upon sufficient gage. The King demanded of the Clergy and
co^monaltie a subsidy of 10000 pounds. The Bishops were removed from the
Chancellor, treasurer, and privy scale, and Lay men put in their stead.

Robert Hatfield, Shriue. Adam Staple, Shriue. John Barnes Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 46 1372
The Frenchmen besieged Rochell, to the removing whereof was sent the Earl of
Pembroke, with a number of men of arms: upon whom fell the Spanish Navy, who
slew and took the Englishmen, and burnt their Navy: the Earl and many Noble
men were carried into Spain.

John Philpots, shriue. Nicholas Brember, shriue. John Piel Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 17. 1374
John Duke of Lancaster, entered France with a strong power, and passed through
ye realm without battle: but in the deserts and mountains of Aluerne, for
lack of victuals, many of his army died. John Awbry, shriue. John Fished,
shriue. Adam of Bury Skinner, Mayor. An. reg. 48. 1374

This year 1374. died the most famous and learned Poet Francis Petrarch, borne
in Tuscany: he was of singular judgment in all acts and sciences, a great
Philosopher, and an excellent Poet and Orator: he was very religious and
virtuous: he despised the worlds vainglory: Petrarch and Boccace.
he died in his hermitage near Pauia. And about the same time died the
renowned John Boccace. This Boccace was a famous Poet borne in Florence: he
wrote many excellent eloquent histories in diverse languages.

John Duke of Lancaster, with Simon de Sudbury, and other, assembled at Brudges
to treat of peace, between the realms of England and France. This treaty
continued almost two years, and ended without conclusion of peace.

Richard Lions, Shriue. William Woodhouse, Shriue. William Walworth Fishmonger
Mayor. An, reg, 49. 1375

John hastings Earl of Pembroke coming into England, after he had ransomed
himself for a great mass of money which he never paid, died.

John Hadle, Shriues. An, reg, 50 1376 Adam Bury late Mayor, Richard Lions late
shriue goldsmith.
William Newport, Shriue. John Ware Grocer Mayor.
Richard Lions, and Adam of Bury citizens of London, were accused by the
Commoners, of diverse frauds and deceits which they had done to the King.
Richard Lions for money did wisely compound and escaped, the other conveyed
himself into Flanders

Prince Edward departed out of this life, and was buried at Canterbury, Black
Prince deceased.
and then king Edward created Richard son of Prince Edward Earl of Chester,
Duke of Cornwall, and Prince of Wales, and because the King waxed feeble and
sickly, he betook the rule of the land to John of Gaunt, Duke of Lancaster.

John Northampton, shriue. Robert Laund, shriue. Adam Staple Mercer, Mayor.
An, reg, 51 1377 K. Edward deceased, New Abbey
King Edward ended his life at his manor of Shene, the 21. day of June, in ye
year 1377. when he had reigned 50. years, 4. months, and od days, whose
body was buried at Westminster. He builded the Abbey of our Lady of Grace by the
Tower of London. He newly builded Saint Stephens Chapel at Westminster, the
Castle of Windsor, and the Nunnery of Detford.

King Richard of Bordeaux.
An, reg, 1.
RIchard the second, the son of Prince Edward, being but 11. years old, began
his reign the 21. of June, in the year of our Lord 1377. In bounty and
liberality he far passed all his progenitors: but for that he was young, was
most ruled by young counsel, and regarded nothing the counsels of the sage and
wise men of the Realm, which thing turned this land to great trouble, and
himself to extreme misery.

The Frenchmen arrived at Rye, The town of Rye spoiled.
spoiled the town, and burnt it.

Not long after they assailed Winchelsea, and were expulsed: but they burnt the
town of Hastings.

Andrew Pickman, Shriue. Nicholas Twyford, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer
Mayor.
The Frenchmen arrived at Southsex, 1378 The Prior of Lewis taken by Frenchmen
near the town of Rothington, where the Prior of Jews with a small company
met them, who with two knights, and an Esquire were taken prisoners by them.
John Bosehame, Shriue. Thomas Cornwalis, Shriue. Iir John Philpot Grocer Mayor.


This John Philpot gave to the same City, John Philpot his charity.
certain tenements, for the which the Chamberlain paieth yearly to xiii.
poor people, every one of them xii.d. the week for ever, and as any of those
xiii. persons dies, the Mayor appoints one, and the Recorder another. 1379


John Halysdon, Shriues. 2380 An, reg, 4 Winchelsea taken.
William Barret, Shriue. John Hodsey Grocer Mayor.
The French Kings Galleys took the town of Winchelsea, put the Abbot of
Battle to flight, and took one of his Monks.

Walter Ducket, Shriue. William Knighthood, Shriue. William Walworth
Fishmonger, Mayor.
This William Walworth increased the Parrish Church of S. Michael in Crooked
lane Eastward, with a new Quire, and side Chapels, etc. About this time the
making of guns was found by a certain Almaine. 1318 Great tax, Commons
rebelled, Rebels entered London, Sauoy, S John's, Highbury burnt. Archbishop of
Canterbury, the Prior of S. John's and a Friar beheaded. Flemings beheaded.
Essex men pacified. The King sen^ to Wat Tiler.
An exceeding great tax was demanded, every person 4. d. by means whereof the
Commons in Kent and Essex rebelled, drue together, and went to Maidston: from
thence to black Heath, and so to London, and entered the city, where they
destroyed many goodly places, as the Sauoy, S. John's by Smithfield, the manor
of Highbury. They set out of the Tower of London Simon Sudbury, Robert Halles
Prior of S. John's. William Appleton a friar Minor, and beheaded them on
Towerhill. They beheaded all men of Law, and Flemings, they spoiled all books
of Law, records, and monuments they could meet with, and set all prisoners at
liberty.

The king offered them peace, on condition they would cease from burning of
houses, and slaughter of men, which ye Essex men took, and returned home: but
the Kentish men remained burning, as before. Whereupon the K. sent Sir John
Newton Knight, to Wat Tiler their Captain, to entreat him to come and talk
with him. The Knight doing his message Wat Tiler answered, that he would come
at his own pleasure, nevertheless he followed softly, and when he came near
Smithfield, where the K. abode his coming, the K. commanded W. Walworth Mayor
of London, to arrest the rebel, which Mayor, being a man of great boldness,
straight way arrested him on the head, in such sort that he astonished him, and
forthwith they which attended on the King, thrust him in diverse places of his
body: which when the commons perceived, they cried out, Wat Tiler arested and
slain.
that their captain was traitorously slain: but the King rode unto them, and
said: What mean you? I will be your Captain, follow me to have what you will
require. In ye mean time the Mayor rode into the city, raised the Citizens,
and shortly returned with a thousand well armed men, sir Robert Knoles a
Citizen of London being their leader. The Citizens of London delivered the King.
The king reioicing for this unlooked for aid, suddenly compassed the commons
with fighting men, which commons forthwith throwing down their weapons,
humbly craved pardon: which was granted, and charters to be delivered to the
captains of every shire, who then departed home. The rude multitude being thus
dispersed, the king made the Mayor and five Aldermen of London Knights for
their good service. The Kentish men pacified.


Jack Straw being taken, confessed all the conspiracy, and lost his head at
London.

John Moore, Shriue. John Hind, Shriue. John Northampton Draper, Mayor.
King Richard married Anne, daughter of Veselaus King of Bohem.

In her days began the use of piked shoes, 1388 Picked shoes, high heads,
and long tailed gowns, which women riding aside used in England by customs
tied in their knees with chains of silver and gilt. Also noble women used
hi^h attires on their heads, piked like bornes, with long trained gowns and
side saddles, after the example of the said Queen, who first brought that
fashion into this land, for before women rode astride like men.

The Merchants of England granted to the King a custom of wools, for four
years. Earthquake
A general earthquake the 21. of May, and a water shaking, that made the ships
in the haue^ to totter.

John Bal. John wraw An, reg, 6.
John Bal was brought to S. Albones, and there drawn and quartered.

John Wraw Captain of the rebels in Suffolk, he was taken, drawn and hanged.

Adam Bawne, Shriue. John Selyt, Shriue. John Northampton Draper Mayor.
A counterfeit phisitia^ punished.
A crafty deceiuer that took upon him to be skillful in Physic and Astronomy,
when his presumptuous lyings could no longer be faced out, was taken, set on
horseback, with his face toward the horse tail, and so led about the city,
with a collar of iordans, and a whetstone about his neck, and rung out with
basins.

Stir against fishmongers. An, reg, 7. 1383
The Fishmongers in London, through the council of John Northampton, then
Mayor, William Essex, John Moore, and Richard Northbury, were greatly troubled,
hindered of their liberties, and almost destroyed.

Simon Winchcome, Shriue. John Moore, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer,
Mayor.
John Northampton late Mayor of London, with John Moore, 1384 John Northampton
condemned. An. reg. 8.
Richard Norbury, and other, were convict at Reading, condemned to perpetual
prison, and their goods confiscate, for certain congregations by them made
among the Fishmongers.

Nicholas Exton, Shriue. John French, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer
Mayor.
King Richard with an army entered Scotland, 1385 The King entered. An, reg, 9.
Earthquake
burnt the country, and returned.

The 18. of July was an Earthquake.

John Organ, shriue. John Churchman, shriue. Sir Nicholas Brember Grocer,
Mayor.
This Nicholas Brember caused a pair of stocks to be placed in every ward of
London, and a common Are to be made therewith to behead such as offended.

The Duke of Lancaster went with a great army into Spain, 1386 An, reg, 10.
to claim the Kingdom of Castile which was due to him in the right of his
wife Constance, daughter to Peter King of Castile.

William Stondon, Shriue. William Moore, Shriue. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger,
Mayor.
Richard Earl of Arundell, 1387 Rochell wine taken An, reg, 11.
and Thomas Earl of Nottingham, encountered with a mighty fleet of Flemings,
laden with Rochell wine, and took 100. ships and more, the which contained
19000. tuns of wine, which they brought to diverse parts of England, whereby
wine was then sold for 13. s. four pence the tun.

William Venour, shriue. Hugh Forstalfe, shriue. Nicholas Exton Fishmonger
Mayor. The nobles rise against the King.

Thomas Duke of Gloucester the Earls of Arundel, Warwick Darby, and Nottingham,
considering how this land was misgouerned by a few persons about the K.
intending reformation of the same, assembled at Radcote Bridge with a power of
forty thousand, came to London, and pitched in the fields near to the tower,
where the King kept his Christmas. 1388
Shortly after they caused the King to call a parliament, whereof hearing
Alexander Neuell, Archbishop of York, Robert Ver Duke of Ireland, and Michael
de la Poole Earl of Suffolk, fled the land, and died in strange countries.
The king by the counsel of the above named Lords, caused to be taken, Sir
Robert Tresilian chief Justice of England, sir Nicholas Brember, late Mayor of
London, sir John Salisbury knight, sir John Beauchamp, sir Simon Burghley, sir
James Barnes knight, and John Vske, a Serieant at Arms, which by the
authority of the said Parliament, were convict of treason, and put to death,
Robert Belknap, John holt, John Locton, Richard Gray, William Burgh, and Robert
Fulthrope Justices, with the Lords which before had voided the land, were
banished for ever.

Thomas Austen shriue. Adam Carlohul, shriue. Nicholas Twyford Goldsmith Mayor.
1389
Statutes made of the Staple to be brought from Middleborow to Calice.

John Walcot, Shriue. John Lovely, Shriue. William Venour Grocer Mayor.
1390 Variance at Oxford. An, reg, 14
In Oxford the Welsh and Southern scholars assailed the Northern, whereby
many murders were done on each side.

John Francis, shriue. Thomas Viuent, shriue. Adam Bawne Goldsmith Mayor.
This Adam Bawne, provided that from parts beyond the seas, was corn brought
to London plentifully: to the furtherance of which good work, the Mayor and
Citizens took out of the Orphans chest in their Guild Hall, 2000. marks to
buy corn, and the Aldermen laid out each of them 20. pound to the like purpose.

The good man of the Cock in Cheap at the little conduit, 1391 An, reg, 14 A
Brewer at the cock in Cheap murdered.
was murdered in ye night time by a thief that came in at a gutter window, as
it was known long after by the same thief, when he was at the Gallows to be
hanged for felony: but his wife was burnt therefore, and three of his men
drawn to Tyborne, and there hanged wrongfully.

John Chadworth, Shriue. Henry Venor, Shriue. John Hind Draper, Mayor.
Upon Christmas day a Dolphin came up the river of Thames to London bridge
foreshewing the tempests that followed shortly after, A Dolphin came up to
London.
or else the disturbance of the Citizens, which through ye Kings displeasure
they came into: because the Londoners had denied the lending of 1000. 1392
Liberties of London seized. An, reg, 16
pound which the king demanded of them. He caused the Mayor, Shriues, and
Aldermen to be summoned to a Counsel at Nottingham, and there imprisoned them,
disanulling all their liberties, and made sir Edward Dalengrige Warden of
London.

Gilbert Maghfield, Shriue. Thomas Newington, Shriue. William Stondon Grocer
Mayor.
When the King saw the Londoners sore repent their trespasses, The King came to
London.
he came to London, where the citizens received him with so great glory, as
might have seemed to receive an Emperor in his triumph, and with such gifts
did honor him, that the worth thereof could not be esteemed. By this means
the King became more tractable to grant them their liberties, and then the
Kings Bench from York, 1363 An. reg. 17.
and the Chancery from Nottingh^^ were returned to London.

Drew Barentine, shriue. Richard Whiting^on, shriue. John Hatley Grocer Mayor.
1394 An, reg, 18
Qeene Anne died at Shene in Southery, and was buried at Westminster.

William Brumstone, Shriue. Thomas Knowles, Shriue. John Froshie Mercer Mayor.
1395 An, reg, 19^
King Richard made a chargeable voyage into Ireland, which came to small effect.

Roger Ellis, Shriue. William Skirrington, Shriue. William Moore Vintner Mayor.
1396 An, reg, 20.
The Kings of England and of France met besides Calice, and there concluded a
peace.

King Richard took to his wife Isabell daughter to the French King.

Thomas Wilford, Shriue. Tamberlaine takes Baiazeth, and rescueth
Constantinople.
William Parker, Shriue. Adam Bawne Goldsmith, and Richard Whittington Mercer,
Majors.
This year 1397. Tamberlaine being Lord of a a certain wast country, and
rude people in the East, who not long before had assembled great numbers of
strangers unto his aid, and ouerthrown the Persians, understanding that
Baiazeth the Turkish Emperor had won diverse kingdoms and many strong Cities
from the Christians, as also discomfited the Christian Imperial army which
consisted of Greeks, Italians, Germans, Hungarions, Seruians, Myssians,
Frenchmen, and others: and that he still persisted in extreme pride of his
invincible strength and fortune, with a mighty host had besieged
Constantinople eight years, being fully persuaded that there was no power upon
earth, that could redeem the City out of his hands, because he knew the
Princes of Christendom to be at dissension among themselves. And thereupon
secured himself, yt if Europ could not prevail against him, there was no
other power that durst encounter him. And whilst he thus thought, the said
Tamberlaine the year alone written, came upon him with a very mighty host,
and in a set battle upon Mount Stella, where Pompey fought with Mithridates,
he overcame this Baiazeth, being the fourth of that name, flew two hundred
thousand Turks, took him prisoner, put him in an iron cage, and so carried
him in triumph from place to place. This Baiazeth was crowned in the year
1373. Amurah the second was crowned 1414. he was the first that ordained the
Imperial Band or guarde of renegate Christians commonly called Ianezaries. And
in the year 1447. Constantine the 7. was crowned Emperor of Constantinople,
The City of Constantinople received that name of the Emperor Constantine the
Great, he was crowned in the year of the world 4271 and in the year of our
redemption 309 he reigned Emperor 31. years, and died at 66. years of age,
but the City of Constantinople was of old time called Byzantium and bears
for Arms in their Scutchion, a cross between 4. letters of B. signifying
Bizantium the ancient name of that City.
being before that, K. of Morea: he was surnamed the Dragon for his cruelty
which he exercised upon the Turks, for revenge whereof, and other ancient
grudges, Mahomet son of Amurat the 2. in the year 1452. after he had done
great spoils and damage upon Greece, he also conquered their chief City
Constantinople, and took Constantine the Christian Emperor prisoner, then
commanded his head to be cut off, and with great derision caused his head to
be shown throughout all the Turkish camp. And among other things of worthy
note and observation you shall understand: that whereas the famous City
Constantinople was at first dignified, reedified, enriched and advanced by a
Constantine, whose mothers name was S. Helen, the same City was lost, and
subiugated unto Turkish slavery by a Constantine, whose mothers name was
likewise Helen. This Mahomet was the second of that name, and the eight in
rank of Turkish Emperors, and was the first that arrogated to his title the
name of Great, whose successors ever since have been called the great Turk,
or grand Signor: Therefore Baiazeth the fourth, by reason of sundry his
victories against the Christians, and cruel murders which he had performed on
his kindred and friends, was surnamed the whirlwinde, or thunderbolt of
heaven. And Tamberlaine after his conquest calling to mind all his fortunes,
and considering how many mighty Princes he had subdued, surnamed himself the
scourge of God.

Thomas Duke of Gloucester, King Richards Uncle was murdered at Calice. 1397
Duke of Gloucester murdered. An, reg, 21.


The Earl of Arundell and many other, were put to death for that they rebuked
the King in certain matters somewhat liberally.

Richard Askam, Shriue. John Woodcocke, Shriue. Richard Whittington Mereer
Mayor.
Thomas Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, Westminster hall repaired.
was banished the Realm.

The King caused the great hall at Westminster to be repaired with a marvelous
costly work. 1398 An, reg, 22. The Duke of Hereford accused the Duke of
Norfolk. The two Dukes banished.


Henry Duke of Hereford accused Thomas Duke of Norfolk of certain words by
him spoken, tending to the reproach of the kings person, which the Duke of
Norfolk utterly denied: whereupon a combat was granted them, but the king
taking up the quarrel, banished the Duke of Hereford for 10. years, and the
Duke of Norfolk for ever.

John Wade, Shriue. John Warnar, Shriue. Drew Barentine Goldsmith Mayor.
Ihon of Gaunt, D. of Lancaster, deceased, Duke of Lancaster deceased.
and was honorably buried in S. Paul's Church at London

The King exacted great sums of money of xvii. 1399 Great exactions.
shires of the realm, and laid to their charges that they had been against
him with the Duke of Gloucester, the Earls of Arundell and Warwick, wherefore
he sent to induce the Lords both spiritual and temporal, to make a submission
by writing, acknowledging themselves to be traitors to the King, though they
never offended him. Blanke Charters.


Moreover he compelled them to set their hands to blankes, to the end that so
often as it pleased him, he might oppress them.

K. Richard sailed into Ireland: An, reg, 23.
About Whitsontide King Richard sailed toward Ireland. In the mean season
Henry Duke of Hereford and of Lancaster, arrived in Yorkshire, demanding the
inheritance due to him by the death of his Father. There came to him, Henry
Percie, Earl of Northumberland, Ralph Neuill Earl of Westmerland, and many
other Lords with their powers, and went to Bristow, and besieged the Castle,
where they took W. Scrope, John Bushy, and Thomas Green, and beheaded them.
King Richard hearing of the Dukes arrival, forthwith took shipping, and
arrived at Milford haven: but when he understood what preparation the Duke had
made, he placed himself in the castle of Conway, desiring to talk with T.
Arundell Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Earl of Northumberland, which being
granted, he came to the castle of flint, where he had a brief communication
with the Duke of Lancaster. They took horse, and that night came to ye castle
of Chester, from thence to Westminster and from thence the King was sent to the
tower of London, where he remained till the next Parliament, which was begun
the morrow after Michaelmas day, at which time he resigned to Henry Duke of
Hereford and Lancaster, all his power and knightly title to the Crown of
England, and France, K. Richard deposed.
when he had reigned 22. years, 3. months, and odd days.

HEnry the fourth, An, reg. ^
son to John of Gaunt Duke of Lancaster was ordained king of England more by
force then by lawful succession or election. He began his reign the 29. of
September, in the year 1399.

William Walden, Shriue. William Hide, Shriue. Thomas Knowles Grocer Mayor.
The King caused the blancke charters made to King Richard to be burnt. The
blanck Charters burnt. Conspiracy disclosed.


John Holland late Duke of Exceter, Thomas Holland Duke of Surrey, Edward Duke
of Awmarle, John Montacute Earl of Salisbury, Thomas Spencer, Sir Ralph
Lumley, Sir Thomas Blunt, Sir Benedict Cely, Knights, with others, conspired
against King Henry, and appointed privily to murder him: but their treason
being disclosed, they were all put to death.

King Richard being in Pomfret castle, died the 14. day of February, his body
was brought to London, and so through the City to Paul's C. bare faced, where
he stood 3. days for all beholders, from thence he was carried to Langley, and
there buried.

The Welshmen rebel by the setting on of Owen Glendouerdew, 1400 Owe^
Glendouerdew. An, reg, 2.
whereof the King being certified, went into Wales, but the Welshmen fled.

John Wakell, Shriue. William Ebot, Shriue. John Frances Goldsmith Mayor.
This time was used exceeding pride in garments 1401
gowns with deep and broad sleeves, Sleeves of garments monstrous. An, reg, 3
commonly called peake sleeves, whereof some hung down to the feet, and at
least to the knees, full of cuts and iagges.

William Venor, Shriue. John Eremingham, Shriue. John Chadworth Mercer Mayor.
The Conduit upon Gornehill in London was made.

1402 Co^nspiracy against king Henry. A stout friar executed Friars hanged.
Certain men affirmed King Richard to be alive, for the which a Priest was
taken at Warwick, who was drawn, hanged, and quartered.

Walter Waldocke Prior of Land, was likewise hanged, and headed. Certain gray
Friars were taken, of the which one Richard Fresby Doctor of Divinity was
drawn and hanged.

Sir Roger Clarindon Knight, a Squire and a Yeoman were beheaded, and eight
gray friars hanged and beheaded at London, and two at Leicester, all which had
published King Richard to be alive.

Owen Gle^douerdew. K. Henry went into Wales. The first Duke of Millaine.
Owen Glendouerdew invaded all the shires that bordered near unto him.

The K. went with a great power into Wales where he profited nothing.

This year 1402. died John Galias of Galiaso the first Duke of Millaine, being
at first but viscount of Millaine, as his ancestors had been before him: he
was created Duke by Wencessaus the Emperor, for ayding him with a great army
against Robert of Bauiere otherwise called Rupert Duke of Bauaria. Compotior
unto the Imperial dignity, Wencessaus was despised of many, and his lose
government generally misliked even of his own brother Sigismond, with whom he
had sharp wars, and was by him taken and kept prisoner until he died of an
Apoplexy. After his death. Robert became sole Emperor in the year 1400. who
with all expedition and fury as well in respect of his own particular malice,
as in pretense of a special favor toward his old tried friends the
Florentines, he came into Italy with a very strong army, with full purpose to
vanquish and be avenged of Galeaso the new Duke of Millaine, but the Duke so
stoutly resisted the Emperor and all his adherents, as he caused him to
retire into Germany: Notwithstanding the importunate suit of the Florentines
unto the Emperor that he should not depart out of Italy and leave them in all
appearance of extreme danger of their enemies whom they had so many ways
vexed: in revenge whereof the said John Galeazo entered into arms, but first
slew his Uncle Barnabas, then posiest himself of his uncles wealth and
authority, and conquered Verona, Vincentia, Padua, Parma, and many other
Italian Cities and territories, he made a large Park for all sorts of beasts,
and in the middle thereof he builded a stately Monastery. He was very fair,
learned, and eloquent, but how long he reigned is uncertain, because the
Archbishop of Florence, and the supplement of Chronicles and Paulus Iouius
differ about the beginning of his reign, the Archbishop says he began in the
year 1385. the Supplement says in the year 1382. and Iouius says in the
year 1378. He reigned 24. years, and died at 55. years of age, his son John
Maria being very young, succeeded him in the year 1402. and was in his minority
brought up by his mother: after that he became tyrannous, he put to death many
honest and virtuous people, and caused many of his enemies to be eaten by
dogs, he imprisoned his kind mother, where he constrained her to end her days
with great misery: he was slain by his own servants as he was at Church
having reigned ten years. Read the supplement of Chronicles.

Ferrara.
The Dukedom of Ferrara, for want of heirs male, returned to the Church
again, about the year 1596. and Pope Clement the 8. took possession thereof,
and converted it to a commonwealth, retaining the regal power thereof unto
himself and his successors.

Scots at Halidon hill.
The Scots were overthrown at Hallidon Hill.

Earl Douglas was taken, and many other: there were drowned in the river of
Tweed about 500.

Richard Marlew, Shriue. Robert Chicheley, Shriue. John Walcot Draper Mayor.
An. reg. 4. 1403 Battle at Shrewsbury.
A great battle was fought near unto Shrewesbury between King Henry and Henry
Percy the younger, unto whom was joined sir Thomas Percy Earl of Worcester,
uncle to the said Henry, and almost all the Gentlemen of Ches-shire, Sir Henry
Percy was slain, sir Thomas Percy taken and beheaded, and of the commons on
both sides about 5000. slain.

Plymouth spoiled.
The town of Plymouth was burnt by ye Britons Thomas Falconer, shriue. Thomas
Poole, shriue. William Askam Fishmonger Mayor.


The Frenchmen came to the Isle of Wight, An, reg. 5. 1404 Frenchmen invaded
the Isle of Wight. Dartmouth invaded by the Frenchmen.
but those of the Isle rising against them, they were glad to depart.

The Lord of Cassels in Britain arrived at Black poole, 2. mile out of
Dartmouth with a great Navy. Where (of the rusticall people) he was slain,
and xvii. ships were taken fraught with wines.

William Louth, Shriue. Stephen Spilman, Shriue. John Hind Draper Mayor.
The son of Owen Glendouerdew was taken, Owens for taken.
and 150. with him were taken and slain.

Richard Scrope Archbishop of York, 1405 Archbishop of York against King
Henry. An, reg, 7.
and Thomas Monbray Earl Marshall, imagined diverse articles against the King,
because he had put down King Richard, offering themselves for those articles
to live and die, which caused great numbers of people to resort to them: but
they were taken and presented to the King at York, where they were both
beheaded.

Henry Berton, Shriue. William Cromer, Shriue. John Woodstocke Mercer Mayor.
James the son of Robert King of Scots, 1406 The King of Scots son taken. An,
reg, 8.
being nine years old, sailing toward France, was by tempest of weather
driven upon the coast of England, where being taken, he was presented to the
King, and remained prisoner till the second year of Henry the sixth.

Nicholas Wotton, shriue. Geffery Brook, shriue. Richard Whittington Mayor.
1407 Great pestilence. Rochester bridge new builded. An, reg, 9.
A pestilence consumed in the City of London, about 30000.

Sir Robert Knowles Knight deceased, he builded anew the bridge of Rochester:
he reedified the Church of the white Friars at London, where he was buried:
he founded a college at Pomfret, etc.

Henry Pomfret, Shriue. William Hallon, Shriue. William Stonden Grocer Mayor.
A great frost.
A frost lasted 15. weeks.

1408 Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph.
Henry Earl of Northumberland, and the Lord Bardolph came into England with a
great company, pretending by proclaimation to deliver the people from the great
suppression that they well burdned with: but by sir Thomas Rokeby Shriue of
Yorkshire, he was encounted at Bramhaunnor, and there slain: the Lord
Bardolph was wounded to death. Thomas Dacke, Shriue. William Norton, Shriue.
Drew Barentine Goldsmith Mayor.


An, reg, 10 1409 Play at Skinners well. An, reg, 12.
This year was a great play at Skinners well near unto Clarken well besides
London, and was of matter from ye creation of the world: there were to behold
the same the most part of Nobles and Gentiles in England, and forthwith after
began a royal Iousting in Smithfield between the H^nowayes and our English
Lords.

John Law, shriue. William Chichely, shriue. Richard Marlow Irenmonger, Mayor.
1410 The Kings son beaten. An, reg, 12.

Upon the even of S. John Baptist, John the Kings son being in East Cheap
after midnight, a great debate happened between his men, and men of the Court,
till the Mayor with other Citizens, ceased the same. K. Henry founded a
College at Battlefield in Shropshire, where he overcame Sir Henry Percy and
other.

John Pen, shriue. Thomas Pike, shriue. Thomas Knowles Grocer Mayor. Guild
Hall in London builded. 1411 An, reg, 13

The guild Hall in London was began to be made newly by the foresaid Mayor and
Alderme^. A squier of Wales, named Rice ap Dee, which had long time rebelled
against the King, was brought to London, and there drawn hanged and quartered.

John Rainewill, Shriue. William Cotton, Shriue. Robert Chichely Grocer Mayor.
The K. caused a new coin of nobles to be made, 1412 Fodringhai An, reg, 14.
which were of less value then the old by 4. d. in a Noble. King Henry founded
the College of Fadringhey in Northamptonshire.

Ralph Leuenhinde, shriue. William Seuenoke, shriue. William Waldren Mercer
Maior^
After the fortunate chances happened to K. Henry, being delivered of all
civil division, he was taken with sickness, and yielded to God his spirit the
10. of March, Anno 1412. when he had reigned 13 years, 6. months, and odd
days: he was buried at Canterbury.

H^^ry the fifth began his reign the 20. An, reg, 1
of March, in the year 1412. This Prince exceeded the mean stature of men: he
was beauteous of visage, his neck long, body slender, and lean, and his bones
small: nevertheless he was of marvelous great strength, and passing swift in
running.

1413 Sir John Old-castle.
Sir John Old Castle, for diverse points touching the Sacrament, before the
Archbishop of Canterbury, the Bishop of London, Winchester, and other, was
convict and committed to the Tower of London, out of the which he brake.

John Stotton, Shriue. John Michael, Shriue. William Cromer Draper Mayor.
1414 An, reg, 2
Certain adherents of Sir John Old Castle, assembled them in Thickets field
near unto the city of London: but the King being warned, took the field
before them, and so took of them such numbers that all the prisoners about
London were ^^^led, diverse of them were after executed, John N^anset Esquire,
Men forswear the land.
with 9. of his men slew John Tibbey Clarke, Chancellor to the Queen, for the
which deed the said Esquier, and four of his men fled to S. Anns Church within
Aldersgate, and after for swore the land.

John Michael, Shriue. Thomas Allin, Shriue. Thomas Fawconer Mercer Mayor.
This Thomas Fawconer caused to break the wall of London near unto Colman
street, Mooregate first bu^ced An reg, 3 1415 Conspiracy
and there to make a gate upon the moore side, where was none before: He also
caused the ditch to be cleansed.

The King rode to Southhampton, where was discovered a great conspiracy against
him by Richard Earl of Cambridge, sir Thomas Gray* and Henry Scrope, with
other, who were executed at Southhampton.

The King entered the sea with 1000. sail, K Henry sailed into Normandy B^ttell
of Agincourt.
and the third night after arrived in Normandy. He laid siege to Hartflew,
which was yielded to him. He sought the battle at Agincourt, where he had a
marvelous victory.

About this time Philip the French King began to set a custom or impost upon
Salt, The first impost upon salt in France.
which was never before.

William Cambridge, Shriue. Allen Euerard, Shriue. Nicholas Wotton Draper
Mayor.
K. Henry arrived at Dover. K. Henry returned. An. reg. 4. 1416
The Mayor of London with the Aldermen and crafts, riding in red, with hoods
red and white, met with the King on black. Richard Whittington, Shriue. John
Couentry, Shriue. Henry Barton Skinner Mayor.


This year it was decreed by a court of common counsel, An, reg, 5. 1417
that a lantherne and candle light should be hanged out at every door in the
city in the winter.

On Easter day at a Sermon in S. A fray in S. Dunstons Church.
Dunstons in the East of London, a great fray happened, wherethrough many
people were sore wounded, and Thomas Petwarden Fishmonger, slain out of hand.
The beginners of the fray, which was the Lord Strange, and sir John Russel
knight, through the quarrel of their two wives, were brought to the counter in
the Poultry, and excommunicated at P. Cross.

King Henry sailed into Normandy, and took the Castle of Tonke, and shortly
after get Caen, Beyonx, and many other Towns and Castles.

Henry Read, shriue. John Gedney, shriue. Richard Marlow, Ironmonger Mayor.
An, reg, 6. 1418
Sir John Oldcastle was sent unto London by the Lord Powes out of Wales: which
sir John was convict by Parliament drawn to S. Giles field, hanged, and
consumed with fire.

The Parson of Wrotham in Norfolk, which had haunted New-Market-heath, and
there robbed and spoiled many, was with his concubine brought to Newgate of
London, where he died.

John Brian. Ralph Barton. Brian deceased, Shriue. John Pernesse succeeded.
Shriue. William Seuenoke Grocer Mayor.
W. Seuenoke. Alms houses and free schole at Seuenoke. An, reg, 7. 1419
This William Seuenoke founded in the town of Seuenocke in Kent, where he had
been nourished, a free school, and xii. alms houses.

King Henry besieged the City of Roan half a year and more, which was
yielded to him.

Richard Whitingham, shriue. John Butler, shriue. Richard Whittington Mercer
Mayor.
Whittington college An, reg, 8. 1420
This Richard Whittington builded the library in the Gray Friars Church in
London: his Excecutors of his goods builded Whittington College, they repaired
S. Bartholomews Hospital in Smithfield, they bare some charges to the pauing
and glazing of the Guildhall, and also of the library there, they new builded
the West gate of London, of old time called Newgate.

K. Henry was made Regent of France, K. Henry made regent of France.
and wedded Lady Katherine the Kings daughter of France at Troys in Champaine:
the feast being finished, the King besieged and won many towns in France.

John Burler, Shriue. John Wells, Shriue. William Cambrige Grocer Mayor.
The King suppressed the French houses of religious Monks and Friars, and such
like in England. An, reg. 9. 1421 Religious houses ^uppressed. A charitable
Bishop.


A Subsidy was demanded, but the Bishop of Winchester lent the King 20000.
pound to ^^ay the matter. The King sailed into France.

Richard Goslin, Shriue. William Weston, Shriue. Robert Chichely Grocer Mayor.
This Robert Chichely w^lled in his testament, Robert Chichely his charity.
that upon his mind day, a competent dinner should be ordained for 2420. poor
men, householders of the City, and 20. pound in money to distribute amongst
them, which was to every man two pence

At this time such was the general and capital command and sway of the King of
England in France, The King of England se^le used ^n the Court of Chancery in
Paris.
(as her own Chronicles testify) that in the Court of Chancery in Paris, all
things were sealed with the seal of King Henry of England, and the great seal
of England was there new made and used: wherein was the Arms of France and
England: and as the King sat in his chair of state, he held two Scepters in
his hands: that is to say, in his right hand was a scepter smooth and plain,
only the proportion of the French coin, commonly called a French crown: and
in his left hand he held a scepter full of curious arts, carved and wrought
with the arms of England, All this and much more is very authentically
recorded in the French Chronicles.
as is used in the English money, and on the top thereof a Cross. Presently
upon this, the french were so vexed with the english government that they
practiced al means to extirp the English, as well by prayers as otherwise, and
never ceased until they had obtained their desire: Calice only excepted,
which was English many years after. Henry the Kings son was borne at Windsor
on the 6. An, reg, 10 1422
day of December.

K. Henry being at Boys S. Vincent, waxed sick and died the last of August in
the year 1422. when he had reigned 9. years, 5. months, and odd days: he
founded two Monasteries upon the Thames, the one of the Religion of the
Carthusians, Shine and Sion.
which he named Bethlem, the other of religious men and women of S. Briget,
which he named Sion. He founded Garter principal King of Arms. He lies
buried at Westminster.

Henry of Windsor.
An, reg. 1.
HEnry the 6. being an infant of 8. months old, began his reign the last of
August in the year 1422. the governance of the Realm was committed to the
Duke of Gloucester, and the guard of his person to the Duke of Exceter, and to
the Duke of Bedford was given the the regiment of France.

William Eastfield, Shriue. Robert Tatarsall, Shriue. William Walderne Mercer
Mayor.
The xxi. of October died Charles King of France, The French King died.
by reason whereof the kingdom of France should come to King Henry, and the
Nobles of France, (except a few that held with the Dolphine) delivered the
possession thereof to the Duke of Bedford, to the use of King Henry.

A subsidy was granted for three years, 1423 Subsidy of woole. Newgate at
London.
five nobles for every sack of woolle that should pass out of the land.

This year the West gate of London, called Newgate, was new builded by the
Excecutors of Richard Whittington, Nicholas James, Shriue. Thomas VVadford,
Shriue. William Cromer Draper Mayor.


James the young King of Scots, An. reg. 2. K. of Scots released.
who was taken by the Englishmen in the 8. year of Henry the 4. and had
remained in England prisoner till this time, was now delivered, and married in
S. Mary Oueries in Southwarke to the Lady Jane, daughter the Earl of Somerset.

The battle at Vernoill in Perch, between the Duke of Bedford Regent of
France, 1424 Battle as Vernell. An, reg, 3.
and the Arminakes, but the English party prevailed.

Simon Seman, shriue. John Bywater, shriue. John Michael Stockefishmonger
Mayor.
By a Parliament was granted to the King for 3. years to help him in his
wars, a subsidy of 12. d. the pound of all Merchandise brought in or carried
out of the Realm, and 3. s. of every tun of wine, which was called tonage or
poundage but since it has been renewed at sundry Parliaments, and now called
custom.

Strangers to be lodged with English hosts.
It was enacted that all the Merchant strangers should be lodged with English
hosts, and within 40. days to make sale of all they brought, or else what
remained to be forfeit to the King.

William M^ldred, shriue. John Brok^^ll shriue. John Couentry Mercer Mayor.
An reg, 4. Debate between the Duke of Gloucester, and the Bishop of Winchester
The morrow after Simon and Iudes day the Mayor caused a great watch to be kept
with most part of the citizens in armor to stand by the duke of Gloucester
against the Bishop of Winchester, who lay in Southwark with a great power of
Lancashire and Cheshire men: but the matter was appeased by the Archbishop of
Canterbury.

The 28. of September was an earthquake, which continued the space of two
hours.

John Arnold, Shriue. John Higham, Shriue. John Rainwell Fishmonger Mayor.
An, reg, 5 W^rd, disch^rged for fifteenes.
This John Rainwell gave certain tenements to the city of London, for the
which the same city is bound to pay forever, such Fifteenes as well be
granted to the K. for Downgate, Bill^ngsgate, and Algate ward, etc.

This year the tower of the drawbridge of London, 1427 An, reg, 7.
was begun by the same Mayor.

Henry Frowicke, shriue. Robert Otley, shriue. John Godney Draper Mayor.
From the beginning of April unto Hallontide, was so great abundance of
rain, that not only hay, but corn also was destroyed.

Thomas Duthouse, shriue. John Abbot, shriue. Henry Barton Skinner Mayor.
The Duke of Norfolk passing through London bridge, his barge overwhelmed, so
that 30. Duke of Norfolk escaped.
persons were drowned, and the Duke with other that escaped were drawn up with
ropes.

A Britain murdered a widow in white chapel parish without Algate of London,
and bare away her goods, but being pursued, he took succor of the Church of S.
George in Southwark, Murder quit with murder.
from whence he was taken, and forswore the land. But as he happened to come by
the place where he had done the murder, ye women of the parish withstones,
sheeps horns, and kennell dung, made an end of him.

William Russo, Shriue. Ralph Holland, Shriue. William Eastfield Mayor.
Before the town of Champaine was taken a woman armed, 1430 La Pucelle de
Dieu. An, reg, 9.
the Frenchmen called her La Pucella de Dieu, through whom the Dolphin trusted
to have conquered all France.

Walter Chartsey, Shriue. Robert Large, Shriue. Nicholas Wotton Draper Mayor.
Francis Sforce son to Sforce of Cutygnola, Francis Sforce made Duke of Milaine.
was by his father Viscount Philip Maria, adopted for his heir, and caused him
to bear the serpent in his Scutchion, which was the ancient Arms of the said
Viscount. And in the year 1430 died Phillip Maria, and the year following, ye
forenamed Francis Sforce, by reason of his singular virtue and valor, was made
Duke of Millaine: he was called Sforce because his father was so called, who
was so surnamed for his valor and Noble acts of chiualry: for albeit at the
first he was but of mean and low place* yet by his own merit he attained by
degrees the highest place in Camp, making all men to obey and serve him by
force, and was thereupon surnamed Sforce, which name has descended unto his
heirs ever since. This Francis had many victories against Pope Eugenius, and
against the Florentines, Venetians, and Mylaneseys: he had almost extirped the
Gwelphes, and Ghibelines: he was feared and honored of all Italy: he made
peace with Venice and other cities: he reedified the great Castle of Millaine,
and builded a fair hospital within the City, and gave thereunto large
revenues only for the use of the poor, he was at great charges in building
the Church of Saint Ambrose* he reigned 16. years, his soune Galease Maria
succeeded him, who banished his own mother, and abounded in all vices: he was
slain in S. Stephens Church, having reigned 9. years, he left behind him 4.
children. Read the Supplement of Chronicles.

1431A commotion at Abington An, reg, 10.
At Abington began an insurrection of certain lewd persons ye intended to have
wrought much mischief: but the chief author being Balif^e of the town,
named William Mundeuile, a Weauor with others, were put to death.

John Adorley, Shriue. Stephen Brown, Shriue. John Wels Grocer Mayor.
This John Wells caused the Conduit called the Standard in Cheap to be new
builded.

This year 1431. The King of England crowned in Paris.
King Henry of England being but 12. years of age, was triumphantly crowned
King of France in our Lady Church in Paris, in the presence of the English and
French Clergy and Nobility: and was with great honor generally received as
King. The Frenchmen ever after called him little Harry, as appears by their
Chronicles to this day.

King Henry after he was crowned at Paris in France, shortly after returned
into England, 1432 An, reg. 11.
and came to London, where he was royally received of all the Crafts men
riding in gowns of white, and red hoods imbrodered richly.

John Oluey, shriue. John Paddesley, shriue. John Perney Fishmonger Mayor.
Four Soldiers of Calice beheaded, 1433 An, reg, 12.
and an hundred and ten banished, and before that time was banished an hundred
and twenty.

Thomas Chalton, Shriue. John King, Shriue. John Brokeley Draper Mayor.
The Earl of Huntington was sent with a company of Soldiers into France,
where he achieved many enterprises.

Thomas Barnewell, Shriue. Simon Air Shriue. Roger Otely Grocer Mayor.
The Thames was frozen, 1432 An, reg, 13. Great frost
that the Merchandise which came to the Thames mouth, was carried to London by
land.

Thomas Catworth, shriue. Robert Clopton, shriue. Henry Frowicke Mayor.
An, reg, 14.
Charles of France recovered the city of Paris, the town of Hartflew, and S.
Denis.

Thomas Morsted, Shriue. William Gregory, Shriue. John Michael Fishmonger
Mayor.
An, reg, 15. Part of London bridge fell.
The gate on London bridge, with the tower upon it next to Southwarke: fell
down, and the 2. furthe^ arches of the said bridge, and no man perished.

1437 An Alderman of London Warden of Norwich. An, reg, 16.
King Henry put down the Mayor of Norwich, sent the Aldermen some to Lyn, some
to Canterbury, took their Franchises into his hand, and appointed John Wels
sometime Mayor of London to be Warden of Norwich.

All the Lions in the Tower of London died.

William Hales, Shriue. William Chapman, Shriue. William Eastfield Mercer
Mayor.
1438 An, reg, 17
This William Eastfield builded the water conduit in Fleetstreete.

Owen Theodor fowly hurting his keeper, brake out of Newgate, but was again
taken afterward.

This Owen (as was said) had privily married Queen Katherne, late wife to
Henry the fifth, and had four children by her.

Hugh Diker, shriue. Nicholas Yoo, shriue. Stephen Brown Grocer Mayor.
Great wind Three men slain.
A great mind in London almost blewe down one side of the street called the
old Change.

A stack of wood fell down at Bainards Castle, and killed 3. men. By the fall
of a staire at Bedford, Eighteen men slain. 1439 An, reg 18 Strumpets work
ray hoods-
where the shi^e day was kept 18. persons were slain. Many strumpets were set
on the pillory and banished the city, except they wore their ray hoods Philip
Malpas, Shriue. Roger Marshall, Shriue. Robert large Mercer Mayor.


It was ordained that all Merchant strangers should go to host with Englishmen,
Parliament at Reading
and to make sale of their Marchandises, and buy again what they would within
the space of 6. months, giving their host for every 20. s. worth 2. d. except
the Easterlings. Also that every householder that was an aliant should pay to
the King xvi. pence the year, Orders for strangers.
and every servant aliant vi. pence.

Sir Rich Which, Vicar of Hermetsworth in Essex, was burnt on Tower Hill the 17
of June. 1440 The postern of London sanke. An, reg, 19
The 18. of July the posterne of London by Eastsmithfield, against the Tower of
London, sanke by night. John Sutton, Shriue. William Wettinhall, Shriue. John
Paddesley Goldsmith Mayor.


A combat was fought at Tote hill between two thieves, 1441 A combat
between 2 thieves. Roger Bolingbrooke for necromancy. Elianor Cobham
apprehended.
the appealer had the field of the defendant

Roger Bolingbrooke with Thomas Southwell, were taken as conspirators of the
kings death, for it was said, that the same Roger should labor to consume the
Kings person by way of necremancy.

Elianor Cobham Duchess of Gloucester was cited to appear before Henry
Chichely Archbishop of Canterbury, to answer certain matters of necromancy,
witchcraft, sorcery, heresy, and treason, where (when she appeared) the
foresaid Roger was brought forth to witness against her, and said, that she was
the cause, and first stirred him to labor in that art. Then she was committed
to the ward of Sir John Steward Knight. An, reg, 29. A Witch burnt.
Then was taken also Margerie Gurdmain, a witch of Ely, whose sorcery and
witchcraft the said Elianor had long time used, wherefore the same witch was
burnt in Smithfield. William Combis, shriue. Richard Rich, shriue. Robert
Clopton Draper Mayor.


Elianor Cobham did penance
The ninth of November, dame Elianor appeared before the Archbishop and others,
and received penance, which she performed. On the xvii. of November she came
from the temple bridge, with a taper of wax of two pound in her hand through
Fleetstreete to Paul's, where she offered her Taper at the Altar. On the
wednesday next she went through Bridge-streete, Grace-Church street to
Leaden Hall, and so to Christ-Church by Algate. On friday she went through
Cheap to S. Michaels in Cornehill, in form aforesaid.

Roger Bolinbrooke executed.
The 18. of November, Roger Bolinbrooke was araigned, drawn from the Tower to
Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.

Thomas Beaumont, Shriue. Richard Norden, Shriue. John Athile Ironmonger Mayor.
An, reg, 21. 1443 Citizens of Norwich against the Prior. An, reg, 22.
The Citizens of Norwich rose against the Prior of Christ's Church within the
same City, and would have flered the Priory: they kept the Town by strength
against the Duke of Norffolke, and all his power, wherefore the King sent
thither the chief Judge John Fortescue, with the Earls of Stafford and of
Huntington, who indicted many Citizens, and the Prior also.

Nicholas Wyfford, Shriue. John Norman, Shriue. Thomas Catworth Grocer Mayor.
King Henry sent into France Ambassadors, 1444 An, reg, 25
W. de la poole Marquis of Suffolk. Adam Molens, Robert Roes and others, to
treat of a marriage between King Henry, and Margaret the kings daughter of
Cicill, and was concluded.

Stephen Foster, shriue. Hugh Which, shriue. Henry Frowicke Mercer Mayor.
On Candlemas eve in diverse places of England, was heard terrible thunders with
lightning, whereby the Church of Baldeoke in Hartfordshire the Church of Walden
in Essex, and diverse others were sore shaken. And the steeple of S. Paul's
steeple fired. 1445 Queen Margaret. An, reg, 24
Paul's in London, about 3. of the clock in the afternoon was set on fire in
the midst of the shaft, but by the labor of well disposed people, the same was
quenched.

Lady Margaret landing at Porchester, went from thence by water to Hampton,
from thence to the Abbey of Tich-field, and was there wedded to king Henry: she
was received at the Black Heath by the Citizens of London, riding on
horseback, in blew gowns and red hoods.

John Derby, Shriue. Godfrey Filding, Shriue. Simon Air Draper Mayor.
This Simon Air builded the leaden Hall in London, Leaden hall in London
builded.
to be a storehouse for grain and fuel (for poor of the City) and also a
beautiful Chapel in the East end of the same. 1436 An, reg, 25.


Robert Horn, Shriue. Godfrey Boleine, Shriue. John Olrey Mercer Mayor.
In a Parliament at Bury in Suffolk, The Duke of Gloucester arested. 1447 An,
reg, 26.
Humphrey Duke of Gloucester was arested, where soon after he died: he was
buried at S. Albones.

William Abraham, Shriue. Thomas Scot, Shriue. John Gedney Draper Mayor.
George Scanderbag alias Castriot.
This year 1447. George Castriot, whom the Turks in scorn called Scanderbeg,
by fine policy, and warlike prowess recovered from Amurath his kingdoms left
by his father, viz. the kingdoms of Epyris and Albania, auntiently called
Macedon: he won by force also from the Turks, many provinces, cities, and
strong holds.

2448 An, reg, 27.
An English Knight named sir Francis de Aragonis took a town of Normandy named
Fogiers, against the truce: and this was the occasion that after the Frenchmen
gate all Normandy.

Will^am Cantlow Shriue. William Marow Shriue. Stephen Brown Grocer Mayor.
Roan was yielded to the French King.

William Hulin, Thomas C^nings, Thomas Chalton Mercer Mayor.
Bishop of Chichester murdered. Blewheard hanged. 1450
Adam Molins Bishop of Chichester keeper of the kings privy seal, was by
shipmen slain at portsmouth. Blewbeard a Fuller, taken beside Canterbury, for
raising a rebellion was hanged and quartered.

The Duke of Suffolk was banished the land, Duke of Suffolk murdered. Jack
Cade rebelled.
who sailing toward France, was met on the sea by a ship of war, and beheaded:
his corpse was cast up at Dover. The commons of Kent in great numbers assembled
on black Heath, having to their Captain Jack Cade, against whom the King
sent a great array, but by the said captain and rebels, they were discomfited,
and sir Humphrey Stafford, and William his brother, with many other slain.
After this victory the rebel came to London, entered the city, and struck his
sword upon London Stone, saying: Now is Mortimer Lord of this city. Upon the 3.
of July he caused the Lord Say to be arrained, and at the standard in Cheap
smot off his head: he also beheaded Sir James Cromer at the miles end: After
this succeeded open robbery within the city. But the Mayor and others sent to
the Lord Scales, keeper of the Tower, who promised his aid with shooting of
Ordinance, and Matthew Gough was appointed to assist the Mayor: so that the
captains of the City took upon them in the night to keep the bridge, where
between them and the rebels was a fiery encounter. In conclusion the rebels
got the drawbridge, and drowned and spoiled many. This conflict endured till
9. of the clock in the morning, in doubtful chance: so that both parties
agreed to desist from fight till the next day, upon condition, that neither
Londoner should pass into Southwarke, nor the kentishmen into London. Then the
Archbishop of Canterbury and other passed to southwarke, where they showed a
general pardon for all offenders: whereupon the multitude retired home. The
captain fled through ye wild of Suffex, and there was slain. Jack Cade
slain. Bishop of Salisbury murdered.
After this the King rode into Kent, where many were drawn and quartered. The
29. of June, William Bishop of Salisbury, was by his own Tenants shamefully
murdered.

John Middleton, Shriue. William Dear, Shriue. Nicholas Wyfford Grocer Mayor.
1451
Souldiars made a fray against the Mayor of London the same day that he took
his charge at Westminster at night, coming from S. Thomas of Acres.

Matthew Phillip, Shriue. Christopher Warton, Shriue. An, reg, 30. 1452
William Gregory Skinner Mayor.
A commotion began by Richard Duke of York and others, which was appeased for
a time.

Richard Lee, shriue. Ralph Alley, shriue. Godfrey Felding Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 31. States created.
King Henry made his two brethren on the mothers side, Edmond Earl of Richmond,
and Jasper Earl of Pembrooke.

1453 An, reg, 32
The 12. of October, the Queen was delivered of a Prince named Edward.

John Waldren, Shriue. Thomas Cook, Shriue. John Norman Draper Mayor.
The Mayor of London first rowed to Westminster. 1454
Before this time, the Mayor, Aldermen, and commons were wont to ride to
Westminster, when the Mayor should take his charge, but this Mayor was rowed
thither by water.

A great fire next without Ludgate, in a Cordwainers house, which Cordwainer,
his wife, three m^n and a maid, were all burnt.

John Field, Shriue. William Tailor, Shriue. Stephen Foster Fishmonger Mayor.
An, reg, 33

This Stephen Foster and Dame Agnes his wife builded the southeast quadrant
adjoining to Ludgate of the city of London, and also conveyed thereunto sweet
water, sufficient for the ease of the prisoners, he also gave forty pounds to
the preachers at Paul's Cross and Spittle.

K. Henry came to S. Albons accompanied with the Dukes of Buckingham and
Somerset, 1455 first battle in S. Albons
ye Earls of Pembroke, Northumberland, Devonshire, Stafford, Dorset and
Wilshire, with other to the number of 2000. The King pight his banner in S.
Peter's street, and the Lord Clifford kept his barriers of the town, so that the
Duke of York with his power, might in no wise enter: but the Earl of Warwick
gathering his men together, brake in on the garden side in Holloway street,
crying a Warwick, and the duke of York brake up the barriers, and fought a
fierce and cruel battle, in which was slain on the Kings side, the Duke of
Somerset, the Earl of Northumberland, the Lord Clifford, and many other. This
done, the Duke of York, the Earls of Warwick and Salisbury, brought the King
to London, where by Parliament, An, reg, 34
the Duke was made protector of the realm, the Earl of Salisbury Chancellor,
and the Earl of Warwick captain of Calice.

John young, Shriue. Thomas Oldgraue, Shriue. William Marrow Grocer Mayor. 1456
An, reg, 35

The Duke of York was discharged of the Protectorship. A great riot was
committed is London against the Lumbards and Italians.

John Steward, Shriue. Ralph Verney, Shriue. Thomas Cancings Grocer, Mayor.
1457 Monstroufishes.
At Erith were taken 4. great fishes, whereof two were whales. Frenchmen landing
at Sandwich, wasted the town, and slew the inhabitants.

Prisoners of Newgate brake out. An, reg, 36.
Sir Thomas Percy, Lord Egremount, and sir Richard Percy his brother being
prisoners in Newgate, brake out by night, and went to the King, other prisoners
took the leads of the gate, and defended a long while against the Shriues, and
all their officers.

William Edward, Shriue. Thomas Reyner, Shriue. Godfrey Bolein Mercer, Mayor.
A feigned agreement was made between the King and the Duke of York. 1458 the
Queens Attorney slain. An, reg, 37.


A fray in Fleetstreet between men of the Court, and the inhabitants of ye
same street, in which fray the Queens Attorney was slain: for this fact the
K. committed the Governors of Furniuall, Clifford, and Barnards Inn to
prison, and William Taylour Alderman of that ward, with many other were sent to
Windsor Castle.

Ralph Iossilin, Shriue. Richard Medtham, Shriue. Thomas Scot Draper, Mayor.
1459 Printing first invented.
The Science of Printing was found in Germany at Magunce. William Caxton of
London, Mercer, brought it into England about the year 1471. and first
practiced the same in the Abbey of S. Peter's at Westminster.

The Duke of York, Bloreheath field An, reg, 38
the Earls of Salisbury and Warwick, with a great host met the K. and other
Lords upon Bloreheath, where because Andrew Trolapa Captain of Calice, the
night before the battle should have been fought, fled with the best soldiers
to the King, the Duke of York, the Earls of March, Salisbury, and Warwick
also fled without battle.

John Plummer, Shriue. John Stocker, Shriue. William Hulin Fishmonger, Mayor.
The three Earls with a puissant army met King Henry at Northampton, 1460
Battle at Northampton. Duke of York claimed the Crown.
and gave him a strong battle. In the end whereof the Kings host was
dispersed, chased and slain, and the King taken in the field. The Duke of
York made such claim to the Crown, that by consent of a Parliament, he was
preclaimed heir apparent.

Richard Fleming, shriue. John Lambard, shriue. Richard Lee Grocer, Mayor.
Queen Margaret having gathered a company of Northren men near to Wakefield,
slew Richard Duke of York with his son Edmond. An, reg. 39 The Duke of
York slain. The second battle in S. Albons.


On Shrouetwesday the Queen with her retinue near S. Albones, discomfited the
Earl of Warwick, and the Duke of Norfolk, and delivered King Henry her
husband. In this battle were slain 1926. persons. Battle at Mortimers cross.


Edward Earl of March had a great battle against the Earls of Pembroke and
Wilshire at Mortimers cross, where he put them to flight, and slew many of
their people.

The Earl of warwick fled from the King. The King and Queen fled to York.
The Earl of Warwick fled from S. Albons to the Earl of March, and almost all
the people of the South countries fell to him. King Henry with the Queen,
withdrew them toward York.

Edward Earl of March came to London with a mighty power of March men, and
accompanied with the Earl of Warwick the 26. day of February, where he was
joyfully received. But many wealthy Citizens not liking of these doings
conveyed themselves out of the City, amongst the which were Philip Malpas
Alderman, Thomas Vaugham Esquire, William Actlife with many other; who fearing
the Queens coming to London, shipped toward Antwerpe: but by the way were
taken by a French ship, and at length delivered for great ransom: it cost
Philip Malpas 4000. Edward Earl of March proclaimed King.
pound. Edward being elected, was proclaimed by the name of Edward the fourth,
on the 4. of March, and King Henry lost his Kingdom when he had reigned 38.
years, 6. months, and odd days.

Edward Earl of March.
An, reg. 1.
EDward Earl of March, began his reign the 4. of March, by the name of Edward
the 4. in the year 1460.

Walter Walker beheaded.
The 12. of March Walter Walker, a Grocer that dwelt in Cheap, for words spoken
touching K. Edward was beheaded. The 13. of March Edward took his journey
toward the North, where between Shireburne and Todcastle, all the North part
met him, Battle on Palm Sunday.
and on palm Sunday the 29. of March, fought a great battle, in which were
slain Henry Percie Earl of Northumberland, John Lord Clifford, John Lord
Neuill, Leo Lord Wells, and many other of both parts, to the number of 357.
and 11. persons: but King Edward got the field. The Duke of Exceter, the Duke
of Somerset the Lord of Ros, the Lord Hungerford and many other fled to York
to K. Henry, K. Henry fled into Scotland.
and then they, with the King, Queen and Prince, fled to Barwicke, and so to
Edenbrough.

George Ireland, shriue. John Lock, shriue. Hugh Which Mercer Mayor.
Faweonbridge Earl of Kent, 1462 Conquer won.
was appointed to keep the Seas with others, to the number of 10000. which
landed in Britain, and won the town of Conquer, with the Isle of Keth, etc.

William Hamton Shriue. Bartholmew James, Shriue. Thomas Cook Draper, Knight
of the Bath. Mayor.
Queen Margaret landed in the North, An, reg, 3 1463
where having but small succor, was feign to take the sea again, and by
tempest of weather was driven to Barwicke, where she landed, but lost her
ships and goods.

Robert Basset, Shriue. Thomas Muschampe, Shriue. Matthew Philip Goldsmith,
Knight of the Bathe, Mayor.
K. Henry's power being at Hexham, An. reg. 4. 1464 Battle at Exham.
the Lord Mountacute with a power enclosed them round about: there were taken
and slain many Lords that were with King Henry, but he himself was fled into
Lancashire.

K. Edward married.
King Edward took to wife Elizabeth daughter to Iaquite Duchess of Bedford,
late wife to Sir John Gray.

Coin enhaunced.
The King changed the coin both gold and silver, and ordained that the new
groat wayed scantly 3. d. and that the noble of 6. s. 8. d. should go for 8.
s. 4. d. etc.

Pestilence, Seriants feast.
A great pestilence, and the Thames over frozen. In Michaelmas Term were made
Serieants at Law, which held their feast in the Bishop of Elies place in
Oldburne, to the which feast, the Mayor of London with the Aldermen being
bidden, repaired, but when the Mayor looked to be set to keep the state in the
hall, the Lord Gray of Ruthin, then Treasurer of England was there placed,
whereupon the Mayor, Aldermen, and Commons departed home, and the Mayor made
all the Aldermen dine with him.

John Tate, Shriue. John Stone, Shriue. Ralph Iossiline Draper, Knight of the
Bathe Mayor.
New coin. An, reg, 5 1465
A new coin was made, a Rose-noble at 10. s. the half noble at 5. s. and the
farthing 2. s. 6. d. an angelet 6. s. 8. d.

K. Henry the 6. taken
King Henry was taken beside the Abbey of Sally in Yorkshire, from thence
brough to Esilton, and there arested by the Earl of Warwick, Doctor Manning
Deane of Windsor, Doctor Bedle, and young Elerton being in his company, were
brought to the Tower of London. A license was granted to convey certain
Coteswoold sheep into Spain, which have since greatly multiplied there.

Sir Henry Waver, Shriue. William Constantine, Shriue. Ralph Verney Mercer,
Mayor.
Queen Rlizabeth was delivered of a daughter named Elizabeth. An, reg, 7.


John Brown, Henry Brice, Shriue. John Stocton, Shriue. Sir John Young Grocer,
Mayor.
Many men were arested, and treason surmised against them, many of them were
put to death, and other escaped for great sums of money. Amongst the which sir
Thomas Cook, sir John Plomar, Humphery Haward, and other Aldermen of London
brought and charged with treason, and quit, notwithstanding lost of their goods
to the King, the value of 40000. marks or more.

Anthony W^dnile, Lord Scales Iusted in Smithfield with the bastard Burgony,
and had the victory.

Thomas Stalkbroke, Shriue. Humphrey Hayford, Shriue. Thomas Olgraue Skinner
Mayor.
Sir Thomas Cook Alderman of London, An, reg, 8. 1468
could not be delivered until he had paid 8000. pound.

Simon Smith, Shriue. William Hariot, Shriue. William Tailor Mayor. Cordwainer
street discharged of fifteenes. An, reg, 9. 1469

This William Tailor gave the City of London certain tenements, for the which
the city is bound to pay for ever, at every Fifteen granted to the King, for
all such as shall dwell in Cord-waiuers street ward, seized at 12. d. a piece,
or under.

The Earl of Warwick adjoining himself with the Duke of Clarence, the Kings
brother, stirred the Northen men, that they diverse times rebelled, and turned
the King and realm to great trouble, but in the end therebels were suppressed
in a battle at Banbury.

Richard Gardener, Shriue. Robert Drope, Shriue. Richard Lee Grocer Mayor.
George Duke of Clarence, Jasper Earl of Pembroke, An, reg, 10 1470
Richard Earl of Warwick, and the Earl of Oxford; arrived at Plymouth, and
another sort at Dartmouth, which all took their voyage toward Exceter, and
then Northward.

K. Edward fled.
King Edward fled from his host beside Nottingham, and the third of October he
took shipping at Lin, and sailed into Flanders. The 6. of October the Duke of
Clarence, the Earl of Warwick, the Archbishop of York, the Lord of Saint
John's, with others, entered the Tower of London, and King Henry being there
prisoner, K Henry restored.
they elected him to be their lawful King, and forthwith rode with him through
London to the Bishops palace, where he rested til ye 14. of October, on which
day he went a Procession, crowned in Paul's Church.

John Crosby, shriue. John Ward, shriue. Sir John Crosby.
Sir John Stocton Mercer Mayor.
Sir John Crosby late Shriue, builded Crosby place in London, he gave 300.
Marks to the repairing his Parrish Church of S. Helen, to poor householders
30. pound, to the repairing of London wall, and the Tower on London bridge,
etc. Parliament at Paul's.


A Parliament at Westminster, from thence proceeded to Paul's, wherein King
Edward was disherited and all his children, and thereupon proclaimed Usurper of
the Crown, and his Brother the Duke of Gloucester traitors, and both attainted,
during this Parliament.

Sir Thomas Cook then being one of the Knights of the Shire for London, being
an excellent well spoken man, and of a profound wit, showed the great wrongs
and losses he had sustained for his fidelity to King Henry, and required
restitution of 22000. Marks that he had lost by force of the said wrongs,
and also he casting no perils, executed the utmost of his wrongs against such
as he knew ba^e any favor to King Edward, of which he repented full sore
afterward, and was feign to fly the land.

King Edward landed at Rauensport with a small company of Soldiers, An, reg,
11. 1471
but by means of his brother the Duke of Clarence, who now returned to his
part, he came to London, entered the City the 10. of April, and took King
Henry, and then went against the Earl of Warwick, whom he vanquished and
slew, with his brother Marquis Montacute near to Barnet, on Easter day. King
Edward took his journey Westward, where besides Tewkesbury, he overthrew
Queen Margaret, Barnetfield Battle at Tewksbury
and took her prisoner, with Prince Edward her son.

Thomas the bastard of Fauconbridge with a riotous company of shipmen and
others of Essex and Kent, came to London, Thomas the bastard Knight.
where being denied passage through the City, Suburbs of Algate and Bishops
fired.
he fired the gates, wann^ the Bulwarks at Algate, and entered the city, but
the Citizens flewe such as entered, causing the other to fly, pursued them as
far as Blackewall, slaying many.

King Henry the sixth Murdered.
King Henry was murdered in the Tower of London, and after buried at Chertsey,
since removed to Windsor.

King Edward rode toward Kent, where he caused inquiry to be made of the
foresaid riotous persons, hanged the rich by the purse, and the other by the
necks. The Mayor of Canterbury, with others, were beheaded there.

Thomas the bastard of Fauconbridge was taken at Southampton, and beheaded.

John Allein, shriue. John Shelley, shriue. An, reg, 12. 1472 The Earl of
Oxford and his Lady
William Edward Grocer, Mayor.
The Earl of Oxford was sent prisoner to Guines, where he remained so long as
the King reigned. In all which time the Lady his wife might never come to him,
or had any thing, but what the people of charity would give her, (...) what
she gate with her needle.

John Brown, Shriue. Thomas Bledlow, Shriue. Sir William Hampton Fishmonger
Mayor.
An, reg, 13. 1473 Strumpets punished.
This Mayor punished many strumpets, caus^^ them to ride with gray hoods, and
banished them the city. He also caused stocks to be set in every wa^^* William
Stocker, Shriue. Robert Billisdon, Shriue. Sir John Tate Mercer, Mayor.
The Duke of Exceter was found dead in the sea between Dover and Calice. An,
reg, 14 1474


John Goose was burnt on the Tower hill.

Edmond Shaw, Shriue Thomas Hill, Shriue Robert Drope Draper, Mayor.
This Robert Drope, An, reg, 15. 1475
builded the East end of the conduit upon Cornhill.

King Edward sailed into France with a great army to aid the Duke of Burgony,
but by suit of the French King, a peace was concluded.

Hugh Brice, shriue. Robert Colwich, shriue. Robert Basset Salter, Mayor.
This Mayor did sharp correction upon Bakers for making light bread, An, reg,
16 Agnes Dainty set on the pillory.
he caused diverse of them to be put on the pillory. Also one Agnes Dainty for
selling of mingled butter.

Richard Rawson, shriue. Willam Horn, shriue. Ralph Iossilin Draper, Mayor.
By the diligence of this Mayor, London wall repaired.
the wall about London was newly repaired betwixt Creplegate and Algate.

King Edward in his progress hunted in Thomas Burdets Park at a Bucke, and
slew many Dear, amongst the which one was a white Bucke. Thomas Burdet, when
he understood thereof, An, reg, 17 1477 T. Burdet beheaded.
wished the Buckes head in his belly that moved the King to kill it. Burdet was
apprehended, accused of treason, condemned, drawn from the tower of London to
Tiburne, and there beheaded.

Henry Collet, Shriue. John Stokes, Shriue. Humphrey Hayford Goldsmith Mayor.
An, reg, 18. 1478
George Duke of Clarence Edwards brother, in the Tower of London made his end
in a But of Malmesey.

Robert Harding, shriue. Robert Byfield, shriue. Richard Gardener Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 19. 1479
A great dearth, and also a great death was in London, and diverse other parts of
this Realm.

Thomas Ilam, shriue. John Ward, shriue. Sir Bartholomew James Draper Mayor.
Great Conduit. Thieves hanged and burnt.
This Thomas Ilam Shriue, newly builded the great Conduit in Cheap.

Thieves for robbing Saint Martins le grand in London, three were drawn to the
Tower hill* and there hanged and burnt, other two were pressed to death.

Thomas Daniel, Shriue. William Bacon, Shriue. John Brown Mercer Mayor.
An, reg, 21. 1481
The Citizens of London lent the King 5000. Marks, which was repaired again the
next year following.

Robert Tate, W. Wilking, shriue. Richard Chawry, shriue. William Harriot
Draper Mayor.
An, reg, 22. 1482
The Scots began to stir, against whom the King sent the Duke of Gloucester,
and others, which returned without any notable battle.

William White, Shriue. John Matthew, Shriue. Edmond Shawe Goldsmith Mayor.
This Edmond Shawe newly builded Creplegate of London from the foundation, An,
reg, 23. Creplegate builded. 1483
which gate in old time had been a prison, whereto the Citizens and others as
were arested for debt, and like trespasses were committed.

King Edward making great provision for war into France, ended his life at
Westminster, the 9. of April, Anno 1483. when he had reigned 22. years, one
month, and odd days, he was buried at Windsor. He left issue, Edward the
Prince, K. Edward deceased.
and Richard Duke of York, and 5. daughters, Elizabeth, that after was Queen,
Cicely Anne, Katherine, and Briget.

Edward the fifth.
EDward the 5. about the age of 13. An, reg, ^.
years began his reign the 9. of April, in the year 1483. which Prince
reigned small space, either in pleasure or liberty: for his unnatural Uncle,
Richard Duke of Gloucester within 3. months deprived him not only of his
Crown, but also of his life (as was said.) This Edward reigned two months and
ten days.

Richard the Duke of Gloucester.
RIchard the 3. brother to Edward the 4. An, reg, 1 L Rivers and others
executed.
was proclaimed K. the 22. of June in the year 1483. he put to death Anthony
Woduile Earl Rivers. Lord Richard Gray, the Queens brother, sir Thomas
Vaugham, and sir Richard Hawes at Pomfret, and William Lord Hastings in the
Tower of London, all in one day.

He was crowned at Westminster on the 7. day of July.

After this were taken for Rebels against the King, Robert Rufe, Sergeant of
London, William Dauy Pardoner, John Smith Groom of King Ed^wards stirop, and
Stephen Ireland wardroper in (...) Tower, with many other, who were charged the
they had sent writings into Britain to the Earl^ of Richmond, and of Pembroke,
and also that they minded to have stolen out of the Tower Prince Edward and
his brother, for the which they we^^ drawn from Westminster to the Tower Hill,
and there all four beheaded.

Thomas Norland, Shriue. William Mattin, Shriue. Robert Bylisdon, Haberdasher,
Mayor.
Duke of Buckingham conspired.
Grudge began between King Richard and ^ Duke of Buckingham, insomuch that the
Du^^ conspired with diverse Noble men against hi^ intending to bring into the
land Henry Earl Richmond, as heir to the Crown: for wh^ conspiracy the Duke
of Buckingham was behe^^ded at Sarisbury.

Fire at leaden Hall. 1484 An, reg, 2.
The 30. of December, was a great fire at l^^^den Hall in London, where through
was burn much housing, and all the stocks for gunnes (...) other provision
belonging to the City.

K. Richard began the high Tower at Westmin^ter.

Richard Chester, T. Britain, Shriues. Three Shriues and 3. Majors in one
year.
Ralph Austry, Shriue. Thomas Hill Grocer, William Stocker Draper, John Ward
Grocer, Majors.
This Thomas Hall builded the Conduite in Grace street.

King Richard being lodged in the City of Lon^on at the Wardrop, sent for
sundry Aldermen, ^d head comoners of the City, and instanced them (...) lend
him certain sums of money, upon suffici^t pledges, of the which persons he had
granted of ^me 100. li. some 100. ma. some 40. li. or 50. mar. (...) assigned a
Chapplen named Chaterton, to deli^ the pledges, after the value of the sums
bor^ned, whereof was parcel, an helment of King Edwards, with the garnishing
of gold, stone, and pearl, certain cups of gold, also garnished with stone
and pearl, and the twelve Apostles of silver and guilt, garnishing of his
Chapel, etc. For the which kindness showed unto him by the Cit^ens, he gave
unto the Chamber of London a (...) cup with a cover of gold, garnished with
cer^ne Kalaxes, Diamonds and Pearl, the which ^s valued at an hundred mark,
but the money (...) him thus borrowed, was never repaied by his ^yes, nor the
pledges redeemed.

Colingborne Esquier, Collingborne apprehended.
was drawn from West^inster to the Tower of London, and there on the (...)
headed and quartered.

Sir Roger Clifford Knight, 1415 An, reg, 3
and one Forrescue ^re drawn through London, and at Saint Mar^es le grand, Sir
Roger would have broke from the Shriues and taken Sanctuary, but the Shriues
took him again: and had him to the Tower hill, where he was beheaded, and
Fortesc^ had his pardon.

M. Earl of Richmond arrived.
Henry Earl of Richmond, Jasper Earl of Pembrooke, his uncle, the Earl of
Oxford, and many other Knights and Esquires, with a small company of Frenchmen,
landed at Milford han^ on the 6. of August, whose coming when it w^^ heard of
in Wales, diverse Noble men with the^ retinue gathered to him in great number.
And the marching against King Richard at a village called Bosworth near to
Leicester, Battle at Bosworth.
he met with his ene^mies the 22. of August, where between them wa^ foughten a
sharp battle, in conclusion whereof, King Richard with diverse others were
slain and king Henry obtained a noble victory, and immedi^ately the Lord
Stanley crowned him King of Eng^land in the field, with the crown which was
t^^ken of King Richards head. Richard was buried in the Gray Friars Church at
Leicester, when he had held the crown two years and two months.

Henry Earl of Richmond.
HEnry the seventh borne in Pembrooke castle, began his reign the 22. An, reg,
1
of August, in the year 1485. He was a Prince of marvelous wisdom,
policy, justice, temperance, and gravity, and notwithstanding many and great
occasions of trouble and war, he kept his Realm in right good order, for
the which he was greatly reverenced of foreign Princes.

On the 22. of August, Parson of S. Mildreds burnt.
was a great fire in Bredstreete of London, in the which fire was burnt the
Parson of S. Mildreds, and one other man in the Parsonage there.

The sweating sickness began the 21. of September, and continued to the end of
October. Sweating sickness whereof died in London 2. Majors and 4. Aldermen.
Of the which sickness a wonderful number died, and in London (besides other)
died Thomas Hill Mayor, in whose place was chosen William Stocker, who likewise
deceased about 7. days after, In which space departed four Aldermen. T, Ilam,
R. Rowson, T. Norland, and John Stocker, and then was chosen Mayor, John Ward,
who continued till the feast of Simon and Jude.

John Tate, shriue. John Swan, shriue. Sir Hugh Brice Mayor.
The 30. of October, Coronatio^ First Yeomen of the Guard.
King Henry was crowned at Westminster, he ordained a number of chosen archers
to give daily attendance on his person, whom he named Yeomen of the Guard.

Jove to the King. An, reg. 2.
King Henry sent unto the Lord Mayor of London, requiring him and his Citizens
of a pressed of 6000. marks. Wherefore the Mayor with his Brethren and Commons
granted 2000. pound, which pressed was repaied again the next year following.

Wheat and bay salt at a great price.
Wheat was sold for 3. s. the bushel, and bay salt at the like price.

The Cross in Cheap was new builded.

John Perciuall, Shriue. Hugh Clopton, Shriue. Henry Collet Mercer Mayor.
John Perciuall being the Majors Caruer, was by Hugh Brice late Mayor, chosen
Shriue of London for the year following.

The king married Elizabeth the eldest daughter al Edward the fourth, by which
means the two families of York and Lancaster were united.

K. Henry married. 1487 Stoke field by Francis Louel. An, reg. 3
Francis Louel and Humphrey Stafford rebelled in the North: which commotion was
quieted by the Duke of Bedford: there was slain John Earl of Lincoln, the
Lord Louell, Martine Swart, and other there above four thousand. This battle
was sought high to a village called Stoke.

Prince Arthur.
On the twenty one of September Queen Elizabeth brought forth her first son
named Arthur.

John Fenkill, Shriue. William Remington. Shriue. William Horn Salter, Mayor.
King Henry coming to London, made W. Horn Mayor of London, and John
Perciuall Alderman, Knights, betwixt Hornsey and Iseldon.

A pressed for the King, in the City of London of 4000. pound, and shortly after
was another pressed of 2000. pound, which were both repaied again the next year.

William Isaake, Shriue. Ralph Tinle^, Shriue. Robert Ta^e Mercer Mayor.
A task of the tenth penny of all men's goods and lands was granted to K. 148^
Earl o^ North^mberland slane. An, reg, 5.
Henry to aid the Duke of Britain against the French King, through which
task the commons of the North made all insurrection, and slew the Earl of
Northemberland, wherefore John Achamber their Captain, with other, were hanged
at York.

William Capel, Shriue. John Brook, Shriue. William White Draper Ma^or.
Roger Shauelocke a Tailor within Ludgate of London, being a man of great
wealth, 1490 An, reg, 6.
flew himself, for whose goods was great business between the Kings Alm^er,
and the Shriues of London.

H. Coote, ^. Reuil, Shriue. Hugh Pemberton, Shriue. John Matthew Mercer Mayor.
King Henry required a benevolence, 1491 Henry the Kings son borne. An, reg, 9.
Conduit grace street.
which was granted toward his journey into France.

Henry the Kings second son, borne at Greenwich the 22. of June.

The Conduit in Grace street was begun to be builded by the Excecutors of
Thomas Hill, late Mayor. Dearth of corn.
Wheat was sold at London for twenty pence the bushel.

Thomas Wood, Shriue. William Brown, Shriue. Hugh Clopton Mercer Mayor.
This Hugh Clopton during his life a Batcheler, builded a stone bridge at
Stratford upon Anon. Stone bridge at Stratford upon Anon. 1^92 An, reg 8.


King Henry took his voyage into France with a great Army to aid the Britons
against the French King.

William Purchase* Shriue. William Welbecke, Shriue. William Martin Skinner
Mayor.
King Henry returned into England. Two Pardone ^s were set on the Pillory in
Cornehill three market days, for forging of false pardons, and for that one of
them had fained himself to be a Priest, he was sent to Newgate, where he died:
the other was driven out of London with shame enough.

1493 fray against the stilliard men.
A riot made upon the Easterlings or Stilliard men by Mercers servants, and
others of the City of London, for the which many of them were sore punished.

Robert Fabian, shriue. John Winger, shriue. Sir Ralph Austrie Fishmonger
Mayor.
This Ralph Austrie roofed with timber, and covered with lead the Parish Church
of S. Martin in the Vintry, and also glazed the same Church, etc.

K. Henry feasteth the Mayor of London.
King Henry holding his roial feast at Christmas at Westminster, on the twelfth
day feasted the Mayor of London Ralph Austry and his brethren the Aldermen and
Commoners: after dinner he dubbed the Mayor Knight, and caused him and his
brethren to tarry and behold the disguisings, and other disports in the night
following, showed in the great hall, hanged with arras, and staged all along on
both sides, which disports being ended, the K. Queen, and Ambassadors, and
other States, being set at a Table of stone, 60. Knights and Esquires served 60
dishes to the Kings mess, and as many to the Queens (neither fish nor flesh)
and the Mayor with 24. dishes to his mess of the same manner service, with
sundry wines in most plenteous wise: Finally, the King and Queen being
conveyed into the Palace, the Mayor with his company, in barges returned, and
came to London by the break of the next day.

Wheat was sold at London at 6. d. the bushel, 1494 An, reg, 10 Salt and wheat
at low price. Wine cheap.
bay salt for 3. d. half penny. Nantwich salt for six pence the bushel, white
herring for 6. s. the barrel, red herring at 3. s. the cade, red sprats 6. d.
the Cade, and Gascoine wine at 6. l. the tun.

Nicholas Alwine, Shriue. John Warner, Shriue. Richard Chaurie Salter Mayor.
Sir William Stanley was beheaded on tower hill.

White herring being good, were sold for 3. s. 4. d. the barrel at London.

Perkin Warbecke arrived at Deal in Kent, where, when he and his company, saw
they could have no comfort of the country, 1495 Perkin Warbecke.
they withdrewe to their ships again, but the Mayor of Sandwich with certain
commons of the country, vickered with the residue that were upon the land, and
took alive of them 169. persons, who were hanged in Kent, Essex, Sussex* and
Norfolk.

An, reg, 11.
Thomas Knesworth, Shriue. Henry Somer, Shriue. Sir Henry Coliet Mercer Mayor.
The 16. of November was holden the Serieants feast at the Bishops place of Ely
in Holborne, where dined the King, Queen, and all the chief Lords of England.

1496 Intercourse An, reg, 12.
In April was concluded an amity and intercourse between this land and the
country of Flanders, etc. The Scots entered England, and by the setting on of
Perkin Warbecke did much harm.

John Shaw, Shriue. Richard Haddon, Shriue. Sir John Tate Mercer Mayor.
S. Anthonies in London.
This John Tate newly builded and enlarged S. Anthonies Church in London, a
College of a goodly foundation* with a free School, and certain alms houses
for ^oore men.

Sir Reignald Bray, with others of the Kings Counsel, declared to the Mayor of
London, that the K. desired to borrow of the Citizens 10000. li. The Mayor
desired respite till the 5. day following, at which time was assembled at the
Guildhall, A loan to the King.
the common counsel, and thither came the forenamed sir Reignald Bray with
other of the Kings Council, at which day with great submission and prayer made
unto them to be good means for the City unto the Kings Grace: the commons
lastly granted to lend unto the King 4000. li. which of his Grace was well and
thankfully accepted* and truly repaied.

By means of a Parliament that was granted to the King, 1497 Blackheath field.
a commotion was made by the Commons of Cornwall, which under the leading of
James Lord Audley, with Michel a Blacksmith, and other came to Blacke-heath,
where the King met with them, discomfited and took their Captains, there was
slain of the rebels about 300. and taken about 1500.

The Lord Audley was beheaded on the Towerhill, the Blacksmith and Flamocke
were hanged headed, and quartered at Tiborne.

The King sent an Army into Scotland under the Earl of Surrey, and the Lord
Neuell, which made sharp war upon the Scots. Hailstones 18. inches. An, reg,
13. Perkin besieged Excester.
In Bedfordshire at the Town of S. Needs, fell hailstones 18. inches about.
Perkin Warbecke landed in Cornwall, went to Bodman, where being accompanied
with three or four thousand men, he proclaimed himself King Richard the
fourth, second son to Edward the fourth. From thence he went to Exceter and
besieged it, which City was valiantly defended by the inhabitants, but many
of the rebels being slain, they withdrew them to Taunton, from thence Perkin
fled to Bewdley, where he took sanctuary, and was after taken and pardoned his
life.

Bartholmew Read, shriue. Thomas Windought, shriue. William Purchase Mercer
Mayor.
Perkin brought to London.
Perkin Warbecke was conveyed upon horseback through Cheap and Cornehill unto
the Tower of London, and from thence back again through Candlewick street to
Westminster with much wondering.

1498
All the Gardens in Moore field, which had continued time out of mind, were
destroyed, and of them was made a plain field for archers to shoot in. Thomas
Bradbury, Shriue. Stephen Ienings, Shriue. Sir John Perciuaile Tailor Mayor.


An, reg, 14. Feigned Earl of Warwick.
A Shoomakers son was hanged at S. Thomas Watrings for naming himself to be
Edward Earl of Warwick son to George Duke of Clarence, which Edward Earl of
Warwick, was then kept secret prisoner in the Tower of London.

1499 An, reg, 15 Wine, salt and wheat cheap.
Gascoine Wine was sold at London for 40. s. the tune.

A Quarter of wheat 4. s. and bay salt 4. d. the bushel.

James wilford, Shriue. Richard Brond, Shriue. Nicholas Alwine Mercer Mayor.
Perkin Warbeck and John a Water were executed at Tiborne.

The Earl of warwick beheaded.
Edward Plantagenet Earl of Warwick son to George Duke of Clarence, was
beheaded at Tower hill. Shortly after Blewet and Astwood were hanged at Tiborne.

John Hawes, shriue. William Stead, shriue. William Remington Fishmonger,
Mayor.
The King builded new his Manor at Sheene, 1500 An, reg, 16.
and named it Richmond. He also new builded Bainards Castle in London, and
repaired Greenwich. Laurence Ailmer, Shriue. Henry Head, Shriue. John Shaw
Goldsmith Mayor.


The Mayor caused his brethren the Aldermen to ride from the Guild Hall unto
the water side, An, reg, 17.
when he went to Westminster to be presented in the Exchequer. He kept his
feast in Guild Hall, whereas before the Majors feast had been kept in the
Majors house, Majors feasts in the Guilde hall.
or in the Grocers or Tailors hall: He afterward caused the Archhouse, and
other houses of Office to be builded at the Guild Hall, where since the feasts
have been usually kept. This Mayor every afternoon held a Court, and called
before him matters, and redressed them without expense of money: he was a man
of sharp wit and bold spirit, by reason of the favor he stood in with the
King, Queen, and other estates, insomuch that he was sworn one of the Kings
Counsel.

The 14. Prince Arthur married. 1502
of November Prince Arthur was married in S. Paul's Church at London to
Katherine daughter to Ferdinando King of Spain, which Arthur the 2. of April
deceased at Ludlow, and was buried at Worcester.

The 25. James King of Scots and Margaret the Kings daughter of England assured.
of January at Paul's cross was published the assurance of James King of Scots,
and of the Lady Margaret, eldest daughter to King Henry of England, in
rejoicing whereof Te Deum was sung, bonefires made through the City, and at
12. of the bonefires were set 12. hogshead^ of Gascoine to be drunk of all men
freely.

The dike called Turnmill brook, and all the course of Fleet dike, Dikes of
London cleansed. An, reg, 18.
and other, were so scou^^ down to the Thaines, that boats and fish, and fewe^
were rowed up to Holborne bridge, as they had of old time been accustomed.

Henry Kebel, Shriue. Nicholas Ninns, Shriue. Bartholmew Read, Goldsmith Mayor.
Kings chapel at westminster.
The Chapel of our Lady at Westminsterd a Tavern near adjoining, were put
down, in which place a most beautiful Chapel is builded by King Henry the
seventh.

Queen Elizabeth died. Kings of England brethren to the Merchant Tailors.
Elizabeth Queen of England died in childbed and was buried at Westminster.

King Henry the seventh being himself a bro^ther of the Tailors, and linen
Armorers in London, as diverse of his predecessors Kings before him had been:
(to wit) Richard the third, Ed^^^^ the fourth, Henry the sixth, Henry the
fifth, H^ the fourth, and Richard the second. Also Du^ 11. Earls 28. and Lords
^5. He now ga^ them by this great Charter the Title of M^^^chant Tailors, as a
name of worship to end^ for ever.

The 8. of August, James the 4. King of Sco^ married Margaret the eldest
daughter to He^ the 7. An, reg, 19
at Edenbrough.

Christopher Hawes, Shriue. Robert Wats, T. Granger, Shriue. Sir Willlam
Capell, Draper, Mayor.
The 21. of November at night, a perilous fire began upon London bridge near
Saint Magnus Church, where 6. tenements were burnt. The 7. of Februry certain
houses more consumed with ^^e against S. Buttelphes Church in Thames street.
The 29. of January began a Parliament at Westminster. Edmond Dudley was speaker
for the Commons, An aid to the King.
wherein was granted to the King of lands, 6. d. in the pound, and of goods
valued ten marks 6. d. and so upwards, which in all rose to the quantity of a
Fifteen.

A new coin is ordained, that is to say, great and half great, which bare but
half faces, 1504 An, reg, 20. A new coin
and some greater of the value, 12. d. were coined.

Robert Acheley, shriue. William Brown, shriue. John Winger Grocer Mayor.
The prisoners of the Marshalsey in Southwark ^^ake out, Prisoners brake out,
1505 An, reg, 11.
and many of them being shortly after taken, were put to execution, especially
those that ^^d lain for felony.

Richard Shore, Shriue. Roger Grove, Shriue. Thomas Knesworth Fishmonger Mayor.
This Thomas Knesworth builded the Conduit at Bishopsgate, Conduit at
Bishopsgate
he gave to the Fishmongers certain tenements, for the which they be bound to
find four scholars at Oxford, and at Cambridge, every of them 4. pound the
year. Also to give to twenty aged poor people of their Company to every of
them a winter garment for ever. Also to give the prisoners of Ludgate and
Newgate, every year 40. s.

King of Castile landed. 1506 An, reg, 22.
Philip King of Castile, and his wife were w^^ther driven into England as they
were passing toward Spain, who were honorably received (...) the Earl of
Arundell.

William Copinger, shriue. Thomas Johnson, shriue.
These Shriues being presented before the ^^rons of the Exchequer, one William
Copinger was admitted and sworn, but Thomas John^ was put back, till they
knew further of the Ki^^ pleasure. On the 10. of October, a commaun^^ment was
brought from the King to the (...) Mayor, Shriues and M^ior of London chosen by
the Kings commandment.
that he should cause an election to be (...) for a new Shriue, at which day
came into (...) Guild hall M. Edmond Dudley, the Kings P^^dent, and there
showed the Kings letters that (...) Commons should name for the Kings pleas^
William Fitz William, Merchant Tailor, and ^^derman for the year ensuing,
which with (...) difficulty was granted. This William fitz Will for the Kings
gracious favor to be Shriue (...) year, gave to the King 100. pound in ready
^^ney, and he was afterward of counsel to H^ the eight.

Sir Richard Haddon Mercer, was also M^^ by the Kings commandment.

Fire in Warwick lane. 1507 An, reg, 23.
Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Mayor.

About Christmas was a Bakers house in w^^wicke lane burnt, with the mistress
of the ho^^ and two women servants.

In Lent the King delivered all prisoners London, which lay for xl. s. or under.

William Butler, Shriue. John Kerkeby, Shriue. William Brown Mercer Mayor.
Who deceased the 22. of March, 1508 An, reg, 24
and forthwith Laurence Ailmer Draper was elected and ^orne, he took his oath
at the Tower, and kept (...) feast.

This year Sir William Caple was commaun^^d to ward by Empson and Dudley,
Aldermen of London put in suit.
and put in ^it by the King for things by him done in his ma^altie, for that
(he was charged) that false mo^y had come to his sight, and had not done due
^unishment upon the party that to him was ac^used to be the coyner of it: but
were this true or not, for that he would fall to no agreement, he was by Darby
and Sympson, and other of their compa^^, whereof there was a Jury (bound to the
^^dles of Dudley and Empson) indicted, and af^^r by Dudley put in prison, some
while in the ^^unter, some time in the Shriues house, while William Butler was
Shriue, and then delivered unto Thomas Exmew, and forasmuch as he would not
agree to pay the King 2000. li. was commanded to the Tower, where he lay, till
at length he was let go free.

Also Thomas Knesworth that had been Mayor, and his Shriues Robert Shore, and
Roger Grove, were sent to the Kings Bench, under the custody (...) Sir Thomas
Brandon, where they were put to their fine of 2000. pound.

The City of Norwich was sore perished, and near consumed with fire, Norwich
burned.
for (as some have wri^^ten) there was more then 160. houses consumed with most
part of their goods.

Stephen Genings Mayor, Merchant tailour by the Kings letters for his election.

Thomas Exmew, Shriue. Richard Smith, Shriue.
This Stephen Genings founded a free Gra^^mer School at Woluerhampton in
Sta^^shire, etc.

1509 Hospital of Sauoy.
This year was finished the goodly Hospital of the Sauoy near unto Charing
Cross, whi^^ was a notable foundation for the poor, done by King Henry the
seventh, unto the which be pur^chased lands for the relieuing of 100. poor
people. More by Indenture septipartite, dated the 19. year of his reign, he
established three Monks* Doctors, or Batchelors of Divinity to sing, and to
preach in Westminster Church diverse fea^^ and every Sunday for ever. Sermons
founded.
An anniuersary yearly of 20. li. to be distributed to the poor by 2. (...)
piece, to 13. poor men, and 3. poor women, founded by him in an alms house
for the same poor men and women, provided in the said Monastery 12. d. a
year. Also a weekly obit, and each of th^^ to give to 140. poor people, each
one a penny. Eig^^ brethren conuerses, to be found meat, drink^ clothing and
lodging for ever. Three scholars (...) kept at the University, 10. li. the
year to each (...) ever. The 13. poor men one to be a Priest ag^^ 45.
years, a good Gramarian, the other 12. to (...) aged 50. years, every
Saturday the Priest (...) receive of the Abbot or Prior, four pence the day,
and each other two pence half penny the day for ever, for their sustenance, and
every year to each ^^e a gown, and a hood ready made, and to 3. women to
dress their meat, and keep them in their (...), each to have every Saturday
16. d. and ^uery year a gown ready made: more to the 13. ^^re men yearly 80.
quarters of coals, and 1000. (...) good fagots to the use of their hall, and
kitchen (...) their mansion. A discreet Monk to be ouerseer to them, to have
40. s. the year, etc. And to this (...) Abbot and Prior to be sworn.

King Henry died at Richmond the 22. of April, Henry the seventh deceased.
^hen he had reigned 23. years, and 8. months, and was buried at Westminster,
in the new chapel which he caused to be builded. He left issue Henry Prince
of Wales, which succeeded in the kingdom, Lady Margaret Queen of Scots, and
lady Mary, promised to Charles King of Castile.

Henry the eight.
HEnry the eight at the age of eighteen years began his reign the two and
twentieth of April. An, reg. 1. The King married and crowned.
Anno 1509. Of personage he was tall and mighty, in wit and memory excellent.
The 3. of June he married la^y Katherine his first wife: who had been late
wife (...) Prince Arthur deceased. On midsomer day the ^ing and Queen were
crowned at Westminster.

George Monex, shriue. John Dogget, shriue. Thomas Bradbury Mercer, the 18. of
October. Sir William Capell Draper, the 12. of January, Majors.
Sir Richard Emson Knight, and Edmond Dudley Esquire, 1510 Emson and Dudley
executed. An. reg. 2.
who had been great Counselors to Henry the seventh, were beheaded on Tower
hill, the 18. of August. This Edmond Dudley in time of his imprisonment,
compiled a Book entitled the (...) of Common wealth.

John Milborne, shriue. John Rest, shriue. Henry Kebel Grocer Mayor.
This Henry Kebel builded Aldermary Church in London, and did many other works
of chariti^ in his life.

Henry the Kings first son was borne on Ne^ years day, but died on S.
Matthewes day n^ following.

1511 An, reg, 3.
Nicholas Shelton, shriue. Thomas Mirfyn, shriue. 1512 An, reg. 4.
Roger Acheley Draper Mayor.
The Nauies of England and France mee^ at Britain Bay, fought a cruel
battle, in wh^^^ the Regent of England, and a Caricke of Fra^^ being grappeled
together were burned, and the Captains with their men all drowned, the
Eng^lish Captain was Sir Thomas Kneuet, who^ with him 700. men. In the French
Carike, (...) Sir Piers Morgan, with xi. hundred men.

John Collet Deane of Paul's, erected one (...) School in Paul's Churchyard in
the year^ 1512 for poor men's children to be taught free, etc. Paul's School.


Robert Holdernes, shriue. Robert Fenrother, shriue. William Copinger,
Fishmonger Mayor. Sir Richard Haddon Mercer Mayor.
The steeple and the lantern on Bow Church in Cheap, was this year finished.
Bow steple builded.


In June the King with a great army in person went into France, 1513 An, reg, 5
Turwin and Turney won. Scots field at bramston called Floden field.
and there conquered Turwin the 22. of August, and took the City of Turney by
appointment, the 29. of of September.

In this time James king of Scots invaded this land with a mighty army, but by
the diligence of the Queen, with the policy and manhood of the Earl of
Surrey, the Kings Lieuetenant, he was himself slain at Bramstone with 3.
Bishops, 3. Abbots, 12. Earls, 18. Lords, besides Knights and Gentlemen, and
eighteen thousand Scots, and all the ordinance and stuff taken the 9. of
September.

John Dawes, John Bridges, Shriue. Roger Basford, Shriue. William Brown
Mercer, Mayor. Sohn Tate Mercer. Mayor.
The seventh of August peace was proclaimed between the King of England and
France during their lives. 1514 An, reg, 6.


All the hedges within one mile of London every way were pulled down, All
fields laid open about London.
and the ditches filled up in a morning by a number of young men, Citizens of
London, because those inclosers had been hinderance to their shooting.

In October a marriage was made between Lewis the 12. King of France, and Lady
Mary the Kings sister of England.

James Yerford, Shriue. John Munda^, Shriue. George Monox Draper Mayor.
This George Monox repaired the parish Church of Waltham-stowe in the County of
Essex, and founded there an alms house for the poor men and women, and a free
school for children.

Richard Hunne a Merchant Tailor of S. Margarets parish in Brigestreete,
Richard Hunne hanged.
who had been put in the Lollards Tower about the end of October, was now the
5. of December, found hanged in the said Tower, and after burned in Smithfield.

1515 An, reg, 7.
On New years Even died the French K. Lewis the 12. And the 9. of April a n^w
peace was concluded between the King of England, and Frances the new King of
France.

In the month of May Charles Duke of Suffolk, Duke of Suff^lke m^^^ed. Lady
Mary the Kings daughter. 1516 An, reg, 8.
^^dded the Lady Mary the kings sister, late Queen of France.

Henry Worley, Shriue. Richard Gray, W. Baily, Shriue. William Butler Grocer
Mayor.
Lady Mary King Henry's daughter was borne at Greenewich on the xi. of February.

Margaret Queen of Scots, King Henry's eldest sister, who had after the death
of her first husband ( James King of Scots slain at Bramston) married
Archibald Douglas Earl of Anguish, fled into England, Queen of Scots fled.
and lay at Harbottle, where she was delivered of a child called Margaret.

Thomas Seimer, Shriue. John Th^^ston, Shriue. John Roast Grocer Mayor.
The Thames was frozen, Great frost 1517 An, reg, 9. This was called the ill
May day many years after.
that men with horse and carts might pass betwixt Westminster and Lambeth.

On May even was an insurrection of young persons and apprentises of London
against Aliens, of the which diverse were hanged, with their Captain John
Lincoln a Broker, the residue to the number of 400. men, and 11. women tied in
ropes all along, one after another in their shirts, came to Westminster hall
with halters about their necks and were pardoned.

Margaret Queen of Scots returned into Scotland, to the Earl of Anguish her
husband. Queen of Scots returned.


Thomas Baldry, Shriue. Ralph Simon, Shriue. Sir Thomas Exmew Goldsmith Mayor.
Many dyed in E^gland of the sweating sickness, and especially about London,
1518 Sweating sickness.
wherefore Trinity term was one day at Oxford, and then adiourned to
Westminster.

The City of Turney was delivered to the French King. An, reg, 10


John All^n, shriue. James Spencer, shriue. Thomas Mirsine Skinner Mayor.
The Earl of Surrey was sent into Ireland, 1519 An, reg, 11.
as (...) there, and the Earl of Kildare was (...) of that office.

Cardinal Campaius.
In July Cardinal Campaius came into England from the Pope, to exhort King
Henry to make wars on the Turks.

John Wilkinson, Shriue. Nicolas Partridge, Shriue. Sir James Yarfords, Mercer,
Mayor.
1520 An, reg, 12.
As K. Henry was at Canterbury with the Queen in readiness to have passed the
sea, he heard of the Emperor Charles coming, with whom he met at Dover, and
accompanied him to Canterbury, where after the Emperor had saluted the Queen
his aunt, King Henry went to Calice.
he took shipping into Flanders. The last day of May King Henry passed over
to Calice, and met with Francis the French King at the Camp between Arde and
Guines, where were many great triumphs and goodly sights. Imediately after he
met with the Emperor, with whom he went to Grauelin, and the Emperor
returned with him to Calice, where he had great cheer.

John Skenington, shriue. John Kyeme shriue. Sir John Burges Draper Mayor.
The 27. of May was Edward Duke of Buckingham beheaded.

1521 An, reg, 13 The King made defender of the Faith. Alms houses by the
Crotchet Friars.
King Henry wrote a book against Luther, and therefore the Bishop of Rome named
him defender of the Faith.

John Britane, Shriue. Thomas Pergetter, Shriue. Sir John Milborne Draper
Mayor.
This sir John Milborne builded certain alms houses adjoining to the Crotched
friars church in London, wherein he placed 14. aged poor people.

The 6. of March the French King attached all Englishmens goods. Frenchmen
attached.
And all Frenchmens bodies and goods were attached at London.

Charles the 5. Emperor, came into England, 1522 An, reg, 14 The Emperor came
to London.
and was honorably received into London by ye Mayor Aldermen, and commons of
the City the 6. of June, the King accompanying him: from thence he went to
Windsor, and sat in the Stall of the Garter. After great feasts, iustes, and
honorable entertainment, he departed to Hampton, and sailed from thence into
Spain.

During this time the Earl of Surrey, Lord Admiral, burnt Morles in Britain,
not long after entered Picardy and burnt diverse towns and castles John Rudstone,
Shriue. John Champneis, Shriue. Sir John Monday Goldsmith Mayor.


The Lord Rosse, and the Lord Dacres of the North burned the town of Kelsey in
Scotland, with 80. villages, and overthrew 18. Towers of stone.

The Emperor Charles, King Henry, and Ferdinando Duke of Austrich, the Pope,
the City of Venice, and diverse others in Italy, were confederate against the
Frenchmen.

The Turks besieged the I Will of Rhodes, The Turks took the Rhodes. 1523
and on Christmas day took it, to the rebuke of Christendom, for their
dissension and negligence.

The Earl of Surrey burned 37. villages in Scotland, dispoiled the Country
from the East Marches to the West. Parliament at the black Friars.


A Parliament at the Black Friars in London, wherein was granted a great
Subsidy.

Christ^en King of Denmark and his Queen^ arrived at Dover, the 22. of June.
came to London, An, reg, 15 The King of Denmark arrived.
and were lodged in the Bishop of Bathe^ place. The Duke of Suffolk was sent
into France with an army of 10000. men, who passing the water of Some without
battle, took diuer Towns and Castles.

Michael English, shriue. Nicholas Ienings, shriue. Sir Thomas Baldry Mercer
Mayor.
Conspiracy at Couentry 1524 An, reg, 16.
In December at the City of Couentry, Fra^^cis Philip, Christopher Pickering,
and Anthon^ Mainyle intended to have taken the Kings trea^sure of his subsidy,
as the same came toward London, therewith to have raised men, and to have taken
the castle of Killingworth, and then to h^^^ made battle against the King, for
the which they were drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne, the other of
their conspiracy were executed at Couentry.

Ralph Dodmer, Shriue. William Roch, Shriue. Sir William Baoly Draper Mayor.
1525
The 9. of March was great triumph made in England, for the taking of the French
King before the City o^ ^auie.

Priories suppressed. Greenwich to were builded.
Cardinal Wolsey obtained license of the Pope to surpr^sie certain small
Priories, to the intent to erect two Colleges at Oxford and Ipswich. The Tower
of Greenwich was builded.

A truce between England and France.

John Caunton, shriue. Christopher ^skew, shriue. Sir John Allen Mercer Mayor.
The xi. of February four Merchants of the Stilyard did penance at Paul's, and
Doctor Barnes bare a faggot.

This year 1526. Charles the son of Gilb^rt Earl of Moun^pensier, 1526 Rome
taken and sacked by the duke of Burbon.
who not long before had married the Lady Jane, sole heir to the Duchy of
Burbon, in whose right he was Duke of Burbon, upon private discontent revolted
from his King Charles the 8. and then served under the Emperor, and the King
of England, and after that the said Duke the year aforesaid besieged Rome and
sacked it, did great spoils and extremities unto the Clergy, forced the Pope
to fly into Castle-Angelo, but himself was there slain by a Friar, with the
shot of a Caliuer.

The 6. of September was proclamation for gold, the French Crown 4. s. 6. d.
The Angel 7. s. 6. d. The Royal 11. s. 3. d. etc.

Stephen Pecocke, Shriue. Nicholas Lambert, Shriue. Sir Thomas Seymer Mercer
Mayor.
In November, December, and January, 1527 An, reg, 19. Extreme rain and
drought.
fell such rain, that thereof ensued great floods, which destroyed corn
fields, pasture, and beasts. Then was it dry till the 12. of April, and from
that nime it rained every day and night till the 3. of June.

Such scarsitie of bread was at London, and all England, that many died for
default thereof. Great famine.


The bread carts coming from Stratford toward London, were met at the Miles
end by the citizens, so that the Mayor and Shriues were forced to go and
rescue the same, and to see them brought to the markets appointed. Wheat was
then at xv. s. the quarter. Shortly after the Merchants of the Stilyard,
brought from Danske such store of wheat and rye that it was better cheap at
London, then in any other part of the Realm.

John Hardy, Shriue. William Hollis. Shriue. Sir James Spencer Vintner, Mayor.
A French Craer of 30. tun, being manned with 38. Frenchmen, and a Flemish
Craer of 27. tun, and 24. 1528 An, reg, 20. A ship chased to the Tower wharfe.
Flemings, meeting at Margate, the one chased the other along the River of
Thames to the Tower-wharfe of London, where Sir Edmond Walsingham Lieutenant of
the Tower stayed them, and took their Captains and men.

The xvii. of June, the term was adiourned till Michaelmas, Sweating sickness.
because of the sweating sickness that then reigned, and there was no such watch
in London at Midsomer, as before had been accustomed.

Ralph Warren, Shriue. John Long. Shriue. Sir John Rudstone Draper, Mayor.
1529 An, reg. 21. Cardinal Woolsey.
In April, May, June, and July, Cardinal Campaius, with Cardinal Woolsey, sat
at the Black friars in London, where before them was brought in question the
kings marriage with Queen Katherine, as to be unlawful: but they long time
protracted the conclusion of the matter, which delay King Henry took very
displeasantly.

Cardinal Campaius departed toward Rome, and shortly after Cardinal Woolsey
was discharged of the Chancellorship, and the king seized all his goods, with
his palace at Westminster, called York palace, into his hands.

Sir Thomas Moore was made Chancellor of England.

Michael Dormer, Shriues. Sir Thomas Moore made Chancellor. New testament
printed.
Walter Champion, Shriue. Sir Ralph Dodmer, Mercer, Mayor.
William Tindall translated the new Testament into English, and printed the
same beyond the seas.

A peace was agreed between King Henry of England, the Emperor, the Frence
King, the King of Boheme, and Hungary.

In the month of October the King came to the black Friars, and began there a
Parliament. Parliament at Black Friars.


King Henry commanded the Bishops to call in Tindals translation of the new
Testament, 1530 An, reg, 23 Suit to the Court of Rome for bidden.
and to see another truly translated, to be set forth.

King Henry upon occasion of delay made by the Pope in his controversy of
diuorsment, caused proclamation to be made, forbidding all his subjects to
purchase any thing from the Court of Rome.

The plague of pest, being hot in the City of London, blew crosses called Per
signum Tau, Pest in London.
were commanded to be set over the doors of houses infected.

It was proclaimed, that no Gascoine wine should be retailed above 8. d. the
Galon. Also that taules calued betwixt the first of Ianury, and the first of
May, should not be killed, but reared up. William Dancy, Shriue. Richard
Choping, Shriue. Sir Thomas Pargetor Salter Mayor.
The Cardinal being convict of a praemunire was arested by the Earl of
Northumberland, delivered to the Earl of Shrewsbury, Cardinal Wolley died.
and brought to Leicester Abbey, where he deceased the 29. of November, and was
there buried.

Clergy in the praemunire K Henry supreme head.
The whole Clergy of England being judged to be in the praemunire, in their
convocation concluded a submission, wherein they called the King supreme head
of the Church of England, and were contented to give the King 100000. pound to
pardon their offense. 1531 A Cook boiled. An, reg, 23.


Richard Rise a Cook was boiled in Smithfield for poisoning diverse persons at
the Bishop of Rochesters place.

The xi. of April vii. men with their horses, and a Ferriman, Thomas Bilney
burned.
were all drowned at Lambeth.

Thomas Bilney was burned at Norwich.

Richard Gressam, Shriue. Edward Altam, Shriue. Sir Nicholas Lambert Grocer
Mayor.
In the month of November, a Serieants feast was held at Ely house in
Holborne. Look more in the Survey of London.

1532 An, reg, 24. Monstrous Fishes. The clergy sworn.
The 25. of May was taken between London and Greenewich two great Fishes,
called Hurl^pooles.

The oath which the Clergy had used to make to the Bishop of Rome, was made
void by statute, and a new oath confirmed, wherein they confessed the King to
be supreme head.

Sir Thomas Moore after suite made, was discharged of the Chancellorship. Sir
Thomas Moore discharged T. Audley Lord chancellor Coiners executed. The first
Duke of Florence.


Thomas Audley Knight made Lord Chancellor. Five men were hanged, and quartered
at Tower hill, for coining and clipping.

This year 1532. Alexander son of Lawrence of Medicis, Duke of Urban, was by
the special savor of his uncle, Pope Clement the 7. made the first Duke of
Florence. By the advice of his uncle, he governed his country, and exercised
great justice upon his people, sat personally in the seat of judgment, and
gave sentence, whereby he gained high estimation: he married the Emperors
daughter, and had no issue, but in the end he inclined to lust, offered
violence unto modest Ladies. And for his reward his kinsman Lawrence slew him
by treason. Anno. 1537. After him succeeded Gosmo de Medicis, who took wa^ning
by the others folly, and governed his people very peaceably, and did many acts
worthy of memory: he builded a college in Pisa, for the advancement of poor
men's children.

The King suppressed the Priory of Christchurch in London, and gave their
Church, Christ Church suppressed.
place and lands to Sir Thomas Audley.

The xix. Tower of London repaired.
of August William Warham Archbishop of Canterbury deceased. The King repaired
the Tower of London. Lady Anne Bullein was made Marchiones of Pembroke. King
Henry went to Calice, and so to Bulletin, where he met with the French King.

R. Rainold, N. Pichon, Shriue. John Martin, Shriue. Sir Stephen Pecocke
Haberdasher Mayor.
The 12. of April being Easter even, the Lady Anne Bolein, who had been
privily married to K. Henry, 1538 An reg, 25. Queen Annecrowned. Prince
Arthurs widow. Beef and mutton sold by weight.
was proclaimed Queen of England, and on Whitsonday with solemnity crowned at
westminster. The 5. of July Queen Katherine was proclaimed Prince Arthurs
widow.

It was enacted that Butchers should sell their beef and mutton by weight,
beef for an half penny the pound, and mutton three farthings: at that time fat
oxen were sold for 26. s. 8. d. the piece, fat weathers for 3 s. 4. d. the
piece, fat Calves the like price, a fat lamb for twelve pence. The Butchers of
London sold penny pieces of beef for the relief of the poor, every piece two
pound and a half, sometime three pound for a penny, and 13. sometime 14. of
those pieces for twelve pence, mutton 8. d. the quarter, and an hundred weight
of beef for 4. s. 8. d.

Lady Elizabeth borne.
The 7. of September between the hours of 3. and 4. of the clock in the
afternoon, was the Lady Elizabeth, daughter to K. Henry, borne at Greenwich,
and there christened in the Friars Church.

William Forman, shriue. Thomas Kitson, shriue. Sir Christopher Asken Draper
Mayor.
A great fish was taken at Black wall, which was brought to Westminster to the
King.

The holy maid of Kent.
The 20. of April Elizabeth Barton a Nun, professed at S. Sepulchers in
Canterbury, Edward Bocking, and John Deering, two Monks of Christ's Church in
Canterbury. Hugh-Rich, Warden of the Friars obseruants in Canterbury, and
Richard Risby of the same house, Richard Master, Parson of Aldington in Kent,
and Henry Gold Priest, were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiborne, and
there hanged and headed, etc. for sundry conspiracies in the matter of divorce
between the Kings Majesty, and Queen Katherine.

All the Priests through England, Oath to K. Henry and Queen Anne.
called to be sworn to the King, and Queen Anne, and their heirs, before
the Archbishop of Canterbury: and all men through England were sworn in their
shires and towns where they dwelled: for refusal thereof, John Fisher, Bishop
of Rochester, Sir Thomas Moore late Lord Chancellor were sent to the tower of
London, diverse other Priests religious, and lay men were sent to other prisons.

The xv. of May was a great fire at Salters hall in Bredstreet.

The xi. of July Lord Dacres of the North was arraigned at Westminster of high
treason, An, reg, 26. Fire in Bredstreet. Lord Dacres araigned.

Friar houses suppressed.

Fire at Temple-barre. The Kings stables burnt.


where he so wittily confuted his accusers, that to their great shame he was
not found guilty.

The second of August was all the places of the obseruant Friars, as
Greenewich, Canterbury, Richmount, Newarke, and Newcastle, put down.

The foureteenth of August was a great fire at Temple bar: the sixteenth of
August was burned the Kings stable at Charing Cross, wherein were burned many
great horses, and great store of hay.

Nicholas Lues^^, Shriue. William Denham, Shriue. Sir John Champneis Shinner
Mayor.
The Popes authority abrogated.
In a Parliament at Westminster, the Pope with all his authority was banished
this realm, the King to be reputed and taken as supreme head of the Church of
England, having full authority to reform all errors, heresies, and abuses in
the same. Also the first fruits and tenths of all spiritual dignities and
promotions were granted the King, First fruits and tenths.
with a subsidy of the laity of twelve pence in the pound.

1537 An, reg, 27. Charterhouse men.
The Prior of the Charterhouse at London, the Prior of Beuall, the Prior of
Exham, Reinolds a brother of Simon, and John hail Vicar of Thisleworth, were
all condemned, drawn, hanged, and quartered at Tiborne the fourth of May. The
K. commanded all about his Court to poll their heads, Poled heads
and caused his own head to be polled.

The 25. of May was in Saint Paul's Church at London examined 19. men and 6.
women, borne in Holland, Hollanders heretics.
14. of them were condemned, a man and a woman of them were burnt in
Smithfield, the other twelve sent to other towns there to be burnt. This was
the last Duke of Millaine, since which time that City has been governed by
strangers


This year 1537. died Francis Sforce the second of that name: this Francis
Sforce was the ninth and last Tuke of Millaine: he was the son of Lewis Sforce,
called the Mo^re: he obtained his Dukedom by means of Prospero Colonno
general of the Camp of the league between the Emperor Carolus Quintus, and
Pope Leo the tenth, but with great difficulty: he married Christierna daughter
to the King of Denmark: he was crowned Duke, Ann: 1523. he reigned with great
troubles and vexations, by reason the Emperor had the greater hold, and
stronger faction in his country, and was forced to fly: for grief whereof to
see his subjects and friends become vassals to the Emperor, and his treasure
given to strangers, he fell into a great sickness, with extreme pain in one
of his eyes and thereof died, and being opened, his heart was found all dry,
and yet notwithstanding his heart was swollen.

In his time the Mylaneses expelled quite all the French garrisons, with their
chief captain Monsieur Lawtrec out of their territories, because of sundry
vile practices and misdemeanors, wherewith the French grieved them. Presently
upon the death of the Duke, his country became a pray to many governors, and
his wife Christians returned into Denmark, and was afterward married unto
Anthony Duke of Lorraine: She was highly honored of all Princes for her
accomplished virtues, especial for her singular patience in her unfortunate
marriage with her first husband, and her incessant pains and kindness which
she performed in his extreme miseries, and long sickness.

The 18. of June 3. Monks of the Charter House of London, Exmew, Middlemore,
Monks executed. Bishop of Rochester beheaded.
and Ni^igate, were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged (...) quartered.

The 22. of June Doctor John Fisher Bishop of Rochester, was beheaded on the
tower hill.

Sir Thomas Moore beheaded. Abbeys visited.
The 6. of July Sir Thomas Moore was beheaded on the tower hill.

The King sent Doctor Lee to visit the Abbeyes, Priories, and Nunneries in
England, who put forth all Religious persons that would go, and all that were
under the age of 24. years.

Humphrey Monmouth, Shriue. John Cotes, Shriue. Iir John Allen Mercer Mayor.
Charitable deeds.
This Sir John Allen, gave to the City of London, a rich collar of Gold to be
worn by the Mayor. L. Katherine Dowager.


The eight of January dyed Lady Katherine Dowager at Kimbalton, and was buried
at Peterborow.

Houses of Religion suppressed.
In a Parliament was granted to the King and his heirs, all religious houses of
the value of 200 pound, and under, with all lands and goods to them belonging.

1536 An, reg, 28
On May day King Henry being at a Iu^ at Greenewich, suddenly departed to
We^minster.

The next day Lady Anne Queen, was had t^ the Tower, and there for things
laid to her char^^ shortly after beheaded. L. Rochford executed.
The 19. of May the Lord Rochford, brother to the said Queen, Henry N^ris,
Mark Smeton, William Brierton, and Franci^ Weston, all of the Kings privy
chamber, a^bout matters touching the Queen, were put t^ death.

The 20. of May the King married Lady Jane, daughter to Sir John Seimer, King
Henry married Lady Jane.
which at Whitsontide was openly showed as Queen, and on the Tuesday in the
Whitson week, Sir Edward Seimer was created Vicount Beuchampe. The eight of
June began a Parliament, and the Clergy held a convocation in Paul's Church,
Articles by the King. Triumph at Westminster.
where they published a Book entitled: Articles devised by the Kings
highness. The nine and twentieth of June, the King held a great iusting at
Westminster.

Thomas Cromwell Secretary to the King, Thomas Cromwell. Vicar general.
and master of the Rolls, was made L. Keeper of the privy seal, and Vicar
general over the spiritualitie under the King, and sat diverse times in the
convocation among Bishops, as head over them.

The 22. of July, Henry Duke of Richmond, and Somerset Earl of Northampton, a
bastard son of king Henry, died, and was buried at Thetford.

L. Cromwell Lord privy Seal and vicegerent, Duke of Richmond. Pater noster,
Creed and commandments.
sent out under the Kings spiritual seal, certain injunctions to the
Prelates and Clergy of the Realm: charging Curates to teach their
Parishioners the Pater Noster, Aue, Creed, and commandments in English.

In the beginning of October, Commotion in Lincolnshire.
at an assize for the Kings subsidy kept in Lincolnshire, the people made an
insurrection, and gathered nine and twenty thousand persons. Against those the
King did send the Duke of Suffolk, the Earl of Shrewsbury, and the Earl of
Rutland, with a strong power, whereof, when the rebels heard they desired
pardon brake up their army and departed home, Lincolneshire commotion
appeased. A ^riest and a butcher executed* Commotion in Yorkshire.
but their Captains was apprehended and executed.

The 9. of October a Priest and a Butcher were hanged at Windsor, for words
speaking in the behalf of the Lincolne-shire-men.

After began insurrection in Yorkshire for the same causes, the people
gathered to the number of forty thousand. Against those rebels the King sent
the duke of Northfolke, the Earl of Shrewsbury and the Marquis of Exceter,
with a great army, with whom a battle was appointed to have been fought on
the even of S. Simon and Jude, but there fell such rain the night before, that
the two Armies could not meet, whereupon they desired the Duke of Northfolke
to sue to the K. for their pardon, and that they might have their liberties,
Commotio^ appeased.
etc Which the Duke promised, and rid post to the King, then lying at Windsor,
to know his pleasure, and so appeased them. Ask, that was chief of this
rebellion came to London, and was not only pardoned but rewarded with gifts.

Shriues.
Robert Paget, William Bowyer. Mayor.
Rir Ralph Warreire Mercer.
The Earl of Kildare and his uncles executed.
The 22. d. December, the Thames being frozen the King and Queen Jane rode
through London to Greenewich. The third of February was Thomas Fitz Garet,
son and heir to the Earl of Kildare beheaded, and five of his uncles,
drawn, hanged and quartered at Tiburne. In the same month Nicholas Musgraue,
Th. Gilby, and others, stirred a new rebellion and besieged the City of
Carlisle, from whence they were driven, and many of them taken and put to death.
Also sir Frances Bigot, Sir Robert Constable and others began a conspicacy, and
for the same were attainted.

The 29. of March, Another conspiracy.
were twelve men of Lincoln drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.

In April through certain Commissions sent into Somersetshire to take up
corn, 1584 Lincolneshire-men executed. An, reg, 29. A commotion in
Somersetshire
the people began to make an insurrection, which was by master Pawlet and other
allayed, the beginners to the number of 60. were condemned, whereof 14. were
hanged and quartered, one of them was a woman.

In June the Lord Darcy, the Lord Hussy, Sir Robert Constable, Sir Thomas
Percy, Sir Frances Bigot, Sir Stephen Hamelton, Sir John Bulmer and his wife,
George Lumley, Nicholas Tempell, Robert Ask, William Thrift, Abbat of
Fountains, Anthony Abbat of Geruaur, the Abbat of Rivers, William Prior of
Birlington, were all put to death: Sir Robert Constable at Hull, over the gate
called Beuerley gate. Ask hanged on a tower at York, Lady Bulmer burned in
Smithfield, Lord Darcy beheaded at tower hill, Lord Hussy at Lincoln, and the
other suffered at Tiburne.

The 26. of August, the Lord Cromwell was made Knight of the Garter.

The 12. of October, Prince Edward borne
was borne at Hampton Court, Prince Edward, and Queen Jane lost her life the
fourteenth of October.

John Gresham, Thomas Lewine. Shriues.
Mayor.
Sir Richard Gresham Mercer.
Alwin a Priest, Harsam Customer of Plimmouth, and Thomas Evil were hanged and
quartered at Tiburne.

The 12. of May Friar Forest was hanged and burnt in Smithfield, for denying
the Kings supremacy, 1585 An, reg, 30
with him was burnt the image of Daruar Gathering of Wales.

The 17. of May was a great fire at S. Margaret Pattens in London, where many
houses and nine persons were burned. Edmond Coningsby for counterfeiting the
Kings sign Manuel, and Edward Clifford for the same cause executed at Tyburne.

Hangman hanged. Bible in every Church and a Register book.
The first of September was one Cartwell hangman of London, and two other hanged
by Clerken well, for robbing a booth in Bartholmew fair. Thomas Cromwell Lord
privy Seal, Vicegerent to the K. sent forth injunctions to all Bishops, and
Curates through the Realm, charging them to see that in every parish Church
the Bible of the largest volume, printed in English, were placed for all men to
read on: And that a book of Register were also kept in every Parish Church,
wherein should be written every wedding, Christning and burying.

Shriues.
William Wilkinson, Nicholas Gibson. Mayor.
Sir William Forman Haberdasher.
Free^chole and Almeshouses at Radcliffe.
Auis Gibson, wife to Nicholas Gibson Grocer, by his license, founded a free
School at Radcliffe near unto London, she also builded there certain
almeshouses for 14. poor and aged persons. Henry Marquis of Excester, Marquis
of Devonshire executed.
Earl of Devonshire, Henry Poole, Lord Mountacute and Sir Edward Neuill, the
ninth of January were beheaded on Tower hill, two Priests, Crofts, Colens, and
Holland a Mariner, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne.

The 17. of November, the black Friars in London was suppressed, the next day
the white Friars, the Gray Friars, and the Monks of the Charterhouse.

John Lambert was burnt in Smithfield. Blacks Friars suppressed. Execution in
Paul's Churchyard
On Ashwednesday John Potter and William Mannering hanged in Paul's Churchyard,
for killing of Roger Cholmeley Esquire in the same place. The third of March,
Sir Nicholas Carew Knight of the Garter, and master of the Kings horse, was
beheaded at the Tower hill.

Margaret Countess of Sarisbury, 1538 An, reg. 13.
Gertrude wife to the Marquis of Excester, Reignold Poole, sir Adrian
Fortescue, and Thomas Dugley Knights of Saint John's, and diverse others were
attained by Parliament. And all the religious houses in England, suppressed,
and not suppressed, were granted to the King for ever.

The eight of May the Citizens of London mustred at the mile end all in bright
harness, Great muster at London.
with cotes of white silk, or cloth, and chains of gold, in three great
battles, the number was 15000, besides whiflers and other walkers: who in
goodly order passed through London to Westminster, and so through the
Sanctuaray, and round about the Park of Saint James, and returned home
thorough Oldborne.

The Vicar of Wansworth executed. Clarken well suppressed.
The Vicar of Wansworth with his Chaplain, his servant, and Friar War, were
hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.

The Nunnery of Clarkenwell, the Nunnery of Haliwell, the Priorie of Saint
Marioueries in Southwarke, and Saint Bartholmew in Smithfield, were suppressed.

Shriues.
John Fair, Thomas Huntlow. Mayor.
Sir William Holleys, Mercer.
This Sir William Holleys builded the beautiful Cross in the City of
Couentry. Couentry Cross. The Register book of Parish Churches. Abbats of
Reading and Glastenbury executed. Pensioners appointed King Henry married Lady
Anne of Cleue.


This year 1539. the King commanded great English bibles to be kept in every
Church, and also a general Register book for Christnings, weddings, and
burials, Anno 1539.

The Abbat of Reading and two Priests were hanged and quartered at Reading. The
same day was Richard Whitting Abbat of Glastenbury hanged and quartered on
Tower hill, besides his Monastery, according to an old prophecy.

In December were appointed to wait on the King 50. pensioners, or Squires,
unto whom was appointed 50. l. the piece yearly. The third of January was the
Lady Anne of Cleue received at Black Heath, 1540
and brought to Greenewich, and the sixth of the same month married to King
Henry. The Cromwell Earl of Essex. 4. fifteens and a subsidy. An, reg, 32.


The thirteenth of April was Thomas Cromwell created Earl of Essex, and made
great chamberlain of England.

In a Parliament was granted to the King a Subsidy of two shillings the pound
of lands, and twelve pence in goods, and four Fifteens.

The Religious order of Knights of S. John's in England, named Knights of the
Rhodes, Knights of Rhodes suppressed.
was dissolved, whose revenues were wondrous great.

In May was sent to the Tower Doctor Wilson, and Doctor Sampson Bishop of
Chicester, Note.
for relieuing certain prisoners, which d^nied the kings supremacy. For the
same offense Richard Farmer, Richard Farmer in the praemunire.
Grocer of London, a wealthy man, was committed to the Marshalsey, attainted in
the praemunire, and lost all his goods.

The 9. of July Thomas Lord Cromwell Earl of Essex committed to the Tower of
London, L. Cromwell beheaded. K, Henry divorced. Priests burnt and hanged, and
others for denying the Kings supremacy.
the 28. of July he was beheaded on the Tower hillwith the Lord Walter
Hungerford. King Henry was divorced from Lady Anne of Cleue.

The 30. of July Robert Barnes, Thomas Gerard, William Jerome Priests, were
burned in Smithfield The same day Thomas Abell, Edward Powell, and Richard
Fetherstone were hanged and quartered for denying the Kings supremacy. The
fourth of August were drawn to Tiburne six persons, and one led. Laurence
Cook Prior of Doncaster, William Horn a lay brother of the Charterhouse,
Giles Horn Gentleman, Clement Philpot, Edmond Bromham, Darby Kenham, Robert
Bird, Geruace Carrow, all put to death for denying the supremacy.

The eight of August Lady Katherine Howard was showed openly as Queen at
Hampton Court. K. Henry married again.


Dry summer. Note.
Great drought and a great death of hot burning agues and flixes. The salt
water flowed above London bridge.

Shriues.
William Laxton, Martin Bows. Mayor.
Sir William Roch, Draper.
1541 An, reg. 33 Commotion in Yorkshire.
Ralph Egerton, and Thomas Harman put to death for counterfaiting the Kings
great scale. In April certain persons began a new rebellion in Yorkshire,
which were shortly taken and put to execution in diverse places, of which,
Leigh, Tatersall, and Thronton, were put to death at London, Sir John Neuell
Knight, and ten persons more were put to death at York.

The misery of Barbarosso K. of Argier, and how he obtained the Crown.
Barbarossa the King of Argier, his mother was a Christian, and in his youth
through extreme poverty was constrained to wander like a peddler, carrying
cheeses and other like mean commodities into Spain to get a poor living, and
after that he gave himself to Piracy upon the sea, by which theft he enriched
himself, and then consorted with other strong thieves and robbers, by means
whereof he grew very strong, and well furnished with many exiles and wicked
persons, and then he assailed and surprised Argier which is in Mauritania,
otherwise called Barbaria; then he joined with the great Turk, and made fierce
wars by sea, wherein he was wondrous fortunate: he did very great damage
unto Spain, and chased Foratine Muleasem, the king of Tunis, out of his
kingdom; but not being able to Maintain his fortunes against the Emperor
Carolus quintus, the King of Tunis and others, by reason he wanted money and
skillful warriors, the forenamed Muleasem in the year 1535. was by Carolus
quintus reestablished in his Kingdom of Tunis: The Christian religion preached
in Tunis.
for which kindness Muleasem permitted the preaching of the Christian faith,
and in the year 1541. Carolus and Muleasem made a strong attempt, either to
take or to extirpe the forenamed Barbarosso out of his Kingdom of Argier, but
it took no effect: yet nevertheless, forasmuch as they had crossed the sea to
that intent, they meant to continue the siege which they had already planted
before his chief city bordering upon the Sea: but upon the sudden there arose
a most great and terrible tempest, with fierce showers of hail and rain,
which did the assailants extreme annoyance; which the Argierians well
perceiving, issued forth with great courage, and made as great slaughter of
their enemies, who were in a manner bea^^, and almost overcome with the fury of
the tempest: this was done about the beginning of October the year last
mentioned: the Emperor hereupon was constrained instantly to retire with
mighty loss of men, ships and galleys. Read Gua^^ and Paulus Iouius.

The Countess of Sarisbury was beheaded in the tower of London. Damport and
Chapman, Countess of Sarisbury beheaded. Damport and Chapman hanged, L. Dacres
of the South put to death
two of the Kings guard, were hanged at Greenewich in robbery.

The 28. of June, Lord Leonard Gray, Deputy (...) Ireland, was beheaded on the
Tower hill. The ^^me day were hanged at Saint Thomas Wa^^ings, Mantile, Royden,
and Frowds, Gentlemen, for spoil and murder they had done in Nicholas Pelhams
Park, the Lord of Dacres of the South being in company, and on St. Peter's day
the Lord Dacres led led from the Tower to Tiburne, and there hanged.

Progress to York.
In August the King took his Progress toward York.

Shriues.
Rowland Hill, Henry Sucley. Mayor.
Sir M^chaell Dormer, Mercer.
Fire at Elsing spittle.
On Christmas even at night began a great fire in the house called Elsing
spittle nigh Cripplegate in London, which at that time was the house of Sir
John Williams. Master of the Kings Jewels, where many of those Jewels were
burnt, and more imbezeled. The Lady Katherine Howard whom the King had married,
for her unchaste living committed with Thomas Culpeper and Francis De^^ham, K.
Henry King of Ireland. Qu Katha: beheaded. A maid boilded.
was by Parliament attainted, C^lpeper and Derham were put to death at Tiburne.
The 2^* of January the King was proclaimed king of Ireland. The 13. of February
were beheaded with^^ the Tower, the Lady Howard, otherwise called Queen
Katherine, and the Lady Rochford.

1542 An, reg, 4. The Earl of Desmond the great Onele. Duke of Norffolke
entered Scotland.
The 17. of March, Margaret Dauie was boil^^ in Smithfield, for poisoning three
households the she had dwelled in.

In the month of August, James Earl of Des^mond in Ireland, submitted
himself to the King The first of October the great Onele of Ireland was
created Earl of Tiron, and his base (...) Mathewe Onele Barron of Dongaman.
(...) Duke of Northfolke entered Scotland the 21. (...) October, burning and
wasting all the Marches, and there tarried till the midst of November.

Sir Henry Hublethorne, Henry Amcots. Shriues.
John Coats, Salter. Mayor.

The King of Scots made a Road into England, and did much harm, but at the
last Sir Thomas Wharton, sir William Musgraue, with a few of the borderers met
the Scots, where they being in number 15000. were overthrown, Scots
overthrown. Maxwell. 1543 An, reg, 35.
in which con^^ict was taken the Lord Maxwell, the Earls of ^lencarne and
Sassilles, with all the Captains of the Army, and on St. Thomas even were
brought into the Tower of London. At new-yeares-tide they were sent home again.

The third of June the Obrine a Lord in Ireland, and diverse of the wild Irish
submitted them to King Henry, K. Henry married.
the said Obrine was created Earl of Clawdicard.

The 12. K. Henry married again. An Army into Landersey.
of July King Henry married Lady Katherine Parre, late wife to the Lord Latimer.

King Henry, sent over 6000. men to Landersey, ^hither also came the Emperor
with a great army, and shortly after came down the French K. with a great
Army, and offered to give battle to the Emperor, by reason whereof the siege
was raised.

Anthony Person, Robert Testwood, and Henry Fil^er were burnt at Windsor.

A great pestilence was at London, Term at S, Albons.
and there^^re Michaelmas term was adiourned to Saint Albons.

John Towles, Richard Dobs Shriues. Majors.
Sir William Bowyer Draper, Sir Ra. Warren.
At Hallontide a road was made into Scotland by the Garrison there, who burned
60. villages, and took great preyes.

This year chanced four Eclipses, one of the Sun the 24. 4. Eclip.
of January, and three of the Moon.

Edward Seymer Earl of Hertford was made Lieutenant of the North, and sent
thither with an army.

Germain Gardener.
German Gardener and Lark Parson of Chealsey, were executed at Tiburne for
denying the Kings supremacy, with them was executed one Singleton, and shortly
after Ashby.

1544 House blown up. Sir John Dudley. An, reg, 36.
The third of April a Gunpowder house in east Smithfield was blown up, and
therein burned 5. men, a boy, and a woman.

Sir John Dudley, Vicount Lisle, high Admiral of England, arrived with his
Fleet of 200. sail in the Frith of Scotland, where he landed diverse of his
men, he landed the residue at Lies, and from thence marched in three great
battles, whereof the said Lord Admiral led the vaward, the Ear^^ of
Shrewsbury the rereward, and Edward Se^mer Earl of Hertford, Lieutenant
general of the battle. H^ere they found the Scots to the number of 6000.
horsemen, besides many footmen r^^^dy to have stopped their passage, Lies
taken and spoiled. Edenborough burnt.
but after certain shot on both sides, they suddenly leaving their
artillery fled toward Edenbrough: then the Englishmen entered the town of
Lies, where the found such riches as they thought had not been in any town of
Scotland. The next day our ar^my went toward Edenbrough, where they beat the
Scots from their Ordinance, and so entered the Canigate, and there slew a great
number of the Scots, and set fire on the town.

The Letany or Procession was by the King commanded to be used in English in
every Parish Church. Procession in English.


Proclamation was made for the inhaunsing of gold to 48. shillings, Coins
inhaunced. Base money coined.
and silver to four shillings the ounce. Also the King caused to be coined
base moneys.

After Whitsontide the Duke of Norffolke and the Lord Privy seal, with a
great army took their voyage toward France, and besieged Mutterell. The Duke
of Suffolk with many other Noble men passed the seas, and encamped before
Boloin on the east side.

The 13. of July, K H. went to Boloin.
King Henry with a goodly company passed into France, and encamped on the North
side of Boloine, after whose coming the town was so sore battered with
Gunshot, that after a months siege, the Captain sent word to the King that
they would yield the Town, upon condition that all which were within, might
depart with bag and baggage, and the Bulloiners departed to the number of
four thousand, four hundred fifty and four.

The 25. of September the K. with his Nobility entered into high Boloine, and
after turned from thence, landed at Dover the first of October.

John Wilford, Andrew Iudde. Shriues.
Sir William Laxton, Grocer. Mayor.

free schools at Oundale.
This William Laxton founded a free School at Dundale in Northamptonshire, he
also builded there certain almeshouses for seven poor alms men.

Prise taken.
This year was taken by the Kings ships of the English cost, the number of 300.
French ships and more, so that the Gray Friars Church in London was laid full
of wine, the Austen Friars and black Friars were laid full of herring and
other fish, that were taken going into France.

A benevolence demanded.
The king demanded a benevolence toward his Wars in France and Scotland. The
Lord Chancellor, the Duke of Suffolk and other of the kings Counsel sat at
Baynards Castle, where they first called before them the Mayor and Aldermen, An
Alderman sent into Scotland.
etc. And because Richard Read Alderman would not agree to pay as they set him,
he was commanded upon pain of death forthwith to serve the K. in his wars
of Scotland: who departed from London the 23. S. W. Roch sent to the Fleet.
of January. Also sir William Roche Alderman, for words of displeasure taken by
the Kings Counsel, was by them sent to the Fleet where he remained till
passion Sunday.

A fained miracle.
A Priest did penance at Paul's Cross, and there confessed, that himself saying
Mass, pricke^ his finger and be bled the Corporas and Altar cloth, A false
accuser set on the pillory, and well marked to be known.
meaning to have made the people believe, that the miraculous host had bled
which he had consecrated.

The 13. of February a Priest was set on the pillory in Cheap, and burnt in
both cheeks with the letters F. and A. and a paper on his head, wherein was
written, For false Accusing, which judgment was given by the Lord Chancellor
in the Star Chamber. A notable example of Justice.

In the beginning of March a rode was made into Scotland by the English men,
who went so far, A rode into Scotland
that a great Army of Scots be set them with three battles* where the English
men for the most part were slain and taken at Panyer hough, among whom, Sir
Ralph Eure, Lord Warden of the Cast Marches was slain, Alderman of London
taken prisoner.
and Richard Read Al^oman of London with others taken prisoners by the Scots.

Trinity Term was adiourned because of the Wars. 1545 An, reg. 37


The French kings Navy coming out of New ^^uen and Deep, arrived in Sussex
before bright H^^sted, where they set certain of their Soldiers a land, but
the beacons were fired, and the men came down so thick, that the French men
(...).

The 19. Men burnt in the hedghogge.
of July by misfortune of shooting off a ^^ne in one of the Hedgehogges a
ship before Westminster, a firken of gunpowder fired, and slew ^^en men, and
the eight was drowned.

The 20. of July the king being at Portsmouth, Mary Rose was drowned.
a goodly ship called the Marie Rose, with Sir George Carrow the Captain and
many other Gentlemen was drowned in the midst of the ha^en.

The 21. of July, the French Galleys came before ^or^hmouth haven, and landed
certain of their ^^^y in the Isle of Wight, and there burned and encamped
about two thousand men, but they went soon driven away with loss of their
Captain and many soldiers.

French men landed at new haven in Sussex.
Within few days after, the whole fleet removed from the Wight unto a place in
Sussex, called New haven, and there landed many captains and soldiers, who by
the valiantness of the gentlemen and yeomen were slain and drowned, and the
rest hardly recovered their Ships and Galleys.

Earl of Hertford sent into Scotland. L. Admiral burnt Treyport.
In August the Earl of Hertford was sent into Scotland with an Army of 12000.
men, when he destroyed diverse towns.

The 9. of September sir John Dudley Lord Admiral of England landed with six
thousand men at Treyport in Normandy, and there burnt the town and Abbie, and
thirty ships, with a bar^^ that lay in the haven.

S. Giles Church burnt. Shriues. Mayor. Chantries. Colleges, and Hospitals
given to the King.
The 12. of September the Church of S. Gilen without Creplegate of London was
burnt.

George Barn, Ralph Alley. Sir Martin Bows Goldsmith.
A Subsidy of two shillings eight pence in the pound of goods, and four
shillings of land.

All Colleges, free Chapels, Chantries, a^ hospitals, were committed to the
Kings order.

1546 The stews put down.
The Stews in Southwarke was put dow^^ The 27. of April being Wednesday in
Ea^^ week, W. Foxley Pot-maker for the mint in the Tower of London fell a
sleep, who could not b^ wakned with pricking, Note this sleeper.
cramping, or otherwis^ till the first day of the next term, which was (...)
14. days, and 15. nights. The cause of his thus sl^^ping could not be known,
though the same were diligently searched for by the Kings Physicians and other
learned men, yea the King himself examining the said W. Foxley, and he was in
all points found as he had slept but one night, and was living till the year
of our Lord 1587.

The 13. of June being Whitsunday, a peace was proclaimed between the Kings of
England and of France.

The 16. Anne Askew and others burnt.
of July were burned in Smithfield for the Sacrament, Anne Askewe, John
Lassels, Nicholas Ouerden Priest, John Adlam Tailor, and Doctor Shaxton
sometime Bishop of Salisburie preached at the same fire, and there recanted,
persuading them to do the like, but they would not.

The 21. of August came into England Flaud, Admiral of France came to London.
high Admiral of France, who brought with him the Sacre of Deep, and 12.
Galleys: he landed at the Tower wharse, where he was honorably received, and
brought to the Bishop of Londons Palace, where he lodged two nights, and then
rode to Hampton Court where the king lay. By the way Prince Edward received him
with a company of 500. coats of velvet with one sleeue of cloth of gold, and
half the coat imbrodered with gold, there was in all to the number of eight
hundred horses.

In September the water of Finsburie was brought to the Conduits at London
wall. Conduit in Lothbury.
Saint Stephens in Colemanstreete, and Saint Margarets in Lothburie.

Richard Geruace, Thomas Cortese. Shrieues.
Henry Huberthorne, Merchant Tailor. Mayor.

Duke of Norfolk sent to the Tower.
The 12. of December, Thomas Duke of Norfolk, and Henry Earl of Surrey his
son was sent to the Tower.

The third of January the Church of the late Gray Friars in London was opened.
And that day preached at Paul's Cross the Bishop of Rochester, who declared the
Kings gift to the Ci^^ie of London, for the relieuing of the poor people, to
wit, S. Bartholmew Spittle, the Church of the Gray Friars, and two Parish
Churches, the one of Saint Nicholas in the shambles, the other St. Edwine in
Newgate market, K. Henry his gift to the City of London.
all to be made one Parish Church of the Gray Friars Church, and in lands he
gave for the maintenance of the same, five hundred marks by the year for
over, to maintain a Quire of Singing-men, viz. eight in number.

Henry Howard Earl of Surrey, was beheaded on the Tower kill the 19. of
January.

Earl of Surry beheaded. K. Henry deceased.
The 28. of January King Henry deceased, appointed his first heirs to his son,
Prince Edward: the second, Lady Mary, his daughter by Queen Katharine: and the
third, Lady Elizabeth, by the Queen Anne Bolein. He deceased when he had
reigned 37. years, nine months, and odd days, and was buried at Windsor.

Edward the sixth.
Edward the sixth began his Reign the 24. of January, An, reg, 1.
1546. when he was but nine years old. King Henry his father by his will had
appointed for his Privy Counsel, the Archbishop of Canterbury, the Chancellor,
the Bishop of Durham, with other to the number of sixteen. Earl of Hertford
L. Protector. K E. made Knight. L. Mayor of London made knight.
The first of February the Earl of Hertford was elected to be Protector of the
Kings person. The 6. of February the L. Protector in the tower of London,
endued K. Edward with the order of Knighthood, and then Henry Hoblethorne, L.
Mayor of London kneeling down, the King made him Knight. The 17. of February*
sir Edward Seimer Earl of Hertford, and L. Protector was created Duke of
Somerset, the L. Parre Earl of Essex, Marquis of Northampton, Sir John Dudley,
Lord Lisle, Duke and Lords created.
Lord Admiral Earl of Warwick, Sir Thomas Wriothesley, Lord Chancellor,
Earl of Southampton, sir Thomas Seimer was made Lord of Sudley, and high
Admiral, Sir Richard Rich was made Lord Rich, Sir William Willowby, Lord
Willowby, Sir Edmond Sheiffield, Lord Sheiffield.

K. Edward crowned,
King Edward was Crowned at Westminster on the 20. of February.

1557 D. Smith recanted.
The 15. of May Doctor Smith recanted at Paul's Cross.

The Lord Protector and the rest of the Counsel, sent Commissioners into all
parts of the Realm, willing them to take all Images out of their Churches,
Images forbidden. Procession forbidden.
for the avoiding of Idolatry, with them were sent diverse Preachers to persuade
the people from their beads, and at that time Procession was forbidden.

Edward Duke of Somerset, and John Earl of Warwick, with a Noble Army were
sent into Scotland, Muskleborow field.
and at a place called Muskleborough, the English men and Scots met, where
between them the 10. of September* was fought a cruel battle: the victory
whereof fell to the Englishmen, and of the Scots were slain 1400, and taken
prisoners 1500.

1. Rich L. Chanceller
Richard Lord Rich was made Lord Chancellor.

Shrieues.
Thomas White, Robert Chersey, Mayor.
Sir John Gresham Mercer.
This Sir John Gresham gave to every ward in London, ten pound to the poor,
and to six score poor men and women, every of them three yards of cloth for a
gown, of eight or nine shillings the yard: he gave also to maidens marriages,
and to the Hospitals in London, about 200. pounds in money. He founded a free
school at Holt, a market town in Norfolk.

All Colleges, Chauntries, free Chapels, Hospitals, Fraternities,
Brotherhoods, and Guildes were granted to the King, and an Act made for the
receiving of the Sacrament in both kinds.

The Church service was sung in English. 1548 An, reg, 2. A goodly watch at
Midsomer.


The watch in London at Midsomer, was now again used both on the Even of Saint
John and Saint Peter, in as comely order as it had been accustomed, which
watch was greatly beautified by the number of more then three hundred
dimilances and light horsemen, The siege of Haddington.
that were prepared by the Citizens to be sent to the rescue of the town of
Haddington in Scotland.

On Saint Peter's day Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester preached before the
King, Bishop of Winchester sent to the Tower. A priest of Cornwall executed.
for the which he was sent to the Tower.

The seventh of July a Priest was hanged and quartered in Smithfield, for that
he had slain M. Body, one of the Kings commisioners, others of his society
were put to death in other places.

A great pestilence was in London, A great pestilence at London.
wherefore commandment was given to all Curates and other, that no corpse
should be buried before six of the clock in the morning, nor after six at
night, and that there should at the burial of every corpse be rung one Bell at
the least, by the space of three quarters of an hour.

William Lock, John Ailife Knights, Shriues. Sir Henry Amcots Fishmonger,
Mayor.
The 16. of September* S. Annes Church within in Aldersgate was burnt.

S. Annes Church burnt. An, reg, 3. Lord Thomas Seymer beheaded.
The 16. of January, Thomas Seimer, Lord Admiral, and brother to the Lord
Protector, was sent to the tower of London. and the 20. of March beheaded on
the Tower hill.

The 23. of April six houses at Broken wharfe were burnt.

1549 Fire at broken wharfe. Commotion in Somerset shire.
In May by means of a Proclamation for enclosures, the commons of Somersetshire
and Lincolneshire made a commotion, and brake up certain Parkes of sir W.
Harbardes, and Lord Sturtons, but sir William Harbarde flewe and executed many
of those rebels. In July the Commons of Essex and Kent, Suffolk and Norfolk,
rose against enclosures, and pulled down diverse parks and hooses.

Commotion in Cornwall.
Also the Commons of Cornwall and Devonshire, required not only that the
enclosures might be disparked, but also to have their old Religion: these
besieged the City of Excester, which was valiantly defended. John Lord
Russell, Lord Privy seal with a number of soldiers entered the City of
Excester the fill of August* slew and took prisoners of the Rebels more then
4. thousand, and after hanged diverse of them in the town and country about.
The L. Gray also with strangers, horsemen, Rebels subdued.
in diverse conflicts slew many people, and spoiled the Country.

The last of July W. Lord Marquis of Northhampton, entered the City of Norwich,
and on the next morning the rebels also entered the town, burned part thereof,
put the Lord Marquis to flight, and flew the Lord Sheffield.

Diverse persons were apprehended as aiders of the foresaid rebels, Martial law.
of the which one was hanged within Aldgate, and another at the Bridge foot
toward Southwarke, both on Mary Magdalens day. In the beginning of August, The
french Kings gullies invaded Gernsey and Iersea.
the French king determined to take the Isles of Gernsey and Iersey, did set
there suddenly upon our ships with a great number of Galleys, but were so
manfully encountered by the Kings Navy, that with the loss of a thousand men
and great spoil of Galleys, they were forced to retire into France.

The eight of August the French Ambassadors gave a defiance to the Lord
Protector, whereupon all Frenchmen with their goods, French men apprehended.
being no Denizens, were apprehended.

The rebels in Norfolk and Suffolk encamped themselves at mount Surrey near
unto Norwich, The Earl of Warwick went against the rebels.
against whom sir John Dudley Earl of Warwick went with an Army, where
meeting with the rebels, they had thought all to have died in the place, but
God brought it to pass, that as well there, as in all other places, they were
partly by power constrained, partly by promise of their pardon persuaded to
submit themselves. The Earl of Warwick entered the City of Norwich the 27. of
August, when he had flaine above five thousand of rebels, and taken their
chief Captain Robert Ket of Windam Tanner.

The 20. Bishop of London deprived.
of September Edmond Bonner Bishop of London, was sent from Lambeth to the
Marshalsey, for a sermon, which he preached at Paul's Cross on the first of
December. On the first of October he was deprived of his Bishopric, and sent
again to the Marshalsey for disobeying the Kings order in religion.

Richard York, John Chester, Shriues.

L. protector brought to the Tower.
The 24. of October, the Duke of Somerset was brought from Windsor, riding
through Oldborne in at Newgate, and so to the tower of London, accompanied with
diverse Lords and Gentlemen, with three hundred horses. The Lord Mayor, Sir
Ralph Warren, Sir John Gresham, master Recorder, sir William Lock, and both
the Shriues, with other knights, sitting on their horses against Soper-lane,
all the officers with halbarts, and from Oldborne bridge to the Tower, certain
Aldermen or their Deputies on horseback in every street, with a number of
householders standing with bills as he passed. There was with him committed
to the Tower, Sir Michael Stan^op, Sir Thomas Smith, sir John Thin Knight,
Wolf and Gray of Reading.

K. E. rode through London.
The 17. of October, King Edward came from Hampton Court to his place in
Southwarke, and there dined, he made master York one of the Shriues, Knight,
and then rode through the City to Westminster.

Charitable deeds of sir Rowland (...) gift to Christ's Hospital.
Sir Rowland Hill Mercer, the twenty eight of October, Mayor.

This sir Rowland Hill caused to be made diverse causeyes, bridges, and free
schools. He gave to the Hospital of Christ's Church in London, five hundred
pound in ready money, and one hundred pound at his decease. The twenty nine of
November, Robert Kete and William Kete his brother, were delivered out of the
Tower of London, to sir Edmond Windam, Shriue of Norffolke, R. Kete and W. Kete
hanged.
to be conuaied to Norwich, where R. Kete was hanged in chains on the top of
Norwich Castle, and W. Kete likewise hanged on the top of Windam steeple. In
December the Scots took Burtierag in Scotland, Holds in Scotland lost.
and other holds then possessed by Englishmen, where they slew man, woman and
child, except Sir John Luteroll the Captain, whom they took prisoner. The 19.
of January were murdered by S. Sepulchers Church without Newgate in London, two
Captains that had served the King at Boline and elsewhere, she one was Sir
Peter Gambo, the other Filicirga, Peter Gambo murdered.
which murders were committed by Charles Ganaro a Fleming, who came post from
Barwicke to do that act: on the morrow he with three of his companions were
taken in Smithfield, and sent to Newgate, and the four and twentieth of
January, they were all four, Charles Gauaro, Gauaro and others hanged.
Balthazar Gauaro, Nicholas Disalueron, and Francis Deualasco hanged in
Smithfield.

The 27. of January, An, reg, 4. Rebels hanged.
Humphry Arundell Esquire Thomas Holmes, Winslow and Bury, Captains of the
Rebels in Devonshire, were hanged and quartered at Tiburne.

The sixth of February the Duke of Somerset was delivered out of the Tower.

The tenth of February one Bell was hanged and quartered at Tiburne, foe moving
a new rebellion in Suffolk.

The house of Fernese made dukes of Parma.
This year 1550. died Pope Paul the third, formerly called Alexander Fernese,
he was enstalled Pope, Anno 1534. in his youth, he had two children, viz.
Peter Jews, and the Lady Constance: This Pope ordained the general councels at
Ma^t^a, at Vicentia, and Trent: he gave the Emperor five Galleys well
furnished for his wars against Barbarosso, he met the Emperor Carolus
Quintus, and Francis the French King at Nice in Province, to make peace
between them for ten years, and concluded a marriage between his Nephew
Octauio, and the Emperors daughter, widow to Alexander de medicis, late Duke
of Florence, and after that with consent of the Emperor, he made his forenamed
son Peter Jews Duke of Parma and Placentia, he died at fourscore and four
years of age.

Peace proclaimed. The liberties of southwarke purchased.
The last of March, a general peace was proclaimed between the King of
England, France, the Emperor and the Scots. This time the Lord Mayor of London
and the Aldermen purchased all the liberties of South warke, which was in the
Kings hands.

The 12. of April, D. Nicholas Ridley was enstalled Bishop of London. Boloine
yielded. Joan Butcher burnt. Rebels executed.


The 25. of April, the town of Boloine was yielded to the French.

The second of May, Joan Butcher was burnt in Smithfield for heresy, that
Christ took no flesh of the Virgin Marie, Richard Lion, Goddard Gorran and
Richard Ireland were executed the 14. of May, for attempting a new rebellion in
Kent.

Trinity Term was adiourned till Michaelmasse. Term adiourned.


In the month of August, a Millar of Battlebridge was set on the Pillory in
Cheap, and had both his ears cut off, for seditious words by him spoken
against the Duke of Somerset.

Also Grig a Poulter that had been taken for a cunning man in curing of
diseases among women, being proved to be a crafty deceiuer, was on the eight
of september set on the Pillorie in southwarke, and the Lord Mayor and the
Aldermen riding through the fair, he asked them and all the Citizens
forgiveness.

Augustine Hide, John Lion, Shriues. Sir Andrew Iud, Skinner, Mayor.
This Sir Andrew Iud erected one notable free schools at Tonbridge in Kent,
wherein he brought up and nourished in learning great store of youth, as well
bred in that shire, as brought from other countries adjoining. He also builded
almeshouses for poor people nigh S. Helens Almesnouses by Saint Helens in
Bishopsgate street.
Church in London, and gave lands to the Company of Skinners in the same City,
amounting to the value of 60. l. 3. s. 8 d. the year, for the which they be
bound to pay 20. l. to the schoolmen, 8. l. to the Usher of the free school
at Tonbridge, yearly for ever, and 4. shillings the week to 6. poor people
at S. Helens, 8. d. the piece weekly, and 25. shillings 4. d. the year in
coals amongst them for ever.

More, Alice Smith of London widow, late wife to Thomas Smith of the same
City Esquire, and Customer of the Port of London, in her last testament
bequeathed lands to the value of 15. pounds by year for ever, to the
Skinners, for the augmenting of the pensions of the poor, inhabiting the eight
almes-houses, erected by the said sir Andrew Iud her father, in the said St.
Helenes in Bishopsgate-streete. She also has given to the Hospitals, and to
the poor of other parrishes, and good Preachers, the sum of 300. pound. As
also to poor Scholars in the Universities, the sum of 200. pound. Of which
her last will and testament, she made her son Thomas Smith late shriue of
London, and Richard and Robert Smith her Executors, who have performed the same
according to her godly and charitable mind.

Arden murdered.
On Saint Valentines day at Feuersham in Kent, one Arden a Gentleman was
murdered by consent of his wife, for the which fact she was the 14. of March
burnt at Canterbury. Michael, master Ardens man was hanged in chains at
Fenersham, and a maiden burnt: Mosbie and his sister were hanged in Smithfield
at London: Green which had fled, came again certain years after, and was
hanged in chains in the high way against Feuersham, and black Will the
Ruffian that was hired to do the act, burnt at Flushing in Zeland.

Bishop of Winchester deprived. 1551
The 14. of February, D. Stephen Gardener Bishop of Winchester was deprived of
his Bishoppricke, and so committed to the tower again. Into his place was
translated Doctor Poinet.

The 24. of April, An Arrian burnt.
a Dutch man was burnt in Smithfield for an Arrian.

The 25. of May an Earthquake at Blechingly, Earthquake
Godstone, Titsey, Rigate, Croidon, Benington, Albery, and diverse other places
in Southery.

The 9. of July, First fall of base money.
the base moneys coined in the time of King Henry the eight, and Edward the
sixth, was proclaimed, the shillings to go for 9. pence, the groat for three
pence, which took effect immediately.

The sweating sickness began in London the ninth of July, which was so
terrible, Sweating sickness.
that people being in best health, were suddenly taken and dead in 24. hours,
and twelve or less. And it is to be noted, that this mortality fell chiefly
on men of the best age, as between thirty and forty years. Also it followed
Englishmen, as well within the Realm, as in strange Countries, the first week
died in London 806. persons. Second fall of base money.
The seventeenth of August, the shilling which of late was called down to nine
pence, was called to six pence, the great to two pence, the half great to a
penny, the penny to an half penny.

John Lambert, John Cowper, Shriues.

The sixteenth of October, E. Seymer, Duke of Somerset, the Lord Gray of
Wilton, Sir Ralph Vane, Sir T. Palmer, Sir Miles Partridge, Sir Michael
Stanhop, Sir T. Arundell Knights, and diverse other gentlemen were brought to
the tower of London: the next morrow, the Duchess of Somerset was also brought
to the tower. Liberties of the Stilyard seized.
The liberties of the stilyard were seized into ye kings hands

Mayor.
Sir Robert Dabs Skinner the 28. of October.
New coin.
The 30. of October was proclaimed a new coin both of silver and gold,
souerains of 30. shillings, Angels of 10. Muster of horsemen. Duke of Somerset
beheaded. An, reg 6. Queen of Scots rode through London. Sir Ralph Vain and
other executed. 1552
shillings, etc. The 6. of November the old Queen of Scots rode through London
toward Scotland, after she had lain four days in the Bishop of Londons
Palace. The first of December the Duke of Somerset was arraigned at
Westminster, and condemned of felony. The seventh of December was a muster of
horsemen before the King at S. James. The 22. of January Edward duke of
somerset was beheaded on the tower hill. The 26. of February sir R. Vine, and
sir M. Partridge were hanged on the tower hill. Sir M. Stanhope, with sir
Thomas A^undell, were beheaded there. The last of April a house near to the
tower of London, with three last of powder, was blown up, the gunpowder makers
being 15. in number, were all slain.

The 16. of May was a muster of horsemen before the King at Greenewich.

The 26. of July began the preparing of the Gray Friars house in London, for
the poor fatherless children, Christ's Hospital.
and that month began the repairing of S. Thomas Hospital in Southwarke, for
poor impotent and lame persons.

A monster.
The third of August at Middleton, 11. miles from Oxford, a woman brought forth
a child which had two perfect bodies from the Nauill upward, and were so
joined together at the Nauill, that when they were laid in length, the one head
and body was East, the other West, the legs of both the bodies grew to it at
midst, where the bodies joined, and had but one issue for the execrements: they
lived 18. days, and were women children.

The 8. of August were taken at Queen brough 3. great fishes called Dolphins:
Great fishes
and the week following, at Black wall were six more taken and brought to
London. This month of August began the great provision for the poor in
London, toward the which every man was contributary, and gave certain money in
hand, and couenanted to give a certain weekly.

The 7. Great fishes
of October were two great fishes called Whirlepooles, taken at Grauesend.

William Garrard, John Maynard. Shriues. Sir George Barn, Haberdasher, Mayor.
This Sir George Barn gave a Windmill in Flusbury field to the Haberdashors
of London, Charitable deeds of six G. Barnes.
the profits rising thereof to be distributed to the poor alms people at the
same company.

The seventh of October were three great fishes called Whirepooles taken at
Grauesend, Great fishes taken.
which were drawn up to the Kings Bridge at Westminster.

In this month the King damanded of the merchants adventurers, by way of
prost, Money borrowed of the Merchants.
of every broad cloth then shipped to Borwins mart, twenty shillings sterling,
to be paid at Anwerpe for certain debt there, and they to have the Kings hand
for the repaiment thereof, which did at that time mount to more then forty and
eight thousand pound.

The new service in English.
The first of November being the feast of all S. the new service Book, called
the Book of common prayer, began in Paul's Church, and the like through the
City, the Bishop of London, Doctor Ridley executed the service in the
forenoone, and preached at Paul's Cross in the afternoon.

First children in Christ's Hospital.
The 23. of November the children were taken into the hospital of the gray
Friars, called Christ's Hospital. And also sick and poor people into the
Hospital of Saint Thomas in Southwarke, in which two places the children and
poor people should have meat, drink, lodging, and cloth of the alms of the
City.

On Christmas day in the afternoon, when the Lord Mayor and Aldermen rode to
Paul's, the children of Christ's Hospital stood from St. First show of children
in Christ's Hospital.
Laurence lane in Cheap toward Paul's, all in russet cotton; the masters of
the hospital foremost, next the Physicians and Surgeons, which children were in
number 340.

King Edward kept his Christmas with open household at Greenewich, Lord of merry
disports.
George Ferrers Gentleman being Lord of merry disports all the xii. days, who
so pleasantly and wisely behaved himself, that the King had great delight in
his pastimes.

On the fourth of January the said Lord of merry disports came by water to the
Tower, where he entered, and after rode through Tower street, where he was met
and received by Sergeant Vaus, Lord of misrule to master John Mainard, one of
the Shriues of London, and so conducted through the City with a great company
of young Lords and Gentlemen, to the house of sir George Barn Lord Mayor,
where he with the chief of his company dined, and at his departure the Lord
Mayor gave him a standing Cup with a cover, silver and gilt, of the value of
x. pound: the residue of his Gentlemen and servants dined at other Aldermens
houses, and with the Shrieues.

In the Month of January the King fell sick of a cough, which grievously
increased, An. reg. 7.
and at the last ended in a consumption of the lights.

The first of March began a Parliament at Westminster, and brake up on the 31.
of March, Parliament, 1553. Subsidy.
then being Good Friday, a subsidy was granted of 4. shillings the pound
lands, and two shillings eight pence goods.

The third of April, being Monday after Easter day, the children of Christ's
Hospital in London, came from thence through the City to the sermon at saint
Mary spittle, all clothed in pl^nket coats with red caps, and the maiden
children in the same livery with karchiefes, all which were there placed on the
scaffold of eight stages, and there sat the Sermon time.

The tenth of April the Lord Mayor was sent for to the Court, and at that time
the King gave to him for a workhouse for the poor and idle persons of the
City of London, Bridewell given to the City of London. The Sauoy suppressed.
Voyage to Muscouie.
his place of Bridewell, and seven hundred marks lands of the Sauoy rents, with
all the beds and bedding of the Hospital of the Sauoy, toward the maintenance
of the said workehouse.

The 20. of May, by the encouragement of one Sebastian Cabot, three great ships
well furnished, were sent forth for the adventure of the unknown voyage to
Muscouia and other east parts of the North seas.

K. Edward deceased.
King Edward being about the age of sixteen years ended his life at Greenewich
on the sixth of July, when he had reigned 6. years, 5. months, and odd days,
and was buried at Westminster.

The tenth of July was proclamation made of the death of King Edward, and how
he had ordained that the Lady Jane, daughter to Francis Duchess of Suffolk,
Lady Jane proclaimed Queen.
(which Lady Jane was married to the Lord Gilford Dudley, fourth son to the
Duke of Northumberland) should be heir to the Crown of England.

The 11. of July Gilbert Pot, Drawer to Ninion Sanders Vintner, Gilbert Pot
punished in Cheap.
dwelling at Saint John's head within Ludgate, was set on the pillory in Cheap,
with both his ears nailed and clean cut off, for words speaking at the time
of the Proclamation of the Lady Jane.

Lady Mary fled.
Lady Mary eldest daughter to King Henry the eight, fled into Framingham Castle
in Suffolk, where the people in the country almost wholly resorted to her.

In Oxford Sir John Williams, in Buckinghamshire, Sir Edmond Pecham, and in
diverse other places, many men of worship offering themselves as guides to the
common people, gathered great powers, and with all speed made toward Suffolk
where Lady Mary was.

Also the 13. of July, by appointment of the Counsel, the duke of
Northumberland, the Earl of Huntington, the Lord Gray of Wilton, and diverse
other, with a great number of men of arms set forward to fetch the Lady Marie
by force, and were on their way as far as Bury.

The 19. of July the Counsel assembled themselves at Baynards Castle, where
they commoned with the Earl of Pembrooke, and immediately with the Mayor of
London, certain Aldermen, and the Shriues, Garter King of arms, and a Trumpet
came into Cheap, where they proclaimed the Lady Mary (daughter to King Henry
the eight, and Queen Katherine) Queen of England, Lady Mary proclaimed Queen.
France and Ireland.

The 20. of July, John Duke of Northumberland, being at Saint Edmonsbury, (and
having sure knowledge that the Lady Mary was at London proclaimed Queen)
returned back again to Cambridge, and about five of the Clock in the
evening, he came to the market cross, and caused the Lady Mary to be likewise
proclaimed Queen of England, but shortly after he was arrested in the Kings
College. And the 25. of July he with other was brought up to the Tower of
London, under the conduct of Henry Earl of Arundell: Thus was the matter ended
without bloodshed, which men feared would have brought the death of many
thousands.

Queen Mary.
An, reg, 1
MAry the eldest daughter to K. Henry the eight, began her reign the sixth of
July, in the year 1553. she came to London. and was received with great joy,
and entered the tower the third of August, where Thomas Duke of Norffolke,
Doctor Gardener late Bishop of Winchester, and Edward Courtney, son and heir
to Henry Marquess of Excester, prisoners in the Tower discharged. The fifth of
August, Bishops restored.
Edmond Bonner late Bishop of London, prisoner in the Marshalsey, and Cuthbert
Tunstall Bishop of Durham prisoner in the Kings Bench, were restored to their
Seas: shortly after all the Bishops which had been deprived in the time of
King Edward the sixth were restored to their Bishoprics, also all beneficed
men that were married, or would not forsake their opinion, were put out of
their livings, others set in the same.

Men drowned at London bridge.
The 11. of August, certain Gentlemen minding to pass under London bridge in a
whirrie, were there ouerturned, and 6. of them drowned.

The 13. of August, master Bourne a Canon of Paul's, preaching at Paul's
Cross, so offended son of the audience, that they breaking silence, Violence
unto a Preacher at Paul's Cross.
cried pull him out, and one threw a dagger at him whereupon master Bradford
and John Rogers two Preachers of King Edwards time, with much labor conuaied
the said master Bourne out of the audience into Paul's School.

The 22. of August, The Duke of Northumberland beheaded. New coins.
John Duke of Northumberland. Sir John Gates, and sir Thomas Palmer knights,
were beheaded on the Tower hill.

The 4. of September was proclaimed certain new coins, a sovereign of gold of
30. s. the half sovereign 15. s. an Angel x. s. the half angel 5. s. Of
silver the great, half groat, and penny: Also bas^ coins to be current as
before. Subsidy pardoned.
At the same day by proclamation was pardoned the Subsidy of four shillings
the pound lands, and 2. s. 8. d. the pound of moveable goods, granted in the
last Parliament of King Edward.

Thomas Ofley, William Hewet. Shriues.

The last of September, Coronatio^.
Queen Mary rode through the City of London to Westminster. A Dutchman stood
on the wethercocke of Paul's steeple, holding a streamer in his hand of five
yardes long, and bowing his knee when the Queen rode by, under him were two
scaffolds, one above the cross, and the other beneath the bowl of the cross,
both set with streamers wauing, and torches burning.

On the morrow the Queen was crowned at Westminster by Doctor Gardener Bishop
of Winchester.

Grauesend barge ouerturned. Charitable deeds of sir Thomas White.
The 25. of October the Barge of Grauesend was ouerturned, and 14. persons
drowned.

Sir Thomas White, Merchant Tailor Mayor.

This Sir Thomas White, a worthy Patron and protector of poor scholars and
learning, erected a College in Oxford now called S. John's College, before
Bernards College: he also erected S. John's hall, sometime Gloucester College
in Oxford, for one hundred of scholars or more, and adjoined it to his
College. He also erected schools at Bristow and Reading: moreover this
worshipful Citizen in his life time gave to the City of Bristow, two
thousand pounds of ready money to purchase lands to the yearly value of 120.
pound, for the which it is agreed, that the Mayor, Burgesses, and commonaltie
of Bristow, in Anno, 1567. and so yearly during the term of ten years then
next ensuing, should cause to be paid at Bristow an hundred pound of lawful
money. The 800. pound to be lent to sixteen poor young cloathiers, and free
men of the same town, for the space of ten years, fifty pound the piece of
them, putting sufficient sureties for the same, and at the end of ten years,
to be lent to other sixteen at the discretion of the Mayor, Aldermen, and
four of the common counsel of the said City. The other 200. l. to be
employed to ye provision of corn, for the relief of the poor of the same
City, for their ready money without gain to betaken. And after the end of 9.
years on the feast of Saint Bartholmew, which shall be in Ann. 1577. at the
Marchant-tailors hall in London, unto the Mayor and commonaltie of the City
of York, or to their Attorney authorized, an hundred and four pound, to be
lent unto four young men of the said City of York, free men and inhabitants,
(clothiers always to be preferred) viz. to every one 25. pound, to have and
occupy the same for the term of ten years, without paying any thing for
the loan of four pound overplus of the 104 pound, at the pleasure of the
Mayor and commonaltie for their pains to be taken about the receipts and
paiments of the said 100. l. The like order in all points is taken for the
delivery of 104 pound in the year, 1578. to the City of Canterbury in the
year, 1579. to Reding, 1580. to the company of the Marchant-tailors, 1581. to
Gloucester, 1582. to Worcester, 1583. to Excester, 1584. to Salisbury, 1585. to
Worcester, 1586. to Norwich, 1587. to Southhampton, 1588. to Lincoln, 1589. to
Winchester, 1590. to Oxford, 1591. to Hereford Cast, 1592. to Cambridge, 1593.
to Shrewsbury, 1594. to Linne, 1595. to Bathe, 1596. to Darby, 1597. to
Ipswich, 1598. to Colchester, 1599. to Newcastle. And then to begin again at
bristow 104. pound, the next year to the City of York, and so forth to every
of the said Cities and towns in the like order as before, and thus to continue
for ever. More, this Sir Thomas White gave unto the Mayor and commonaltie of
Couentry, the sum of 1400. pound, to purchase lands and tenements to the
value of seventy pound by the year, which the said Mayor and Communaltie did
purchase by the only procurement and aid of the said sir Thomas White, for the
relief and preferment of the Commonwealth of the said City of Couentry, being
then in great decay. The rents and profits whereof, he has devised to be
yearly converted as follows. First, that twelve poor men Inhabitants of the
foresaid City, shall have paid unto them in free alms, the sum of 24.
pounds yearly, the same to be paid unto them upon the xi. of March, yearly,
or within vi. days after, viz. to every of them xl. s. a peer for ever.
Further, he has devised, that for the space of ten years within one year
after his decease, to four poor young men of the said City xl. pound yearly,
viz. ten pound to each of them for ix. years following the receipt thereof, in
freelone. And after those ix. years be expired, to other iiii. poor young men
of the said City, likewise for ix. years, and so from ix. years to ix.
years for ever. And after those ten years be expired, he does devise that the
said Mayor, or Communaltie, and Bailifes of Couentry for the space of thirty
years, shall employ the said xl. l. yearly to two young men of the said City
for nine years in free lone for ever, and so likewise after those nine years,
from nine years to nine for ever. And after those thirty years be expired,
the said sum of forty pound, yearly to be delivered in free lone to one
young man of the said City, for nine years, and so likewise from nine years
to nine years for ever.

And after that, he does devise the said sum of forty pound, to be paid and
delivered to the Town of Northampton, the same to be delivered to one young
man for nine years in free lone, and so from nine years to nine years for
ever. And then the next year after that, to the Town of Leicester, as
aforesaid. And the next year after that, to the Town of Nottingham, as
aforesaid. And the next year after that, to the Town of Warwick, as
aforesaid. And then again to Couentry for one year, and so to the other
towns aforesaid, one after another for ever. And he does devise to the Master
and Wardens of the Marchantaylors, to see the said devise truly executed and
performed according to the covenants, twenty s. yearly for ever. And to the
Mayor, Recorder, and ten Aldermen of Couentry for their pains in putting
forth the said money, six shillings eight pence to each of them for ever, and
to the Steward and town Clerk for making of the Bonds continually without any
charge to those that receive the said money, twenty shillings yearly for ever,
this is in the Records remaining in the Marchantaylors Hall. And furthermore,
as I have received from Saint John's College in Oxford, the same Sir Thomas
White enlarged the gift of 1400. pound aforesaid, to be delivered to the City
of Couentry, to the sum of 2060. pound, or thereabout, toward the purchasing
of lands, within the City of Couentry or near to the same, the rents whereof
to be employed as is before rehearsed, with addition also to pay yearly
forty pound to the said College of Saint John's in Oxford, for annuitie for
ever.

Cardinal Poole recalled.
Cardinal Poole was sent for to return to England.

The 12. of November, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, Lady Jane that
was before proclaimed Queen, and the Lord Gilford her husband, were araigned
at Guild hall of London, and condemned of Treason.

A treaty for marriage with the Queen.
In the beginning of the month of January, the Emperor sent a Noble man called
Ecmondine, and certain other Ambassadors into England, to conclude a marriage
between King Phillip his son, and Queen Mary.

Commotion in Kent by Sir Th. Wiat.
The 21. of December, began the Church service to be done in Latin, as the same
had been left in the last year of King Henry the eight.

The 25. of January, Sir John Gage Chamberlain, certified the Lord Mayor of
London, that Sir T. Wiat Wiats insurrection.
with certain other rebels were up (...) Kent, whereupon great watch was kept,
and that night the Lord Mayor rode about to peruse the same, and every night
after two Aldermen did the like, in the day time the gates of the City warded
by substantial Citizens.

The 27. of January the Lord Treasurer came to Guild Hall from the Counsel to
request the citizens to prepare 500. footmen well harnished, to go against
the said Wiat, which was granted, and on the morrow were sent to Grauesend by
water.

The 29. of January the Duke of Norfolk with the Captain of the guard, and
other soldiers, Duke of Norfolk sent against Wiat.
and the Captain and soldiers that were sent for London, minded to assault
Rochester Castle where Wiat and his company lay, but the Captains of the
City and their soldiers fled over Rochester bridge to Wiat, so that the Duke
was feign to return again to London with great fear of his life.

Thus Wiats number being strengthened with the Queens ordinance and treasure,
the 30. Wiat Strengthened with the queens ordinance.
of January, he removed to Black heath.

Henry Duke of Suffolk father to Lady Jane, flying into Leichestershire, and
Warwicke-shire, made proclamation against the Queens Marriage with the Prince
of Spain, etc. But the people inclined not to him.

The first of February the commons of the City assembled in their Liueries at
the Guild hall whither the Queen with her Lords came riding from Westminster,
and there after vehement words against Wiat, declared that she meant not
otherwise to marry, then the Counsel should think both honorable and
commodious to the Realm, and therefore willing them truly to assist her, in
oppressing such as contrary to their duties rebelled: Lord William Howard
Lieutenant of the City of London.
She appointed Lord William Howard Lieutenant of the City, and the Earl of
Pembroke General of the field, which both prepared all things necessary. Wiat
entered Southwarke the third of February, wherefore the drawbridge was broken
down, Ordinance bent to that part, general pardon proclaimed to all that would
give over, and forsake their rebels. After Wiat had lain three days in
Southwarke, he turned his journey to Kingstone on Shrouetuesday in the
morning, being the sixth of February, where he passed over the Thames* and
purposed to have come to London in the night* but by means that the carriage
of his chief ordinance brake, he could not come before it was fair day. The
same Shrouetnesday in the afternoon were two men hanged in Paul's Churchyard,
Two men hanged in Paul's Churchyard.
one late Shriue of Leicester, the other a Baker. On the morrow early in the
morning, the Earl of Pembrooke and diverse other, were in St. James fields with
a great power, and their Ordinance so bent, that Wiat was feign to leave the
common way, and with a small company came under St. James wall from the danger
of the Ordinance, and so went by Charing Cross unto the Bell Savage nigh unto
Ludgate, without resistance, in at the which gate he thought to have been
received, but perceiving that he was defeated of his purpose, Wiat taken.
he fled back again, and at Temple b^t was taken and brought by water to the
Tower of London.

The tenth day of February the Duke of Suffolk which was taken in
Leicestershire, The Duke of Suffolk brought to the lower. Lady Jane beheaded.
Wiats men hanged.
was brought to the city of London by the Earl of Huntington, and one of his
brethren with him, and so had to the Tower.

The 12. of February Lady Jane, and her husband Lord Gilford were beheaded.

The 14. and 15. of February about the number of 50. of Wiats faction, were
hanged on twenty pairs of Gallows in diverse places about the City.

The 17. of February was proclamation made, Strangers banished the realm.
that all strangers should avoid the Realm within 14. days next ensuing, upon
pain of their goods to be confiscate (all free Denizens, Merchants, and
Ambassadors excepted.)

The 22. of February, certain of Wiats faction to the number of 400. and more,
were led to Westminster, coupled together with halters about their necks, and
there in the Tiltyard, the Queen (who looked forth of her Gallery) pardoned
them.

The 24. of February H. Gray, Duke of Suffolk beheaded.
Duke of Suffolk was beheaded on the Tower hill.

The 11. of April, Sir Thomas Wiat was beheaded on the Tower hill, and after
quartered, 1554 Th. Wiat beheaded.
his quarters were set up in diverse places, and his head on the Gallows at Hay
hill near Hide Park, from whence it was after shortly stolen.

The 27. of April, W. Thom. quartered.
Lord Thomas Gray was beheaded. William Thomas Gentleman for conspiring Queen
Mary's death, was drawn to Tiburne and there hanged and quartered the 18. of
May.

The tenth of June Doctor Pendleton Preached at Paul's Crosso, at whom a Gun
was shot, A Gun sho^ at a Preacher.
the pellet whereof lighted on the Church wall, but the shooter could not be
found.

The 22. of June was proclamation made, forbidding the shooting in hand Gunnes,
and bearing of weapons. An reg. 2. An imposture.
The 15. of July, Edward Croft, about the age of 18. years stood on a scaffold
at Paul's Cross all the sermon time, where she confessed, that she being
moved by diverse lewd persons thereunto, had upon the 14. of March last before
passed, counterfeited certain speeches in an house without Aldersgate of
London, through the which, the people of the whole City were wonderfully
molested.

The 19. of July, the Prince of Spain arrived at Southampton, after he came
to Winchester, and there going to Church was honorably received of the Bishop,
The marriage of K. Phillip and Q. Mary.
and a great number of Nables. On St. James day the marriage was solemnized
between him and Queen Mary. Shortly after they came to London, where with
great provision they were received of the Citizens the 18. of August.

Sh^s.
David Woodrofe, William Chester.

A Spaniard hanged.
The 26. of October, a Spaniard was hanged at Charing-crosse, for killing of an
Englishman in fight.

Mayor. Cardinal Poole.
Sir John Lion Grocer, the 28. of October.

The 24. of November, Cardinal Poole came into England, was by a Parliament
restored to his old dignity, and shortly after came into the Parliament house,
where the King and Queen and other States being present, he exhorted them to
return to the communion of the Church. The next day the whole Court of
Parliament desired the King and Queen, and cardinal, that by their means
they might be restored to the sea of Rome. The 18. of November, Q. Mary bruted
to be with child.
the Lord Mayor of London with the Aldermen in Scarlet, and the commons in
their best Liueries, assembled in Paul's Church, where Doctor Chadsey one of
the Prebends Preached: he read them a letter sent from the Counsel, the
effect whereof was, that the Bishop of London should cause Te Deum to be sung
in all the Churches of his Diocese, with continual prayer for the Queen,
which was conceived and quick with child as was thought: the letter being
read, he began his Sermon with this theme: Ne timeas Maria, inuenisti enim
gratiam apud Deum: which Sermon being ended, Te deum was sung.

The second of December, Cardinal Poole came to Paul's Church, where he
tarried till the King came from Westminster, Cardinal Poole came to Paul's.
and then the Lord Chancellor entered Paul's Cross, and preached a Sermon. In
the which Sermon he declared that the King and Queen had restored the Pope to
his supremacy, and three Estates assembled in the Parliament, submitting
themselves to the same.

The 27. of December, Prince of Peiemount.
Emmanuel Prince of Piemount with other Lords were received at Grauesend, and
so conveyed to Westminster.

The 9. of January, Prince of Orange.
the Prince of Orange landed at London.

The 4: of February John Rogers Vicar of Saint Sepulchers was burnt in
Smithfield. Ioh. Rogers burnt.


The 22. of February ninety nine horses and two Carriers laden with treasure
of gold, and silver brought out of Spain, The King of Spaines treasure.
was conuayed through the City to the Tower of London, under the donduct of sir
Thomas Gresham, the Queens Merchant and others.

1555. Earl of Devonshire delivered. Use of Coaches first in England.
Against Easter the Earl of Devonshire came to the Court, and about ten days
after, the Lady Elizabeth came likewise to the Queen.

This year Walter Ripon made a Coach for the Earl of Rutland, which was the
first Coach (says he) that ever was made in England, since to wit, in Anno
1564. the said Walter Ripon made the first hollow turning Coach, with pillars
and arches for her Majesty, being then her servant. Also in Anno 1584. a
chariot throne with four pillars behind to bear a Canopy with a Crown
imperial on the top, and before, two lower pillars, whereon stood a Lion and
a Dragon, the supporters of the Arms of England.

W. Flower burnt at Westminster.
On Easter day a Priest named William Flower with a wood knife wounded another
Priest as he was ministering the Sacrament to the people in S. Margarets Church
at Westminster, for the which fact the said William the 24. of April had his
right hand smitten off, and for opinions in ^atters of Religion, was burned
nigh unto S. Margarets Churchyard.

A Millars son fained to be King Edward the sixth.
The tenth of May, William Constable, who had named himself to be King Edward
the sixth, was sent to the Marshalsey, and the 22. of May, he was carried about
Westminster Hall before the Judges, whipped about the Palace, and then through
Westminster into Smithfield.

The first of July John Bradford was burned in Smithfield for Religion.
Bradford burnt.


In this month of August was brought to Lin a monstrous fish of forty foot in
length. An, reg, 3. Monstrous fish.


King Philip went to Brussels in Brabant to visit the Emperor his father.

Thomas Leigh, John Machill. Shriues.

In October fell such abundance of rain, Great land waters.
that for the space of six days, men might row with boats in Saint Georges
fields, water came into Westminster hall half a yard deep.

The 26. of October, Ridley and Latimer.
Doctor Ridley and Doctor Latimer was burned at Oxford for Religion.

Sir William Garrard Haberdasher, Mayor.

The Queen yielded up to the spiritual men the first fruits and tenths of all
Bishoprics, First fruits and tenths restored to the Clergy.
Benefices, and Ecclesiastical livings. In this Parliament was granted to the
Queen, a Subsidy of the Laity, from five pound to ten pound, 8. pence of the
pound, from ten pound to twenty pound, 12 pence of the pound, and from twenty
pound upward, 16. pence of the pound, and all strangers double, and the Clergy
granted 6. shillings of the pound.

St^^^^ Gardener Bishop of Winchester, chancellor of England, died the ninth of
November, D. Gardener deceased.
and was (...) Winchester.

William Con^le, The miller, son faining to be King Edward,
who had caused letters to be cast abroad, th^^ King Edward was alive, and to
some showed himself to be King Edward, the 13. of March was drawn, hanged,
and quartered at Tiborne.

D. Cranmer burnt.
The 21. of March, Doctor Cranmer Archbishop of Canterbury, was burned at Oxford
for Religion.

Cardinal Poole on Sunday next, was consecrated Archbishop of Canterbury.

The 28. of March, a part of Newgate, called Mannings hall was burnt. 1556
Newgate a fire. Conspiracy


Certain persons purposed to have robbed the Queens Exchequer, to the intent
they might be able to maintain war against her. Vdall Throgmorton, Peeham,
Daniel, and Stanton, were apprehended, and diverse others fle^.

Throgmorton and others executed.
The 28. of April, Throgmorton and Richard Vdall were drawn to Tiburne, and
there hanged and quartered.

The 12. of May a ship laden with herneshaws was brought out of Brabant to
Billinsgate, and the herons were there sold for xii. pence, or xiiii. the best.

The nineteenth of May, Stanton was likewise executed.

The eight of June, Rossey Detike, and Bedell, were executed at Tiborne.

Sands hanged.
The 11, of June, Sands, a younger son of Lord Sands, was hanged at Saint
Thomas of Waterings for a robbery.

Thirteen burnt at Stradford. An, reg, 4.
The 27. of June, 13. persons were burnt at Stratford the Bow.

The eight of July, Henry Peckam, and Thomas Daniel were hanged and headed on
the tower hill for conspiracy.

This year in the month of August, sir William Garrard Mayor of London (being
invited) dined with the reader in the middle Temple, The Majors sword put down.
from whence when the Mayor departed, certain Gentlemen of the younger sort, as
well of that house as of the inner Temple, by force put and held down the
sword, before the Mayor, till he came to the outer gate next the street, for
the which fact, within four days after, the two Readers with all their
Companies of both houses, were sent for to the Rolls in Chancerie lane, where
sat the Marquess of Winchester, Lord Treasurer, assisted with xi. other of
the Queens Privy Counsel. These commanded the two Readers, to deliver the
names of the principal doers in the fore-expressed action, the which if they
refused to do, themselves should be committed. Whereupon (consulting a
little) they presented the names of twenty, whereof the Lord committed
fourteen to the Fleet, and took bonds of the rest to appear in the
Star Chamber the first day of the next Term: at the which day appearance
being made, as well by those committed, as the other that were in bonds,
through humble intercession of all the head and chief learned men of every
Bench and Bar in the four Innes of Court, their punishment was referred to
the discretions of the Benches of those houses, where the faults were
committed, and so all was ended in that course, and the prisoners with the rest
discharged, which notwithstanding were after for the most part expelled their
houses, till upon great submission, and long suit, they were restored by
degrees and times.

Conspirators executed. A great burning fever, whereof 7. Aldermen died in
London. Rose pence suppressed.
Cleba a Schoolmaster, and three of Lincolnes Inn, being brethren in
Norfolk, were hanged and quartered at Bury for conspiracy.

The last year began the hot burning fevers, whereof died many old persons,
so that in London died seven Aldermen, in the space of ten months.

The 19. of September the Rose pence being a base coin, made in the reign of
Henry the eight, and Edward the sixth were forbidden, to be any longer current
in England, but to be only current in Ireland.

William Harper, John White, Shriues. Sir Thomas Ofley Merchant-tailor, Mayor.
A false accuser well marked.
The 21. of November, a man was brought from Westminster with a paper on his
head, riding, his face toward the horse tail, to the standard in Cheap, and
there set on the Pillory, and after burned in both the cheeks with the letters
F. and A. for falsely accusing one of the Court of the Common Pleas in
Westminster of treason.

Note this example.
The 16. of December, a stranger borne, was arraigned for making keys to
Newgate, to have murdered the Keeper, and let forth the prisoners, at which
time at his arraignement, he thrust a knife into the side of his fellow
prisoner, that had given witness against him, so that he was in peril of
death thereby, for the which fact he was immediately taken from the bar into
the street before the Justice hall, where his hand being first stricken off,
he was then hanged on a gibit.

The keeper of Newgate was arraigned and indicted, A warning for Gaolers Gun
shot into the Court.
for that the said prisoner had a weapon about him, and his hands loose.

The fourth of January a ship before Greenewich (the Court being there) shot
off her Ordinance, The very like chanced in Qu. Eliz^be^hs time.
one piece being charged with a bullet, which passed through the Court, and did
no more hurt.

The seven and twenty of February, an Ambassador came from the Emperor of
Muscouy, Ambassador from Moscouy.
who was received at Totenham by the Merchants adventurers of London, riding in
velvet coats and chains of gold, and by them conuaied through the City unto
Fanchu^ch street, where he lodged until the twelfth of May, and then returned.

The Lord Sturton murdered this men, A president of special Justice.
for the which he was conuaied from the tower of London to Salisbury, and there
hanged with four of his servants, the 6. of March.

A blazing Star was seen at all times of the night, the 6.7.8.9. and 10. of
March. A blazing star.


King Philip returned into England and the 12. K. Phillip returned into England.
of March passed through London, with the Queen and the Nobles of the Realms.

The 23. of April, Thomas Stafford and other so the number of 32. persons,
coming out of France, 1557 A practice of rebellion
took the Castle of Scarborough, which they enjoyed two days, and then were
taken and brought to London.

The 28. of May, T. Stafford beheaded.
T. Stafford was beheaded on the tower hill, and on the morrow three of his
companions were drawn to tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.

Wars with France. Englishmen sent to Saint Quintans.
The 7. of June open war was proclaimed against the French King.

The sixth of July the King passed over to Calleis, and so into Flanders, where
he made great provision of War against the French King: the Queen sent over
an Army of one thousand horsemen, four thousand footmen, and two thousand
Pioners, to aid King Phillip, whereof the Earl of Pembrooke was general.

Anne of Cleave dead An. reg. 5. S. Quintaines taken. Dearth and plenty.
The fifth of July died the Lady Anne of Cleave, and was buried at Westminster.

The 18. of August the Town of Saint Quintaines was taken by King Phillip,
with the help of Englishmen, which much vexed the French.

This year before harvest, wheat was sold for four mark the quarter, malt
at 44. shillings the quarter, beans and Rye at 40. shillings the quarter, and
pease at 46. shillings 8. pence. But after harvest, wheat was sold for 5.
shillings the quarter, malt 6. shillings eight pence. Rye at three shillings
and 4. pence. In the Country wheat was sold for 4. shillings the quarter, malt
4. shillings eight pence, and in the same places a Bushel of Rye for a pound
of Candles, which was four pence.

Richard Malerie, James Altham, Shriues. Sir Thomas Curteis Fishmonger, Mayor.
Calice lost by the Englishmen.
The first of January the French men came to Calice with a great army, and
within four days were masters thereof, and shortly after won all the pieces
on that side of the sea.

The French King also invaded Flanders, spoiled and burnt Dunkirke before King
Phillip could come to the rescue.

The 7. of July, within a mile of Nottingham, 1558 An, reg, 6. A wondrous
strange tempest.
a tempest of thunder, as it came through 2. towns, beat down all the houses
and Churches, the bells were cast to the out side of the Churchyards, and some
webbes of lead, 400 foot in the field, writhen like a pair of gloves, the
river of Trent running between the two towns, the water with the mud was
carried a quarter of a mile, and cast against trees, the trees were pulled up
by the roots, and cast twelve score off. A child was taken forth of a man's
hands, and carried a hundred foot, and then let fall, and so died, five or
six men were slain, there fell some hailestones that were fifteen inches
about, etc.

The quartaine agues continued more vehemently then the last year passed, The
last years violent feauers continued still.
whereof died many old people, especially Priests, so that a great number of
Parishes were unserved.

John Halse, Richard Champion, Shriues. Sir Thomas Leigh Mercer, Mayor.
King Phillip being absent out of the Realm, Queen Marie ended her life the
17. of November in the year 1558. when she had reigned 5. years four
months, and odd days. The same day deceased Cardinal Poole, and a little
before two of her Physicians, beside diverse Bishops and Noble men. Queen Mary
was buried at Westminster, Queen Mary dies.
and Cardinal Poole at Canterbury.

Queen Elizabeth
An. reg, 1.
THe 17. of November 1558 came certain news unto the Parliament house of the
death of Queen Mary, whereat many rejoiced, and many lamented, and forthwith
her death being generally known, Q. Elizabeth proclaimed.
they proclaimed the Lady Elizabeth second daughter to King Henry the eight.
Queen of England, France, and Ireland, defender of the faith, etc. In London
and Westminster: the Queen was then at Bishops hatfield, but not proclaimed
there until two days after.

The Clergy attend the Queen at highgate.
The Queen came shortly after from Hatfield to the Charterhouse at London, and
all the Bishops met her by the way at Highgate, and kneeling acknowledged their
allegiance.

The Queen remained at Charterhouse until the time of her Coronation,
coronation
and the 14. of January she rode in triumph through London to the palace of
Westminster, and the next day was crowned by Doctor Oglethrop Bishop of
Carleite*

The 20. of January began a parliament, A Parliament.
wherein the first fruits, tenths, and the supremacy were reserved and connexed
to the Crown: in this parliament time the Queen granted license for a free
disputation to be held in Westminster Church, A disputation
concerning some different points in Religion, but it came to no effect.

The 24. The mass suppressed, and the service in English.
of June the book of common Prayer was established, and the Mass clean
suppressed in all Churches.

The 11. of July the Citizens made a show before the Queen of armed men, of
halberdiers, pikemen, and muskatiers.

In the foresaid month, Supremacy Bishops deposed. All Monks and monasteries
suppressed.
the Queen began to put in practice the oath of S^premacie upon Bishops and
other chief officers, which diverse refused and were deprived, and by authority
of this parliament, all such Religious houses as were erected by Queen Mary,
were now quite suppressed.

In August following all ancient Church relics and new made Images in Queen
Mary's reign, All roods and images pulled down.
were beaten down and burned in the open streets.

The eight of September, Obsequies for the French King.
a solemn obsequie was kept in Paul's Church for the French King, Henry the
second, who died of a wound which he received in running at tilt in Paris.

Thomas Lodge, Roger Martin, Shriues. The Duke of Norffolk An, reg, 2. 1559
Sir William Hewet, Clothworker, Mayor.
The Duke of Norffolke is sent toward Scotland to encounter with the French
faction, which at this time was grown very strong in diverse parts of Scotland.

The Lord Gray besieges Leeth. English Commissioners between the French and
Scots.
In April the Lord Gray entered Scotland with ten thousand men, and besieged
Leeth, where between the French and the English were many hot skirmishes, and
many slain on either part.

In May a noble man of France upon his earnest suit, obtained of the Queen to
send sir William Cecill, her principal Secretary, and Doctor Wotton, to treat
with the French men in Scotland, by whose wisdom the Scottish faction
prevailed, and the French agreed to depart.

The 5. of July through shooting of a Gun in a house in crooked lane, a barrel
of powder was set on fire, which blew up four houses, shattered diverse others,
slew twenty persons outright, and hurt as many, besides great damage to houses
and goods.

All base money suppressed.
This year the Queen by consent of her council, made Proclamation for the
utter abolishing and suppression of all manner of base copper moneys, which
until this time had been current throughout the Realm in diverse Kings
reigns, and after this publication there was not any base metal coined in
England.

Christopher Draper, Thomas Roo, Shriues. Sir William Chester, Draper; Mayor.
An, reg. 3. 1561 Marchant-tailors school.
The 21. of March the wardens and assistants of the Marchant-tailors in London,
founded the famous free school in the Parrish of S. Laurence Pounteney, and M.
Richard H^ls of the same company, gave 500. l. toward the purchase, wherein
the said School is kept.

The x. of April W Geffery was whipped from the Marshalsey unto Bedlam, False
Prophe^s.
for publishing that one John Moore was Jesus Christ, which said John Moore
after he had been well whipped, confessed himself a cosening knave.

The 4. of June between 4. and 5. Paul's steeple burned.
a clock in the after noone, there chanced a terrible tempest of thunder and
lightning, and chiefly about London, where amongst many harms, it fired the
lofty spire of Paul's steeple, and began about the top thereof, which was two
hundred foot hie from the top of the stone battlemenes, the fire ceased not
until it came down to the roof of the Church, and consumed all the bells, lead
and timber work.

Alexander Auenon, Humfrey Baskeruile. Shriues.
Sir william Harper, Marchant-tailor. Mayor.

This Sir William Harpes founded a free School in the town of Bedford, Free
school at Bedford.
where he was borne.

The 15. An, reg. 4.
of November the Queens Majesty published a Proclamation, wherein the
restored to the Realm diverse small pieces of silver money, as the piece of
six pence, four pence, three pence, two pence, and a penny, three half pence,
and three farthings, and also forbad all foreign coins.

In March a Mare brought forth a foale with one body and two heads, and a long
tail growing out between the two heads. A Sow forrowed a Pigge with four
legs like to the arms of a man child, with hands and fingers, etc. Monstrons
births.


In April a Sow farrowed a Pigge with two bodies, eight feet, and but one
head, many calves and lambs were monstrous, some with collers of skin about
their necks, like to the double cuffes of shirts and neckerchiefes then used.

1562 A monstrous child birth.
The 14. of May a man child was borne at Ch^chester in Sussex, the head, arms,
and legs whereof, were like an Anatomy, the breast and belly big, from the
nauill a long string hanging about the neck, a collar of flesh like the ruff
of a nekerchiefe, coming up about the ears.

The Queens Majesty in September addressed a band of her subjects to the
town of Newhauen in Normandy, Going to Newhauen
upon whose arriual the towns men and inhabitants joyfully surrendered
themselves and their towns, which was kept by Englishmen from September, 1562.
to the twenty nine of July, 1563. The governor of which band was the Earl of
Warwick, who with the Captains serving there, and soldiers trained by them
to knowledge of service together, with part of the old approved garrison of
Barwicke, and at that time both manfully defend the place, and valiantly
encountered by sundry skirmishes with County Ringraue and his band, the most
part whereof were achieved to the great ouerthrows of the adversaries part, and
singular commendations of ours.

William Allin, Richard Chamberlain, Shriues. Sir Thomas Lodge, Grocer, Mayor.
An, reg. 5. Tempest at Leicester. 1563
The 16. of January great tempest of wind and thunder happened in the town of
Leicester, which uncovered 411. baies of houses, and ouerturned many.

When the Frenchmen with huge Armies assembled out of all parts of France, to
recover the place of passage, the stopping whereof by our power was the double
woe of their common wealth, there bred through the season of the year, and
putrification of the air, a miserable plague among our men, which maruellously
increased with the death of diverse of the best Captains and Soldiers,
wherewithal there followed a cruel and quick siege, whereat was present the
young King himself, the Constable, and the best tried number of warlike
Soldiers within the whole Country. The Cannons were placed, the Castle and
walls were battered, and sundry breaches made beyond expectation, howbeit they
were rewarded by our Sunners, our Captains and soldiers, in courageous order
standing at several breaches ready to defend their assaults, which perceived
by the enemy, they caused their trumpeters to sound the blast of emparle, that
composition might be made, wherein both parties concluded, the town was
delivered the 29. of July.

The plague of pestilence being in the town of Newhauen, Pestilence in 108.
Parishes in London, besides 11. in the subburbs.
through the number of soldiers that returned into England, the infection
thereof spread into diverse parts of this realm, but especially the City of
London was so infected, that in the same whole year, that is to say, from the
first of January, 1562. until the last of December, in An. 1563 the whole
number of all that died of all diseases, as well within the city and liberties
as in all out parishes, was 23660* and of the^ there died of the plague twenty
thousand, one hundred thirty six.

Tempest at London.
The 8. of July, happened a great tempest of lightning and thunder,
where-through a woman and three kine were slain in the Covent garden near
Charing Cross: in Essex, a man was torn in pieces, his barn borne down, and
his hay burnt.

There was no term kept at Michaelmas.

Earthquake
An Earthquake in the month of Seytember, specially in Lincoln and Northampton
shires.

Edward Banks, Rowland Hayward, Shriues. Sir John Whight Grocer, Mayor.
The Mayor takes his oath at the Tower. An, reg 6. Lightning and thunder.
The new Mayor kept his feast at Guildhall, and took his oath at the outermost
gate of the Tower of London.

From the first of December to the twelfth, was such continual lightning and
thunder, that the like had not been seen nor heard by any man living.

In the month of December was driven on the shore at Grunsby in Lincolneshire
a monstrous fish in length xix. yards. his tail xv. foot broad, and vi. yards
between his eyes.

Term kept at Hertford. 1564
Hillary Term kept at Hertford Castle.

Peace proclaimed between England and France.

Through suit of the Armorers there was on the vigile of Saint Peter a watch in
the City of London, which did only stand in the high street, in Cheap,
Cornehill and so forth to A^dgate.

The Qu: progress through Cambridg.
The fifth of August the Queens Majesty in her progress came to the University
of Cambridge, and was of all the Students most honorably received in the Kings
College. She made within S. Mary's Church a notable Oration in Latin, in the
presence of the whole learned University, to the Students great comfort. The
next day she went forward to Fincinbrooke.

The 30. A good device.
day of August was enacted by a common Counsel of the City of London, that all
such Citizens as from thenceforth should be constrained to sell household
stuff, should first cause the same to be cried through the City by a man with
a bell, and then to be sold by the common outcrier appointed for that purpose.

The 20. Great floods in the thames.
of September rose great floods in the river of Thames, where through the
Marshes were ouerflowed, and many cattle drowned.

Edward Iackeman, Lionell Ducket, Shriues.

The second of October was an obsequie at Paul's for Faroinando late Emperor.
Obsequio for Ferdinando Emperor. Fiery impressions.


The seventh of October at night all the North parts of the Element seemed to
be covered with flames of fire, proceeding from the Northeast and Northwest
toward the midst of the firmament, and descended West.

Sir Richard Mallorie Mercer, Mayor.

The 21. An, reg, 7. The thames frozen over.
of December began a frost which continued so extremely, that on Newyeares
even people went over and along the thames on the ye, from London bridge to
Westminster, some played at the footeball, diverse of the Court being then at
Westminster, shot at pricks set upon the thames. And people both men and women
went on the thames, in greater number then in any street of the City. On the
third day of January at night it began to thaw, and on the fifth day was no ye
to be seen between London bridge and Lambeth, which sudden thaw caused great
floods and high waters that bare down bridges and houses, and drowned many
people in England, especially in Yorkshire, Owes bridge was born away. The
third day of February, Ows bridge born down H Stuart married the Queen of
Scots. 1565
Henry Steuart Lord Darly eldest son to Matthew Earl of Linneaux, took his
journey toward Scotland, and in summer following married Mary Queen of
Scotland.

The 22. of April, the Lady Margaret Countess of Linneaux, was commanded to
keep her chamber at the White hall, where she remained till the two and
twentieth of June, and then by sir Frances Knowles and the guard conuaied her
to the Tower of London by water.

Tempests at Chelsford.
The 16. of July about nine of the clock at night began a tempest of lightning
and thunder, with showers of hail, which continued till three of the clock in
the next morning so terrible, that at Chelmisford in Essex, 500. acres of corn
was destroyed, the glass windows on the East side of the town, and on the
West and South sides of the Church were beaten down, with all the tiles of
their houses, besides diverse barnes, chimnies, and the battlements of the
Church which were overthrown. The like harm was done in many other places, as
at Leedes, Crainebrooke, Dover, etc. Margraue and Marquis of Baden.
Christopher Prince, and Margraue of Baden, with Cicely his wife, sister to the
King of Swethland, in September landed at Dover, and the xi. day of the same
they came to London and were lodged at the Earl of Bedfoords place, where
within four days after she traveled, and was delivered of a man child,
which child was christened in the Queens Chapel of White Hall, the Queens
Majesty being Godmother, gave the child to name Edward Fortunatus.

This year, Muster of horsemen.
by commandment of the Counsel diverse musters of light horsemen in sundry
days, and in several places about the City of London were taken by the Mayor
and other commissioners for that purpose, by which means it happened on the
eight of October (that Sir Richard Mallorie) riding through Tower street toward
the tower hill there to have taken muster, as was appointed, The Mayor of
London his sword seized.
he was met by Sir Francis Iobson then Lieutenant of the Tower, and by him
forbidden to enter the hill with the sword before him, whereunto no answers by
the Mayor could be heard, but the sword was violently seized on by the
Lieutenant and his men, and defended by the officers of the Mayor, so that the
Lieutenant called for more assistance out of the Tower, and the Majors Officers
were minded to have raised tower street, and so more of the City, whereof was
like to have bin a great tumult, but the Lord Mayor caused Proclamation to be
made, that no man should draw weapon, or strike any stroke, but every man to
depart, horsemen and all, till they were again warned to appear, which was on
the same day seven night, being likewise monday, and the xv. of October, that
they did there muster before the Mayor in that very place on the tower hill
before appointed, where, by the Counsels appointment, the Mayor had the sword
peaceably borne before him, as he had been accustomed.

John Rivers, James Hawes, Shriues. Sir Richard Champion, Draper, Mayor.
An. reg, 8. The 17. of November. Paul's gate blown open.
The 24. of December there rose a great storm of wind, by whose rage the Thames
and Seas overwhelmed many persons, and the great gates at the West end of Saint
Paul's Church in London, were through the force of the wind then in the
western part of the world blown open.

1596 The Marquis of Baden returns. The ^urse in Cornehill.
The Marquis of Caden, and the Lady Cicely his wife, sister to the King of
Swethen, now in the month of April departed the land.

Certain houses in Cornehill being first purchased by the Citizens of London,
and cost them more then 3532. pound, were afterward sold to such as should
carry them from thence, and then the ground being made plain, possession
thereof was given to Sir Thom. Gresham Knight, there to build a place for
Merchants to assemble in, at his own proper charges, who on the 7. of June,
laid the first stone of the foundation, and forthwith the workmen followed
with such diligence, that by the month of November, in Ann. 1567. the same was
covered with slate.

The Queen progress to Oxford.
The 31. of August the Queens Majesty in her Progress came to the University
of Oxford, and was of all the Students honorably received.

An. reg. 9.
The 5. of September after disputations, the Queen at the humble suit of
certain of her Nobility, made a brief Oration in Latin to the University,
and the 6. her Majesty bade them farewell and rode to Ricote.

Richard Lambart, Ambrose Nicholas. Shriues.
John Langley, The 4. of April. Mayor.
Sir Christopher Draper Ironmonger.
Charles James, the sixth of that name, King James borne.
son to Henry Stuart Lord Darly and Marie, King and Queen of Scots, was
borne in Edenborough Castle the nineteenth of June last past, and the
eighteenth of December solemnly christened at Sterling, whose Godfathers at
the Christning were Charles King of France, and Philibert Duke of Sauoy, and
the Queens Majesty of England was the Godmother, who gave a fount of gold
curiously wrought and inameled, waighing 333. ounces.

The 10. of February in the morning, H, King of Scots murdered.
Stuart Lord of Darly, before named King of Scots, by Scots in Scotland was
traitorously murdered, the revenge whereof remains in the mighty hands of
God.

The 22. of February the Lady Margaret Douglas Countess of Linoux, mother to
the said King of Scots, was discharged out of the Tower of London.

Within the space of ten months last past, 7. Alderme^ deceased in London.
Ossestry burnt.
died seven Aldermen of London.

The 22. of April by great misfortune of fire in the town of Ossestry in
Wales, to the number of two hundred houses besides cloth, corn, cattle, etc.
were consumed.

Milnall in Suffolk burnt.
The 17. of May in the town of Milnall in Suffolk, 37. houses besides barnes,
stables, and such like, were consumed with fire in the space of two hours.

Shan Onele discomfited.
Shan Onele who had rebelled against the Queens Majesty in Ireland, was this
year with his great loss, manfully repelled from the siege of Dundalke, by
the Garrison thereof, and afterward through the valiancy of Sir Henry Sidney,
Lord Deputy of Ireland, he was so discomfited in sundry conflicts, that now
he determined to put a collar about his neck, and penitently to require his
pardon. But Neile Mackener his Secretary persuaded him, first to try the
friendship of certain wild Scots that then lay encamped in Clan Iboy under the
conducting of Alexander Oge, and Mac Gilliam Buske, whose father and uncle Shan
Onele had lately killed; nevertheless he went to the said Camp the second
of June, where after a dissembled entertainment, Gilliam Busk ministered
qua^relling talk, Shan Onele slain.
and made a fray upon Oneiles men, and then gathering together his Scots, hewed
in pieces Shan Onele, his Secretary, and all his company.

Watch at Midsomer.
On Saint John's Even at night, was the like standing watch in London, as had
been on Saint Peter's Even two years before passed: this order of watch is
still continued.

The 29. of July Charles James the young Prince of Scotland, Coronation in
Scotland
after a Sermon made by John Knokes, was crowned King of Scots at Sterling
Church, and at that time the Queen of Scots was prisoner at Loughleuen.

Sir Nicholas Throgmorton having talked with the Queen of Scots at Loughleuen,
returned out of Scotland in the month of August.

Thomas Ramsey, William Bond, Shriues. Sir Roger Martin, Mercer, Mayor.
After a dry Summer there followed a sharp winter with such a scarcity of
fodder and hay, An, reg, 10 Hay sold by weight.
that in diverse places the same was sold by the weight, for five pence the
stone, there followed also a great death of Cattle.

In the month of January the Queens Majesty sent into the narrow seas, three
of her Ships, Ships sent to the sea against the subjects of K. Phillip.
named the Antilope, the Swallow, and the Aid, and one Bark, named the Phoenix,
the which were manned with 500. men: her Highness appointed the charge of
those Ships and men to William Holstocke Esquire, Controwler of her Ships, who
had commandment to stay the subjects of King Phillip: and according to his
charge, he used such diligence, that on the eleventh of March next following,
he was with eleven sail of Flemish Hoies upon Boloine, which came from Roan,
and in them four hundred and odd Tons of Gascoine and French wines, which
they intended to have conuaied into Flanders, but William Holstock stayed all
the said Hoyes, and sent them to London, where they made their discharge.

More, on the 28. of March the said W. Holstocke serving in the Antilope, as
Admiral in his Company, W. Winter the younger being Viceadmirall, serving in
the Aid, and John Basing Captain of the Swallow, and Thomas Gauerley Captain
of the Phoenix, met in the narrow Seas 14. sail of great Hulkes, which were
come out of Portingale, and bound to Flanders, their chief lading being
Portingale salt, and they had good store of Spanish Rials of plate, and also
great store of spices, the which 14. Hulkes did maintain their fight for the
space of two hours, but the said William Holstocke and his company took the
same Hulkes, whereof six were sent into the river of Thames, and the Admiral,
and Viceadmirall of the said Hulkes, being two great ships, which William
Holstocke himself did take, were conuaied to Harwich, and there discharged.

1568 Great winds.
The 28. of March, through vehement rage and tempest of winds, many vessels on
the Thames, with two Tiltboates before Grauesend were drowned.

Queen of Shots arrived in England.
The 16. of May, Mary Q. of Scots after her escape made out of Loughleuen, where
she had been long imprisoned, arrived at Werkington in England, having in her
company to the number of 16. persons, besides 4. watermen, where she was
stayed, and conuaied to Carlisle, and from thence to Bolton castle belonging to
the L. Scrope, who with sir Ralph Sadler sent down for that purpose, had the
custody of her, till she was committed to the Earl of Shrewsbury.

Archbishop of York deceased.
The 26. of June, deceased Thomas Young, Archbishop of York at Shefield, and
was buried at York.

The great hall, and Palace whereof, he had pulled down and destroyed.

John Aleph, Richard Harding Salter, James Bacon, Shriues.

The eleventh of October were taken in Suffolk at Downam Bridge, 17. monstrous
fishes, Monstrous fishes.
some of them 27. foot in length, 2. miles from Ipswich. Sir Thomas Roe
Merchant tailor, Mayor.

At the cost and charges of the Citizens of London, New Conduit at walbrooke.
An, reg, 11 The Burse for meeting of Merchants.
a new Conduit was builded at Walbrooke corner, near to Dowgate, the water
whereof is conuaied out of the Thames.

The 22. of December was the first day that the Merchants left their meeting in
Lombard street, and came into the Burse in Cornhill, builded for that purpose.

The 27. of January a Frenchman and two Englishmen were drawn from Newgate to
tiburne, and there hanged, the French man quartered, who had coined gold
counterfaite, the Englishmen, the one had clipped silver, the other cast
to^^ons of Tin.

William Herbert Earl of Pembrooke, deceased the 17. of March, buried in
Paul's Church.

The 28. of March the Pentioners were appointed in armor on horseback, 1569
Muster of Pentioners. A Lottery at London.
mustered before the Queen in Hide Park beside Westminster.

A great Lottery of 400000. lots, every lot 10. s. being holden at London in
Paul's Churchyard at the West door, was begun to be drawn the 11. of
January, and continued day and night till the sixth of May.

The 17. of August, an Ambassador from Musconie, landed at Tower-wharfe,
Ambassador from Muscouy.
and was there received by the Lord Mayor of London, Aldermen ^^d Shriues in
Scarlet, with the Merchants adventurers in coats of black velvet, all on
horseback.

Term adiourned.
The plague of pestilence somewhat reigning, Michaelmas Term was adiourned
unto Hillary Term.

Henry Bechar, William Dane. Shriues.

This William Dane by his Testament, and also Margaret Dane his wife gave great
Legacies to the poor.

The 11. of October, Thomas Duke of Norffolke was brought to the Tower prisoner.

Sir Alexander Anenon Ironmonger, Mayor.

No Majors feast.
This Mayor went by water to Westminster, and there took his oath, but kept no
feast at Guild Hall, lest through coming together of a multitude, infection of
the pestilence might have increased.

An, reg. 12. The Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland proclaimed traitors.
Earl of Sussex Lieutenant general against the Earls.
The 24. of November the Queens Majesty caused the Earls of Northumberland
and Westmerland, who rebelled in the north, to be proclaimed traitors, and
forthwith prepared an Army for their suppression.

The Earl of Sussex the Queens Lieutenant general in the North, had on the
17. of November there published the like proclamation against the said rebels,
and also sent out to all such Gentlemen as he knew to be of her Majesty's
loving subjects under his rule, which came unto him with such a number, as he
was able to make above five thousand horsemen and footmen, and so being
accompanied with the Earl of Rutland his Lieutenant, the Lord Hunsden General
of his Horsemen, William Lord Eure, who had the leading of the rereward of the
footmen, and Sir Ralph Sadler treasurer, who all came to York the 11. of
December, they marched from York toward Topcliffe the 12. sir G. Bows coming
from Bernards Castle met him, and was made Marshall of the Army: then they went
to Northalerton, to Smoeton, to Crofebridge, and so to Aclay, on the which day
the Rebels fled from Durham to Exham.

The Earl of Sussex went from Aclay to Durham: then to Newcastle, and the 20.
of December to Exham, from whence the rebels were gone the night before to
Naworth, Earl of Warwick sent against the rebels.
where counselling with Edward Dakers concerning their own weakness, as also
how they were pursued by the Earl of Sussex and his power of 7. thousand. And
moreover that the Earl of Warwick, the Lord Clinton, Lord Admiral of
England, and Lord Vicount Hereford, with an Army of 12. thousand out of the
South, whereof the said Earl of Warwick was general, not far behind them
at Brown bridge.

The next night the two Earls of Northumberland and Westmerland, The Earl of
Northumberland and Westmerland.
with sundry of the principal Gentlemen, fled to Hetlaw in Scotland. The other
rebels were shortly after taken by the Earl of Sussex.

The fourth and fifth of January did suffer at Durham to the number of sixty
six Constables 1570 A caveat for Constables
and other, amongst whom an Alderman of the town, and a Priest called Parson
Plomtree, were the most notable. Then George Bows Marshall finding many to be
factors in the aforesaid rebellion, Rebels ex^^uted.
did see them executed in every market to (...) and other places, betwixt
Newcastle and W^therby, about 60. miles in length, and 40. mile^ in breadth.

The 22. of February, Leonard Dacre having raised a number of people, the L.
Hunsd^n and other setting on him with a company of valiant soldiers, slew many
of his people, and forced him to fly into Scotland.

On Goodfriday the twenty seven of March, Simon Digby, John Fulthroppe
Esquire, Robert P^^^man, Traitors executed.
Thomas Bishop the younger Gentleman, were drawn from the Castle of York to
Knauesmire, without the City of York, and there hanged, headed and quartered.

The Earl of Sussex made journey into Scotland.
The 17. of April the Earl of Sussex with the Lord Hunsdon, master William
Drewry high Marshall of Barwicke, with all the garrison and power of the same,
began a journey into Scotland, and entered into Tiuidale, burnt, overthrew, and
spoiled all the Castles, towns and villages before them, till they came to
Craling.

Sir I. Foster with a garrison entered Scotland.
The same day sir John Foster Warden of the Middle Marches with the Garrison of
the same, entered into Tiuidale upon Expas gate sixteen^ miles from Warke, where
in like order they burnt, razed and spoiled their country before them till they
came to Castle Craling, which likewise they overthrew, razed and burnt.

There both the Armies met, and so marched by the River of Tiwit, razing,
burning and spoiling Castles and piles along the River, till they came to
Godworth.

The Lieutenant returned to Barwicke the 22 of April.

The Lord Scrope Warden of the West Marches, entered Scotland the 18. of April,
The Lord Scrope entered Scotland.
burnt and spoiled almost the Doinfrees, took many prisoners, and returned
safely. The Marches of England were so guarded by the Lord Eure, sir George
Bows, and other of the Bishopric, that not one house was burned, nor one
cow taken out of England. There were razed and ouerthrown, and burnt in this
journey, above fifty strong Castles and piles, and above 3. thousand towns
and villages.

The 26. the Lieutenant, accompanied with the Lord Governor, the Marshall, and
diverse lusty Gentlemen, Captains, and soldiers, to the number of three
thousand, set forward to York, and so to Hewme Castle, which Castle was
yielded, the Lord Governor, the Lord Marshall, Rebels executed at Barwicke.
and other expelled the Scots, to the number of 160. persons, among whom were
two Englishmen, which were carried to Barwicke, and there executed. The L.
Lieutenant placed in the Castle Captain Wood, and Captain Pikeman with two
hundred soldiers, and so returned to Barwicke. The fourth of May, he sent
master Drewry Marshall, with the number of 2000. to take Faust castle, which at
the first coming was delivered to the Marshall, who expelled the Scots, and so
returned to Barwicke.

Sir William Drewry set forward toward Edenborough with diverse Scottish bands
to join with the Earls of Lineaur, Morton, Glencarne and Mar, with other of
the Kings power of Scotland, in pursuing of the English rebels, and such as
supported them. They came to Edenborough the 14. of May, and from thence to
Lithcoe, where the Regent was slain.

The 17. the footmen marched to Fankirke, and Sir William Drewry with the
horsemen marched to Sterling, to see the King. The 18. they departed to the
foot bands, and so together Marched by Glasco, where the Lord Hambleto^ ad
besieged a house of the Lungs, but hearing of their coming they fled.

The 23. our General with the whole Army, marched toward the Castles of
Hamleton, and there had parley with Arthur Hamleton, but he would not deliver
the Castle: from thence accompanied with the Earl of Lenox and Mortaine with
the horsemen, marched to a fair house of the Abbots of Kelwing, which house
they burned with 17. houses more, whereof one was the Lord Lanhaps.

The 27. of May, Thomas Norton and Christopher Norton of Yorkshire, The
Nortons executed.
were drawn from the Tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged, headed, and
quartered.

The 28. of May, the Castle of Hamleton was yielded to sir William Drewry,
Hamleton in Scotland yield. Conspiracy in Norfolk
and by him presently spoiled and burnt.

A conspiracy was made by certain Gentlemen and other in the country of
Norffolke, whose purpose was on Midsomer day at Harlestone fair with sound of
Trumpet, to have raised a number, and then to proclaim their pretense against
strangers and others. This matter was uttered by T. Kete unto I. Kensey, who
forthwith sent the same Kete to the next Justice, before whom he opened the
whole matter, whereupon Master D. Drewry immediately apprehended John
Throgmorton, and after him many Gentlemen of the City of Norwich, and the
Country of Norffolke, and at the next Sessions of goal delivery, at the Castle
of Norwich, ten of them were endifed of high treason, three of them were
hanged, bowelled and quartered, which were I. Throgmorton, Thomas Brook, and
George Dedman.

The 4. Duke of Norffolke removed.
of August the Duke of Norffolke was removed to the Charterhouse near unto
Smithfield.

The same day was arraigned I. Felton for hanging a Bull at the gate of the
Bishop of Londons Palace, Felton executed.
and also two young men for coining and clipping, who all were found guilty of
high treason.

The 8. of August, I. Felton was drawn from Newgate into Paul's Churchyard, and
there hanged before the Bishops Palace gate, and being cut down alive, was
bowelled and quartered. The Shriues returned to tiburne with two young men,
which were there executed for coining and clipping.

The 22. of August the Earl of Sussex and the Lord Scrope marched from Carlisle
with the Quee^ Army, A journey into Scotland.
and force of the North into Scotland, passing over the River of Eske, Leuin,
and Sarke, so to Dornocke wood, and then to Annonna, a strong house of the L.
Harris, which they razed and overthrew with others thereabouts, from thence to
Hodhim, which they blewe up, from thence to Kennell, which they burnt, from
thence to Domfrees, which they sacke^, and overthrew a sumptuous house
belonging to the Queen of Scots, then passing the river of Longher, they burnt
and spoiled Cowhilles and Powtracke, and returned to Domfrees, and so to the
town of Bankende, which they burnt, with another house pertaining to William
Maxwell, and so to the Castle of Calauoracke, which castle they blew up and
returned.

The 28. of August they marched toward Carlisle, where by the way they burnt
two houses the one being Arthur Greames, the other Rich George.

Francis Barnam, William Box, Shriues.

The fifth of October happned a terrible tempest of wind and rain, by means
whereof many ships and other vessels were drowned: High waters.
the waters ouerflowing drowned many towns, villages, cattle, houses and
goods, beside many men, women, and children drowned in their beds.

Sir Rowland Hayward Clothworker. Mayor.

In the month of December the money sent out of Spain to the Duke of Alua,
An, reg, 13.
then Governor in the Low Countries, therewith to have paid his Soldiers,
was taken by the Queen of Englands ships on the west vasts, brought a land
there* and so to the Tower of London. Also a proclamation was published of the
causes why the same money was so stayed here.

The 23. Royal Exchange.
of January the Queens Majesty accompanied with her Nobility, came to sir
Thomas Gresham in Bishops gate street of London, where ^he dined, and after
returning through Cornehill, entered the Burse, which place she caused by an
Heralde to be proclaimed the Royal Exchange.

The 17. of February, at Kingstone, A strange kind of earth removed.
near Marclech, in the County of Hereford, was seen the ground to open, and
certain rocks with a piece of ground removed, and went forward the space of
four days. It removed it self between six of the clock in the evening
and seven the next morrow, forty paces, carrying great trees and sheep-coates,
some with threescore sheep in them. The depth of the hole where it first brake
out, is thirty foot, the breadth of the breach is eightscore yards, and in
length above twenty score yards, it overthrew Rinnastone Chapel. Also two
high ways b^ removed nigh an hundred yards, with the trees of the hedgerowes.
The ground in all is 26. acres, and where tillage ground was, there is pasture
left in place, and where was pasture, there is tillage ground gone upon it.

1571 Parliament.
The second of April a Parliament began at Westminster, wherein was granted
by the Clergy a subsidy of six shillings in the pound, and by the temporalitie
two Fifteenes, with a Subsidy of 20. s. 8. d. in the pound.

Doctor story executed.
The first of June John Story a Doctor of the Canon law, who before had been
condemned of high treason, was drawn from the tower of London to Tiburne, and
there hanged, and quartered.

A combat appointed at Tuthill.
The 18. of June there was a combat appointed to have been fought for a
certain Manor and demaine lands in the Isle of Hearty in Kent; Simon Low, and
John Ryme plaintifes, had brought a writ of right against Thomas Paramour, who
offered to defend his right by bataile, and the plaintifes aforesaid accepted
to answer his challenge. Hereupon the said Paramour brought before the Judges
of the common Pleas at Westminster one George Thorn, and the plaintifes
brought Henry Naylor Master of defense. Thorn cast down a gauntlet, which
Naylor took up: upon the sunday before the battle should be tried, on the
next morrow the matter was stayed, and the parties agreed, that Paramour being
in possession should have the land.

Tee quarrel of combat stayed.
It was thought good that for Paramours assurance, the order should be kept
touching the combat, and that the Plaintifes should make default of appearance,
and that the Court should fit in Tuthill fields, where was prepared one plot
of ground one and twenty yards square, double railed for the combat, without
the West square a stage being set for the Judges, representing the Court of
common pleas.

About ten of the clock the Court of common pleas came to the place prepared:
when the Lord chief Justice with two other his associats were set, then Low
was called to come in, or else loose his writ of right.

Then the sureties of Henry Naylor were called to bring in the said Naylor,
champion of Simon Low, and shortly thereupon Sir Jerome Bows leading Naylor
entered the lists, bringing him down till he came against the Judges, and there
making courtesy, Naylor put off his nether stocks, and so bare footed and bare
legged, and his dublet sleeves tied up to the elbow bare headed, came in as
aforesaid.

Then were called the sureties of George Thorn, and immediately sir Henry
Cheiney entering used the like order as Naylor had. After all this, the Lord
chief Justice rehearsing the manner of bringing ye Writ of right by Simon Low,
of the answer made by Paramour, and how Paramour had challenged to defend his
right by his champion, and of the accepting the trial by law with his
champion, then for default of appearance in Low, he judged the Land to
Paramour, and dismissed the Champions.

The 16 of July Rebecca Chamber of Heriettesham, for poisoning T. Chambers A
woman burnt.
her husband, was burnt at Maidstone in Kent.

The 7 of September the Duke of Norffolke was removed from the Charter house to
the Tower of London. Duke of Norffolke sent to the Tower. B. of Salisbury
deceased.


The twenty two of September deceased John Jewel Bishop of Salisbury, in his
life a most eloquent and diligent preacher, but a far more painful and
studious writer, as his works remaining witness.

Shrieues.
Henry Milles, John Branch. Mayor.
Sir William Allen Mercer.
The christian victory against the Turks. The battle of Lepa^to Anno reg. 14.
The 9 of November great rejoicing was made at London, for the late come news
of a marvelous victory obtained by the Christian army by sea, against the
Turks the sixth of October last passed, wherein was taken and sunk of the
Turks Galleys and Brigantines 230, there were slain of the Turks more then
thirty thousand, beside a great number of prisoners taken, and about 12000
Christians that had been slaves with the Turks, were set at liberty. The 13
of January deceased sir William Peter knight, S.W. Peter's deceased.
who had been Secretary and of the privy Council to four Kings and Queens in
this Realm, and seven times L. Ambassador abroad in foreign lands: he
augmented Excester College in Oxford, with lands, to the value of one hundred
pounds by year.

The 16 of January, Thomas Duke of Norffolke was arraigned in Westminster Hall,
Duke of Norffolke araigned.
and there by his Peers found guilty of high Treason.

The 11 of February Kenelme Barn and Edmond Mather, were drawn from the Tower
of London, and Henry Rolfe from the Marshalsee in Southwarke, all three to
Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, Barncy and Mather for
conspiracy, and Rolfe for counterfeiting the Queens hand.

The 12 of February was proclamation made for the sharp punishment of such as
conuaied bells, lead, A proclamation.
and other Church goods out of the Parish Churches or Chapels.

The tenth of March deceased sir William Pawlet knight, Lord Saint John Earl
of Wilshire, Marquis of Winchester, knight of the Garter, one of the Queens
Majesty's privy Counsel, and Lord high Treasurer of England. He was borne in
the year of our Lord 1483, he served Henry the 7, Henry the 8, Edward the 6,
1572.
Queen Mary, and Queen Elizabeth. Himself did see the children of his
childrens children, growing to the number of 103.

The 25 of March by the commandment of the Counsel, the Citizens of London
assembling at their several halles, the master collected the most active
persons of every their companies, to the number of 3 thousand, whom they
appointed to be pikemen and shot, the pikemen were forthwith armed in fair
corslets, Soldiers trained.
the gunners had every of them his Callieuer, with the furniture. To these were
appointed diverse captains, who to train them up in warlike feats, mustered
them thrice every week, sometime in the artillery yard, teaching the gunners
to handle their pieces, sometime at the miles end, and in Saint Georges field
teaching them to skirmish.

On May day they mustred at Greenewich before the Queens majesty, where they
showed many warlike feats, A show at Greenwich.
but were much hindered by the weather, all day showring.

It was enacted that all persons above the age of fourteen years, being
taken, vagrant, and wandering misorderly, should be apprehended, whipped, and
burnt through the right ear with a hot iron for the first time so taken, the
second time to be hanged.

The massacre in France Duke of Norf. beheaded. French Ambassador.
This year 1572, was the Massacar in Paris.

The 2 of June Thomas Duke of Norffolk was beheaded on tower hill.

Francis Duke of Memorency, and Betraude de Saligners, Knights of the order of
Saint Michaell, Ambassadors for Charles king of France arrived at Dover.

The 15 of June they repaired to the White hall, and there in her Graces
chapel about one of the clock in the after noone, the Articles of treaty,
league or confederacy, and sure friendship concluded at Bloys the nineteenth of
April, between the Queens majesty and the French King, being read, the same
was by her majesty and his Ambassadors confirms to be observed and kept.

Earl of Northumberland beheaded.
The 22 of August Thomas Percie Earl of Northumberland, now brought out of
Scotland whither he had fled, was beheaded at York.

In the month of August sir Thomas Smith, Enlishme^ sent to Ireland.
one of the Queens Majesty's privy Counsel, sent his son Thomas Smith
Esquire, into Ireland with a Colony or habitation of English men to inhabit
the Ardes in Vlster.

Richard Pype, Nicholas Woodroffe. Shriues.


Sir Lionell Ducket, mercer. Mayor.


The 18 of November was seen a star Northward, An. reg. 15* A strange star.
very bright and clear in the contestation of Cassiopeia, which with three
chief fixed stars of the said constellation made a Geometicall figure
lozengewise, of the learned men called Rombus: this star in bigness at the
flrst appearing, seemed bigger then Jupiter, and much less then Venus when she
seemed greatest, also the said star never changing his place, was carried about
with the daily motion of heaven, as all fixed stars commonly are, and so
continued almost six months. The same star was found to be in place
celestial, far above the Moon, otherwise than ever any comet has been
seen, or naturally can appear: therefore it is supposed, that the
signification thereof is directed purposely, and specially to some matter not
natural, but celestial, or rather supercelestiall, so strange, as from the
beginning of the world never was the like.

The 14 of November, Edward Earl of Darby, Lord Stanley and Strange, L. The
Earl of Darby deceased.
and Governor of the Isle of Man, knight of the noble Order of the Garter, and
one of the Queens Majesty's Privy Counsel, deceased: His life and death
deserving commendation, and craving memory to be imitated, was such as
follows. His fidelity to two Kings and two Queens in dangerous times and
great rebellions, in which time and always as cause served, he was Lieutenant
of Lancashire and Cheshire. His godly disposition to his tenants, never forcing
any service at their hands, but due payment of their rent. His liberality to
strangers, his famous houskeeping, his feeding of aged persons twice a day
forty and odd, besides all comers thrice a week appointed for his dealing
days, and every good Friday 35 years relieved one with another 2700, with
meat, drink, and money worth. His cunning in setting bones disioynted or
brake, his surgery and desire to help the poor, his delivery of his George
and seal of the Lord Strange, An. reg. 15
with exhortation that he might keep it so unspotted in fidelity to his
Prince, as he had, and his hope that he died in the Queens favor, his joyful
parting this world, his taking leave of all his servants by shaking of hands,
and his remembrance to the last day.

The 18 of January William Lord Herbert Earl of Worcester, began his journey
toward France, to the christning of the Kings daughter there, in stead of the
Queens majesty of England. The said Earl with many of his company, were
robbed upon the sea of much of their baggage* and three or four of their men
slain.

In the month of February through sundry heinous complaints brought to the
Queens Majesty and her Counsel, The narrow sea scoured.
of Pirates that kept the narrow Seas, doing many robberies, as also the robbing
of the Earl of Worcester, it pleased her Majesty to send one of her Ships
named the Swallow, under the charge of William Holstocke Esquire, controller of
her highness ships, who had with him the Gillian, the Bark Garet, and the
Bark of Yarmouth, and 306 able Mariners, Gunners, and Soldiers in the said
three ships, and one Bark which scoured the narrow Sea, from the North
forland as far Westward as Falmouth in Cornwall, and took twenty ships and
Barks of sundry nations, viz. English, French, and Flemmings, (but all Pirates)
and in fashion of war. Pirates on the West seas.
He apprehended in those ships and Barks to the number of 900 men of all
nations, and sent them to Sandwich, Dover, Wight, and Portsmouth (whereof three
of them that rebbed the Earl of Worcester were shortly after executed at
Wight.) Also the said William Holstocke did rescue and take from the abouesaid
Pirates, xv. other merchants ships laden with merchandises, yt were their
prises, Pirates executed.
being of sundry nations, and set at liberty the said fifteen merchants
ships and goods: which done he returned.

The 25 of March being Wednesday in Easter week, George Brown cruel murdered
near to Shooters-hill in Kent, a wealthy merchant of London named George
Sanders, 1573. G. Sa^ders murdered.
and John Bean of Wolwich, which murder was committed by the procurement of
mistress Sanders, wife to the said George Sanders, G. Brown, Anne Sa^ders,
Anne Drury, and trusty Roger, hanged.
for the which fact, George Brown was hanged in Smithfield in London, the 20
day of April, and after hanged in chains near unto the place where he had
done the fact. Mistress Anne Sanders, mistress Anne Drewry, and trusty Roger
mistress Druries man, were al as accessory, hanged in Smithfield on the 13 of
May. Not long after Anthony Brown, A. Brown hanged at York.
brother to the forenamed George Brown, was for notable felonies conveyed from
Newgate to York, and there hanged.

This year the Queen of England being moved by the Regent of Scotland, sent a
power of 1500 Englishmen to the siege of Edenborow Castle, sir William Drewry
knight Marshall of Barwicke, to be general of her forces there, who with his
Captains and soldiers marched thitherward from Barwicke to Leeth, and from
thence on the 25 of April to Edenborough, entered the town, and the same day,
summoned the Castle, raised mounts, and began the siege in five places,
Edenborough castle yielded to the English.
continuing the same so hot, ye on the 28 of May, the Castle was surrendered
into his hands, and his ensign was set up, and afterward spread in sundry
places of the Castle, and afterward, by him it was delivered unto the use of
the K. of Scots, part of the spoil was given to the soldiers, the Canons and
artillery with certain other instruments left to the King: more you may read
in my Annals.

The second of June, Hail in Northa^ptonshire.
a great tempest of rain happened at Tocester, in Northhampton shire,
where-through six houses of that Town were borne down, and fourteen more
sore perished, the haile-stones were six inches about, one child was there
drowned: and many sheep with other cattle.

The sixteenth of June, T. Woodhouse Thomas Woodhouse.
Priest was arraigned in the Guild hall of London, and condemned of high
Treason, who had judgment to be hanged and quartered, and was executed at
Tiburne, the 19 of June.

The sixteenth of August, Walter, Earl of Essex, accompanied with the Lord
Rich, and diverse other Gentlemen, embarked themselves in several ships at
Lerpoole, and took their voyage toward Ireland. The Earl of Essex sailed
into Ireland.
The Earl after many and great dangers on the Sea, landed at Knockfergus. The
Lord Rich with the like dangers, landed at Castle Kilcliffe; where being met by
Captain Malby, master Smith, and master Moore, was conductdd to master Malbies
house, where he had in readiness on the morrow morning 150 horsemen for their
safeguard to Knockfergus, beside 50 kernes.

Sir Brian Makephelin on the 6 of September, came to Knockfergus, to the Earl
of Essex, and there made his submission.

After him, Ferdorough Macgillasticke Roze, Oge, Macwilline did the like, and
diverse others, sent their messengers to the Earl, to signify, that they were
at his disposition, as the Baron of Dongarrow, Condonell, Odonell, and the
Captain Kylulto.

The Earl of Essex, having the country of Clanyboy, Earl of Essex General of
Vlster.
and other, the Queens Majesty directed her Letters to the Lord Deputy of
Ireland, willing him to make the Essex Captain general of the Irish Nation,
in the Province of Vlster, and to divide the country won, Clanyboy, and
elsewhere, etc.

Shrieues.
James Haruey, Thomas Pullison.

Mayor.
Sir John Rivers, Grocer.

An. reg. 16 A monstrous fish.
The 6 of July in the Isle of Thanet, a monstrous fish of the sea, did shut
himself on shore, where for want of water, beating himself on the sands, he
died. The length of this fish was twenty two yards, the nether iaw, 12 foot,
the opening, the thicknes from the back whereon helay, to the top of his belly,
was 14 foot, his tail of the same breadth, between the eyes, 12 foot, some of
the ribs were 16 foot long, his tongue was fifteen foot long.

Obsequie for the K. of France.
The 7 of August, a solemn Obsequie was kept in Paul's Church in London, for
Charles the 9. King of France.

The 15 of August, being Sunday, Agnes Bridges, a maid about the age of 20
years, and Rachel Pinder, a wench about 12 years old, who both of them had
counterfeited to be possessed by the devil, stood at Paul's Cross, where they
acknowledged their hypocritical counterfeiting, requiring forgiveness of God,
and the world: for they had made the people believe many things.

The 4 of September in the afternoon, A Ladde drowned in a channel in London.
such a form of rain happened at London, as the like of long time could not be
remembered, wherethrough, the channels of the City, suddenly ran with a forcible
course, that a lad about the age of 18 years, near unto Dowgate, was borne
over with the stream, and by the same, carried from the conduit there,
toward the Thames, with such a swiftnes, that no man with staves, or
otherwise, could stay him, till he came against the cart wheel, that stood in
the water gate, before which time he was drowned, and found starke-dead.

Thomas Blanke, Antony Gammage.

James Hawes Hawes, Cloathworker.

This Mayor kept no feast at the Guild hall, but diued at his own house, No
Majors feast.
with his brethren the Aldermen, the companies dined at their several halles.

Michaelmas Term, Term adiourned. Two tides in one hour. Fiery impressions
maruailous. An. reg. 17
which had bin adiourned by Proclamation, began at Westminster on the sixth of
November. The same sixth day in the morning, there happened two great tides in
the River of Thames: the first, by course, the other, within an hour after,
which ouer-flowed the marshes. The 14 of November, about midnight, diners
strange impressions of fire and smoke were seen in the Air, to proceed
forth of a black cloud in the North, toward the South, which so continued til
the next morning. The next day following, the heavens from (...) parts did
seem to burn, and over our heads (...) flames from the Horizon round about
rising (...) meet.

Flies in February, the number strange
The four and twentieth of February, (...) Tewkesbury a strange thing happened
after (...) flood, which was not great. In the afternoon^ there came down the
river of Auen, great number of Flies and Beetles, such as in Summer euenings
use to strike men on the face, in great heaps, a foot thick upon the water,
so that to credible men's judgment, there were within a pair of buts length of
those flies, about a hundred quarters. The milles there-about, we^^ dammed up
with them, for the space of four days after, and then were cleansed by
digging them out with shouels, from whence they came, as yet unknown, but the
day was cold, and a hard frost.

The 16 of February, between four and five of the clock in the afternoon,
Earthquake.
great Earthquakes happened in the City of York, Worcester, Gloucester,
Bristow, Hereford, and the Countries about, which caused the people to run
out of their houses, for fear they should have fallen upon their heads. In
Tewkesbury, Bredon, and other places, the dishes fell from the cupbords, and
the Books in men's studies from the shelues. In Norton Chapel, the people
being on their knees at evening prayer, the ground moving, caused them to run
away in great fear, fearing that the dead bodies would have risen, or the
Chapel have fallen: part of Rithing Castle fell down, with certain brick
Chimnies in Gentlemen's houses.

On Easter day, the third of April, 1575. Anabaptists at Paul's cross.
was disclosed a Congregation of Anabaptists, Dutchmen, in a house without the
bars of Algate, at London, whereof 17 were taken, and sent to prison, and
four of them bearing fagots, recanted at Paul's cross, on the 15 of May.

The 17 of May, Matthew Parker, Archbishop of Canterbury deceased.
Doctor of Divinity, Archbishop of Canterbury deceased at Lambeth, and there
was honorably buried.

This reverend Father examined thoroughly the English translation of the holy
Bibles, wherein he partly used the help of his brethren Bishops, and other
Doctors, and caused the same to be newly printed in the largest Volume, for
the furniture of many Churches then wanting. Also making diligent search for
the antiquities of the Britons, and English Saxons, to the end those monuments
might be carefully kept, he caused them to be well bound, and trimly covered,
and such, whereof he knew very few copies to be extant (amongst the which,
whereunto I am witness, and was an helper, was Matthew Paris, Matthew
Florilogus, and Thomas Walsingham) he caused to be printed. The famous Palace
of his Sea at Canterbury decayed, he renewed and fully restored with the
charges of more then one thousand four hundred pound.

He founded a Grammar school in Rach^a^^^ in the County of Lancaster, and did
many other good deeds to Colleges, in giving scholarships, Books, Money, and
Plate, etc.

The 21 of May, one man, and ten women Anabaptists Dutch, Anabaptists
banished.
were in the consistory of Paul's, condemned to be burnt, only one woman was
converted, the other were banished.

Family of Love.
The 21 of June, stood at Paul's Cross, five persons, terms, the Family of
Love, who there confessed themselves utterly to detest as well the Author of
the Sect, H. N. as all his damnable errors and heresies.

Anabaptists burnt.
The 22 of July, two Dutchmen Anabaptists were burnt in Smithfield.

Thunder and hail.
The 30 of July in the afternoon, was a great tempest of lightning and thunder,
wherthrough both men and beasts in diverse places were stricken dead. Also at
that time fell hail stones seven inches about.

The 26 of September, a Poulters wife in the Parish of Christ's Church, Four
children at a burden.
within Newgate in London, was brought to bed of four children at one burden,
all maiden children, and the same day month, the mother was buried, but all
the four children living, and were christened, but lived not long.

Shrieues.
Edward Osborne, Wolstone Dixie.

Mayor.
Sir Ambrose Nicholas Salter.

This Mayor went by water to Westminster, and there took his oath: he kept no
feast at Guild Hall, but dined at his own house with his brethren.

The Companies dined at their several Halles.

The 11 of February Anne Aueries widow, forswearing her self for a little
money, An. reg. 18 God punishes perjury.
that she should have paid for six pounds of ^^w at a Shop in Woodstreet of
Londun, fell immediately down speechles, casting up at her mouth, the same
matter, which by Natures course, should have been voided downwards, till she
died. A terrible example of Gods judgment, upon such as make no conscience of
swearing, though it be against their own elder brother.

The 15 of February, Edmond Grindall, Archbish. elected.
sometime Bishop of London, late Archbishop of York, was in the Chapter house
of S. Paul's Church at London, elected Archbishop of Canterbury.

The 5 of March, in the night, a Tilt-ooat, Tiltboat drowned. 1576.
with about the number of thirty persons, coming from Grauesend, toward
London, were all drowned, one by excepted.

The 15 of June, Martine Frobisher, Frobishers first voyage for the discovery
of Cathay.
with two small Barkers, and one Pinnesse, departed from Blackwall, upon his
voyage for the discovery of a passage to Cathay, by the Northwest seas. Upon
the first of July, he had sight of Freesland, but durst not approach the same,
by reason of the great Ice that lay along the coast: not far from thence he
lost his pinnesse, and one of his Barks, who mistrusting the danger of
tempests, returned home, with report that their General Martine Frobisher was
cast a^way, which Captain notwithstanding continued his course Northwest,
beyond any man that has heretofore discovered, and the 20 of July, had a sight
of a high land, which he named Queen Elizabeth's foreland, and after that
another foreland with a great passage, dividing as it were, the two maine lands
asunder, this place he named Frobishers straight. After he had passed sixty
leagues further, he went a shore, found the same to be inhabited with savage
people, brought one of them into his Bark, and returning, arrived in England
in the month of August. One of his company brought from thence a piece of
black stone, which being brought to certain Goldfiners to make a say thereof,
found it to hold gold (as they said) and that very richly.

The month of August, many complaints being brought to the Queen against the
Flushingers, for great spoils and robberies by them daily committed upon her
Subjects, her majesty gave order to put four good ships and two Barks of her
own to the Seas, under the charge of master William Holstocke Esquire,
controller of all her highness ships, with 1100 men, victualled for six
weeks, in which time was by them taken eight Flushingers ships, and ba^kes,
prizes, and two hundred and twenty Sea Rouers in them, who were sent to sundry
prisons.

Walter, Earl of Essex, and Earl Marshall of Ireland, Knight of the Garter,
Earl of Essex deceased.
falling sick of a laske, the 25 of August, deceased on the 12 of September,
at Diuelon in Ireland, and was buried at Carmarthen in Wales.

William Kempton, George Barn. Shrieues.


John Langley Goldsmith. Mayor.


The 17 of March, An. reg 19 Patricke Brunton ouerturned.
through a strange tempest which happened in the North, near to a Town called
Richmond, not only cottages, trees, barnes, and hay-stackes, but also the most
part of a Church called Patricke Brunton, was overthrown, with most strange
sights in the Air, both terrible and fearful.

The 26 of March, 1577. Charitable acts of M. Lamb. Holborne conduite builded.
the new conduit near unto Holborne, with one cock at Holborne Bridge, were
begun to be founded by William Lamb, sometime Gentleman of the Chapel to
Ring Henry the eight, now citizen and Cloth-worker of London. The water whereof
is conveyed into pipes of Lead, to the said conduit, more then two thousand
yards in length; all which, of his own costs and charges, amounted to the sum
of 19 hundred pound, was fully finished the 24 of August, in the same year.

The said W. Lamb has given to the company of Stationers, 6 pound 13
shillings, four pence, in the Parish Church of S. Faiths under Paul's Church in
London, to give to twelve poor people every friday, 12 pence in money, and 12
pence in bread.

Item to Christ's Hospital in London, yearly for ever, 6 pounds, and 100
pounds in many to purchase lands.

Item to Saint Thomas Hospital in Southwarke, four pounds yearly.

Item to the Hospital, called the Sauoy sometime. 10 pounds at once, to buy
bedding for the poor.

Item to the Cloth-workers in London, 4 pounds in the year. Also more, his
late dwelling house, with other, to the value of 30 pounds the year, to the
intent they should hire a Minister, to say divine service every Sunday,
Wednesday, and Friday, and that four Sermons every year, after his decease,
be preached in the Church, to the said house belonging, called S. James in the
wall by Creple-gate, and also to give to 12 poor men, yearly, on the first of
October, to every one a Gown of good Freese, ready made, a shirt of good
locoram, and a strong pair of shoes. And 12 poor women, 12 gown^ of the like
Freese, 12 smockes, and twelve pair of shoes for ever.

A Free school and alms houses at Sutton in Kent.
Item he erected a free School, and six alms houses at Sutton valens in Kent,
where he was borne, and appointed for the Master, twenty pounds, and the
usher ten pounds yearly for ever, and to the six almes-houses, ten pounds
yearly, with an orchard and gardens.

Item toward a free School at Maidstone in Kent.

Item to set poor Clothiers aworke, in the country of Suffolk, one hundred
pounds.

To the towns of Ludlow and Bridgenorth, each of them a hundred pounds.

The 31 of May, Martine Frobisher, A Second voyage toward Cathay.
with one Ship and two Barks, furnished for that purpose, sailed from Harwich,
in Essex, toward Cathay, by the Northwest Seas, and entered his straits,
beyond Queen Elizabeth's fore-land, about thirty leagues, where he went on
shore, and finding store of gold Ore (as he had bin informed) fraught his Ship
and Bark, caught a man, woman and child of that country, and then on the
twenty four of August, returning, arrived at Milford haven on the twentieth of
September.

The 20 of June, W. Worth the reading.
Lumney a poor man in the Parish of Emely, in the county of Worcester, being
kept in prison by a wealthy Widow, he having a Mare of 22 years old, with
Foale, within three days after, his Mare foaled a Mare Colt, the which
immediately had an Vdder, out of the which was milked the same day a pint of
Milk, and every day after, gave above three pintes, to the great sustentation
of the said poor man's wife and children, the which Colt continued in that
sort, long time after, as has been seen of many thousands.

Strange and sudden sickness at Oxford.
The fourth, fifth, and sixth days of July, was the Assizes held at Oxford, where
was arraigned and condemned one Rowland Ienkes, for his seditious tongue, at
which time there arose amidst the people a dampe, that almost all were
smothered, very fewescaped, that were not taken at that instant, the Jurors
died presently: shortly after died Sir Robert Bell, Lord chief Baron, Sir Rode
Olie, Sir W. Babington, Master Weneman, M. de Olie, high Shrieue, M. Danuers,
M. Harcourt, M. Kirle, M. Pheteplace, M. Greenewood, M. Foster, M. Nash,
Serieant Baram, M. Stephens, etc. There died in Oxford three hundred persons,
and sickened there, but died in other places, 200 and odd, from the sixth of
July, to the twelth of August, after which day died not one of that sickness,
nor one of them infected not another, nor any one woman or child died thereof.

Tempest in Norff.
On Sunday, the fourth of August, between the hour of 9 and 10 of the clock
in the forenoone, whilst the Minister was reading of the second Lesson in the
Parish Church of Blib^rough (a town in Suffolk) a strange and te^^le tempest
of Lightning and Thunder, stroke through the wall of the same Church, into the
ground, almost a yard deep, drove down all the people on that side, above 20
persons, then renting the wall up to the Reuestry, cleft the door, and
returned to the Steeple, rent the timber, brake the chains, and fled toward
Bongey, six miles off: the people that were stricked down, were found
groueling more then half an hour after, whereof a man and a boy were found
stack dead, the other were scorched. The like flash of Lightning and crackes of
Thunder, rent the Parish Church of Bongey, nine miles from Norwich, wrung in
sunder the wires and wheels of the clock, slew two men which sat in the
belfrey, and scorched another, which hardly escaped.

The stone Tower of London Bridge, The tower upon London Bridge new builded
with timber.
being decayed, was taken down, and a new foundation drawn, Sir John Langley,
Lord Mayor of the City of London, laid the first stone, the 28 of August, in
the presence of the Shrieues of London, and the two Bridge-Masters.

Nicholas Backhouse, Francis Bowyer. Shrieues.


Sir Thomas Ramsey, Grocer. Mayor.


This sir Thomas Ramsey, Sir Thom. Ramseyes gift, is of 243 l. the year, to
Christ's Hospital
Lord Mayor of the City of London, with the goodly and virtuous Lady, Dame Mary
his wife, both living, being seized of lands in the right of the said Dame
Mary, and of her inheritance, have given the fee simple of the same lands,
being the yearly value of 243 l to Christ's Hospital in London. The rents and
profits whereof are limited to be employed, as follows, viz. unto Peter House
in Cambridge, shall be given yearly forty pound to the finding of four
scholars, and two fellows there. More, ten pound yearly toward the
relieuing of the poor, harbored in the Hospital of Saint Bartholomew in
London, and other ten pounds yearly, to the relieuing of poor Prisoners, in
the four Prisons of London, to wit, Newgate, Ludgate, and the two Counters,
this to be continued for ever, the residue to be converted toward relief of
the poor children of Christ's Hospital aforesaid. This gift she afterward in
her widowhood, confirmed, and augmented greatly, both in her life, and by her
Testament.

A blazing Star.
The 11 of November, at night, was seen a blazing Star with a long stream,
which was nightly seen, till eight of the clock.

An. reg 20 Sergeants feast.
Tae 19 of November, the new Sergeants at the Law, seven in number, held their
feast in the Temple of London.

A warning to Coniurers.
The 17 of January, one Simon Pembrooke, dwelling in Southwarke, being
vehemently suspected to be a Coniurer, by commandment of the ordinary Judge
for those parts, appeared in the Parish Church of Saint Savior, at the court
holden there: which Simon busied in entertaining a Proctor, and having money in
his hand, leaned his head upon the pew, wherein the Proctor stood, which after
he had done a certain space, the Proctor began to lift up his head, to see what
he aild, and found him departed out of life, and straightway the said Simon
fell down, rattling a little in the throat, and never spoke word after. This
was done even as the Judge came into the church, who said it was the just
judgment of God, toward those that used Sorcery, and a great example to
admonish others to fear the justice of God. After his clothes being opened,
there were found about him devilish books of coniuration, and abominable
practices, a picture of a man, having three dice in his hand, and this writing,
Chance dice fortunately, and diverse papers of such like matters, as he had
dealt in for men, such as are mentioned in Leuiticus, the 20 chapter, the 6
verse. If any soul turn himself after such as work with spirits, and after
southsayers, to go awhooring, (says the Lord) I will put my face against that
soul, and will cut him off from among my people.

The 3 of February, John Nelson, Nelson executed.
for denying the Queens supremacy, was drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged and
quartered.

The 10 of March, 1578.
deceased the Lady Margaret, Countess of Lineaux, and was buried at
Westminster.

The 31 of May, Martine Frobisher, Frobishersthird voyage.
with fifteen sail of good ships well appointed, departed from Harwich in
Essex, on his third voyage toward Cathay. The 31 of July, after many attempts,
and sundry times being put back by Islands of Ice in his straites, he came to
anchor in the Islands, now by her Majesty named Meta incognita, whereas in the
year before, they fraght their ships with the like Ore, and then on the last
of August, returning thence, arrived safely in England, about the first of
October.

Shrieues.
George Bond, Thomas Starky.

Mayor.
Sir Richard Pipe, Draper.

An. reg. 21 Cassimere received.
The 22 of January, about 7 of the clock at night, John Cassimere, Count
Palatine of the Rhene, and Duke of Bauaria, landing at the Tower of London, was
there by diverse Noble men, and others, honorably received, and conveyed by
cresset-light, and torch-light to Sir Thomas Gressams house in Bishops-gate
street, where he was feasted and lodged till Sunday next, and then by the
Nobility, brought to the court at Westminster, and after lodged in
Sommerset-house. On the eight of February, he was made Knight of the Garter,
and on the fourteenth of February, departed from London homewards, with great
rewards given by the Queens Majesty, the Nobility, and men of honor.

Deep snow upon a sudden.
The fourth of February, and the night following, fell such abundance of snow,
that on the fifth in the morning, the same was found at London, to be two foot
deep in the shallowest, and otherwise being driven by the wind very boistrous
in the Northeast, on banks, an ell, or yard and a half deep, in the which
drifts of snow in the countries, many cattle, and some men and women were
ouer-whelmed and lost, it snowed till the eight day, and freezed till the
tenth. When following a thaw, with continual rain a long time after,
Greatland waters
which caused such high floods, that the Marshes and low grounds being drowned,
the water rose so high in Westminster hall, that after the fall thereof, some
fishes were found there to remain.

The 20 of February deceased sir Nicholas Bacon Lord Keeper of the great Seal
of England, Lord Keeper deceased.
who was honorably buried under a sumptuous monument in Paul's Church of
London, the 9 of March.

The 25 of April sir Thomas Bromley knight, 1579 Lord cha^cellor.
was made Lord Chancellor of England.

The 14 of April, An heretic burnt at Norwich.
Matthew Hamont of Hithersey, three miles from Norwich ploughwright, for
denying Christ to be our Savior, and publishing diverse other horrible
heresies, was conuented before the Bishop of Norwich, condemned in the
consistory, and delivered to the Shrieues of Norwich to be executed: but
because he had spoken words of blasphemy against the Queens Majesty and other
of her Counsel, he was by the Mayor Sir Robert Wood, and Sergeant Windam
Recorder, condemned to lose his ears, which were cut off the thirteenth of May
in the Market place of Norwich, and on the 20 of May he was burnt in the Castle
ditch there.

This year Mark Scalior, A lock and key weighed but one wheat corn.
Blackesmith of London, for trial of his workmanship made one hanging lock
of Iron, steel and brass of eleven several pieces, and a pipe key, all
clean wrought, which waied but one grain of gold. He also at the same time
made a chain of gold of forty three linkes, to which chain the lock and key
being fastened and put about a fleas neck, Great art and labor to very small
purpose.
she drew the same with ease. All which lock and key, chain, and flea, wayed
but one grain and a half: a thing most incredible, but that I my self have
seen it.

The traitorous fact of Thomas Appletree.
The 17. of July the Queens Majesty being on the river of Thames, betwixt her
Manor of Greenwich and Depford, in her privy barge, accompanied with the
French Ambassador, the Earl of Lincoln, and, others; it chanced that one
Thomas Appletree, seruingman in the company of others, rowing up and down the
Thames, having a Calliuer charged with a bullet, and shooting at randon, by
misfortune shot one of the watermen (the second next unto the bales of the said
barge which sat within six foot of her Highness) clean through both arms,
for the which fact the said Thomas was on the 21 of July brought to the water
side, where was a Gibbet set up, and when the hangman had put the rope about
his neck, he was by the Queens pardon delivered from execution.

John Fox delivered 269 Christians out of the Turks hands.
This years John Fox of Woodbridge, William Wicnor, Robert Moore Englishmen,
having been prisoners in Turkey about the space of thirteen years, with more
than 260 other Christians of diverse nations, by killing of their keeper,
meruailously escaped, and returned to their native countries.

Great water floods.
In the month of September and October fell great winds and raging floods in
sundry places of this Realm, where through many men, cattle, and houses, were
drowned. In ye town of Newport the cottages were borne down and the corn
lost, pasture ground overwhelmed, cattle drowned. In the town of Bedford the
water came up into the Market place, where cubbords, chests, and forms, swam
about the houses, their fuel, corn and hay was wract and borne away. Also the
town of Saint Edes in Huntingtonshire was ouerflowed suddenly in the night,
when all men were at rest, the waters brake in with such force, that the town
was all defaced, the Swannes swam down the Market place, and all the town
about the boats did floate. Gormanchester was suddenly suppressed, their houses
full of water, and their cattle destroyed.

Martin Calthorpe, John Heart. Shrieues.


Sir Nicholas Woodroofe, Haberdasher. Mayor.


On the 21 of September, An. reg. 22 Sir Thomas Gresham deceased.
Sir Thomas Gresham knight, agent to the Queen (who had builded the Royal
exchange in London) deceased suddenly at his house in Bishops gate steets of
London, and was buried in the parish Church of S. Elen there.

The 6 of April being Wednesday in Easter week, 1580 Earth quake general.
about six of the clock toward the evening, a sudden earthquake happened at
London, and generally throughout England, by violence whereof, the great clock
bell at Westminster struck against the hammers, as diverse clocks and bells
against their hammers and clappers both in the City and country did the like.
In London a piece of the Temple Church fell down. In the late dissolved Church
of the Gray Friars now called Christ's Church, in the Sermon time one falling
from the top, killed a young man out of hand, and one other stone so bruised a
maiden, his fellow servant both to one master, that she lived but 4 days.
Diverse other were sore bruised running out of the Church. Some stones fell from
the Church of Saint Paul in London, and some from the Church of Saint Peter at
Westminster, diverse chimnies with shaking lost their tops, and ships on the
river of Thames and on the Seas, were seen to totter: this earthquake
continued about London not passing one minute of an hour, but in East Kent,
and the sea coast, thereabout it was felt three times, to wit, at 6.9.11. of
the clock. The first of May, after 12 of the clock in the night, was an
earthquake felt in diverse places in Kent, namely at Ashford, great Chatte, etc.
which made the people there to rise out of their beds, and to run to their
churches to call upon God, by earnest prayer to be merciful unto them.

Strange hail.
The 13 of June about 6 of the clock in the morning, at Shipwash within Bothell
Barony in Northumberland, there happened a tempest of lightning and thunder,
after the which of a sudden, came great showers of hail, amongst the which
were stones of diverse shapes.

The 17 of June, A monstrous child.
in the Parish of Blansdon in Yorkshire, after a great tempest of lightning
and thunder, a woman of four score years old named Alice Perin, was delivered
of an hideous monster, whose head like unto a sallet, the fore part of his body
like a man, but having eight legs, not one like another, and a tail of half
a yard long.

About the 18 of July, Soldiers transported into Ireland.
the Lord Gray took his voyage toward Ireland, as Lord Deputy thereof, after
whom were sent diverse bands of lusty soldiers, both horsemen and footmen,
under the leading of expert captains.

The 23 of September at Fennistanton in Huntingtonshire, one Agnes, child
monstrous.
wife to William Linsey, was delivered of an ugly and strange monster, with a
face black, mouth and eyes like a Lion, and both male and female.

Ralph Woodcocke, John Allot. Shrieues.


The eight of October appeared a Crinicall or blasing star, bushing toward
the East, Blasing Star.
which was nightly seen more than two months after.

The eighteenth of October, Sergeants feast.
were made 8 Sergeants at law, to wit, William Fleetwood Recorder of London,
Edward Flowerdew, Thomas Snagge, William Periam, Robert Halton, John Clench,
John Puckering, Thomas Walmsley, and held their feast in the new temple at
London.

The 19 of October, proclamation was published at London, for the apprehension,
and severe punishing of all persons suspected to be of the family of love.

Mayor.
Sir John Branch, Draper.

There arrived upon the West coast of Ireland, certain companies of Italians
and Spaniards sent by the Pope to aid the Earl of Desmond in his rebellion,
which fortified themselves strongly near Smerwicke, in a fort which they
called Castle delore, there erecting the Popes Banner against her Majesty:
which when the Lord Gray of Wilton deputy of Ireland understood, marched
thitherward, and the sixth of November, hearing of the arrival of four or five
of the Queens Majesty's ships, and also of three barks, fraughted from
Limorket and Korke with victuals, on the morrow after marched toward the fort,
unto which he gave so hot an assault, that on the ninth of November the same
was yielded, all ye Irish men and women hanged, and more then 400 Spaniards,
Italians, and Byscaies at ye time put to the sword, the Coronell, Captains,
Secretary, and other (to the number of 20) saved for ransom. In which
fortress was found good store of money, biscuit, bacon, oil, wine and diverse
other provisions of victual, sufficient for their company for half a year,
An. reg. 23
beside armor, powder, shot, and other furniture for two thousand men and
upwards.

The 28 of November, were arraigned in the Kings bench, William Randall for
coniuring to know where treasure was hid in the earth, and gods felloniously
taken, Ralph Spacie, and Christopher Waddington for being present, Randall,
Elas, Spacie, and Waddington were found guilty, and had judgment to be hanged,
Randall was executed, the other were repriued.

About the four and twentieth of December in the town of Walsam in the County
of Sussex, a Child of eleven years old, Strange speeches of a child.
named William Withers, lay in a trance, and then coming to himself again,
uttered to the standers by many strange speeches, against pride,
coueteousnesse, and coldness of Charity, etc.

About the 12 of January proclamation was published at London, Against Jesuits
and massing priests.
for reuocation of sundry the Queens Majesty's subjects remaining beyond the
seas under color of study, and yet living contrary to the laws of the Realm.
And also against the retayning of Jesuits and massing Priests, sowers of
sedition, and other treasonable attempts, etc.

The 13 of January, a man was drawn to S. Thomas of Watrings, and there
hanged, headed, and quartered, for begging by a license, whereunto the Queens
hand was counterfeited.

The sixteenth of January the Parliament began at Westminster, Parliament at
Westminster.
and on the twentieth of January the Queens majesty went from White hall, to
the Parliament house by water.

Iusting at Westminster.
The 22 of January triumphant iusting was accomplished at Westminster, where
many of the beholders as well men as women sore h^^t, some maimed, and some
killed by falling of scaffolds.

Mice devoured grass.
About Halontide last past, in the marshes of Dainsey hundred, in a place called
Southminster, in the County of Essex, there suddenly appeared an infinite
multitude of Mice, which ouerwhelming the said marches, did sheare and gnaw the
grass by the root, spoiling and t^^^ting the same with their venomous teeth,
in such sort, that the cattle which grased there^^, were smitten with a
morraine and died thereof, which vermin by policy of man could not be
destroyed, till it came to pass that there flocked together all about the same
marshes, such a number of Owls, as all the shire was not able to yield,
whereby the marsh-holders were shortly delivered from the vexation of the Mice,
the like of this was also in Kent.

The 4 of April, the Queen dined at Depford, Francis Drake knighted^
and there after dinner entered the ship wherein captain Drake had sailed
about the world, and being there, a bridge that her Majesty came over brake,
being upon the same th^^ 200 persons, and no hurt done by the same, and there
she knighted Captain Francis Drake i^ in his ship.

The Banqueting house builded at Westminster, 1581
beginning on the 26 of March, and finished on the eighteenth of April, in
which me^^^ space, to wit, Banqueting house at Westminster. Ambassadors out of
France.
on the sixteenth of April arrived at Dover certain noble men of France, to
wit, Francis Burbon, Prince Daulphine of Auergne, Arthur Casse Marshall of
France, Lodowike Lusigaian, Lord of Lansac, and others. These came from
Grauesend by water to London, and so to the Court; then being at Westminster,
where they were honorably entertained, the Nobles and gentlemen desirous to
show them all c^rtesie, prepared a triumph in most sumptuous order, upon
Whitson Monday and Tewsday: the chief chalengers of which attempts, Iousting,
tourneying and barriars.
were the Earl of Arundell, L. Windsor, Philip Sidney and other, the
defendants to the number of one and twenty, all which of them six courses
against the former chalengers, who performed their parts valiantly.

The 21 of June in the night, Cross in Cheap defaced.
the lowest Images about the Cross in Cheap, were broken and defaced,
whereupon proclamation was made, that who so would bewray the doers thereof,
should have forty Crowns, but nothing came to light, but an evil end befell
the doer.

This year were to be seen in London two Dutchmen of strange statures, Two
men of strange stature.
the one in height seven foot and seven inches, in breadth betwixt the
shoulders three quarters of a yard and two inches, the compass of his breast
one yard half and two inches, and about the wast one yard, quarter, and one
inch, the length of his arm to the hands a full yard, a comely man of person,
but lame of his legs, for he had broken them with lifting of a barrel of
Beer. The other was in hight but three foot, he had never a good foot nor any
knee at all, and yet could dance a galliard, he had no arm, but a stump to the
elbow or little more on the right side, on the which singing he would dance a
cup, and after toss it about three or four times, and every time receive the
same on the said stumpe, he would shoot an arrow near the mark, flourish
with a rapier, throw a bowl, beat with a hammer, hew with an axe, sound with a
trumpet, and drink every day ten quarts of the best beer, if he could get
it.

Prisoners arraigned for not coming to Church.
The 18 of July were brought from the Fleet, the Gatehouse, Newgate, and the
Counters, sundry prisoners indicted for refusing to come to the Church, all
which being convicted by their own confession had judgment accordingly to pay
twenty pounds for every month of such wilful absence.

Shriues.
Richard Martine, W. Web.

Mayor.
Sir James Haruy, Ironmonger.

Monsieur Duke of Anioue came into England An. reg. 24.
The first of November Monsieur the French Kings brother Duke of Anioue, and
other Nobles of France having lately arrived in Kent, came to London, and were
honorably received and retained at the Court with great banqueting.

Campion and others executed.
The first of December Edmond Campion Jesuit, Ralph Sherwin, and Alexander
Brian Seminary Priests, having been arraigned and condemned for high treason,
were drawn from the tower of London to Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.

The first of February the Queens majesty, Monsieur returns, and is
honorably conuaied toward the sea.
with her whole Court accompanied Monsieur Duke of Anioue from Westminster to
Canterbury, where, when she had feasted all the French Nobility, either took
leave of another, and her Majesty returned. The sixth, the Duke lodged at
Sandwich, and on the next morning took the sea, being accompanied with the
Earl of Leicester, the Lord Hunsdon, the Lord Howard, knights of the Garter,
the Lord Willowby, Lord Windsor, Lord Shefild, Lord Hyward, and Lord Audley,
Mr. Sidney, sir George Carry, Master John and Robert Carry, and a great number of
Gentlemen, so as the whole train that attended upon the said Earl, was one
hundred gentlemen, and more then three hundred seruingmen. The Lord Hunsdon,
had of gentlemen and others to the number of one hundred and fifty, and the
Lord Hayward had as many, Duke of Anioue received into Zeland.
all which sailed in 15 ships to Flushing in Zeland, where the Prince of Orange
and the States of the Low Countries, received the said Duke and our Nobles of
England with great joy, Duke of Anioue created Duke of Brabant, etc.
conducting them from thence to Middleborow, and then to Antwerpe, where before
the twentieth day of the same month, they solemnly created the said Duke of
Anioue, Duke Lothyer, Braband, etc. and our Nobility returned into England.

1581. Pain executed, at Chelmsford.
John Pain Priest being indicted of high treason for words by him spoken, was
arraigned and condemned at Chelmsford, and there executed on the second of
April.

The Conduit in Fleetstreet newly built.
This year the water Conduit in Fleetstreete was new builded with a larger
Cesterne at the charges of the City.

The fifteenth of May at night about ten of the clock a blasing star
appeared, descending in the Northwest, A blasing star.
the beard whereof streamed Southeast.

7. Priests executed at Tiburn.
The 28 of May, Thomas Ford, John Sheret, and R. Johnson Priests, having bin
before condemned of high treason, were drawn from the Tower of London to
Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered. And on the 30 of May, Luke Kerby,
William Filby, Thomas Cotton, and Laurence Richardson, were for the like
treason in the same place likewise executed.

Lord Wilowby Ambassa-into Denmark.
The 14 of July, Peregrine Bartue, Lord Willowby of Eresby, appointed Ambassador
to Frederick King of Denmark, with the Garter, embarked at Kingstone upon
Hull, and prosperously arrived at Elismore in Denmark, on the twentieth of the
same month. On the foureteenth of August, the said King received robes of the
order, ware the Garter, Collar and George, and the Lord Ambassador returning
with his train, arrived at Bromtholine in Norffolke, on the twentieth of
September.

This year was first founded a public lecture in Surgery, The Lecture of
Surgery first founded.
to begin to be read in the College of Physicians in London, Anno 1584. the
sixth of May, etc. by John L. Lumley, and Richard Caldwell D. in Physic. The
Reader whereof, to be a Doctor of Physic.

The 19 of July certain firkins of gunpowder (to the number of seven) and as
many more firkens of Sturgeon, A strange misfortune of gunpowder on Galley key*
laden in a cart upon Galley key, some small portion of the same powder being
shed on the ground, the horse in the said Carre struck fire with his foot, and
fired all together, where through the Sturgeon was blown away, some into the
Thames, some else where, one firken was driven through alomed wall that was
boorded over, the Crane on the wharfe with the houses near to adjoining
shatred, many men and horses so blasted, the 3 men and 7 horses died thereof.

The 12 of August there arose a great tempest of lightning, thunder,
whirlewind, and rain, A strange tempest in Norffolke.
beside hailestones fashioned like to the rowels of spurs, 2 or 3 inches about,
in the Country of Norfolk, between the towns of North Walsam, and Worsteed,
which tempest beat the corn flat to the ground, rent up many great trees, and
shiuered them in pieces, or wound them like writhes, at Hemming (a mile from
Worsted) the west door of the Church weighing more then 300 weight, was lifted
off the hooks, and blown over the Font within one yard of the Chancel door,
the top of the Church was riuen up, and the lead blown away, five webbes of
Lead were rufled up together like a glove, and blown into the field without
the Churchyard. At East Russen were many barnes blown down.

Shrieues.
William Roo, John Hayden deceased the twenty four of November, and Cuthbert
Buckle succeeded.

Mayor.
Sir Thomas Blanke Haberdasher.

Term kept at Hartford.
Michaelmas term was adiourned to the Castle of Hertford, there to begin in
Crastina Animarum.

Thames Water brought into the high strets of London.
Peter Morris free denizon, conuaied Thames water in pipes of Lead, over the
steeple of Saint Magnus Church: at the North end of London bridge, and so into
diverse men's houses in Thames street, Newfishstreet, and Grass street, up to
the Northwest corner of Leaden hall (the highest ground of London) where the
waste of the main pipe ran first this year on Christmas even, and since
being divided into four spouts, often times running four ways, plentifully
serving to the commodity of the inhabitants near adjoining in their houses,
and also clensing the kennels of the street toward Bishops gate, Algate, the
Bridge, and the Stocks market. But now no such matter, private commodity being
preferred, common commodity is neglected, and not reformed as was promised.

The 17 of January in the Parish of Armitage, in a place called Blackemore in
Dorcetshire, a piece of ground containing three acres removed from the place
where it was first planted, and was carried clean over another close, Ground
removed in Docetshire.
where Alder and Willow trees grow, An. reg. 25
the space of forty goad (every goad containing 15 foot) and has stopped up a
high way that directed toward the market town of Cerne, and yet
notwithstanding the hedges wherewith it was enclosed, enuiron it still, and the
trees stand thereon bolt upright, saving one Oak that is well nigh twenty
loads, removed the place, whereas this ground had his being, is left like unto
a great pit.

The 23 of January being Sunday, A gracious admonition to keep the Sabbath.
about 4 of the clock in the afternoon, the old and underpropped scaffolds
round about the Beare-garden, on the South side of the Thames, over against the
City of London, on excharged with people, sell suddenly down, whereby to ye
number of 8 persons men and women were slain, and many others sore hurt and
bruised. A friendly warning to such, as more delight themselves in the cruelty
of beasts, then in the works of mercy, the fruits of true possessed faith,
which ought to be the Sabbath days exercise.

This year 1583, 1583. The Prince of Orange slain. Note.
William Prince of Orange was slain by John Iowrigny a Wallon Soldier, who
notwithstanding sundry extreme torments inflicted upon his body and limbs in
prison, as also having his flesh plucked off with hot pincers upon an open
stage, yet he never shrunk, nor craved any favor, neither repented him of the
fact, but feared he had not slain him.

The Arch bishop of Colle^ expulsed for marrying a wife.
About this time the Archbishop of Collen being well in years, married a wife,
whereupon the Emperor with other Princes of Germany, made war upon him, and
forced him to fly into Holland for aid, but could not prevail; and forthwith
there was an other preferred in his room, and all was quiet.

A house blown up with gunpowder in Fetter-lane.
On the sixteen of April about eight of the clock in the morning, a gunpowder
house in Fetter-lane, and diverse other houses near adjoining, were blown up,
with the spoil of fifteen hundred weight of powder, two men and one woman
were slain, and diverse other persons sore hurt, and some strangely saved.

Alasco of Poland.
Albertus Alasco free Baron of Lasco, Vainoide, or Palatine of Siradia in
Poland, arrived at Harwich in Essex, and on the last of April, came by water
to Winchester house in Southwarke, where he remained for the most part of his
abode here.

Elias Thacker was hanged at Saint Edmond bury in Suffolk on the fourth of
June, John Coping on the sixth for spreading certain books seditiously penned
by one Robert Brown against the Book of Common prayer, established by the
Laws of this realm.

On the ninth of July deceased Thomas Ratcliffe, Earl of Sussex, Lord
Chamberlain to her Majesty, and knight of the Garter, at Bermendsey besides
London, and was on the 28 of July, conveyed through the same city of London,
toward Newhall in Essex, there to be buried.

Edmond Grindall Doctor of Divinity, Archbish. of Canterbury deceased.
Archbishop of Canterbury, deceased in Croydon, in Surrey, on the 6 of July,
and was there buried.

Barnard Randolph Esquire, common Sergean of the city of London, deceased on
the 7 of August. This man in his lifetime, delivered to the company of the
Fish-mongers in London, the sum of nine hundred pounds, Justice Randolph his
charity of 900 pounds.
to be employed toward the conducting of Thames water, cesterning the same in
Lead, and castleying with stone in the Parishes of Saint Mary Magdalen, and
Saint Nicholas Cold Abbey, near unto Fish-street, seven hundred pounds. The
other two hundred pounds, to pay for ever yearly the sum of ten pounds,
viz. toward the maintenance of a poor scholar in the University of Oxford,
yearly four pounds: toward the mending of the highways in the Parish of
Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex, four pounds. And to the poor people of
the Parishes of Saint Nicholas Olive in Bred-street, and Saint Mary Magdalen,
near old fish-streete, forty shillings.

More, he bequeathed to be bestowed in lands or annuitie, to the relief of the
poor, inhabiting in the Wards of Queene-hith, and castle Baynard, in the city
of London, and in the aforesaid Parish of Tisehurst, in the County of Sussex,
the sum of 1000 pounds, a fair Legacy, if it be performed.

At this time Pirates, and great Rouers troubled the Seas.
In the month of June, were sent to the seas, a ship, called the Bark Talbot,
and a small Bark, both manned with one hundred men, under the charge of William
Borough Esquire, Clerk of her Majesty's Navy, for the apprehending of certain
out-ragious sea-rouers, who for that they were many in number, and well
appointed, so boldly behaved themselves, as that shortly after, it was
confidently bruited, that they had vanquished in fight the said Ship and Bark,
but within few days after, beyond all exspectation, they were by the said W.
Borough and his company, discomfited and taken, to the number of ten sail, Sea
Rouers apprehended and executed.
whereof three prises, and some of the chief Pirates, namely T. Walton, alias
Purser, Clinton, Athinson, W. Ellis, W. Valentine, alias Bagh, T. Beuen, and
four more, on the nineteenth day of August, were hanged at Wapping. Walton as
he went to the Gallows, rent his Venetian Breeches of crimson taffata, and
distributed the same to such his old acquaintance as stood about him: but
Atkinson had before given his murrie Velvet doublet, with great gold buttons,
and his like colored Velvet Venetians, laid with great gold lace, which he had
worn at the seas of Porbeke, unto such of his friends as pleased him.

An heretic burned at Norwich.
On the 17 day of September, John Jews, who named himself Abdoit, an obstinate
Heretic, denying the Godhead of Christ, and holding diverse other detestable
heresies, was burned at Norwich.

On the 22 of September, Albertus de Lasco, Palatine of Siradia in Poland
returned.
Palatine of Siradia in Poland, after he had well viewed the order of our
English Court and Nobility, with other places of this Realm, especially, the
University of Oxford, he returned toward Poland.

On the 23 day of December, John Whitgift, Doctor Whitgift Archbish. of
Canterbury.
Doctor of Divinity, late Bishop of Worcester, was at Lambeth, translated to
the Archbishopric of Canterbury.

The 25 of September, a monstrous child was borne in Yorke-shire, having two
heads.

William Masham, John Spencer. Shrieues.


Sir Edward Osborne, Clothworker. Mayor.


The tenth of October, at Caster in Norfolk, A monstrous fish.
about two miles from Yarmouth, there was a Fish, by force of the Easterly
wind, driven ashore, the length whereof, from the neck to the tail, was,
seventeen yards and a foot, the head was great, for the chap of the iaw was
three yards and a quarter in length, An. reg 26
with teeth of three quarters of a yard compass, great eyes, and two great
holes over them, to spout water, her tail was fourteen foot broad in
thicknes, from the back to the belly, she was four yards and a half.

This year 1583, the Queen being at Barn Elmer, at the earnest suite of sir
Francis Walsingham, she entertained twelve Players into her service, Players.
and allowed them wages and liueries, as Grooms of the Chamber, and until
then she had none of her own, but diverse Lord had Players.

James Earl of Desmond in Ireland, secretly wandering without any succor,
being taken in his cabine by one of the Irish, Desmonds head set on London
bridge.
his head was cut off, and sent into England, where the same (as the head of an
Arch rebel) was set on London Bridge, on the 13 of December.

The 13 of December, through negligence of indiscreet persons, brewing in the
Town of Nantwich, Nantwich in Cheshire burnt.
the fire being carelessly left, set upon some light matter, and so burst forth
to the roofs of the house, and in short time increased, that from the West end
of the Town, the flame was dispersed so furiously, that in short space a great
part of the South side, and some of the East side, was burned down to the
ground. Which fire beginning at six of the clock in the Evening, and
continuing till six of the clock in the Morning, consumed in a manner, all
the whole town, and about the number of two hundred houses, beside
brew-houses, barnes, stables, etc. In all about 600 houses.

Someruile Arden and others arraigned.
John Someruile of Edstow in Warwickshire, of late discovered and taken in his
way, coming to have killed the Queen, confessed that he was moved thereunto
by certain traitorous persons, his kinsmen and allies, and also by often
reading of certain seditious books lately published: for the which the same
Someruile, Edward Arden Esquire, Mary Arden his wife (father and mother in Law
to the said Someruile) and Hugh Hall Priest, were on the 16 of December,
arraigned in the Guild hall of London, where they were found guilty, and
condemned of high treason.

On the 19 of December, I. Someruile, Someruile strangled himself.
and E. Arden, being brought from the Tower of London, to Newgate, and there
shut up in several places, within two hours after, Someruile was found to
have strangled himself. And on the morrow after, E. Arden was drawn from
Newgate, into Smithfield, and there hanged, Arden executed.
bowelled and quartered: whose head with Someruiles, was set on London Bridge,
and his quarters on the gates of the City.

On the 10 of January, William Carter was arraigned and condemned of high
treason, Carter executed for printing of traiterous books
for printing a seditious and traitorous book, entitled, A Treatise of
schism, and was for the same on the next morrow, drawn from Newgate to
Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, and forthwith a book was
published, entitled, A Declaration of the favorable dealing of her Majesty's
Commissioners, etc.

The 7 of February, Five executed for treason.
were arraigned at Westminster, I. Fenne, George Hadocke, I. Munden, I, Nutter,
and Thomas Hemerford, all five were found guilty of high treason, and had
judgment to be hanged, bowelled, and quartered, and were executed at Tiburne,
on the 12 of February.

1584. Throgmorton executed.
The 21 of May, Francis Throgmorton Esquire, was arraigned in the Guild Hall of
the city of London, where being found guilty of high treason, he was condemned,
and had judgment to be drawn, hanged, bowelled and quartered. The tenth of
July next following, the same Francis Throgmorton was conuayed by water, from
the Tower of London, to the Black Friars stairs, and from thence by land to
the Sessions hall in the old Baily, without Newgate, where he was delivered to
the Shrieues of London, laid on a hurdle, drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged
and quartered.

Antwerpe besieged, and yielded to the Duke of Parma.
This year 1584, the rich and most flourishing City of Antwerpe, was strongly
besieged by Alexander Duke of Parma, with eleven thousand men: All which was in
vain, except he could stop all relief by water, therefore he made a Bridge
over the great River of Scheld, by means whereof, the Citizens were wholly
impeached of all manner of succor, so as they were constrained to submit
themselves again to the King of Spain government, having endured a years
siege: during which time, Citizens become resolute soldiers.
five hundred gallant Merchants, at their own charges, became resolute
Soldiers, skirmishing daily with the enemy, until by their own
forwardness, and the chance of war, they were either slain or taken.

Stephen Slanie, Henry Billingsley. Shrieues.


Sir Thomas Pullison, Draper. Mayor.


The 12 of November, An. reg. 27
the Queen (returning after her Progress) came to her Manor of S. James,
where the Citizens of London, to the number of two hundred, in coats of
Velvet, and chains of gold, on horseback, and 1000 of the Companies on foot,
(having torches ready, to give light on every side, received and welcomed her.
And on the twenty four day of the same month, her Majesty and the Lords, rode
to the Parliament, which was that day begun at Westminster.

In the month of January deceased Edward Fines, Lord Clinton, Earl of
Lincoln, Earl of Lincoln deceased.
and Lord Admiral of England, Knight of the Garter, and one of her Majesty's
privy Council, and was buried at Windsor.

The 21 of January, Jesuits, Seminaries, and massing Priests banished.
Seminaries, and other Massing Priests, to the number of 21, late prisoners in
the Tower of London, Marshalsey, and Kings Bench, were shipped at the Tower
Wharfe, to be conveyed toward France, and banished this Realm for ever.

Henry Earl of Darby, Earl of Darby Ambassador into France.
appointed by her Majesty, Ambassador to Henry, the third French King, to
inuest him with the order of the Garter, on the 26 of January passed with his
train from London to Grauesend, and from thence to Dover, where they embarked
and landed at Calleis on the first of February, and returning again, landed at
Dover on the 11 of March.

W. Parry executed.
The second of March, W. Parry was drawn from the Tower, through the city of
London, to Westminster, and there in the Palace Court, hanged and quartered for
high treason, as may appear by a book, entitled, A true and plain
declaration, of the horrible treasons, practiced by William Parry, etc. he was
a cunning Traitor.

This year, sir Walt. Mildmay Knight, one of her Majesty's privy Council,
founded a College in the University of Cambridge, and named it Emanuel
college. Emanuel College founded.


1585. Parliament dissolved.
The twenty nine of March, the Parliament was dissolved, at the breaking up
whereof, her Majesty in the Parliament house, made an Oration, as ye may read
in my larger labors.

About the 24 of April, by commandment from har Majesty, the citizens of
London appointed out of the companies of the same city, to the number of four
thousand men with armor ensigns, etc. the greater part whereof were shot,
Citizens of London trained up with shot.
the other were pikes and halbarts in fair corslets, all these were trained up
under expert Captains, and other officers, who mustered and skirmished daily
at the Miles end, or in Saint Georges field, and on the 18 of May, mustred in
the Park of Greenewich, and skirmished before the Queens Majesty, who gave
them thanks.

The 25 of April, Earl of Arundell sent to the Tower.
Philip Howard Earl of Arundell, was brought to the tower of London, for
attempting to have passed beyond the Seas, without license of the Queen.

On the twentieth of June, Henry Percy, Earl of Northumberland, prisoner in the
tower of London, upon vehement suspicion of high treason, was found there to
have murdered himself, as more at large in a larger book I have set down.

The 26 of June, arrived at London, The sovereignty of the Low Countries
presented to her Majesty, and a pedigree drawn to prove the Q' title to those
provinces by descent.
Deputies for the States of the Netherlands, who were lodged about the Tower
street, and had their diet worshipfully appointed at the charges of her
Majesty, in the Clothworkers hall. Those on the 29 of June, repaired to the
Court then at Greenewich, where they presented to her Majesty, the sovereignty
of those countries.

The 4 of July, Charles, Lord Howard, late Lord Chamberlain, was made Lord
Admiral: and Henry, Lord Hunsdon, was made Lord Chamberlain of the household.

The 5 of July, T. Awfield Seminary Priest, Awfild and Welby executed.
and T. Welby Dyer, were arraigned at London, found guilty, and had judgment to
be hanged, as Felons, for publishing of books, containing false, seditious,
and slanderous matter: these were on the next morrow executed at Tiburne.

The sixteenth of July, Sir Francis Russel Knight, Lord Russell, third son to
Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford, was slain with a dagge in the borders of
Scotland, beside Barwicke, by a Scot, as they met upon a truce day. On the next
morrow, Francis Russell, Earl of Bedford, Knight of the Garter, and one of her
Majesty's privy Council, Father to the late named Sir Francis Lord Russell,
slain on the borders of Scotland, Earl of Bedford deceased.
deceased, and was honorably buried at Cheineies in Bedford-shire.

Soldiers transported into the Low Countries by commission.
In the month of July, Soldiers were pressed in the City of London, and being
furnished for the wars, at the charges of the companies, set forth toward
the Seas, on the 13 of August, and were transported over into Holland, Zeland,
etc. as other the like Sruldiers, out of other parts of the Realm before had
been.

Ground and trees sunk.
On the fourth of August, at the end of the Town called Motingham, in Kent, 8
miles from London, the ground began to sink, three great Elmes being swallowed
up, and driven into the earth, past man's sight.

The fourteenth of September, Sir Francis Drake General, as well by ses, as by
land, Christopher Carlisle Esquire, Lieuetenant General, Martine Frobisher,
with diverse other Gentlemen Captains, and two thousand and three hundred
Soldiers and Sailers in twenty two Ships and Pinesses, departed from
Plymouth: and passing by the Isles of Bayon, and the Canaries, arrived at Saint
Iago, which city they took and burned: after, they sailed to Saint Domingo,
which they spoiled and ransomed: from thence to Cartagena, which they also
took, spoiled and ransomed: and retiring homewards, razed and burned the city
and Fort of S. Augustine, in Terra florida, and the 27 of July, in Anno 1586,
arrived at Plymouth: their soldiers and sailors got but small spoil.

The nineteenth of September, Seminary Priests banished.
to the number of two and thirty Seminary Massing Priests, and other late
prisoners in the Tower of London, Marshalsey, Kings Bench, and other places,
were embarked, to be transported over into the costs of Normandy, to be
banished for ever.

Antony Ratcliffe, Shrieues.
Henry Pranell

Sir Wolstone Dixie, Skinner. Mayor.


In the months of November and December, many men and horses were shipped at
the Tower wharfe, to be transported over into the Low countries.

The 2 of December, An. reg. 28
Frederick Lord Windsor, deceased at Westminster, The Earl of Leicester
Lieutenant general of the Low countries.
and was honorably buried at Bradenham, in Buckinghamshire.

And on the sixth of December, the Lord Robert Dudley, Earl of Leicester, Lord
Lieutenant General, with his train, entered the Town of Colchester in Essex,
where he lodged at the house of sir Thomas Lucas, on the next day he set
forward to Harwich: and on the eight of December, the said Earl, accompanied
with the Earl of Essex, the Lord North, the Lord Audley, sir W. Russell, sir
Thomas Sherley, sir Arthur Basset, sir Walter Waller, sir Geruaise Clifton, and
other with his train, to the number of 50 sails of ships and hoyes, set
forward toward Vlushing, where, by sir Philip Sidney Governor, and others, he
was honorably entertained, as he was the like into all other towns of the Low
countries.

The Queen took order for the peopling and inhabiting of the countries, late
belonging to the Earl of Desmond, to which end, diverse honorable and
worshipful Gentlemen, provided to be undertakers of signories there, whereof
some went into the said Country, others according to order taken, sent their
people, among which were, Desmond in Ireland, peopled of the English nation.
Sir Christopher Hatton, sir Walter Rawleigh, sir William Courtney, sir Richard
Molinox, sir George Bourchire, sir Edward Fitton, sir Valentine Brown, sir
Walter Luson, John Popham, her Majesty's Atturny General, and others.

The nineteen of January, Nicholas Deuorox, alias Wodson, was condemned for
treason, Order for plantation in Ireland.
in being made Priest at Reymes in France. Also Edward Barbat, being made
Priest as aforesaid, and coming into this Realm, was likewise condemned of
treason, and both drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered,
on the one and twentieth of January.

On the same day, Archbish^ of Canterbury called to be of the privy Coun-
a Wench was burnt in Smithfield, for poisoning of her Aunt and Mistrisse, and
attempting the like to her Uncle.

On the feast day of the purification of our blessed Lady, Doctor John
Whitegift, Archbishop of Canterbury, William Lord Cobham, Warden of the five
Ports, and Thomas, Lord Burckburst, were chosen and taken to be of her
Majesty's privy Council: the two first were sworn on that day, and the third
on the next morrow.

The eleventh of February, T. L. lost his ears for treacherously practicing to
enjoy the goods and lands of his natural kinsmen.
Thomas Louelace was brought prisoner from the Tower of London, to the
Star Chamber, against whom her Majesty's Attorney did inform, that the same
Louelace, upon malice conceived against Leonard Louelace, and Richard Louelace,
his cousin germans, had falsely and deuilishly contrived and counterfeited a
very traitorous Letter in the name of Thomas Louelace (another brother of the
said Leonard and Richard, then resident beyond the Seas) purporting that the
same Thomas should thereby incite and provoke the said Leonard, to procure the
said Richard, to execute her Highness destruction, with other circumstances of
treason.

This Letter he cast in an open highway, pretending thereby, that upon the
discovery thereof, his said kinsmen Leonard and Richard, should be drawn in
question for the treasonable matter against, her Majesty in that bill
contained, even in the highest degree, for which offense, her Majesty's
Attorney prayed, that the said Thomas, then prisoner, might receive condign
punishment. A notable and praiseworthy ensample of Justice.
Whereupon the Court adjudged him, that he should be remitted to the Tower,
from whence he came. That he should be carried on horseback about Westminster
hal, with his face to the horsetaile, and a paper on his back, wherein to be
written: For counterfeiting of false and treacherous Letters against his own
kindred, containing most traiterous matters against her Majesty's person. And
from thence to be carried in that manner, and set on the pillory in the Palace at
Westminster, and there to have one of his ears cut off, also to be carried in
like manner into London, and set on the pillory on market day in Cheap, with
the like paper. And after that, carried into Kent, and at the next Assise there,
to be set on the pillory with the like paper, and his other ear to be cut off:
also to be set on the pillory, one market day at Canterbury, and another at
Rochester in the like manner, and at every the said places: this order taken
touching this offense openly read, the sentence whereof was duly executed.

Strange sickness at Excester.
The 14 of March, at the Assizes kept at the City of Excester in Devonshire
before Sir Edmond Anderson, L. chief Justice of the common pleas, Sergeant
Floriday, one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and other Justices, there
happened a strange sickness: first, amongst the prisoners, and then amongst
other persons, and beside the prisoners, many of all degrees died thereof,
namely Serieant Floriday, Sir John Chichester, Sir Arthur Basset, and Sir
Bernard Drake Knights, Tho. Carew, Richard Carry, I. Fortescue, I Waldran, and
Tho. Risdone Esquires, and Justices of the peace: of the common people died,
very many Constables, Reues, Tithmen, and Jurors, and namely of one Jury being
twelve of them, died eleven.

The seventeen of March a strange thing happened, Master Dorington of
Spaldwickt, A strange worm found in the heart of a horse.
in the County of Huntington Esquire, one of her Majesty's Gentlemen
Pentioners, had a horse which died suddenly, and being ripped to see the cause
of his death, there was found in the hole of the heart of the same horse, a
strange worm, which lay on a round heap, in a Call or skin, in the
likeness of a Toade, which being taken out and spread abroad, was in form
and fashion not easy to be described, the length of which worm, divided into
many grains, to the number of 50, spread from the body, like the branches of a
tree) was from the snout to the end of the longest grain, 17 inches, having
four issues in the grains, from whence dropped forth a red water, the body in
bigness round about, was 3 inches and a half, the color whereof was very like
to a mackarell. This monstrous worm found in manner aforesaid, crawling to have
got away, was stabbed in with a dagger, and died, which after being dried, was
showed to many honorable persons of the Realm.

1586. Seminary Priests executed
The 18 of April, in the Sises holden at London, in the Justice hall, William
Tompson, made Priest at Reymes in France, and remaining within this Realm, was
condemned of treason. Also Richard Lea, made Priest at Lions, was likewise
there condemned, which said William and Thomas, were both on the twentieth of
April, drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled, and quartered.

Sir Henry Sidney deceased.
The first of May sir Henry Sidney, knight of the Garter, Lord president of
Wales, departed this life, and was honorably buried at Penshurst in Kent.

Ambassadors from the K. of Denmark.
The 8 of May, arrived at London on the Tower Wharfe, Henry Ramelius, Chancellor
for Germany, Ambassador from Frederick the second King of Denmark, unto the
Queens Majesty of England, he was honorably received of the Lord Talbot, the
Lord Cobham, and other great estates, and by them conuayed through Tower
street, Fanchurch street, and Grace-street, into Bishops-gate street, to
Crosby place, where he remained till he had finished his Embassage, and
returned on the thirtieth of May toward Denmark.

Wolston Dixie Mayor, 1586, founded a free school at Bosworth, in
Leichestershire, endowed with twenty pound land by year and better: more, he
gave to the governors of Emanuel College in Cambridge, 600 pounds to buy land,
for the mainteinance of two scholarships, and two fellowships there, the
scholars to come forth of Bosworth school: he gave also toward the erecting of
Emmanuel College 50 pounds, to Christ's hospital in London, 42 pounds the
year for ever, toward the Divinity lecture, to S. Michaell bassings hall in
London 10 pounds the year for ever. Unto his company of Skinners, 500 pounds,
to be lent unto young men of that company, viz. 200 pounds to four young men
merchant Adventurers for 3 year, at 3 pounds 6 shillings, 8 pence the year,
and three hundred pounds to ten other, after the same rate, part of the profits
to be spent in coals yearly to the poor of Saint Michaels parish, Basing hall,
for ever. To Saint Bartholmewes hospital, and Saint Thomas hospital 50. l. to
each. The poor of Bridewell 20. l. To the poor of Newgate 20. l. To the poor
of the Compters 10. l. to each, to Ludgate 10. l. To Bethlem 10. l. To the
four prisons in Southwarke 20. pounds thirteen shillings and four pence. To
poor maids marriages 100. l. To poor strangers of the Dutch and French
Churches 50. li. To the poor of Basings-hall 10. l. To the poor Eling in
Middlesex, four pounds. And 200. toward building of the Pesthouse.

The 17. The Earl of Arundel censured in the Star Chamber.
of May Philip Earl of Arundell was conuaied from the Tower of London to
Westminster, and there in the Star Chamber, by the Counsel condemned to pay
10000. l. fine for his contempt, and to remain in prison at the Queens
pleasure.

League with the King of Scots.
A Commission was erected from her Majesty, tending to the ratifying of a firm
League of amity, between her Majesty and James King of Scots, which League
being articuled, Commissioners were appointed, Edward Earl of Rutland, W. Lord
Euers and T. Randolph Esquire, who with their Train came to Barwicke on the
19. of June, were the Ambassadors of Scotland being present, they accomplished
the matter, according to the commission, the Articles of the said league in all
and every part sufficiently confirmed on 1. of July, which being done, the said
Earl of Rutland with his train returned home. Master Randolph went into
Scotland to take his leave of the King and returned into England.

Captains of the artillery garden, other wise called London Captains.
This year 1586. certain Merchants and other gallant active Citizens at their
own proper charges only for their countries service and defense, practiced
weekly diverse feats of Arms, and by orderly course every man bare al degrees
of Offices from the corporal to the captain: and when they had by usual
practice attained unto some perfection with observation of Martial discipline,
then they trained the common soldiers of the City and taught them the managing
of their pieces, pikes, and halbeards, to march, countermarch, and ring: this
president was taken from the Merchants of Antwerp.

The 18. of June Henry Elkes clarke, for counterfeiting the Queens sign
manuell, Elkes executed for counterfeiting the Q. sign manuell,
to a presentation of the personage of all Saints in Has^ings, directed to the
Archbishop of Canterbury, or to his Comissary general (the Diocese of
Chichester doing void) that he might be institued Parson there, was drawn to
Tiburne and there hanged and quartered.

A Lottery for marvelous rich and beautiful Armor, A lottery at London for
rich armor.
was begun to be drawn at London in Paul's Church yeard, at the great West gate
(an house of timber and board being there erected for that purpose) on Saint
Peter and Paul's day in the morning, which Lottery continued in drawing, day and
night for the space of two or three days.

Tho. Tho. Candish his voyage.
Candish having of his own charges built and furnished for two years
provision, a ship called the Desire, of 140. tun, and a less of 60. tuns,
named the Content joining thereto a bark of 40. tuns named Galliane, in which
fleet were 125 men, set sail from Plimoth on the 21 of July, and began his
voyage about the Globe of the earth, which voyage he finished in the space of
two years and less then two months, as ye may read in R. Hacluyt.

In the month of July, Great reioicing in London for apprehension of traitors.
diverse traitorous persons were apprehended, and detected of most wicked
conspiracy against her Majesty, and also of minding to have stirred up a
general rebellion throughout the whole Realm. For joy of whose apprehension,
the Citizens of London on the 15 of the same month at night, and on the next
morrow caused the Bells to be rung, and bone fires to be made, and also
banqueted every man according to his ability, some in their houses, some in the
streets, with singing of Psalms and prasing God for preserving of her Majesty,
and people of this Land: which doings of the Citizens were so well accepted of
her Majesty, as by her letters to them directed may appear.

Traitors indicted.
The seventh of September certain of these wicked Subjects were indicted, first
for intending Treason against the Queens own person, secondly, for stirring
civil wars within the Realm, and thirdly for practicing to bring in foreign
power to invade the Realm, 7 of them appeared at Westminster, on the
thirteenth of September, who all pleaded guilty, and were condemned.

On the fifteenth of September, other 7 were likewise arraigned, who pleaded
not guilty, were found guilty by the Jury, and had judgment.

These traitors 14 in number were executed in Lincolnes Inn fields, on a stage
or scaffold of timber strongly made for that purpose, even in the place where
they had used to meet, Traitors executed.
and to confer of their traitorous practices, there were they hanged bowelled
and quartered, seven of them on the 20 of September, to wit, I. Ballard Priest,
A. Babington Esquire, I. Savage gentleman, R. Barnewell, gentleman, Chidirke
Tichborne Esquire, Charles Tilney Esquire, E. Abington Esquire. The other 7
were likewise executed on the 21 of September, to wit, T. Salisbury Esquire,
Henry Dunne Gentlemen, Edward Jones Esquire I. Trauarse gentleman, I. Charnocke
Gentleman, R. Gage gentleman, Jerome Belamie gentleman etc.

The twenty two of September, Sir Philip Sidney wounded, and died thereof.
sir Philip Sidney knight, a most valiant and towardly gentleman, son and
heir to sir Henry Sidney late deceased, in service of his Prince and defense
of his country, in the wars of the Netherlands, was shot into the thigh with
a musket, at Zutphen in Gelderland, whereof he died on the 17 of October, whose
body was conuaied into England, and on the 16 of February conuaied from the
Minories without Algate of London through the principal streets of the same
City, accompanied of many honorable persons unto S. Paul's Church and there
honorably buried, the Captains of the Artillery Garden being 250 in number,
all in mourning habit, accompanied the Corpse to Church, these Captains at this
time flourished.

The eight of October, John Low, Seminary Priests executed.
John Adams, and Richard Dibdaile, being before condemned for Treason in being
made Priest by authority of the Bishop of Rome, were drawn to Tiburne and
there hanged bowelled and quartered.

Robert House, William Elkin. Shrieues.


Sir George Barnes, Haberdasher. Mayor.


Ludgate at London new builded.
One of the West gates of the City of London, commonly called Ludgate, being
sore decayed, and in peril to have fallen, was taken down, the prisoners
thereof in the mean time remaining, in the Southeast quadrant, to the same
gate adjoining; which quadrant, for the ease of the prisoners was sometimes
builded by Stephen Forstar, Fishmonger, Mayor, and Dame Agnes his wife, etc.
And this year the said gate was again not only newly, but also strongly and
beautifully builded at the charges of the Citizens of the same City. The
foundation whereof in the name and presence of Sir Wolston Dixie Mayor,
certain Aldermen, Anthony Radcliefe, and Henry Prannel shrieues, was laid on
the second of May, and forthwith so diligently applied, that the same gate was
fully finished in the space of six months or less, so that on the twenty
nine of October in the same year the said gate was set open to Sir William
Cecill Knight Lord Treasurer, who first entered the same on horseback,
accompanied of the Earl of Darby, and diverse other honorable persons and
noble men of her Majesty's privy Counsel, who all rode to the Guild hall,
where, on the same day George Barn Lord Mayor of that City kept his feast,
after he had taken his oath and charge in the Exchequer at Westminster.

On the same 29 of October the Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Treasurer and
the Earl of Darby, Parliament at West.
representing the Queens Majesty's person, began the high Court of Parliament
by proie, which Session of Parliament was at this state assembled for trial of
matters concerning Mary Queen of Scots etc. The 23 of November the Earl of
Leicester, Lieutenant general of her Majesty's forces in the united Provinces
of the Low countries, returning from thence arrived at London.

The second day of December the Parliament was proroged until the 15 of
February: Parliament against the Queen of Scots.
the substance of matter handled in the same Session of Parliament, concerning
the Queen of Scots is set down in a letter learnedly penned, and published,
directed to the Earl of Leicester.

The 6 of December, Proclamation against the Queen of Scots.
the Lord Mayor of London, assisted with diverse Earls, Barons, the Aldermen in
their scarlet, the principallest officers of the City, the greatest number of
Gentlemen of the best account in and about the City, with the number of eighty
of the grauest Citizens in coats of velvet and chains of gold, all on
horseback in most solemn and stately manner, by sound of four Trumpets,
about ten of the clock in the forenoone, made open and public proclamation
and declaration of the sentence lately given by the Nobility against the Queen
of Scots, under the great Seal of England, bearing date at Richmond the fourth
of December, being openly read by Master Sebright, Towne-Clarke of London, and
with loud voice solemnly proclaimed by the Serieant at Arms of the said
City, in four several places, to wit, at the Cros^ Cheap, at the end of
Chancery lane in F^ street, over against the Temple, at Leaden^ corner, and at
S. Magnus corner near Lon^ bridge; during which time, like solemn ^clamations
were made with great solemnity the country of Middlesex, namely in the Palace
at Westminster, without Temple Bar^ in Holborne, by the Shrieues of London
(...) Middlesex, assisted with sundry Noblemen (...) Gentlemen of good account,
and the Justice ^ Peace of the said country, to the great and w^derfull
rejoicing of the people, as it seem^ ringing of bells, making of bonefires, and
^ing of Psalms.

The Queens Majesty foreseeing the g^rall dearth of corn and other victuals,
grow partly through the unseasonableness of (...) years past, partly through
the vncharita^ greediness of such as be great corn maste^ but especially
through the unlawful and (...) much transportation of grain into for^
countries, by the advice of her honour^ Council, published a proclamation, and
b^ of orders, to be taken by her Justices, for reli^ of the poor,
notwithstanding all which, the ^^cessiue prices of grain still increased, so
(...) wheat and meal was sold at London for (...) the bushel, and in some
other parts of t^ Realm dearer.

The 8 of February being Wednesday accor^ding to sentence lately given by the
nobili^ Mary Steward Queen of Scots, Queen of Scots after 19 years
imprisonment in Scotland and England was beheaded.
about ten of the Clock before noone, was executed and suffered death, by
beheading upon a scaffold set up for that purpose, at the great Hall of the
Castle of Fodringay, in the presence of George Talbet Earl of Shrewsburie,
Henry Gray Earl of Kent, principal Commissioners, and others the Gentlemen of
the Country near adjoining, to the number of about 300, all her apparel was
burned, but her body with the head was royally buried at Peterborow, on the
first day of August next following.

The 15 of February the Parliament began at Westminster, Parliament at
Westminster.
wherein was granted to her Majesty toward her charges for the defense of this
Realm, a subsidy by the Clergy of 6 shillings the pound, and of the temporalty
two shillings eight pence goods, and four shillings lands, with two fifteenes
etc.

Monday the twenty four of February a man hanged for felony at Saint Thomas
of Waterings being begged by the Chirurgions of London, to have made of him an
Anatomy, after he was dead to all men's thinking, cut down, stripped, laid
naked in a Chest, thrown in a Carre, and so brought from the place of
execution through the Borow of Southwarke, A man revived after he had been
executed.
and the city of London, to the Chirurgions hall, near unto Aldersgate, the
chest being there opened and the weather extreme cold, he was found to be
alive, and lived till thursday next following, and then died.

The twenty three of February a gunpowder house at Radriffe was blown up with
much harm.

Sir Thomas Bromley knight, Lord Chancellor of England, deceased on the 12 of
April, and was buried at Westminster.

The first making of great round Globes.
This year 1587, Master William Sanderson of London Fishmonger, attained the
perfection of making the great round globes, viz. Celestial and Terrestrial.

On the 16 of April, deceased the Duchess of Somerset at Hanworth, and was
buried at Westminster.

Ea^le of Rutland deceased.
Edward Earl of Rutland, Knight of the Garter, departed this life at London on
the 18 of April, and was very honorably conuaied from thence to his Castle of
Beauoyre, and buried in the Parish Church at Bettifford.

The 29 of April, Sir Christopher Hatton knight late Vicechamberlaine, and one
of her Majesty's privy Counsel, Sir Christopher Hatton L. Chancellor.
was made Lord Chancellor of England at Croidon, and on the 3 day of May, being
the first day of the term, he rode from Ely place in Holborne to Westminster,
there to take his oath, before whom went about the number of forty, his
gentlemen in one livery and chains of gold, diverse Pentioners and other
Gentlemen of the Court upon footclothes, the officers and Clerks of the
Chancery, and then the Lord Chancellor, having on his right hand the Lord
Treasurer, and on the left hand the Earl of Leicester, after whom rode
certain of the Nobility, the Judges of the Realm, and many knights.

The 22 of May was published by proclamation an order, Clothes to be
transported generally.
granted by the Queen in favor of her Subjects, for the transporting of
clothes out of the Realm, to wit, that the Merchants of the Stilyard resident
in London, and all other Merchants, strangers, or other of the realm, may buy
of the Clothiers, any cloth unwrought, vnbarbed or unshorn, and shall have
full liberty to ship and carry away out of the port of London, any such
clothes: and further, that all Merchants, strangers, and English, that shall
not have liberty to buy clothes at Blackwell-hall, or within the liberties of
the City of London, may buy all manner of clothes, in the City of Westminster.

The 18 of June Robert Earl of Leicester was made Lord Steward of the
household, and Robert Deuorex Earl of Essex, was made master of her Majesty's
horse.

The fifteen of June Robert Earl of Leicester took shipping at Margate in
Kent, toward the Low Countries, where he remained not long but returned.

This years was a late spring, and a cold Summer, A strange backward spring.
so that at Midsomer Peason in the cods were sold at London for 8 pence the
pecke, yet after were plenty, no cherries ripe till Saint Iames-tide or Lammas,
and then such plenty that they were sold for a penny the pound.

The 7 of September sir Thomas Henage was made Vicechamberlaine.

Shrieues.
Thomas Skinnet, John Catcher.

Mayor.
Sir George Bond Haberdasher.

An. reg. 30
Richard May Merchant-tailor lately deceased, gave to the Chamber of London 300
pou^ds, toward the new building of the Blackwell Hal, which at length took
effect.

Upon this gift the said Blackwell hall was taken down, Blackwell hall.
a new foundation was laid, and within the space of ten months after, with
the charges of 2500 l. the same was finished.

1588
Great provision was made this year both by Land and Sea, to withstand the
invasion by the Spanish Armado against the Realm, for besides the general
forces of the Realm appointed to be mustered, trained, and put in readiness
in the several shires, for the defense of the land there was also a leauy made
of two several armies, the one to make the body of a camp to reside at
Tilbury in Essex, Camp at Tilbury.
to encounter with the Enemy, if he should attempt to land in any place of that
country, whereof the Earl of Leicester, Lord Steward of her Majesty's household
was Lieutenant General, as also of the Armies levied against foreign
invasion. The other to be employed for the guard of her highness person, under
the charge of the right Honorable the Lord Hunsden, Lord Chamberlain to her
Majesty. The camp at Tilbury, consisting both of horsemen and footmen,
raised out of all the shires, were of Lancers 253, of light horsemen 769, of
footmen 22000. the army for the guard of her Majesty's person, Lances 481,
light horsemen 1431. footmen 34050. The Navy set forth and armed to the seas,
consisted partly of her Majesty's ships, partly of the ships of her subjects,
which were furnished out of the Port towns whereunto they belonged, of this
Navy, the chiefest and greatest part was under the charge of the Lord Charles
Howard of Effingham, Lord Admiral of England, and were addressed to encounter
with the Spanish Fleet: the rest of the ships were assigned unto the Lord Henry
Seimer, Admiral of the Fleet to guard the narrow Seas, and to impeach the
issuing forth of the ships and vessels, prepared by the Duke of Parma at
Dunkirke.

The 23 of May, the Lord Admiral came to Plymouth with the Fleet aforesaid,
finding there Sir Francis Drake in a readiness with more then 50 ships and
pinnaces. The 24 of June the Lord Admiral issued out toward the Sea from
Plimmouth: he divided her Majesty's Fleet into three parts, viz. Sir Francis
Drake Vice Admiral in the Revenge with other, toward the Islands of Silly,
John Hawkens Rere-Admirall in the Victory, with other toward the Isles of
Vshent: And the Lord Admiral with the rest, remaining in the sleeue, appointed
other there, all to discern, if the Spanish forces did any way pass.

The 19 of July, intelligence was brought to the Lord Admiral by a pyrate
Pinnis, whose captain was Thomas Fleming, that the Spanish Fleet was seen in
the sea.

The 20 of July, the Lord Admiral made toward the Sea, and the same day had
sight of the Spanish Fleet, in number by estimation 158 sails. The Lord
Admiral cast about toward the Land to interrupt them from approaching, and
having got the wind of them, prosecuted them all that night, and so
continually, from place to place, until the second of August, in which space
having by the power GOD wonderfully overcome them, he returned to Margate in
Kent. Now the Camp being kept at Tilbury in Essex, Her majesty went to the
Camp at Tilbury.
under the charge of the Earl of Leicester, the ninth of August her Majesty
repaired thither; where all the whole Camp being set in order of Battle, she
passed through every rank of them, to their great rejoicing, and lodged that
night, and the night following, in the house of Master Edward Rich a Justice in
the Parish of Hornedon. On the next morrow her Majesty returned to the Camp,
and on the twelfth returned to Saint James, and shortly after the Camp was
dissolved.

Sermon of thanksgiving.
Sunday the 20 of August Master Nowell Deane of Paul's, at Paul's Cross, in the
presence of the Lord Mayor, the Aldermen in Scarlet, the Companies in their
liueries, preached, moving them to give land unto God, for the great victory
given to our English Nation, by the overthrow of the Spanish Fleet.

The 26 of August, Seminaries and others executed.
at the Sessions hall near unto Newgate, were condemned 8 persons, for being
made Priests beyond the Seas, and remaining in this Realm contrary to a
Statute; four Temporal men for being reconciled to the Romish Church, and
four other for relieuing the others. The 28 W. Deane and H. Welby were hanged
at the Miles end, W. Hunter, R. Morton, and Hugh More at Lincolnes Inn fields,
T. Acton at Clarken well, T. Fulton, and James Clarkeson, between Brainford
and Hounslow. The 30 Richard Flower, G. Shesley, Richard Leigh, Richard Martin,
John Roch, and Margaret Ward gentlewoman, who had conveyed a cord to a Priest
in Bridewell, whereby he escaped from thence, were hanged at Tiborne.

This year 1588, The transferring of the Greek patriarch from Greece into
Russia.
the Patriarch of the Greek Church came from Chyo, alias Syo in Greece, unto
the City Mosco in Russia, and for a certain sum of money resigned all his
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction, state, style, and dignity, unto the Metropolitan
of Mosco and his successors for ever, which done, the old Patriarch left Mosco,
and in his return toward Grecia, the Turks robbed him of all his treasure,
and slew him. A just reward for his cowardice and covetousness.

The 2 of September at night, a vehement fire brake forth against the Dutch
Church in London, to the great terror of the whole City, but by the burning of
one house, and pulling down of some other the fire was quenched.

The 4 of September, deceased Robert Dudley Earl of Leicester, Earl of
Leicester deceased.
Lord Steward of her Majesty's household, lieutenant general, and Marshal of
England, at Cornebury in Orfordshire, from whence he was conuaied to his
Castle of Kenelworth, and from thence to Warwick, where he was honorably
interred. He had in his town of Warwick, founded one Hospital of an old
guilde, given him by the towns for twelve poor men, endowing the same with
lands to the yearly value of 200. pound, and fifty load of Wood out of
Killingworth Park, and gave to the same Hospital, by his Testament, 200
pounds in money, for a stock: he was extreme tyrannous in authority.

Banners taken from the Spaniards showed at Paul's Cross.
Vhe 8 of September, the Preacher of Paul's Cross moved the people to give God
thanks for the overthrow of our enemies the Spaniards, and there were showed
11 ensigns or banners, takn in the Spanish ships by our men, and on the next
morrow hanged on London bridge toward Southwarke, where then the Fair was
kept, being our Lady day.

Shrieues.
Hugh Offley, Richard Saltonstall.

Mayor.
Sir Martin Calthorp Drapor.

Seminary Priests executed.
The 5 of October John Welden and William Hartley made Priests in France were
hanged, the one at Miles end, the other at Holliwell; Robert Sutton, for being
reconciled to the Church of Rome was hanged at Clarkenwell.

The 8 of October at night was burnt one stable with horses about the number of
twenty at Drury house, near to the Strand. Stable and horses burnt. An. reg. 32


The 19 of November was this year kept holy day throughout the Realm, with
sermons, singing of Psalms, Bone fires, etc. for joy and thanksgiving unto
God, for the overthrow of the Spaniards, our enemies on the sea, and the
Citizens of London assembled in their Liueries that day at a Sermon at Paul's
Cross tending to that end.

The 24 of November being Sunday, the Queens Majesty having attendants upon
her, The Qu. Majesty came to Palus.
the Priuy-Counsel, Nobility and other honorable persons, as well spiritual as
temporal in great number, all on horse back, did come in a chariot throne,
made with four pillars behind to have a Canopy, on the top whereof was made a
crown imperial, and two lower pillars before, whereon stood a Lion and a
Dragon, supporters of the Arms of England, drawn by two white steeds from
Somerset house, to the Cathedral Church of Saint Paul etc. At the temple
Bar, the Lord Mayor and his Brethren the Aldermen in Scarlet received and
welcomed her Majesty to her city, delivering to her hands the Scepter, which
her Highness delivered to the Mayor, who bare the same before her. The
Companies in their Liueries stood along to Paul's Church, where at the great
west door she dismounted about 12 of the clock, and was received under a canopy
by the Bishop of London, the Deane and others of the Clergy, to the number of
more then 50. all in rich Coapes, and by them brought to a Closet, toward, the
Pulpit Cross, where she heard a Sermon made by Doctor Pierce, Bishop of
Salisbury, and then returned to the Bishops Palace, where she dined, and
returned to Somerset house by Torchlight.

Great wind.
The 5 of January at night, a great wind in the Northeast ouerturned trees, and
otherways did great harm in very many places.

The Qu. received into Westminster.
The 30 of January, the Queens Majesty came from Richmond to Chelrich, and so
to Westminster, and was received by the Mayor, Aldermen and commoners of her
city of London, in coats of velvet, and chains of gold, all on horseback
with the Captains of the city, betwixt 5. and 6. of the clock at night by
torchlight.

Soldiers punished for abusing their Captains.
The first of February two Soldiers were set on the Pillory at the Leaden hall,
whereon they stood by the space of three hours, the one had his ear nailed,
the other his tongue pierced with an aule, which aule remained in his tongue
till he was taken from the Pillory, for abusing their captains, and
Governors with had speeces.

A Parliament.
The 4 of February began the Parliament at Westminster.

An Heretic burned.
About this time Francis Ket, M. of Art of Wimondham, for holding diverse
detestable opinions against Christ our Savior, was burnt near to the city of
Norwich.

The 5 of February, Marshall Law.
two soldiers were hanged on trees at the Miles end, for being mutinous.

The 29 of March, being Easter Even, 1589. Parliament dissolved.
the Parliament brake up at Westminster, wherein was granted two subsidies, of
two shillings eight pence the pound the piece, four fifteenes, and a tenth.

The 14 of April, Philip, Earl of Arundell, Earl of Arundell arraigned.
was arraigned at Westminster of high treason, and found guilty by his Peers,
had judgment accordingly.

The 18 of April, Sir John Norris, and Sir Francis Drake, Generals, with six
of her Majesty's ships, 20 ships of war, and ^00 fit for burden, having in
them a choice company of Knights, Captains, Gentlememen and soldiers,
departed from Plymouth, and the 23 of the same, arrived at the Groine. The 26,
they took the lower Town, with great store of ordinance, Voyage to Portugal.
victuals, cables, and other furniture for shipping. About the 6 of May, they
fought with the Spaniards, at Borges bridges, where the enemies fled with the
loss of 700 men. The lower town of Groine was burned, and the ninth of May,
our Fleet set sail the thirteenth, the Earl of Essex, sir Philip Butler, and
sir Roger Williams met the said Fleet, so that on the sixteenth, the whole
Navy arrived at Phinicha, where they set a land, and the same day wanne both
Town and Castle. After this they divided the Army, whereof part marched with
Sir John Norris, by land, to Lisborne, the rest with Sir Francis Drake, passed
by Sea to Cascales. The twenty fourth, our men entered the suburbs of Lisborn,
where they obtained rich spoils, and plenty of every good thing. The twenty
seventh, the Army left Lisborne, and came to Cascales, without any great fight
or skirmish, where they took the castle, and thence returned for England, but
landing at Vigo, they took the town, and wasted the country.

Norris and Drake return from Portugal.
The 21 of June, sir Francis Drake arrived at Plymouth: and the third of July,
sir John Norris, with the rest of the Fleet, arrived there also, the two
Generals being offended the one with the other.

L. Mayor deceased.
The third of May, deceased Martin Calthrope Lord Mayor of London, M. Richard
Martin Alderman succeeded.

Mayor.
Richard Martin Goldsmith, the 5 of May.

Lightning and thunder.
The first of August at night, was the greatest lightning and thunder about
London, that ever was seen or heard, of any man living, and yet but small hurt
done, thanks be to God tharefere.

Sir John Norris, and sir Francis Drake being returned, as you have heard, many
of their sailers and soldiers, shortly after their landing, fell sick, and
died, of a stinch bred amongst them on shipbord, othersome of them so rudely
behaved themselves, about the country, and elsewhere, Sailers and soldiers
executed.
that diverse of them being apprehended, on the 27 of August, one of them was
hanged on the end of a sign, at an Inn door, in Kingston upon Thames, for a
terror to the rest: and on the 29 of August, two more of them were hanged in
Smithfield, two at the Towerhill, two besides Westminster, and one at Tiburne.
It was now usual with sailers and others, at their return of such voyages, to
rob, pilfer and mutiny at their arrival.

In the month of September, Soldiers sent into France.
the Citizens of London furnished 1000 men to be sent over into France, to the
aiding of Henry late King of Navarre, then challenging the Crown of France.

Richard Gurney, Stephen Some. Shrieues.


The 21 of October, Serieants feast.
Richard Martin Mayor of London, accompanied with his brethren the Alderman,
being invited guests, rode to the Serieants feast, then holden in the new
Temple hall, and at the Temple gate, the Lord Mayor was by certain young
Gentlemen, denied to enter with his sword before him, whereupon he with his
brethren returned home.

Sir John Heart Grocer, the 28 of October. Mayor.


The 6 of November, Lodowicke Griuell of Warwickshire Esquire, Lodowick Griuel
pressed to death.
was brought from the Tower of London, to Westminster, and the^^ at the Kings
bench bar, for murder, and other notorious trespasses, wherewith he was
charged, arraigned and found guilty: but standing mute, had judgment to be
pressed to death, which judgment was put to execution in the Iayle of the
Kings bench in Southwarke, An. reg. 32.
on the 14 of November, on the which day, for the same fact, his man was hanged
in the Palace court at Westminster.

Citizens of London frighted by fire.
In this month of November, the citizens of London, were sundry times
affrighted by casualtie of fire: first on the 20, about 4 of the clock in the
morning, on Fish-streete hill, where one large house was burned to the ground,
and some people, in helping to quench, were consumed, and the houses next
adjoining: also the one side of Saint Leonards Church was sore spoiled. On the
22 at night, about 11 of the clock, one other house, over against the first,
on the other side of the way, was in great danger, but soon slaked. On the
twenty sixth, about one of the clock in the morning, one other house, and some
people were burnt, on the backside of the first house burnt, and other houses
near about, were sore spoiled, etc.

Tempest of wind.
The 5 of January, about five of the clock in the evening, before twelfth day,
began a great and terrible tempest of wind in the Southwest, which continued
with great vehemence, till about eleven of the clock of the same night, this
in the city of London, blew the Tiles off men's houses, and caused them to fear
the overthrow of their houses. The lesser west gate of Saint Paul's Church, A
door of Paul's blown over.
next to the Bishops Palace, was broken, both boltes, bars and locks, so
that the same was blown over.

In the country, houses and barnes were borne over, and some blown far from
the places whereon they had stood, besides trees in great numbers, blew up by
the root. On the seas, no man can tell what harm was done. At Southhampton,
the ships and barks riding at anchor, were driven aland, and sunk, the like
was never seen.

Sir John Heart, Knight, Sir John Hearts bounty.
Alderman of London, builded a free School, in Cuccold, alias Coxold in
Yorkshire. And endowed it with thirty and five pounds a year for ever. He
likewise gave fin to Sussex, Sidney College in Cambridge, two Fellowships, and
four Schollarships, viz. forty and five pounds a year, for ever.

The 21 of February, Ambrose Dudley, Earl of Warwick deceased, and was buried
at Warwick.

This year 1589, A new kind of weauing.
was devised and perfected, the Art of knitting, or weauing of silk stockings,
Wastcoteh, Couerlets, and diverse other things by ingines, or steel Loomes, by
William Lee, sometime Master of Arts of Saint John's college of Cambridge: and
sixteen years after this, he went into France, and taught it to the French,
because he was not regarded in England.

A Wench burnt.
The 5 of March, a Wench was burned in Saint Georges field without Southwarke,
for poisoning her Mistress and other.

The Duke of Guise slain.
This year 1589, Henry Duke of Guise, and his brother the Cardinal Guise, were
both slain by commandment of the French King Henry the third. This Duke was
wonderously beloved of the Clergy, and of the Peers and commons of France: he
was also very highly esteemed of the Conclaue, and of many other foreign
Princes. The manner of his death was taken very grievously, especially by such
as had combinde themselves in league to suppress the Protestants, and prefer
the Roman Catholic Religion,

Within a while after, the said King Henry the third was also slain by a
Friar, in revenge of the death of the two brethren before named, and the Friar
himself was instantly slain by such as were about the King, who slew him with
the said enuenomed knife, wherewith he stabd the King. The French K. slain.
This Henry the third, was the last of the house of Valois. And presently upon
his death, Henry of Burbon, King of Navarre, laid just claim to the crown,
who with great difficulty, and almost eight years, sharp wars with the
Leagers, he got peaceable possession of the whole Kingdom. But at the first,
the Leagers drove him into diverse extremities, and forced him to fly into
Deep, where he was ready to have embarked for England, if the Queen had not
speedily sent a resolute Army unto him, under command of the Lord Willowby.
And from that time, the Queen aided him with diverse Armies, under the command
of the Earl of Essex, General Norris, sir Roger Williams, and many others,
besides incessant supplies, upon sudden occasions from London, Kent, Essex,
Suffolk, Surrey, Sussex, and Hamhshire, both of horse, men, and munition.

The next year following, Paris besieged.
the great and ancient City of Paris was besieged by their new King, Henry the
fourth: which City until their day of visitation, was a glorious and a
flourishing City, and the most populous of all the cities in Europe, until for
their better defense, they were constrained to pull down all their suburbs:
and albeit the siege held not full five months, yet such was the extremity of
famine unto all the inhabitants, as it may well be said to be greater and more
miserable, then either the siege of Samaria, or Jerusalem: for, after they had
eaten up all manner of herbage and carrian, and all manner of moist leather,
with whatsoever else they could get to eat, they did eat many children:
concerning which, and many other memorable and capital Accidents, you may
read more at large in my larger Chronicle. Yet since I have speken thus much of
France, I will also for thy further delight, give thee a touch of some of the
chief ancient Kings thereof. The first K. of France.
Faramond was the first King of France, in the year 431, and reigned 11
years. Clodouius, alias, Clouis, was the fifth King of France, in the year
485, he was the first King of France that was christened, he was baptized by S.
Remy, Archbishop of Reins, after diverse victories upon his enemies, and had
enlarged his territories. Pope Anastasius sent him the name and title of
Patrician and Consul, with a crown of gold, richly adorned with precious
stones. At this time, the Arrian heresy much troubled Christendom. Clotarius,
alias, Cotane, the first and seventh King of France, his son Cranus with a strong
faction, Disobedience severely punished.
rebelled against him, who^ he overthrew in battle, took him prisoner, and
burned him, his wife and children, and the chief of his servants, Pepinus,
alias, Pepin, the Brief, began in the year 750. He instituted the Parliament
at Paris. Carolus Magnus, alias, Charles le Maine, so called, for his many
noble Acts which he did, for the general good of Christendom, began his
reign in the year 800, he was King of France forty six years, and Emperor
thirteen years, and died at 71 years of age.

Vlfringhampton burnt.
On Wednesday in Easter week, by shooting of a Gunne, in the Town of
Vlfringhampton, in Staffordshire, about the number of 80 houses were burned.

Soldiers transported.
In the month of April, 3000 footmen were sent from hence into Britain in
France, under the conduct of Sir John Norris, Knight, to join with the Prince,
son of the Duke Mountpoinsier, and General of the French Kings forces in the
Province: which company, were often since supplied.

About this time, Free Schools and hospitals founded.
(as I am informed) Robert Johnson, a zealous Minister, Preacher and Parson of
Northlumffingham, in the County of Rutland, finding the poor of those
quarters, to be unprovided for, and no Grammar School erected in that country,
for edification of youth, at his own proper costs and charges, caused two
fair free Gramer Schools to be builded in Okam, and Vppingham, the two market
towns of that shire, and in each of them provided a Schoolmaster, and an
Usher: more, he caused Hospitals to be builded in the said Towns, both called
Christ's Hospital: in every of which may be placed twenty four poor people:
and for their maintenance here, he bought and procured lands of the Queen,
with a corporation and mortmaine for the same. This man has left a good
example to the other Ministers and Preachers, to the glory of God, for he
preached both by word and life, not to enrich himself, but was bountiful to
the poor, both in his own Parish, where he was married, and keeps a good
house, and also in the Town of Stamford, where he was borne: in which Town,
for many years together, he caused forty poor men's children to be taught at
his charges.

The 21 of September, being the Feast of Saint Matthew in the afternoon, was a
great stir at Lincolnes Inn, by Prentisrs, and others, against young Gentlemen
students at Law there, for some rude demeanore, late before by them done,
against the inhabitants of Chancerie Lane, which had like to have grown to
great mischief, had not the same been by wise Magistrates soon appeased: for
the uproar grew great and violent, suddenly.

Shrieues.
Nicholas Mosley, Robert Brook.

Mayor.
Sir John Allot Fishmonger, the 28 of Oct,

An. reg. 33
He deceased in the month of September, next following, and sir Rowland
Heyward clothworker, served out the rest of that year.

A purueier hanged.
In the month of January, one Nichols a Purueyer, for converting to his own
use, certain provision taken for her Majesty, was hanged for example to other
the like purueyers.

Bold impostures that distracted the people.
The 16 of July, Edmond Copinger, and Henry Artington Gentlemen, came into
Cheap, and there in a carre, proclaimed news from heaven, (as they said) to
wit, that one William Hacket Yeoman, represented Christ, by partaking his
glorified body, by his principal spirit, and that they were two Prophets, the
one of mercy, the other of Judgment, called and sent of God, to assist him in
his great work, etc. These men were afterward apprehended. The 20 of July
Hacket, was arraigned, and found guilty, as to have spoken diverse most false
and traiterous words against her Majesty, to have rased and defaced her Arms,
as also her picture, thrusting an iron instrument into that part that did
represent the breast and heart, etc. For the which he had judgment, and on the
28 of July, brought from Newgate, to a gibbet by the cross in Cheap, where
being moved to ask GOD and the Queen forgiveness, he fell to railing and
cursing of the Queen, and began a most blasphemous prayer against the divine
Majesty of GOD, Hacket hanged.
he was there hanged and quartered. His immodest speeches at his arraignment
and death, utterly disgraced all his former-seemed sanctity, wherewith he had
shroudly possessed the common people.

The next day, Edm. Copinger, Copinger died in Bridewel.
having wilfully abstained from meat, and otherwise tormented himself, died in
Bridewell, and Henry Artington, long after in the Counter, submitting himself,
writ a Book of repentance, and was delivered. The people had formerly received
a very reverent opinion of them.

In this month of July, Robert Deuorex, Earl of Essex, was by her Majesty
appointed to have the charge and conduction, as her Lieutenant General of 4000
footmen, and some number of horsemen, and Pioners sent into France, for the
assistance of the French King, against the confederats of the League. In which
expedition, he was also honorably accompanied with sundry Gentlemen Soldiers,
that voluntarily followed him in his service.

Shrieues.
William Rider, Benedict Barnham.

Mayor.
Sir William Web.

Proclamation against Jesuits and Seminaries.
In the month of October, a Proclamation was published, containing a
declaration of troubles, pretended against the Crown, by Seminaries and
Jesuits, etc. For the preventing whereof, charge was given to all Officers, to
look to their charges, for defense of the Realm: and special Commissioners
were appointed in all Shires, to enquire out the said Seminaries, and such as
might be reconciled by them, etc.

Bren O Royrke apprehended.
On the 28 of October, Bren O Royrke, a great man of Ireland, was arraigned at
Westminster, where he was found guilty of high treason, and after for the
same, executed at Tiburne, on the third of November, as more at large I have
expressed in mine Annals.

The 20 of November, sir Christoper Hatton, An. reg. 34 Lord Cha^cellor
deceased.
Knight, Lord Chancellor of England, deceased at his house in Holborne,
commonly called Ely house, because it belongs to the Bishop of Ely. On the 16
of December, he was honorably buried in Saint Paul's Church at London, one
hundred poor people, having gowns and caps given them, and go before him, of
Gentlemen and Yeomen in gowns, cloakes and coats, more then three hundred,
with the Lords of the Council, and other, beside 80 of the guard, that
followed, etc. A sumptuous monument for him, was since provided in Paul's Church.

The 10 of December, three Seminaries, Seminaries and others executed.
for being in this Realm, contrary to Statute, and four other for relieuing
them, were executed, to wit, Ironmonger, a Seminary, and Swithen Wells,
Gentleman, in Graies Inn fields: Blaston and White, Seminaries, and three
other their abetters at Tiburne.

The fourteenth of January, Captain Cosby executed.
Captain Arnolde Cosby, an Irishman, did forcibly set upon John, Lord Burke,
(also an Irishman) near to the Town of Wansworth, in the County of Surrey,
and there upon a malicious intent, did wilfully murder him, giving him one
mortal wound with a Rapier, by means whereof, he fell down, and after that,
the said Cosby with a dagger, gave unto the said Lord Burke, twelve, or more,
grievous and several wounds, of the which mortal wound, he died within two
hours after, For the which fact, Cosby was hanged on a gibbet, near unto
Wansworth, on the 27 of January.

The 18 of February, Thomas Parmort, A Seminary executed in Paul's Churchyard.
was convicted of two several high treasons, the one for being a Seminary
Priest, and remaining in this Realm, and the other for reconciling John
Barwis, against the form of a statute. The said Barwis was likewise convicted
of treason, for being so reconciled, and also of felony, for relieuing the said
Priest, Thomas Parmort was executed in Paul's Churchyard, on the 20 of February.

In the month of February, Sir Edmond York, Soldiers sent into France.
Knight, conducted over into France, two thousand footmen, sent from hence, for
the service of the French King, which upon their arrival, remained under the
charge of Sir Roger Williams, General of the English companies there.

The twenty seventh of April, Sir John Parrat Knight, 1592.
was arraigned at Westminster, found guilty of treason, and had judgment in the
same place, on the 16 of June, but died in the Tower.

Tiltboat drowned.
The fourth of May, a Tiltboate of Grauesend, having in the same Boat about the
number of forty persons, was overrun by a Hoy, so that the greater part of
those people were drowned over against Greenewich, the Court then being there,
and the Queen beheld the mischance.

New Lord Keeper.
The 4 of June, Sir John Puckering made Lord Keeper of the Great Seal.

Execution in Smithfield for poisoning Alms houses founded by the Merchant
Tailors.
In the month of June, a young man was hanged in Smithfield, and a woman was
burnt, both for poisoning of her husband, a Goldsmith.

The Merchant Tailors in London, this year founded fair Almes-houses, upon a
plot of ground near unto East Smithfield, in the Parish of S. Botolph without
Aldgate, which plot of ground was given to them by Richard Hills, sometime
Master of that Company, as also one hundred load of Timber by Anthony Ratcliffe
of the same society, Alderman: In these Alms houses fourteen charitable men,
brethren of the said Merchant-Tailors yet living, have placed fourteen poor
aged sole women, which receive every one of them of their founder, sixteen
pence or better weekly, besides 8. pounds, 15 shillings yearly paid for of
the common treasury, to the said Company for fuel.

The fourth of September a woman was burnt in Smithfield, A woman burnt in
Smitfield. The river of Thames seemed to be almost void of water, and many
things were found by diverse as they walked up on the low sands.
for poisoning of her husband.

Wednesday the sixth of September, the wind West, as it had been for the space
of two days before very boisterous, the River of Thames was made void of
water, for forcing out the fresh and keeping back the salt; that men in diverse
places might go 200 paces over, and then fling a stone to the Land. A Colliar
on a Mare rode from the North side to the South, and back again, on either
side London Bridge, but not without peril of drowning both ways.

John Gerrard, Robert Tailor. Shrieues.


Sir William Roe Ironmonger. Mayor.


This Mayor rode from the Guild Hall to the Tower, and there took his oath, No
Majors feast.
being accompanied of the Aldermen, Recorder and Shriues, the Livery and
Batchelers of the Ironmongers, the liuerie of the Haberdashers, and no more,
these dined at the Lord Majors house, and at the Halls of these two Companies,
and this was done by the appointment of the Queens Counsel, for avoiding
infection of the plague.

Term kept at Hartford. An. reg. 35
Michaelmas Term was kept at Hartford, and began on Crastina animarum.

The third of November deceased sir John Parat in the Tower of London.

A butchers daughter said she was daughter to King Philip and Queen Mary.
The 13 of December, a certain gentlewoman by the Councels commandment was
whipped through the City of London, for affirming her self to be the daughter
to Philip king of Spain, as she had been persuaded (by some accounted
Sooth-saiers, after proved liers) for she was known to be a Butchers daughter
in Eastcheape.

Parliament at Westminster.
The 19 of February, the Parliament began at Westminster.

The 21 of March, Henry Barrow gentleman, John Greenewood Clarke, Daniel
Studley Girdler, Sapio Bislot gentleman, Robert Bowley Fishmonger, were
indicted of felony, the said Barrow and Greenewood for writing sundry seditious
books, Barrow and Greenewood hanged.
tending to the slaughter of the Queen and State: Studley, Billot and Bowley,
for publishing and setting forth the same Books, and on the 23, they were all
arraigned, found guilty, and had judgment on the last of March, Henry Barrow
and John Greenewood, were brought to Tiburne, and there hanged on the 6 of
April.

The tenth of April the Parliament at Westminster brake up for a time,
Parliament dissolved.
wherein was granted three Subsidies of two shillings eight pence the pound
goods, and four shillings lands, and 6 fifteenes.

About the same time Penry, a principal penner and publisher of books
entitled Martin Mar prelate, Penry apprehended and hanged.
was apprehended at Stebbenheth by the Vicar there and committed to prison. In
the month of May he was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, condemned of
Felony, and afterward conuaied from the Goal of the Kings Bench to Saint
Thomas Waterings, and there hanged, this pernicious book much troubled the
people.

The 19 of July the Court of Assise for Surrey, was holden and kept in S.
Georges field, Court of Assizes kept in S. Georges field.
in a Tent there set up for that purpose, many prisoners were there arraigned,
nineteen were burnt in the hand, but none executed. This Assise was ended the
same day, which was thought would have lasted three days, but the Justices
(all duties being paid) made have away, for fear of being infected with the
pestilence.

This year was no Bartholmew fair kept at London, No Bartholmew fair at
London.
for the avoiding of concurse of people, whereby the infection of the
pestilence might have increased.

Paul Banning, Peter Hawghton. Shriues.


Sir Cuthbert Buckle Vintner. Mayor.


For part of ye year, sir Rich. Martin goldsmth. An. reg. 36


Number of the plague died in London.
The whole number this year buried within the City of London, the suburbs and
other places adjoining, as well of the plague, as of the other diseases, from
the 29 of December in the year 1592, until the 20 of December, 1593 was as
follows. Within the walls of all diseases, 8598, whereof the plague, 5390,
without the walls and in the liberties, 9295. the plague 5285. so that within
the City and Liberties, of all diseases 17863. whereof the Plague was 10675.

Prince Henry borne.
The 19 of February 1593. at Edenburght in Scotland was borne Prince Henry the
eldest son of King James the 6. King of Scots.

A Seminary executed.
The 18 of February Harington a Seminary, was drawn from Newgate to Tiborne,
and there hanged, cut down alive, strugled with the hangman, but was quartered.

Lopez arraigned.
The last of February, Rodoricke Lopeza a Portugal (as it was said) professing
Physic, was arraigned in the Guild Hall of London, found guily, and had
judgment of high Treason, for conspiring her majesty's destruction by poison.

1594. Great wind over turned trees.
In this month of March were many great storms of wind, which ouerturned
trees, steeples, houses, barnes, etc. namely in Worcestershire, in Beaudley
forest many Oaks were overthrown. In Horton wood of the said shire, more
then one thousand five hundred Oaks were overthrown in one day, namely, on
the Thursday next before Palmesunday.

In Staffordshire, the shaft of the steeple in Stafford Town was rent in
pieces along through the midst, and thrown upon the Church, wherewith the said
roof is broken: 1000 pounds will not make it good. Houses and Barnes were
overthrown in most places of those shires. In Canke wood more then 3000 trees
were overthrown: many steeples more or less above 50. in Staffordshire were
perished or blown down.

The 11. of April was a great rain, Great rain.
which continued more then 24 hours long, and withal a great North wind.

The 14 of April, a woman was burnt in Smithfield, for killing of her husband.
A woman burnt for pety Treson.


The 16 of April Ferdinando Earl of Darby deceased at Latham, in a very
strange manner.

The second of May came down great floods, Great floods.
by reason of sudden showers of hail and rain that had fallen, which bare
down houses, Iron milles, the provision of coals prepared for the said mils,
it bare away cattle, etc.

The second of May, Serieants dinner.
the new Serieants of the Law in number ten, held their dinner in the Temple.

The third of June deceased John Aylmer Bishop of London, at Fulham, Bishop of
London deceased.
and on the 26 of June was solemnly interred in his Cathedral Church of Saint
Paul in London.

The 7 of June, Doctor Lopez, D. Lopez and others executed.
and two other Portugals, were drawn from the Kings Bench in Southwarke, to
Tiborne, and there hanged and quartered.

Mayor of London deceased. Sir Richard Martin Mayor. Ships set out by the
Citizens of London
The first of July, deceased Sir Cuthbert Buckle, Lord Mayor of London, and on
the next morrow was elected Sir Richard Martin to be Mayor for the rest of that
year, and on the third of July, he took his oath at the Tower of London.

The fifteen of July by a common Counsel in the Guild hall was granted
(according to a precept from her Majesty) that six ships and two pinnaces
should be set forth at the charges of the City, the same to be ready with men,
munition and victuals for three months by the last of July.

Soldiers set out by the Londoners.
More on the 17 of July, the same Common Council, according to another precept
granted 450 men on foot to be likewise set out by the citizens, toward the
charges whereof a fifteenth was seized and paid.

This year in the month of May, fell many great raines, but in the month of
June and July much more, for it commonly rained day and night till Saint James
Eve, Great rain.
and on Saint James day in the afternoon it began again, and continued for
two days together: notwithstanding there followed a fair harvest in the month
of August, but in September great raines raised high waters, Bridges at
Ca^bridge and at Wareborn down.
such as stayed the carriages, and bare down bridges, as at Cambridge, Ware,
and elsewhere. Also grain grew to be of a great price, as a strike or bushel
of Rye 5 s, a bushel of wheat 6, 7, or 8 s, etc. which dearth happened more by
mean of overmuch transporting by our Merchants, then the vnseasonablenes of
the weather passed.

This year Beuis Bulmar an ingenious Gentleman made an engine at Broken
wharfe, Thames water connaied into London.
thereby from thence to convey Thames water up into the City, sufficient to
serve the whole West part thereof, being conuaied into men's houses by pipes of
lead. The same Gentleman on the 18 of October gave unto sir Richard Martin then
Lord Mayor of the City of London, and to the City for ever, one cup of
silver with a cover, weighing 137 ounces of fine, A silver Mine found
better then the Sterling; the silver of which cup with other (he said) was
dug out of the mine in England, in the month of August last before passed.

Robert Lee, Thomas Benet. Shrieues.


Sir John Spencer Clothworker. Mayor.


The 30 of December a woman was burnt in Smithfield for coining of money. An.
reg. 37
A woman burnt in Smithfield Bishop of London elected.
The same day D. Fletcher B. of Worcester was elected B. of London.

The 26 of January William Earl of Darby married the Earl of Oxfords
daughter, Earl of Darby married.
at the Court at Greenewich.

The tenth of February two soldiers or Captains, named York and Williams,
York and Williams^ executed.
were executed at Tiburne for felony.

1595 A Jesuit executed.
The 10 of February Southwell a Jesuit, that long time had lain in the Tower
of London, was arraigned at the Kings Bench bar, he was condemned, and on the
next morrow drawn from Newgate to Tiburne, and there hanged, bowelled and
quartered.

Great dearth of corn and other victuals.
This year by means of the late transportation of grain into foreign
Countries, the same was here grown to an excessive price, as in some parts of
this Realm, from fourteen shillings to 4 marks the quarter.

Disodered youths punished.
On the 27 of June, certain young men apprentises and other, were punished by
whipping, setting on the Pillory, etc. for taking of butter from the maket
women in Southwarke, after the rate of three pence the pound, whereas the
sellers price was 5 pence the pound, they would be their own caruers.

Coiner and a cunning cosoner punished.
Certain men for coining were hanged, and also a Scriuener in Holborne was
hanged, and quartered for taking the great seal of England from the old
patent and putting the same to a new.

On the 29 of June being Sunday in the afternoon, a number of unruly youths on
the Tower hill, being blamed by the Warders of Towerstreete-ward to sever
themselves and depart from thence, Unruly youths on the tower hill apprehended
for being there assembled to do violence to the Lord Mayor and to make
insurrection.
threw at them stones, and drove them back into Tower street, and were
heartned thereunto by a late Soldier, sounding of a trumpet, but the trumpeter
and many other of them being taken by the shrieues of London, and committed to
prison. About 7 of the clock the same night, sir John Spencer Lord Mayor rode
to the Tower hill, attended by his officers and others, to see the hill cleared
of all tumultuous persons, where about the middle of the hill, some warders of
the Tower or Lieutenants men told sir John that the sword ought not to be borne
up there, and two or thee catching hold thereof, some bickering was there, and
she sword bearer hurt, but the Lord Mayor seeing the hill cleared of all
trouble rode back, the sword bearer bearing up the sword.

The two and twenty of July, Unruly youths executed on the Tower hill, they
died penitent.
in presence of the Earl of Essex, and other sent from the Queen, were
arraigned in the Guild Hall of London, fine of those unruly youths that were on
the Tower hill apprehended, they were condemned, and had judgment to be
drawn, hanged and quartered, and were on the twenty four of the same month
drawn from Newgate to the Tower hill, and there executed accordingly.

Sir Thomas Wilford knight, Sir Tho. Wilford Provost Marshall within London h^
behaved himself very mildly and discreetly.
Provost Marshall for the time in the City of London rode about, and through
the city of London daily, with a number of men well mounted on horseback,
armed with cases of pistols, etc. This Marshall apprehended many vagrant and
idle people, brought them to the Justices, who committed them, etc.

Thomas Low, Leonard Haliday. Shriues.


Sir Stephen Slany Skinner. Mayor.


Two marshals in London at one time.
This year in February, 1595. the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, as well for
expelling vagrant people out of the City, reforming of common abuses to be
aiding to Clarks of the Market, for redress of forrainers false waights and
measures, as to be assistant unto all Constables and other civil officers for
the more speedy suppression of any distemperature that may arise by youth, or
otherways; they ordained two Marshals, An. reg. 38
viz. Master Read, and Master Simson, and after them Master Roger Walrond was
admitted alone.

Notorious knaves.
The 20 of February five men for couzonage and counterfeiting of Commissions,
etc. were set on the Pillory in West Cheap, some of them had their ears
nailed and cut off, others that had before lost their ears were burnt in their
cheeks, and forehead.

A Pinnace made in the Leade^ Hall by a Land Carpenter being never taught nor
used to make any Ships or Boats.
This year a certain Pinnace was made by a House-carpenter, in the
Greene-yeard of Leaden hall in London, it was about some 5 tun, to be taken a
sunder, and set together with vices; the same was finished and launched out of
Leaden hall on the 12. of March in the night, and drawn by strength of men and
horses on a sleed with wheels made for that purpose, toward Algate, where
about the parish Church of S. Catherine Christ's Church, the wheels taking fire
on the Axeltrees, were broken about one of the clock in the morning, where it
stayed till the next night, and then was drawn to the Tower hill, where the
same was calked and pitched, and on the xx. of March drawn and lanched into
the river of Thames, at the water gate by the Tower, and from thence by water
drawn to Ratcliffe, and there tackled.

The ninth of April being good Friday in the afternoon, 1596. Soldiers
pressed and discharged
the Lord Mayor and Aldermen were sent from the Sermon in Paul's Church-yeard,
and forthwith upon precept from the Council, pressed 1000. men, which was done
by eight of the clock the same night, and before the next morning they were
purueied of all manner of furniture for the wars, ready to have gone toward
Dover, and so to the aid of Callis against the Spaniards, but in the afternoon
of the same day, they were all discharged.

And on the 11. Soldiers pressed.
of April being Easter day about ten of the clock came a new charge, so
that all men being in the parish Churches ready to have received the Communion,
the Aldermen, The Spaniards win Callis.
their deputies, and Constables, were feign to close up the Churchdoores, till
they had pressed so many to be soldiers, that by 12. of the Clock, they had
in the whole City 1000. men, and they were forthwith furnished of armor and
weapons, etc. Soldiers sent to Callis.
And they were for the most part that night and the rest on the next morning
sent away, to Dover, as the like out of other parts of the Realm, but returned
again about a week after, for the French had lost Callis, etc. And in June
1598. the town of Callis was quietly restored back to the French.

L. Keeper deceased.
The last of April at night, deceased Sir John Puckering L. keeper of the great
Seal, he died of a great palsy, wherewith he had been taken on the 26 of
April at night.

On May day proclamation was made, that all soldiers appointed to sea, should
in all have pass to Portesmouth, Soldiers to the sea.
etc. to the Earl of Essex, and other the Nobility there.

New L. Keeper.
The 6 of May sir Thomas Egerton Master of the Rolls, was made Lord Keeper, and
had delivered unto him the great Seal. The 11. he rode (accompanied of the
Nobility and others in great number) to Westminster, and there took his place.

Water floods. These inundations were very strange and terrible.
In this month of May (as before.) fell continually raines every day or night,
whereby the waters grew deep, brake over the high ways, namely, betwixt
Ilford and Stradford ye Bow, so that market people riding toward London,
hardly escaped, but some were drowned: also toward Lambeth in the high way,
people not on horseback were borne on men's backs, and rowed in wherries in
Saint Georges field.

Robert Earl of Essex and Charles Howard, high Admiral of England, Cadize
voyage.
embarked with 150. good sail of ships on the first of June weighed anchor,
and hoised up sails, outward their journey from Plimmouth toward Spain, and
won Cadiz, and returned with great booties and spoils.

The 22 of July Henry Carey Lord Hunsdon, and Lord Chamberlain deceased at
Somerset house without Temple bar, L. Chamberlain deceased.
and was honorably buried at Westminster: about the same time also deceased
Sir F. Knoles, one of her Majesty's privy Counsel.

Sunday the eight of August, Triumph in London for victory in Spain.
great triumph was made in London for the good success of the Earl of Essex,
and his company in Spain, the winning, sacking and burning of the famous Town
of Cadiz, the overthrow and burning of the Spanish Navy, and other accidents.
A Serman of thanksgiving was preached at Paul's Cross in the forenoone, and
bon-fires with great joy.

In the year 528, The Civil Laws reduced into order.
and in the 2 year of Justinian the Emperor, he gave charge that his first
Cod^ should be composed of the Gregorian, Theodosian and Hermoginean Code.

In the third year of this Emperor, the first Code came forth.

In the fourth year he commanded the Digests to be composed.

In the seventh year of his reign the Institutions were set forth, and within
one month after them came forth the Digests.

In the eight year came forth the new Code of Justinian.

In his ninth year, which was in the year of our Lord 535 diverse novel
constitutions were published.

The 15 of August a new house of Timber not full finished in Fleetstreete,
suddenly fell down, A warning to Carpen^ers.
and with it one old house adjoining, by the fall whereof the good man, with a
man-seruant and a child were killed.

In the month of August began a new collection, for so relieve the poor in
this City, so that besides their ordinary pensions in money given to them, they
also received weekly two shillings, Too good to last long.
bread ready baked, every lofe weighing 24 or 26 ounces the piece: but this
charity lasted but a while.

The 29 of August, the Duke of Bolloine being arrived in England, came to the
Court at Greene-wich, Duke of Bolloine came into England.
and there by oath for the King his Master, confirmed the League of amity
betwixt the two Realms of England and France.

Soldiers sent into France.
Shortly after soldiers were sent over to aid the French in their wars.

Earl of Shrewsbury Ambassador into France.
The 16 of September, Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsbury, and sir Anthony
Mildmay Knight, Ambassadors, with Lords, Knights, Gentlemen, and other, to the
number of more then two hundred horse, departed toward France, arrived at
Deep on the twenty three, had audience of the King, who most princely welcomed
them on the 7 of October, the fidelity or oath of the league was solemnly taken,
the order of the Garter most royally performed, and the Ambassadors returning
with great honors, arrived in the Downs on the 27 of October.

Richard Godard, John Wats, 28 Septem. Shrieues.


Thomas Skinner Clothworker 28 Oct. Mayor.


Henry Billingsley 31 December.

Through the diligent carfulness of T. Skinner Mayor provision was made for
corn to be brought from Danske, Provision made for grain from beyond the seas.
and other the Gaft Countries, by our Merchants, unto whom was granted custom
and stowage free, as also to make their own price, or transport to any part of
this Realm, whereupon it followed (were the price never so high) this City
never wanted for their money.

This year, like as in the months of August, September, October, and
November, Great la^d waters.
fell great raines, whereupon high waters followed: Dearth.
wheat in meal was sold at London for ten shillings the bushel, Rye six
shillings, and Oatemeale eight shillings.

The 17 of November, a day of great triumph, An. reg. 39 Great triumph for the
prosperous reign of her Majesty.
for the long and prosperous reign of her Majesty at the Court, the Earl of
Cumberland Champion for the Queen, the Earl of Essex, Bedford, Southampton,
and Sussex, with other, ran at the tilt most bravely.

Sunday the fifth of December, great numbers of people being assembled in the
Cathedral Church of Wels in Somersetshire, Tempests in the City of Wels.
in the Sermon time before noone, a sudden darkness fell among them, and
storm and tempest followed, with lightening and thunder, such as overthrew to
the ground them that were in the body of the Church, all which Church seemed to
be on a light fire, a loathsome stench following, some stones were stricken out
of the Bell tower, the wires and irons of the Clock were molten: which tempest
being ceased, and the people come to themselves, some of them were found to be
marked with sundry figures on their bodies, and their garments not perished,
nor any marked that were in the Chancell.

The 30. of December at night, deceased Peter Hauton, T. Skinner Mayor
deceased: he spent more of his time then any of his predecessors.

H. Billingsley Mayor


an Alderman of London, and the same night also deceased Thomas Skinner Lord
Mayor of the same City. Whereby was made frustrate the great hope that men had
conceived of his good government to come. And on the next morrow being the last
of December, Henry Billingsley Haberdather, was elected Mayor, who being chief
customer for her Majesty, on the twelth even, sat in the Custom house with
the sword before him lying on the table.

The eleventh of January he took his oath at the Tower of London.

In the month of May, Soldiers were pressed in the city of London to the
number of 550. with all the furniture, 1597. Soldiers trained and sent to the
sea.
at the charges of the Citizens: these were trained to the field, out of which
was picked 400. and the rest dismissed: these and other picked men out of
diverse Shires about the number of 6000. most bravely funished of all things
necessary, besides the supersfluities of voluntaries, who spared for no cost,
namely, in gold lace and feathers, under conduct of Robert Earl of Essex, were
sent to the seas: they set from the west coasts of England, about the tenth of
July, being Sunday, and on monday the same fleet was sailed out of sight from
England, but the 17. being Saturday, having the wind against them, as the like
for three or four days before, a tempest of lightning and thunder, rain, and
darkness, shook and dispersed them, whereupon they returned: Sir Water
Rawley, with forty sail came to Plimmouth, and afterward the Earl and others,
to Falmouth, some of their company wanting, namely, the Lord Thomas Howard, the
Lord Mountioy, the Lord Rich, and other: the gallants or voluntaries came home
again, but not with such iollity, as they went out, for many left their
Feathers at sea. About the twenty seven of October, was news that the Earl
of Essex was returned, having before sent home three or four ships very richly
laden, and lately taken: he left the fleet to pursue the action in taking more.

This Summer arrived here an Ambassador from the King of Polonia, and had
audience the twenty five of July, whose Oration was presently answered by her
Majesty in Latin.

This year the Earl of Essex and the Lord Thomas Howard, the Earl of
Southampton, The Isla^ds voyage.
sir Water Rawleigh, and other brave Commanders, with 18. of the Queens ships,
and many English Merchants ships, and 12. Hollanders ships, made a warlike
voyage to the Isles of Terceres.

In the month of August, the price of Wheat in the Markets of London, fell
from thirteen shillings the bushel, to ten shillings: Rye from nine
shillings, to six shillings, and so to three shillings, but then rose again
to the old greatest price.

Ambassadors from Denmark.
This year also, Arnold Whitefield, Chancellor of Denmark, Ambassador, and
Christian Barnkun his assistant from the King of Denmark, arrived here: these
had audience at the Court, then at Tibols, on the seventh of September, and
were answered by her Majesty, without pawse to every point of their embassage,
and feasted.

Shrieues.
Henry Roe, John Moore, 28 September.

Mayor.
Richard Saltonstall, Skinner. 28 October.

Lectures read in Sir Thomas Greshams College.
Monday, the 3 of October. began the reading of the Divinity lecture in Sir Tho.
Greshams College, by him founded in Bishops-gate street.

Earl of Notingha^ created. Parliament at Westminster.
The 23 of October, the honorable Lord Charles Howard. Lord high Admiral of
England, was created Earl of Notingham at Westminster.

The cause of this spoil of the people was the indiscreet behavior of the
inferior Marshals.
A Parliament began at Westminster, on the 24 of October: on the which day
diverse people were smuldered and crushed to death, pressing between
White Hall, and the College Church, to have seen her Majesty, and Nobility
ryding in their Robes to the said Parliament.

This year, An. reg. 40 Price of Pepper. Pety treason.
Pepper was sold for eight shillings the pound.

The 25 of January, one named Ainger, was hanged at Tiburne, for wilfully and
secretly murdering of his own Father, a Gentleman, and a Counselor at the Law
at Graies Inn, in his chamber there.

The ninth of February, A Parliament.
the Parliament having granted three Subsidies, of four shillings the pound
lands, and two shillings eight pence the pound goods, and six fifteenes was
dissolved and brake up.

On the third of April, Twiford Town in Devonshire was burnt by casuality of
fire, 1958. Twiford Town burnt.
beginning in a poor cottage, a woman there frying pancakes with straw, the
same fired the house, and so to the Town, about one of the clock in the
afternoon: the rage of which fire, lasting one hour and a half, consumed 400
houses, burned down, one hundred and fifty thousand pounds consumed in money,
Plate, Merchandise, household stuff, and houses: fifty persons, men, women, and
children, consumed: an Almes-house preserved with poor men therein in the
midst of the flames: two thousand pounds weekly was bestowed there in the
market on Mondaies in Devonshire Carsies, nine thousand people maintained by
the clothing of that town, in Cornwall, and Sommersetshire. It was the Earl
of Deuonshires chief seat, where yet stands his castle or court place. Thus
much certified to her Majesty.

Sir Robert Cicil returns out of France.
On the first of May, Sir Robert Cicil, and other Ambassadors, returned out of
France, and came to the Court.

The 12 of July, one Johannes, alias, Buckley, a Priest made beyond the Seas, A
Jesuit executed.
having been arraigned in the King Bench, on the third of July, and there
condemned of Treason, for coming into this Realm, contrary to a Statute, was
drawn to Saint Thomas a Waterings, and there hanged and quartered, his head
set on the pillory in Southwarke, his quarters in the highways toward
Newinton, Lambeth, etc.

Lord treasurer deceased.
On the fourth of August, Sir William Cicil, Knight of the Order, Lord Burleigh,
Master of the Wards and Liueries, Lord high Treasurer of England, a famous
Counselor to the Queen Majesty, during all her reign, and likewise had been
to King Edward the sixth; who for his singular wisdom, was renowned throughout
all Europe, departed this mortal life, at his house by the Strand, his body
was conuaied to Westminster, with solemn funeral, and from thence secretly to
Stanford, and there buried among his Ancesters.

The King of Spain dies.
The third of September, died Philip the second of that name, King of Spain, at
Madrill, at 72 years of age, his son Philip succeeded him.

Doctor Cotton, Bishop of Excester.
This year 1598, the 12 of the month of November, William Cotton, Doctor of
divinity, sometimes Cannon of Paul's, was consecrated Lord Bishop of Excester.
He strongly maintained the Rites, and Government of the Church. And lived so
long, that he saw the change of Bishops, throughout all the Bishoprics of
England and Wales.

The first of September, in the afternoon, Thunder and lightning.
thunder and lightning at London, two great cracks, as it had been the
shooting of great Ordinance, some men smitten at the Posterne by the Tower of
London, and one man slain at the Bridge-house in Southwarke, over against the
Tower.

Edward Holmdon, Robert Hampson, Shrieues.
the 28 of September.

Sir Stephen Some, Grocer, Mayor.
the 28 of October.

The second of October, Earl of Comberland returned from the seas.
arrived the Earl of Comberland, being returned from the seas, and having made
spoil of the strong Town and Castle of Saint John de Portarico, etc.

The 9 of November, Squire of Greenwich was arraigned at Westminster, Squire
executed for high Treason.
condemned of high Treason, and on the thirteenth, drawn from the Tower, to
Tiburne, and there hanged and quartered.

The 14 of November, The Qu. received. An. reg. 41
the Queens Majesty came to Westminster, and was there most royally received
by the Mayor of London, Aldermen and Shrieues in scarlet, and a great number of
wealthy Citizens, in Velvet coats, and chains of gold, all on horse back in
the evening by Torch-light.

In the month of December, great frosts, the Thames nigh ouer-frozen at
London. Great frosts. Soldiers sent into Ireland.
In the beginning of the month of January, soldiers in diverse shires, as also
in the City of London, were pressed and furnished of all things necessary for
the wars, and were sent into the Low countries there to serve, in place of
old soldiers, from thence to be transported into Ireland. The subsidy men in
the city were seized at eight pence the pound, goods, or lands, toward this
charge. Also in this month, great lones of money were demanded and granted, by
the citizens of London.

Soldiers into Ireland.
The month of February, a fifteen was granted, and paid by the citizens of
London, for the setting forth of more soldiers into Ireland.

1599. Earl of Essex rode toward Ireland.
The 27 of March, about two of the clock in the afternoon, Robert Deuereux,
Earl of Essex, Lieutenant General, Lord high Marshall, etc. departed from his
house in Seding lane, through Fenchurch street, Grace-street, Cornehill,
Cheap, etc. toward Iseldone, High-gate, and rode that night to Saint Albons,
toward Ireland: he had a great train of Noblemen and Gentlemen, on
horseback before him, to accompany him on his journey, his coaches followed
him: he had also (by the pleasure of God) a great shower or twain, of rain and
hail, with some great claps of thunder, as he rode through Islington.

The months of March, April, and May cold and dry, but on Whitsonday great
hail and high waters, the like of long time had not been seen, the extreme
violence of this Tempest made London streets more fresh and fair then ever
was seen before.

In the Month of August by the Queens appointment (politickly to prevent
dangerous annoiance of her estate, Ships sent to the seas and men trained for
the wars.
then feared to have happened, but not expressed) the Citizens of London were
charged with the furniture and setting forth to sea, of twelve ships, since
increased to 16. etc. Also with 6000. men and furniture for the wars, which
men with all speed were made in a readiness. Three thousand of them were
daily trained in the field under Captains, Citizens of the same City, from the
sixth of August, etc. The other three thousand appointed to attend upon her
Royal person, were also likewise trained under Captains, in brave furniture,
for they were householders of account: all which their charges was partly borne
by themselves, the residue performed by subsidies levied of the Citizens.

In this mean time, to wit, on the fifth of August at night by commandment
from her Majesty, the chains were drawn thwart the streets and lanes of the
City, and Lanthornes with light of candles, hanged one at every man's door,
there to burn all the night, and so from night to night, and great watches
kept in the streets, which so continued a long time. The City and Citizens kept
unusual watch and ward, and all sorts of people were much amazed and frighted,
as well by reason of preparation for wars, not knowing any cause, as also by
the soddaine strange, and terrible rumors and reports of the Spaniards fierce
approach.

Also many thousands of horsemen and footmen chosen persons, well appointed
for the wars, trained up in armor, with brave liueries, under valiant
Captains in diverse shires, were brought up to London, where they were lodged
in the suburbs, towns, and villages near adjoining, from the eight of
August, till the 20. or 23. in which time the horsemen were showed in Saint
James field, the footmen traimed in other grounds about the City, and then all
discharged homewards, with charge to be always ready at an hours warning. And
so it followed, that on the 25. of August at night, Posts were sent after them,
to recall the horsemen, presently to return to London with all speed
possible, which charge they prepared to perform. But on the 27. of August the
said Posts were likewise sent to stay them at home, or to return them back,
whose forwardness in service of the Queen was such, as the like has not
been seen or heard of, toward any Prince of this Realm, such was the
dutifulness of her loving and obedient subjects. The 26. of August, being
Sunday in the morning before six of the clock, by the commandment from the
Queen, the 3000. soldiers trained up by the Citizens, were all in Armor, in
the open streets, attending on their Captains, till past seven of the clock:
at what time being thoroughly wet by a great shower of rain, were sent home
again for, that day. On the next morrow, being the 27, the other 3000
Citizens, householders, and subsidy men, showed on the Miles end, where they
trained all that day, and other until the 4 of September, and so ceased they
training: and whatsoever had been foreseen, and wisely prevented by the
Queen, and her Nobility, (whereof the Comminalty were utterly ignorant for
that time) a good Peace within this Realm has since followed, which God long
continue among us.

Humfrey Wild, Roger Clarke, Shrieues.
the 28 of September.

Sir Nicholas Mosley, Clothworker, Mayor.
the 28 of October.

This Roger Clarke Shrieue, bidding the Companies of London to dine with him,
Note.
as had been accustomed by other Shrieues his predecessors, took no
benevolence of them toward his charges.

On Michaelmas even, Robert, Earl of Essex, Lieutenant General for Ireland,
Earl of Essex returned out of Ireland.
having secretly returned into England, came to the Court at Nonsuch, and spoke
with the Queen, and on the second of October, was for contempt, etc. committed
to the Lord Keeper.

The people ignorantly muttered many things.
On the 29 of November, the Lord Keeper, and other Lords of the Counsel, in the
Star Chamber, persuaded against rumorous talk of the Earl of Essex.

The Archdukes enstalled.
In December, the late Cardinal Albertus, and Isabella his wife, Daughter to
the late King of Spain, with great pomp in Antwerpe, were sworn Archdukes.

An. reg. 42
A Tilt-boat from London, toward Grauesend, lost against Woolwich, with 40
persons, men and women, whereof 11 were saved.

Twenty prisoners sent to Wisbich Castle.
The 19 of January, 16 Priests, and four lay men, were removed out of diverse
prisons, in, and about London, and sent to the Castle of Wisbich, in
Cambridge-shire, whereof one was a Bishop of Ireland, and another a Franciscan
Friar, of the rule of the Caputians, which wore his Friars weed all the way as
he went, a thing not seen in England many years before.

L. Mountioy sent into Ireland.
The eight of February, Charles Blunt, Lord Mountioy, departed toward Ireland,
as Lieuetenant there: soldiers out of diverse shires were sent before him, and
also after him in the month of February, namely the Citizens of London, at
their own charges, furnished and sent 300 at that time into Ireland.

The 21 of June, John Rigby was drawn from the Kings Bench in Southwarke, 1600.
to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered, for being reconciled
contrary to the Statute.

In the month of July, were drawn, hanged, and quartered at Lincoln, two
Priests, Execution of Seminaries.
named T. Hunt and Sprat, for coming into this Realm, contrary to the
Statute: two other Priests, Edward Thing, and Robert Nutter, were likewise
executed for the like offense, at Lancaster. Also T. Palafer a Priest, executed
at Durham, and a Gentleman with him, for relieuing and lodging him in his house.

In the month of July, Soldiers sent into Ireland.
the Citizens of London sent out 300 soldiers into Ireland with their
furniture: also out of diverse shires, soldiers were likewise furnished and
sent thither.

This year, in the month of April, Richard, The Bishop of London Ambassador
to Emden.
Bishop of London, with other Commissioners, to wit, Doctor Perkins, and Doctor
Swale, were sent Ambassadors to Emden, there to treat with the Commissioners
from the King of Denmark, who had long remained there for that purpose: but
their commission expired, they were returned ere Ambassadors were come there:
whereupon our Ambassadors also returned into England, the 8 of July next
following. In which service, the said Reverend Father, so wisely, bountifully,
and honorably carried himself, that the Queen very graciously accepted his
proceedings.

The fifth of June, the Earl of Essex was called before the Lords of the
Council, The Earl of Essex suspended from his office.
at the Lord Keepers, where for matters laid to his charge, he was suspended
from use of diverse offices, till her Majesty's pleasure to the contrary, to
keep his house, as before: whereat the people still murmured.

Conspiracy against the King of Scots.
The 5 of August, Charles James, King of Scots, in Scotland, escaped a strange
and strong conspiracy, practiced by the Earl of Gowry, and his Brother, as at
large appears in a book thereof extant, first published, and printed in
Scotland, and since in England.

Means for an entreaty of peace to be had.
A peace being concluded at Veraine in France, in the year 1598, between Henry
the fourth, King of France and Navarre, and Philip the second King of Spain:
The Queen of England, was likewise invited by the French King, her confederate
allye, to dispose her self unto a like treaty of amity with Spain. To the
effecting whereof, he had procured the consent of the K. of Spain, then living.

After whose decease, Philip the third, succeeding his Father in the Crown,
the same was again revived and solicited by Andreas of Austria, the Governor
of the Low Countries, and the Bishop of Constance, both for the house of
Burgundy, and Kingdom of Spain, afterward ratified by the Archduke, Albert
returned out of Spain, with the Infanta his wife. Upon which former promise
made unto her Majesty, she was at length induced to condescend unto a treaty
of peace at Bolaigne in France, a place chosen by mutual agreement on either
side, with the assent and good liking of the French King; whether both Princes
sent their Ambassadors, furnished with ample power and authority in that
behalf, where the English Ambassadors arrived the sixteenth day of May, in
this present year, 1600, being the day prefixed for this assembly, and the
Spanish, the seventeenth of the same month. The Commissioners on the English
side were these, Sir Henry Neuel Knight, her Majesty's ordinary Ambassador,
resident with the French King, John Harbert, Esquire, her Majesty's Secretary
in the North part, and Thomas Edmonds Esquire, her Majesty's Secretary for the
French tongue. The Commissioners for Spain, were Baltazar de Caniga, and
Fonseca, Ambassador resident for the King of Spain, with the Archduke of
Austria in the Low Countries, and Ferdinando Carillo, Doctor of the civil Law,
unto whom were adjoined on the Archdukes part, John Richardot, President of
the counsel of the said Archduke, and Lewis Verraken, the said Archdukes
Audiencer. The Commissioners on both sides, being viewed and considered of,
some question for the presidencie and superiority of place, fell into
disputation and debate, her Majesty challenging the same, as due unto her,
before the time of the Emperor Charles, (as appears by Volateran) in the
time of King Henry the seventh, her Highness Grandfather, when this self-same
difference between both those Crowns coming into question, the Pope
preferred England, and adjudged unto this Crown, the most honorable place:
but forasmuch as the same was contradicted by the Spanish Commissioners, who
not only refused to yield presiansie unto her Majesty, but also to admit an
equality, or of any other indifferent and middle course, whereby the honor of
her Majesty might be preferred; the present treaty (which hitherto was
performed, only by some private visitations and conferences of some one or
two of the Commissioners on either side, without coming to any general
meeting or colloquie) was on the second day of August, in the year aforesaid,
for this time delayed, and by mutual assent of the Commissioners on both
sides, according to their several authorities, respectively granted unto them
in that behalf, suspended, until the the end of sixty days following, in
which mean while it might be understood, what should be the determination of
both Princes, for a further ^ preceding in the said colloquie of peace at some
other time and place, wherein as yet no certain resolution has been hitherto
taken.

Ambassadors from Barbary.
The 8 of August, 1600, came Ambassadors from Abdela Wayhetanow, King of
Barbary, the chief whereof was his Secretary, diverse in commission with him
were Artificers and Tradesmen: Right Turkish charity.
they were very bountifully entertained at the Queens charges, during their
six months abode, they were very subtle and unthankful, they abhorred to
give any manner of Alms unto any poor Christians, they sold their broken meat
unto such as would give most for it, they killed all their own meat in the
Ambassadors house, as Lambs, and all kind of Pullen, etc. which they usually
killed, turning their faces toward the East, they used to wash their own
feet twice or thrice aday, and sometimes to wash their bodies: they use
beads, and pray to Turkish Saints: they diligently observed the manner of our
weights and measures, and all things else that might avail their native
Merchants, and prejudice the English Nation.

The 18 of September, Ambassadors from Russia.
came Ambassadors from Borris Pheodorwich, Emperor of Russia, which said
Borris was newly come unto that dignity by usurpation, only by means of his
greatness in popularity, having as he supposed long before made away the late
immediate Heir Demetrius, second son to old Ivan Vasselowich, and younger
brother to the late Pheodor Vasselowich. This Borris at his first coming to
the crown, was as bounteous and liberal unto all sorts of people, as he was
when he was a subject; but within a while after he grew very covetous, and
desirous to fill his treasure, by means whereof within six years he was as
generally hated of all the Russians, as ever he was beloved: of whose sudden
and unexpected downfall, you may read at large in the third year of King
James.

About the last of August, Robert, Earl of Essex set at liberty.
Earl of Essex was set at liberty.

The 10 of September, They were sent home at the Q. charges.
the said Ambassadors of Barbary, were again conveyed to the Court at
Oatlands, They were sent home at the Qu. charges.
there to take their leave of her Majesty, but were required to stay, to see
the Iusting, and other triumphs at Westminster, on the 17. of November.

Souldirs sent into Ireland, run awaies punished.
In the month of September, soldiers pressed, in, and about the City of London,
to the number of 350. and likewise out of diverse shires were sent toward
Ireland, whereof diverse running from their Captains and colors, were afterward
taken and hanged for example to others.

Ambassadors from Russia and Muscouia.
The 18. of September, Ambassadors from Muscouia or Russia, landing at Tower
wharfe, were there received by the Aldermen of London, in scarlets, the Muscouy
Merchants, and a number about two hundred, of the principal companies in
velvet Coats, and chains of gold, all well mounted, conveyed them in c^aches,
from the Tower to the house sometime pertaining to Sir Cuthbert Buckell, Mayor.

The 14. of October, the said Ambassadors rode to the Court, and had audience
before the Queen.

Hospital in Croydon founded.
This year the most Reverend Father in God John Whitgift, Archbishop of
Canterbury, did finish that notable monument of our time, to wit, his Hospital
of the holy Trinity in Croydon, in the County of Surry, by him there founded
and builded of stone and brick, for the releise and sustentation of certain
poor people. As also a fair Schoole-house for the increase of literature,
together with a large dwelling house for the Schoolmaster: and these premises
he has through Gods assistance in his own life time performed, for as (my
self have heard him say) he would not be to his Executors a cause of their
damnation, remembering the good advice that an ancient Father has left to all
posterity.

Tutior via est, vt bonum quod quisquis post mortem sperat agi per alios, agat
dum viuit ipse per se: It is a way far more safe for a man to do^ good and
charitable deeds by himself, whilst he lives, then to hope that others will
do the same for him after his death.

Thomas Smith, Thomas Cambell, Shrieues.
the 28 of September.

William Crauen, the fourteenth of February.

Sir William Rider Haberdasher, Mayor.
the 28 of October.

The 13 of November, the Queen being most honorably attended on by the
Prelates, Nobles, and Judges of this Realm, was received near unto Chelsey, by
the Lord Mayor of London with his brethren the Aldermen, in scarlet, besides to
the number of 500 Citizens, in coats of velvet, and chains of gold, on
horseback, every of them having two staffe-torches to attend on them, and they
all waited on her to her Palace at Westminster.

An. reg. 43 Iusts at Westminster.
The 17 of November, there were most princely Iusts performed at White Hall in
honor of the Queens holy day by three Earls, four Lords, seven Knights and
nine Gentlemen, her Majesty's Pentioners. At these Iusts was so great an
assembly of people, as the like has not been seen in that place before.
There were also present sundry Ambassadors, as namely from the French King, the
King of Barbary, and Fez, and the Emperor of Russia.

Tempest.
The fifth of February in the morning being Sunday, a great tempest of wind
brake the Windmill beyond Saint Giles in the field without London, the Miller
thrown one way, an other man an other way, one North, the other South, a part
of the Mill roof, and half the millstone in like manner thrown.

Drumlers made in great have to little purpose.
Notwithstanding, that for many years together upon sundry devises, the City
was continually charged either with building, or furnishing ships and soldiers
to Sea, or else in trayning, mustering, or leuying and sending soldiers well
appointed, either into Ireland or Holland, or into both: all which were ever
performed with wondrous dexterity, so as their great trouble and charges for
sixteen years space never ceased. Over and besides all which, it happened the
last year, upon a strong report of the Spaniards preparation for a second
invasion, that the City was at extraordinary charges in building and altering
the upper decks of many great strong hoyes, and new cutting in them lower
port-holes apt for the ready use of great Ordnance, Galleys made by the
Citizens of London, and given to the Queen.
which vessels so altered and prepared for war were called Drumlers. And this
year the Citizens gave five fifteenes toward the new making and ample
furnishing of two Galleys. And when these costly Galleys were lanched, rigged,
and in all points furnished, then the City gave them unto the Queen.

The Cross in Cheap was partly repaired, which the Queen thought had been
fully repaired, for so she commanded it should.

Sunday the eight of February, Earl of Essex his rising.
about ten of the clock before noone, Robert Deuoreux Earl of Essex, assisted
by sundry Noblemen and Gentlemen in warlike manner-entered the City of London
at the Temple bar, crying for the Queen, till they came to Fenchurch street,
and there entered the house of Master Thomas Smith, one of the Shiriffes of
London, who finding himself not master of his own house (by means of the
strength the Earl brought with him) and being ignorant of his intent and
purposes, conveyed himself out at a back gate to the Mayor, whereupon the
Earl with his Troop turned into Grace-streete, and there perceiving himself
with his Assistants to be proclaimed Traitors, also the Citizens to be raised
in Arms against him, he with his followers wandering up and down the City,
toward Evening would have passed at Ludgate, which was closed against him, so
that he was forced to return to Queen Hithe, and from thence by water, to his
house by the Strand, which he fortified; he understanding that great Ordnance
was brought to have beat it down, he yielded and was conveyed to the Tower
about midnight.

The 17 of February, Captain Thomas Lee was drawn to Tiburne, and there
hanged, bowelled, and quartered for conspiracy against the Queen: he took his
death constantly, confessing he had diverse ways deserved it, but to be
innocent of that he was condemned for, etc.

A Seminary executed.
The eighteenth of February, John Pibush a Seminary Priest, after seven years
imprisonment in the Kings Bench, hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas
Waterings, for coming into the Realm, contrary to the statute Anno twenty
seven of the Queens reign.

The Earls of Essex and Southa^pton arraigned.
The 19 of February, the Earl of Essex and the Earl of Southampton were both
arraigned at Westminster, and found guilty of high Treason.

The Earl of Essex beheaded.
Ashwednesday, the five and twenty of February, the Earl of Essex was beheaded
in the Tower, between the hours of seven and eight of the clock in the
morning, being present, the Earls of Hartfort and Cumberland, the Lord Thomas
Howard Constable of the Tower for that time, and not passing sixty or seventy
persons more: the Hangman was beaten as he returned thence, so that the
Shrieues of London were sent for, to assist and rescue him from such as would
have murdered him.

The 27 of February, Mark Bakworth, Execution of Seminaries.
and Th. Filcockes Seminary Priests, were drawn to Tiburne, and there hanged
and quartered, for coming into the Realm contrary to the Statute.

And the same day a Gentlewoman called Mistress Anne Lina, a Widow, A
Gentlewoman hanged.
was hanged in the same place, for releeuing a Priest in her lodging contrary
to the said statute.

The last day of February, a young Gentleman, named Waterhouse, One hanged for
libelling.
was hanged in Smithfield, for speaking and libelling against the Queens
proclamation, and the apprehending of the Earl of Essex: at this time
Libellers abounded.

The fifth of March, the Earl of Mar, Ambassadors from Scotland,
the Lord of Krynters, in Commission, Ambassadors, and others from Scotland,
came to London, and were lodged by the Exchange, in the house of Master Anthony
Ratcliffe.

The 13 of March, Sir Gelly Merike Knight, Merike and Cuffe executed.
and Henry Cuffe Gentleman, were drawn to Tiburne, the one from the Tower, the
other from Newgate, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, as being actors
with the Earl of Essex.

The 15 of March, in the night, a new Scaffold was carried from Leaden Hall in
London to the Tower hill, and there set up by Torchlight.

Danuers and Blunt executed.
The 18 of March, Sir Charles Danuers, and Sir Christopher Blunt Knights, were
upon the new scaffold on the Tower Hill beheaded.

1601
In the Month of May, five fifteenes were levied in London, toward the setting
out of Galleys to the Seas (as was appointed by the Queen) and charges about
the Earl of Essex, when he entered the City.

The 20 of June Proclamation was made at London for delivering of Prisoners to
serve in the Galleys, made at the charge of the Citizens.

Bold offe^ders severely punished.
Two men were set on the Pillorie in Fleetstreet, whipped with gags in their
mouths, and their ears cut off, for attempting to have robbed a Gentlewoman
in Fetter lane in the day time, putting gags in the mouths of the servants of
the house because they should not cry. One of these thieves was afterward
hanged and quartered at Saint Thomas Waterings.

The Earl of Shrewsburie and Worcester of counsel. Soldiers sent to the Low
countries.
Gilbert Talbot Earl of Shrewsburie, Edward Earl of Worcester, and sir John
Stanhope were called to be of the Queens Council.

In the month of July 1000. soldiers were sent to the Low Countries, set out
at the charges of the Citizens of London, 3 l 10. s. a man. More 800 soldiers
set out by the Shires.

Desmond brought out of Ireland.
The 26 of August, Desmond and an other Knight brought out of Ireland, were
conveyed to the Tower of London.

About the 5 of September certain Noblemen, and other of France, to the number
of 300 persons arrived at the Tower wharffe, Marshall Biron of France.
the chief of them were conveyed in Coaches through the City into Bishopsgate
street, and there the principal, namely Marshall de Biron was lodged in
Crosby place, the other near adjoining to Corne-hill.

Henry Anderson, William Glouer, Shrieues.
the 28 of September.

Sir John Garrard Haberdasher, Mayor.
the 28 of October.

About the 13 of October, Lady Ramsey. An. reg. 44
400 soldiers were set out of the City of London.

In November the Lady Mary Ramsey, widow to Sir Thomas Ramsey, sometime Mayor
of London was buried in the Parish church or Hospital of Christ's church by
Newgate market: A charitable dole or alms was given for her, on the same day
in the afternoon at the Leaden hall 17 poor weak people were there among the
sturdy beggars crushed and trodden to death. 17 poor people murdered.


The 19 of December, Parliament dissolved.
with the grant of Subsidies and Fifteenes the Parliament was dissolved.

Lightning and thunder often before Christmas, and in the holy days, Lightning
thunder and earthquake at Christmas.
and an Earthquake at London on Christmas even at noone.

In the month of January news came out of Ireland, Victors in Ireland.
that on Christmas day the Spaniards and Irish were overcome and slain in
great numbers, and the Englishmen were victors.

Bonefires for victory in Ireland.
The 18 of January at night bone-fires were made at London with ringing, etc.
For joy of news out of Ireland, the victory of our English there against
Tyrone.

Windsor boat cast away. 1682 Execution.
Windsor boat was cast away against the Black Friars stayres at London by
tempest.

The nineteenth of April, Peter Bullock Stationer, and one named Ducket, for
printing of books offensive were hanged at Tiborne.

Seminaries executed.
The 20 of April, Stichborne, William Kenson, and James Page, Seminary Priests
were drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, for coming
into this realm contrary to the statute of An. 27. etc.

Great leuying of soldiers to aid Holland.
In the month of May, great pressing out of Soldiers about London, to be sent
into the Low Countries.

The 22 of June, proclamation was published for the pulling down of late
builded houses, Proclamation against late building and Inmates, but never the
better.
and the avoiding of Inmates, in the City of London, Westminster, and for the
space of three miles distant of both these Cities; but little hurt was done,
and small effect followed, more then of an Act of Parliament, made to that
purpose: those Cities are still increased, and pestred with cottages and
Inmates, to the great infection of them both.

Seditious persons punished.
The last of June, Atkenson a customer of Hull, was set on the Pillory in
Cheap, and with him three other, who had been brought thither on horse back,
with their faces toward the horse tails, and papers on their heads. They were
there whipped on the Pillory and lost their ears by judgment of the
Star Chamber, for slanderous words by them spoken, against the Counsel.

The same last of June in the afternoon fell great lightning and thunder with
hale-stones in many places of nine inches compass, Tempest of thunder and
hail.
which at Sandwich in Kent lay a foot deep on the ground, brake the glass
windows of their Churches, and many tiles of their houses, some barnes were
fired by lightning.

About the first of August, Soldiers to Ireland
the citizens of London set out and furnished 200 soldiers toward Ireland.

James Pemberton, John Swinarton, Shrieues.
the 28 of September.

Sir Robert Lee Merchantailor, Mayor.
the 28 of October.

In the month of January, An. reg. 45
the citizens of London were charged with ships to sea, to lie before Dunkerke,
two ships and a Pinnace, furnished, manned and maintained.

The 17 of February William Anderson alias Richardson, a Seminary Priest,
Seminaries executed.
was drawn to Tiborne, and there hanged, bowelled and quartered, for being
found in England contrary to the statute of Anno 27. etc.

In the month of March, the Queen lying at Richmont, Staight watches kept.
dangerously sick, straight watches were kept in London with warding at the
gates, lanthornes with lights hanged out all the night, at which news the
people were sore perplexed.

Queen Elizabeth deceased.
Thursday the four and twenty of March, about two of the clock in the morning,
deceased Queen Elizabeth at her Manor of Richmont in Surrey, being then aged
seventy years, and had reigned, forty four years five months and odd
days. Whose corpse was privily conveyed to Whitehall, and there remained till
the 28 of April, and then buried at Westminster.

King James proclaimed.
The same day aforesaid, the Nobility and Privy Counselors of Estate, with as
great peace, prudence and providence, as the heart of man could imagine,
assembled themselves together, and far beyond the general imagination of all
men, being a matter most remarkable, took speedy order, as well for the
instant manifesting the Queens death, as in publishing to the whole Realm,
for their lasting comfort, the true and lawful successor. And about eleven of
the clock the same Thursday in the forenoone, There were 37 Earls and Barons
and Bishops dined that day with Master Shrieue Pemberto^, besides Judges and
chief ge^try that dined with Master Shrieue Swinarto^.
which according to the computation of the Church of England is the last day of
the year 1602, being accompanied with the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Shrieues of
London, and very many others of most reverend and honorable quality at the high
Cross in Cheapeside, proclaimed James the sixth of that name King of Scotland,
to be the right King of England, Scotland, France, and Ireland, defender of
the Faith, being lineally descended from Margaret, the eldest daughter to King
Henry the seventh, by Elizabeth his wife, which was the eldest daughter of King
Edward the fourth, the said Margaret was married to King James the fourth of
that name, King of Scotland, in the year of our redemption, 1503 who had issue
James the fifth, who was Father to Mary Queen of Scotland: And the said Mary
was mother to James the sixth, now sole Monarch of the whole Island of great
Britain, and King of France and Ireland, this forenamed Proclamation was most
distinctly and audibly read by Sir Robert Cecill principal Secretary unto
Queen Elizabeth. Also the Lords and Privy Counselors of Estate with great
diligence, sent speedily condign Messengers unto his Majesty into Scotland,
who manifested their whole proceeding with tender of their zealous love and
duty, and the peoples universal joy, and great desire to see their King,
which his Majesty most graciously accepted, approved all their proceedings, and
returned them all princely thanks, authorizing the Lords and others late
Privy Counselors of Estate to the Queen, to persist as they had begun,
until he came personally unto them.

This change was very plausible, and well pleasing to the Nobility and Gentry,
and generally to all the Commons of this Realm, among whom the name of a King
was then so strange, as few could remember, or had seen a King before, except
they were aged persons, considering that the government of the Realm had
continued near the space of 50. years under the reign of two Queens, which
is the far greater part of an old man's age, but tidings hereof being brought to
the King in Scotland, he called a Council to him, and taking order for setting
all things in his realm of Scotland, began his voyage toward England.

King JAMES.
PResently upon the death of Queen Elizabeth of famous memory, An. reg. 1.
the Nobility of this Land and Privy Counselors of Estate unto the said
Queen, acknowledged the immediate right of James the sixth, then King of Scots,
and within six hours after her death, the said Lords and Counselors, gave
full satisfaction unto the people by three Proclamations, the first at the
Court gate, the second at the high Cross in Cheap, and the third at the
Tower, by the name of James the 1. King of England, Scotland, France and
Ireland, defendor of the Faith, etc. The King being then full 36 years of age,
and crowned King of Scots in his infancy, began his reign over the great Isle
of Britain the 24 of March 1602.

The Nobility and State aforesaid, with all speed sent Sir Charles Pearcy and
Master Thomas Sommerset with letters unto the King, signifying the death of the
Queen, and tender of all their duties, love and allegiance; but Sir Robert
Carry rid post and brought the first news to the King, and as he rode gave
knowledge unto his brother Sir John Carry, then Governor of Barwicke. This calm
and discreet course of the English Lords, in proclaiming the King, and quiet
settling the whole Estate, without faction or interruption, was as plausible
unto all his Highness Subjects as admited of all foreign nations.

1603. The King Begins his journey for England.
The 5. of April the King came from Edenborough to Dunglasse, and the next day
to Barwicke, and upon the morrow after came news of many disordered persons
that were in Arms in the borders, whereat the King was somewhat troubled, and
forthwith there was power sent to suppress them, and after that when the King
came to London, he with the advice of the Lords of his Counsel, set all the
parts of the northborders in as good condition as any other part of his
dominions.

The kings journey from Barwicke. to London
The 8. of April the King went from Barwicke to Wytherington, and then to
Newcastle, and from thence to Durham, to York, to Grimstone, to Dancester, to
Newarke upon Trent, to Beuercastle, to Burleigh, to Hinchingbrooke, to
Godmanchester, to Royston, to Standon, to Theobalos, where the Lords and either
of the Privy Council, and many other of the Nobility, attended his coming,
and did their homage unto his Majesty: And here the King made of his Privy
Council, the Lord Henry Howard, the L. Tho. Howard, who was also made L.
Chamberlain, and the L. Mountioy, there the King made 28 knights.

The 10 of April diverse prisoners were discharged out of the Tower, Prisoners
discharged.
among whom the Earl of Southamton was the chiefest.

The 27 of April, Diverse slain by Gunpowder.
there were thirteen persons slain, and blown in pieces, by misfortune, at
the Gunpowder mill at Redriffe.

The 7 of May his Majesty came from Theobalds to London, against which time
Master James Pemberton and Master John Swinnarton, The Lord Mayor, Shrieues and
chief Citizens, ride to receive the King.
shrieues of London and Middlesexe had furnished themselves with 80 men on
horse back, in fair Liueries, but Master Pemberton being sick, M. Swinnarton
with the whole train attended at Waltham to receive his Majesty, as the
shrieues of other Cou^ties had formerly done in all the Kings progress from
Scotland. And at Stanford hill three miles from London, the L. Mayor and
Aldermen in scarlet robes, accompanied with the chief officers and counselors
of the City, and 500. grave Citizens in velvet coats and chains of gold well
mounted, atte^ded his Majesty: there met him also diverse his Highness officers
as Sergeants at arms, Heralds, and Tru^peters, every one in due place: ye Duke
of Lenox bare the sword, the L. Tho. Howard received his Majesty into the
Charterhouse, where he stayed 4 days and made 80 knights; you shall understand
ye whilst the King was in his journey, Prisoners released.
many prisoners were released out of diverse prisons and the Mau^dy very
solemnly performed. And the 28 of April at Westminster a very Royal obsequy
for the late Queen Elizabeth, Funeral for Queen Elizabeth
according to the Kings appointment by his letters to the Lords of the Privy
Council, all ancient English rites and customs were fully observed, except
only the feast of Saint George, which his Majesty deferred until his personal
coming unto some of his own palaces.

Proclamation.
The 7 of May proclamation was made for suppression of all manner of former
Monopolies that hindered commerce, and protections that impeached men's suits in
Law, and against the annoyance and oppressions done by ye Saltpeter men,
Purueyors, and Cardmakers.

Barons Created.
The 11 of May, the King rode privately from the Charterhouse to White Hall, and
went from thence by water to the Tower of London, and there the 13 of the same
he made Barons, viz. Robert Lord Cecill Baren of Essenden, Robert Lord Sydney
Baron of Penshurst, William Lord Knowles Baron of Graies, Edward Lord Wotton
Baron of Marley: he also made xi knights.

Proclamations.
The 16 of May, Proclamation was made to prohibit all manner of persons from
killing of Dear, and all wild foul, according to the Tenor of diverse
statutes, for preservation of the Kings game of hunting and hawking.

The 19 of May, proclamation was made for the suppression of disordered persons
in the North-borders, and for the mutual peace and amity of both Kingdoms.

The 20 of May, the King made Knights, Knights made.
sir Julius Caesar, sir Roger Wilbram, masters of the requests, sir William
Waad, sir Thomas Smith, sir Thomas Edmonds, clerks of the privy Council, and
sir Thomas Lake, Clerk of the Signet.

The twenty two of May, the King knighte^ sir Robert Lee, Mayor of London, The
Lord Mayor of London knighted.
sir John Crook Recorder, and sir Edward Cook, his Highness Attorney general.
And that day the King made a great feast, and was served with great state, and
at night sundry fire-workes upon the Thames, the Court being at Greenewich.

In the last year, Sergeants feast.
and last term of Queen Elizabeth, there was a call of Sergeants at Law, viz.
Thomas Couentrie, Robert Houghton, Laurence Tanfield, I. Crook, Thomas Foster,
Edward Philips, Thomas Harris, James Altham, Henry Hubert, Augustine Nichols,
and Robert Barker: these received writs from the Queen, de statu and gradu
seruientum ad legem suscipiendi, returnable tres Pascae next following, being
the second return in Easter term: but the Queen dying in the mean time,
their Writtes abated, which notwithstanding the King being advertised thereof
in Scotland, from the Council of England, of their late election, gave order
for the rest of their proceedings, according to their ancient laudable
customs, so far forth, as that they proceed by new Writs, in his name
returnable the day aforesaid, and added unto their number three others, viz.
John Sherly, George Snig, and Richard Hutton: these fourteen, upon Tuesday
the seventh of May, being the next day after the return of their writs, made
their appearance before sir Thomas Egerton, Lord Keeper of the great Seal, in
the high Court of Chancerie, and were then sworn Sergeants at Law, and upon
Tuesday following, being the 24 of May, they were admitted to the Common pleis
bar, and the same day kept their solemn feast in the middle Temple hall. At
this feast, Sir E. Philips was chosen the Kings Sergeant: you shall understand,
that albeit some of the Sergeants were knighted, yet amongst themselves they
had no precedence, but every man held his place according to his antiquity.

Note. Presumption punished.
The 1 of June, there was one whipped through London for presuming to come to
the Court, having his house infected.

Valentine Thomas executed for high treason.
The 4 of June, Valentine Thomas having been many years prisoner in the Tower,
was arraigned at the Kings Bench Bar, and there condemned of high treason,
for conspiracy against our late Queen, and some of her Council, and the 7 of
June about six of the clock, he was drawn from the Kings Bench in
Southwarke, to S. Thomas Waterings, and there hanged and quartered.

Ambassador.
About this time came Ambassadors from many foreign Princes, namely Monsieur
Rosney, from the French King, Don John de Tassis, from the King of Spain,
others came from the Archduke, from the King of Poland, the Signory of Venice,
the Duke of Florence and the States of Holland.

The twenty one of June Roger Earl of Rutland was sent Ambassador unto
Christianus the fourth King of Denmark to solemnise the Baptism of his son,
The Earl of Rutland Ambassador into Denmark.
and to present him with the Garter, being attended by W. Segar Norroy King of
Arms, he returned into England the thirtieth of July.

The 2. The great Ladies of England do their homage to the queen. Knights of
the Garter.
of July the King solemnized the feast of S. George at Windsor, and enstalled
Prince Henry Knight of the Garter, and there the chief Ladies of England did
their homage unto the Queen.

There were also made Knights of the Garter with Prince Henry, the Duke of
Lenox, the Earl of Southampton, the Earl of Mar, and the Earl of Pembrooke.

Within few days after were made diverse Proclamations for the apprehension of
Anthony Copley, Sir Griphin Markham Knight, Proclamations. The Lord Cobham, and
the Lord Gray and Sir Walter Rawleigh apprehended.
and William Watson, and William Clearke Priests, and about the same time were
apprehended as traitors the Lord Cobham and his brother, the Lord Gray, sir
Walter Rawleigh and others.

The 21. of July, at Hampton Court, Henry Wri^^hesley Earl of Southampton was
created and restored, Cration of Earls and Barons.
the Lord Thomas Howard created Earl of Suffolk, Charles Lord Montioy created
Earl of Devonshire, Sir Thomas Egerton Baron of Elesmire, sir William Russell
Baron of Thornehaugh, sir Henry Gray, Baron of Grooby, sir John Peter, Baron of
Writtle, sir John Harington, Baron of Exton, sir Henry Danuers, Baron of
Dawnsey, sir Thomas Garrerd, Baron of Gerrardes Bromley, sir Robert Spencer,
Sir Thomas Edmonds Ambassador.
Baron of Wormeleighton, sir Thomas Edmonds is sent Ambassador Lieger to the
Archduke. The twenty three of July, the King made sixty and one Knights of the
Bath.

Knights of the Bath. Coronation.
Against this time of Coronation, the citizens had made wondrous great
provision; but through the terrible increase of pestilence in the City and
Suburbs, their sumptuous Pageants, and other triumphant entertainments, stood
like ruins, being not yet finished, and the King constrained to omit his
former determination, in ryding through London, as Kings have accustomed, and
all Londoners prohibited by Proclamation from coming at Court: there died that
week of all diseases, eleven hundred and three: the twenty five of July being
Monday, and the feast of Saint James the Apostle, King James the first of that
name, King of England, and the most noble Lady Queen Anne his wife, were both
crowned and anointed at Westminster, by the most reverend Father in GOD, John
Whitgift, L. Archbishop of Canterbury, in presence of all the Nobility, and
diverse others, namely, Sir Robert Lee, Mayor of London, in a Robe of crimson
Velvet, and all the Aldermen in scarlet gowns, and twelve Citizens admitted to
attend them.

The twenty sixth of July, The Aldermen of London knighted.
the King sent for all the Aldermen of London, to Westminster, and knighted
them, and the same day the King knighted sir Christopher Parkens, Doctor of the
Law, Master of the Requests, and Deane of Carlil^.

At this time, The 5 of August, to be kept holy day.
the Bishops commanded the 5 of August to be held as a Holy Day, with prayers,
preaching and thanksgiving to God for the Kings escape from being murdered by
Earl Gowry in Scotland.

The plague increased still most grievously in London, and thereupon it was
ordained, A holy decree.
that every Wednesday there should be a general fasting and prayer, with
preaching throughout the land, to draw the people unto humble and hearty
repentance of their sins.

This year, Faires forbidden. Term at Winchester. No Majors feast at Guild
hall. Inmates suppressed
Bartholmew Fair was forbidden, and Michaelmas term adiorned unto Mensem
Michaelis, and to be kept at Westminster: but by reason of the sickness, it was
afterward held at Winchester, and the Lord Majors triumphs and great feast at
Guild hall was this year omitted. At this time there was a strict Proclamation
against Inmates, and diverse new built houses and sheds, standing noysomely,
ch^aking the streets, or other places, all which were by express order beaten
down, there was also great care and provision for the banishing of Rogues and
Vagabonds, Rogues banished.
according to the tenor of the Statutes in that behalf.

Shrieues.
Sir William Rumney, Sir Thomas Middleton, Shrieues.

Mayor.
Sir Thomas Bennet Mercer, Mayor.

The Lord Spencer sent Ambassador to the Duke of Wytenberge.
The 8 of October, Robert Lord Spencer, was sent by his Majesty unto
Frederick, Duke of Wytenberge, to inuest him Knight and Companion of the most
noble Order of the Garter, and returned before Christmas.

The 4 of November, the Lord Cobham, the Lord Gray of Wilton, Prisoners carried
from the Tower unto Winchester.
were conveyed from London Tower unto Winchester, to be arraigned, and to that
purpose the 19 of November, were also conveyed from the Tower to Winchester,
Sir Walter Rawleigh, Sir Griffin Markham Knights, George Brook, brother to the
Lord Cobham, Anthony Copley Gentleman, William Watson, Arraignement at
Winchester.
and William Clearke Priests, and the same day out of the Gate House at
Westminster, went Sir Edward Parham Knight, and Brooksby Esquire of
Leycester-shire, they were all condemned of high treason, save only sir Edward
Parham, who was acquitted by the Jury. The 29 of November were executed the two
Priests, and six days after was George Brook hanged, and the ninth of
December, Execution.
sir Griffin Markham, and the two Barons, after they had bin severally brought
upon the scaffold in the Castle of Winchester, and had made their confessions,
and prepared themselves likewise severally to die, upon the sudden, the Kings
warrant, written with his own hand, was there delivered to sir Benjamin
Tichborne, high Shiriffe of Hamshire, commanding him to stay execution: these
three, and sir Walter Rawleigh, were returned prisoners to the Tower, the 15 of
December.

From the 23 of December, 1602, The great Plague in London. The whole land
visited with sickness except London.
unto the 22 of December, 1603, there died of all diseases, within London and
the Liberties, thirty eight thousand, two hundred, and forty four, whereof,
the plague, thirty thousand, five hundred, seventy eight: and the next year
following, London was clear of that infection, and then were all the shires in
England grievously visited: note the work of God.

The 29 of February died the most renowned and reverend Father in God, D.
Whitgift, Archbishop of Canterbury deceased.
Archbishop of Canterbury, he was a holy and merciful man.

The 5 of March, was Proclamation made, Proclamation.
for the authorizing the Book of Common prayer.

The thirteenth of March, Creation of Earls.
the Lord Henry Howard, was created Baron of Marnehill, and Earl of
North-hampton, and Thomas, Lord Buckhurst, was created Earl of Dorset.

This year, sir William Rumney, and sir Thomas Middleton, shriues of London,
through their great pain and diligence, cleansed the City of Rogues and lewd
people, which at that time swarmed exceedingly.

The King, Queen, and Prince, with all the Nobility, ride in state through
London.
The 15 of March, the King, Queen and Prince, with the Lords spiritual and
temporal, the Gentry and all Officers, as well of honor and arms, as
otherwise, passed most triumphantly from the Tower, through the high streets
of his Highness Royal Chamber of London, to Westminster, and all the way he
went, even from his first entrance into the City, until he came to Temple
bar, his Majesty was received and attended by the Lord Mayor, in a Robe of
crimson Velvet, bearing a golden Scepter in his hand, and the grave Citizens of
every Company in their Liueries, standing in their stalles with great state,
having their banners and bannerets displayed on the one side of the streets,
and the other side very strongly rayled, to give free passage, and keep back
the violent pressing of the multitudes of people, which at that time exceeded,
as well in houses, as otherwise, The second Pegeant was set up at the charges
of the Italians, and the third at the charges of the Netherlanders.
and at this time, the former gates of Pageants, being seven in number, were
all most sumptuously beautified and adorned with solemn orations, melodious
harmony, and diverse ingenious devices: the first Pageant stood in Fan-church
street, the second in Gracious street, the third in Cornhill, the fourth at
the East end of Cheap side, and at the East side of the high Cross in Cheap,
was erected a low Gallery, wherein stood the Aldermen, the Chamberlain, the
Town Clerk, with the Counsel of the City, where Sir Henry Mountegue,
Recorder of London, after his Oration in the behalf of the Lord Mayor, and the
whole body of the City, presented three Cups of gold; one for the King, the
second for the Queen, and the third for the Prince. The fifth Pageant stood at
the West end of Cheap, the sixth in Fleet-streete, and the seventh at Temple
Bar: at this time, all the chief Conduites ran Claret wine: there was an
other Pageant erected in the Strand, at the charges of the inhabitants
there-abouts.

The 19 of March began the Parliament at Westminster, A Parliament.
and continued until the 7 of July, and was there proroged until the 7 of
February next after.

Sir Edward Denny was made Baron of Waltham by writ, Sir Edw. Denny, Baron of
Waltham.
and sat in his Robes in the Parliament house, the day wherein the Parliament
was adiourned.

Sir Thomas Smith, 1604. An. reg. 2. Ambassador to Russia.
late Alderman of London, is sent Ambassador unto Borris Pheodorwich, Emperor
of Russia.

This year, The King grants a Corporation unto the Felt-makers of London.
his Majesty by his Letters Pattents, incorporated the Felt-makers of London by
the name of Master, Wardens, and Communalty of the Art or Mystery of
Felt-makers of London, granting unto them thereby diverse privileges and
liberties for the good government of the same corporation: this was the first
Company that the King incorporated, and was obtained by the humble and earnest
suite of Richard Banister, John Sands, Hugh Philips, Robert Brown, and others,
Felt-makers of London.

Peace with Spain proclaimed.
The 5 of August, arrived Don John de Velasco, Constable of Castile, being sent
from Philip the third King of Spain, to take the oath of the King of England,
for ratification of the Articles of Peace, then agreed upon by certain English
Lords, authorized by the King, and by former Commissioners, sent the last year
from Spain and the Archduke, which said Don John, with all the Commissioners,
upon Sunday, the 19 of August, were most royally entertained and feasted at
Whitehall, and the same forenoone, the King in his own Chapel, was sworn
unto the foresaid Articles, Ostend besieged 3 years and 3 months.
and in the afternoon the Peace was proclaimed with Spain and the Archduke, at
the Court, and in London. And this month, the Archduke won the strong Town
of Ostend in Flanders, after it had been besieged with all extremity, 3
years, and 3 months.

The Lord Robert Cecil created Viscount Cra^born.
The 20 of August, the Lord Robert Cecill, Baron of Essenden, was created
Viscount Cranborne.

The Customs of merchandise let to farm.
In October, the Customs of Merchandise were raised both inward and outward,
and were then let to farm.

K. James proclaimed King of Great Britain.
The 24 of October, with great state, by a King at Arms, and Heralds, and two
Sergeants at Arms, assisted by the L. Mayor and Aldermen, K. James was
proclaimed in London, King of Great Britain, France and Ireland, Defendor of
the faith, etc.

Sir Thomas Hayes Knight. Shrieues.


Sir Roger Jones Knight.

Sir Thomas Low Knight, Haberdasher. Mayor.


The 10 of December, D. Bancroft archbishop of Canterbury.
the most reverend Father in GOD, Richard Bancroft, Doctor of Divinity, late
Lord Bishop of London, was translated to the Archbishopric of Canterbury.

The 24 of December Richard Vaughan, D. Vaughan, Bishop of London.
Doctor of Divinity, late L. Bishop of Westchester, was by his Deputy,
installed Bishop of London in Paul's Church.

The 4 of January, at Whitehall, Sir Philip Harbert married.
sir Philip Harbert, brother to the Earl of Pembrooke, married the Lady Susan
Vere, youngest daughter to the Earl of Oxford; the King himself gave her in
marriage.

The 6 of January in the afternoon, Charles D. of Albany, second son to K.
James, Robert, Knights of the Bath.
L. Willoughby, the L. Chandois, William, L. Compton, the Lord Norris, William
Cecill, son and heir to the L. Viscount Cranborne, Allaine Percy, brother to
the Earl of Northumberland, Thomas Somerset, second son to the Earl of
Worcester, Francis Manners, brother to Roger, Earl of Rutland, Ftancis
Clifford, brother to the Earl of Cumberland, Thomas Howard, second son to
the Earl of Suffolk, and John Harington, Son and Heir to the Lord
Harington. All these were made Knights of the Bath, and two days after that,
they performed all appropriate Rites and Ceremonies. And the same time the
forenamed Duke Charles, was also created Duke of York, The Duke of York
created.
being not full four years of age, the Earls of Oxford and Essex were his
esquires.

Lions whelped in the Tower.
The twenty sixth of February was a Lion whelped in the Tower, which whelpe was
taken from the Damme, and brought up by hand, as the King had commanded, by
reason that the same Lioness, in August last, had whelped a Lion, and spoiled
it, by carrying it in her mouth up and down the den, to hide it: this young
Lion lived but sixteen days: after this, the King caused a convenient place
to be made, near to the Lions Den for the Lioness to breed in: and the
same Lioness afterward, brought forth two Lions at one litter, and they
lived, and became as lusty as any other in the Tower: these four were the
first that over were whelped in the Tower.

All Jesuits and Seminaries banished by Proclamation.
The 22 of February 1604, Proclamation was made against all Jesuits and
Seminaries, and that they should forthwith depart out of the kingdom.

A Proclamation for establishing the Episcopal authority, and the book of
common prayer.
The 5 of March, Proclamation was made for confirmation of the Ecclesiastical
government of the Church of England, and the Book of Common prayer, as it has
been used in the time of Queen Elizabeth, etc.

The 28 of March 1605, the Earl of Nottingham, Lord high Admiral of England,
embarked for Spain, to take the Kings oath, for confirmation of the Articles
of Peace, lately agreed upon, and returned the nineteenth of June: An. reg. 3.
1605. The Lord Admiral sent to the King of Spain, to take his oath.
he left sir Charles Cornwallis Ambassador Lieger in Spain.

The 19 of April, Edward, Earl of Hertford, was likewise sent Commissioner
into Flanders, to the Archduke and Duchess, to take their oaths for
confirmation of the said Peace, and returned the 20 of May. The Earl of
Hertford goes to take the oath of the Archduke. A charitable deed.


At this time To. Dove of London, Marchant-taylor, gave competent maintenance
for ever, for the tolling of a Bell in Saints Sepulchers Church, to cause good
people to pray for such prisoners as are to be executed out of Newgate, and to
cease when they are executed: this Bell does begin to toll at six of the
clock in the morning, and the same is made known unto the prisoners, that the
said Bell is to put them in mind to prepare themselves for death, etc.

The 29 of March was borne Philip, The Prince of Spain borne.
Prince of Spain, son to Philip, the 3 of that name.

At Greenwich the 8 of April, was borne the Lady Mary, The Lady Mary borne.
Daughter to our Sovereign Lord the King, between 11 and 12 a clock at night.

The twenty one of February last died Clement the eight, Pope of Rome, 3 Popes
in six weeks.
after he had reigned full thirteen years, after him succeeded Leo the
eleventh, who dyed within fourteen days after his instalment, and after him
came Paul the fifth.

Knights of the Garter elected.
The Feast of Saint George was kept at Greenewich, where the King elected the
Duke Vlricke, brother to our most gracious Queen Anne, and Henry, Earl of
North-hampton, knights of the Garter.

At Greenewich the fourth of May, the King made Earls and Barons, Creation of
Earls and Barons.
viz. Sir Robert Cecill, Viscount Cranborne, Baron of Essenden-was created
Earl of Salisburie, Thomas Cecil, Lord Burghley, elder brother to sir Robert
Cecil, was created Earl of Excester, Sir Philip Harbert, younger brother to
the Earl of Pembrooke, was created Baron of Shurland, and Earl of Montgomery,
Rober, Sidney, Baron of Penhurst, was created Viscount Lisie, Sir John Stanhope
was created L. Stanhope of Harington, Sir George Carew, was created Lord Ca^ew
of Clopton. M. Thomas Arondell, was created Lord Arondell of Wardour, and M.
William Cauendish, was created Lord Cauendish of Hardywicke.

The Lady Mary christened.
The next day after, being Sunday, the Lady Mary was christened.

The pretended sleeping preacher.
Upon May day last, Richard Haydocke, a Physician, asked forgiveness of the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, for deluding the King, and many others, under
pretense of being inspired, and to preach in his sleep by night, with which
deceit he had so strongly possessed the vulgar, as it was hard to remove them,
although he confessed the abuse.

The 19 of May, the Queen was churched, The Qu. churched.
and two days after^, the King made twelve Knights.

In this month, John Lepton of Kepwicke, Master Leptons swift journey between
London and York.
in the County of York Esquire, a Gentleman of an ancient Family there, and of
good reputation, his Majesty's servant, and one of the Grooms of his most
honorable Privy Chamber, performed so memorable a journey, as I may not omit
to record the same to future ages, the rather for that I did hear sundry
Gentlemen, who were good horsemen, and likewise many good Physicions affirm it
was impossible to be done without danger of his life.

He undertook to ride five several times betwixt London and York in six
days, to be taken in one week, betwixt Monday morning, and Saturday
following: he began his journey upon Monday, being the 20 day of May, betwixt
two and three of the clock in the morning, forth of S. Martins, near
Aldersgate, within the City of London, and came into York the same day,
betwixt the hours of 5 and 6 in the afternoon, where he rested that night:
the next morning being Tuesday, about 3 of the clock, he took his iourny forth
of York, and came to his lodging in S. Martins, aforesaid, betwixt the hours
of 6 and 7 in the afternoon, where he rested that night: the next morning being
wednesday, betwixt 2 and 3 of the clock, he took his journey forth of London,
and came into York about seven of the clock the same day, where he rested
that night: the next morning being Thursday, betwixt two and three of the
clock, he took his journey forth of York, and came to London the same day,
betwixt 7 and 8 of the clock, where he rested that night; the next morning
being Friday, betwixt two and three of the clock, he took his journey toward
York, and came thither the same day, betwixt the hours of 7 and 8 in the
afternoon, so as he finished his appointed journey, (to the admiration of all
men) in five days, according to his promise: and upon Monday, the 27 of this
month, he went from York, and came to the Court at Greenwich upon Tuesday,
the 28, to his Majesty, in as fresh and cheerful manner, as when he first
began.

Duke Vlrich returns to Denmark.
The first of June, Prince Vlricke, Duke of Holstaine, etc. embarked for
Denmark.

The King makes special provision for the breeding of Lions in the Tower.
About this time the King caused a convenient place to be made on the back part
of the Lions Den, for the Lions to breed in, which took good effect: read
my large Book, concerning the Trial and Conclusions with the Lions, touching
their Instinct of Nature, in not fearing the Cock, nor greedy devouring the
Lamb, as also the undaunted Courage of the English Masties, against the
fiercest Lion in the Tower.

The 15 of June Thomas Dowglasse was committed to the Tower, who arrived in
England but three days before, being then sent prisoner by the County Palatine
of the Rheine, Thomas Dowglasse sent prisoner out of Germany, and after that
condemned and executed for his treason.
the 26 of June the said Thomas Dowglasse was brought to the Sessions house at
Newgate, and there condemned of high treason, viz. for counterfeiting the Kings
Privy signet, and for counterfeiting the Kings hand unto Letters of his own
devising unto diverse Princes of Germany, etc. and the next day after his trial
he was drawn, hanged, and quartered in Smithfield.

The second of July 1605 seauenteene Scottish Ministers contrary to the Kings
former express commandment held a solemn assembly at Aberdine in Scotland,
An unlawful assembly of Ministers.
who being conuented for the same before the Council of Scotland, utterly
denied not only their Lordships authority in that behalf, but the kings also,
saying, that in matters Ecclesiastical, they neither owe nor ought to
knowledge themselves in any subjection, either to the King, or to any temporal
Counsel, and that all spiritual differences should be tried and determined by
the Church, as competent Judges, etc. Justifying their voluntary meeting to be
good and warrantable by the word of God, alleging the several assemblies of
the Apostles without knowledge or consent of any temporal estate, etc. for
which riot, and for denying the Kings supremacy in causes Ecclesiastical, six
of the chief of them, the tenth of January following at Blackeneese were
arraigned and condemned of high treason.

The fifth of July arrived at London, Prince George Lodwicke Langraue, of
Lutenburgh, etc. A special Ambassador from the Emperor of Almaine.
being sent Ambassador from Rodolphus the second of that name, Emperor of the
Romans, unto the Kings Majesty, to congratulate his peaceful enjoying this
Kingdom, and the rest of his lawful inheritance, and for continuance of
ancient amity with the King of Great Britain, and the Emperors imperial
dignity: this Ambassador was accompanied with three Earls, and 24 Knights and
Gentlemen, he had a guard of muskets, and an hundred other common persons, and
returned the 22 of July.

A proclamation against Pirates and peace-breakers.
The 8 of July proclamation was made against Pirates, and other English Mariners
and Soldiers, who under pretense of serving the States, robbed diverse
Englishmen and other Nations, who made complaint thereof unto his Majesty: This
is the third Proclamation against Pirates.

Shiriffe Jones died and a new shiriffe chosen in his place.
The 24 of July died shireiffe Jones, and two days after Oliver Style Grocer
was chosen shiriffe for the remainder of that year, but the said Oliver Style
was not chosen Alderman, but remained as a Commoner, because he had paid a fine
before, to acquit himself thereof, and as he supposed of all other public
offices, wherein he deceived himself.

The first of August, died Sir Edmond Anderson Lord Chief Justice of the (...)
Pleas, a man very famous for Law, The Lord Anderson deceased.
Equity and Conscience, he sat Judge of that High Court three and twenty
years, he abhorred briberie, he was utterly against all Monopolies, and
Polipragmaes in concealements: after him succeeded Sir Francis Gawdie, a most
just Judge, and a great Lawier, he died the 15 of December next following.

The 11 of August the King made Proclamation to redress the misimployment of
lands and goods, A proclamation for continuance of things given to charitable
uses.
and other things given to charitable uses.

William Caluerley of Caluerley in Yorkshire Esquier, murdered two of his own
children in his own house, A cruel homicide.
then stabd his wife into the body with full intent to have killed her, and
then instantly with like fury went from his house to have slain his youngest
Child at nurse, but was prevented: he was pressed to death in York the 5 of
August.

The 27 of August the King, The kings progress to Oxford
Queen and Prince with many of the Nobility being accompanied with the
Ambassadors of Spain and the Archduke, were very royally received into Oxford,
where the King heard sundry disputations, and himself made an Oration in
Latin in presence of the whole assembly, and for three days space they were
most sumptuously feasted by the Earl of Dorset, Lord Treasurer of England and
Chancellor of that University, who also gave free entertainment unto all
comers from morning until night during the Kings abode in Oxford.

The Woodmo^gers and Carmen of London made a corporation.
The 29 of August 1605. the King by his Letters Pattents did incorporate the
Woodmongers and Carmen of London, and the Suburbs to be a Body Corporate and
Politic for ever, by the name of Master Wardens and Fellowship of
Woodmongers, Thomas Hunt, and Mark Snelling and Cuthbert Coleman were the
first Master and Wardens thereof.

A special Ambassador from the King of Denmark.
The last of August arrived at London Henricus Remelyus Principal Secretary of
Estrate unto Christianus the 4 King of Denmark, to be enstalled Knight of the
Garter in his Kings right, to whom the order of the Garter was sent two years
before, he returned the 28 of September.

The Archbishop of Canterbury sworn a privy Counselor.
The 29 of September the L. Archbishop of Canterbury was sworn a Privy
Counselor of Estate at Hampton Court.

About the 20 of September sir Thomas Smith returned out of Russia, being sent
thither Ambassador the last year unto the Emperor Boris Pheodorowich
Godonoua, Sir Tho. Smith returns from Mosco.

Demetrius came out of Poland and was brought up there.


at whose arrival there he found the country in uproar, and the Emperor in
open wars against Demetrius, who claimed the crown, then entered his
territories with an army of Polonians, and seconded by certain discontented
Russians, all which notwithstanding the Emperor used and entreated him very
respectively, and became so gracious with him as the Emperor granted all that
he desired, and being returned from Mosco to Vollogda to embarke for England,
he understood that the said Boris Pheodor had poisoned himself, and that his
son Pheodor Borossowich succeeded him, who upon knowledge that the English
Ambassador was not yet departed, dealt as kindly with him as his father had
done, as well in accepting his letters, as promising to confirm whatsoever his
father granted, but this young Emperor died within eight weeks after his
coronation: and the forenamed Demetrius the supposed son to the ancient Euan
Vaselowich obtained the crown, which said Demetrius after his counsel had
duly informed him of the serious purposed and discreet carriage of the English
Ambassador from the King of England, and that he remained yet in Russia, with
all speed sent Gauarillo Salmanoue a great Courtier unto his Lordship, with
commission to give him a honorable dispatch, and to signify his Majesty's
most earnest desire to be in love and amity with King James of England, above
all the Kings in the world.

Thomas Pearcy, Robert Catesby, The practice of the blowing up of the Parliment
house.
Thomas Winter and others in the last year of the reign of Queen Elizabeth,
by the instigation of certain Jesuits, practiced with the king of Spain, to
send a well furnished Army upon England, promising him great aid to entertain
them at their arrival at Milford Haven, and to that purpose the King promised
to send them fifty thousand pound for leuying of horse and ^oot, and
preparation of Munition in England to second them: but whilst this was in a
manner concluded, Queen Elizabeth died, and the King of Spain upon certain
knowledge that King James was established, dispatched his Ambassadors and
Commissioners for England, for confirmation of a lasting Peace between them,
yet nevertheless the said Robert Catesbie sent Thomas Winter again to the
King of Spain to resolicite their former project, but the King answered him,
your old Queen is dead with whom I had wars, and you have a new King with
whom I have ever been in good peace and amity, and for continuance thereof I
have sent my special Commissioners, and until I see what will become thereof,
I will not hearken unto any other course whatsoever. When Winter returned, and
made this known unto Catesby, Pearcy and the rest, then they began to cast
about what they might do of themselves to advance the Roman Catholic
Religion, but first they would see the event of the first Parliament, if that
would mitigate any former Laws, and try what good the Conclusion of Peace
with Spain would do unto them before they attempted any further: but when
they perceived that neither Parliament, nor public Peace sorted in any part
to their desire, and that the Peace concluded was rather a more ready means
for the Law to proceed against them then otherwise, because the Peace
concerned only the Amity of Christian Princes for the general good of
Christendom, without any particular or private respect: then Catesby told the
rest, he had a device in his head that should free them, and the rest of the
English Catholics from their oppressions, and when he had found out fit
Ministers for execution of his device, after they had taken oath and Sacrament
for secrecy, he told them he had devised the mean to undermine and blow up
the Parliament house, at the instant when the King, Queen, Prince, Peers, and
Commons were all assembled, which project they presently embraced, and
forthwith Pearcy hired certain lodgings close to the Parliament house: and
then they appointed Miners, who with great difficulty dug and undermined a
part of the wall, but after a while they understood that the Vaut right under
the Parliament house was to be let to hire, then Guydo Fawkes went and hired
it: this Fawkes was of late a Soldier in Flanders, and for this purpose was
sent for, who by consent of the rest changed his name, and was called John
Johnson Master Pearcies man: after they had hired the Vant, they secretly
conuaied into it thirty and six barrels of powder, and covered them all over
with Billets and Fagots. The discovery of the gunpowder treason.


About ten days before the Parliament should begin, an unknown party in
the Evening met a servant of the Lord Mounteagles in the street, and delivered
him a letter, ^h^^^ing him speedily to give it unto the Lord, which he did:
when his Lord had read it, and obseru^^ the dangerous contents, with a special
ca^^^^, not to appear the first day of Parliament, (...) was amassed, and
forthwith delivered it to the Earl of Salisbury the Kings principal
Secretary, a chief Counselor of Estate: when the Earl had indiciously
observed the stran^^^ Phrase and Tenor thereof, with the terrible threats
therein against the whole State, he acquainted the Lord Chamberlain therewith,
and then they conjoined unto them the Lord Admiral, the Earls of Worcester
and Northampton, who instantly consulted what was fittest to be done, omitting
neither time diligence nor industry, all which notwithstanding, they could not
as yet find out the depth of this mystery, and were therefore much troubled in
mind, because the appointed day of Parliament draw near, which was Tuesday
the fifth of November: upon the Saturday before, the King being returned from
hunting, the said Lords acquainted his Highness with what had past, and when
his Majesty had well noted the strange contents of the letter, which purported
the sudden ruin of the State, the King said notwithstanding, the slight
regard which might be given to scattered Libels, yet this was more quick and
pithie then was usual in libels, and willed them to search in all places, as
well not daily frequented, as of usual repair; and concerning any foreign
disturbance or invasion, he well knew the present force and preparation of all
Christian Princes, and that whatsoever practice of treason was now in hand, it
must be performed in some unsuspected place, and by some homebred traitors:
thereupon new search was made in all places about the Court and the Parliament
house, but could not as yet find any thing worthy their labors: all which
searches were performed with such silence and discretion, as there ^ose no
manner of suspicion either in Court or City, the Lord Chamberlain whose office
it most concerned, never rested day nor night, and the night before the
Parliament, as Sir Thomas Kneuet with others scowted about the Parliament
house, espied a fellow standing in a corner very suspitiously, and asked him
his name, what he was, and what he did there so late, who answered very bluntly
his name was John Johnson Master Pearcies man, and keeper of his ledgings. Sir
Thomas Kneuet continued still his search in all places thereabouts, and
returning thither again, found him lingering there still, searched him, and
found under his cloak a close Lantern, and a burning Candle in it: and about
him other signs of suspicion, that he stood not there for any good: then the
Knight entered the Vaut, where they found the powder covered with billets and
fagots as aforesaid, and then the Lord Chamberlain caused the Traitor to ^e
bound, and being now about three a clock in the morning he went unto the King,
and with exceeding gladness told his Majesty the treason was discovered and
prevented, and the traitor in hold, the King desired to see Fawkes, who when he
came before the King used like traiterous and audacious speeches as he did at
his first apprehension, affirming himself was the only man to perform this
treason, saying, it sore vexed him that the deed was not done, and for that
time would not confess any thing touching the rest of the Conspirators, but
that himself only and alone was the contriuer and practiser of this treason.

Between five and six a clock in the morning the Council gave order to the
Lord Mayor of London to look to the City, and in very calm manner to set
civil watch at the city gates, signifying therewithal that there was a plot
of treason discovered, and that the King would not go to Parliament that day:
and the same day in the afternoon, the manner of the treason was by
Proclamation made known unto the people, for joy whereof, there was that night
as many bonefires in and about London as the streets could permit, and the
people gave humble and hearty thanks unto Almighty God for their King and
Countries right blessed escape.

Within 3 days after two other proclamations were made, signifying unto the
people who were the chief conspirators, with commandment to apprehend Pearcy
and Catesby, and to take them alive if it were possible, which said Pearcy and
Catesby were gone to Holbach in Warwickshire to meet Winter, Grant, and others:
where under pretense of a great hunting, they meant to raise the country, and
surprise the Lady Elizabeth from the Lord Harington, whom they meant to
proclaim Queen, and in whose name they meant to enter into Arms, being
persuaded that the King, the Prince and Duke of York were by that time blown
up in the Parliament house: but when they knew their treason was known and
prevented, and saw the Kings forces round about the house, so as they could not
escape, Pearcy and Catesby very desperately issued forth, and fighting back to
back were both slain with one musket shot.

Saturday the ninth of November the King went to Parliament, wherein the
presence of the Queen, the Prince, the Duke of York, the Ambassadors of the
King of Spain, and the Archduke, and all the Lords Spiritual and Temporal,
and Commons of the same, he made a very solemn oration, manifesting the whole
complot of this Treason.

Sir Clement Scudamour Knight, Shrieues.
and Master John Iolles Shrieues.

Sir Leonard Halliday Merchantaylor Mayor. Mayor.


At this time the solemn triumphs and pleasant trophies in honor of the Lord
Mayor, The Lord Mayor. triumphs
and the City of London were held two several days, viz. the day of his oath,
and all Hollonday, but there was none in three years after by reason of
continual sickness.

The Lord Knowles married.
The 19 of January the Lord William Knowles Baron of Graies married Elizabeth
Howard eldest daughter unto the said Thomas Earl of Suffolk.

A present from the King of Spain.
The 4 of January the Spanish Ambassador delivered a Present from King Philip
his master unto King James, viz. six Ienets of Andalusia, with rich saddles and
saddlo clothes, and all other things suitable.

Sir Georg Carew Ambassador in France.
Sir George Carew is sent Ambassador Lieger into France.

The 19 of January a great Porpos was taken alive at Westham, in a little
Creek, a mile and a half within the land, A great Whale came up as hie as
Wolwich.
and was presented unto Francis Goston Esquire, chief Auditor of the Imprests,
and within a few days after, a very great Whale came within eight miles of
London whose length was diverse times seen above the water, and the same was
judged to be a great deal longer then the longest ship in the River.

Three entire Subsidies, and six fifteens given by the te^poralty, and four
Subsidies given by the Clergy.
A few days before Christmas the Parliament brake up, and began to sit again
the 22 of January being Tuesday, and continued until the 27 of May next
following, in which Parliament they gave the King and his successors three
entire Subsidies, and six fifteenes, and then the Parliament was prorogued
until the 18 of November: at this time the Clergy gave unto the King and his
Successors four entire Subsidies: And in this Parliament it was enacted that
the 5 of November for ever should be kept holy day, The 5 of November ordained
holy day.
with preaching and thanksgiving unto Almighty God for his mercy, in preventing
the terrible danger of the late practice by Pearcy, Catesby and the rest, to
blow up the Parliament house.

The 27 of January at Westminster were arraigned Thomas Winter, Guydo Fawkes,
Arraignement of Traitors at Westminster.
Robert Keys and Thomas Bates for plotting to blow up the Parliament house,
digging in the mine, taking oath and Sacrament for secrecy, etc. and Robert
Winter, John Grant, Ambrose Rookewood, for being acquainted with the treason
afterward, giving their full consent thereunto, and taking oath and sacrament
for secrecy, and sir Euerard Digby for being made acquainted with the said
treason, yielding assent, and taking his corporal oath for secrecy: all which
indictments were proved against them, and by themselves confessed, and
thereupon had judgment given them to be drawn, hanged and quartered, their
limbs to be set upon the City gates, and their heads upon the Bridge:
according to which sentence the thirtith of January, Sir Euerard Digby, Robert
Winter, Execution in London and Westminster.
John Grant and Bates were executed at the west end of Saint Paul's Church, and
the next day after the other four were executed in the Parliament yeard, 6 of
the 8. acknowledged their guiltiness in this horrible treason, and died very
penitently, but Grant and Keys did not so.

Saturday the 22 of March between six and seven a clock in the forenoone, A
terrible rumor that the King was slain.
a rumor was suddenly spread throughout the Court, and the City of London,
that for certain the King that morning was slain as he was hunting in Okeeing
Park, 20 miles from London, which dreadful news still increased until nine
a clock, being seconded by infinite suggestions, by reason whereof it was
generally received for truth, and thereupon the Court gates were kept shut, the
Lord Mayor began to set guard at the City gates, and to raise their trained
soldiers: Sir William Wade Lieutenant of the Tower did the like with his
hamlets within his Liberties, and the Parliament was greatly amassed: but by 11
a clock the joyful news of ye Kings good health was made known in London by
proclamation, as it had been an hour before at the Court gate, whereat the
people began to revive their vexed spirits, which until then were wondrously
surcharged with hearts grief, yea men and women, old matrons, and young virgins
made exceeding great lamentation: this flying terror went three days journey
into the country before it was fully suppressed.

An. reg. 4. Henry Garret arraigned. 1606
Friday the 28 of March 1606 in the Guildhall in London was arraigned and
condemned Henry Garnet Provincial of the Jesuits in England, for being
acquainted with the Gunpowder plot, and concealing the same, for the which he
was adjudged to be drawn, hanged and quartered, and his head to be set upon
London bridge, and according to that sentence he was executed the third of May
at the west end of S. Paul's Church, Garnet executed.
where he acknowledged the greatness of his offense in concealing the treason,
and besought all Catholics to forbear and desist from treason, and all other
violent attempts whatsoever against Kings and Princes, saying that all such
practices were utterly against the Catholic Religion.

The twenty nine, Great winds and floods and shipwreck.
and thirtith of March the wind was extreme violent, so as it caused much
shipwreck upon the coasts of England, France and the Low countries, it brought
in the sea and drowned much cattle, and in Picardie near Dyope, it blew down
a steeple which slew fourscore persons in the fall thereof, in Flanders and up
toward Germany, there were many Churches, Towns, Wind-milles, and trees
blown down, and the 8 of June following it rained 24 hours, and the next day
there ^ose strange land-waters which carried away mils, trees and houses, made
new currants where never any was seen before, it brake down the heads of
pooles and trenches, and carried quite away great quantities of cattle, timber
and other things from off up land grounds.

The 24 of April arrived Don John de Mendoza, Marquis of Saint German, A
special Ambassador from Spain.
from the King of Spain unto the King of Great Britain, to congratulate his
happy deliverance from the late pretended treason, and to deliver certain
presents from Queen Margaret of Spain, unto Queen Anne of Great Britain,
viz. a robe of morrey satin, Presents from the Queen of Spain unto the Queen
of Great Britain.
imbrodered all over with amber leather, and in many places with gold, upon the
fore part thereof was forty eight tags of beaten gold, three inches long,
hollow within, and filde with amber greece very curiously wrought, and two
large chains of amber greece, two Karkanets of Amber greece, a velvet Cappe
with gold buttons, pleasantly enameld like the tagges, every of these were
severally enclosed in an ouall box of gold, and were presented all together in
a vessel of gold like unto a Basin.

Knights of the Garter made.
Tuesday the 20 of May at Windsor were enstalled Knights of the Garter Robert
Earl of Salisbury, and the Lord Thomas Howard Viscount Bindon.

Lords brought from the Tower and censured in the Star chamber.
The third of June, Henry Lord Mordant, and Edward Lord Sturton were convicted
in the high Court of Star Chamber of diverse misprisions and contempts, and for
the same the Lord Mordant was censured to pay ten thousand marks, the Lord
Sturton six thousand marks, and imprisonment during his Majesty's good
pleasure.

A proclamation against all Jesuits and Seminaries.
The tenth of June proclamation was made for the banishing of all Jesuits,
Seminaries and Roman priests.

The Lady Sophia daughter to our Soueraign Lord the King was borne at
Greenewich upon Sunday the 22 of June, at three a clock in the morning, The
Lady Sophia borne.
and died the next day, and upon Thursday next after was very solemnly conuaied
by barge, covered with black velvet, accompanied with three other barges
covered with black cloth, unto the Chapel royal in Westminster, and was
there enterred by Doctor Barlow Lord Bishop of Rochester, where were present
all the great Lords of the Council with the Heralds and chief officers of the
Court.

The 27 of June Henry Earl of Northumberland was brought from the Tower unto
the Star Chamber, The Earl of Northumberland convicted in the Star chamber.
and there convicted of diverse misprisions, contempts and offenses, and for the
same was adjudged to pay thirty thousand pound and to be removed from the
place of a Privy Counselor, and from being Captains of his Majesty's
Pentioners, and from all other offices which he held of his Majesty's grace and
favor, and to remain prisoner during life.

At this time returned Signior Nichola Molyno of honorable family, having
been here three years Ambassador Lieger for the Signory of Venice, Ambassador
from Venice.
whom the King honored with Knighthood, and in his stead came the honorable
Signior Georguo Iustiniano from the Duke and State of Venice, of which most
famous and flourishing city, I have here very briefly set down the first
foundation and State thereof as follows.

Bleda and Attilla Brethren Kings of the Hunnes, after they had made great
excursions and spoils upon Illyria and Thrace, as far as Thermopyle, Attilla
desirous to be sole Sovereign slew his brother Bleda, The Original and State
of Venice.
then he subdued most nations Eastward, and after that with five hundred
thousand men he invaded the Roman Empire, viz. the Romans and Visygotes, who
encountered him with diverse Armies, he passed violently through Italy, and
forced the people to fly from City to City and other places, of which sort
some went and possessed certain very small Islands in the sea, which then were
not well known by any name: but were afterward called Venice as you may read:
he also invaded France, and besieged Orleance in the year of the world, 4414.
and after Christ, 452 and gave battle unto Detyus Aefius the Vice Emperor,
and Theodoric King of Vys^gotes: the fight continued one whole day, wherein was
performed all martial prowes, and two hundred thousand slain on both sides,
yea, such was the effusion of blood, that very many dead bodies floted up and
down, as it had been a brook of blood: in this fight Attilla had the worst,
yet nevertheless, he reencouraged himself, and furiously assailed Italy, and
had utterly spoiled it, if the Pope had not humbled himself before him, then
he returned into his own Country of Hungary: The Emperor Valentinian the
third, being in a manner constrained, gave him his sister in marriage, after
that he married an other, at which Nuptial he became so drunk, that he died
thereof: the City of Venice being at first but a small thing was governed by
Consuls, who resisted Pelagius, Nestorius and Pharamond the first King of
France, then it increased and was governed by Tribunes. And in the year, 582.
Pope Pelagius the second, in a Council of twenty Bishops by means of the
Archbishop of Aquilea, it was agreed that Grado should be the Metropolis of
Venice and Istria, by reason that Grado was then more Noble and populous then
Venice, and so continued until the year, 654. Afterward Mallo Mocco and
Palestina by means of a great assembly of people from Padua and Mount Telice,
which came in company of the Bishop of Padua, Venice was greatly increased:
this was done when Padua had been destroyed by the Lombards, the third and
fourth time, in the year 593. And in the year 654 unto the foresaid ten
Tribunes, were added two more to rule in Hyraclia, which Hyraclia took his
name of Hyraclius the Christian Emperor: the said Hyraclia in the year 603
was reedified and enlarged by Bishop Magno, but Rotaryo King of Lombards still
exercising his cruelty, destroyed Oderzo and other places, as also there was
civil wars a long time in most parts of Italy, so as many ancient Noble
habitations being ruinated, These Islands until then were not known by any
name.
the distressed persons for their convenient safety resorted and inhabited
these foresaid small plots or Islands, lying in the sea, the chief whereof was
then call Ryuo Alto, and is now called the Ryalto, which they found to lie
commodious for traffic and Navigations: then they increased so fast in people
and building that these petty plots or Islands became well inhabited, and
therein with great Christian piety erected eight fair goodly Churches with
many stately palaces, so as the City was grown very great, and these last
twelve Magistrates of Tribunes continued until the year 697. and was then by
the forenamed Hyraclius and Pope Sergius the first, in the general Council of
Aquilea: those foresaid Islands, were called Venice, and by virtue of the same
Council it was ordained that they should choose themselves a Duke out of their
City successively for ever: and for conclusion of peace after long dissension
between Grado and Venice, the Pope was content that the Patriarchie of Grado
should be transferred unto Venice, since which time, he has there held his
Cathedra, and the Venetians have been governed by Dukes, assisted by Senators,
Paulus Lucius was the first Duke, and have so continued Dukes by election
until this present year 1606. with great honor and prosperity, over whom
Leonardo Donato now reigns, there have been ninety and one Dukes, since the
forenamed Council.

Sir Edw. Cook Lord chief Justice of the common pleas.
At this time the King made Sir Edward Cook Lord chief Justice of the common
Pleas, after he had been fourteen years his Majesty's Solicitor and
Attorney general.

A Tomb for Queen Elizabeth.
This year at the appointment and charges of the King the stately Tomb for
Queen Elizabeth was fully finished, and set up in a little Chapel on the
North side of the high Altar in the Chapel Royal at Westminster and her
Image or Status placed amongst the Pictures of other Kings and Queens in an
upper room on the North side of the high Alter in the Abbey Church at
Westminster, which said, Images of former Princes were wont to stand in a dark
lost or Chapel behind the high Altar, and were removed thence into a more
lightsome place by Doctor Neile, Deane of Westminster, which said Deane
repaired the Tomb of Anne of Cleave, gave a rich Altar Cloth unto the Church,
and reformed the impeachments of light in the Quire thereof. A monstrous mother.


The 15 of July the wife of Richard Homwood of East Grimsted in Sussex without
any known cause murdered her own three children, and threw them into a pit,
and then cut her own throat likewise.

Thursday the 17 of July, The King of Denmark arriueth in England.
Christianus King of Denmark with eight ships cast anchor before Graues-end,
and the next day King James with Prince Henry and diverse Nobles went thither
to him, and dined a ship-boord, and after diner both Kings came to Greenewich,
where Christianus and all his train were royally entertained. The 24 of July
these Kings rode progress together, and for four days space they and their
train were worthily feasted by the Earl of Salisbury at Theobalds: and upon
Thursday the last of July, both Kings with all magnificence rode through
London, against which time, and upon very short warning the Citizens had made
diverse Trophies, viz. a Bower of the Muses at the East end of Cheapeside; a
brave stately Pageant with delicate music, eloquent Orations, and variable
pleasant devises, at the West end of Cheapeside, upon the South side whereof
sat the Lord Mayor, and Aldermen in Scarlet Robes, where Sir Henry Mountegue
Recorder of London, after his solemn Oration in Latin, presented the King of
Denmark with a fair Cup of gold: and upon the Fountain in Fleetstreete was
a pleasant pastoral devise with music and pleasing songs: and for their more
State and easy passage, the Streets were rayled in, on the one side, and the
Companies sat in their Liueries on the other side in as great bravery as is
used at a Coronation: And that night the Kings were lodged at White Hall: the
next day the King of Denmark after he had seen and noted the rare
Architecture and stately monuments in the Chapel royal at Westminster: he
suruaied Paul's Church, and on the top of the steeple thereof, he caused the
Keeper of the steeple to take the just length and breadth of his foot in the
lead: from thence the King went to the Royal Exchange, and to the Tower,
where Sir William Wade banqueted him and all his attendants; Sir William Wade.
and within few days after that, the Earl of Rutland feasted all the King of
Denmarkes Privy Counselors, having made his provision to have feasted the King
also.

Sunday the 10 of August the King of Denmark with his Counsel and chief
Gentlemen were royally feasted by the King of Great Britain in the Elizabeth
Jonas at Chatham, The King of Denmark returns.
and the next day Christianus feasted King James Queen Anne, Prince Henry,
and others of the Nobility in his own ship, and about four a clock in the
afternoon, all princely complements being performed, they took their leave
one of another: and the Thursday following the King of Denmark with all his
ships and train, having a fair wind set sail of Denmark. The King whilst he
was in England heard two sermons in Latin, and dealt bountifully and royally
with all men.

The 24 of September the French King baptized his Son the Prince Dolphin,
Prince Dolphin of France christened.
being then full five years of age.

This year diverse churches in London were well repaired, and somewhat
beautified, Churches repaired.
namely, Christ-church, Trinity Church, Saint Brides church, and Bow-church
with others: The city also very carefully cleansed their ditches and common
shewers, and made flood gates in Holborne ditch, and Fleet ditch: and beyond
all expectation they turned Moorefield into diverse pleasant and princely
walks, and planted it round on all sides and quarters with good store of young
trees, and rayled it round in like manner to preserve the walks, Morefield
otherwise called the new walks
and keep the trees from violence, and defended the outsides thereof with a
new strong brick wall: there was also made diverse vauts under ground, some to
convey away foul water without offense, and one to bring fresh water into the
town ditch to keep it sweet. This field was ever until this present a rude
noisome place like a Lay-stall, half environed with stinking ditches, very
offensive to the City and all passengers: Sir Leonard Hallyday Lord Mayor was
very forward and careful to the furtherance of this work, and for contriuing
to bring a river to the North part of London to serve the City, and to cleanse
their ditches and sewers; and what he could not perform in his Maiorality, his
Successor Sir John Wats did his full endeavor to accomplish: and Master
Nicholas Leate a grave wise, and wealthy Citizen was wondrous painful and
industrious in the furtherance of this work, A truce between the Emperor of
Germany and the great Turk.
and of the rest thereunto adjoining: also there were many thousands of worthy
citizens wondrous earnest to express their bounty toward the bringing of the
foresaid river to the city, according to the Tenor of a statute lately made for
them in that behalf.

This year was concluded a truce for 15 years between Rodolphus the second
of that name Emperor of Almaine, and the Great Turk.

Shrieues
William Walthall, John Leman a bachelor.

Mayor,
Sir John Wats knight, Clothworker Mayor.

The 18 of December, the Lords, Knights, and B^rgesses of the Parliament had
leave to go home unto their houses, and the tenth of February they all began to
sit again.

The sixth of January at Whitehall with very great solemnity the Lord James Hay
was married unto Honora the daughter and heir of the Lord Edward Denny. The
Lord Hay married.


The twentieth of January if pleased God to send a mighty west wind which
continued sixteen hours, which brought in the sea, Great floods.
by reason whereof, and of high spring tides, both which encountered the land
waters, after a great rain; which caused the River of Seuerne beginning as
far as the mount in Cornwall, to ouerflow her banks all along on both sides
up into Somersetshire, and Glocestershire, in some places the Waters ouerflowed
their Banks, three foot, in other places five foot, and some places seven
foot, by means of which sudden inundation, much people and cattle were
drowned, diverse Churches and villages borne down and spoiled, and some utterly
destroyed, and in Wales in diverse places, it did most harm in manner as
aforesaid, A Seminary executed Reconciliation between the Grave of Emden and
his Subjects.
the like whereof in England is not known to be mentioned in any Chronicle.

The 26 of February Robert Drewrie a Seminary was executed at Tiburne.

The 1 of March a peace and reconciliation was concluded and proclaimed
between the Grave of Emden, and the City of Emden, and the Grave entered and
took possession of the City, his Subjects assured him his royalties and
profits, and concerning all other differences between the Grave and the
Citizens it was agreed the same should be determined by the Emperor, this was
done after the people had wasted their wealth, and were wearied with three
years war.

An. reg. 5. 1607 The King manifests his mind to both houses.
Tuesday the last of March, the Lord Knights and Burgesses of the Parliament
came before the King at Whitehall, unto whom he made a solemn speech. And from
that time the houses sat not until the 20 of April following, and the 2 of
May the King made an other solemn speech unto the said Lords, Knights and
Burgesses concerning the union.

Great floods in diverse houses.
Maundy thursday the 2 of April, there happened great inundations of water in
Kent, Essex, Suffolk and Norffolke. And the 17 of April there arose in the
City of Couentry a most strange and dreadful inundation.

The 8 of May arrived Prince Ienuille of the house of Lorraine, second son to
Henry late Duke of Guise, which was slain in the year 1589 he was very
honorably feasted and entertained by the King. Prince Ienuile came into
England.
And the 22 of May he accompanied the King, Queen and Prince unto Theobalds,
where they were royally feasted and entertained with pleasant and ingenious
devises by the Earl of Salisbury, being the appointed day, in which his
Majesty came to take possession thereof. Tuesday the 25 of May, the said Prince
Ienuille with others ran at Tilt at White Hall, viz. The Prince Ienuille. The
Duke of Lenox. The Earl of Arundel. The Earl of Pembroke. The Earl of
Montgomerie. The Viscount Haddington.

The L. Compton. The L. Hay.

Sir Henry Carry. Sir Richard Bulkley. Sir Richard Preston. Sir Henry Guntrot.
And the 29 of May the said Prince returned into France.

About the middle of May, Unlawful assemblies to lay open enclosures.
certain common persons assembled themselves in Northamptonshire,
Warwickshire, and Leicestershire: they cut and brake down hedges, filled up
ditches, and laid open all such enclosures of commons and other grounds, as
they found enclosed, which of ancient time had been open, and employed to
tillage. And the last of May, they were straightly commanded by Proclamation to
surcease their disorder, but yet they ceased not: whereupon the Sheriffs and
Justices had authority given them, to suppress them by force. And after that,
the King sent certain Noblemen and Judges to punish the wilful offenders
according to law. And the 28 of June, the King made another proclamation,
signifying his great unwillingness to have proceeded against them, either by
marshall law, or civil justice, if lenity or gentle admonition might any way
have prevailed with them, to desist from their turbulent rebellions and
traitorous practice.

Tuesday, the second of June, Doctor Rauis lord Bishop of London.
in Paul's Church, the right reverend Father in God Thomas Rauis, Doctor of
Divinity, late Bishop of Gloucester, was by his deputy Doctor King, Deane of
Christ-church, enstalled Lord Bishop of London. He died the 14 of December,
1609.

Friday the 12 of June, the King dined with the Lord Mayor, The King dineth
with the Lord Mayor, and made free of the Cloath-workers.
and after dinner went into Cloath-workers Hall, and was there made free of
that company. At that time also were made free sir Patricke Murry knight,
gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, sir Arthur Arston knight, sir Hugh Carmychel
knight, James Meadow Doctor of Divinity, one of the Kings Chaplains, and
others.

The 16 of July, being the great feast day at Merchantailors hall, the Lord
Mayor feasted all the Aldermen that were not free of the Merchantailors, and
with them these honorable Personages following, viz. Patricke Steward, Earl
of Orqueney, sir John Ramsey knight, Lord Viscount Hadington, sir John Selby
knight, Edward Ramsey gentlemen Sewer to the King. These were also made free of
the Cloathworkers, sir William Stone being then Master of the company, Henry
Walton, Thom^s Bostocke, Richard Boothe, and William Kymber Wardens.

His Majesty paieth 600000. l. which was lent unto Elizabeth. Ambassadors from
the States
The third of July, the Kings Majesty repaied threescore thousnd pound unto the
Citizens of London, which sum the Londoners had lent unto Queen Elizabeth
the 3 of February 1598.

On Saturday, being the fourth of July, arrived John Berke, chief Councellor
of Dort, and James de Maldere Knight, Lord of Heyes, and had audience the sixth
of July: they were honorably entertained and feasted in many places.

The fourth of July, the right honorable sir Thomas Kneuit knight, Sir Thomas
Kneuit made Baron.
was called by writ to the Parliament, by the name and title of Baron of
Escricke, and sat that day in his roabes among the Barons, being the last day
of that Parliament, holden upon prorogation, A Parliament.
and so again proroged until the 16 of November following.

Sunday the 5 of July, Sir Julius Caesar made a Privy Cou^sellor.
sir Julius Caesar knight, Chancellor of the Exchequer, was sworn a Privy
Councellor of Estate.

Thursday the 16 of July 1607 the Kings most excellent Majesty, with Prince
Henry, The King and Prince feasted at Merchantailors hall.
and diverse honorable Personages, dined at Merchantailors hall, and were most
joyfully entertained with great variety of melodious harmony of voices and
instruments, and pleasant speeches (being the day they held their feast for the
election of Master and Wardens) and after dinner Master John Swinnarton the
Master, and Richard Wright, Andrew Osborne, Edward Atkinson, and William Albany
the four Wardens of the Company, being accompanied with master Baron
Southerton, and sir Leonard Halliday, sir William Crauen, sir John Swynerton,
knights, and Aldermen, and Ieffrey Elwes Alderman, being all members of that
Company, resorted to the Kings most excellent Majesty, who dined in their
chamber called the Kings Chamber, and sir Henry Mountague knight, Recorder of
London being there present, did in the name of the whole Company most humbly
thank his Majesty, for that it had pleased him to grace it with his royal
presence that day. And the Master of the Company did present his Majesty with
a purse full of gold, and Richard Langley the Clarke of the Company, did
deliver unto his Majesty a roll, wherein was entered the names of seven Kings,
one Queen, seventeen Princes and Dukes, two Dutchesses, one Archbishop,
thirty one Earls, five Countesses, one Viscount, twenty four Bishops, sixty
six Barons or Lords, two Ladies, seven Abbats, seven Priors, and one Sub-prior
(omitting a number of Knights, Esquires etc.) who had been free of the Company,
which his Majesty most graciously accepted, and said, that he himself was
free of another Company, yet he would so much grace the Company of
Merchantailors, that the Prince his eldest son should be free thereof, and
that he would see and be a witness, when the garland should be put on his
head. And then they in like manner resorted to the Prince, who dined in the
great hall. And the said Master presented his Highness with another purse full
of gold, Prince Henry made free of the Merchantailors.
and the Clarke delivered his Highness a like roll, which were also graciously
accepted, and his Highness said, that not only himself would be free of the
Company of Merchantailors, but commanded one of his Gentlemen, and the Clarke
of the Company to go to all the Lords present, and require all of them that
loved him, and were not free of other companies, to be free of his Company:
whereupon those Lords whose names ensue (with humble thanks to his highness)
accepted of the freedom: viz. John Berke Lord in Godschalckcoort, etc.
Strangers.
Counceller of Dort in Holland. Sir James du Maldere knight, Lord of Heyes,
etc. Counceller of Zeland. Sir Noel de Caron knight, L. of Schoonwal, etc.
Ambassador Lieger from the States, etc. The Duke of Lenox. Earl of Nottingham
Lord Admiral. Earl of Suffolk Lord Chamberlain. Nobleme^.
Earl of Arundell. Earl of Oxenford. Earl of Worcester. Earl of Pembrooke.
Earl of Essex absent, yet entered by order from the Prince, under his Highness
own hand. Earl of Northampton. Earl of Salisbury principal Secretary to the
King. Earl of Montgomery. Earl of Pearth. Lord Viscount Cranborne. Lord
Euars. Lord Hunsdon. Lord Knolles. Lord Hay. Lord Sanker. Lord Borley. M.
Howard. Sir John Harington. Knights.
M. Sheffield. Sir Thomas Challoner, Governor to ye Prince. Sir Roger Ashton
Master of the Wardrobe, and Gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber. Sir Thomas
Vauasor, Knight Marshall. Sir David Fowlis. Sir David Murry. M. Doctor
Mountague, Deane of the Chapel. M. Adam Newton Deane of Durham, and Tutor to
the Prince. Sir Thomas Savage. Sir Jews Lewknor, M. of the Ceremonies: and
many other Knights, Esquires, and Gentlemen servants to the King, Queen, and
Prince, and to Noblemen.


The new Master and Wardens of the Merchantailers.
The new Master and Wardens chosen in the presence of the King and Prince, was
John Johnson Master of the Company, and Thomas Owen, Richard Scales, John
Woller, and Randolph Wolley Wardens.

The Earl of Arundels eldest son.
The next day the King christened James, the eldest son of Thomas Earl of
Arundel, borne of Alethea, youngest daughter to Gilbert Earl of Shrewsbury,
the Earl of Suffolk and the Lady Arbella were the other gossips.

The Earl of Tyrone and other Irish lords fled out of Ireland.
About the beginning of September, there fled out of Ireland into the parts
beyond the Seas, Hugh Earl of Tirone, Terconnel, Hugh Baron of Don Gannon,
Caffer Oge Odonnel, brother to the Earl of Terconnel, Orto Oge Oneale, Nephew
to the Earl of Tyrone, the Countess of Tyrone, and two of the younger sons
of Tyrone, and the son and heir of the Earl of Terconnel, being an infant
of one year of age, or thereabout, with diverse other their servants and
followers, they embarked at Lughswillie.

The seventh of September was borne Duke Charles, second son to the King of
Spain. The King of Spaines second son borne.


Wednesday the 16 of September died the Lady Mary, The death of the Lady Mary.
daughter to our Sovereign Lord the King, and was solemnly interred at
Westminster the twenty three of the same, in a vaut of the same Chapel, and
in the same manner as was her sister the Lady Sophia.

Sir Ieruais Clyfton of Layton Bromeswold Knight, was made Baron by writ, Sir
Iaruais Clyfton made baron The Lord Awbignye married.
by the title of Baron of Layton Bromeswold, and sat in his roabes with the
Lords in the Parliament house, the 16 of November, being the day of the
adiornment of the Parliament. And the twentieth day of July following, the Lord
Esme Stewart, Lord of Awbigny in France, gentleman of his Majesty's Bedchamber
in England, and sole brother unto Lodouicus Duke of Lenox, married Katherin in
the only daughter and heir of the said Lord Clyfton.

The first day of March in the second year of his Majesty's reign, Inmates
and increase of building forbidden by proclamation. Also the preservation of
timber and uniformity of building throughout London commanded by proclamation.
proclamation was made, straightly prohibiting all increase of buildings within
the city of London, and one mile thereof, Contemners censured in the
Star Chamber.
and expressly commanding all persons to build all the fore front and windows
of al their new buildings, either of brick or stone, but it took small
effect: whereupon the 12 of October this present year 1607 Proclamation was
made again to the same effect, and commanding them to build all their utter
walls and windows, either (...) brick or stone. And ye 16 of October there were
2 censured in the the star Chamber, for building contrary to the tenor of his
Majesty's first Proclamation.

The old rotten Banqueting house of timber taken down, and a new builded of
brick and stone.
This year the King new builded the stately Banqueting House, with increase
of many fair lodgings at Whitehall.

Provision for such Preachers as shall preach at Paul's Cross.
Doctor Ailmer, late L. Bishop of London, and the right honorable Elizabeth
Countess Donger of Shrewsbury, have given certain sums of money for the
better maintenance of sermon hereafter at Paul's Cross, and Thomas Russell
Draper, has likewise given ten pound a year for ever, to be given unto such
vnbeneficed Preachers as shall preach at Paul's Cross, whereupon the Lord Mayor
and Court of Aldermen for the due employment of the foresaid sums, and
increase of the same, have further provided for the said Preachers, so as every
o^ them, being vnbeneficed, shall not only receive a gravity in money, but
also every one that shall preach there, shall at his pleasure be freely
entertained for five days space, with sweet convenient lodgings, fire, candle,
and all other necessary, viz. from thursday before their appointed day of
preaching, until tuesday morning following.

Geffrey Elwes, Nicholas Style. Shrieues.


Sir Henry Row Mercer, Mayor. Mayor.


The 16 of November, The discovery of the Earl of Tyrons treason.
proclamation was made concerning the Earl of Tyrone, Terconnell, and others
of Ireland, signifying their purpose and practice to extirpe the English nation
out of Ireland, and to confer and yield the kingdom of Ireland unto the
Pope, and Tyrones soliciting foreign Princes to attempt the conquest thereof.

The 20 of December, proclamation was made to apprehend the Lord Maxwell, The
Lord Maxwell brake out of prison.
who wounded the Porter and so brake prison out of Edenbrough Castle. This Lord
Maxwell aided James Macdonell to escape likewise.

The 24 of December, Sir Thomas Parry sworn a Privy Counselor of Estate.
sir Thomas Parry Knight, Chancellor of the Duchy, was sworn a Privy
Counselor of Estate.

The 8 of December began a hard frost, and continued until the 15 of the same,
and then thawed: and the 22 of December it began again to freeze violently, A
great frost.
so as diverse persons went half way over the Thames upon the Ice: and the 30
of December, at every ebb many people went quite over the Thames in diverse
places, and so continued from that day until the third of January: the people
past daily between London and ye Banke-side at every half ebb, for the flood
removed the Ice, and forced the people daily to tread new paths, except only
between Lambeth and the ferry at Westminster, the which by incessant treading,
became very firm and free passage, until the great thaw: and from Sunday the
tenth of January, until the fifteenth of the same, the frost grew extreme, so
as the Ice became firm, and removed not, and then all sorts of men, women, and
children, went boldly upon the Ice in most parts; some shot at pricks, others
bowled and danced, with other variable pastimes; by reason of which concourse
of people, there were many that set up boothes and standings upon the Ice, as
Fruit sellers, Victuallers, that sold beer and wine, Shoomakers, and a Barbers
tent, etc. Every of them had fire near their beings. The 15 of January it
began somewhat to thaw, and so continued 4 days together: yet nevertheless
the great Ice upon the Thames held firm and passable, and became somewhat
smooth, like as in the last great frost in the year 1564. which till then were
very craggy and uncertain. The 19 of January the frost began again, but not
violently until Sunday the 24 of January, and then held on until the 30 of
the same. All the Hartichokes in gardens about London were killed with this frost.
The 1 of February the Ice began to break by little and little, and the next
day in the afternoon, all the Ice was quite dissolved and clean gone, so as
no sign remained thereof: many bridges were spoiled by this frost, and much
foul perished, especially small birds which in many places were found frozen to
death: this frost was more grievous in Ireland and France, then in England.

The 9 of February, Viscount Hadingto^ married.
sir John Ramsey knight Baron of Barnes Viscount Hadington, married Elizabeth
the eldest daughter of Robert Earl of Sussex, the King gave her in marriage,
and at dinner the King drank to the bride and bridegroom in a fair cup of
gold which he gave him. And with it a patent of 600 pound yearly pension out
of the Exchequer to the longest liver of them both: this the King did to reward
his faithful service against the dangerous treason of Earl Gowry in Scotland.

The 10 of March was laid the first stone for the new building of Algate,
Allgate new builded.
but it was not fully finished until the end of the next year after, this old
gate was taken down and new builded at the charges of the Citizens.

The eleventh of April George Ieruas a Seminary, An. reg. 6. 1608 A Seminary
executed.
was drawn to Tiburne and there executed.

The eleventh of April being Monday, S. Edmo^ds Bury spoiled by a sudden fire.
the quarter Sessions was held at Saint Edmondsbury, and by negligence an out
malt-house was set on fire, from whence in most strange and sudden manner,
through fierce winds, the fire came to the farther side of the Town, and as
it went, left some streets and houses safe and untouched: the flame flew clean
over many houses near unto it, and did great spoil to many fair buildings
farthest off, and ceased not until it had consumed 160 dwelling houses,
besides other, and in damage of wares and household stuff, to the full value
of threescore thousand pound. The King was very forward to do them any favor.
The King showed great kindness to the distressed inhabitants, as well in
giving them five hundred load of timber to repair their buildings, as in
preferring their best means to raise their general and particular estates,
and in giving them a new Charter. The Knights and chief Gentlemen of that
County performed likewise great kindness unto the Townsmen: the City of
London gave kindly toward their relief.

The 17 of April Doctor Montague, Deane of the Kings Chapel, Doctor
Mountague Lord Bishop of Bath and Wels.
was consecrated Bishop of Bath and Wels, by the Lord Archbishop of Canturbury.
At this consecration were present Prince Henry, the Duke of York, and most of
the great Lords of the Privy Counsel, and diverse Bishops.

The Earl of Dorset dies.
The 19 of April, at Whitehall died Thomas Earl of Dorset, Lord high Treasurer
of England. He died suddenly at the Counsel Table.

The oath of allegiance ministered unto suspicious persons.
The 29 of April, proclamation was made, commanding the oath of allegiance to be
ministered unto all persons that should come from beyond the seas, only to
distinguish honest subjects from traitorous practisers, and not for any point
or matter in religion: all known Merchants and others of honest state and
quallitie were exempt from taking this oath. This proclamation was made, by
reason that many suspicious persons of base sort came daily from beyond seas,
and refused to take the oath.

At this time Henry Earl of Northampton was made Lord Privy Seal. The Earl
of Northampton made L. Privy Seal.


Friday the 6 of May, Robert Earl of Salisbury was sworn Lord high Treasurer
of England at Westminster, being accompanied with the most part of all the
Earls and Barons, The Earl of Salisbury made Lord high Treasurer of England.
and with an extraordinary company of Knights and others of honorable rank and
quality; and that day he feasted the King, Queen, and Prince, the Lady
Elizabeth, the Duke of York, and all the Counsel.

The 20 of May at Windsor were made knights of the Garter, The Earls of Dunbar
and Montgomery made Knights of the Garter.

Francis Earl of Comberland is the other lord Lieutenant.


George Earl of Dunbar, Baron Hume of Berwick, Lord of Norham, Lord high
Treasurer of Scotland, one of the two Lords Lieutenants in equal authority
over the middle shires of Great Britain, sometime the borders of both the
kingdoms Lord Governor and Captain for his Majesty of the said town of
Berwick, and the Garrison thereof, and one of his Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Counsel: and Philip Earl of Montgomery, Baron of Shurland.

In the month of June the King knighted Sir Alexander Hay, Sir Alexander Hay
knighted.
Secretary for the Scottish affairs.

The 23 of June Thomas Garnet a Jesuit was executed at Tyburne, A Jesuit
executed.
having favor offered him, if he would have taken the oath of allegiance
aforesaid, which he refused to do.

This Summer at Astley in Warwickshire, by reason of the fall of the Church,
there was taken up the corpse of Thomas Gray, The corpse of the lord Marquess.
Dorset taken up whole, having been 78 years enterred.
Marquess Dorset: he was buried the tenth of October 1530 in the twenty two
year of Henry the eight: and albeit he had lain 78 years in the earth, yet
his eyes hair and flesh remained in a manner as if it had been newly buried.
Concerning which you may read the new Epitaph set over his sepulcher.

Doctor Neyle, Lord Bishop of Rochester.
The ninth of October Doctor Neyle Deane of Westminster was consecrated Bishop
of Rochester at Lambeth.

Shrieues.
George Bolles, Richard Farrington, Shrieues.

Sir Humphrey Weld Grocer, Mayor. Mayor.


The Viscount of Cramburne married.
The first of December William Viscount Cramburne, son and heir to Robert
Earl of Salisbury, Lord Treasurer of England, married Catheren Howard, the
third Daughter of Thomas Earl of Suffolk.

Consorts of pirates within the Streights, and in the maine sea.
For these five years last past, great and manifold roberies, spoils,
pyracies, murders and depredations within the streights and elsewhere have
been committed by several companies of English pirates, as well upon our own
nation as others, but especially upon the Florentines and Venetians wherewith
his highness being much grieved, published from time to time sundry
proclamations, denouncing the said offenders to be rebels, and therewithal
gave order for their suppression and apprehension as traitors and
peace-breakers. But all this prevailed not, for they still increased and
persisted in their former villainies: with which offenders, there were some
English Merchants, who very cunningly underhand used co^merce, trucke, and
traffic for stolen goods, to the great cherishing and abetting of those
malefactors, and dishonor to this nation; for redress whereof, the King by
proclamation the eighth of January, prohibited all English Merchants from any
manner of meddling or dealing with them, upon great penalty, commanding the
Judge of the Admiraltie, to proceed severely in Justice against all such
offenders, and that from him there should be no appeal granted to any person
touching the premises: all which notwithstanding the number of Pirates still
increased, and did great damage unto the English Merchants, and to all other
nations. There were Hollanders and Esterlings that at this time and before,
became fierce Pirates, and held consort with the English robbers, viz. Ward,
Bishop, This Sir Francis Verney did turn upon hope of adua^cement, but he
became extreme poor and miserable.
Sir Francis Verney, and others. Whereupon the King of Spain sent certain
ships of war, under command of Don Lewis Faxardo, who very politikely about
the middle of July, came upon them at Tunis, and suddenly burned about 20 of
their ships lying in harbor: at which time, though captain Ward escaped in
person by being then a shore, yet his great strength and riches perished in
the fire, with other his confederates.

And the 22 of December, Pirates executed.
there were executed at Waping 19 Pirates, some whereof had been in consort
with the forenamed English pirates.

Strange shifting of the tides.
Sunday the nineteenth of February, it should have been dead low water at
London bridge, but quite contrary to course, it was then hie water, and
presently it ebbed almost half an hour, the quantity of a foot, and then
suddenly it flowed again almost two foot higher then it did before, and then
ebbed again, until it came near the right course, so as the next flood began
in a manner as it should, and kept his due course in all respects, as if there
had been no shifting nor alteration of tides. All this happened before twelve
of the clock that forenoone, the weather being indifferent calm.

The young Earl of Dorset married, and the Earl of Hertfords grandchild married.
The 25 of February, Richard Lord Buckhurst, married the Lady Anne Clyfford, the
only child of George Earl of Cumberland. And the last of February died Robert
Earl of Dorset, father to the forenamed Richard, L. Buckhurst. And the first
of June next following, Edward Seymour, the son and heir of the Lord
Beauchampe, married the Lady Anne Sackuyle, second daughter to the said Robert
Earl of Dorset.

An. reg. 7. 1609 A general truce in the Netherlands for twelve years.
In this month of March 1609. upon full 3 years deliberate advice, was
concluded and proclaimed a general and particular truce and ceassation from
all manner of hostility by sea and land for twelve years, between Philip the
third of that name King of Spain, and Albertus and Isabella Archdukes of
Austria on the one part, and the general Estates of Holland, Zealand, and
Frizeland on the other part. In this truce were included all the newter Towns,
Forts, and Cities. This was done after either side had tried their utmost
fortunes, and felt the bitter sting and cruel misery of almost fifty years
bloody wars, to the great damage of all Christendom, and advantage of the
unreconcilable common enemy the Turk.

The last year, and this spring, The first general planting of Mulbery trees
in England.
according to his Majesty's express order, upon apparent reason and great
likelihood of future good and utility to the common subjects of this land,
there were many thousands of young Mulbery trees brought hither out of France
by Monsieur Francis Vertron, alias Forest of Verton in Pycardie Esquire, who
had a Patent for the same for two years: which were likewise by order sent
into diverse shires, and there planted for the feeding of Silkewormes to make
silk, In Dawpheny and other parts of France, there was silk made a good while
before, but not thorowout the whole kingdom until of late years.
like as it is made in France. The last year at Greenwich he kept great store
of English Silkewormes, the which the King with great pleasure came often to
see them work; and of their silk the King caused a piece of Taffata to be
made. It is but twenty years since the first general making of silk in
France. And the like general planting of Mulbery trees there, who until then
could not make Silk. All which notwithstanding for many years past here in
England have been diverse ingenious and industrious English gentlemen, who have
planted Mulberies, made many trials, taken great pains, and been at expenses
to breed and feed their worms and to make silk, whereof they brought some to
good perfection. Amongst whom of most note is William Stallendge Esquier, who
at this time and before, M. Nicholas Ieffe and many others had put it in
practice long before.
by his proper practice had bred great store of worms to good perfection, and
thereof made good silk in London, viz. 13 yeardes of Taffata, and diverse
payres of Stockings of sundry colors which he presented unto his Majesty, and
unto the Queen and Prince, and unto many others the other year: This
Stallendge about three years past had a Pattent for seven years to bring in
Mulbery seeds: and this year according to the kings direction, he and the
forenamed Forest planted Mulbery trees in most shires of England, viz. M.
Stallendge furnished the Western parts and M. Forest the Northen part, the
King planted Mulbery trees near Saint James Park.

Britain Burse builded.
The beautiful building in the Strand near Durham house was begun the tenth
of June last past, and was fully finished in November following, at the proper
charges of Robert Earl of Salisburie Lord high Treasurer of England, They were
there entertained with pleasant ingenious speeches, gifts and devises.
and upon Tuesday the tenth of April this year 1609 many of the upper shops
were richly furnished with wares, and the next day after that the King, Queen
and Prince, the Lady Elizabeth and the Duke of York with many great Lords and
chief Ladies came thither, and then the King gave it a name; and called it
Britain Burse.

The 8 of May the King by his Proclamation prohibited all foreign Nations that
after August next they should not fish upon any the coasts of England, Scotland
or Ireland, Al foreign nations forbidden to fish upon the coasts of England
Scotland and Ireland without special license.
nor the Isles adjacent without special license from the Commissioners in that
behalf ordained, viz. to have license from the Commissioners in London for
Fishing near England and Ireland, and from the Commissioners in Edenbrough to
fish in the Scottish seas, and the Isles adjacent.

The first, second and third of June, The King hears the Bishops and secular
Judges.
the king in person royal heard the differences between the ecclesiastical
and the temporal Judges argued, touching prohibitions out of the Kings Bench,
and Common Pleas.

The 8.9. and 10. The King hears the complaints touching his navy.
of June his Majesty also in proper person accompanied with the L. Treasurer,
the Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain and others, heard
the manifold complaints of the abuses of the officers of his Navy royal.

The 23 of June ye King, Queen and Prince, A trial of fight between a Lion, a
Horse and a Bare.
with diverse great Lords and many others came to the Tower to make trial of
the Lions single valor, and to have the Lions kill a great fierce Bare which
had killed a child, but the Lions being tried by one and one at a time, and
lastly by two together which were bred in that open yard where the Bare was put
loose for combat, yet would none of them assail him but sled from him, and
sought to return into their dens. After the first Lion was put forth, then was
there a stone horse put into the Bare, and Lion, who when he had gased upon
them a little, he fell to grasing standing in the midst between them both, and
whereas at first there was but two mastifes let in, who boldly sought with the
Lion, there was now 6 dogs let in, who flue all upon the horse, being most in
their fight at their first entrance, and would soon have woried the horse to
death, The parents of the child had as much as ^aw and reason could afford.
but that suddenly even as the King wished there entered in 3 stout Bearwards,
who wondrous valiantly rescued the horse and brought away the dogs, whilst
the Lion and Bare stood staring upon them. And the fifth of July this Bare
according to the Kings express commandment was bayted to death with dogs
upon a Stage, and the mother of the murdered child had twenty pound given her
out of the money, given by the people to see the death of the Bare.

About two years past, viz. at Christmas, 1607. Kingly paiments beyond
president.
the King borrowed of Francis Jones, and Nicholas Salter and their partners
being Farmers of the Custom house, one hundred and twenty thousand pound for
one whole year, which said sum his Majesty very graciously and careful
repayed at Christmas 1608. with full royal consideration for the same.

In the month of March the last year 1608. the King borrowed of certain
other Citizens the sum of threescore and three thousand pound for fifteen
months: and this Midsomer day 1609 the King not only repayed them all the said
sum, There was never the like royal payment made by any King to the common
subjects.
but allowed them likewise their full interest for the same, viz. seven
thousand and five hundred pround as a royal recompense: the King sent them
word that he had money ready for them, and that if they would they should
receive their money before their day, but they refused it.

Of late years certain ingenious and industrious persons devised and found
out the making of Allome within the Kings Dominions, The first making of Allome
in England.
viz. in Devonshire, and Ireland, and lastly at Gysborrow, and other places in
Yorkshire, where the said Allom by this time was brought to full perfection by
the Lord Sheffield, and Sir Thomas Challoner, Sir David Fowllis, Sir John
Bowrchier Knights, and William Turner, Nicholas Cryspe, Elias Cryspe, Abraham
Chamberlain Citizens of London, to the great use and profit of the common
wealth, whereupon the first of July the King by his Proclamation prohibited the
bringing in of any Allome from beyond the seas into any part of his Majesty's
dominions upon pain of confiscation. The King likewise ordained fit places for
Storehouses of Allome, for the ready use thereof to such as would buy the same,
the King also gave very gracious respect and princely remuneration unto all
those, who of late had taken pains and been at expenses in the practicing and
atchieuing to bring this royal commodity unto due perfection, and then took
the traffic thereof unto himself.

This year the King had aid of his Subjects throughout the Kingdom of
England for knighting his son Prince Henry according to the Law of this land,
An ancient duty.
in the leuying whereof the Subjects were very favorably dealt withal, for
whereas by the ancient law of this land the subjects ought to have paid twelve
pence in the pound of the yearly value of their lands, his Majesty very
graciously ordained several Commissioners in the several shires, who
according to the purpose of their commissions did so moderately demean
themselves as no man was compelled to pay any more then he would willingly
give, being a very ancient duty due unto the King, and was now in a manner
quite forgotten.

Let all that are pardoned note this for example.
Robert Allyley being arraigned at Newgate for felony, stood mute and refused
the ordinary trial, whereupon as the manner is, the hangman came unto him to
bind his hands, but Allyley resisted, and with his Fist smote him on the face
in the presence of the Judges, who presently remembered that this prisoner but
the last Sessions before, was there convicted of felony, and for the same had
obtained the Kings special pardon, which pardons in general are unto all
persons, but only upon their good behavior unto the King and his subjects,
His hand was nailed at the Gybet end before his face.
and thereupon the Court instantly gave Judgment, that for the blow he gave,
his hand should first be cut off: And then his body to be hanged for that fact
for the which he had his pardon, according to which sentence he was presently
executed upon a Gybbet at the Sessions gate.

In December in the 34 year of Queen Elibeth, The original and foundation of
the East India Company.
there were letters pattents granted for fifteen years to the East India
Merchants trading to the East Indies, and in May last 1609. The Kings Majesty
upon mature deliberation in favor of the said Company, finding the same to be
very commodious traffic and Navigations, and as propitious and honorable for
this Kingdom renewed and enlarged the foresaid letters pattents and Charter to
continue for ever, enabling them thereby to be a body corporate and politic.
The first governor of this Company named and ordained both in the first and
last pattent was Sir Thomas Smith Knight, who is also Governor of the Muscouy
Company, and president and treasurer of the Company and counsel for Virginea.
This year the said East India Company builded a most stately ship at Detford
of the burden of twelve hundredth tun, being the greatest and goodliest ship
that ever was builded in this kingdom by any Merchants. At this time they also
builded a Pinace of two hundredth and fifty tun to attend her. And upon
Saturday the 30 of December, his Majesty and Prince Henry, with the Lord
Admiral, the Lord Chamberlain, the Earl of Worcester, and many other Lords
went to see these ships launched, and were all entertained with a banquet in
the chief Cabin of the great ship, and the rest were banquetted at a long
Table in the half deck* these rich and plentiful banquets were all served in
fine Chyna Dishes which were freely permitted to be taken and carried away by all persons. The King gave the Governor a very fair chain of gold with a
Jewel wherein was the Kings picture: highly commending his endeavor, care and
industry for the good of the common wealth, maintenance of traffic and
Navigations, for the which also his Maiest^ with very gracious respect commended
and thanked the assistants of that company, wh^ likewise kissed his Highness
hand, the King called the great ship the Trade^ Increase, and the other the
Pepper Corn.

Shrieues.
Sebastian Haruie, William Cokayne sheriffs.

Mayor.
Sir Thomas Cambell Iremonger Mayor.

Translation, and consecration of Bishops.
The sixth of November the famous Doctor Lancelot Androwes Lord Almner, Bishop of
Chichester was transferred unto the Bishopric of Ely. And the 3 of December
George Abbot Doctor of divinity, Deane of Winchester, was consecrated Lord
Bishop of Couentry and Lychfield. And Samuel Harsenet Doctor of Divinity was
consecrated Lord Bishop of Chichester. And 12 of February, the forenamed Doctor
Abbot was transferred to the Bishopric of London and was enstalled in Paul's,
by his deputy Doctor Pasfielde.

The six of January at the Court of Whitehall in the presence of the King and
Queen and the Ambassadors of Spain and Venice, and of all the Peers and great
Ladies of the land, and of many thousand of others, there the Prince performed
his first feats of arms, viz. Prince Henry his first feats of Arms.
at Bar^yers against all comers, being assisted only with six other, viz.
the Duke of Lenox, the Earl of Arundel, the Earl of Southampton, the Lord
Hay, sir Thomas Somerset, and sir Richard Preston, who shortly after was
created Lord Dingwell: against these challengers came 56 brave defendants,
consisting of Earls, Ba^ons, Knights and Esquiers every challenger fought with
eight several defendants two several combats at two several weapons, viz. at
push of pyke and with single sword, the Prince performed this challenge with
wondrous skill and courage to the great joy and admiration of all the
beholders, the Prince not being full sixteen years of age until the 19 of
February: these feats of Arms with sundry stately shows and ingenious
devises began before ten a clock at night, and continued until three a
clock next morning being Sunday, and that day the Prince feasted all the
Combatants at Saint James house, and then gave three rich prises unto three of
the best deseruers defendants, viz. unto the Earl of Mountgomery, M. Thomas
Darcy, son and heir to the Lord Darcy of Chich, and unto six Robert Gourdon.

In the year 1584. was discovered ye Country which is now called Virginea, The
first discovery and plantation of Virginea.
and was so called by Queen Elizabeth, and she assigned the same unto sir
Walter Rawleigh, as being the chief discouerer thereof. And in the year 1587.
there were sent thither above 100 souls, viz. men, women, and children, since
which time until the third year of his Majesty's reign, the yearly sending
thither for plantation ceased, and then upon more exact discoueries there were
sundry yearly supplies sent thither of men, women and children with all
things necessary under conduct of captain Newport, and also in the Month of
may there were sent thither nine ships with five hundred men, women and
children with all necessary provision under command of Sir Thomas Gates
Lieutenant general, Sir George Summers Admiral of Virginea, and captain
Newport Vice Admiral, with other expert captains and resolute gentlemen. And
likewise at the end of this present year 1609. there was sent an other supply
of three ships with an hundred and fifty men, being for the most part
Artificers under command of the right Honorable Thomas Lord La Ware, who by
the free election of the Treasurer and Counsel of Virginea, and with the full
consent of the generality of that company was constituted and authorized during
his natural life to be Lord Governor and captain general of all the English
Colonies planted, or to be planted in Virginea, according to the tenor of his
Majesty's Letters Pattents granted this present year unto the said company.

The Lord La War had his Pattent sealed by that Company the twenty eight day
of February this year 1609. The Lord La War goes to Virginea.
he went accompanied with Knights and Gentlemen of quality: And in June next
there was one ship with 20 men, and a years competent provision for the whole
Colony sent after him.

The ninth of February the Parliament began at Westminster, The Parliament
adiorned.
and continued until the twenty third of July, and was then prorogued until
the 16 of October following, and then the Lords and Commons sat again until
the sixth of December, and then it was adiourned unto the ninth of February.

The Kings Majesty in his princely providence for the present and future good
of his Kingdoms, The plantation of the North of Ireland by the Citizens of
London.
and chiefly for prevention of all rebellion in the Kingdom of Ireland, and
in his especial favor, and kingly respect unto the City of London, did in
July last make a liberal offer unto the Lord Mayor and citizens of London for
the present possession and plantation of Englishmen in the Province of Vlster;
And when the Lord Mayor and Citizens had well advised themselves therein, then
in August they sent four discreet expert persons, being accompanied and
directed by Sir Thomas Philips as the Lords of the Council had appointed, to
suruay that Province, and to observe the profits with the estate and condition
thereof, and to report what ruins were to be repaired, and what cities,
castles and towns were presently to be builded, and when these 4 suruayors
were returned, they ascertained the Lord Mayor and Citizens, as well of the true
estate and validity thereof, as of the several commodities, honor and dignity
yt would thereby ensue, and then they humbly accorded unto the Kings most
gracious and bounteous offer; then the Lord Mayor and Citizens upon mature
deliberation levied 20000. li. to be employed in these Irish affairs, and by
virtue of their act of common Council they constituted 24 Committies
consisting of 6 Aldermen and 18 Commoners, the two chief whereof were called
the governor and deputy, all which are to be new chosen every year, having
power and authority given them to order and dispose of all matters for
plantation, traffic, rule and government in that North part of Ireland,
whereupon the 14 of February they made publication thereof, signifying unto all
handy crafts men their present entertainment and employment in this expedition,
and that they should have their full wages with their dwelling houses and other
good means for the honest maintenance of themselves and their families: upon
knowledge whereof there came about 300 several persons, who were presently
fitted and furnished with all things necessary, and with all conueniency were
sent to Vlster: and so this expedition proceeded prosperously; William Cokaine
Alderman was the first governor.

Thursday the 3 of May, the French Queen, An. reg. 3. 1610 The king of France
murdered.
with all solemnity was crowned in Paris, having been ten years before married
to the king: and the next day after the King was murdered in his coach as he
rode through Paris by a base villain that stabd him into the body with a long
knife twice, that he died instantly, and his body was carried to the Loouer:
presently upon the Kings death the Queen was made Regent during her sons
minority, viz. Lewis the 13. The 20 of May being Sunday, our King and Queen,
the Prince, the Duke of York, the Lady Elizabeth, and all the Lords and Ladies
in the Court mourned in black for the death of this French King Henry the 4.
and about the end of June, was he buried in Paris with as great royalty, as
ever was any king of France. Upon the murder of this French king the Lords and
Commons of the Parliament of England, humbly besought the King our sovereign
Lord to have a more especial care then formerly had been for the preservation
of his royal person, and also to take speedy order for the avoiding imminet
danger, and keeping his Subjects in their due obedience: and forthwith the
Commons of the Parliament for manifestation of their allegiance, love and
duty, they voluntarily of their own accord took the oath of allegiance, and
after them the Lords of the upper house did so likewise, who also ministered the
same oath unto all their servants and followers, and such as refused to take
the oath were put from their Lords services, and the Bishops in their
Convocation house ordained that every Bishop in their several visitations
should minister the same oath unto all their Clergy, which they performed
accordingly: this oath was also ministered unto others as follows, according
to the tenor of a special statute made this Session of Parliament in that
behalf.

Prince Henry created Prince of Wales.
The appointed time now drew near for Prince Henry to be created Prince of
Wales: and upon thursday the last of May the Lord Mayor and Aldermen being
accompanied with 54 several companies of citizens of London in their several
Barges bearing Arms, distinguished by their proper Ensigns banners and
streamers in brave and warlike manner, and therewithal plenteously furnished
with sundry sorts of excellent music, and had also to entertain the Prince
diverse ingenious and pleasant trophies upon the water, all which in very comely
order went to Chelsea, the Lord Mayor as Admiral going foremost, where from
nine a clock in the morning until past three in the afternoon, they attended
the coming of the Prince, who could not come sooner by reason of the low ebb,
at which tsme the Prince came from Richmond being very honorably accompanied
and attended: And from Chelsea the Lord Mayor and citizens conducted his
Highness unto the court at White Hall: as they returned from Chelsea the
citizens led the way, and the Lord Mayor followed them, going always next
before the Princes Barge: To see this joyful fight, the people for 7 miles
space swarmed on both sides the river, and the Thames was covered with boats,
barges, and lighters full fraught with men, women and children. And upon Sunday
the 3 of June the King made 25 knights of the Bath whose names follow: And the
next day the King created and crowned the Prince his eldest Son Henry, Prince
of Wales in the Great White Chamber at Westminster, being performed with all
magnificence and solemnity, and with the full consent of the Lords spiritual
and temporal, and commons of the Parliament, being all there present, the Lord
Mayor and Aldermen of London were also present at this Creation: the Princes
titles were proclaimed, viz. Henry Prince of Wales, Duke of Cornwall and
Rothesey, and Earl of Chester. In honor of this Creation there was the next
night at the Court a most rich and royal mask of Ladies, viz. the Queen, the
Lady Elizabeth, daughter to our Soueraign, the Lady Arabella, the Countess of
Arondel, the Countes of Darby, the Countes of Essex, the Countes of Dorset, the
Countes of Mountgomery, the Viscounts of Haddington, the Lady Elizabeth Gray,
the Lady Elizabeth Guilford, the Lady Katherine Peter, the Lady Winter, and the
Lady Winsor: and upon Wednesday in the afternoon in the Tiltyard there were
diverse Earls, Barons and others being in rich and glorious armor, and having
most costly caparisons wondrous curiously imbrodered with pearl, gold and
silver; the like rich abiliments for horses were never seen before, presented
their several ingenious Trophies before the King, Queen and Prince, and then
ran at Tilt, where there was a world of people assembled to behold their
trophies; and that night there were other triumphs upon the water with ships
of war and Galleys fighting one against an other, and against a great Castle
builded upon the water: and after these battles, then for an hours space
there were many strange and variable fire works in the castle, and in all the
ships and galleys.

The Knights of the Bath.
Knights of the Bath.
The Earl of Oxford. The Lord Gourdon. The Lord Clifford. The Lord Fitzwalter.
The Lord Fitzwarren. The Lord Hay. The Lord Erskine. The Lord Winsor. The Lord
Wentworth. Sir Charles Somerset. Sir Edward Somerset. Sir Francis Stewart. Sir
Ferdinando Dudley. Sir Henry Carry. Sir Oliver Saint John. Sir Gilbert Gerrard.
Sir Charles Stanhope. Sir Edward Bruce. Sir William Stewart. Sir Robert Sydney.
Sir Ferdinando Tuchet. Sir Peregrine Bartye. Sir Henry Rich. Sir Edward
Sheffield. Sir William Cauendish.
The 4 of June Proclamation was made, A proclamation touching Jesuits and
Recusants.
commanding all Roman Priests, Jesuits, and Seminaries to depart this Kingdom
by the 4 day of July next, and not to return upon pain of the severity of the
law: also by this proclamation, the King straightly commands all Recusants to
return home to their dwellings, and not to remain in London, nor to come
within ten miles of the Court without especial license, but to depart from
London and the Court by the last day of this month, and to remain confined
according to the tenor of the statute in that behalf provided.

Presently after that the oath of allegiance was ministered unto all officers,
atturneyes and Clerks, The oath of allegiance ministered.
belonging to any of the Courts of Westminster hall, and the Exchequer, and
unto all Aduocats and Proctors of the spiritual Courts. This oath was also
ministered unto all Lawyers and Students in the Innes of Court and Chancerie,
and unto all Studients and Scholars in both the Universities.

The 25 of July 1610. The Lord Clifford married.
the Lord Henry Clifford, son to Frances Earl of Cumberland married the Lady
Francis Cecill daughter to Robert Earl of Salisbury Lord high Treasurer of
England.

This year the King builded a most stately ship for war, The King builds the
greatest and goodliest ship of war that ever was built in England
the Keele whereof was an hundred and 14 foot long, and the cross beam was
forty and four foot long: she will bear 64 pieces of great Ordnance, and is
of the burden of 1400 tun: This royal ship is double built, and is most
sumptuously adorned both within and without with all manner of curious caruing,
painting and rich gilding, being in all respects the greatest and goodliest
ship that ever was builded in England: and this glorious ship the King gave
unto his son Henry Prince of Wales: and the 24 of September the King, the
Queen, the Prince of Wales, the Duke of York, and the Lady Elizabeth with
many great Lords went to Wollwich to see it lanched, but because of the
narrowness of the Docke, it could not then be launched, whereupon the Prince
came the next morning by three a clock, and then at the launching thereof the
Prince named it after his own dignity, and called it the Prince, Master
Phynyes Pet. was Warden and chief work master in building this ship.

The Lord Wotton sent to take the oath of the French King.
The King sent the Lord Wotton Ambassador into France to take the oath of the
young King, and of the Queen Regent his mother, for performance of a league
newly made between the two Kingdoms: he arrived at Callis the 28 of August,
and came to Paris the 7 of September, and the King was sworn the 12 of the
same month. And the Ambassador returned into England, the 7 of October. And
the French King, viz. Lewis the 13. was crowned the sixth of October at Reins
in Champaigne.

Sunday the 21 of October, Three Bishops consecrated.
by Commission from the King to the Lord Bishop of London, the Lord Bishop of
Elye, the Lord Bishop of Worcester, and to the Lord Bishop of Rochester, they
did consecrate in the Chapel of the Lord Bishop of London, Master John
Spottyswod Archbishop of Glasco, Master Gawen Hamelton Bishop of Galloway, and
M. Andrew Lamb Bishop of Breachyn: which consecration was performed mutatis
mutandis, according to the form of the Church of England.

Richard Pyot, Francis Ihones, Shreeues. Shrieues.


Sir William Crauen Merchantaylor, Mayor. Mayor.


The Triumphs, Trophies, and pleasant devices at this time, in honor of the
Lord Mayor and City of London, were extraordinary great, being in a manner
twice so much as has been usual within the City, and so likewise were the
stately shows and ingenious devices upon the water, at the charges of the
Company of Marchantaylors.

Notwithstanding the City of Londons former The City of London builds new
granaries and store houses.
plentiful provision of sundry Granaries and other Storehouses for the
general service thereof, and for prevention of sudden famine, yet such is the
late unspeakable increase of people within and about the City, as well of
strangers as Natives, so as the Magistrates in their providence, for prevention
of famine, and for provision for the poor, very carefully about two years
past began to build a Bridewell twelve new fair Granaries, being sufficient
to keep six thousand quarters of Corn, and two store houses for sea-coale
for the poor, which will keep four thousand load of coals. These necessary
houses were not finished until this time. Master Alderman Leman used great
pains and diligence in the contriuing and accomplishing of this memorable
work.

The prince of Anhalt comes to see the King.
This last Summer there were wars in Cleueland, and the united protestant
Princes, with their several forces aided the Marquess of Brandenberg in his
claim to that Dukedom, and the Dukedom of Gulich: in which wars, and at the
taking the City of Gulich, Christianus Prince of Anhalt, was chief General
of all the united forces; Sir Edward Cecill, Lord General of all the English
and Sots forces in Cleuela^d and Gulich,
and sir Edward Cecyll, otherwise called Colonel Cecyll, was then Lord
General of the English and Scottish Army. This Prince Christanus, arrived of
late at Dover, and came to see the King, who entertained and feasted him and
all his train very roially. He took great pleasure to view the City of
London: he beheld the pleasant triumphs upon the water, and within the City,
which were then extraordinary in honor of the Lord Mayor and Citizens: and that
day, this Prince with all his German train, were feasted in the Guild hall,
where he manifested his princely former admiration touching the greatness,
situation, state, and wealth of the City; and then he also admired the goodly
uniform order and rich habit of the citizens, and said, that there was no
State nor city in the world, that did elect their Magistrates with such
magnificence, except the city of Venice, unto which the city of London comes
very near, etc.

The 7 of December John Roberts, A Monk and a Seminary executed.
a Benedict Monk, sometime provincial of the Benedictans in England, and
Thomas Summers a Seminary, were condemned at Newgate, and executed at Tiburn,
they having bin before sundry times taken and banished, and yet presumed to
return again, and here to practice against the King and State.

George Palyn, Citizen and Girdler of London, at this time gave ad pios vsus,
3600. pound, M. Palyns bounty.
that is to say, twelve hundredth pound unto the two Universities, and nine
hundredth pound for an Almes-house, and the rest he bequeathed unto other godly
and charitable purposes, in which legacies he bestowed the better part of all
his wealth.

This month of December 1610. The Prince of Wales setleth his household.
Henry Prince of Wales kept his Court at Saint James near Charing Cross, and
settled his house, and ordained his Officers, as well the Officers of his
Highness Revenues, as those of his household, the names of the chief whereof
follow.

Of his Highness Revenues.
Sir Edward Philips Chancellor. Master Adam Newton, Secretary. Sir George
Moore, Receiver General. Sir Willi. Fleetwood, Suruaier general. Sir
Augustine Nichols Sergeant. M. Thomas Stephens, Attorney. M. Richard Cunnock,
Auditor.
Of his Highness Household.
Sir Thomas Challoner, Chamberlain. Sir Charles Cornewalleys, Treasurer. Sir
John Hollis, Comptroller. Sir David Fowllis, Cofferer. Sir David Murrey.
Gentleman of the Bedchamber.
The Parliament dissolved by Proclamation, dated the 31 of December.
Whereas the Kings most Excellent Majesty has continued this Parliament
together, longer then has been usual, or might well have stood either with
his important affairs of State, or with the public business of three whole
Terms spent in the two last Sessions, or with the occasions of the Country,
where the service and Hospitality of many Persons of quality has been
missing, and diverse Shires, Cities and Borough Towns have been burdened,
with allowances made to the Knights, and Burgesses whom they employed, besides
the particular expense of the nobility, and others attending that service; And
all this in expectation of a good conclusion, of some of those weighty causes,
which have been therein deliberated, not only for the supply of the
necessities of his Majesty's estate, but for the ease and freedom of his
subjects, in many things proposed by his Majesty in Parliament, far
differing and surpassing the favors and graces of former times, both in nature
and value: His Majesty has now resolved (for preventing of further trouble,
of all those that would prepare themselves, to be here against the time limited
by the last prorogation) to declare by these presents, that they shall not
need, to give their attendance at the day appointed, for any service to be
done, as members of this Parliament, because his Majesty (for many good
considerations known to himself) has now determined to dissolve this
Parliament, by his Commission under the great Seal of England.

Upon New years night, The Prince of Wales, his mask at Whitehall.
the Prince of Wales being accompanied with twelve others, viz. two Earls,
three Barons, five Knights, and two Esquires, they performed a very stately
mask, in which was an excellent Scene, ingenious speeches, and rare songs,
and with great variety of most delicate music.

The French King sent Monsieur de la Verdyne, A special Ambassador from the
French King.
one of the Marshals of France, Governor of Maine, accompanied and attended
with sixescore persons all in mourning habit. He and his whole train came to
Lambeth the 16 of January, and were lodged in the Archbishops palace, which the
King caused to be very roially furnished, and during their abode, they were
also entertained at the Kings charge. The Ambassador had audience upon Sunday
the 20 of January; and the next Sunday the King took his oath, for performance
of a league lately made between the two Kingdoms.

M. Teasdale his bounty.
Thomas Teasdale of Glymton in Oxfordshire-Gentleman, at this time gave five
thousand pound to purchase land, for perpetual maintenance of seven Fellows
and six Scholars, to be placed in Bailyoll College in Oxford, and to be
chosen thither from time to time out of the Free-schoole of Abingdon in
Backshire. He also gave lands for perpetual maintenance for an Usher in that
School, besides many other charitable legacies. He deceased the 13 of June
1610.

Dunbar deceased. Viscont Fenton a Privy Counselor.
The 30 of January 1610. died the Earl of Dunbar, and the 18 of April next
following, viz. 1611 his funeral was very honorably performed at Westminster.
The 31 of January 1610 the Lord Viscont Fenton captain of the Guard, was
sworn a Privy Counselor.

Sir Marmaduke Dorrell builds a Parrish Church.
About this time sir Marmaduke Dorell knight then Master of the Kings household,
but was afterward cofferer of the kings household, builde^ a very fair new
Parish Church in the Town of Fulmer in Buckingham-shire near Vxbridge, this
church was consecrated by Doctor Barlow Lord Bishop of Lincoln, and within
five years after this time, most of the Churches within and about London with
their steeples, were either newly enlarged or repaired, or beautified, as also
about 3 years after, there were diverse Chapels new builded and consecrat, as
a Chapel builded by Baron Altham at Oxhey, and a Chapel builded in the
Strand by sir Julius Caesar Knight Master of the Roles, as also diverse
Churchyards ordained and consecrated, ye last whereof was that at
White-chappel near Mile-end-greene, and at this time Bow-steeple in Cheap Side
was well repaired and the fair Dial set up.

The 11 of February 1610. Sir Henry Montegue made Sergeant.
sir Henry Montegue Knight recorder of London, was made Sergeant at Law, and
presently after he was made the Kings Sergeant, and so remained Recorder of
London until the 18 of November 1610. and then was made L. Chief Justice of
the Kings Bench, An. reg. 9. 1611 Viscon^ Rochester created.
and the next day road to Westminster Hall with great state being very
honorably acco^pained and attended. Upon our Lady Day, being the^ Easter Day,
the King created Sir Robert Car Knight, L. Viscont of Rochester, at White Hall.

The 9 of April 1611. Doctor Abbot L. Archbishop of Canterbury.
the most reverend Father in God, George Abbot Doctor of Deuinity Lord Bishop
of London, was transferred unto the Archbishopric of Canterbury, and upon
Sunday the 23 of June he was sworn a Privy Counselor at Greenewich.

Sir Thomas Dale and sir Thomas Gates sent with supplies to Virginia.
About the middle of March last Sir Thomas Dale Knight Marshall of Virginia was
sent thither with three ships and three hundredth men, and all things necessary
for the Colony, and also twelve Kine twenty Goats, besides Coneies, Pigeons
and Pullen, and toward the end of May following, Sir Thomas Gates Knight,
Lieutenant General of Virginia was sent with three ships and three Caruells,
and two hundredth and fourscore men, and twenty women, and two hundredth kine,
and as many swine, with other necessaries. And the next spring were sent
thither more supplies, besides a particular supply for the English in the
Bermodes.

Sir Thomas Ouerbury.
The 20 of April 1611 Sir Thomas Ouerbury was committed to the Tower, and died
there the 15 of September next following.

Thursday the 9 of May this year 1611. the King in person came in the
forenoone, The King in person comes into the Star-cha^ber to see the trial
of his Pixe.
and suruaied Westminster-hal, the Court of Exchequer and all the Offices, the
King being accompanied and attended, by the Lord Chancellor, Lord Treasurer,
Lord Privy Seal, the Lord Chamberlain, with six other Earls and sir Julius
Caesar Knight Chancellor of the Exchequer, and went into the Star Chamber, being
thither come of purpose to see his Moneys of Gold and Silver, and caused them
to be taken out of the Pixe, which were then brought from the Tower to be
tried, as well for their weight as finenesse, where Edmond Doublday Esquire,
Warden of the Mint, with the rest of the Officers of the Mint, with their
several keys opened the Pix, and powered forth the gold and silver before his
Majesty to be tried and assaied by their several standards, Proclamation
against the transportation of gold and silver and the quoin advanced.
which was more then was done by any King this hundredth years, the King then
also gave them a Jury of sixteen Goldsmiths of the best skill, and note to
make farther trial and satisfaction, and presently after this his Majesty
made a strict Proclamation for preservation of his moneys within his dominions,
which were most subtly transported in great abundance by Hollanders and
others, so as his Majesty in his wisdom and kingly care was constrained to
advance his quoines, and to make an increase of the price and valuation read my
large Book.

The 13 of May being Monday in Whitson week, The Duke of York the Earl of
Arundell and the Viscont Rochester made knights of the Garter.
at Windsor were enstalled knights of the Garter, Prince Charles Duke of York,
son to our sovereign Lord the King, and Thomas Earl of Arundell, and Robert
Viscont Rochester.

The ninth of June Doctor Buckeredge was consecrated Lord Bishop of Rochester,
Doctor Buckeridge B. of Rochester.
did Doctor Melburne Bishop of Saint Dauies.

The 23 of June arrived Prince Otto, son and heir to Mawrice, The young
Landgraue of Hesson arriueth in England.
Langraue of Hesson of 17 years of age, being very Princely accompanied and
attended, the king honored two of his Attendants with knighthood, this young
Prince went unto both the Universities, and saw diverse of the Kings palaces,
and returned the 3 of August.

The 6 of June the King by Proclamation straightly commanded the oath of
Allegiance to be ministered unto all sorts of people, The oath of Allegiance
ministered.
and a true certificate to be made thereof unto the great Lords of the Counsel.

Proclamation against al increase of buildings with in London and the Suburbs
and 20 miles thereof.
The 8 of August the King by proclamation very straightly commanded, that there
should be no more increase of buildings within London and ye Suburbs, and
twenty miles thereof, and to build in uniform of brick and stone, for the
preservation of timber, whereof there was plain^ appearance of extreme want,
except by providence prevented, as also that the sudden increasing of people in
London and Westminster was the decay and depopulating of many Towns and
Hamlets in diverse shires, for the more speedy and assured redress whereof and
other such like enormities, the King made an other proclamation the 10 of
September following.

Doctor King Lord Bishop of London.
The 18 of September 1611 Doctor King Deane of Christ-church in Oxford, was
consecrated Lord Bishop of London.

France and Spain match together.
At this time was concluded a double match between the young French King and the
King of Spaines daughter, and the Prince of Spain and the French Kings sister^

The Earl of Pembrooke a Privy Counselor.
Wensday the 29 of September, the Earl of Pembrooke was sworn a Privy
Counselor.

Edward Barkeham, George Smithes Shrieues. Shrieues.


Sir James Pemberton Knight Goldsmiths, Mayor.
Mayor.

Wensday the 18 of March 1611. Two Heretics burned.
Barthelmew Legate an obstinate Arian Heretic was burned in Smithfield. And
the eleventh of April following viz. 1612. Edward Wightman. an other perverse
Heretic, having refused more favor then he could either desire or deserve,
was burned at Lichfield, this Heretic would feign have made the people
believe, that he himself was the Holy Ghost and immortal, with sundry other
most vile opinions, not fit to be mentioned amongst Christians.

The 22 of April the Viscont Rochester was sworn a Privy Counselor. An.
reg. 10 1612 Viscont Rochester a Privy Counselor.


The 29 of May 1612. Richard Newport and William Scot Seminaries, were executed
at Tiburne. Two Seminaries executed.


The 25 of June Robert Carliel and James Edwin were executed for murdering
John Turner a Fencer, and the 27 of June the Lord Sanquire was arraigned at the
Kings Bench bar, The Lord Sanquire executed.
for conspyring and hireing the said two persons to kill the said Turner, the
Lord confessed the indictment, and was executed upon a Gibet the 29 of June at
Westminster.

The 25 of June 1612. began a great Lottery in London, Lotteries in London.
the greatest Lot or Prize was a thousand pound in plate, and three years
after that there was an other greater Lottery drawn at the same place viz. at
the West end of Saint Paul's Church.

The 26 of June died Roger Earl of Rutland at Cambridge, Roger Earl of
Rutland deceast.
and was buried at Bottysford, his brother Sir Francis Manners succeeded him in
the Earldom.

At this time the corpse of Queen Mary late Queen of Scotland, The King
builds a royal Toombe for his mother, and translateth her corpse from
Peterborow to Westminster.
was translated from Peterborough to Westminster, being thither attended by the
Lord Bishop the Couentry and Lichfield. And upon Thursday of 8 of October, the
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Chancellor, the Lord Privy Seal, the
Earl of Worcester with other Noble men and Gentlemen, and the Lord Bishop of
Rochester and the Deane of Westminster met the Corpse at Clarkenwell about six
a clock in the Evening, and from thence with plenty of Torchlights, the body
of the said Queen was brought into the Chapel Royal, at Westminster, and was
there placed in a vaute, upon the Southside whereof the King had new made a
Royal Toombe for her, where she now rests.

Great winds and shipwreck.
In the months of October, November and December there happened great winds,
violent storms and tempests, which caused much shipwreck upon the Ocean, in
havens and rivers, and did great damage upon the Land, and the next spring
there fell extroardinary rain even until Saint Iames-tyde, and yet upon she
humble and hearty prayers of the people in all Churches, it pleased Almighty
God to send a more seasonable and plentiful harvest then in many years before.

The last year in Summer here arrived sir Robert Sherley knight an Englishman,
An Ambassador from the King of Persia, to the King of Great Britain.
from the King of Persia. And by him sent Ambassador to the King of Great
Brittan, and was very honorably received and entertained, he returned in
January this year 1612.

The Kings Majesty by his letters pattents, dated the seventh of June,
Hicks-hall builded.
in the seventh year of his reign, did enfeoffe 15 knights and Esquires of
the County of Middlesex, of a piece of ground, lying in Saint John's street in
Middlesex, to be for ever employed for a Sessions house, and for the keeping of
a prison or house of correction for that county, upon which piece of ground Sir
Baptist Hicks knight, one of the Justices of that county, at his own proper
charge builded a fair Session house of Brick and Stone, and upon Wensday the
13 of January this year 1612. the house being then newly finished, there were
assembled six and twenty Justices of that county, where the founder feasted
them all, and when they had well considered what name that house should bear,
then with one consent they all agreed it should be called Hicks-hall, after the
name of the Founder, and then the Founder gave it freely to them and their
Successors for ever.

Until this time the Justices of Middlesex held their County Court or
meetings, in a rude common Inn called the Castle, near Smithfield-bars,
anoyde with Carriers and many other sorts of people.

Sir Baptist Hicks his farther bou^tie.
The said Sir Baptist Hicks has also builded a very fair Hospital of free
stone at Camden in Gloucester-shire for six poor men and six women, allowing
them competent mainetenance for ever, he also repaired the Parrish Church and
gave them a Bell.

Lent strictly kept.
This year upon sundry apparent reasons of present ensuing famine, the Fast of
Lent was straightly commanded to be strickly kept, and that all persons should
utterly abstain from killing and eating of all manner of Butchers flesh, which
course took good effect as you read at large.

Shrieues.
Edw. Rotherham, Allexander Prescot, Shrieues.

Mayor.
Sir Ioh. Swynarton knight Mercha^taillor, Mayor.

Friday the 16 of October 1612. at 11 a clock at night, arrived at Graues-end
the most illustrious young Prince Frederick the fifth of that name Count
Palatine of the Reyne etc. The Palsgraue a^^ueth in England.
being very Princely accompanied and attended, he was received by Sir Lewis
Lewkenor Knight, Master of the Ceremonies, whom the King had sent thither
before to attend the coming of the Prince, upon knowledge of his ariuall the
King sent speedily the Duke of Lenox with other Earls and Barons to signify
his hearty welcome, and the next Sunday they accompanied the Palsgraue by Barge
from Graues-end to White Hall, where Prince Charles Duke of York received and
entertained him at his first landing, and brought him up into the great
Banqueting House, where he was likewise entertained by the King Queen, Henry
Prince of Wales, and the Lady Elizabeth.

The 29 of October the Palsgraue dined at the Guild Hall, and was accompanied
with the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, and the Duke of Lenox, being the great
Feast day of the Lord Mayor, after dinner the Lord Mayor in the behalf of the
City and himself, in sign of love and hearty welcome, presented the Palsgraue
with a Basin and Eure, and two fair Liuerie pots curiously wrought and richly
gilded, and in every of them was engraven Ciuitas London.

Friday the sixth of October died the most Noble and hopeful Prince Henry
Prince of Wal^s, Henry Prince of Wales deceased.
he was Royally buried in the Chapel Royal at Westminster the seventh of
December.

Spon Saint Thomas day the Palsgraue and Grave Mawrice were elected Knights of
the Garter, The Palsgraue and Grave Maw^ice made Knights of the Garter,
and upon Sunday the 7 of February the Palsgraue in person was enstalled at
Windsor, and Grave Mawrice was enstalled by his Deputy and kinsman Count
Lodowicke of Nassaw,

The Lady Elizabeth married unto the Palsgraue.
The 14 of February being Shroue Sunday the Lady Elizabeth was married unto the
Palsgraue: In honor whereof there were sundry warlike Tryumphs and Trophies
upon the Thames three days before the day of marriage, and upon the wedding
day there was Tilting and other Royal entertainements of Time, and that night
there was a Mask of Lords and Ladies, and two nights after that there were two
several Maskes performed by the Gentlemen of the four Innes of Court, all
which were set out and adorned with more sundry propperties, speeches and
ingenious devices, then ever was any before in this Kingdom, A present from
London.
and the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London in the behalf of the city and
themselves, presented the Bride with a very fair chain of Oriental pearl.

Prince Charles bishopped. An. reg. 11 1613
Upon Easter day, the King the Palsgraue and the Lady Elizabeth received the
Sacrament in the Chapel of White Hall, and the next day Prince Charles was
confirmed or Bishopped in the same Chapel, by the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, in the presence of the King and Queen, the Prince having been
formerly conferred withal by the Lord Archbishop, and the Lord Bishop of
Bathe and Wells, touching the principles of Religion, unto whom he manifested
such princely understanding and forwardness, and there withal upon the
sudden gave such ready answers and reasons of his Faith, as drove them and
all the rest that heard him into great admiration, the Prince being then but
twelve years of age the 19 of February last.

Satterday the tenth of April 1613. The Palsgraue and the Lady Elizabeth set
forward for Heydelberg.
the Palsgraue and the Lady Elizabeth set forward on their journey for
Heydelberge, being accompanied with the King and Queen, and Prince Charles,
and went by barge from White Hall to Greenewich, and upon Twesday they all in
like manner went by Coach to Rochester, where the next morning the Palsgraue
and the Lady Elizabeth took their leave of the King, Queen and Prince, and
then rode to Canterbury, and from thence to Margate, where the Lord Admiral of
England with nine ships and pinaces attended their coming and received them
and their train, and with them there went to conduct them the Duke of Lenox,
the Earl of Arundell, the Viscont Lisle, and the Lord Harrington, all these
were embarked the 23 of April, but through contrary winds it was the 25 of
April before they arrived at Flushing, and from thence passed through the
united Provinces, and through the Dukedom of Cleaueland Gulych, and through
the Bishoprics of Collen and Tayer, and through part of Hessia, in all which
places they were most kindly entertained, and presented with many princely
presents, and being arrived at Heydelberge, they were likewise as joyfully
received and welcomed by the Princes Electors and others with great Tryumphs
and royal entertainements. The Palsgraue during his abode in England demeand
himself so Nobly, that he won the hearts of the whole Nation, and at his
departure he expressed his Princely bounty in gifts and rewards.

A Ianus borne, shipwreck, great flames and fires.
The 17 of April 1613. at Alington in Lancashi^e was borne a maiden child,
having four Legs, four Arms, two Bellies ioynde to one back, one head
with two faces, the one before and the other behind, and this year likewise
was great Ship-wracke, by violent tempests, there happened also sundry
Inundations, and strange accidents, and much damage done by fire in diverse
places, The Globe burnt.
and upon Saint Peter's day the Globe on the banckside was burned.

The Millita^y exercis^ of Arms in the Artill^^y Garden again p^t in practice.
The practice of Arms and Millitary discipline in the Artillery Garden by the
Citizens of London, formerly mentioned in the year 1586. being for the space
of almost four and twenty years quite neglected and in a manner forgotten,
began this year 1613. to be practiced in far more excellent manner then
formerlie, and shortly after upon the example of this warlike exercise of the
Citizens of London, then the young Gentlemen of the Innes of Court and
Middlesex and others, began the like practice of Arms, in a place called the
Covent Garden, and after that they made themselves a more convenient place in a
field between Saint James, and Saint Gyles.

The 24 of October, Sir Peeksall Brocas does penance at Paul's Cross.
sir Pecksall Brocas knight did penance at Paul's Cross, for standing
convicted before the high Commissioners for secret and notorious Adulteries.

The 26 of October arrived Olexsey Euanowich Iszazen, Sir John Merick sent Lord
Ambassador to Russia.
from the young Emperor of Russia Michaell Euanowich Vryoue, he returned the
next spring, and then the King sent Sir John Merricke Knight, Lord Ambassador
to the said Emperor, who according to his Commission, with great pains and
long travail, made a firm Peace and League between the King of Sweaden and
the Emperor of Russia.

Thomas Benet, Henry Iay, Shrieues. Shrieues.


Sir Thomas Middleton Knight Grocer, Mayor. Mayor.


The 4 of November 1613. Viscont Rochester made Earl of Somerset.
the Viscont Rochester was created Earl of Somerset, and Baron of Branspeth,
and the same day in the afternoon Sir Edward Cook Knight, L. Cook a Privy
Counselor.
Lord chief Justice of England was sworn a Privy Counselor.

Sunday the 26 of Decembert Robert Earl of Somerset married the Lady Francis
Howard, daughter to Thomas Earl of Suffolk. Earl of Somerset married.


Sunday the 2 of January 1613. Prince Henry Frederick borne at Heydelberg.
between the hours of twelve and one in the morning, was Prince Henry
Frederick borne at Heydelberge in Germany, the first borne son of the most
high borne Princess the Lady Elizabeth the eldest daughter of the most High
and Mighty Prince James King of Great Britain, and wife to the most Noble
Prince Frederick the first Count Palatine, chief of the Princes Electors, An.
reg. 12 1614
he was christened the sixth of March.

Sir Ralph Winwood made Secretary, and Sir Thomas Lake a Privy Counselor.
Thursday the 29 of March 1614. Sir Ralphe Winwood Knight, Master of the
Requests was sworn principal Secretary of Estate, and Sir Thomas Lake Knight,
Clerk of the Privy Signet was sworn a Privy Counselor.

The 15 of June died Henry Earl of Northamton, and was buried in the chapel
of Dover castle, Henry Earl of Northamton deceast.
he founded three Hospitalls, one whereof was at Greenewich, which he ordained
should be for ever governed by the company of Mercers of London.

Christianus King of Denmark, his second coming into England.
In the month of July this year 1614. the King of Denmark with three ships
arrived at Yarmouth, accompanied and attended by his Lord Chancellor, and Lord
Admiral and diverse other of quallity and a competent Number of his Guard and
others.

Friday the 22 of July he came to the Queens Court at Somerset house in the
Strand, the King of great Britain being then in Bedfordshire ryding
progress, where having speedy knowledge of his brothers a ryuall set forward
instantly for London, and upon the next Sunday both the Kings, the Queen and
and Prince Charles met at Somerset house, where the Bishop of London preached
before them.

And the first of August the King of Denmark being accompanied with King James
and Prince Charles, went by Barge to Woolwich, and to Graues-end, where they
dined, and after dinner went aboard the King of Denmarkes ship, and there the
King of Great Britain took leave of his brother, and returned that night to
Theobalds, Prince Charles accompanied his Uncle the next day to Rochester, and
and having viewed the Navy Royal, they returned to the King of Denmarkes Ship,
and the next day Prince Charles returned to London, and the King with a fair
wind set sail for Denmark, having every way expressed his Royal bounty as
formerly.

The thirteenth of July, The Earl of Suffolk Lord Treasurer The Earl of
Somerset Lord Chamberlain.
Thomas Earl of Suffolk was made Lord high Treasurer of England, and at this
time Robert Earl of Somerset was made Lord Chamberlain.

This Michellmas Term there was a call of Seargeants at Law, viz. the
eleventh of November. A call of Sergeants.


At this time was finished and builded the new fair Counsel Chamber for the
Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, A new Counsel Chamber for the L. Mayor of
London.
by reason the former Chamber was too little, Sir Thomas Middleton Knight being
then Lord Mayor.

In September there was a general muster of horse and foot throughout the
Land, A general muster and trayning.
and therewithal trayning of soldiers, but chiefly in the City of London by
the citizens them^selues, many whereof by their former voluntary exercise of
Arms and Millitary discipline, was now so ready and expert that they taught
o^thers. And whereas at this time there was by the Lord Mayor and citizens,
twenty select^^ captains chosen to train and govern the trained bands of
London, viz. six thousand^ there were found in the said former company viz. of
the Artillery garden, sufficient men ^ be their Lieutenants and all other
officers (...) the apt and ready trayning of others, fr^^ whom upon good
observation all the shires (...) England took example: the captains and
gen^tlemen of the Artillery garden, demeand themselves so well, exercising all
points of war* that it pleased Prince Charles to go in person to the
Artillery garden to see their weekly exercise of arms, and to go into Hoxton
field to see their great muster and trayning of the six thousand citizens,
which weekly practice now used in the Artillery garden, they were determined
to remove from thence, and to hold their usual Marshall meetings and practice
of arms in the great third field from Mooregate viz. next the six Windmills,
which field, Master Leat with great pains has been diverse years a preparing
to that purpose.

The Thames cleared of Piles, Stops and Weyres.
At this time the river of Thames was cleared of stops, pyles and weyres by the
Water Bailey of London, as he was appointed by the Lord Mayor and Court of
Aldermen.

Master Hugh Middleton, Master Middleto^ brings a river to London.
Citizen and Goldsmith of London, borne in Denbigh-shire having spent five
years time with the advice and direction of the best and most skillfull
Artizens, employed bestowed great sums of money, forced to use seven hundred
workmen at one time, and endured infinite Callumny and detraction, he brought a
delicate River of sweet water from two plentious springs, viz. the one whereof
is called Chawldwell near Ware, and the other Amwell in Herefordshire, which
two springs being united, run jointly together to the North-side of London,
which River with the Trenches to convey it, and the great Cesterne to receive
it with great difficulty was brought unto desired effect in Summer, 1613. but
the Current was restrained from running into the Ceasterne until Michaelmas
day in the year 1613. And that day there came to behold it the Lord Mayor if
London, and Sir Thomas Middleton Knight, Lord Mayor Elect for the year
ensuing, brother to this Mayor Hugh Middleton Master of this memorable work,
with many Aldermen, and a great number of grave Citizens and others, who were
entertained with excellent Music, and the royal sound of drums and trumpets,
and with speeches and other pleasant entertainements, and at the lifting up of
the Scluce to let the River run into the Ceasterne there was a peale of
Chambers, since which time with all possible expedition this water is conuaied
from this Ceasterne by pipes of Elm into all high stre^ and chief lanes of
the city and the suburbe^ thereof, the general and particular benefit their of
is invaluable.

Shrieues.
Peter Proby, Martin Lumley. Shrieues.

Mayor.
Sir Thomas Hayes Knight Draper, Mayor.

Two Hospitalls founded.
At this time was founded the Great Hospi^tall at the Charter House near
London, for fourscore men, and forty children, and the new built Hospital at
Dulwich in Surrey, read my large book.

Great frosts, snow, and great floods.
The 17 of January 1614. it began to freeze in ordinary manner, and the 23 of
January it began to snow, and continued freezing, and snowing many days, and
upon Sunday the twelfth of February it began to snow most extremely, and
continued until the foureteenth of February at noone, and then it abated, and
from that time, for many days after it continued freezing and snowing much or
little, until the sixth or seventh of March, by means whereof much cattle
perished as Calves and Lambs, Dear and Coneys etc. by reason the earth lay
long covered with deep snow, to the great hurt of all manner of cattle, and
many were forced to use new devices to fadder, this snow brought extreme
danger to all Trauaillers, after this snow thawed there followed Inundations,
great and violent which did great spoils and damages as you may read in my
large book.

Tuesday the seventh of March 1614. The King is entertained at Cambridge.
the King was royally received into Cambridge, where he stayed until Satterday
following, in which space the University entertained his Majesty with learned
disputations in Divinity, Philosophy, etc. and with Comodies in Lattin and
English, with great feasting of the King his Nobility and train, the King in
most gracious manner came to them again in May next following, what is more to
be said touching his Majesty's being at Cambridge, I could never learn,
notwithstanding my letters and mediation to the Vice Chancellor, therefore I
cannot promise any more in my large book.

The 25 of March 1615. An. reg. 13 1815 Proclamation against transportation of
children, and of gold and silver.
proclamation was made to restrain the sending of children over beyond the
seas, to make them Roman Priests, Jesuits or Seminaries, and there was an other
Proclamation made to stay and prevent all further transportation of gold or
silver out of this land, upon several penalties, as well to the Counselor as
Transporters.

Sunday the 23 of April 1615. Sir George Villers Knighted.
George Villers Esquire, was sworn gentleman of the Kings Bedchamber, and the
next day he was Knighted.

The 24 of April there were 18 Jesuits and Seminaries taken out of Newgate,
Jesuits and Seminaries sent to Wisbidge.
and six out of the Gatehouse at Westminster, and were all 24 sent to Wishydge.

Two Knights of the Garter.
The 23 of May were enstalled Knights of the Garter, the Lord Viscont Fenton
captain of the Guard, and the Lord Knowles Master of the Court of Wards.

The Lord Hay made a Baron.
The 29 of June, James Lord Hay, was created Baron of Sawley in Yorkshire.

The next day being Friday, Sir Robe^^ Dormer Knight and Baronet, Sir Robert
Dormer made Baron.
was created Baron Dormer of Wing.

The 19 of July Doctor Milburne Deane of Rochester, Doctor Milburne Bishop.
was consecrated Bishop of Saint Dauies.

Proclamation against increase of building about London.
At this time proclamation was made again, not only to stay, all further
increase of buildings, which were daily erected in and about London, contrary
to sundry former Edicts, and thereupon this Proclamation rattified and
confirmed all the former Proclamations, and straightly charged all
Commissioners in that behalf, to look and search into the depth of all such
offenders, and offenses, and to punnish them accordingly. This Proclamation was
dated the 16 of July 1615. And yet for all this, there was wondrous new
increase of buildings round about London, chiefly on the North-side of the
Couen-garden upon a field called Long Acar near Saint Giles in the field etc.

Bishop of Winchester a Privy Counselor.
The 3 of August, Doctor Bilson Bishop of Winchester was sworn a Privy
Counselor.

This year 1615. was builded a House of Correction for the County of Middlesex
nere Clearken-well in a large garden plot, A house of correction builded for
the County of Middlesex.
purchased by the Justices of that county for that purpose the purchase and
building whereof cost above five and twenty hundredth pounds, part of which
money was the free gift of the Justices of the county, and the rest was levied
by the Inhabitants.

The City of London at the request of the Counsel, gave five hundredth pounds
in ready money to make a stock for the said house of correction, but it was
employed in the building and furnishing of that house.

And then the Justices ordained two Governors and a Matrone, to order and
govern the Vagrants committed to that house, and they to have a Sallarie of
two hundredth pound a year allowed them for their pains, In regard of which
Sallarie, they do receive the Vagrants, and keep them at work without
farther charge to the county, until they be discharged thence by order of the
Justices of peace.

This Summer also was the West Smithfielde of London paued all over, Smithfield
paued all over.
and strongly Rayled in on all sides, and likewise the new raised mount or
middle of the Field was strongly Railed abount for the better saffetie of
passengers, and securetie of all that should walk therein from the danger of
Coathes, Carts, Horses, Oxen and all other Cattle, of all which that field is
seldom empty, and the last year the new Palace yard before Westminster Hall
was likewise paued, the pauing of these two places, was forms held as strange
and difficult to be so fully per^formed, as well for that it was generally
sup^posed there could not be sufficient quanti^ of stones found to repair the
daily decay (...) London streets, and to paue new them streets, as it was of
late years to see most of the high streets of London to be paued all along
by their shops sides with broad free stone, which manner of smooth pauement
began first by the Gold-smithes and Mercers toward the East end of
Cheape-side about five years past, and since by degrees many other streets
did the like, though very slowly, but the Stationers in Paul's Churchyard in
the year 1616 bordered their side in uniform order all in one Summer.

The high-cawses in London taken down and made level.
And about eight years past the sundry high Cawses which lay in the midst of
diverse his streets, and great thorough-faires were taken down, and the
streets made sweeter fairer, and more passable, as the Strand, where the first
reformation began, in Holborne, in long Southwarke, the great highway by the
Minors to Algate, from Algate to White-chappell, which was the last Cawsey that
was taken down: there was an other great cawsey from Bishops-gate to
Shoredich-church, there were diverse others as in Saint Iohns-streete, Barbican,
Red-crosse-streete, White-crosse-streete, and in other places, the which are
all removed and new paued, and no sign remains of any of the former offenses
or anoyance to passengers or inhabitants, which remove of those sundry broad
long and high cawses were ever formerly held impossible to be removed, and the
streets to be made so sweet and passable as now they are.

The 27 of September 1615. The Lady Arbella deceast.
died the Lady Arbella in the Tower, she was buried in the Chapel Royal at
Westminster.

William Gore, John Gore. Shrieues. They were brehren borne in London, Shrieues.
and both free of the Company of Merchantayllers.

Sir John Iolles Knight Draper Mayor. Mayor.


He builded a Free-schoole, and eight fair sliues houses at Stratford-bow for
eight poor families, toward the maintenance of all which he gave fifty three
pounds thirteen shillings and four pence a year for ever.

And during the time of his Mayralty, Sir John Iolles his bounty.
he dilligently administered Justice, and very bounteous and cheerful, he with
certain Aldermen, names follow, visited and suruaied the bounds and limits of
the River of Thames, and held Courts and Iuries in sundry places, in this
progress, he was as honorable accompanied and attended, as was befitting so
honorable a Maistrate of so famous a City as London, the like visitation had
not been in about fourscore years before.

Monday the 23 of October 1615. Richard Weston yeoman, Weston executed.
was indicted and condemned in the Guild Hall of London for poisoning (...)
Thomas Ouerbury Knight, and was executed at Tiburne the next Wensday.

Thursday the ninth of November 1615 Anne Turner widow, Mistress Turner
executed.
was indicted and condemned at Westminster, for being accessarie before the
murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, she was executed at Tiburne the twelfth of
November.

The Lieutenant of the Tower executed.
Thursday the 16 of November 1615. Sir Ieruas Elwese Knight Lieutenant of the
Tower, was indicted and condemned in the Guildhall, for being accessarie before
the murder of Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed upon the Tower hill the 20
of November.

Franckline executed.
Monday the 27 of November 1615. James Franklin Gentleman, was indicted and
condemned at Westminster, for being accessarie also before the murder of the
said Sir Thomas Ouerbury, and was executed at Saint Thomas Awaterings upon
Satterday the ninth of December.

The next year viz. the 24 of May, Frances Countess of Somerset was brought
to Westminster Hall, and the next day Robert Earl of Somerset was brought
thither likewise, and had their several trials by their Peers, touching the
business lastly mentioned, and from thence they returned back again to the
Tower.

The seventeenth of November 1615. The second Lottery.
began she drawing of the second great Lottery for Virginia.

At the end of this year 1615. Captain Benjamin Joseph goes to the East
Indies.
the East India Merchants sent out six brave ships to the East Indies, under
command of Beniamine Joseph, an excellent Nauigator.

The third of December 1515. D. Abbot B. of Sallisbury.
Robert Abbot Doctor of Divinity, and brother to the Lord Archbishop of
Canterbury, was consecrated Lord Bishop of Sallisbury.

The three and twentieth of December, The Earl of Pemb. made L. Chamberlain.
the Earl of Pembrooke was made Lord Chamberlain.

The third of January, The Earl of Worcester L. Privy Seal.
the Earl of Worcester was made Lord Privy Seal.

Thursday the fourth of January, Sir Georg Villers Master of the horse.
Sir George Villers was made Master of the Horse.

The third of April 1616. Sir John Digby made a Prime Counselor.
Sir John Digby Knight, was sworn a Privy Counselor, and was made
Vice-Chamberlaine to the King.

At this time Master William Jones Merchant, 1616 An reg. 14 Master William
Jones his Bounty.
and free of the Company of Haberdashers of London, gave nine thousand pounds
to build twenty Alms houses at Monmouth in Wales, for twenty poor men and
women with competente, maintinence for them for ever.

He builded there also a fair Free school, the Master thereof to have a
hundredth Mark yearly for ever, and the Usher a hundredth Nobles yearly for
ever.

And at Newland he have likewise five thousand pounds for the maintenance of a
Preacher, and for the relief of the poor and others for ever.

In London he gave sixteen hundredth pounds, to allow a learned Preacher a
hundredth pounds a year for ever.

He gave also fourteen hundredth and forty pounds to purchase a yearly
relief for ever of nine poor men of the Company of Haberdashers.

He have to the four Hospitalls of London five hundredth pounds.

He gave a thousand pounds to be given to poor Preachers throughout the Land
for a present gift.

All these his gifts and bounty, he ordained should be for ever at the dispose
of the Company of Haberdashers, the full sum of money to the aforesaid uses
is eighteen thousand pounds five hundredth and forty, besides his bounty in
Hambro and Stood, etc.

Sea-coale and Pit-coale make glass and melt Mettels.
At this time was brought to perfection the making of all manner of Glass,
viz. Venice Glass, and all other sorts of Glasses, by the burning only of
Sea-coale, and also the melting of Iron and all other Mettles only with
Sea-coale, and also the burning of Brick with Sea-coale, whereof I will say
more in my large Book.

The ninth of June 1616. Sir Frances Bacon a Privy Counselor.
Sir Francis Bacon Knight, was sworn a Privy Counselor.

Thursday the twentieth of June, the King in person being accompanied with
Prince Charles and the great Lords of the Counsel, The King makes an oration
in the Starchamber.
went into the Star Chamber, and there made an excellent Oration unto the
Judges and others.

Monday the first of July 1616. A Seminary hanged and a woman burned.
one Maxfield a Seminary was executed at Tiburne, and the same fore-noone a
woman was burned in Smithfield for killing her husband.

Wensday the third of July Sir John Iolles Knight, The Lord Mayor in person
surueieth the bounds of the River of Thames and reformeth, all manner of
anoyances.
Lord Mayor of London accompanied with Alderman Prescot, Alderman Jones,
Alderman Rotherham, Alderman Lumley, Master William Gore one of the Shreeues of
London, Master Jones common Sergeant, Master Smart Sword bearer, Master Sparrey
Water Bayliffe, with diverse other chief officers and gentlemen, went to Suruay
the bounds, and limits of the River of Thames Eastward, and to cleanse the
River of annoyances, and to reform the abuse of unlawful fishing and spoil
of Fry etc. And to that purpose kept Court at Graues-end, and gave a Jury to
make dilligent enquiry of all abuses and annoyances, from thence he and his
whole train rode to Rochester, where the Mayor and Aldermen of that City
entertained him and all his train very kindly, and the next morning those
three Barges that brought them to Graues-end, being come about, carried his
Lordship and the rest from Rochester, Master Rock.
to Lee, and Master Rock, The Mayor of Rochester in his own Barge conducted
the Lord Mayor as far as his liberties extended, and passing by the Kings
Castles and Navy Royal, they were saluted with many volleis of great shot.

And being come to Lee, the Lord Mayor that afternoon held a Court and gave a
Jury for Essex as he had done before in Kent, and the next day returned to
London, having demeand himself very Nobly and performed all things very
honorably, and given very kind entertainment to such Gentlemen of the
several Counties, as came either to see him or observe the carriage of the
business, because the like visitation to this purpose had not been in the
memory of the oldest man then living.

And the 16 of July the Lord Mayor with eight Aldermen kept like Courts at
Putney for Surrey, and at Fullham for Middlesex, and the sixteenth of
September, the Jury for Middlesex made their presentiments before the Lord Mayor
in Westminster Hall. And the 18 of September, the Jury of Kent made their
presentiments before the Lord Mayor at Detford in the fore-noone, and the Jury
of Essex gave in their Presentiments unto the L. Mayor at Barking in the
afternoon. And the 25 of September, the Lord Mayor kept Court again in
Westminster Hall in the forenoone, and in Southwarke in the afternoon, to
take Presentiments and give order for reformation.

Sunday the 7 of July Doctor Thomas Morton, Deane of Winchester, Doctor Morton
Bishop of Chester.
was consecrated Bishop of Chester.

The same day were enstalled Knights of the Garter at Windsor, Francis Earl of
Rutland, Knights of the Garter made.
Sir George Villers Knight Master of the horse, and the Lord Viscont Lisle.

At White Hall the ninth of July 1616. Two barons created.
were created Barons, viz. Sir John Hollis Knight was created Baron of
Hawghton, and Sir John Roper Knght was created Baron Tynchham of Tyncham in
Kent.

Tuesday the 16 of July 1616. the Earl of Arondell was sworn a Privy
Counselor. The Earl of Arondell sworn a Privy Counselor.


The 20 of July the Lord Carew was sworn a Privy Counselor. The Lord Carew a
Privy Counselor.


At Woodstocke upon Tuesday the 27 of August 1616. Sir George Villers Knight of
the Garter and Master of the Horse, was created Viscont Villers, and Baron of
Whaddon. Viscont Villers created.


By virtue of a special Commission from his Majesty, and from the City of
London, bearing date the fifteenth of May this year 1616. Peter Proby Alderman
of London, The City of London sends Alderman Proby into Ireland to reform
abuses, and to ratify good laws and constitutions in the Province of Vlster
viz. Londons plantation.
and Governor for the new plantation of the Province of Vlster in Ireland,
accompanied with Master Mathias Springham Merchantailor, and Master Clement
Moss Solyciter for London with others, did there establish such Laws and
constitutions for the City of London Derie, and the Borough of Colerame, as
should thenceforth be observed and kept, according to the Tenor of the Kings
Charter granted to the City of London in that behalf. The said Alderman Proby
by virtue of the Kings Commission, did there also Minister oath unto all
officers and others, for the well government and making of true accounts. He
carried over thither with him two rich swords, the one whereof he delivered to
Sir John Vawghan Knight Mayor of Lonon Dery, and the other to Trystram
Beryfford Esquire, Mayor of Coleraine for that time being, and to be borne
before them and their successors for ever. There was also sent unto the Mayor
of London Dery, a great gilded Man being sent him from the Governors and
Assistants for that plantation. Alderman Proby with his company went from
London the eight and twenty of May last, and returned to London the 28 of
August 1616. what is more to be said touching this business, I must refer
you to my larger book.

The Bishop of Fly a Privy Counselor.
Sunday being Michaelmas day, Doctor Androwes Bishop of Ely was sworn a Privy
Counselor at Hampton Court.

The fourth of October Doctor Mountague was translated from Bathe and Wells to
Winchester, and forthwith he expelled all Inmates out of Winchester house on
the Banke-side, reduced diverse parts thereof from foul noysomnesse unto
sweetness and comeliness, he repaired the whole house throughout, and builded
some part new, and enclosed a great part of the wharfe, and made a new fair
pair of stairs into the Thames, he spent almost three thousand pound in the
repair and beautifying this ancient house, which for a long time had been
suffered to run to ruin.

Allan Cotton, Cutbert Hacket, Shrieues. Shrieues.


Sir John Leman Knight Fishmonger a batcheler Mayor. Mayor.


In his Maioralty the old ruinous Gate called Aldersgate was quite taken down,
Aldersgate new builded.
and fairly new builded from the foundation. The river of Thames cleared of
shelues in all parts, and the Haven of Queen Hyth cleansed, and likewise the
making of the great wharse on the South Side of the river by the Willowes, and
also the new strict order for the passage of Cars and Carts in the streets, for
the preservation of all passengers.

Thursday the last of October 1616. viz. Prince Charles created Prince of Wales.
Alhollond Eve, Prince Charles came in great state by Barge from Barn Elmes to
White Hall, accompanied and attended by diverse great Lords, and others of
honorable rank and quallity besides his own train, and was most joyfully
met at Chelsey by the Lord Mayor, Aldermen and Citizens of London, each Company
in a several Barge, and distinguished by their several Arms in their rich
Banners and stately Streamers, besides the Royal sound of Drum and Trumpet, and
great variety of excellent Music, besides all which and the infinite number of
people upon the shore and in Boats and Barges to behold this joyful day,
there was also at the Cities charge in honor of his Highness creation more
particular pleasant Trophies and Ingenious devices met him upon the water then
ever was at any former creation of any Prince of Wales.

And upon Monday the fourth of November, at White Hall, where the Kings Majesty
invested and crowned Prince Charles Prince of Wales, The Earl of Arondell was
then Earl Marshall.
at this solemn creation were present most of the Nobility of the Land. The
Lord Archbishop of Canterbury and diverse other Bishops and reverend Prela^s,
all the Judges of the Law, sir Edward Cook only excepted; there were present
also the Lord Mayor and Aldermen of London, in their scarlet Robes as were the
Judges.

26 Knights of the Bath made.
In honor of this joyful creation, there were made five and twenty Knights of
the Bath, who performed all their Ceremonies in the upper Parliament house, and
the next Sunday withal Magnifisence being lustily mounted, they rode to
White Hall, and were there Knighted by his Majesty.

Knights of the Bath.
James Lord Maltreuers. Algernon Lord Percy. James Lord Wryothesley. Edward
Lord Clynton. Edward Lord Beauchamp. Lord Barkley. Lord Mordant. Sir Alexander
Erskin. Sir Henry Howard. Sir Edward Sackuill. Sir William Howard. Sir Edward
Howard. Sir Montague Barty. Sir William Stourton. Sir Henry Parker. Sir Dudley
North. Sir Spencer Compton. Sir William Spencer. Sir William Seymor. Sir
Rowland Saint John. Sir John Candish. Sir Thomas Neuill. Sir John Roper. Sir
John North. Sir Henry Carey.
In honor of this joyful creation, there were solemn Tryumphs performed at
Lowdon in the County of Salop, the fourth of November, and published by Master
Daniell Powel Gentleman.

Also in honor of this creation, there were forty young gentlemen selected out
of the four Iunes of Court who fought at Barriers, viz. the one half against
the other.

Barons created.
Thursday the seventh of November Thomas Elsmer Lord Chancellor of England was
created Viscont Brackley. And William Lord Knowles was created Viscont
Wallingford, and Sir Philip Stanhope Knight, was created Baron of Shelford, and
upon the next Satterday the Lord Mayor feasted the Knights of the Bath.

The Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench put from his place.
Satterday the 16 of November 1616. Sir Edward Cook Knight was discharged from
his Office, viz. from being Lord Chief Justice of the Kings Bench.

Monday the 18 of November Sir Henry Montague Knight, the Kings Sergeant at Law
was sworn Lord chief Justice of the Kings Bench. Sir Henry Montague Lord
chief Justice of the Kings Bench.


This Summer, and harvest was so dry, that passengers were anoyde with dust in
the highwaies the 20 of November. A dry Summer.


Sunday the 8 of December 1616. Arthur Lake Doctor of Divinity was consecrated
Bishop of Bathe and Wells. Two Bishops consecrated.


Lewis Bailey Doctor of Divinity, was consecrated Bishop of Bangor.

The Archbishop of Spalato ariueth in England.
Monday the 16 of December 1616. Marcus Anthonius de Domynis, Archbishop of
Spalato in the Territory of Venice, was very honorably entertained and received
at Lambeth by the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury with whom he remained, and writ
a brief declaration of his Reasons for leaving that Prelacy, and forsaking his
Native Country, which Book was presently published in eight Languages, and
dispersed through Europe: and in Summer following he printed in London the first
four of his ten books, entitled of the Commonweal of the Church.

Monday the two and twentieth of December, Sir Thomas Edmonds a Privy
Counselor.
Sir Thomas Edmonds Knight, Ambassador Ledger in France was sworn a Privy
Counselor, and made Comptroller of the Kings household, and the Lord Wotton was
made Treasurer of the Kings household.

Sunday the fifth of January the Lord Viscont Villers was created Earl of
Buckingham at White Hall. Earl of Buckingham created.


Twesday the fourth of February 1616. Earl of Buckingham a Privy Counselor.
the Earl of Buckingham, was sworn a Privy Counselor.

Twesday the 13 of February, the King in person sat in the Star Chamber, The
King sits in the Star Chamber.
and made an excellent Oration to the Lords, and to the Judges, unto whom he
gave a charge and direction how they should proceed in the Circuits.

Shroue Twesday the 4 of March, Disordered youths
many disordred persons of sundry kinds, amongst whom were very many young
boys and laddes that assembled themselves in Lincolnes Inn field, Finsbury
field, in Ratliffe and Stepney field, where in ryotous manner they did beat
down the walls and windows of many victualling houses, and of all other
houses, which they suspected to be bawdie houses, And that afternoon they
spoiled a new Playhouse and did likewise more hurt in diverse other places, in
pulling down walls and windows, and spoiling of house-hold-stuffe, and were
so head^strong, that they dispightfully used and resisted the Shrieffes of
London and the Constables and Justices of Middlesex. Whereupon the Lords of the
Counsel by the Kings appointment, ordained diverse of the Chief Justices of
Middlesex to be Provost Marshals, and to execute Marshall Law if the like
occation should happen.

Shroue-twesday the fourth of March this year 1616. the Queen feasted the
King at her Palace in the Strand, Denmark house.
formerly called Somerset House, and then the King commanded it should no more
be so called, but that it should from henceforth be called Denmarke-house,
which said Denmarke-house the Queen had many ways repaired, beautified, new
builded and enlarged, and brought to it a pipe of conduit water from Hyde-parke.

Sir Francis Bacon Lord Chancellor.
The seventh of March, the Great Seal of England was delivered to Sir Francis
Bacon Knight the Kings Attorney, and was then made Lord Keeper, and the next
day toward Evening died the Lord Elismer late Lord Chancellor, and the fourth
of January following, Sir Francis Bacon Lord Keeper was made Lord Chauncelor.

Sir Henry Yeluerton the Kings Attorney.
When Sir Francis Bacon was made Lord Keeper, then was sir Henry Yeluerton
Knight the Kings Soliciter made the Kings Attorney, and Master Thomas Couentry
Esquire Recorder of London was made the Kings Soliciter, and was Knighted the
16 of March.

Friday the foureteenth of March 1616. The King rydeth into Scotland.
the King being accompanied with the Queen and Prince Charles, and many of the
Chief Nobility and others, went from White Hall to Theobalds, and from thence
the King with his appointed train set forward toward Edenborough, the next
Monday being Saint Patricks day.

And upon his Majesty's return to London, The King returns from Scotland.
viz. the 15 of September next following, the King came from Windsor to London,
and was met at Hyde-parke by the Lord Mayor and Aldermen, and above four
hundredth of the chief Citizens with chains of gold, and well mounted, the
Lord Mayor presented the King with a purse, and in it five hundredth pieces of
gold called the Unity, and there the King Knighted sir Anthony Ben Recorder of
London.

The 20 of March 1616. The Lord Hay a Privy Counselor.
the Lord Hay was sworn a Privy Counselor at Hynching-brooke.

Sunday the 23 of March 1616. Lord Noell created.
at Burley on the hill in Rutland-shire, sir Edward Noell Knight and Baronet,
was created Lord Noell of Rydlington.

At this time near Wapping, A new Chapel of ease builded.
in the Parish of White-chappell, was new builded a very fair large Chapel
and a Churchyard to it, which were consecrated the 7 of July 1617. by the Lord
Bishop of London.

Upon Michaelmas day Doctor Montague Lord Bishop of Winchester was sworn a
Privy Counselor at Hampton Court, The Bishop of Winchester a Privy
Counselor.
and that day at that place Sir John Villers married Frances the daughter of Sir
Edward Cook Knight.

Shrieues.
William Hallyday, Robert Johnson, Shrieues.

Mayor.
Sir George Bolles Knight Grocer, Mayor.

Ambassadors from Russia.
Twesday the fourth of November, here arrived Stephen Euanowich Lieutenant of
Rasco, and Mark Euanozin Posdieof, of one of the three Chancellors of Russia,
from the late mentioned Michaell Pheodorowich Emperor of Russia, they had
audience the next Sunday, and upon Now years day the King feasted them and
their chief followers and attendants at Whitehall, being fifty in number,
their whole Train was 75.

The L. Hay married.
Thursday the 6 of November, the Lord Hay married the Lady Luce, daughter to the
Earl of Northumberland.

The L. Archbishop of Spalato preaches in London.
Sunday the last of November 1617. the Lord Archbishop of Spalato, preached at
the Marcers Chapel in the Italian tongue, there were present the L.
Archbishop of Canterbury, the L. Chancellor, the Earls of Arondell and
Pembroke Lord Zowch, the Lord Compton, and many others of great note, he
preached there again upon Sunday the nineteenth of April 1618.

Sunday the foureteenth of December, at ^^^beth were two Bishops consecrated,
viz. Two Bishops Consecrated.
(...) Felton Master of Pembroke-hall was consecrated Lord Bishop or Bristow,
and Doctor Montaigne Deane of Westminster, was consecrated Lord Bishop of
Lincoln, at this Consecration were present and assistant at the imposition of
hands with the Lord Archbishop of Canterbury, the Lord Archbishop of Spalato,
the Bishops of London, Ely Rochester and Lichfield.

Monday the four and twenty of December 1617. The second son of the Lady
Elizabeth born at Heydelberg.
was borne Charles Lodowick at Heydelberg about four a clock in the morning,
and was christened in March following, Prince Charles was out of his Godfathers.

At this time the Appothecaries of London obtained a corporation for themselves
and their successors for ever, The Appothecaries London made a particular
Company.
and by Letters pattented were made a Body Pollitique and Corporate, and that
all such as use and profess the Apt, and Mystery of Appothecaries within
London and the Suburbs thereof, and within seven miles compass thereof, shall
be ordered and governed by the Master, Wardens and socitie of the Art and
Mystery of the Appothecaries, Edmond Philips was the Master, Stephen Hyggines,
and Thomas Fanes were the first Wardens.

New years day being Thursday 1617. George Earl of Buckingham was created
Marquess of Buckingham at White Hall. Marquis of Buckingham created.


Thursday the eight of January 1617. Sir Robert Manton Knight was sworn the
Kings Secretary. Sir Robert Manton Secretary.


This years fleet to the East Indies.
At the end of February this year 1617. the Company of the East India Merchants
sent nine brave goodly ships well appointed to the East Iudies. And Sir Thomas
Dale Knight went General, this was the first fleet of the second joint stock.

At the beginning of this month of April 1618. An. reg. 16 1618
the Lord De la Ware with about eight score persons, viz. men and women, went
ye second time to Virginea to make good the plantation the Lord De la Ware at
his first being in Virginia through extremity of sickness was constrained to
return for England about six years past, The Lord De La War his second
going to Virginia.
and could not recover his perfect health until the last year, in which he
builded a very fair ship, and went now in it himself, Captain Spilman.
and after him went Captain Henry Spilman with thirty persons, this Captain
Spilman had been formerly ten years in Virginia, knew most of the Kings of
that Country, and spoke their Languages very understandingly.

The Palace of Paris burned
The seventh of March this year 1617. about one a clock at midnight, there was
seen in the air over the Pallas of Paris in France, a flame of fire (as it
were a Star of a Cubit long, and a foot broad, which fired the Palas, and
with extreme terror and violence burnt it down, and therewithal burned the
ancient Records of France, and the Pictures and Statuaes of the Kings of
France, this fire notwithstanding the readiness of water, and twenty thousands
of willing persons endeavoring to quench it, yet it continued about twenty
hours, in which space it also burned a prison, with great damage to other
houses and Tradesmen, great Pillars and Arches of stone burned with great
flames as if they had been made of Timber and commixt with Brimston, Chagford
in Devonshire.
and the first week of this month of March, happened in the Town of Chagford
in Devonshire, at a Court of Stanery, a wall fell down and after that part of
the house, and five Master Nicholas Eueligh then Steward of that Court, and two
of his servants. And Master Richard Cottell of the Middle Temple Esquire, Sol
and Mars were in coninuction at that time.
and seven other) there were also about thirty persons sore hurt, within few
days of these two accidents above said, the Townehouse of Delph in Holland by
negligence was set a fire and quite burned down.

Martine Fotherby Doctor of Divinity, Doctor Fotherby Bishop of Salisbury.
and Chaplain to the Kings Majesty, one of the Canons of Christ-church in
Canterbury, borne at Grimsby in Lincolneshire, he was Kinsman, Pupile and
Chaplain to the good Archbishop White-gift, and was Consecrated Bishop of
Salisburie upon Sunday the nineteenth of April 1618. by the most Reverend
Father in God Doctor Abbot, Lord Archbishop of Canterbury.

Sir Dudley Digs sent Ambassador to the Emperor of Russia.
This month of May, 1618. the forenamed Russia Ambassador with his Train
returned, and Sir Dudley Digges Knight was sent Ambassador to the Emperor of
Russia from his Majesty.

William Parker Citizen and Merchantaillor of London, The upper part of Paul's
new glassed and repaired.
died about two years past, and amongst other things which he gave to Pius
and Public uses, he gave a thousand pound toward the new building of
Aldersgate, which was employed therein according to the Tenor of his Will, he
gave also five hundredth pounds toward the new glasing of the decayed windows
in the upper part of Paul's Church in London, and the same to be done in rich
colloured glass with Effygies and holy stories as it had been formerly glased
and adorned, the first window whereof being new made was prepared and appointed
to be set up on the Northside of the Quire in the month of June, this year
1618. and much of the old glass repaired the decaies of diverse broken windows.

Dura enim est Historiographorum conditio, si vera dicant, homines prouocant;
si falsa scripturis commendant, Dominus, qui vera dicta ab adulteris
sequestrat, non acceptat, says Matthew of Paris. Of the Universities in
England, and Colleges of the same, with the Founders and principal Benefactors.
I Have before time rejoiced (says Erasmus Roterdam) that England was so well
furnished with so many men of excellent learning, but now I begin to envy her
felicity, for that he so flourishes with all kind of literature, that by
taking the commendation thereof from the other regions, she does as it were
maruailously obscure them. And yet notwithstanding, this commendation is not as
now first due to England, in the which (it is well known) have been of long
time men of great learning. The Universities prove this to be true, which both
for their antiquity and worthiness, contend with the most ancient and worthy
Universities in the world.

Peter College was erected of t^o ancient Hostels, Peter College.
sometime belonging unto the Brethren of the sect called De poenitentia Jesus
Christi) by Hugh Balsam, sometime Subprior of Ely. 1256.

This Hugh was afterward the tenth Bishop of Ely, and finished this College in
Anno 1248.

Clare-hal.
Clare Hall was first builded by Richard Badow, then Chancellor of the Students
there, and the same was called University Hall. 1326.

It was since that enlarged by Gwalther Thansteed Master of the same hall, who
with consent of the said Richard Badow resigned the foundation thereof to
Elizabeth Lady of Clare, third daughter of Gilbert, and sister and one of the
heirs of the last Gilbert de Clare Earl of Gloucester, who was first married
to John Bourgh, Earl of Vlster in Ireland, after to Theobald of Verdon, and
thirdly to Sir Roger Damary, and had issue by them all: she I say named it
Clare Hall.

Pembroke hall.
Pembroke Hall was founded by Mary of Valentia, daughter to Guydo Earl of
Saint Paul in France, wife to Adomate de Valentia Earl of Pembroke. She
obtained of King Edward the third, whose cosen she was, to found this College
in her own ground, with purchasing two or three t^nements thereby, and named
it Aula de Vale^ce Marie, An. 1343.

Corpus Christi College.
Corpus Christi College was first begun to be builded by the Aldermen and
brethren of Corpus Clristi Guild.

This College was brought so far forth; she rather by the help of Saint
Mary's Guild and fraternity, newly adjoined to the other Guild.

In the year 1353. they did elect Henry Earl of Darby and Lancaster, who
should obtain them favor for the purchasing of Mortmaine, for such lands and
tenements as after many did sell thim. This Earl of Darby in the 28 year of
Edward the third was created the first Duke of Lancaster, and then they elected
him their Alderman, who recognized their statutes, not by the Dukes seal, but
by the seal of the Alderman of that Guild.

Trinity hall was first an Hostell, Trinity Hall.
purchased by John Cranden, sometime Prior of Ely, who procured it for his
brethren, the Monks of that house, to be students there in the time of Edward
the third, which hostell was afterward purchased by William Bateman Bishop of
Norwich, who builded this College of Trinity hall upon the said ground, being
the first founder thereof; he deceased in the year of Christ 1354.

Gunuile and Caius College was first founded by Edmund Gunuile, Gunuile and
Caius College.
sometime Parson of Terington in Norffolke, he gave it to name Gunuile Hall as
appears by his statute 1354.

At his decease, leaving a good mass of money, commended the further finishing
of the same Hall to William Bateman Bishop of Norwich, who with the assent of
the Aldermen and Brethren of the Guiles of Corpus Christi and our Lady, changed
with them the said house, with their house called the Stonehall, where now
Gunuile and Caius college stands.

John Caius Doctor in Physic, sometime fellow and late Master of the same
college, has enlarged the house, and now made a second foundation, with
giving certain manors and lands to the same, 1557.

Kings College was first founded by King Henry the sixth, Kings College.
in Anno 1441.

The same King altered the form of his first foundation, Anno 1443.

Edward the fourth in displeasure of the first foundation, withdrew from the
college so much land as the first founder had given them: but afterward he
restored them to the inheritance of five hundred marks. After him, Henry the
seventh finished that notable chapel, begun by Henry the sixth, to the
glasing stalls, and pauing with marble, which was done by King Henry the eighth.

Queens College.
Queens College was begun by Lady Margaret, wife to King Henry the sixth,
1446. She procured Mortmaine 100. l. by year, Anno 1448. At the intercession
of Andrew Ducket, sometime Principal of Barnard hostell (which hostell he gave
to the said college.) He was Parson of Saint Botolphs in Cambridge, who by his
own money and help of others, purchased certain tenements, and builded his
college, being the first President of the same, who gave as well by his life,
as by his Testament, diverse ^ummes and parcels of land, and also procured
^ertaine gifts of the Duke of Clarence, of Cecily Duchess of York, of
Richard Duke of Glo^ester, of Anne Duchess of the same, of Edward Earl of
Salisbury, Maude Countess of Ox^ord, and Marmaduke Lumnee Bishop of Lin^olne,
with diverse other. Elizabeth wife to ^ing Edward the fourth, finished that
which Queen Margaret had begun in the year ^465.

Katharine Hall was founded by Robert Woodlarke, Doctor of Divinity, Katherine
Hall.
and Provost of the Kings college, and Chancellor to the University, as is
testified by the charter of King Henry the sixth, bearing date the 37 of his
reign, which was the year of Christ, 1459.

Jesus College was founded by John Alcock, Jesus College.
the 29 Bishop of Ely, who did convert the Monastery of S. Radigond (the
Abbess living a dissolute life, the Monastery then destitute of government,
the edifices then fallen into ruin, and ^n conclusion, the Nuns departing
thence, leaving it desolate) into a college of chaplens and scholars, the
year 1496.

This Alcocke borne at Beuerley, founded a Free-schoole at Kingston upon Hul,
and a school ^n the south side the Parish church of the Trinity, wherein his
parents were buried.

The rents of Jesus College have been more amplified by Sir Robert Read
Knight, Doctor Elestone, Doctor Roiston, and Doctor Fuller.

Christ's College.
Christ's College was founded by King Henry the sixth, who named it Gods House,
(...) was sometime a great hostell so called, first fo^^^ded by W. Bingham,
Parson of Saint Sakery London, and other. King Henry the seue^^ granted his
Charter to Lady Margaret his ^^ther, Countess of Richmond and Darby, to
^^^crease the students there, translating at her (...) position, so that from
thenceforth it should (...) called Christ's College.

S. John's College.
S. John's College being first an hostell of religious Canons, was erected by
Nigellus the s^^cond Bishop of Ely, Treasurer to King Hen^^ the first, the
year of Christ, 1134.

Those Canons lived by the name of the Hospital and Brethren of Saint John,
until the year of Christ 1510. though at that time so (...) decayed, that
there was but a Prior and two Brethren, and by the dilapidations of their goods
moveable, and immovable, they abuse their revenues and within the space of ten
years last past, from the sum of one hundred and forty pounds, to thirty
pounds, etc. Whe^^upon Henry the eight, Richard Bishop of Winchester, John
Bishop of Rochester, Charles Somerset Lord of Herbert, Thomas Louel, Henry
Marne, and John Saint John, Knights, Henry Horn, and Hugh Ashron Clerks,
Executor^ (...) the Testament of Lady Margaret, Countess (...) Richmond and
Darby, grandmother to Kin^ Henry the eighth, and mother to King Henry the
seventh, upon the suppression of the said Priorie, she being prevented by
death, leaving behind her sufficient goods, and committing the (...) to those
her said friends and executore, they erected the said College, 1511.

Magdalene College was first an hostell or hall, Magdalen College.
inhabited by diverse Monks of sundry Monasteries; Edward Duke of Buckingham
translated the same to a College, naming it Buckingham College, who builded
up the Hal in the year of Christ, 1519.

After him Thomas Audley of Walden sometime Chancellor of England, took upon
him to be founder of the said college, and going about to establish the same,
was prevented by death, so that what he had begun, he left imperfect, and
altogether unfinished. Christopher Wray Lord chief Justice of England repaired
and beautified it.

Trinity College was founded by King Henry the eighth, in the year of Christ,
1546. Trinity College.


The college was builded in the plot where sometime Edward the third builded
his house called the Kings Hall, in the year of Christ 1337.

There was joined unto this Hall, a college called Michael House, with an
hostell called Phiswicke hostell, and after the building there (being made of
three) King Henry the eight named it Trinity College. Queen Mary augmented it
with 338 pounds lands the year.

Michael House was founded by Haruie de Stanton, Priest, Michael house.
Chancellor of the Exchequer to Edward the second, of whom he obtained (...) to
erect the said college, in the year of our Savior Christ 1324.

Emmanuel College.
Emmanuell College founded by sir Walter Mildmay, in Anno 1584.

Sussex Sydney College founded.
Sussex Sydney College, was founded in the year 1598. by the right Honorable
the La^^ Francis Sydney, sometime Countess of Sussex.

And thus much in brief, concerning the University of Cambridge with the
Colleges and Halls in the sa^^.

The University of Oxford was instituted by King Alfred a Saxon, after the
birth of Christ 873. years: and has Colleges.
University College, University College.
or Saint Marie Church (as some have written) founded in the time of King
Alfred, by Sir William Archdeacon of Duresme, in the year 873.

But more likely by William Bishop of Duresme, in the 12 year of William
Conqueror, in Anno 1081.

Baliol College was founded in the time of Henry the third, by John Baliol,
Baliol College.
father to John Baliol King of Scotland, in the year of Christ, 1263.

Merton College was founded in the reign of Henry the 3. Merton College.
by Walter Merton sometime Canon of Paul's, and also of Salisbury, at a Town in
Surrey by Nonsuch, called (...), Anno 1264. And after, in Edward the first
time, being Bishop of Rochester, he translated i^ to Oxford, and deceased.

Excester College.
Excester college was founded in the time of Edward the second, by Walter
Stapleton Bishop of Excester, 1156.

And augmented in the time of our Sovereign Lady Queen Elizabeth, by Sir
William Peter knight, in the year of Christ, 1566.

Orial College.
Oriall College was founded in the time of Edward the second, by Sir Adam
Brown, Almoner of the said King, and for the said King, the year of Christ,
1323.

Queens College:
Queens College was founded in the time of Edward the third, by Robert
Englishfield in his own ground, and by him called the Queens Hall. He was
chaplain to the Lady Philip, wife to the same Edward, the year of Christ,
1340.

New College.
New College was founded in the time of King Edward the second, by William
Wickham Bishop of Winchester, the year of Christ 1379. Edmond Grindall
Archbishop of Canturbury, was a benefactor of twenty pounds the year, beside
books and places. William Wickham also founded a college in the city of
Winchester, by the like name of New College in Anno 1389.

Lincoln College.
Lincoln College was founded in the time of King Henry the fifth, by Richard
Fleming Bishop of Lincoln, 1440.

And augmented in Richard the third time Thomas Rotheram Bishop of Lincoln in
the (...) 1479.

All Souls College, All Souls College.
was founded in the time King Henry the sixth, by Henry Archbishop of
Canturbury, in the year 1437. King Henry the (...) gave it to sour Priors
alians, to wit, Al^^erbury in Salope, Runmey in Kent, Langua^th in Southwales,
Wedon Pinkney in Northamptonshire: and therefore is he in the ^^^ord called the
founder of that college.

Chichley also founded Bernard College in Oxford, since suppressed by Henry
the 8. and now re-edified by Sir Thomas White, and by him called Saint John's
College. More, he founded a college at Higham ferris, with Almes^ouses there.

Divinity School was founded in the reign of Henry the sixth, Divinity
School.
by Humfrey Duke of Gloucester, 1447. He gave 129 books to the Library there.

Magdalen College was founded in the time of King Henry the sixth, Magdalen
College.
by William Wamflet Bishop of Winchester, 1459.

He builded a good part of Eaton College, begun by King Henry the sixth. He
builded a free-schoole at Wamflet in Lincolneshire.

Brasen-nose College was founded in the reign of King Henry the seventh,
Brasennose College.
by William ^mith Bishop of Lincoln. He deceased in the year 1513.

Corpus Christi College was founded in the Corpus Christi College.
reign of King Henry the seventh, by Richard Fox Bishop of Winchester in the
year 1516.

Christ Church was founded in the time of Henry the 8. Christ, Church.
by Thomas Wolsey Cardinal and Archbishop of York, in the year of Christ
1539.

And finished by the same King Henry the eight in the year 1549.

Canterbury College.
Canterbury College in Oxford founded by Simon Islip Archbishop of Canterbury
in the year of our Lord 1353.

And lately suppressed in the 31 year of King Henry the eight, was joined to
Christs-church^^ in Oxford.

Trinity College sometime Durham College.
Trinity college was founded and so named in the time of Queen Mary, by S.
Thomas Pope Knight in Anno 1556. which college was first founded in the time
of King Edward the third by Thomas Hatfield Bishop of Durham, and by him named
Durham college for eight Monks, and seven clarks, admitted by the Prior of
Durham, there to study, Anno 1370. Robert Walworth Prior of Durham endowed it
with 3 ^^nates of land, etc. in Readington and Clarton, ^ the adnowsion of ye
church of Readington, which college at the suppression by King Henry the
eight, might dispend land as the same was the^ valued by the Visitors 115
pounds, four shillings four pence.

Saint John's College was founded and is named, in the time of Queen Mary by
Sir Thomas White Merchantailor, Anno 1557. which College sometime called
Bernards College, S. John's College sometime Bernard College.
being amongst other suppressed in the time of King Henry the eight, and
greatly ruinated, the same Sir Thomas White purchased, and after bestowed large
sums of money in building thereof, and did lay the same College in very good
land near to the University of Oxford, to the yearly value of 500 pounds
which he purchased with his money, and has left order to make it dispend six
hundred pounds the year.

Also the same sir Thomas White, founded a hall for students, by him called
Saint John's Hall, sometime Gloucester College, founded by John Glifford for
Monks: which College being suppressed, he redeemed from spoil and wast with
his money, placing there a Principal and Scholars to the number of an hundred
persons or more made great reparations of the house, and adjoined it to his
said College of Saint John.

Wadham college was founded in the year 1613. Wadham College founded.
by Nicholas Wadham of the county of Sommerset Esquire, and Dorothy his wife,
sister to the right honorable, John Lord Peter of Writle.

Oxford has Halls.
Brodegate Hall. Heart Hall. Walter Stapleton William Wanstock
Magdalene Hall. Alborne Hall. Saint Mary Hall. White Hall. New Inn. Edmond
Hall.
In the Universities of England (says Erasmas Roterodam) there be certain
colleges, in the which there is so much Religion, so strait Discipline, and
such integrity of life, that if you did see it, you would neglect in comparison
of them, all Monkish rules and ceremonies.

All ye cities in England, many market towns and some villages, have free
Grammar schools erected in them, for the further increase of learning and
virtue.

Virtuous men have, to the perpetual registring of their good names, done
these good deeds: learned men have not been all the doers: Some therefore for
the supply in other, of that which wanted in themselves, have done wisely, all
to this purpose (that virtue and learning united and knit together, might in
this curage make a learned virtuous world) have done godly. It were much (there
are so many) in a small room to comprehend them, but the chief and worthy
patterns of the rest are: Eaton School. Henry the 6. 1443 Westminster. Queen
Elizabeth. Winchester. W. Wickham Bishop of Winchester. 1387 Paul's School in
London. John Collet. 1510

Saint Antonies in London by John Tate: Merchantailors school in London, by
the Merchantailors. 1560
How a man may journey from any notable town in England to the City of London,
or from London to any notable Town in the Realm.
The way from Walsingham to London.
FRom Walsingham to Picknam. xii. mile From Picknam to Brando^ fery. x. mile
From Brandon fery to Newmarket. x. mile From Newmarket to Braban. x. mile From
Braban to Barkeway. x. mile From Barkeway to Puckrich. vii. mile From Puckrich
to Ware. v. mile From Ware to Waltham. viii. mile From Waltham to London. xii.
mile
From Barwicke to York, and also to London.
FRom Barwicke to Belford. xii. mile From Belford to Anwick. xii. mile From
Anwicke to Morpit. xii. mile From Morpit to Newcastle. xii. mile From Newcastle
to Durham. xii. mile From Durham to Darington. xiii. mile From Darington to
Northalerton. xiiii. mile From Northalerton to Topcliffe. vii. mile From
Topliffe to York. xvi. mile From York to Tadcaster. xvi. mile From Tadcaster
to Wentbridge. xii mile From Wentbridge to Doncaster. viii. mile From Doncaster
to Tutford. xviii. mile From Tutford to Newarke. x. mile From Newarke to
Grantham. x. mile From Grantham to Stamford. xvi. mile From Stamford to
Stilton. xii. mile From Stilton to Huntington. ix. mile From Huntington to
Roysten. xv. mile From Royston to Ware. xii. mile From Ware to Waltham. viii.
mile From Waltham to London. xii. mile
From Carlisle to Doncaster, and so to London.
FRom Carlisle to Hasket yate. viii. mile From Hasket yate to Pirath. viii. mile
From Pirath hardby to Apelbie. x. mile From Apelby to Burghley. vi. mile From
Burghley to the Spittle. viii. mile From the Spittle to the Bows. viii. mile
From the Bows to Grethaw bridge. iiii. mile From Grethaw Bridge to Catrike
Bridge. x. mile From Catrike bridge to Limon. vi. mile From Limon to
Borowbridge. xii. mile From Boroughbridge to Wetherby. viii. mile From Wetherby
to Aberforth. v. mile From Aberforth to Ferrybridge. vii. mile From Ferrybridge
to Doncaster. x. mile From Doncaster to London as before.
From Carnaruan to Chester, and so to London.
FRom Carnaruan to Conway. xxiii. mile From Conway to Denbigh. xii. mile From
Denbigh to Flint. xii. mile From Flint to Chester. x. mile From Chester to
Which. xiiii. mile From Which to Stone. xv. mile From Stone to Lichfield. xvi.
mile From Lichfield to Colsill. xii. mile From Colsill to Couentry. viii. mile
And so from Couentrie to London as hereafter follows.
From Cokermouth to Lancaster and so to London.
FRrom Cokermouth to Kiswicke. v. mile From Kiswicke to Grocener. viii. mile
From Grocener to Kendale. xiiii. mile From Kendale to Burton. vii. mile From
Burton to Lancaster. viii. mile From Lancaster to Preston. xx. mile From
Preston to Wigam. xiiii. mile From Wigam to Warington. xx. mile From Warington
to Newcastle. xx. mile From Newcastle to Lichfield. xx. mile From Lichfield to
Couentry. xx. mile From Couentry to Daintrie. xiiii. mile From Daintrie to
Tocester. x. mile From Tocester to Stonystratford. vi. mile From Stonystratford
to Brickhill. vii. mile From Brickhill to Dunstable. vii. mile From Dunstable
to S. Albones. x. mile From S. Albones to Barnet. x. mile From Barnet to
London. x. mile
From Yarmouth to Colchester, and so to London.
FRom Yarmouth to Becclis. viii. mile From Becclis to Blybour. vii. mile From
Blybour to Snapbridge. viii. mile From Snapbridge to Woodbridge. viii. mile
From Woodbridge to Ipswich. v. mile From Ipswich to Colchester. xii. mile From
Colchester to Eastford. viii. mile From Eastford to Chelmsford. x. mile From
Chelmsford to Brentwood. x. mile From Brentwood to London. xv. mile
From Dover to London.
FRom Dover to Canterbury. xii. mile From Canterbury to Sittingborne. xii. mile
From Sittingborne to Rochester. viii. mile From Rochester to Grauesend. v. mile
From Grauesend to Datford. vi. mile From Datford to London. xii. mile
From S. Burien in Cornwall to London.
FRom S. Burien to the Mount. xx. mile From the Mount to Thury. xii. mile From
Thury to Bodman. xx. mile From Bodman to Launstone. xx. mile From Launstone to
Occumpton. xv. mile From Occumpton to Crokehornewell. x. mile From
Crokehornewell to Excester. x. mile From Excester to Honiton. xii. mile From
Honiton to Charde. x. mile From Charde to Crokehorne. vii. mile From Crokehorne
to Shirborne. x. mile From Shirborne to Shaftsbury. x. mile From Shaftsbury to
Salisbury. xviii. mile From Salisbury to Andeuor. xv. mile From Andeuor to
Basingstocke. viii. mile From Basingstocke to Hartlorow. viii. mile From
Hartlorow to Bagshot. viii. mile From Bagshot to Stanes. viii. mile From Stanes
to London. xv. mile
From Bristow to London.
FRom Bristow to Maxfield. x. mile From Maxfield to Chapnam. x. mile From
Chapnam to Marleborough. xv. mile From Marleborough to Hungerford. viii. mile
From Hungerford to Newburie. vii. mile From Newburie to Reading. xv. mile From
Reading to Maydenhead. x. mile From Maydenhead to Colbrooke. viii. mile From
Colbrooke to London. xv. mile
From S. David's to London.
FRom Saint David to Axford. xx. mile From Axford to Carmarden. x. mile From
Carmarden to Newton. x. mile From Newton to Langburie. x. mile From Langbury to
Brecknocke. xvi. mile From Brecknocke to Hay. x. mile From Hay to Harford.
xiiii. mile From Harford to Roso. ix. mile From Roso to Gloucester. xii. mile
From Gloucester to Cicester. xv. mile From Cicester to Farington. xvi. mile From
Farington to Abington. vii. mile From Abington to Dorchester. vii. mile From
Dorchester to Henley. xii. mile From Henley to Maydenhead. vii. mile From
Maydenhead to Colebrooke. vii. mile From Colebrooke to London. xv. mile
FINIS.
The principal Fayres of England and Wales, orderly set forth; with the
Month, Day, and Place, where they be kept.
Fayres in January.
THe iii day at Llanibither. The xii day at Salisbury. The vii. day at
Llanginnie: the xxv. day (Conversion of S. Paul) at Grauesend, at Bristoll, at
Churchingford, at Northalerton in Yorkshire every Wednesday from Christmas
till June: the xxxi. day at Llandyssell.

Fayres in February.
THe first day (Bridget) at Bromley: the ii day at Maidstone, at Bath, at
Linne, at Bicklesworth, at Budworth, at Reading, at Faringdon, at the Vizes in
Wiltshire, at Godlemew, at Whiteland. The iii. at Boxgroue, at Brimley. See the
Records in the Roles.
The sixth at Stafford for three days, for all kind of Merchandise, without
Arrests. The viii. at Tragarron: the ix. at Llandaffe. The xiiii. at Owndle in
Northamptonshire at Feuersham in Kent: the xxiii. at Vppingham in Rutlanshire,
at Higham-ferries, at Baldocke, at Walden, at T^wkesbury, at Froome, at Henly
upon Thames.

Faires in March.
THe first day at Llangadog, at Madrim, and at Llangeuelah. The viii day at
Tregarron: The xii day at Stamford, at Sudbury, at Wooborne, at Wrexham, at
Bodnam, at Spaford: ye xiii. at Wye, at Mountbowin in Cornwall: the xvii. at
Pattrington: The xviii. at Sturbridge. The xx. at Durham, at Alesbury. The
xxiiii. at Llanerchimeth. The xxv. at Northhampton, at Malden, at Cardigan, at
Malpas, at Saint Albones, at Huntingdon, at Newcastle, at Ashwell in
Hartfordshire, at great Cartwalden in Essex, at Saint Jones in Worcestershire,
at Woodstocke. The xxxi. day at Malmesbury.

Faires in April.
THe ii. day at North-fleete, at Rochford, at Hitchin. The iii. day at Leeke in
Staffordshire. The v. at Wallingford. The vii. at Darby. The ix. at
Billingsworth. The xxii. at Stabford, the xxiii. at Northampton, at Chichester,
at Tamworth, at Ipswich, at Charing, at Amptill, at Hinningham, at Saint Pembs,
at Bury, at Wilton, at Wortham, at Brewton, at Castle Combs, at Bewdley, at
Lonquer, at Riliborough, at Bishops-Hatfield, at Gilford, at Nutlay in Sussex,
at Engfield in Sussex, at Brigstocke, at Sabrigworth in Hartfordshire. The xxv.
at Cosbrooke, at Buckingham, at Inings in Buckinghamshire, at Darby, at
Winchcombe in Gloucestershire, at Calne in Wiltshire, at Cliffe by Lewis in
Sussex, at Dunmow in Essex, at Vttoxeter. The xxvi. at Tenderden in Kent, at
Clete.

Faires in May.
THe first day at Leicester, at Warwick, at Oswestree, at Kinuax, at
Worseworth, at Brick-hill, at Congerton, at Reading, at Stow the old, at
Pombridge, at Chensford, at Perin, at Andouer, at Maidstone, Llatrissent, at
Vske, at Grighonell, at Rippon, at We^dore, at Blackborne, at Flockingham, at
Laighton, at Phillipsnorton, at Stokerley, at Lerfield, at Ocestrie, at
Linfield, at Stanstead. The ii. at Pwltheley. The iii. at Noneaton in
Warwickshire, at Ratsdale in Lancashire, at Waltham Abbey, at Elstow a village
by Bedford, at Bramyard, at Hinningham, at Chersay, at Chipnam, at Cowbridge at
Abergauenny, at Mounton, at Denbigh, at Mirthir, at Tiduile. The v. at
Marchenleth. The vi. Almesbury, at Hoy, at Knighton. The vii. at Beuerley, at
Newton in Lancashire, at Oxford, at Stratford upon Auon, at Hanslop, at Bath,
at Hatesbury: the ix. at Maidstone: the x. at Ashburn in the Peake: the xi. at
Dunstable: the xii. and xiii. at Greys Thorrocke in Essex: the xv. at
Welshpoole: the xvi. at Llangarranogge: the xix. at Odchill, at Rochester, at
W^llow, at Manfield: the xxv. at Blackborne: the xxvi. at Lenham: xxix, at
Cambroke.

Fayres in June.
THe iii. day at Ailesbury. The ninth at Maidstone. The 10. at Marfield, at
Newborough in Lancashire, at Okingham, at Holt, at Wellington, at Llanwist, at
Newcastle in Emli^, at Kingwilgaio. The 13 at New-towne in Kedewen. The 14 at
Bangerk: the 15 at the Vizes at Pershore, seven miles from Wocester. The 16. at
Newport in Keames, at Bealth. The 18. at Higham-ferries, at Tow-greene, at
Hadstocke, at Llanuilling: the 19. at Bridgenorth: the 21. at Ystradmeyricke:
the 22. at Shrewesbury, at Saint Albons: the 23. at Barnet, at Castle Ebichen,
at Dolgelly. The 24 at Westchester, at Colchester, at Wakefield, at Horsham, at
Wenlocke, at Croydon, at Bedford, at Bramsgroue, at Barnewell, at Gloucester, at
Lincoln, at Peterborow, at Windsor, at Halifaxe, at Lancaster, at Ashburne, at
Bishops castle, at Tunbridge, at Leicester, at Boughtongreene, at Kerkhame in
Aundernesse, at Hartford, at Kingstone in Warwickshire, at Reading, at Ludlow,
at Romford, at Pemsey, at Shaftsburie, at Bricknock, at Preston, at York, at
Bosworth, at Aukenburge, at Westo^, at Ashburne in the Peake, at Hurst, at
Crambrocke in Kent, at Warmester in Wiltshire, at Farnam, at Harstone in
Norfolk, at Bedle, at Stracstocke, at Beuerley. The 26. at Northop: the 27. at
Folkstone, at Burton upon Trent, at Llandogaine: the 28. at Royston, at
Hescorne, at Pombes, at Matchenleth: the 29. at Munstrill in Leicestershire, at
Woluerhampton, at Sarstrange, at Lower Knots-ford, at Woodhurst, at Wem, at
Mansfield, Southam, at Tring, at Bolton, at Bilballenec, at Peterborough, at
York, at Onay, at Buntington, at Vpton in Worcestershire, at VVitney in
Oxfordshire, at Holdworth, at Grayes, at Thurrocke in Essex, at Hornedon, at
Sudbury in Suffolk, at Lemster, at Gorgange in Lancashire, at Peterfield, at
Ashwell, at Westminster, at Sinnocke in Kent, at Stockworth in Lincolneshire,
at Marleborow, at Bromley in Lancashire, at Buckingham, at Barkhamstead, at
Tring, at Bemington, at Hodsdon, at Stafford, at Mount-sorrell, at Llanbeder,
at Pont-stephen, at Cardiffe, at Llamergaine, at Bala: the 30. at Maxfield in
Cheshire.

Fayres in July.
THe ii. day at Congerton, at W^borne, at Huntington, at Ashton under line in
Lancashire, at Smeath in Kent, at Rickmansworth in Hartfordshire, at Swanley.
The iii. at H^^uerson. The v. at Burton upon Trent. The vi. at Llanidlae, at
Lanibither. The vii. day at Canterbury, at Albrighton, at Vppingham, at
Chip^pingnorton, at Vlzes, at Burntwood, at Cappell-frith, at Richmond, at
Tenburie, at Hauerfordwest, at Treshenimicha, at Emlin, at Castlemaine, at
Denbigh, at Sweaton, at Shelford. The xi. at Patacy, at Lidde. The. xv. at
Pinchbacke, at Greenestead in Sussex. The xvii. at Leeke, at Winchcombe, at
Saint Kenelmes, at Llanuilling. The xx. at Awserton, at Bowli^, at Vxbridge, at
Catesby at Saint Margarets, at Odiham, at Chimmocke, at Bolton in the Moore, at
Barkeway, at Ickleton in Cambridgeshire, at Betley, at Tenbie, at Neath, at
Llanymthinery, at Woodstocke. The xxii. at Stonystratford, at Kimolton, at
Bicklesworth, at Bridgenorth, at Barnards castle in the North, at Yarne in
Yorkshire, at Broughton in Furnace, at Clytherall in Lancashire, at Keswicke
in Cumberland, at Batlefield by Shrewesbury, at Northwich in Cheshire, at
Stockbury, at Kingstone, at Marleborough, at Turbury, at Witherall, at
Colchester, at Calne, at Coolaige, at Yadland, at Maudlin-hill by Winchester,
at Newarke upon Trent, at Roking in Kent, at Maudlin-hill by Heydowne in
Yorkshire, at Ridwallie, at Withgrig, at Ponterley. The xxiii. at Chestone, at
Carnarnon. The xxv. at Saint James by London, at Saint James by Northampton, at
Bristole, at Darby, at Dudly, at Chichester, at Stone, at Shisnal, at Stamford,
at Louth, at Lyuerpoole, at Thrapsto, at Barcamstead, at Buntingford, at
Doncaster, at Baldocke, at Walden, at Tilburie, at Ipswich, at Rauenglasse, at
Erith, at Bromley, at Ashwell, at Hatfield, at Breadoke, at Reading, at
Chilholme, at Dover, at Malmesbury, at Aldergame, at Broomesgroue, at Camden,
at Wigmore, at Chickham, at Trobridge, at Rosse, at Machenbleth at
Landengeiram, at Capell-Iago, at Stackpoole, at Bisetour at Linfield, at
Kirtham the Isle, at Wetherby in Yorkshire, at Themblegreene, at Skipton in
Crauen. The xxvi. at Tiptry at Bewdley, at Raiadargwy. The xxvii. at
Chappelfrith, at Richmond in the North, at Warington, at Horsham, at
Canterbury, at Malpasse, at Ashford.

Fayres in August.
THe i. day at Shrewesburie, at Loughborough in Leicestershire, at York, at
Newcastle upon Trent, at Selby, at Newton in Lancashire, at Dunstable, at
Bedford, at Saint Needs, at Yelland in Yorkshire, at Northamchurch, at
Selborne, at Exceter, at Thack^^ead, at Rumney, at Mailing, at Feuersham all
th^^ in Kent: at Wisbitch, at Horseney in Holde^nesse, at Hay, at Bathe, at
Karmarthen, (...) Ka^rgwilly, at Llantrissent, at Chepstow, (...) Llaurwen, at
Flint: the 4. at Linton, at R^^nor: the ninth, at Aberlew: the tenth, at M^ton
Mowbra, at Chorlay, at Rugby, at Chidl^^, at Owndle, at Sedole in Yorkshire,
at Weydon, at Frodisham in Cheshire, at Banbury, at New Brainford, at Wilton,
at Waltham Abbey, at Alchurch, at Farneham, at Wor^ster in Wiltshire, at
Hungerford, at Hawckhurst, at Blackamore, at Mearworth, at Ludlow, at Saint
Lawrence by Bodwin, at Winstow, Toucestour, at Kellom, at Sherborne in
Yorkshire, at Doncaster, at Croyley, at ^^garron, at Haliegh, at Diffringoly
which, at Newborough, at Kenwilgaio, at Harley: at Marras. The xv. day at
Hinckley in Leicestershire, at Saint Albones, at Belton, at Huntington, at
Preston in Aundernesse, at Wakefield, at Carlisle, at Gisborough, at Goodhurst,
at Cambridge, at Dunmow in Essex, at Stroud by Rochester in Kent, at
Northampton, at Luton, at Dryfield in Yorkshire, at Elsemere, at Tutbury, at
Hinkley, at Marleborough, at Whitland, at Kardigan, at Rosse, at Swansey, at
Eglwysuait, at Yminith, at Newin, at Newport in Munmouthshire. The xvi, at
Rayaydargwy: the 24. at London, at Nantwich at Riddermuster, at Pagets Bromley,
at Harewood, at Croyley in Lancashire, at Northalerton, at Tuddington, at
Faringdon, at T^wksbury, at Sudbury, at Norwich, at Dover, at Oxford, at
Chorley, at Beggars bush beside Rye, at Bromley, at Alborough in Holdernesse,
at Watford in Hartfordshire, at Aberconwey, at Mummouth, at Mountgomery. The
xxviii at Ashford, at Sturbridge in Worcestershire, at Talisarnegreene, at
Welshpoole. The xxix. at Watford, at Coby in Lincolneshire, at Karmarthen, at
Brecknocke, at Kaerwis. The Sunday after Saint Bartholomew at Sandbich.

Faires in September.
THe first day S. Giles, at Chappel-filuy, at Neath. The iiii. at Oakham. The
vii. at VVare, at VVoodburihill. The viii. at Sothwarke nigh London, at
Sturbridge, at Wakefield, at Waltham on the VVoulds, at Gisborough both the
Lady days, at Brewood, at Drayton, at Blackborne, at Northampton, at
Atherston, at Vlcester, at Gliborne, at VVorseworth, at Chaul^on in Cheshire,
at Partney, at Bury in Lancashire, at Huntington, at VVol^epit, at VVestneme,
at Chattom, at Smeath, at Raculuor, at Snide, at Malden, at Rockingham, at
Hartford, at Drifield, at Llandissell, at Kardigan, at VVhitland, at Cardiffe,
at Tenby, at Bewmorris. The xiii. at Pwlhely, at Newtowne in Redwin. The xiiii.
at Newport: at Chesterfield: at Richmond: at Rippon in the North: at Stratford
upon Anon, at ^arseley: at Hetsburie: at Smalding, at Waltham Abbey, at Penhad,
at Wotton under hedge, at Barseley, at Hidome in Holdernesse, at Denbigh, at
Newborough, at Rosse: at Mun^ton: at Abergauenni. The.xv. at Raiadargwy. The
xvii. at Cliffe, a Llanidlasse. The xx. at Llanuellie, at Kothin. The xxi. at
Nottingham, at Strafford: at Shrewesburie, at Peterborough, at Kingston in
Warwickshire: at Holden in Holdernesse, at Maydenbrackley: at Daintry in
Northamptonshire: at Baldock, at Bedford at Saint Edmondsburie, at Woodstocke,
at Lentham, at Eastrid at Milnall, at Clanone, at Braintrie, at Wendouer, at
Dover, at Witherall, at Katherinehill by Gilford, at Malden in Essex, at
Croydon, at Vizes, at Marleborough, at Canterbury, at Abergwilly, at Knighton.
The xxiii. at Pa^cridge in Staffordshire a great Horse fair, at Malton a great
fair of horses and of cattle all the week long in Yorkshire: at Llanuillin^^
The xxviii. at Dolgeth, at Kaermarthen. The xxix. at Leicester, at Westchester,
at Lancaster, at Blackborne, at Ashorne, at Tuddingtin, at Saint Iues, at Saint
Albones, at V^bridge, at Highamferries, at Brunningham, at Selby, at
Killingworth, at Ludlow, at Balmestocke, at Newbery, at Michael Deane, at
Canterbury, at Sittingborne, at Woodham ferry in Essex, at Kingstand, at
C^ke^mouth, at Basingstoke, at Maldon an Horsefaire, at Way-hill by Andouer, at
Bookeham, at Headly, at Buckland, at Bishop stratford, at Shelford in
Bedfordshire, at Hull, at Merthir, at Llanuihangell, at Aberconwy, at Llocher,
at Machenleth, at Llnidlasse, at Wemer vii days, at Hay.

Faires in October.
THe Monday after Saint Michael, at Falseley. The iii. at Boulton in the
Moors. The iiii. at Saint Michael. The vi. at Saint Fayths besides Norwich, at
Hauent in Hampshire, at Maidstone in Kent. The viii. at Hereford, at
Bishops-stratford, at Chichester, at Swansey, at Llambedder* at Pont-stephen.
The ix. at Harborough in Leicestershire, at Gainsborough, at Blithe in
Nottinghamshire, at Ashborne in the Peake, at Sabridgeworth in Hartfordshire,
at Hodnet, at Deuizes. The ix and tenth days at Greys Thorrocke in Essex: the
xii. at Boulton in Furnace, at Llangoneth. The xiii. at Edmondstow in
Nottinghamshire, at Tamworth, at Drayton, at Cruston, at Stapforth, at
Grauesend, at Hitchin, at Royston, at Windsore, at Marshfield, at Colchester in
Essex, at Staunton, at Charing, at Aberfrow, at Newport in Monmouthshire, at
Leighton-bussard. The xviii. at Welingborough, at Burton upon Trent, at
Bridgenorth, at Tisdale in Darbishire, at Wyham, at Barnet, at Banburie, at
Middlewich, at Bishopshatfield, at Ely, at Brickhill, at Newcastle, at
Faringdon, at Charing, at Henley in Arden, at Marlow, at Vphauen, at Tunbridge,
at As^well, at York, at Thirst, at Wrickley, at Holt, at Charleton, at
Lawhadden, at Kidwelly, at Iske, at Radnor. The xix. at Saint Frideswides by
Oxford. The xxi. at Couentrie, at Newmarket, at Stokesley, at Cicester, at
Lentham, at Saffron-walden, at Hereford, at Llanibither. The xxiii. at
Whitchurch, at Lower Knotisford, at Ratsdale, at Bicklesworth, at Preston. The
xxx. at Beuerly: the xxviii. at Warwick, at Ashby de la Zouch, at Lamster, at
Preston in Andernes, at Stanford, at Hartford, at Oxford, at Biddenden, at
Waxmester in Wiltshire, at Willon, at Aberconwey, at Llanedy. The xxix. at
Talisarnegreene. The xiii. at Stokesley, at Wakefield, at Ruthin, a Pwshely, at
Abermarles.

Faires in November.
THe i. day at Bricklesworth, at Ludlow, at Kellome, at Castlemaine, at
mountg^mmery. The ii. at Loughborow, at Leeke, at Marfield, at Blechingley, at
Mayfield in Sussex, at Bishops castle, at Elsemere, at Kingstone upon Thames,
at York in Petergate. The iii. at Kaermarthen. The v. at Welsh-poole. The vi.
at Newport pond in Essex, called Cole fair; at Wellington, at Pembridge, at
Salforth* at Lessorth, at Stanley, at Trigney in Cornwall, at Andiuer, at
Wetshod, at Hartford, at Mailing in Kent, at Bedford, at Marron in Holdernesse,
at Brecknock. The x. at Lenton by Nottingham vii days, at Rugbie, at Wem, at
Shifnall, at Llambither, at Aberwingrin: the xi. at Marleborow, at Dover, at
Fockingham, at Newcastle in Emlin, at York, at Botingam in Yorkshire, at
Shaftesbury, at Tlathara Maies at Aberkenuen, at Monmouth, at Tream, at
Withgrig. On Monday after Saint Martin, at Englesrow in Kemes, at Carnaruan.
The xiii. at S. Edmondsburie, at Gilford in Surrey. The xv. at Llanithinery, at
Machenleth. The xvii. at Harlow, at Hide, at Northampton, at Spaldocke, at
Lincoln. The xix. at Horsha in Kent. The xx. at S. Edmondsbury in Suffolk, at
Health at Hide, at Ingerston. The xxii. at Penibont, at Sawthey. The xxii. at
Sandwitch, at Ludlow, at From, at Tuddington, at Katescrosse by Prittlwell in
Essex, at Bwelth, at Bangor, at Carline. The xxv. at Highamferries. The xxviii.
at Ashborne in the Peake. The 29. at Lawrest. The 30. at Boston a Mart, at
Cublay in Darbishire, at Kimolton, at Bedford in Yorkshire, at Warington, at
Gargraue, at Wakefield, at Baldocke, at Peterfield, at Colongborough, at
Amptill, at Cobham, at Maydenhead, at Rochester, at Greenesteed in Sussex, at
Ocestry, at Bewdley, at Mayden-brackley, at Narbert, at Pecorees in Gower, at
Gargreene, at Preston, at Harleight, at Bradford.

Faires in December.
THe v. day at Pluckley, at Dolgeth, at Newton. The vi. at S. Needs, at
Northwich in Cheshire, at Arundle, at Spalding, at Exceter, at Cased, at
Hendingham, Seuenoeke in Kent, at Woodstocke, at Grantham, at Hethin, at
Hornesay. The vii. at Sandhurst: the viii. at Leicester, at Northampton, at
Malpasse in Cheshire, at Clitherall in Lancashire, at Kinnax, at Heirsome, at
Whitland, at Kardigan, at Bewmarris at Llanunen: the xxi. at Hornebie in
Lancashire. The 22. at Llandilauaw: the 29. at Canterbury, Salisbury, Royston.

A Note of the moveable Faires here in England.
THe three Mondaies next after Twelft day, at Hincklay in Leicestershire: the
Twesday next following Twelft day, at Melton Mowbray, an Horsefaire at
Salisburie.

The Thursday after Twelft day at Banburie, at Litterworth in Leicestershire:
and every thursday after for 3 weeks. The Ashwednesday, at Lichfield, at
Tamworth, at Dunstable, at Fakinghame, at Royston, at Eaton by Windsor, at
Exceter, at Cicetour, at Candaine in Glocestershire, at Tunbridge in Kent: the
first Monday in Lent at Abington, at Winchester, at Chichester, at Cherlay in
Surrey. The first Twesday in Lent at Bedford: the first Thursday in Lent at
Banbury. On Mid-lent sunday at Standford, at Odsham, at Saffron Walden: the
Friday, and saturday before Care-sunday at Hartford. The Monday before our Lady
day in Lent at Kendall, at Wisbitch, at Denbigh in Wales: the fifth sunday in
Lent being Caresunday at Hartford, at Grantham at Salisbury, at Sudbury, at
Helxsome in Sussex. On Palm sunday even at Pumfract, and every fourtnight
until Trinity-sunday, and that is three weeks betwixt: and every fourtnight
after till S. Andrewsmas at Leicester, at Alesbury, at Skipton upon Crauen, at
Fockingham, at Wisbich. On Palme^unday at Worcester, at Billingsworth, at
Kendall in Lancashire. On Maunday-thursday at Kettering, at Sudmyster in Essex.
On good Friday at Millonie. On Monday in Easter week at Gainsborough a Mart,
at Onay in Buckinghamshire, at Drifield in Yorkshire:

On Twesday in Easter week at Longner, at Couentry, at Hitchin. And a
fourtnight fair begins the Twesday in Easter week, and continues every
Twesday fortnight until Christmas, being great faires of cattle: the Tuesday
and Wednesday at Brailes, at Sandbatoth, at Rochford, at Northslect.

On the Wednesday in Easter week at Wellingborough, every Wednesday between
Easter and Michaelmas, a fair of cattle at Beuerley. On Friday in Easter week
at Skipton in Crauen. On Low-sunday at Bicklesworth in Buckinghamshire. The
Monday after Low-sunday at Enlome. The third Sunday after Easter at Lowth in
Lincolnshire.

Rogation week, all the week is for retayling at Beuerley, at Inglefield in
Lancashire, at Rech. Holy Thursday, or Ascension day, at Litterworth, at
Hallaton in Leicestershire, at Rippon, at Brunningham, at Wigham, at Bishop
Stratford, at Newcastle, at Middlewich, at Burton upon Trent at Chapplefrith,
at Stapport in Cheshire, at Yarne, at the Vizes, at Brastead in Kent, at
Sudmaster in Essex, at Darkin, at Grantham, at Beuerley. The Sunday after
Ascension day at Tharstead, at Bur^ington in Yorkshire.

On Whitson even at Skipton in Crauen, at Wisbitch. On Whitsonday at Ratisdale,
at Leutham, at Kerby Steven in Westmerland, at Ryhill, at Cribby. On
Whitson-monday at Darrington in the North, at Burton, at Midlome, at
Harsl-greene in Lancashire, at Oundle in Northamptonshire, at Whitchurch, at
Biclesworth, at Saint Iues, at Sleeforth in Lincolneshire, at Cokermouth in the
North, at Salforth, at Exceter, at Easdome, at Apleby, at Rygate, at
Sitingbridge at Bradford, at Amerson, at Dryfield in Yorkshire, at York, at
Agmonham, at Stokecheere. On Whitson-tuesday at Melton Mowbray, at Longuer in
Staffordshire, at Ashby, at de la zouch in Leicestershire, at Higher Knotsford
in Cheshire at Oringstoke, at Laighton Buzzard, at Farringdon in Barkshire, at
Perith in Cornwall, at Long-guilford, at Canterbury, at Rothford in Essex, at
Lewis in Sussex, at Chipping at Daintry in Northamptonshire. On Wednesday in
Whitson week at Leeke in Staffordshire, at Sandborow, at Royston, at Newarks
upon Trent. On Thursday in Whitson week at Kingstone upon Thames, at
Cockfield. On Friday in Whitson week at Darby, at Cockfall. On Trinity even at
Skipton in Crauon, at Punfract, at Rowell in Northamptonshire for six days.
On Trinity Sunday at Southcane in Yorkshire, at Kendall, at Hounslow, at
Stokesley, at Saint Mary Awke, at Tunbridge. On Trinity Monday at VVatford, at
Spilby, at Ray in Essex. On Corpus Christi day at Couentry, at Stamford, at
Banbury, at Stopport, at Prescoate, at Saint Needs, at Hallaton, at Newberie,
at Saint Annes, at Hemptstead, at Bishop Stratford, at Rosse. The Sunday next
after Trinity-Sunday at Belton. On the Eve and on the Feast or day of Apostles
Peter and Paul, at Greys Thorreck in Essex. On Relic Sunday, which is the
sunday fortnight after Midsommer, at Fodringay. The sunday after the third of
July at Hauerhull. The sunday after Saint Bartholomew, at Sandbitch in
Cheshire. The Twesday after Michaelmas at Salisburie. The Thursday after
Michaelmas at Banburie.

FINIS.
A Table of These Particular Notes following,
GAllen. page 15 The first Imperial crown of gold. page 17 The original of
the Patriarchy of Constantinople. page 17 The death of Saint Jerome. page 17
Saint Patrique. page 18 Rome spoiled by the Goths. page 18 The death of Saint
Augustine. page 18 A strange pestilence. page 23 The life and death of the
false Prophet Mahomet. page 24 Clocks and Dials appointed. page 26 The tyranny
of Justinian the Emperor. page 28 France spoiled by the Saracens. page 31
Germany converted. page 30 Saxony converted. page 31 The Original of
Flanders. page 31 Solemn music in Churches. page 31 The Bishoprics of
Hambro and Bream founded. page 32 The original of Normandy. page 33 The Danes
and Norweys converted. page 35 The translation of the Empire. p. 36 The Gamoth
invented. p. 37 The end of the race of Charlemaigne, and the beginning of Hugh
Capet. p. 38 Lubeck founded. p. 40 Frost five months together in England. p. 44
Goodwynsands. p. 49 The conquest of Jerusalem by Godfrey of Bolloigne. p. 50
The Story of Lybussa and Velasca, with her Army of Ladies. p. 56 Johannes de
Temporibus. p. 60 Gratianus. p. 62 London Bridge built of timber. p. 64 York
burned. p. 67 Paris streets and London streets paued. p. 68 A fish like a
man. p. 69 The Jews commit great outrages. p. 71 The first Kingdom of
Tartars. p. 78 London Bridge built of stone. p. 79 Three thousand persons
spoiled upon London Bridge. p. 81 Winchellea destroyed by a strange inundation.
p. 94 The Shepherds of England and France go a pilgrimage. p. 95 The twelve
Peers of France ordained. All the youth of London sworn. p. 96 The Saracens
attempt to spoil Christendom, with other things of note. p. 97 Strange
tempest: the first great rot of sheep. p. 102 The original of the Knights
Templers* Knights of Rhodes and Malta. p. 104 Justices punished, fifteen
thousand Jews banished. p. 109 Sea-coale forbidden to be burned nere London.
p. 113 The French King burns infected persons. p. 116 The Jews in Germany
burned. ibid. A terrible mortality with other things of note. p. 118, 119. and
100.126 The most honorable order of Knights of the Garter. p. 129 The
misfortune of five great Princes. p. 131 A serpent in England with two heads.
p. 133 The staple of wool removed. p. 143 A wondrous mortality in England of
great note. p. 136 The famous Poets, Francis Petrarch and John Boccace. p. 139
Tamberlayne takes Baiazeth, and rescueth Constantinople. p. 149 The first Duke
of Millaine, with other things of note. p. 154 The first impost of salt in
France. p. 161 The King of Englands Seal used in Paris, with other things of
note. p. 163 Francis Sforce made Duke of Millaine. p. 167 The King of England
crowned in Paris. p. 169 George Scanderbeg. p. 174 The original of Printing.
p. 178 An admirable sudden pestilence in Paris. Rome taken and sacked by the
Duke of Burbon, vide in Anno 1526. The first Duke of Florence. p. 219 The last
Duke of Millaine. p. 222 Barbarosso King of Argier. p. 232 The house of Ferneze
made Dukes of Parma. p. 250 The last fall of base money in England. p. 282 The
Archbishop of Collen expulsed for marying a wife. p. 341 The Prince of Orange
slain. p. 340 Antwerpe besieged. p. 348 Captains of the Artillery Garden. p.
359 The Patriarch of Greece sells his dignity. page 371 The Duke of Guyse
slain, and the French King slain, being the last of the house of Valois, the
house of Navarre succeeds him, the misery of Paris during the siege, and a
brief touch of some of the chief ancient Kings of France. p. 379 The Civil
Law reduced into order. p. 398 The original and State of Venice. p. 464
FINIS.

