engraved title page ^TA

^PRVDENTIA^

^DIEV^ET^MON^DROIT^



A declaration of the life and Death of John Story, Late a Romish Canonical
Doctor, by professyon. 1571.

Imprinted at London, by Thomas Colwell.

The special Contents of this declaration.
First, wherefore John Story was imprisoned in the Queens Benche. His breaking
of that Prison and flyeng into Flaunders. His traiterous and naughty delyng
there. The cause and manner of his conueyance from thence into England. The
manner of his arainement, and Judgment. The manner of his death and execution.
An Epilogue or short conclusion of his Life.
GEntle Reader in this short declaration, I purpose briefly to note unto thee,
part of the life and the manner of death of John Story, late a Romish and
Canonical Doctor by profession. If I should discourse the common places of
description of persons, his parents, his educatyon and bringyng up, his
sundry outrageous doings executed by him in the persecutynge of the members
of Christ, and the manner of his life from time to time, namely in the time of
K. Henry the eight, when the statute of six Articles was first set forth, and
all his cruelty used since, to the day of his death: it would ask a
volume as great as (...) book of Martyrs: a great part of which book is
stuffed with his tirannous and cruel tragedies, executed against God and his
poor members.

As for the wilful and wicked course of his younger years, a great part whereof
he spent in the University of Oxford^, to report all the parts, it would
requ^^e a long story.

One Pranke may stand in stead of many. And although Christian charity require
us always, and of all men, to report the best, specially of them that be
departed: Yet no charytie forbyddeth a man with sobryetie and modestye to
report the truethe for the benefit of good example to other: Or else all
writing of histories after the parties death (when they be most truly written)
should be condemned, and the bridle of just infamy perilously taken away from
wicked men.

About the year of our Lord. 1529. Story being a student of the civil law
in Hinkse^e Hall in Oxforde, and on a time lodging abroad alone as often times
his manner was to do, in the company of a woman, whom he had at his
commandment, was fet home from thence late in the night, and carried alofte
through the open streets with a solemn procession of the whole company of
his house, every man caryenge a candell burninge before him, as a token of his
virginytye, and syngyng merelye together, Qui pius, prudens, humilis, pudicus,
Sobrius, castus fuit, and quietus,
Vita dum presens. etc.
as if they had been S. Nicholas clerks.

After that, about the year of our Lord, 1538. the said Storye being then
Doctor and Pryncypall of Broadgates in the said vniuersytie of Oxforde, and
mistrustinge a young gentleman for over familiar resorting to his aquaintaunce
in the town, gave him earnest charge, with terrible threats, as he loved his
life to come there no more, for Love and Lordship can brook no fellowshipp.

Therefore on a certain time for his good chaste purpose, taking occasion to
walk abroad, and having his man with his sword waiting upon him, and
passing through the Church yard of S. Olaues he met the said young gentle man
retorning home from the town, being utterly without weapon, and having only
his study gown cast upon him. And he imagining that he came from such places as
he had so often for bidden him, in great fury and heat of mind, being also
fired with ielosie toward his love, he raught back suddenly unto his man and
drew his sword, and having the gentleman at advantage in the corner of two
walls, ran him through both sides, and left him for dead.

Imediatly a cry was raised, the people assembled, Doctor Storye was
apprehended by the officers, and laid in Bocardo: where he continued until it
was perfectly known, that the young gentleman so wounded was past all danger.
For God by his gracyous prouydence so dyrected the sword, that notwithstanding
it pierced through both sides, yet it perished not one part of all the
entrails.

He that writes these words is a witness hereof and saw the party dressed,
and the towells drawn through his body. The party so wounded is named N.
Brierton, and is yet alive.

These are the first fruits of Doctor Stories good Doctorly doings, agreeable
with his life that followed after ward.

A kyndly bear will bite by time.

Now I will begin the rest of this Declaration at the beginning of the Reign
of the most virtuous, godly, learned and hopeful Prince, King Edward the sixth:
who after the death of the most noble and famous prince, King Henrye the.viii.
his Father, took upon him, as of right appertayned unto him, the Regal state
and government of this Realm. And first, and before all other things, he
seekynge the high advancement of Gods honor restored unto us the sincere
doctrine of the Gospel of our Savior Jesus Christ, and made most Godly Laws
for the abholysshynge of all superstycion and idolatry. At which time, John
Storye being then of the Parlyament house and a great enemy to the glorious
light of Christ's Gospel, did vehemently inueigh against the godly doings of
that virtuous Prince, namely, for setting forth the book of Common Prayer
and Administracion of the Sacraments in Englysh: where he did not only
slaunderouslye speak of the Doctrine, but also malyciously and sediciouslye
spoke of that godly Prince (alleging the sentence of Ecclesiastes: That woe is
to that Realm whose king is but a child, wrestynge the same text against
that noble Prince, even to the same sense that gave chief occasion to the
rebellion in the same kings time, and meaning that both the Prince and the
realm did they wist not what.

And shortly after that he had thus declared his rebellious heart and canckred
judgment, he then fled this realm into the parties beyond the seas, and
there abode all the life of that virtuous Prince.

After his death, as soon as the late Queen Mary possessed the crown, the
aforsayd Story returned again from beyond the Seas, and obtained of Queen
Mary by the help of Bishop Boner, that he became a co^missioner, and a cruel
perpersecutor of Christ's members, wherein he traueyled with such vehemence and
in such a tyrannous manner, as never was there any before him did, and in that
state he continued all the days of Queen Maryes life.

After the death of Queen Mary, so sone as our most dear sovereign Lady came
to the possession of the crown, and that she had called a parliament, chieflye
for the restitution of Gods blessed word and the true administracion of the
Sacraments to Gods high honor, and also for the amendment of the decayed
state of this Realm. The said Story being of the parliament house who was an
enemy to all godly reformations, did with great vehemence speak against the
bill that was therexhibited for the restytucyon of the book of common prayer,
and said these words: I did often times in Queen Mary's time, say to the
Bishops that they were to busy with Pecora campi, (for so it pleased him to
term the poor commons of England) chopping at twiges, but I wished to have
chopped at the root, which if they had done, this gere had not cum now in
question, and here in most traitorously he meant the distruccion of our dear and
sovereign lady Queen Elizabeth. For the which words spoken in such an
audience and in such vehement manner, there was no honest nor true heart that
hard him but did utterly abhor him.

And sone after that he had declared his traiterous heart to the Queens
highness, and his conscience accusing him, he fled and lurked about in sundry
corners, as did Cain when he had murdered his brother Abell. But at the last he
was taken in the west country rydyng before a Male in a frise coat like a
serving man, and was apprehended in the highwaie by one master Ayleworth a
gentleman one of the Queens servants, and brought before the counsel, and
after sent to prison to the Queens Bench (for more the^ suspicion of Treason)
in the first year of her highness reign.

And after the said Story had remained there a while he espyenge his time and
by the help of his friends (as commonly such lewd papists lack none) he
brake the said prison and fled again beyond the Seas, namely into Flaundyrs,
and there not only practiced diverse wicked and treyterous enterprices toward
our Sovereign lady the Queen's majesty and the state of this realm, by sundry
co^ferences that he had with such as have of late rebelled and co^spired the
destruction of the same. But also he became an open and common enemi to every
good subject of this realm of England, and obtained in Flaundyrs of the Duke
of Alna a commission and authority to practice his old cruetie and to arest
and aprehend al such Englishmens goods as should arrive in those countries, or
that did traffic out of England into those parts, or from thence into
England, and to confiscat ye same by reason of which authority, he used there
such extremytie that he was the spoiler and vndoer of diverse merchauntes, and
of more would have been, if he had longer continued: wherefore the said
Merchauntes were in forced to study and deuyse some remeady, and to practice
some way or mean how to remove this comber some man from them.

And among other devises, they having experience of him to be a gredy and
ravenous wolf, put into his head (by such as he suspected not) that there was a
pray for him of English goods in a Ship that lai^ in a certain place which was
named unto him, where he should find such a treasure of goods to be confiscate,
as would be sufficient for him during his life. The wolf being hongry and
desirous of this great pray, set forward, and came into a Ship that promised to
bring him to the place where the pray was. But to be short ^^ssone as he was
entered the Shipe, the s^^e brought him clean a way out of Flaundirs into
England, and landed him at Harwyche in the Month of Auguste last paste.

And sone after, knowledge being given to the Queens honorable counsel of his
landynge, he was brought to London and there he was committed to prison to the
lollardes tower in Powles where he continued a while that he might well peruse
that place wherein he had most cruelly tormented many a good Chrystyan. But he
lacked there one thing, which was the monstrous and houge Steckes, that he and
Boner his old faithful friend had used to turmoyle and persecute the poor and
Innocent christians in, hanging sum therein by the heles so high, that only
their heads lay on the ground. Some were stocked in both feet and arms, some
also were stocked by both their feet and by both their thombes, and so did hang
in the Stocks. And some also were stocked by both their fete, and cheyned by
the neck with collars of Iron made fast behind them to a post in the wall,
and such other deuelishe and tyrannus engynes and deuyses by him practiced
these at his being in the lolardes Tower he myssed, and great pity it was that
he had not tasted of them: But alack the good Bishop Gryndall late Bishop of
London had brent and consumed them with fire.

But to return where I left, after that Story had contynnued a certain of
time in the lollardes Tower, and had been diverse times examined, he was from
thence removed to the Tower of London, where he remained until the.xxvi. day of
May. 1571. And then was he^ brought from thence into westminster hall before
the judges of the Queens Benche, and there arayned. And after the indictment
had been read unto him, theffect whereof was, that where as Rychard Norton, Thomas
Markenfelde, Christopher Neuyll, Frances Norton and Thomas Ienny alias Iennings
with other traitors, after their offenses committed in the north; and being
thereof indicted in the.xii. year of the Queens highness reign before the right
honorable Thomas Earl of Sussex lord president of the Queens cou^saill in the
north parts, John lord Darcye etc. they after their indictment did the.xxiii.
of June in the year aforsayd embarke them selves in sundry Ships and fled
this realm unto Antwarpe in Brabant, which is under the government of king
Phylip, and there contrary to their allegeaunce did lead their lives, and the
aforsaid John Story. D. W. P and I. P, being borne in England and the Queens
subjects, did with them conspire, compass and Imagine the Queens death, and
her highness to depose and depryue.

And by diverse persuasions and letters did also procure straungiers to invade
this realm of England, and to leuy war against the Queen, and her hyghnes to
depose. And that the aforsayd John Story etc. knowing the abouesaid Norton and
others to have committed their treasons here in England, did receive, comfort
and help them at Antwarp aforsaid, against their allegeaunce. etc.

And after the indictment read he being called upon by the court to answer
to the same, pleaded that he was not the Queens subject nor had not been these
vii. years, but was the subject of the most catholic and mighty prince king
Philip king of Spain, to whom he was sworn, and had in Fee of him one
hundredth pound by the year, therefore said he I am not bound to answer to that
indictment, neither will I answer unto it.

And here he used many pretty tauntes as well to the judges as also pleasyng
him self with giuinge of pretty nippes and girdes.

And very stowtlye, he maintained his former plea, affirming also, that they
were not his lawful judges, neither that they had law to proceed against him
being none of the Queens subjects.

And then being demanded where he was borne? he answered in England.

Then said they it folowith that you are subject to the laws of this realm,
and should be so to our Queen

Whereunto he replied and said, that God commanded Abraham to go forth from
the land and country where he was borne, from his friends and kynsfolke into
another country. And so he following his example, for conscience sake in
religion did forsake his country^ and the laws of this realm and the prince
also, and had wholly given him self to the service of a foreyne governor king
Philip king of Spain.

And hereupon he stood very stoutlye, but to small purpose.

Then when he perceived that they would proceed in judgment against him, he
said, they had no law so to do. And with that he turned him about to the
people, and said: good people, I trust ye see how violently I am used and how
unjustly and contrary to all justice and equity they use me.

And he added that he had good hope that he was not destitute of some friends
there that would give notice and knowledge to the most Catholycke prince his
master how cruelly they dealt with him.

And then again, being called upon to answer, one said unto him, master
Storye, because you think it violence that is showed unto you in stead of law
and justice, you shall know that we do nothing but that we may do both by
law and equity.

And then one of the Judges said: this is Scarborowes case. Nay, said Story, my
case is not Skarboroughes case: but in deed I had Skarborough warning to come
to this arraignement, for I knew nothing thereof until.vij. of the clock in
the morning.

Then, there was a book delivered him to read, wherein he might see what they
might do by law: and after he had read it, the Judge demanded of him how he
liked it? And he answered, God have mercy upon me. Then the Lord chyefe
Justice gave him Judgment to be drawn, hanged and quartred, and so was he
again sent unto the Tower.

And as he went by the way: certain persons in several places met with him
and one said: Oh Story, Story: thou art a strange Story: Remember Master
Bradforde that godly man, his blood asks vengeance on thee Story: repent in
time. Another cried on him and said: Story, call to mind the rigor that thou
shewedest upon Master Read, a Gentleman, whom thou did utterly destroy:
ask God forgiveness Story for that wicked deed.

Another cried unto him and said: Blessed be God, Story, that has made thee
partaker of such Bread, as thou wast wont to deal to the innocent members of
Jesus Christ.

Another also cried out upon him, and said: Story, Story: the abominable cup
of fornication and filthynes that thou have given other to drink, be heaped up
topfull, that thy plagues may be the greater at the terrible day of Gods
wrath and vengeance, unless thou ask mercy for thy filthy, corrupt and
stinkyng life. And yet again, another cried out unto him and said: I pray God
that thy heart be not hardened, as was Pharaos, and made harder then ye Adamant
stone, or the steel, that when he would, he could not repent and call for
grace.

And among all the rest, one came to him at London Stone, and saluted him with
this Meeter, saying: Master Doctor Story,
For you they are right sorry
The Court of Louaine and Rome:
Your holy father the Pope,
Cannot save you from the rope,
The Hangman must have your gown^


To whom he answered not one word*

THe first day of June, the said Story was drawn upon an herdell from the
Tower of London unto Tiborn: where was prepared for him a new pair of Gallows
made in triangle manner. And by the way as he went, many people spoke unto him,
and called upon him to repent his Tirrannie and wickedness, and wylled him to
call upon God for mercy: But he lay as though he had been a sleep, and would
not speak to any person.

And when he was taken from the herdell and set in a carte, he made there a
solemn protestation, and said:

I am come hither to die: and truly, if this death were ten times more fierce
and sharp then it is, I have deserved it?

I have lived the space of threescore and. vij. years: and now my body must
abide this temporal pain and punisshement provided for me here in this life,
by mean whereof, my days shall be cut off. But where at the first I stood in
fear of death, I thank God, this night passed I have been so comforted with
good and godly men, that the fear of death is taken from my sight. And now I
appeal to God the Father, trustyng in the Passion of his Son Christ Jesus,
and hoping, by the sheding of his blood only to be saved. And although of a
long time I could not apply the virtue of his Passion and death to the use
and benefit of my soul, because of my long houerynge in fear: Yet now, I
thank God, I know how to apply this medicyne, as for example:

A Pothecarye may have a Medicine liyng in his shop.vij. years, that may
help a sick or diseased man by the counsel of a Physicion: But if this
medicyne be not applied to the pacient, but still remains in the Apothecaries
shop it profits nothing: No more (said he) could the benefit of Christ's
Death healpe me: because, though I knew the medicyne good, I did not apply it
unto my Soul health: Stories years were many and evil spent.
But now that it has pleased Almightye God to call me to account of my.lxvij.
years, which now must have an end, and this corrupt body must feel a temporal
punisshement, for my sins have deserved it (as I said before) I am now come
to the proof of this Medicine.

David, when he had committed Adultery with Barsabe the wife of Vrias (whose
Husband also he caused to be put in the Front of the Battle, and so was he
murdered:) he for that trespass felt a temporal punishment by the loss of
the life of his son, which he loved tenderly.

Also, when he nombred his people, he greatly displeased God: And for his
offense and transgression, he felt a temporal pain: and choice was given unto
him from above, to choose one of these.iij temporal and bodily punyshments:
that is to say: Three days Pestilence: the Sword, that is to say, bloody
Battle.vij. years: or Famyne.vij. years.

And he thought to choose the least: and he chose three days Pestilence. But
this Scourge took away an infinite nombre of his subjects. So now as my
sins deserve a temporal pain, which here have an end, even in this flesh:
I am of the same mind that the Prophet David was: And with him I agree saying.
Inuoco te Domine. etc. Lord I call upon thee in this day of my trouble, hear
me O Lord out of thy dwelling place. etc.

But now to speak a little of my arraignment: when I was at Westminster, I
alleged in my plea that I was no Subject of this Realm, His hand is to the
contrary.
as I did likewise before the Queen's Commisioners, Sir Thomas Wroth, Master
Thomas Wilbraham late Recorder of the City of London, M. Peter Osborne,
Master Marshe, and M. Doctor Wattes: where the Recorder of London made like
demand as was demanded of me at Westminster: and that was whether I was
borne in England, or no? Whereunto I answered I was.

Then said he, it follows that you are and ought to continue the Queen's
faithful subject. I lie before the Commssioners.
Whereunto I replied then as I do now, saying: I am sworn to the noble King,
Defendour of the ancient Catholic Faith, King Philip King of Spain: And he
is sworn again by a solemn and corporal Oath, to maintain and defend the
University of Louaine, Stories hand is to the contrary of his voluntarye
confession.
whereof I am a member, and therefore no subject of this Realm, no yet subject
to any Laws thereof:

For it is well known, that I departed this Realm being freelye licensed
thereunto by the Queen, who accounted me an abject and castawaye, and I came
not hither again of mine own accord: but I was betrayed.

And although I had an inckelyng given me before of such a thing pretended
toward me, Story was not betrayed, but by Gods provision delivered to be cut
off, as a naughty and corrupt member.
yet I could not shun nor escape it: For sure it was God yt made dym mine
understanding, and blinded mine eyes, so that I could not perceive it. But
holy writ commands me to love my enemies, and here I forgive them freely
with all my heart, beseechyng God that they take no harm for me in another
Country, I would be right sorye they should, although they betrayed me.

I trauayled with them from Ship to Ship, by the space of eight days and
mistrusted no peril to be at hand until I was clapped fast under the Hatches.

But sure, sure: it was God yt wrought it: Yea, and although I was accounted a
Poller of the English men of your country: I stand now here before God, and
by the death I shall die, I had never out of any Ship more then two Pieces of
Gold, and forty Dallers that was laid in my hand.

But once again, to my arraignme^t, where there were certain Letters laid to
my charge, wherein I should go about to provoke ye Nortons, the Neuiles and
oth^^ to rebel, I never meant it: Yet will I discharge my conscience freely and
frankly and tell you truth. Here Storye before he was war, has told you that
he was a rank Traitor.
There was a Commission for a like matter sent into Scotland, which I wrote
with mine own hand: But it contained a Prouiso, wherein the Queen of England
and her Dominions were excepted.

There are yet two things yt I purpose to talk of: namely, for that there are
here present a great nombre of Youth: And I would to God I might say or speak
that which might bring all men to the unity of the Church: for there is but
one Church, one Flock and one Shepherde: If I could this do, I would think my
self to have wrought a good work.

The first Poinct touches my cruelty, wherewith I am sore burdened: And the
second concerns my Religion.

As touching the first, there were three in Commission, of the which I was one
that might do least, for I was the last of the three. And though I might by
persuasion assaye to cause them to revoke the articles that they had
maintained, and to confess the presence, wherein I stand: Ye know that he that
chydeth, is not worthy to be condemned for fightyng: No more am I worthy to be
counted cruel for chiding: It was the Bishop that pronounced the Sentence
Exco^municamus, and against that I could not do, for I was one of the Layetie.

Yet often times the Bishop to whom I was Servant was bold with me when he
had so many Prisoners that he could not well bestow them. For at one time the
Lord Rich, sent him out of Essex. xxviij. And at another time.xxiiij. Also at
another time.xvi. and.xiiij. and some of them were sent to me, which I kept
in my House with such fare as I had provided for my self and my Famylie, at
mine own cost and charge.

And to prove that I was not so cruel as I am reported to be, A pretty tale,
and it were long enough and true enough.
let this one tale suffice: There were at one time.xxviij condemned to the
Fire, and I moved the Deane of Paul's to tender and pity their estate, which
after was Abbot of Westminster, a very pitiful minded man: I think the most
part of you know him, it is M. Fecknam, and we went up and persuaded with
them, and we found them very tractable. And Master Fecknam and I labored to
the Lord Cardinal Poole, showing that they were.

Nescientes quid fecerunt. The Cardinal and we did sue together to the Queen,
and laid both the Swords together, and so we obtained pardon for them all,
saving an old woman that dwelt about Paul's Churchyard, she would not
convert, and therefore she was burned. There (...) of them received absolucion,
and that with all reverence: search the^ Register and you shall find it.

Yea, and it was my procurement that there should be no more burnt in London,
for I saw well that it would not prevail, and therefore we sent them into
odd corners into the country.

Wherefore I pray you, name me not cruel, I would be loath to have any such
slander to ron on me. But since I dye in charity, I pray you al of charity
to pray for me, that God may strengthen me with patience to suffer my death:
to the which I yield most wyllyngly.

And here I make a peticion to you my friends that would have bestowed
anythyng on me, I beseech you for charity sake, bestow it yearly on my wife,
who has four small children, and God has now taken me away that was her
staff^ and stay: And now my Daughter Weston and her three children are gone
over unto her, and I know not how they shall do for food, unless they go a
beggynge f^^m door to door for it: although in deed no English persons do
beg but of English, being helped by the Lady Dorm. and Sir Francisco: I have
good hope that you will be good unto her, for she is the faythfullest wife, the
louyngest and constantest that ever man had. And twice we have lost all that
ever we had, and now she has lost me to her great grief I know.

The second poynct that I thought to speak of, is concerning my Religion, for
that I know many are desirous to know what faith I will dye in, the which I
will briefly touch: I say with Saint Iherome that ancient father and pillar
of the old ancient, catholic, and Apostolic Church grounded upon the
Patriar^es; Prophets and Apostles, that in the same faith that I was borne in,
Which is not the church wherein S. Hierome lived.
I p^rpose to dye. And as the Arcke that Noe and his Famyly did possess,
figured the ship of Christ's Church, out of which ^hyp who soever is can not be
saved. In tha^ ship am I: Example. A ship that (...) tossed on the floods is
often in danger of loss on the sands, and sometimes on the rock. But when
the men that are in the ship espy present peril at hand, there is a Cockboat
at the tail of the ship, whereunto they fly for succor: So likewise, I being
in the Ship of Christ, once fell out of the same ship and was in present peril
and great danger. But then I following the example of a good Maryner, took the
Cockboat, thinking to drive to land: and at the last, being in the boat, I
espied three Oars, that is to wit: Contricion, Confession and Absolutio^. And
I held al these fast, and ever sense I have continued in the ship of Christ, of
which, the Apostle Peter is the guide and principal, and in the faith
catholic of my king I die.

Then said the Earl of Bedford, are you not the Queens subject? No, said
Story, and yet I do not exclude the Queen but I pray for her, her Counsel and
the Nobility of this Realm long to continue. Then said the Lord Honsdon:
Are you not the Queens Subject, you were borne in England? Then said Story:
Every man is free borne, and he has the whole face of the Earth before him to
dwell and abide in where he likes best: and if he can not live here, he may go
else where. Then was there (as I think one of the Ministers) hearing him to
make so light of our noble Queen and Country, demanded of him whether she
were not next and immediatlye under God, Supreme head of the Churches of
England and Irelande? whereunto he answered: I come not hither to dispute, but
if she be, she is: my nay will not prevail to prove it otherwise.

And then they cried, away with the ^arte: And so he was hanged according to
his judgment.

An Epilogue, or a brief Conclusion, of the life of the aforesaid John Story.
THe aforesaid John Story, beside that he was an obstinat Papist and a rank
Traitor, he was also in Queen Maryes time, the cruellest tirant and
persecutor of the innocent members and blessed professors of Christ, that ever
was to his power, sithen that cruel tirant Nero. For his whole delectacion and
pleasure was, in racking, stockyng, whippyng, manaklyng and burning of
innocents, without respect either of age, virtue, learning, weakness of wit, or
of a simple boy, or childish wenche: and all was fish that came to the net.

And he often and openly said (in the herynge of many) in the time of Queen
Mary, that the burning of Heretics (as he termed them) was to gentle a death
for they had too much scope to prate and talk what they lust: But said he, if
I live, I will have a clo^e Cage of Iron made for them, with a door in the
side, like to the Brazen Bull of perillus, where they shall be enclosed, and the
door made fast, and the fire to be made under them. And then (said he) they
shall know what friyng is, and their mouths shall be stopped from blowyng out
their pestilent Doctrine. So that by the premises, it may manifestly appear,
that there has not ben a wickeder man toward God, his Prince and country,
then he has been.

God save the Queen, and confound her enemies.
Seen and allowed. etc.




